Vertical heterostructures (HS) of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) host interlayer excitons (ILX), with electrons and holes residing in different layers. With respect to their intralayer counterparts, ILX feature much longer lifetimes and diffusion lengths, paving the way to excitonic optoelectronic devices operating at room temperature. While the recombination dynamics of ILX has been intensively studied, the formation process and its underlying physical mechanisms are still largely unexplored. Here we use ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy with a white-light probe, spanning both intralayer and interlayer exciton resonances, to simultaneously capture and time-resolve interlayer charge transfer and ILX formation dynamics in a MoSe2/WSe2 HS. We find that the ILX formation timescale is nearly an order of magnitude (∼1 ps) longer than the interlayer charge transfer time (∼100 fs). Microscopic calculations attribute the relative delay to an interplay between a phonon-assisted interlayer exciton cascade and subsequent cooling processes, and excitonic wave-function overlap. Our results provide an explanation to the efficient photocurrent generation observed in optoelectronic devices based on TMD HS, as the ILX have an opportunity to dissociate during their thermalization process. Monolayer (ML) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) exhibit remarkable physical properties which make them an ideal platform to study exciton physics and to realize novel optoelectronic devices One of the most intriguing properties of TMD-HS is the lateral confinement of the ILX within moiré potentials, which are formed at small interlayer twist angles ILX dynamics have been explored in different TMD-HS by time-resolved techniques Here we use ultrafast optical TA spectroscopy to directly probe the transient optical response of the ILX in a MoSe 2 /WSe 2 HS. These measurements are enabled by highly stable and broadband white light probe pulses spanning the visible to the NIR. The resulting high signal-to-noise measurements are capable of resolving the ILX formation dynamics through its weak TA signal (two orders of magnitude lower than the TA of the intralayer exciton) while simultaneously measuring intralayer exciton and interlayer hole transfer (IHT) dynamics. The ILX signal shows a delayed growth on a picosecond timescale, which is significantly longer than the experimentally measured 100-fs IHT process from MoSe 2 to WSe 2 . We simulate the exciton dynamics by solving the microscopic Heisenberg equations of motion and find that the difference in formation timescales is due to phonon-assisted hole tunneling of photo-excited excitons which gives rise to hot ILX populations that quickly exchange energy and momentum with phonons. The relaxation down to the ILX ground state proceeds through multiple scattering processes involving higher energy interlayer s states. Our simulations demonstrate that these hot ILX populations contribute strongly to the WSe 2 PB signal but only weakly to the optically bright ILX transition, resulting in the relative delay of the ILX signal as the populations cool. Experiments are performed on a large-area (mm-scale) MoSe 2 /WSe 2 HS fabricated using a gold tape exfoliation method (see details in Supplementary Note 1.1) We apply ultrafast TA spectroscopy with a broadband white-light continuum (WLC) probe to study the ILX formation dynamics. We selectively photoexcite the MoSe 2 layer by tuning a narrow-band (10 nm) 70-fs pump pulse on resonance with the A exciton peak of MoSe 2 ( ω = 1.58 eV ) with a fluence of 3 μJ/cm 2 (Supplementary Fig. Focusing on the ILX energy region of the 2D ∆T /T map below the optical gap of the intralayer excitons, the TA spectrum at 4 ps pump-probe delay shows a broad peak with a signal strength ∆T /T ∼ 10 -4 (Fig. A recent ultrafast TA experiment performed with excitation densities above the exciton Mott transition reported the generation of an interlayer electron-hole plasma whose optical signature consisted of a broad photoinduced absorption (PIA) plateau extending below the optical gap of the HS To understand the observed delayed rise in the ILX signal compared to the IHT process, we developed a microscopic model Incoherent population contributions, N M o/W,ξe , are referred to with a superscript ξ corresponding to the valley location of the electron where ξ e = K/K /Σ/Σ while the hole remains in the K valley; the ILX population is similarly denoted as N IL,ξe . In Fig. The differential transmission signals (DTS) (Eq. (2) in the Methods section) are calculated for the probe energies of A M o , (Eq. ( The calculated DTS time traces are reported in Fig. The DTS of ILX shows similar behavior to the A W but with a significantly longer risetime (Fig. By directly comparing the DTS signals of the probed A W and ILX transitions, we are able to trace the microscopic mechanisms of the ILX formation and relaxation processes. We have used TA spectroscopy with a combination of high sensitivity and broad spectral coverage to directly track the formation dynamics of ILX in a TMD HS. We find that ILX PB signal rises on a picosecond timescale, significantly slower than the build-up dynamics of intralayer exciton PB signals in general and of IHT specifically. terms of different contributions. The hundreds of femtoseconds build-up time of the WSe 2 PB signal is mainly related to interlayer scattering of hot holes and therefore represents a rather direct estimation of the hot carrier injection process between the TMD layers of the HS. The slower rise time of the ILX signal is the result of the combination of two scattering processes: (1) phonon-mediated exciton cascade process from unbound and/or higher energy excitonic s states to the ground state and (2) intra-exciton energy and momentum relaxation of hot ILX populations. Our simulations also demonstrate that the dynamics of optically bright intra-and inter-layer excitons are influenced by optically dark momentum-indirect excitons. Besides its fundamental interest, the delayed ILX formation observed and discussed here could explain a long-standing puzzle in optoelectronic devices based on TMD HS, namely the observation of efficient generation of photocurrent despite the large binding energy of the ILX We foresee that our combined theoretical-experimental approach can be extended to study in real-time exciton formation process in other systems, such as hybrid organic/TMD HS Large-area MoSe 2 /WSe 2 HS are prepared using a modified gold tape exfoliation method Time-resolved and static optical measurements are performed at 77 K. TA spectroscopy measurements are performed in a transmission geometry (Supplementary Fig. The estimated FWHM-IRF is 140 fs for both TA instruments. To obtain the DTS theoretically, we solve the Bloch equations for the excitonic transitions P i μ,Q = P i μ,Q up to third order in the electric field as in from the probe-induced dynamics. The coupled equations of motion which couples to Maxwell's equations giving the total electric field and therefore the transmission at the HS as in where the matrix elements are given by Here, d i μ = q φ i μ,q d * ,cv,i q are the excitonic and d cv,i q the electronic dipole moments, φ i μ,q are the excitonic wave functions obtained by solving the Wannier equation for the respective excitonic configuration i with radial quantum number μ and relative momentum q. α i and β i are the ratios of the effective masses Coulomb potential for two dielectric slabs in three dielectric environments, 1 = 3.9 (SiO 2 substrate on the MoSe 2 side), g = 1 (assuming a vacuum environment between the layers) and 2 = 1 (vacuum on the WSe 2 side), as in In the following, and to be in line with the notation used in the main part of the manuscript, we denote the excitonic populations under consideration as: and the excitonic coherent polarizations as: Therefore, the DTS signal for the probed A M o transition reads explicitely: Eq. ( describes the probed A W transition (purple ellipse in Fig. where the first two terms account for Pauli blocking due to the electron of the pumped momentum-direct excitonic Q,1s , (left red parabola) and subsequent phonon-assisted IL hole tunneling leads to the formation of ILX incoherent populations, N IL,K Q,μ , with finite momentum Q and also high quantum number μ (right green parabolas) (see Eq. (1) and Eq. ( 