A material described as lutetium-hydrogen-nitrogen (Lu-H-N in short) was recently claimed to have "near-ambient superconductivity" [Gammon et al, Nature 615, 244, 2023]. If the results could be reproduced by other teams, it would be a major scientific breakthrough. Here, we report our results of transport and structure measurements on a material prepared using the same method as that reported by Gammon et al. Our X-ray diffraction measurements indicated that the obtained sample contained three substances: the FCC-1 phase (Fm-3m) with a lattice parameter a=5.03 Å, the FCC-2 phase (Fm-3m) with a lattice parameter a= 4.755 Å and Lu metal. These two FCC phases are identical to the those reported in the so-called near-ambient superconductor. However, we found that the samples had no evidence of superconductivity, through our resistance measurements in the temperature range of 300 -4 K and pressure range of 0.9 -3.4 GPa, and our magnetic susceptibility measurements in the pressure range of 0.8-3.3 GPa and temperature down to 100 K. We also used a laser heating technique to heat the sample to 1800°C and found no superconductivity in the produced dark blue samples below 6.5 GPa. In addition, the color of the both samples remain dark blue in the pressure range investigated. Room-temperature superconductors have been hunted by physicists for more than a century and are considered as a holy grail of condensed matter physics field. Since such material conducts electrons with zero resistance and expels magnetism at room temperature, it is expected to revolutionize our lives. Recently, Gammon et al reported evidence of near ambient superconductivity in a pink material called lutetiumhydrogen-nitrogen (Lu-H-N), We loaded a lutetium foil (99.9%) with dimensions of 110 m  110 m  40 m into the gasketed hole in a diamond anvil cell placed in a glovebox with argon atmosphere, and compressed the high pressure cell to ~2.3 GPa in the glovebox to isolate air and moisture. The high pressure cell was then taken out from the glovebox, and placed into a gas loading system. Prior to gas loading, the system was flushed three times with a mixture gas of compressed hydrogen (99%) and nitrogen (1%) to dilute the oxygen content in the chamber. The high-pressure cell with the preloaded Lu foil was opened in the gas loading system to allow gas mixture to enter into the sample hole. Then, the high-pressure cell was closed again in the gas loading system and pressurized to 2.0 GPa with a remote gear controlling device. Afterwards, the high pressure cell was heated to 65 C in a furnace and kept at this temperature for 24 hours. The obtained sample appears dark-blue color under a transmitted white light (inset of Fig. As shown in Fig. We carried out X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements on the sample-obtained-at-65C, in order to check the chemical composition and crystal structure. As shown in Fig. In order to determine the elemental composition of our sample, in particular nitrogen content, the energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) measurements were carried out. As shown in Fig. Given the fact that the heating temperature of 65 C cannot make the lutetium foils to fully react with gas mixture (Fig. As shown in Fig. Finally, an interesting phenomenon in the described room temperature superconductor is that the superconductivity occurs only in the pink phase, which transitions from the blue one in the pressure range of 0.3-3 GPa. The recent investigations showed that such a pink phase was observed in the nonsuperconducting Lu-H-N samples which were synthesized by high pressure and high temperature condition, In summary, we performed the high-pressure investigations on two samples initially prepared by the same method, using 99H2/1N2 gas mixture and a lutetium foil as starting materials, followed by annealing the sample at 65C for 24 hours as reported by Gammon et al These authors with star (*) contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to L.S. (llsun@iphy.ac.cn) 