The axion is expected to solve the strong CP problem of quantum chromodynamics and is one of the leading candidates for dark matter. CAPP in South Korea has several axion search experiments based on cavity haloscopes in the frequency range of 1-6 GHz. The main effort focuses on operation of the experiments with the highest possible sensitivity. It requires maintenance of the haloscopes at the lowest physical temperature in the range of mK and usage of low noise components to amplify the weak axion signal. We report development and operation of low noise amplifiers for 5 haloscope experiments targeting at different frequency ranges. The amplifiers show noise temperatures approaching the quantum limit. Axions are one of the possible candidates for dark matter are axions. They are hypothetical elementary particles postulated by the Peccei-Quinn theory in 1977 to solve the strong CP problem in quantum chromodynamics where ﰰ ﰰﰰﰰ ﰰ is a model-dependent coupling constant, ﰰ ﰰ and ﰰ ﰰ are the axion density and mass, ﰰ ﰰ is the static magnetic field, ﰰ is the effective haloscope volume, ﰰ is the cavity form factor, and ﰰ ﰰ , ﰰ ﰰ are the cavity and axion quality factors. Because the axion mass is unknown, the resonance frequency of the cavity should be tunable to allow scanning all frequencies corresponding to all possible axion masses. The scanning speed is given by where ﰰﰰﰰ and ﰰ ﰰﰰﰰ are the read-out signal-to-noise ratio and system noise temperature, respectively. There have been numerous cavity experiments in search of axions (see, for example, In CAPP we use flux-driven Josephson parametric amplifiers (FDJPA) with close to quantum-limited noise Axion haloscope experiments use strong magnets to obtain the highest possible output signal. Devices based on Josephson junctions are very sensitive to external magnetic fields and should be protected from it. Each of the CAPP magnets has a compensation coil to provide a volume with reduced magnetic field, which is limited and highly occupied with RF components. To protect the FDJPA from the field of the 8T magnet, which is about 0.1 Tesla in the vicinity of the FDJPA, we developed a three-layer magnetic shield (Fig. A block diagram of the RF chain used for the axion experiment with a FDJPA as the first amplifier is shown in Fig. In the CAPP flagship "12TB" and planned "18T" experiments we use wet dilution fridges which consume a lot of liquid helium during the cooldown of our equipment. To save budget and minimize the number of cooldowns we made a special design of the mixing chamber RF assembly (Fig. We have 25 FDJPAs for a frequency range 0.98-6.0 GHz. Some of them are shown in Table We developed a set of FDJPAs for a frequency range of 0.98 to 6 GHz as well as methods and designs to implement them in CAPP axion search experiments. Noise temperatures of all amplifiers approach the quantum noise limit and their gain (>20 dB) allows minimizing the influence of subsequent amplifying stages on the system noise temperature. The FDJPAs have so far been used in 5 completed and ongoing CAPP experiments. 