A first modeling approximation of the general performance of radiofrequency (RF) switches based on hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), a two-dimensional (2D) dielectric material is presented. The I-V characteristics intrinsic and extrinsic impedance parameters, the return loss, insertion loss and isolation of RF 2D switches fabricated with hBN are described here by a equivalent circuit models. Straightforward analytical expressions are obtained. In contrast to conventional switches, the unique RF performance of the hBN switch, at ON-state, i.e., a direct improvement with frequency of the insertion loss, is accurately described by considering a capacitor in the intrinsic part of the model. The latter is suggested to be related to storaged charge during the resistive switching mechanism. The highest mean relative error obtained between modeling and measurements of the return loss is of 7.6 % with the approach presented here which overcomes the 42.5 % of difference obtained with a previous model with an incomplete intrinsic device description. Memristive non-volatile devices have gained attraction for low-power high-performance applications in both digital and analog scenarios Furthermore, a unique feature of hBN switches is the improvement of the insertion loss with frequency Based on atomistic simulations and measurements, the transport during the different resistive switching states of hBN MIMlike devices (cf. Fig. A practical description of the scenario described above is provided by the quantum point contact model based on the Landauer transport equation where V is the applied voltage, G p = G o n with G o as the quantum conductance (≈ 77.5 μS for one transmission mode) and n as the number of fully formed conducting filaments; I 0 = [2q(N -n)/(αh)] exp(-αφ) with q as the element charge, N as the number of independent conducting filaments, h as the Planck's constant and α and φ are parameters related to the width and height, respectively, of a confinement-related potential barrier The Thévenin transformation of the EC yields a solution for Eq. ( where G A = 1 + R s G p , Λ = αqR s and W {Ξ} is the Lambert function. Details on the derivation of the model have been provided elsewhere This modeling approach has been used before to describe the resistive states of hBN nonvolatile devices The cross-section of an hexagonal borond nitride RF switches, similar as the ones demonstrated in the literature where Z 0 = 50 Ω is the characteristic impedance, whereas the impedance terms for the device with extrinsic contributions are and with the access impedance Z a = R a + jωL a , the extrinsic impedance due to pads electrostatic coupling Z c = 1/(jωC p ) and the intrinsic impedance Z int as where ω = 2πf is the angular frequency with f as the operation frequency. By using Eqs. ( depending on whether Z int is defined for the ON-or OFF-state, respectively. Notice that the approach presented here considers the contribution of C ON in the expressions of both extrinsic and intrinsic insertion loss in contrast to previous studies and respectively, at ON-state. The modeling approach presented above has been applied to describe the experimental I-V performance, RF insertion loss and RF isolation of fabricated hBN RF switches The EC extrinsic network for all devices has been calibrated to the electromagnetic simulations of the OPEN-structure presented in The EC describes the experimental RF power handling in both ON-and OFF-state of the device in In order to validate the expressions considering extrinsic elements, a comparison with results of the experimentally-calibrated EC has been performed for the devices under study. Eqs. ( The comparison between de-embedded (intrinsic) experimental S 21,int and the different models, namely the one presented here (cf. Eq. ( For the device in The return loss, an important factor for RF switches The static characteristics of hBN-based MIM-like structures, intended for RF applications, have been described for the first time here at both resistive states by using a physics-based equivalent circuit and the corresponding equations. Furthermore, the dynamic performance of 2D RF switches based on hBN has been precisely modeled here by considering an intrinsic charge contribution -via C ON -related to the storaged charge within this 2D material during the filament-based resistive switching mechanism. An analysis of the equivalent circuit considering such contribution yields straightforward expressions used to describe a unique increase with frequency of the S 21 parameter of RF hBN switches. Both the EC and the derived equations for impedance and scattering parameters are able to describe experimental data of three different devices. The relative error of the return loss and the insertion loss shows the higher accuracy of the approach discussed here with respect to other previously used models. The expressions obtained here for the dynamic performance of hBN switches aim to boost the modeling and analysis of these devices as well as their use in circuit design by considering a physical phenomenon represented by C ON , neglected in previous works, in their equivalent circuit. The relative error r of the two dynamic modeling approaches, the one with C ON and R r,ON/OFF (proposed here) and the oftenly used one without such elements are shown in Fig. This implies that the applied bias drops entirely at the source side of the constriction This approximation is guaranteed by R P (≈ 12.9 kΩ) being much higher than the voltage-dependent diode resistance (with a lower value) to which it is in parallel with. The expressions reported for S 21,ext , obtained with ABCD parameters, in Extrinsic elements are not considered in the experimental data nor in the modeling results.