Improving the photon-spin conversion efficiency without polarization dependence is a major challenge in realizing quantum interfaces gate-defined quantum dots (QDs) for polarization-encoded photonic quantum network systems. Previously, we reported the design of an air-bridge bull's-eye cavity that enhances the photon absorption efficiency of an embedded gate-defined QD regardless of the photon polarization. Here, we numerically demonstrate that a further 1.6 times improvement in efficiency is possible by simply adjusting the distance of the substrate from the semiconductor slab where the bull's-eye structure is formed. Our analysis clarifies that the upward-preferred coupling and narrow far-field emission pattern realized by substrate-induced asymmetry enable the improvement. A quantum network A promising approach for the improving efficiency is to embed QDs in optical cavities. Because polarization-spin correspondence is essential for polarization-encoded qubits, the optical cavity must be polarization-independent. Although using time-bin qubits In this study, we discuss the possibility of further absorption enhancement due to directional coupling induced by out-of-plane asymmetry in the cavity. The coupling rates for the out-ofplane directions are unbalanced in such an asymmetric cavity; therefore, enhanced or suppressed coupling rates can be obtained in the desired direction. Several methods, such as controlling etching depth The cavity structure we considered is schematically shown in Fig. As the bull's-eye structure, we used our previously designed air-bridge bull's-eye cavity In our previous study, we derived an analytical expression for the cavity-enhanced light absorption efficiency of a gate-defined QD using the temporal coupled-mode theory. Following the result, the absorption efficiency of the QD in a cavity at the resonant wavelength of λ 0 is obtained as S eff represents an effective mode area of the cavity mode defined as where U E denotes the electric energy density of the cavity mode normalized to 1 at the cavity center. η far represents the far-field spatial matching between the incident light source and cavity mode, defined as where E cav and E source are the field distributions of the cavity mode and the incident light source in the momentum space, respectively, obtained at the top surface of the slab 4γ abs γ t (γ t + γ b + γ abs ) 2 . (4) We rewrite Eq. ( or using corresponding quality factor representations: 4Q abs Q rad (Q abs + Q rad ) 2 . ( M takes the maximum value of 0.5 in vertically-symmetric cavities (γ t = γ b , that is, Φ = 0.5) only when the absorption-radiation matching (γ rad = γ abs ) is satisfied, which is the case discussed in our previous study QD (λ 0 ) on T gap , calculated using Eq. ( (1) was calculated using the corresponding equation in Sec. 2.2 with the field distributions and quality factors of the cavity mode obtained from the 3D-FDTD simulation. We also show the results calculated by independent 3D-FDTD simulations, which directly evaluate η abs QD (λ). The results based on Eq. ( where ψ is the phase change after reflection and is supposed ψ = π. Δφ plotted as a function of T gap /λ 0 represented by the red line in Fig. Fig. Without substrate (Theory) As shown in Eq. ( We numerically investigated the photon absorption efficiency of a gate-defined QD embedded in a bull's eye cavity with a substrate underneath. Our results demonstrated that the absorption efficiency can be improved more than 1.6 times compared to that without the substrate when the distance between the bull's-eye structure and the substrate is approximately 0.4 times the resonant wavelength. The substrate acted as a partial mirror that reflected light, thereby modifying the vertical coupling constant of the cavity. At the distance, the constructive interference condition for increasing upward coupling is satisfied, which resulted in a 1.64 times improvement of the absorption efficiency. In experiments, the distance between the bull's-eye structure and the substrate can be controlled precisely by adjusting the thickness of the sacrificial layer. The analysis of each factor determining the absorption efficiency clarified that the upward directionality, Φ = γ t /γ rad , plays a dominant role in the improvement. We also found that the far-field spatial overlap between the cavity mode and the incident Gaussian beam, η far , is also favored by the presence of substrate, suggesting that further improvement is possible by tailoring the cavity radiation profile through careful tuning of the cavity design in the future. The substrate-induced asymmetry can improve absorption in a simple manner. This simple method would be useful for improving the collection efficiency of photons emitted from a defined QD Funding. JST CREST (JPMJCR15N2); MEXT KAKENHI (22H04962); JST Moonshot R&D (JPMJMS2066).