Recent experiments have shown that the phase diagrams of the kagome superconductors AV3Sb5 are strongly impacted by changes in the c-axis lattice parameter. Here, we show that c-axis deformations impact primarily the Sb apical bonds and thus the overlap between their pz orbitals. Changes in the latter, in turn, substantially affect low-energy electronic states with significant Sb character, most notably the central electron pocket and the van Hove singularities located above the Fermi level. Based on the orbital-selective character of c-axis strain, we argue that these electronic states experience a non-negligible attractive electron-phonon pairing interaction mediated by fluctuations in the apical Sb bonds. We thus propose a multi-band model for superconductivity in AV3Sb5 that includes both the Sb pocket and the V-derived van Hove singularities. Upon comparing the theoretical phase diagram with the experimentally observed vanishing of the Tc dome across a Lifshitz transition of the Sb pocket, we propose that either an s +-or an s ++ state is realized in AV3Sb5. The discovery of superconductivity (SC) in the family of kagome metals AV 3 Sb 5 (A: K, Rb, Cs) has sparked significant interest, since the interference between different electronic hopping paths in the kagome lattice endows the electronic structure with flat bands, van Hove singularities (vHs), and Dirac points. These features have the potential to promote collective electronic behaviors characteristic of materials with strong electronic correlations or non-trivial band topology Studies of the SC properties of AV 3 Sb 5 have lagged the investigations of the CDW phase, partly because the latter onsets at much higher temperatures (T CDW ∼ 100 K) than the former (T c ∼ 1 K). There have been reports of both nodeless Γ point derived from the Sb p-orbitals, highlighting their relevance for the onset of pairing In this paper, we combine density functional theory (DFT) calculations and low-energy modeling to show that the Sb degrees of freedom play an essential role for the superconductivity of AV 3 Sb 5 . Our starting point is the empirical observation made in Ref. We start by employing DFT to elucidate the impact of c-axis distortions on the band structure of AV 3 Sb 5 , focusing on A = Cs for concreteness. For details, see the Supplementary Material (SM) To address whether this displacement pattern is capable of affecting the low-energy electronic states, we first calculate via DFT the atomically-resolved band structure near the Fermi energy in the undistorted phase [Fig. In Fig. The electronic properties of AV 3 Sb 5 should be impacted not only by static strain, but also by thermal fluctuations associated with the atomic displacement pattern promoted by the c-axis strain. These fluctuations are expected to be strongly coupled to the electronic states with significant Sb character. Because the displacement pattern associated with the Sb-Sb bonds does not break crystal symmetries, it cannot be decomposed in terms of a single phonon mode. Instead, there are two different phonon modes that modify the bond lengths along the c-axis without modifying other features in the crystal structure: a longitudinal acoustic phonon mode with outof-plane dispersion and a Γ-point optical phonon mode that transforms as the A 1g irreducible representation of the point group. Note that the A 1g displacements, represented in Fig. The coupling between the electronic states with significant Sb spectral weight and these phonon modes should lead to a non-negligible attractive pairing interaction. To assess its impact, we construct a low-energy model for the SC phase considering a simplified Fermi surface that consists of a small Sb electron-pocket at the Γ point and a large hexagonal-like Fermi surface originating from one of the V vHs To derive the SC gap equations, we generalize a patch approach commonly employed to describe systems with vHs near the Fermi level The resulting four-patch model is schematically shown in Fig. T for the gap functions on the four patches, the corresponding linearized gap equations can be written in matrix form as χ pp ⃗ ∆ = ⃗ ∆, with where V Λ ≡ Λ -Λ dε tanh(βε/2)/(2ε) ≈ ln (2e γ βΛ/π) is the particle-particle bubble with β = 1/(k B T ) and η ≡ N Γ /N M is the ratio between the DOS. Here, Λ is the cutoff for the pairing interaction, as shown in Fig. (2) where g ≡ 12g 2 ΓM + (g ΓΓ -2g M M -g MM ) 2 . Analysis of the eigenvectors of λ E2g , which is doubly-degenerate, shows that they describe d x 2 -y 2 -wave and d xy -wave SC states, which transform as the 2D irreducible representation E 2g of the point group D 6h (see SM Only positive eigenvalues correspond to attractive pairing channels. For the E 2g channel (d + id), λ E2g > 0 requires a strong enough inter-M-patch repulsion to overcome the intra-M-patch repulsion, g M M > g MM > 0, as found in renormalization group studies of the threepatch model Figure To elucidate which of these SC regimes are consistent with the experimental observation of a suppression of T c across the Lifshitz transition A large attractive intra-pocket pairing interaction g ΓΓ could be mediated by the Sb-Sb bond fluctuations discussed above. On the other hand, CDW fluctuations with wave-vector M could boost g ΓM , rendering it repulsive (attractive) if the CDW breaks (preserves) time-reversal symmetry. However, these CDW fluctuations should also enhance g M M, since the M patches are connected by the same wave-vector. Because the latter couples states with similar orbital compositions (V-V orbitals), whereas g ΓM couples states with different orbital compositions (Sb-V orbitals), the CDW boost of g M M is expected to be larger, particularly if the CDW is enhanced by the vHs. Interestingly, the Sb-Sb bond fluctuations could switch this hierarchy if the relevant vHs is one of those located above the Fermi level. Indeed, as shown in Figs. We now discuss the experimental implications of our results. All three states obtained in our model, d + id, s +-, and s ++ , are fully gapped, which makes it challenging to distinguish between them solely via spectroscopy. Directly probing time-reversal symmetry breaking, for in-stance via Kerr rotation, would help exclude or confirm d + id. The suppression of T c across the Sb electronpocket Lifshitz transition shown in Fig. In summary, we showed that changes in the c-axis lattice parameter of AV 3 Sb 5 lead to significant changes in the electronic dispersion promoted by the apical Sb p z orbitals. Not only the energies and the k z -dispersion of the vHs located above the Fermi energy are modified, but also the bottom of the Γ-point electron band shifts strongly with c-axis strain. We proposed that fluctuations of the Sb-Sb bonds promote a non-negligible electron-phonon pairing interaction for states with sizable Sb orbital character, which includes both the central electron pocket as well as the saddle points located above the Fermi level. The resulting s +-and s ++ states are consistent with several experimental observations, including the full suppression of T c across the Lifshitz transition involving the Sb pocket -Supplementary Material - All density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed with Projector Augmented Waves (PAW) as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio simulation package (VASP) version 5.4.4 Our low-energy model consists of a small Sb-derived central electron pocket and a large V-derived hexagonal-like Fermi surface associated with the van Hove singularities (vHs). To describe the latter we employ a simple tightbinding parametrization , where A, B, C denote the V sublattice and: Here, ), and a 3 = a 2 -a 1 , see Fig. Fixing the length-and energy-scales, a = 1 and t = 1 eV, there are four free model parameters: μ M , μ Γ , t, and t ′ . In the 7-band model based on first principles calculations in Ref. = -0.4667 eV (cf. t above) and t Sb NN = -0.1813 eV (cf. t above). We therefore fix the ratio t/ t ≈ 2.6. The other parameters used, μ M = 0.02t, t ′ = -0.2t, μ Γ = -3.65 t, were chosen such that the Fermi surface obtained from the tight-binding parametrization in Eq. (S1) matches the Fermi surface of CsV 3 Sb 5 measured experimentally in angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) in Ref. The kagome lattice with the three sublattices (A, B, C) indicated. Nearest-neighbor and next-nearest neighbor hoppings (t, t ′ ), as well as intra-unit cell vectors (a1, a2, a3), are also shown. We consider a low-energy patch model where the important degrees of freedom are the states near the three M points, where the vHs are located, and near the Γ point, where the small electron pocket is present. Hence, our model consists of four patches, three at M and one at Γ. The part of the interaction Hamiltonian relevant for superconductivity is given by where α = 1, 2, 3 runs over the three distinct M points in the Brillouin zone, σ denotes spin, and σ is the opposite of σ. There are more interactions allowed in the model, but they play no role for superconductivity. Here, gMM , gM M, gΓM , and gΓΓ denote dimension-full pairing interactions. As we show below, the only SC instabilities of this model correspond to SC order parameters transforming as the A 1g and E 2g irreducible representations (irreps) of the point group D 6h of the AV 3 Sb 5 compounds. Denoting ⃗ ∆ ≡ (∆ M1 , ∆ M2 , ∆ M3 , ∆ Γ ) T as the gap functions on the four patches, the corresponding linearized gap equations can be written in matrix form as χ pp ⃗ ∆ = ⃗ ∆, with where , and . Here, N i (ε) are the DOS of the patches, calculated from the tight-binding parametrization as: where v i (k) = |∇ξ i (k)| is the Fermi velocity of band i, and S i (ε) is the constant energy contour ξ i (k) = ε. For the Γ pocket, ξ Γ is given by Eq. (S2) whereas for the M pocket, it is given by the second largest eigenvalue of the 3 × 3 upper block-diagonal of the matrix in Eq. (S1), corresponding to the band crossing the Fermi level, as shown in Fig. Here, asymptotic expressions were derived in the last step, where we defined c 0 ≡ 2 exp(γ)/π ≈ 1.13 with γ denoting Euler's constant. Notably, the logarithmic divergence disappears in the "deep incipient band" regime, corresponding to μ Γ < μ c (see also Focusing on the non-incipient-band case, where μ Γ -μ c > Λ and the BCS regime is appropriate (βΛ ≫ 1), the gap equations simplify considerably, since V μ = V Λ . Defining the dimensionless pairing interactions g MM = gMM N M (0), g M M = gM MN M (0), g ΓΓ = gΓΓ N Γ (0) and g ΓM = gΓM N M (0)N Γ (0), we obtain the gap equations of the main text, with η ≡ N Γ (0)/N M (0) and: Diagonalization of χ pp /V Λ yields the two leading and competing eigenvalues: We note that the eigenvalue λ 1 is doubly degenerate, and that there is a fourth eigenvalue λ 3 = λ 2 -g which we do not consider, as it is always smaller than λ 2 . For each eigenvalue λ i , as long as it is positive, there is a superconducting instability with critical temperature T i c = 2e γ k B π Λ exp (-1/λ i ). To determine the SC channels corresponding to these eigenvalues, we compute the corresponding eigenvectors (not normalized), which are given by where The first two eigenvectors correspond to the d xy ( ⃗ ∆ 1 ) and d x 2 -y 2 ( ⃗ ∆ 2 ) form factors. As such, they transform as the two-dimensional irreducible representation E 2g , and the degenerate eigenvalue λ 1 is associated with a d-wave SC instability The relative phase and relative amplitude between the degenerate d xy and d x 2 -y 2 gap functions can only be found by going beyond the linearized gap equations. In practice, one computes the coefficients of the biquadratic couplings between the two gaps in the Landau free energy expansion. The analysis in the subspace of the M patches was done in Ref. The phase diagram shown in the main text, and repeated in Fig. 