The theoretical and computational framework of finite deformation mesoscale field dislocation mechanics (MFDM) is used to understand the salient aspects of kink-band formation in Cu-Nb nano-metallic laminates (NMLs). A conceptually minimal, plane-strain idealization of the three-dimensional geometry, including crystalline orientation, of additively manufactured NML is used to model NMLs. Importantly, the natural jump/interface condition of MFDM imposing continuity of (certain components) of plastic strain rates across interfaces allows theory-driven 'communication' of plastic flow across the laminate boundaries in our finite element implementation. Kink bands under layer parallel compression of NMLs in accord with experimental observations arise in our numerical simulations. The possible mechanisms for the formation and orientation of kink bands are discussed, within the scope of our idealized framework. We also report results corresponding to various parametric studies that provide preliminary insights and clear questions for future work on understanding the intricate underlying mechanisms for the formation of kink bands. A fundamental challenge in the development of efficient engineering materials is to design a material that has both high strength and high toughness, as most materials have exclusively either of these properties. Kinking in nano-metallic laminates is a deformation mechanism that may circumvent this challenge, as it leads to enhanced plasticity (ductility) at an almost constant level of stress after yielding In general, the formation of shear or kink bands, due to strain localization, is detrimental as it produces sites of narrow planes under intense shear or lattice rotations, which acts as a source for crack initiation and leads to eventual material failure. For instance, it was reported in In this work, we model the compression of composite nanolaminates within a plane strain idealization, using the theoretical and computational framework of MFDM. The interface conditions in MFDM impose continuity of certain components of the total plastic strain rate, which models continuous plastic flow across the laminate interfaces. We consider a 'minimal' model setup in considering 3 co-planar slip systems for each material in the bi-metallic laminate structure and show that kink bands are formed in qualitative accord with the experimental observations of [NMB + 15, ZLS + 22]. We also report on other studies within this idealized setup and discuss whether kink bands form or not for different cases. The outline of the paper is as follows: after presenting some notational details used in this paper in the following paragraph, Section 2 provides a brief review of the theory of MFDM. For more details on the theoretical and computational framework of MFDM, the interested reader is referred to [AA20a, AZA20, AA20b, Aro19]. Section 3 discusses the various successes of the MFDM framework with correspondence with experimental studies in many instances. Section 4 shows the numerical results of kink-band formation in composite nanolaminates within our idealization using the computational framework of MFDM. We also discuss various parametric studies of our model characterizing this complicated problem of kink band formations in NMLs. Section 5 presents some concluding remarks and the scope of future work for modeling compression of NMLs using our framework. Vectors and tensors are represented by boldface lower and upper-case letters, respectively. The action of a second-order tensor A on a vector b is denoted by Ab. The inner product of two vectors is denoted by a • b, while the inner product of two second-order tensors is denoted by A : B. A rectangular Cartesian coordinate system is invoked for the ambient space and all vector and tensor components are expressed with respect to the basis of this coordinate system. The partial derivative of the quantity (•) w.r.t. the x i coordinate of this coordinate system is denoted by (•) ,i , and e i denotes the unit vector in the x i direction. The time derivative of a quantity (•) is denoted by ( •). Einstein's summation convention is always implied unless mentioned otherwise. The symbols grad, div, and curl denote the gradient, divergence, and curl on the current configuration, respectively. For a second order tensor A, vectors v, a, and c, and a spatially constant vector field b, the operations of div, curl, and the cross-product of a tensor (×) with a vector are defined as follows: In rectangular Cartesian coordinates, these are denoted by where ε ijk are the components of the third order alternating tensor X. When we refer to different slip systems with respect to their slip vector orientation, we mean that those orientations were in the initial unstretched lattice, and do not represent the orientations of the corresponding slip vectors in the deformed lattice, unless mentioned otherwise. The governing equations for MFDM In Eq. (3), W is the inverse of the elastic distortion tensor (F e ), α denotes the dislocation density tensor (Nye's tensor), v denotes the material velocity, L = grad v is the velocity gradient, T is the (symmetric) Cauchy stress tensor, and V denotes the dislocation velocity field with respect to the material. Eq. (3a) is the incompatibility equation for the inverse elastic distortion tensor, while Eq. (3b) is derived from the statement of conservation of the Burgers vector content of an arbitrary area patch in the current configuration The extended set of governing equations for MFDM Here, (4a) is the evolution equation for the dislocation density tensor, and (4b) is the incompatibility equation in terms of χ with a condition that div χ = 0, while f denotes the plastic position vector, and the evolution equation for f is given by (4c). L p is the additional mesoscale field which represents the averaged rate of plastic straining due to all dislocations that cannot be represented by α × V , where both fields in the product represent space-time running averages of the corresponding microscopic fields. This is due to the fact that the average of products is not the same as the product of averages, in general. Hence, all fields in the MFDM framework are running space-time averages of the corresponding fields of the field dislocation mechanics (FDM) theory; except for L p , as there is no corresponding field in FDM theory to L p . To close the above set of equations in (4), constitutive statements for V , L p , T are used, consistent with the mechanical dissipation being non-negative Initial conditions for α, f and boundary conditions for α, f , χ, and v are specified, for a well-set evolution in MFDM. • The α evolution equation (shown in Eq. ( where Φ is a second order tensor valued function of position and time on the boundary, characterizing the flux of dislocations at the surface satisfying the constraint Φn = 0. Here, n isThe outward unit normal field on the boundary. The boundary condition is specified in two ways: (a) Plastically constrained : Φ(x, t) = 0 is specified at a point x on the boundary for all times, which ensures that there is no outflow of dislocations at that point of the boundary, and only parallel motion along the boundary is allowed. (b) Plastically unconstrained : A less restrictive boundary condition where Lp × n is simply evaluated at the boundary (akin to an outflow condition), along with the specification of dislocation flux α(V •n) on the inflow part of the boundary. Additionally, for all calculations presented in this paper (curl α × n) = 0 is imposed, a particular specification of a boundary condition that arises from simple mathematical modeling of the manifestation of dislocation core energy at the mesoscale. • For the incompatibility equation, χn = 0 is applied on the outer boundary of the domain, which along with the system (4b) ensures that χ vanishes when α is zero in the entire domain. • The f evolution equation requires a Neumann boundary condition i.e., (grad ḟ )n = (α × V + L pχ -χL)n on the outer boundary of the domain. • The material velocity boundary conditions are applied based on the loading type, which is discussed later in Section 4. • The initial condition α(x, 0) = 0 is assumed for all simulations here. • In general, the initial condition for f is obtained by solving for χ from the incompatibility equation and solving for f from the equilibrium equation, for prescribed α on the given initial configuration. We refer to this scheme as the elastic theory of continuously distributed dislocations (ECDD). For the initial conditions on α considered above, this step is trivial, with f = X, where X is the position field on the initial configuration. • The model admits an arbitrary specification of ḟ at a point to uniquely evolve f using (4c) in time, and this rate is prescribed to vanish. Interface conditions for plastic distortion rate: The interface jump condition for the α solve is [[α × V + Lp + l 2 γ curl α]] × n = 0, and this gets imposed in the finite element formulation. Here, [[(•)]] denotes the jump in (•) across the interface. This interface condition allows for the discontinuity of certain components of plastic strain rate across the interface Traction continuity and natural interface conditions consistent with the PDE for χ, ḟ are also enforced by our finite element formulation. Constitutive relations in MFDM are required for the stress T , the plastic distortion rate L p , and the dislocation velocity V . The details of the thermodynamically consistent constitutive formulations can be found in Sec. 3.1 of Table Core energy density Table Table Table 2: Constitutive relations for plastic strain rate L p . Table Table All parameters in our model, except k 0 and l, are part of the constitutive structure of wellaccepted models of classical crystal plasticity theory. The parameter k 0 was introduced in [AB00]. The length scale l simply controls the refinement of the GND microstructure and does not play a physically significant role in our results. The MFDM framework is based on the space-time averaging of microscopic dislocation mechanics, and the obtained governing PDEs shown in (4) are closed by the phenomenological specification of L p , V , T and g. This approach has been quite successful in addressing some challenging problems in modern plasticity theory related to the computation of patterning • It is difficult to deduce a physical connection between the plastic strain/distortion in classical plasticity theory to the mechanics of dislocation, beyond modeling in 1-D. The MFDM framework brings out an explicit connection between the plastic strain rate and the motion and geometry of an evolving microscopic array of dislocations. Obviously, this has many benefits, even for a phenomenological specification of the macroscopic plastic strain rate. Moreover, the MFDM framework has allowed for a first unification between phenomenological J 2 and crystal plasticity theories and quantitative dislocation mechanics. • With a single extra material fitting parameter beyond a classical plasticity model (and two in the finite deformation setting), the MFDM framework has enabled a significant variety of phenomena to be modeled, in qualitative and quantitative accord with experimental results. The initial configuration of NMLs, as shown in Fig. The boundary conditions for the material velocity for the simulations of compression of NMLs are as follows: • v 2 = 0 at the bottom boundary of the domain. • v 2 = -|ê|L at the top boundary of the domain, where L is the length of the laminate in the (undeformed) initial configuration at t = 0. • The applied traction in the horizontal direction is zero on both the top and the bottom boundary of the domain. • v 1 = 0 at a single node of the bottom boundary. This along with the above conditions suffices to constrain rigid motion. As discussed earlier, we assume 3 slip systems for both Cu and Nb. One of the reference slip directions is aligned along the layer parallel direction, while the other two are defined to initially accommodate symmetric double slip with respect to the loading axis. With reference to Fig. Table Fig. Fig. The orientation of the kink band depends on the Schmid factors of the 3 slip systems considered, which is the largest for the 2 oblique slip systems. Based on the deformed shape of the NML as shown in Fig. The rotation of the deformed slip vectors w.r.t. their respective initial orientations is shown in Fig. We report various numerical studies with respect to changing the ordering of metallic layers, the effect of removal of slip vectors, and the slip vector orientations on the kink band formation. • Flipping the order of Cu and Nb layers in the nano-laminate structure resulted in a change in the orientation of the band as shown in Fig. • Removal of θ 1 inclined slip system, and just considering layer parallel slip system and θ 2 inclined slip system, resulted in the orientation of the band as shown in Fig. • Removal of the θ 2 oriented slip plane did not change the orientation of the kink band formed, and it is similar to as shown in Fig. • Removal of the layer parallel slip system and just considering the double symmetric slip system with the same orientations, as before, did not change the orientation of the kink band formed, as shown in Fig. • We consider different orientations of slip vectors (θ 1 = θ 2 ) from 20 • to 45 • for Cu, and keep the slip vector orientation for Nb to be the same i.e. θ 1 = θ 2 = 45 • . Kink bands form for slip vector orientations from 20 • to 30 • , but for 35 • to 45 • kink bands do not form, and NMLs undergo more uniform compression. The stress-strain response with just 2 slip systems is relatively stronger as compared to the 3-slip system case, as shown in Fig. We further compare the field plots of GND density (ρ g ) with/without the layer parallel slip system as shown in Fig. Another interesting observation is that the domain-averaged rotation, with respect to the initial orientation, decreases with an increase in the initial orientation angle of the slip vectors from the loading axis, in the range of initial orientations where kink bands form. This shows that in order to accommodate the same level of plastic deformation, slip vectors with smaller angular deviation from the loading axis rotate more on average during plastic deformation. We investigate the effect of layer thickness on the formation of kink bands in NMLs. It was experimentally observed in the work by Nizolek et al. [NMB + 15] that kink bands do not form and homogeneous deformation is observed for layer thickness greater than 250 nm. We run our simulation with the same parameters as stated in Table In this section, we investigate the response of NML in three cases. For case (i), we take the usual parameters (k 0 = 20, l = 0.01732, V = 0), while for case (ii) the parameters are (k 0 = 0, l = 0, V = 0), and for case (iii) the parameters taken are (k 0 = 0, l = 0, V = 0). Physically, case (ii) corresponds to just Voce's law-based hardening (without the effects of GND hardening) and no plastic strain rate due to mesoscopic core energy. For case (iii), in addition to case (ii), there is no plastic straining due to the motion of GNDs, and this case is closest to conventional plasticity within our unified crystal plasticity and dislocation mechanics framework. As expected, with no hardening from GNDs accounted for in case (ii) and case (iii), we obtain a weaker strain-hardening response, as compared to case (i). It was observed in numerical simulations that kink bands do not form for case (ii) and case (iii), as shown in Fig. In this section, the layer direction of NML is aligned perpendicular to the compression loading direction. As observed in the experiments [BMC + 13], kink bands do not form for layer perpendicular compression and the deformation of the NML is shear-driven parallel to the layer direction. This results in material flow under shearing within the individual layers as shown in Fig. • The numerical results that we have obtained are with continuous plastic flow across the interfaces, imposing continuity of certain components of plastic strain rate across the interface. Moreover, we see the accumulation of GND density across the interface (refer to Fig. Using 'micro-hard' boundary conditions within SGP models would make it difficult to reproduce drastically different scalings in the micropillar compression experiments for two different configurations (90 • and 45 • oriented metal thin film with respect to compression loading axis), as experimentally observed in • Our model is not able to reproduce size dependence on the initial yield strength, as observed in the micropillar compression experiments of single crystal pure Ni [UDFN04]; to our knowledge, SGP-based theories have not modeled these experiments either. Most SGP theories are able to predict a significant size effect at initial yield in the presence of boundary constraints or in the presence of inhomogeneous deformation, without being able to fundamentally distinguish boundary constraints arising from the kinematics of dislocation slip • SGP studies of micropillar confined thin film plasticity and kink banding [KN19, KTN21, ZLC23], usually employ a ∼ 0 value of work hardening to reproduce experimental behavior, raising the question of accurate representation of macroscopic behavior by the models. Moreover, the SGP studies of This work reports a preliminary study of the modeling of kink-banding in NML within the MFDM framework. We report reasonable success, which further strengthens the ability of the MFDM framework to model important and challenging problems in the field of modern plasticity. Our simulations of a minimalistic model recover important experimental results in the compression of NMLs such as: • dependence of kink-band formation on the layer thickness. • kink bands do not form when the layer direction is aligned perpendicular to the compression loading direction, and there is shear-driven deformation within the layers of NML. At this time we are unable to provide a detailed analysis of the location of the kink bands in our numerical simulations. Rough speculation in this regard is as follows: the bands cannot cross the top and bottom boundaries because of the applied velocity boundary conditions. The corners of the sample result in stress concentrations due to geometric and changes in velocity boundary conditions on intersecting external boundaries. These stress concentrations may be the source of the location of the bands with the orientation governed by the most active slip systems. Of course, there are subtle details of the effects of the GND evolution that definitely affect the localization of the band and the layer length scale effects. Such a detailed understanding of the localization of the kink band is a fundamental challenge for future work as is the modeling of the full 3-D geometry of NML samples and the crystallography of actual slip systems present in Cu and Nb. The prediction of experimentally observed kink bands in NMLs [NMB + 15, ZLS + 22] along with the micropillar confined thin film plasticity [MCM14, MZHM16] form a discerning, critical set of key experimental tests of mesoscale plasticity theories, to be accomplished without ad-hoc model modifications on a case-by-case basis. The MFDM model has been shown to be in qualitative accord with these experimental tests, building confidence in its adequacy as a model for the intricate phenomena involved in mesoscale plasticity.