The local magnetic susceptibility of the spin-triplet superconductor UTe2 has been investigated by positive muon (μ + ) Knight shift measurements in the normal state. Three distinct μ + Knight shift components are observed for a magnetic field applied parallel to the c axis. Two of these exhibit a breakdown in the linear relationship with the bulk magnetic susceptibility (χ) below a temperature T * ∼ 30 K, which points to a gradual emergence of a correlated Kondo liquid. Below Tr ∼ 12 K linearity is gradually restored, indicating partial relocalization of the Kondo liquid quasiparticles. The third Knight shift component is two orders of magnitude larger, and despite the c-axis alignment of the external field, scales with the a-axis χ above Tr ∼ 12 K. We conjecture that this component is associated with magnetic clusters and the change in the temperature dependence of all three Knight shift components below Tr is associated with a change in magnetic correlations. Our findings indicate that prior to the onset of superconductivity the development of the itinerant heavy-electron fluid is halted by a gradual development of local U 5f -moment fluctuations. Solid-state materials exhibiting odd-parity superconductivity have long been of fundamental interest. Today these are recognized as holding great promise for providing practical solutions to limitations in spintronics Within conventional spin-fluctuation theory, oddparity pairing is expected to be mediated by ferromagnetic (FM) fluctuations Experimental observations indicate that the superconducting state of UTe 2 emerges from a well-developed heavy Fermi liquid. In particular, the temperature dependence of the electronic specific heat (C el ∝ T ) and the electrical resistivity (ρ ∝ T 2 ) below T ∼ 5 K Here we report on the utilization of the positive muon (μ + ) to probe the local magnetic susceptibility of a UTe 2 single crystal grown by a chemical vapor transport (CVT) method Our μSR measurements were performed using the Nu-Time spectrometer at the TRIUMF Centre for Molecular and Materials Science. Most of the measurements were done with H applied parallel to the c axis (H c) and perpendicular to the initial muon spin polarization P μ (0), in a so-called transverse field (TF) configuration. The muon spin precesses about the local magnetic field B μ at its stopping site with a frequency f μ = γ μ B μ /2π, where γ μ /(2π) = 135.54 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio. The frequency f μ is obtained from the oscillatory TF-μSR asymmetry spectrum (see Fig. The term K 0 is due to the Pauli paramagnetism of the conduction electrons sensed by the μ + via the Fermi contact interaction. The second term K 5f is proportional to the susceptibility of the localized U 5f -moments χ 5f (T ), which has two contributions: (i) the direct dipole-dipole interaction between the local 5f -moments and the μ + , and (ii) the additional polarization of the conduction electrons by the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction with the localized moments. The formation of a heavy-electron fluid introduces an additional local magnetic susceptibility component χ HF (T ) that the μ + may couple to. Figure where a 0 is the total initial asymmetry and a i , σ i , B i and φ i are the initial asymmetry, depolarization rate, average internal field and phase angle of the individual components. Fits to Eq. ( Figure Figure Based on a two-fluid description of the Kondo lattice where χ cc , χ f f and χ cf are spin susceptibilities associated with the unhybridized conduction electrons, unhybridized local f -moments, and spin polarization of the conduction electrons by the correlated f -moments, A is a coupling constant associated with the on-site hyperfine interaction of the nuclear spin with the conduction electrons, and B is a coupling constant associated with a transferred hyperfine interaction via orbital overlap with the localized f wavefunction on neighboring atoms and an indirect interaction with the local f -moments mediated by the conduction electrons. In the two-fluid model to the hyperfine coupling constants A and B being very close in value, as found to be the case for certain nuclei and external field directions in other heavy-fermion compounds At temperatures above T * , χ c (T ) is dominated by the unhybridized local 5f -moments, so that K 2 ∝ χ c ≈ χ f f . The deviation from this linear relation that occurs below ∼ 30 K diminishes below T r ∼ 12 K, and linear scaling appears to be restored at T ∼ 2.5 K [see Fig. shown in Fig. The depolarization rate σ 3 associated with K 3 increases rapidly below 20 K (see Fig. The onset of gradual relocalization at T r ∼ 12 K basically coincides with the strong increase of χ a (T ) with decreasing temperature, a saturation of the real part of the static susceptibility in INS measurements Our findings suggest that the evolution of the heavyelectron Fermi liquid in UTe 2 is halted by the development of critical localized spin fluctuations below T r ∼ 12 K. While the exact cause is unknown, it also appears to unlock the magnetic moment of defect-induced magnetic clusters from the a axis. Remarkably, the relocalization of the U-5f moments does not influence signa-tures of the heavy-electron Fermi-liquid in transport and NMR 1/T 1 T measurements. The coexistence of decoupled localized moments and a Fermi liquid in UTe 2 may be a consequence of an underscreened Kondo lattice 