A polymer network fractures by breaking covalent bonds, but the experimentally measured strength of the polymer network is orders of magnitude lower than the strength of covalent bonds. We investigate the effect of statistical variation of the number of links in polymer chains on strength using a parallel chain model. Each polymer chain is represented by a freely-jointed chain, with a characteristic J-shaped force-extension curve. The chain carries entropic forces for most of the extension and carries covalent forces only for a narrow range of extension. The entropic forces are orders of magnitude lower than the covalent forces. Chains with a statistical distribution of the number of links per chain are pulled between two rigid parallel plates. Chains with fewer links attain covalent forces and rupture at smaller extensions, while chains with more links still carry entropic forces. We compute the applied force on the rigid plates as a function of extension and define the strength of the parallel chain model by the maximum force divided by the total number of chains. With the J-shaped forceextension curve of each chain, even a small scatter in the number of links per chain greatly reduces the strength of the parallel chain model. We further show that the strength of the parallel chain model relates to the scatter in the number of links per chain according to a power law. Imagine the following experimental setup. A box-shaped sample of material has its opposite sides attached to parallel plates. The distance between these plates is slowly increasing and the elastic force acting upon these plates due to the presence of the material sample between them is being continuously measured. This process is continued till the complete rupture of the material sample. The maximal value of the force measured in this process divided by the cross-sectional area of the sample is strength. A highly elastic material, such as silica glass or a polyacrylamide hydrogel, fractures by breaking covalent bonds. However, the experimentally measured strength of such a material is orders of magnitude lower than the strength of covalent bonds A hydrogel is a polymer network swollen with water. Water has low viscosity so the friction between polymer chains is low. When stretched, the polymer network deforms with near-perfect elasticity. The elastic deformation is due to the entropy of polymer chains The polymer network has polymer chains with different numbers of links per chain. When the network is stretched near a rupture, only a small fraction of the polymer chains are stressed to the covalent bond strength, and other polymer chains still carry entropic forces. Recall that the covalent bond energy is several eV, and the thermal energy is on the order of kT = 1/40 eV at room temperature, where k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature. The two types of energy differ by about two orders of magnitude. For either entropic force or energetic force, the force scales with energy divided by the atomic bond length. This picture predicts that the strength of the polymer network is about two orders of magnitude lower than the strength of covalent bonds. We hypothesize that the large reduction in strength is caused by statistical variation of the lengths of polymer chains. We test this hypothesis using an idealized model. Because the experimentally measured strength of a polymer network is unaffected by small crack-like z < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " Y o / q t Y g M z R k i 0 n d H z e g 3 p w m x s l o = " > A A A B 6 H i c d V D L S g N B E O y N r x h f U Y 9 e B o P g a d m The parallel chain model. A large number of polymer chains are arranged in parallel and attached to two rigid plates. Each polymer chain consists of a random number of monomers. When the two rigid plates are pulled apart by a pair of forces F , all polymer chains are stretched to the same end-to-end distance z. flaws, we ignore any effect of stress concentration and adopt a model in which all polymer chains are stretched in parallel between two rigid plates (Fig. A J-shaped force-extension curve is predicted by Kuhn and Grün The J-shaped force-extension curve has been combined with a scatter in the number of links per chain before. Itskov and Knyazeva Insights into the mechanics of fracture of polymer networks were given in recent works by means of modeling and simulation. Yu et al. In this work, we focus our attention on the question that was not specifically investigated in previous work. Our goal is to understand and quantify the effect of the scatter of the number of links per chain on strength. The distribution of the number of links per chain in a polymer network has been rarely measured. Motivated by experimental data The Weibull distribution has an analytical form with well-studied statistical characteristics. Let n be the number of links per chain. The Weibull distribution has the cumulative distribution function (CDF) The parameters m > 0 and n 0 > 0 describe, respectively, the shape and the scale of the Weibull distribution. The CDF F (n) is the probability for the number of links per chain to be less or equal to n. At n = 0, the CDF has an infinite slope when m < 1, a finite slope when m = 1, and a zero slope when m > 1. Therefore, to make small the probability for a chain to have a small number of links, we require m ≥ 1. When m → 1, the CDF approaches an exponential distribution. The smaller the value of m is, the larger the scatter in the number of links per chain is. When m → ∞, the CDF approaches a step-function. That is, the number of links per chain is deterministic, n = n 0 . Thus, we restrict the shape parameter in the range 1 ≤ m < ∞. We allow the scale parameter n 0 to be an arbitrary positive number. The Weibull distribution has the probability density function (PDF), p = dF/dn: Inspecting Eq. ( The mean μ and the standard deviation σ for the Weibull distribution are respectively given by where Γ(•) is the gamma function defined by The coefficient of variation defined as the ratio of the standard deviation and the mean, C v = σ/μ, is a dimensionless measure of scatter. For the Weibull distribution, the coefficient of variation depends on m but not on n 0 as evident from ( The dip in the data occurs because three unload-reload cycles are performed at this point before the stretch is further increased. Each polymer chain has a force-extension curve, f (z, n), where f is the force on the chain, and z is the extension. The force-extension curve depends on the number of links in the chain, n. The number of parallel chains is assumed to be large so that the mean force of the parallel chain model is given by In the remainder of the paper, we will evaluate this integral for several types of force-extension curves. The freely-jointed chain of n links has the following force-extension curve ( where f is the force pulling the chain at two ends, z is the extension in the direction of the applied force, b is the length per link, and L(g) = coth g -1/g is the Langevin function. We will refer to Eq. ( The breaking force is on the order of 1 nano-Newton, which is orders of magnitude larger than the entropic force. This breaking force is assigned to every chain. If the force on a chain exceeds f b , the chain breaks. An ideal parallel chain model is considered for comparison, in which all polymer chains have the same number of links, deform at the same stretch, and break simultaneously. The strength of the ideal model equals the breaking force f b . Note that in experiments of rupturing a polymer network, the strength is defined by the maximal stress, i.e. the maximal force per unit area. In the parallel chain model, the area is constant, and we will define strength by the maximal force per polymer chain. Upon changing the integration variable from n to n/n 0 , Eq. ( The integration of Eq. ( A r e n C f n x X l 3 P q a t S 8 5 s 5 g D 8 g f P 5 A y F + l k A = < / l a t e x i t > Hereafter, we will use the coefficient of variation C v , instead of m, to characterize the scatter in the number of links per chain. When C = 0, all have same number of links per chain, so the normalized strength is 200, the normalized breaking (see Eq. ( We define the extensibility by the extension at which the force peaks. The extensibility decreases as the number of links per chain scatters more (Fig. We note a fact about the Weibull distribution. The median is given by The median moves to lower n as m decreases, or as C v increases. Although This equation is also plotted in Fig. We consider two additional force-extension curves: one is linear, and the other is a modified Langevin function (Fig. The linear force-extension relation terminates when the force reaches the breaking force f = f b at extension z = nb. The modified Langevin force-extension relation takes the form The parameter K is introduced to fit this equation to the force-extension curve of an individual polyacrylamide chain measured in the experiment using an atomic force microscope In Eq. ( Graphs of the normalized strength f max b/(kT ) of the parallel chain model as a function of the coefficient of variation C v = σ/μ for the Langevin, modified Langevin, and linear force-extension relations are plotted in Fig. where A and q are constants that need to be determined. We can compare these results with the experimental data for the polyacrylamide hydrogel A polymer network ruptures by breaking covalent bonds, but the experimentally measured strength is orders of magnitude lower than the ideal strength that would occur if all polymer chains ruptured simultaneously. We have studied this large difference using a parallel chain model. The model assumes a statistical distribution of the number of links per polymer chain, but individual chains break independently without stress concentration. The model represents each individual chain by freely-joined links, which undergoes entropic elasticity. For most of the extension, the entropic force is orders of magnitude lower than that of a covalent bond, leading to a J-shaped force-extension relation. When the parallel chain model reaches the peak force, only a small fraction of the polymer chains reach the covalent bond strength, and most other chains bear the entropic force. With the J-shaped forceextension relation, even a small amount of scatter in the number of links per polymer chain significantly reduces strength. However, the reduction is not enough to account for the strength measured experimentally. This finding indicates that a polymer network will concentrate stress so that at rupture an even smaller fraction of polymer chains reach the covalent bond strength than that predicted by the parallel chain model. For brevity, we will abuse notation and denote the normalized nondimensional force f b/(kT ) by f and the nondimensional extension z/b by z throughout the Appendix. The goal of our analysis is to understand the origin of a power-law relationship between the strength of the parallel chain model and the coefficient of variation of the form of Eq. ( Therefore, we make the following assumptions. Assumption 1. The force-extension relation f (z/n) can be approximated by a function of the form: where g(•) is a smooth function such that g(0) = 0 and g(ξ 2ξ 1 ) = f b , the breaking force, r is a parameter, and a is a small parameter. Assumption 1 holds for the Langevin and the modified Langevin force-extension relation. Assumption 2. The family of probability distributions p(n; σ, μ), where σ and μ are, respectively, the mean and the standard deviation, has the property that the maximum of np(n; μ, σ) is approximately proportional to μ/σ, i.e., max where B is a constant and C v = σ/μ is the coefficient of variation. Note that this assumption holds for a family of distributions with probability density functions of the form provided that μ is much greater than σ (at least by the factor of 3). Then the maximum of the product np(n; μ, σ) is achieved near n = μ. Hence max Our goal is to show that max where A is a constant. According to Assumption 1, for a fixed z, the approximation f (z/n) to the force-extension function f (z/n) is zero outside the interval [z/ξ 2 , z/ξ 1 ] ≈ [(z/r)(1a), (z/r)(1 + a)]. The length of this interval, l = 2az/r is small. We approximate the interval by the midpoint quadrature. The midpoint rule is exact if the integrand is linear and admits an error O(l 3 ) otherwise. Using the midpoint rule we obtain: The strength is the maximum max z f (z). Assumption 2 implies that max z f (z) ≈ 2ag(ra) max which is the desired conclusion. Now we derive the power law for particular families of probability distributions. To find the maximizer of zp(z) we differentiate it and set its derivative to zero. This results in the following equation for the maximizer z: Table The Gaussian distribution. The Gaussian distribution has the PDF Eq. ( We assume that C v is small enough so that the negative values are extremely unlikely, i.e., C v ≤ 3. Then z max is approximated by Plugging Eq. ( Therefore, the empirical power law is not specific to the Weibull distribution but is expected to be observed for any distribution of lengths of polymer chains that are approximately Gaussian near their maxima.