Topological quantum computation by way of braiding of Majorana fermions is not universal quantum computation. There are several attempts to make universal quantum computation by introducing some additional quantum gates or quantum states. However, there is an embedding problem that M -qubit gates cannot be embedded straightforwardly in N qubits for N > M . This problem is inherent to the Majorana system, where logical qubits are different from physical qubits because braiding operations preserve the fermion parity. By introducing 2N -body interactions of Majorana fermions, topological-nontopological hybrid universal quantum computation is shown to be possible. Especially, we make a systematic construction of the C n Z gate, C n NOT gate and the C n SWAP gate. A quantum computer is a promising next generation computer Braiding of Majorana fermions is the most promising method for topological quantum computation There are several attempts to make universal quantum computation based on Majorana fermions In this paper, we systematically construct various quantum gates for universal quantum computation by introducing 2N -body interactions of Majorana fermions preserving the fermion parity. We have required the fermion parity preservation because it is beneficial to use the standard braiding process as much as possible due to its topological protection. By combining topological quantum gates generated by braiding and additional quantum gates generated by many-body interactions of Majorana fermions, topological-nontopological hybrid universal quantum computation is possible. It would be more robust than conventional universal quantum computation because the quantum gates generated by braiding are topologically protected. We systematically construct arbitrary C n -phase shift gates, the Hadamard gate, C n NOT gates and C n SWAP gates in the N -qubit system by this generalization. Supplementary Materials are prepared for detailed analysis in the case of small qubits to make clear a general analysis for the N -qubit system. Physical qubits and logical qubits: Majorana fermions are described by operators γ α satisfying the anticommutation relations {γ α , γ β } = 2δ αβ . ( The braid operator is defined by It satisfies B 4 αβ = 1 and there is a corresponding anti-braiding operator B -1 αβ = B 3 αβ . The qubit basis is defined by with n α = 0 or 1, where ordinary fermion operators are constructed from two Majorana fermions as 2N + 4 Majorana fermions constitute N + 1 physical qubits. The braiding operation preserves the fermion parity P αβ ≡ iγ β γ α , where it commutes with the braid operator B αβ , It means that if we start with the even parity state |00 • • • 0⟩ physical , the states after any braiding process should have even fermion parity. Therefore, in order to construct adding one qubit n 0 uniquely so that N α=0 n α = 0 mod 2. Alternatively, when a physical qubit |n N • • • n 2 n 1 n 0 ⟩ logical is given, we associate to it a logical qubit |n N • • • n 2 n 1 ⟩ physical just by eliminating the qubit n 0 . An example reads as follows, This correspondence is different from those in the previous works 2N -body interactions: A generic operator involving two Majorana fermions γ α and γ β is expressed as U αβ = a 1 + a 2 γ α + a 3 γ β + a 4 γ β γ α , since higher-order terms γ p α γ q β are absent for p ≥ 2 and q ≥ 2 because of the relations Then, by imposing the parity conservation condition [U αβ , P αβ ] = 0 with the fermion-parity operator The choice θ = π/4 corresponds to the braiding operation. In general, θ can take an arbitrary value. This operator transforms the Majorana operators as We show that non-Clifford gates are constructed based on them. The two-body operation is realized by the unitary dynamics, with The four-body operation is introduced αβγδ (θ) defined by which keeps the parity We use an abbreviation, The relation holds because of the coefficient i in Eq.( It is realized by the unitary dynamics, B with Similary, we may define the 2N -body operation by It satisfies the unitary condition, We also define It is realized by the 2N -body interaction of Majorana fermions N physical qubits: We consider the 2N Majorana fermion system. The explicit actions on 2N physical qubits are given by for odd numbers and for even numbers, where we have defined the rotation along the z axis by and N -1 logical qubits: N -1 logical qubits are constructed from N physical qubits based on the correspondence Local z rotation is possible for any qubits as in Local x rotation is possible for any qubits as in where we have defined the rotation along the x axis by and Accordingly, the Hadamard gate is embedded in arbitrary N qubits by using the decomposition formula, Next, we show that it is possible to construct any 2 N diagonal operators based on many-body Majorana interactions, and hence, an arbitrary C n -phase-shift gate is constructed. By applying the Hadamard gate, it is possible to construct the C n NOT gate. There are N C M patterns of 2M -body unitary evolutions in 2N physical qubits. By taking a sum, we have N M =1N C M = 2 N independent physical qubits. They produce 2 N -1 independent logical qubits because there are complementary operators B α (θ) and B α (θ) which produce the same logical qubits. The complementary operators are denoted as where α indicates a set of indices which is the complementary set of α in the indices 1 ∼ 2N . For example, we consider the case for four qubits N = 4, where eight Majorana fermions exists. The following different braiding operators B 56 and B 123478 give an identical logical quantum gate where α = 56 and α = 123478 with N = 4. See the full list of the complementary braiding operators for four physical qubits in Eq.(S143) in Supplementary Material. There are 2 N -1 independent components in N -1 logical qubits. On the other hand, there are 2 N -1 independent manybody Majorana operators. Hence, it is possible to construct arbitrary diagonal operators by solving the linear equation. They include the C n -phase shift gates. Using the relation ) with q p = 0, 1, the C n -phase shift gate is constructed as where B odd contains odd number of σ z operators for logical qubits, while B even contains even number of σ z operators for logical qubits. By setting φ = π, we obtain the C n Z gate. For example, the CZ gate in three qubits are embedded as where U p→q CZ indicates that the controlloed qubit is p and the target qubit is q. The CCφ phase-shift gate acting on three logical qubits in given by Especially, the CCZ gate is constructed as follows, The Toffoli gate is constructed by applying the Hadamard gate to the CCZ gate as in See Fig. (p,q)→r CZ indicates that the controlloed qubits are p and q while the target qubit is r. See Fig. The C n NOT gate is constructed from C n Z gate as where the Hadamard gate is applied to nth qubit. See Fig. where U p→p C n NOT indicates that the target qubit is p and the others are controlled qubits, where p indicates the complementary qubits of the qubit p. See Fig. As a result, an arbitrary phase-shift gate, the C n NOT gate and the Hadamard gate are constructed in any logical qubits, and hence, the universal quantum computation is possible based on many-body interactions. We have analyzed the embedding problem inherent to the Majorana system, and shown that universal quantum computation is possible by introducing many-body interactions of Majorana fermions. Especially, the C n -phase shift gate, the C n NOT and the C n SWAP gate are systematically constructed, which are the basic ingredients of universal quantum computation based on the Solovay-Kitaev theorem. Although it was previously pointed out that four-body interactions of Majorana fermions are enough for universal quantum computation The proposed quantum gates based on many-body interactions of Majorana fermions are not topologically protected because they are not generated by the standard braiding operations. By combining topological quantum computation based on braiding of Majorana fermions and nontopological quantum computation based on many-body interaction of Majorana fermions, topological-nontopological hybrid universal quantum computation is possible. It would be more robust than conventional universal quantum computation because many of quantum gates generated by braiding are topologically protected. Recently, quantum simulation on Majorana fermions is studied in superconducting qubits Motohiko Ezawa Department of Applied Physics, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan We consider a one-dimensional chain of Majorana fermions and only consider the braiding between adjacent Majorana fermions. We denote B α ≡ B α,α+1 . The braid operators B α satisfies the Artin braid group relation The embedding of an M -qubit quantum gate to an N -qubit system with M < N is a nontrivial problem in braiding of Majorana fermions. There are two partial solutions. One is setting additional qubits to be 0 as ancilla qubits, where every quantum gates can be embedded. The other is not to use the braiding B 1 . We discuss both of these in what follows. 1. Ancilla embedding N -1 logical qubits are embedded in N logical qubits if the additional qubit is 0, This is because the correspondence between the physical and logical qubits are identical if the N -th qubit is 0. It is assured by the fact that we can use the same even parity basis in (N -1) qubits because the N th qubit is 0. On the other hand, the action is different if the additional qubit is 1, This is because it is necessary to use the odd parity basis in physical N -1 qubits so that total parity is even in the presence of the N th qubit. It is still useful because there are many quantum algorithms where ancilla qubits are 0. We study what M -qubit quantum gates can be embedded to an N -qubit quantum gate with M < N . First, we examine the case for one logical qubit as a simplest example. The braiding B 1 acts differently on the even and odd bases, where On the other hand, B 2 and B 3 act on even and odd bases in the same way, Similarly, B k for k ≥ 4 has the same action on the even and odd bases. We find that embedding is possible if we do not use the braiding B 1 . Hence, all of the Pauli gates, the Hadamard transformation, the iSWAP gate can be embedded to the N -qubit quantum gates. On the other hand, the quantum gates which use braiding B 1 cannot be embedded to larger qubit as it is. For example, the CZ gate is given by the braiding e -iπ/4 B -1 once it is embedded to three logical qubits. They are different, In general, M -quantum gates cannot be embedded in N qubit. We solve the problem by introducing many-body interaction of Majorana fermions in Eq.( We discuss how to construct single logical qubit The basis of physical qubits is given by By taking the even parity basis as single logical qubit is constructed from two physical qubits. The braid operator B 1 is written in terms of fermion operators, which operates on two physical qubits (S10) as[2] Taking the even parity basis, the action is where the basis for the logical qubit is defined by The braid operation is written as in terms of the S gate defined by The braid operator B 2 is written in terms of fermion operators, It operates on two physical qubits (S10) as where In the even parity basis, the action is It has the relation where U √ X is the square-root of X gate defined by The corresponding braiding is shown in Fig. which operates on two physical qubits (S10) as[2] In the even parity basis, the action is the same as (S16), where the S gate is defined by (S17). The corresponding braiding is shown in Fig. The corresponding braiding is shown in Fig. The corresponding braiding is shown in Fig. Then, the Pauli Y gate is given by sequential applications of B 2 and B 3 , The corresponding braiding is shown in Fig. It is known to be generated by triple braids as The corresponding braiding is shown in Fig. The even cat state is made by applying the Hadamard gate (S30) as However, a double braiding is enough for the construction of the even cat state |ψ⟩ even-cat , On the other hand, the odd cat state |ψ⟩ odd-cat is made as In order to construct two logical qubits, we use six Majorana fermions γ 1 , γ 2 , γ 3 , γ 4 , γ 5 and γ 6 . Three ordinary fermion operators are given by The basis of phycial qubits are given by The explicit braid operators on the physical qubits are Two logical qubits are constructed from three physical qubits as In the logical qubit basis, the braiding operators are where R x is defined by (S21) and U xx is defined by (S20). The two-qubit Pauli gates are defined by where k 1 and k 2 take 0, x, y and z. The Pauli Z gates are generated by braiding B 2k+1 with odd indices, They are summarized as where n 1 and n 2 take 0 or 1. The Pauli X gates are generated by braiding with even indices B 2k , It should be noted that B 2 4 does not generate I 2 ⊗ σ X but generate σ X ⊗ σ X . We show the braiding for Pauli gates in Fig. The Hadamard gate acting on the first qubit can be embedded as (S44) The Hadamard gate acting on the second qubit can be embedded as It requires more braiding than the previous results It is known that the controlled-Z (CZ) gate is generated as See Fig. It is also known that the controlled-NOT (CNOT) gate is generated by 7 braiding See Fig. which is realized by 7 braiding as See Fig. We list up various quantum gates generated by braiding. The anti-CNOT gate is defined by which is generated by 7 braiding It can be decomposed into U CX = (I 2 ⊗ U X ) U CNOT . If we use this relation, 9 braiding are necessary. See Fig. The iSWAP gate is defined by which is realized by the six braiding The double CNOT gate is defined by[9] which is realized by See Fig. which is realized by See Fig. which is realized by See Fig. We define the entangled Hadamard gate by which is realized by We note that it is obtained by a permutation of the third and fourth columns of the cross product of the Hadamard gates given by which leads to a relation H . Hence, it is realized by H and U H ⊗ U H are the Hadamard gates and they are useful for various quantum algorithms. The equal-coefficient state is constructed as where |j⟩ decimal logical is a decimal representation of qubits. It is a fundamental entangled state for two qubits. We use eight Majorana fermions in order to construct three logical qubits, The explicit braid actions on the physical qubits are Three logical qubits are constructed from four physical qubits as Explicit matrix representations for the braiding operator are The three-qubit Pauli gates are defined by where k 1 , k 2 and k 3 take 0, x, y and z. The Pauli Z gates are generated by braiding operators B 2k+1 with odd indices They are summarized as where n 1 n 2 and n 3 take 0 or 1. The Pauli X gates are generated by braiding operators with even numbers, We show the corresponding braiding in Fig. solely by braiding. This problem is solved by introducing many-body interactions of Majorana fermions as in Eq.(S142). The other Pauli gates can be generated by sequential applications of the above Pauli gates. We first search braiding operators for the quantum gates generated by odd double braiding, There are eight patterns represented by the Pauli Z gates Next, we search real and diagonal gates obtained by the following odd braiding We search states whose components are ±1. There are four additional quantum gates, whose traces are zero TrU diag = 0, In addition, there are additional quantum gates, whose traces are nonzero TrU diag ̸ = 0, It is natural to anticipate that the CZ gate and the CCZ gate are generated by even braiding because they are diagonal gates. However, this is not the case by checking all 4 3 patterns of braiding. As a result, the even braiding do not generate the CZ gates and the CCZ gate This problem is solved by introducing many-body interactions of Majorana fermions as shown in the main text. The Hadamard gate can be embedded in the first qubit as as in the case of (S44). We also find that the Hadamard gate can be embedded in the third qubit as On the other hand, it is very hard to embed the Hadamard gate in the second qubit It is possible by introducing many-body interactions of Majorana fermions. The Hadamard gate for the N -th qubit is given by S14. Two-qubit quantum gates embedded in three-qubit quantum gates The iSWAP gate can be embedded to a three-qubit topological gate because it does not involve B 1 and is given by See Fig. We find that the three-qubit Hadamard transformation is generated as There is a relation where U 3P is defined by 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 It is impossible to generate the W state by braiding because the number of the nonzero terms of the W state is 3, which contradicts the fact that the number of the nonzero terms must be 1, 2, 4 and 8 for three qubit states generated by braiding. The braid representation of 2N + 2 Majorana fermions is equivalent to the π/2 rotation in SO(2N + 2), suggested by the fact that braid operators are represented by the Gamma matrices The iSWAP gate is embedded as We consider odd braiding defined by where n k is an integer satisfying 1 ≤ n k ≤ N + 1. They are Abelian braiding because there are no adjacent braiding. Then, there are only 4 k patterns. Especially, we consider odd double braiding defined by are interesting because they are identical to where m k = 0, 1. Namely, every Pauli gates constructing from the Pauli Z gate can be generated. Next, we consider even braiding defined by They are also the Abelian braiding, where each braiding commutes each other. We also consider even double braiding defined by On the other hand, it is impossible to construct the Pauli X gate except for the first qubit. See Eq.( The Hadamard transformation is used for the initial process of various quantum algorithm such as the Kitaev phase estimation algorithm, the Deutsch algorithm, the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm, the Simon algorithm, the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm, the Grover algorithm and the Shor algorithm. It is generated by the braiding (S104) The equal-coefficient state is generated as where |j⟩ logical is the decimal representation of the qubit. In the even parity basis, the action is which is identical to the rotation along the x axis 