Kinks, point-like geometrical defects along dislocations, domain walls, and DNA, are stable and mobile, as solutions of a sine-Gordon wave equation. While they are widely investigated for crystal deformations and domain wall motions, electronic properties of individual kinks have received little attention. In this work, electronically and topologically distinct kinks are discovered along electronic domain walls in a correlated van der Waals insulator of 1T -TaS2. Mobile kinks and antikinks are identified as trapped by pinning defects and imaged in scanning tunneling microscopy. Their atomic structures and in-gap electronic states are unveiled, which are mapped approximately into Su-Schrieffer-Heeger solitons. The twelve-fold degeneracy of the domain walls in the present system guarantees an extraordinarily large number of distinct kinks and antikinks to emerge. Such large degeneracy together with the robust geometrical nature may be useful for handling multilevel information in van der Waals materials architectures. When a discrete symmetry is broken in an electronic system, degenerate ground states are generated. They would coexist to have an inhomogeneous phase landscape, as laterally connected by various line defects of domain walls (DWs). These line defects have provided intriguing physics such as topological edge modes in topological materials and interesting functionality in various ferroic materials for spintronic Layered transition metal dichalcogenide 1T -TaS 2 [Figure The solitonic nature of DW kinks is further manifested by their electronic states. The local density of states (LDOS) for the kink is directly probed by the differential tunneling conductance (dI/dV ) with STM as shown in Figure The main features of the kink electronic states are reasonably reproduced by DFT calculations. In our calculations, the DW4 structure exhibits its major in-gap state at +170 meV [Figure The localized kink states can be understood by the emergence of edge states in the DW 1D electronic channel. In order to examine the topological property of the DW and its edge modes, we construct a simplified tight binding model. One complication here is that the electronic states of the DW have significant hybridization with one edge of the neighboring domain [red dashed lines in Figure We disclose electronic and topological properties of kinks along electronic domain walls in a van der Waals material of 1T -TaS 2 with a correlated CDW phase. Well-defined kinks and antikinks are identified along the CDW DWs by STM, which are mobile between pinning defects. Their atomic structures and in-gap electronic states are clearly resolved in STM and STS, which are well reproduced in our atomic structure models within the DFT calculations. Through the tight-binding approximation, these kinks and antikinds are mapped into Su-Schrieffer-Heeger topological solitons. Since various different domain walls can be created in a metastable way STM and STS experiments: 1T -TaS 2 single crystal was cleaved in high vacuum for a clean surface. The sample was pre-cooled at 78 K for 30 minutes and transferred to a cryogenic STM (4.4 K) kept in ultrahigh vacuum for the STM / STS measurements. STM images were obtained by constant-current mode with a sample bias of -600 mV and the set current of 30 pA. We kept a small tunneling current (a large junction resistance of ∼10 GΩ) to avoid the kink from moving while the scanning. Spectroscopic data were obtained using a lock-in amplifier with a frequency of 1 kHz and a modulation of 5 mV. DFT calculations: DFT calculations were performed by using the Vienna ab initio simulation package The PythTb package was used for the tight-binding calculations where c † i and c i are creation and annihilation operators, and A and B represent two sites of a unit cell [Figure 