We carried out X-ray diffraction and Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (EXAFS) studies to investigate the origin of the low lattice thermal conductivity in BiCuSeO, and the role of silver (Ag) doping in doped samples. BiCuSeO is a promising thermoelectric material with high thermoelectric efficiency, which is significantly enhanced by doping either single Ag dopants or dual dopants (Pb and Ag). We verified that the thermal displacement parameters associated with copper (Cu) are significantly large in undoped BiCuSeO. Ag dopant, which replaces Cu, was also found to have similarly large thermal displacement parameters, that remain large down to low temperatures. Our results point towards significant disorder on Cu-site in both undoped and doped BiCuSeO, which is retained by Ag dopant on replacing Cu. The disorder is observed to be localized on the Cu-site and seems to be independent of other atoms in the crystal structure. Our observation of the disorder, which could be either static or quasi-static, is consistent with a "rattling" mode scenario. Thermoelectric effects directly convert thermal energy into electrical energy, and vice-versa. They have potential applications in energy generation from waste heat, and refrigeration, and may play a major role in alleviating the looming energy crisis and global climate change issues One of the promising examples of thermoelectric materials is BiCuSeO. Its crystal structure consists of alternating layers of fluorite-like [Bi 2 O 2 ] 2+ oxide layer and anti-fluorite-like [Cu 2 Se 2 ] 2-chalcogenide layer, stacked along the c-axis Despite promising thermoelectric properties of BiCuSeO, a fundamental understanding of its physical properties is still lacking. In particular, the unusually low lattice thermal conductivity has many proposed theoretical explanations This work presents a systematic study of undoped, Ag doped and (Pb,Ag)-dual doped BiCuSeO, with the aim to examine the origin of the intrinsic low lattice thermal conductivity, and mechanism of further reduction by introduction of Ag. For this, the experimental techniques of powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (EXAFS) are employed to understand the global and local crystal structure. Temperature dependent XRD and EXAFS measurements are carried out, to investigate the dynamics through thermal displacement parameters, in order to directly study the origins of the low lattice thermal conductivity in BiCuSeO. While XRD provides accurate results about the overall 'global' crystal structure, it is not sensitive to dopants with small concentrations. In order to study structure and dynamics of these dopants, EXAFS measurements are conducted. EXAFS is an element specific spectroscopic technique, that can be used to gain information about the doping site of trace Polycrystalline (powder) samples of undoped BiCuSeO, Ag doped BiCuSeO (BiCu 1-x Ag x SeO) and (Pb,Ag)-dual doped BiCuSeO (Bi 1-x Pb x Cu 1-x Ag x SeO) for doping levels of x = {0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08} were synthesized via a solid state reaction process. The raw materials used were Bi (Alfa Aesar, 99.5%), Bi 2 O 3 (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%), Cu (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%), PbO (Sigma Aldrich, 99.9%), Ag (Sigma Aldrich, 99.9%) and Se (Alfa Aesar, 99.5%) powders. Stoichiometric mixtures of these raw materials were mixed and ground in an agate mortar and pestle. The mixtures were pressed into cylindrical pellets of 1.6 cm diameter under 50 MPa. The pellets were sealed in quartz tubes under vacuum (<10 -2 mbar). The sealed tubes were put in a box furnace, heated to 623 K and held there for 12 h. This intermediate step ensures complete reaction of Se with the elemental metals All XRD measurements were done using a Rigaku Smartlab diffractometer. The powder samples were thoroughly ground before the measurement, and mounted in Bragg-Brentano reflection geometry. Cu Kα radiation was used, with Cu Kβ blocked using a nickel filter. Heating and cooling from room temperature was done using Anton Paar DHS and DCS sample stages respectively, under vacuum (<10 -1 mbar). The DHS stage was used in the temperature range of 298-1023 K, while the DCS stage was used in the 93-773 K range. In the overlap temperature range of 303-773 K, all the XRD data and fitted parameters were found to agree, within measurement uncertainty. Hence, for visual clarity, data from the DCS stage is only shown for 93-298 K range, with the DHS stage data displayed for the range of 298-1023 K. Note that the measurements were only done up to 1023 K since BiCuSeO decomposes at higher temperatures Rietveld refinement of XRD data of all samples was done on the GSAS-II software Reitveld refinement produced fits for the data and background, and yielded the lattice constants (a, c) of the tetragonal unit cell and isotropic mean-square displacements (U iso ) for each atom. Note that U iso was computed to obtain values with reasonable error bars, since the refinement of anisotropic displacement parameters with X-ray diffraction increases uncertainty significantly. To overcome this difficulty, we used EXAFS to estimate atom-pair mean-square displacement, as described in the next section. All EXAFS measurements were carried out at the Canadian Light Source (CLS) on the Hard X-ray Micro-Analysis (HXMA) beamline 06ID-1. At room temperature (298 K), Ag K-edge (25514 eV) data was collected for all doped samples, while Cu K-edge (8979 eV) data was collected for all doped and undoped samples. For temperature dependence, the highest doping concentration (x = 0.08) of single doped and dual-doped BiCuSeO samples were chosen, along with the undoped BiCuSeO sample. The energy of the incident X-ray beam from the wiggler was selected using a double-crystal Si(111) monochromator, with higher harmonic contributions suppressed by a combination of Rh-coated mirrors and a 50% detuning of the wiggler. Relatively low concentration of Ag made transmission geometry unsuitable. Ag K-edge EXAFS measurements were performed in a 90 degree, fluorescence geometry using a 13-element Ge solid-state detector, with the sample 45 degree to the incident beam. Cu K-edge EXAFS data, on the other hand, was collected in both transmission and fluorescence geometry simultaneously, with the sample again 45 deg to the incident beam. Standard Ag and Cu foils were utilized for energy calibration, respectively. As reference, EXAFS spectra in transmission geometry were also collected on these standard foils, along with each EXAFS measurement on the actual samples. Each sample was diluted with pure boron nitride powder, finely ground, pressed into a uniform pellet, and then affixed to polyimide tape. These procedures were done in order to achieve suitable element concentration and uniformity. At least three scans were taken at each edge for each sample in order to guarantee data reproducibility and good signal-to-noise ratio. EXAFS data processing and fitting was done on the ATHENA and ARTEMIS softwares of the Demeter suite respectively where j represents different coordination shells made up of N j identical atoms at approximately the same distance from the absorbing atom; S 2 0 is the amplitude reduction factor which corrects for multi-electron scattering and other experimental effects (generally between 0.7 and 1.2); σ 2 j is the atom-pair mean-square displacement along the atom-pair distance r j ; f j (k) and δ j (k) are the scattering factor and scattering phase shift, which are provided in the FEFF program where E 0 is the theoretical Fermi level position. In data fitting, the r-space data is fit to a sum of complex phase and amplitude functions calculated using the FEFF program, to extract atom-pair distances (r j ) and thermal factors (σ 2 j ) for each atom-pair. Another two fitting parameters, S 2 0 and ∆E 0 (the difference in edge energy between the value defined for the data and the theoretical function), are also determined for each edge. In the preliminary fits, the values of S 2 0 are found to be reasonable, very close to 1, for all temperatures. Hence, in the final fits, S 2 0 is fixed to its room temperature value for all edges. In this analysis, we fit both the real and imaginary parts of the r-space data. TABLE I: Lattice constants a and c of the tetragonal unit cell, with the space group P4/nmm (No. 129), for BiCu 1-x Ag x SeO and Bi 1-x Pb x Cu 1-x Ag x SeO samples, obtained from Rietveld refinement of XRD data taken at room temperature (298 K). A. X-ray Diffraction The XRD data obtained at room temperature for all samples was fit using Rietveld refinement to extract the lattice constants of the tetragonal unit cell. The lattice constants obtained from this fitting are tabulated in Table Isotropic mean-square displacements (U iso ) were also obtained for each atom from Rietveld refinement of XRD data of undoped BiCuSeO, which will be discussed in the next section. Due to the relatively low concentration of dopants, U iso values for dopant atoms could not be estimated by Rietveld refinement. Both lattice constants and isotropic mean-square displacements were obtained from Rietveld refinement of XRD data of undoped BiCuSeO. where a is the length of the lattice constant at temperature T , a 0 is the lattice constant at T = 0 K, A is a scaling constant and Θ E is the Einstein temperature. A similar relation is used to fit lattice constant c. The quasi-harmonic fits, based on Eq. ( within experimental uncertainty. Θ E is also consistent with the value obtained through harmonic fits of U iso , as discussed below. Isotropic mean-square displacements (U iso ) of Bi, Cu, O and Se are shown in Figure Note that U iso for oxygen shows large uncertainty, due to the small atomic form factor of oxygen. The dashed lines correspond to the quasi-harmonic fits for the temperature dependence of U iso for each element. The quasi-harmonic fits only work for the temperature range of 93-700 K, after which the data for all three elements is clearly seen to diverge significantly from the harmonic fits. Both Einstein model and Debye model were used as quasi-harmonic fits for the data Debye : where is the reduced Planck constant, m is the mass of the atom, k B is the Boltzmann The value of Θ E and Θ D from the fits are 95 (±2) K and 241 (±3) K respectively, which matches values reported previously by other studies Note that the values of U iso are significantly higher for Cu, as compared to Bi, O and Se, suggesting that the displacement amplitude for Cu is higher than the other elements. In general, tightly bound atoms in a solid crystal structure are expected to have U iso vales close to 0.007 Å2 at room temperature The samples showed no significant doping dependence for room temperature EXAFS measurements, which means that the local environment of the dopant site remains the same as doping fraction increases. Further information about doping dependence can be found in the Supplemental Material To obtain quantitative information, the EXAFS data is fit to the first three shells expected for Ag replacing Cu in BiCuSeO. This three-shell fit for the data at 150 K is shown in The fits yield the atom-pair mean-square displacements (σ 2 j ) for the three fitted shells, tabulated in Table Note that the comparison of U iso and σ 2 j is possible since both represent different measures of the same physical quantity, mean-square displacement. Since both account for thermal vibrations of atoms about their equilibrium positions, it is expected that all contributions from different atom-pairs in the various σ 2 j add up to give U iso Since Ag is expected to replace Cu in BiCuSeO, Cu K-edge EXAFS measurements were also performed in order to provide a reference point of the same site. Also, having drawn the comparison of similarities in mean-square displacement values of Ag (from EXAFS) and Cu (from XRD), these measurements provide a direct comparison between the two elements based on the same technique of temperature dependent EXAFS. These measurements were conducted on the undoped, 8% Ag doped and 8% (Pb,Ag)-dual doped samples. The fit results for Cu K-edge EXAFS measurements are summarized in Table The Cu K-edge EXAFS results confirm the observation of significant disorder at the Cu-site in both undoped and doped BiCuSeO, which arises mainly along the Cu-(Cu/Ag) atom-pair. Note that the introduction of Ag at Cu-sites in the doped samples does not affect the disorder of Cu atoms, since the values of σ 2 2 are almost same for all dopings, at all temperatures. The values of overall mean-square displacement for Cu from EXAFS (sum of σ 2 j ) and XRD (U iso ) are found to match within error bar, suggesting that contributions from further shells of neighbouring atoms are not significant, compared to the second shell, Cu-(Cu/Ag), in particular. The main findings from our X-ray diffraction and EXAFS studies are our observation of the unusually large U iso parameters for Cu in undoped BiCuSeO and large σ 2 parameters for both Ag and Cu for doped BiCuSeO samples. We also observe that these "thermal" displacement parameters are independent of doping concentrations as well as temperature (at low temperatures). We will first discuss the possible origin of the observed large "thermal" parameters and the implication of our observations for thermoelectric properties of doped and undoped BiCuSeO. First, we note that U iso parameters as well as σ 2 j parameters are usually called thermal parameters because the main source of this displacement parameter is due to lattice dynamics (i.e. Debye-Waller factor), but static disorder can also contribute to these parameters. Often dynamic and static origins of the disorder can be distinguished from the temperature dependence of thermal parameters, since the dynamic contribution shows characteristic temperature dependence. However, temperature-independent thermal parameter does not automatically indicate static disorder, since quasi-static disorder, such as a low frequency fluctuation, will be temperature independent for most of the temperature range probed. While our observed large thermal parameters for Cu and Ag in Cu-site (this is further discussed below) could be either due to static or quasi-static disorder, we argue that static disorder is less likely to be the main source of the disorder. What is peculiar about the U iso data shown in Figure There exists a mechanism that could explain the quasi-static origin of the observed thermal disorder of Cu/Ag. To explain the intrinsic low lattice thermal conductivity of BiCuSeO, Vaqueiro et al. proposed a "rattling" mode mechanism The origins of intrinsic low lattice thermal conductivity in BiCuSeO have been debated to date. One of the proposed explanation suggested that the heavy Bi atom is responsible Since the flat phonon branches are limited to Cu, it suggests that a localized mode on Cu is responsible for these flat phonon branches. This is the mechanism proposed by Vaqueiro et al., a low energy, independent vibrational "rattling" mode on Cu atom, and our experimental results seem to support this scenario. Another important finding that backs up the above picture is our observation of the lack of lattice expansion with Ag doping. The introduction of Ag dopant in Cu-site does not significantly increase the lattice constants, as seen in the case of BiCu 1-x Ag x SeO in Table Since Ag 1+ ion (129 pm) is much larger in size than Cu 1+ ion (91 pm) The introduction of Ag leads to a further decrease of lattice thermal conductivity, in both single The dopant site for Pb is generally agreed upon, it is expected to replace Bi in the BiCuSeO framework, as shown in Figure Given that Ag doping does not increase static disorder parameter in our doped samples, we can conclude that the dopant is more or less uniformly (and randomly) replacing Cu atoms. The mass defect therefore given by Ag replacing Cu, coupled with the retained disorder of Ag dopant, could be the main reason for the reduced thermal conductivity. It is also worth noting that, while large σ 2 j values are observed along the Ag-(Cu/Ag) and Cu-(Cu/Ag) atom-pair in EXAFS results, the values of σ 2 j along Ag-Se and Cu-Se are found to be considerably smaller. This result is somewhat unexpected. One possibility is that, within the Cu-Se plane shown in Figure Nevertheless, the role of Se in the Cu-Se plane of BiCuSeO is unclear and should be clarified by further study. However, in the case of fluorescence measurements on very dilute samples, statistical variation is indeed the largest source of measurement uncertainty, as is the case for our Ag K-edge EXAFS data. Thus, our fits for that data give reduced-χ 2 close to 1, as is expected for good fits! S-IV. GOODNESS OF FIT FOR EXAFS