In Part I of this work, we proposed a stochastic model describing solute interactions with stationary and moving grain boundaries (GBs) and applied it to planar GBs in 1D systems. The model reproduces nonlinear GB dynamics, solute saturation in the segregation atmosphere, and all basic features of the solute drag effect. Part II of this work extends the model to 2D GBs represented by solid-on-solid interfaces. The model predicts a GB roughening transition in stationary GBs and reversible dynamic roughening in moving GBs. The impacts of the GB roughening on GB migration mechanisms, GB mobility, and the solute drag are studied in detail. The threshold effect in GB dynamics is explained by the dynamic roughening transition, which is amplified in the presence of solute segregation. The simulation results are compared with the classical models by Cahn and Lücke-Stüwe and previous computer simulations. In many alloys, the chemical components strongly interact with grain boundaries (GBs), reducing their mobility and, in some cases, pinning the GBs in place. The most common mechanism of the solute-induced retardation of GB motion is the solute drag effect, in which the GB moves slower when it carries a solute segregation atmosphere The classical solute drag models by Cahn In Part I of this work In the present paper (Part II), we extend the model to 2D systems. This will allow us to study the GB shape fluctuations in the form of either kink pairs or capillary waves. In section II, we formulate the 2D version of the model representing the GB as a solid-onsolid interface with an adjustable interface energy. The model reproduces a roughening transition in both stationary and moving boundaries. This allows us to study the dynamic roughening effect and its impact on GB migration mechanisms and the solute drag process. In the 2D version of the model, the GB is a 1D object (curve) separating two 2D grains. The model is illustrated in Fig. where γ is the GB energy per unit area assumed to be the same for all segments. For a planar interface all ε i = 0. Each GB node i is acted upon by two forces: (1) external force F applied parallel to the z-axis, and (2) local interface tension ε i-1 + ε i . At a finite temperature, each node executes a driven random walk along the z-axis. The model falls in the category of solid-on-solid (SOS) models and the absolute SOS (ASOS) model with A 3D DGSOS model was recently used to simulate solute drag by moving GBs To describe the GB dynamics, we adopt the harmonic transition state theory (TST) are the jump probabilities, and k B is Boltzmann's constant. The jump barriers E ± i are given by where u ± i is the total energy change due to the jump. This energy change includes the work ∓F a against the external force F and the energy changes, ∆ε i-1 and ∆ε i , of the two GB segments connected to node i: As discussed in Part I The variable E ti in Eq.( The pinning raises the unbiased jump barrier to E ti > E 0 . Accordingly, the biased jump barriers E ± i given by Eq.( where t = n/2ν 0 is the discrete time variable. Here, α > 1 is the pinning strength coefficient and t p > 0 is the pinning time, both model parameters. After the node finally makes a successful jump, the attempt counter n is reset to zero and the process repeats from the new state. When t ≪ t p , the barriers grow with time as √ t. The square root time dependence reflects the diffusion kinetics of the solute supply to the GB, causing its pinning. If a successful jump takes a long time t ≫ t p , the barrier plateaus at E ti = αE 0 ≡ E ∞ > E 0 . This long-time limit represents the saturation of the segregation atmosphere. Once the atmosphere is saturated, the GB displacements are controlled by the fully pinned barrier E ∞ . The most interesting and complex is the intermediate kinetic regime in which t p is close to the escape time t 0 . We refer to this kinetic regime as active pinning. The process described above was implemented in KMC simulations. At each KMC step, three random numbers (r 1 , r 2 , r 3 ) are drawn uniformly from a unit interval. The first number r 1 chooses a GB node, say i, for an attempt. All nodes can be chosen with equal probability. Then r 2 chooses between a forward jump or a backward jump, also with equal probability. Finally, r 3 decides if the attempt is successful according to the jump probability P ± i . If the attempt fails, the counter of unsuccessful attempts at site i is advanced by 1 and E ti is raised according to Eq.( We will first investigate GB properties in the absence of external forces (F = 0). The GB is then only subject to equilibrium thermal fluctuations. Analysis of this case will create a baseline for comparison with moving GBs discussed later in section IV. In addition, since the present SOS model is distinct from previous versions, a detailed characterization of equilibrium GB properties will inform future applications of the model Without external forces, the average GB position executes an unbiased random walk while the GB shape fluctuates due to energy exchanges with the thermostat. The GB properties can be characterized by the following quantities: and the mean squared excess GB energy where the bar indicates averaging over a long time. • GB heat capacity per node computed from the energy fluctuation formula Note that the GB heat capacity can also be calculated directly by C = dε/dT . • Excess GB area s ≡ ε/γ. • Mean squared GB width where • The GB "flatness" parameter f defined as the fraction of parallel segments (z i = z i+1 ) relative to the total number of segments. • Energy self-correlation function where ε(t) is the instantaneous interface excess energy per node and the angular brackets indicate averaging over initial states (t = 0) along a long simulation trajectory. The GB structure is expected to be nearly planar with a small number of thermal kinks when k B T ≪ γa 2 and rugged and wavy when k B T ≫ γa 2 . A transition from the first structure, called "smooth", to the second one, called "rough", can be expected to occur when γa 2 is comparable to k B T . A smooth GB contains kinks as thermal excitations of the perfectly planar structure. In the present model, the lowest-energy excitation is the triangular bump shown in Fig. and the formation barrier in the absence of pinning is where u k = ( √ 2 -1)γa 2 is the single-kink energy. One of the base nodes of the triangular bump can jump forward to form a double kink (Fig. The thermal kink concentration (probability per node) on a smooth GB is from which the excess GB energy is The GB heat capacity calculated from this energy, reaches a maximum at k B T /γa 2 = ( √ 2 -1)/2 ≈ 0.21. This maximum can be associated with the GB roughening transition. Note that the kink concentration corresponding to this maximum is n k = 2e -2 ≈ 0.27, which is no longer small. Above the roughening transition, the GB develops significant shape fluctuations and can be better described by the capillary wave theory where is the GB stiffness, f is the GB free energy per unit area, and β is the small angle between the local GB orientation and the x-axis. The first term in the right-hand side of Eq.( The KMC simulations were performed in normalized variables obtained by dividing the time, the coordinates, and all energies by ν -1 0 , a, and E 0 , respectively. The normalized temperature, force, and GB energy become, respectively, Other normalized variables used in the simulations are summarized in Table We first consider the simulation results in the absence of pinning. Recall that the GB is not acted upon by any external force (φ = 0). Figure To understand the nature of the roughening transition, we examine the temperature dependence of the GB heat capacity computed from the fluctuation formula In the capillary wave regime, Eq.( The stiffness obtained from this equation is plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. The sharp increase in λ below the roughening transition is an artifact because the capillary wave model is only valid for rough interfaces. The fact that λ decreases with increasing temperature points to a significant contribution of the configurational entropy to the GB free energy associated with the GB shape fluctuations. Figure where τ 0 r is a constant. The activation energies ε a extracted from the fits were found to be practically the same for all system sizes and equal to ε a = 0.821. This number is reasonably close to the normalized kink pair energy u 2k /E 0 = 2( √ 2 -1)σ = 0.828, see Eq.( Such rearrangements occur on a greater length scale than in a smooth GB, causing the significant increase in the relaxation time. The effect of pinning on the equilibrium GB properties is controlled by the relative pinning time τ p /τ 0 , where τ 0 = t 0 ν 0 is the unpinned residence time. To investigate the pinning effect, the KMC simulations were performed at several fixed values of τ p /τ 0 spanning the range from 0.01 to 100. As temperature was increased, τ 0 decreased (cf. Eq.( These observations are consistent with the temperature dependence of the heat capacity shown Figure A. GB dynamics in the absence of pinning Now suppose that the GB is acted upon by an external force F . We first disregard the pinning effect and consider the motion of a chemically pure GB. Examples of velocity-force functions obtained by the simulations are shown in Fig. • 1D models, including the classical models • Smooth GBs strongly deviate from the classical models by displaying much lower mobility. The mechanism of the latter deviation is as follows. Smooth GBs undergo a dynamic roughening transition as the velocity increases at a fixed temperature. This transition alters the migration mechanism and increases the GB mobility. The migration mechanism is mediated by the motion of kink pairs when the GB is smooth and by a biased random walk of the average GB plane when the GB becomes rough. As mentioned above, a rough GB contains a high concentration of geometrically necessary kinks accommodating the capillary waves. Their motion is responsible for both the capillary fluctuations and, in the presence of a driving force, for the drift of the average GB plane. Due to the large kink concentration, the GB mobility is high. By contrast, a smooth GB contains a small concentration of thermal kinks that can only support slow GB migration. A large enough force can cause the nucleation of additional (non-equilibrium) kinks and eventually cause a dynamic roughening transition. The latter, in turn, accelerates the GB migration and is responsible for the sigma shape of the velocity-force curves at large σ values (Fig. The dynamic roughening transition is illustrated Figure We next discuss the kink-mediated migration of a smooth GB in more detail. Several models of interface migration by the kink pair mechanism were proposed where is the forward jumps barrier and is the backward jump barrier. The velocity-force relation predicted by Eq.( where the subscript 2k indicates that this velocity is specific to the kink pair mechanism. Equation ( where is the probability per one attempt that a given node on a planar GB (call it state 0) pops up to form a triangular bump (call it state 1). The factor P s in Eq.( Alternatively, the triangular bump can expand into a kink pair containing two GB nodes (state 2) as shown in Fig. . Here, and are the 1 → 2 and 2 → 1 jump probabilities (per attempt), respectively. Note that they are related to the single-kink drift velocity (25) by v = aν 0 (P 12 -P 21 ). Putting all pieces together, the GB velocity by the kink pair mechanism becomes v 2k = 2v P 01 P 10 + 2(P 12 -P 21 ) Figure Note that Eq.( It was proposed = a P 10 + 2(P 12 -P 21 ) Comparison with the KMC simulations shows that this interpolating function overcorrects the model by under-predicting the GB velocity (not shown in Fig. with l 2k given by Eq. We now consider a GB subject to the pinning effect. It is convenient to discuss the impact of pinning in terms of the normalized solute diffusivity D/D 0 rather than the normalized pinning time τ p /τ 0 as in section III B 2. The relation between the two is D/D 0 = τ 0 /τ p As expected, we find that the pinning always reduces the GB velocity under a given driving force relative to the unpinned case (Fig. The solute drag force is defined as the difference between the force required to drive the GB in the presence of pinning and the force to drive an unpinned GB with the same velocity As in the 1D case An important effect revealed by the present simulations and not captured by 1D models is the impact GB roughness on the solute drag. As shown in Fig. Furthermore, in the presence of pinning, the curves in Fig. Although the dynamic roughening transition is continuous, it seems reasonable to associate it with the point of maximum curvature on the roughness-velocity curves. In Fig. We have developed a stochastic model of solute-GB interactions aiming to better understand the solute drag phenomenon. The model is very simple and contains only a small number of parameters but still captures the main physics of solute interactions with both stationary and moving GBs. The model describes the kinetic competition between GB migration and solute diffusion, which is the key mechanism of the solute drag. The solute diffusion is included in the model indirectly through the square root time dependence of the GB jump barriers. The GB dynamics is represented more accurately than in the linear approximation commonly employed in the modeling of GB migration. Since the model is stochastic, its numerical solution requires KMC simulations. At variance to the traditional KMC simulations, the present random walk algorithm does not implement a Markov chain. As discussed in Part I The 2D version of the model represents the GB as a solid-on-solid (SOS) interface. This choice is not the only possible option: some of the previous simulations of GB migration utilized the Ising model The model reproduces a roughening transition in stationary GBs as temperature increases. This is a continuous transition that can be identified with the peak of the GB heat capacity. Active pinning reduces the roughening transition temperature and makes the transition sharper. The model also predicts dynamic roughening, a process in which a smooth GB becomes rough as the migration velocity increases at a fixed temperature. This is another continuous and fully reversible transition: the GB returns to the smooth state if it comes to rest. Without pinning, the dynamic roughening transition is spread over a broad velocity range. The pinning shifts this transition towards lower velocities and makes it significantly sharper. The mechanism of dynamic roughening has been studied in great detail. In a stationary state or when the velocity is low, GB migration occurs by the kink pair mechanism, which can only sustain slow motion. The driving force reduces the barrier for kink pair nucleation in the forward direction, boosting the population of non-equilibrium kinks and increasing the GB mobility. In section IV A, we proposed an analytical model of this process that agrees well with the simulation results. The growing kink concentration and its spatial variations eventually cause capillary waves. The GB structure becomes rough and the GB migration mechanism changes from kink-mediated to a random walk of the average GB plane. The dynamic roughening transition is responsible for the threshold behavior in GB dynamics, in which the GB moves very slowly until the driving force reaches a critical level at which the motion sharply accelerates. This threshold effect is especially strong for highenergy GBs. The solute pinning sharpens this effect and increases the force required to "unlock" the GB mobility. Somewhat similar shapes of drag-velocity curves were observed in prior KMC simulations using different methodologies To put our results in perspective with the literature, dynamic roughening of open surfaces is known in the field of crystal growth Observing static or dynamic roughening in simulations or experiment requires a particular combination of parameters, such as the GB energy, GB mobility, and (in alloys) solute segregation and solute diffusivity. Some GBs can remain smooth all the way to the melting point, while others premelt before they could undergo a roughening transition. GB faceting is another transition that can interplay with roughening but remains beyond the scope of this paper. Both the 1D and 2D versions of the model reveal effects that were not in the classical models It should be recognized that the discreteness of the GB displacements imposed by the underlying a × a grid is a critical ingredient of the model capturing the existence of the GB structural units. It is due to this discreteness that the GB can be smooth or rough and can migrate by the kink pair mechanism. Details of the kink structure and energy may depend on the grid structure and symmetry. However, without the grid, there would be no kinks and no roughening transition. Being very simple, the proposed model is not intended for accurate quantitative predictions for a particular material. Nevertheless, the numerical values of the parameters chosen for this work are quite realistic. For example, it was found above that the roughening transition temperature T r satisfies the condition θ r /σ = k B T r /γa 2 ≈ 0.2. Taking Cu as an example, we can estimate a ≈ 0.3 nm (between the first and second neighbors). GB energies in Cu vary widely from ∼ 0.2 J m -2 for low-angle GBs to ∼ 1 J m -2 for some of the high-angle, high-energy GBs In conclusion, we presented a model that provides useful insights into GB interactions with solutes in general and the impact of GB roughening on the GB dynamics, GB migration mechanisms, and the solute drag. It is hoped that this model can inform future modeling studies targeting specific materials and possibly motivate new experiments. It would also be interesting to extend the model to 3D, in which case the GB roughening becomes a real phase transformation. with the wave numbers k n = (2π/L)n. (We assumed for simplicity that N is odd.) The complex Fourier amplitudes ŵn satisfy the relation ŵ-n = ŵ * n with ŵ0 = 0. Inserting the Fourier expansion The (N -1) nonzero terms in this expansion represent decoupled vibrational modes. Since each term is quadratic in the fluctuation amplitude | ŵn |, the canonical ensemble-averaged square fluctuation is given by Inserting this fluctuation spectrum into Parseval's theorem we obtain the mean squared interface width Note that In the thermodynamic limit (N → ∞), Eq.( where the second term represents the capillary-wave contribution. The calculation is explained on the event diagram in Fig. It is convenient to describe the system evolution as occurring during a KMC simulation. At the first KMC step, one of the three nodes of the triangular bump is selected at random. The subsequent events are represented by the solid green arrows (Fig. Returning to the first KMC step, there is a 2/3 chance that one of the two base nodes of the triangular bump is selected. This node will then attempt to jump upward and create a two-node kink pair (state 2). The success probability of this jump is P 12 , so a two-node kink pair can form with the probability of (2/3)P 12 . Once formed, this kink pair can grow further or transform back into a triangular bump. The back transformation can happen immediately (probability P 21 ) or after some period of growth represented by the dashed red arrow. Let P r be the probability of returning into the triangular bump. The latter can then collapse into a planar GB. The collapse probability along this route is thus (2/3)P 12 P r P c . Finally, if the selected base node cannot make a successful jump, the triangular bump remains but eventually collapses into a planar GB with the probability (2/3)(1 -P 12 )P c . The bottom row on the diagram (Fig. The remaining unknown is the return probability P r . The problem of finding P r can be formulated as follows. A kink pair attempts to grow starting from a two-node state. The growth can be described as a driven random walk of the number of nodes in the pair starting from two. At each step, the number of nodes can increase by one with the probability P 12 , decrease by one with the probability P 21 < P 12 , or not change. We must find the probability that the kink pair eventually collapses into a single-node state (triangular bump). This problem is equivalent to the cliff-hanger problem of a man making random steps starting one step away from a cliff Inserting this solution into Eq.( which is Eq.( (1 -P 12 )P C 2 3 (1 -P 12 ) 