We study the extent to which a three-dimensional dispersing Periodic Anderson Model (PAM) can explain the emergence of novel superconductivity in the Infinite-Layer Nickelate compounds. By going beyond frequently used 2D models, the 3D dispersing PAM allows us to incorporate effects of finite out-of-plane hopping and orbital hybridization in describing these systems. Using an unbiased functional Renormalization Group (fRG) approach, we show that d x 2 -y 2 superconductivity arises in a series of 3D ab-initio models of the Nickelates (e.g.RNiO2), where R is a rare earth element. We the study the impact of going beyond the Ni-d orbital by including the R-d z 2 and the interstitial-s as hybridizing conducting bands. We explore the dependence of the models on key parameters, including the local Hubbard coupling, doping and temperature. We find the hybridization with the interstitial-s band driving a 3D d z 2 -r 2 -type superconductivity while out of plane hopping primarily enhances an s-wave superconducting order. The recent discovery of superconductivity in Sr-doped NdNiO 2 1 has re-kindled interest in studies of single orbital models of high T c superconductivity due to the Srdoping primarily affecting the occupation of the 3d x 2 -y 2 -Ni orbital Previous studies of the impact of hybridization with a conduction band on a correlated system have been conducted primarily in the Periodic Anderson Model (PAM), which models a localized orbital with electronic correlations. Though PAM models were originally constructed to study non-dispersing f orbitals in heavy electron systems Momentum dependent hybridization within PAM models has previously been studied primarily in two dimensions. The interplay between local correlations and hybridization drives fluctuations in the local spins with electronic correlations enhancing moment formation, which can in turn be screened by the conduction electrons leading to the antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic orders seen in these systems. Beyond simple screening, momentum dependent hybridization can introduce frustration, which can reduce or suppress antiferromagnetic correlations in the system. Previous studies of 2D PAMs with frustrated hybridization done with an eye to the Ce-115 systems have captured the emergence of d x 2 -y 2 -type superconducting fluctuations as the degree of frustration is tuned The generalized PAM we consider here as a model for the Nickelates requires a dispersing correlated orbital and is equivalent to a Hubbard model with hybridization. Tuning the parameters of the model, we should be able to capture many of the phases seen in the PAM and Hub-bard Hamiltonians. We utilize a decoupled variant of the functional Renormalization group (fRG) to construct the response of the generalized PAM in two and three dimensions. We explore the impact of the hybridization with the interstitial-s and d z 2 bands within the PAM framework and analyze the changes to the system's response for the case of a dispersive d x 2 -y 2 band. We find unconventional superconductivity of the d z 2 and d x 2 -y 2 -type in the three dimensional and two dimensional systems, respectively. The fRG allows us to explore the impact of doping the conduction band, the s, d z 2 -bands of the rare-earth layer, as well as the d x 2 -y 2 Ni-band. The remaining sections of the manuscript are organized as follows. In Sec.II we introduce the hybridization and dispersions of the modified two-and three-dimensional PAM models and present the computational details of the fRG flow we employ to study these models. We discuss our results for the two-dimensional PAM systems in Sec.III. In Sec.IV we present our results for the threedimensional PAM models. In Sec. V we introduce and construct flows for the ab-initio Hamiltonians proposed for the Nickelates 8 . We further analyze some simplified model Hamiltonians derived from the ab-initio models. We summarize our conclusions and present directions for future work in Sec.VI The Hamiltonian for the generalized periodic Anderson model (PAM) is given by where c † iσ , f † iσ are operators for electrons at lattice site i with spin σ in the broad conduction and narrow (localized) bands respectively. The hopping amplitudes and chemical potentials of the bands are represented by t c , t f and μ c , μ f . The electrons in the system interact primarily via the local Hubbard coupling (U ) in the narrow (localized) band with the hopping between the localized and conduction bands (V ij ) presenting a channel that competes with and reduces the impact of the local repulsion. The basic PAM model is defined by a local, momentum independent hybridization (V) and a dispersionless localized band (t f = 0). Modeling systems beyond the Kondo insulators requires additional terms which at the single particle level requires allowing for extended hybridization (V i,i+δ = 0) and a broadening the localized orbital (0 < t f << t c ). Such generalizations introduce frustration from the onsite and nearest neighbor hybridizations, which along with the broadened bands and Hubbard coupling determine the degree of localization of the f electrons. The interplay between hybridization and electronic correlation presents a rich playground with previous studies of PAM models finding quantum critical points as a function of the hybridization where ξ c k is the dispersion of the conduction band, ξ f k is that of the narrow (localized) orbital and V k represents a generalized hybridization. Most PAM systems are hybridized locally (V k = V 0 ), but introducing a momentum dependence can help model those heavy fermion systems that show metallic or insulating states. In this work we primarily consider hybridizations of the form with the first expression corresponding to a band (ξ c ) hybridizing locally and to nearest neighboring sites on a cubic lattice while the second expression represents the overlap between the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 and an interstitial-s band for the Nickelate systems. We note that the hybridizations can be projected to a 2D square lattice representative of the N iO 2 planes by averaging over the k z modes; for the interstitial-s band, this simply leads to a reduced hybridization (see Sec.V C). Our goal is to study the responses generated by the hybridization and correlations in these interacting electron systems using the decoupled functional renormalization group outlined in previous works (fRG) where Γ is the interaction vertex (Γ Λ=st = U ), Σ Λ k (ω) is the self energy and R Λ (ω) is the regulator. The single particle potential from the hybridization with the conduction electrons is given by where the chemical potentials μ c and μ f have been subsumed in the corresponding dispersions. Starting at a scale (Λ st >> W ) where all free modes in S Λ are frozen out, the fRG flow equations track the evolution of the vertices as modes are integrated out, scale by scale. The fRG flow of the vertices is constructed via the decoupling of two-body interactions as outlined in previous works , with N f corresponding to the number of Matsubara frequencies retained, N the number of momentum modes in the system and N ω , N k corresponding to the number of frequency and momentum basis functions used to approximate the auxiliary channels. Truncation of the auxiliary channels of the full vertex in each of the channels enables an unbiased and efficient treatment of system-wide fluctuations. From the flows for the self-energy (Σ) and the vertex (Γ), we study the quasi-particle weight the charge and spin response functions and the superconducting susceptibilities given by χ SU (q, Ω) = ω1,k1,ω2,k2 where f O k is the momentum profile associated with the ordering, O. For the models considered below the interactions drive momentum profiles beyond local ordering The responses observed are sensitive to the temperature at which the flow is constructed so we have set β ∼ 2N when studying dominant ordering tendencies and augmented these with studies of the temperature dependence of the system response when necessary. The 2D PAM has served as a prototype model for describing the physics of insulating states in the heavy fermion compounds that can range from a band or Kondo insulator to an antiferromagnet Our search for superconducting order due solely to hybridization began in the PAM models where we evaluated susceptibilities of the model for the cases with local (V 0 ), nearest neighbor (V 1 ) and frustrated hybridization (V 0 + V 1 ), as the system is doped away from half filling. The response of the system for the three cases is shown in Fig. Frustration can enhance superconducting correlations with previous studies finding both the ratio (V 0 /V 1 ) and hybridization (V 0 ) to play a role in the enhancement Although a two dimensional PAM can be used to model the role of hybridization in the Nickelates, recent proposals have suggested the hybridization with the interstital-s band plays an additional role as the driver of a crossover from two to three dimensional superconductivity. Investigating the mechanism and the crossover requires treating the three-dimensional structure of the hybridization. Hence, in this section, we investigate, along with hybridizations to local and nearest neighboring sites, the impact of hybridization with the interstitial-s band present in the Nickelate compounds. Following our approach to the 2D PAM, we examine the impact of doping on the ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic and superconducting correlations present within these systems. The resolutions for the fRG used to construct the flow were set at N k = 1, which corresponds to 7 basis functions, V IS = 0.6t the Hubbard coupling and local hybridization can be captured by the exchange coupling given by J ∼ V 2 0 /U which for large values of V 0 leads to a suppression of the spin response at all values of doping. The differences to the 2D PAM response revolve around the reduced the spin response and the faster suppression with doping both of which can be explained due to the changes in the dimensionality of the system. Beyond the local (s-wave) superconducting response V 0 also drives an extended swave which unlike the s-wave response is enhanced with increasing V 0 . For low values of V 0 , the AF order is stable but as the hybridization is increased we can expect the system to transition to a metallic phase with strong superconducting correlations. Unlike the local case the nearest neighbor hybridization appears to replicate the physics of the 3D Hubbard model with V 1 simply controlling the strength of AF response and we observe the expected suppression of the spin response as the system is doped. The last row of Fig. Unlike locally hybridized systems, hybridization with the interstitial s band, defined in Eq.4, does not lead to the complete screening of the spin response in the system. The response observed is similar to the case for nearest neighbor hybridization with the system showing enhanced in-plane ((π, π, 0)) and ferromagnetic spin response with increasing hybridization. The spin response of the 3D PAM hybridized with the interstitial s-band is shown in Fig. The observation of superconductivity in the Nickelates represents the culmination of a long search for Cuprate analogs in the quest to understand high-T c superconductivity To understand the origin of superconductivity in the Nickelates, their electronic structure has been thoroughly studied In this section, we consider ab-initio models constructed to capture a family of RNiO 2 systems 7,8 . Tuning the rare earth R in this family is of considerable current interest, as the reported T c of 2K for R=La is an order of magnitude smaller than the T c = 10 -15K observed in the R=Nd,Pr compounds, and the ionic size of the rare earth layer appears to control the dimensionality of the superconducting order The hybridization to the interstitial-s is substantial and reported to be an order of magnitude stronger than V d (V IS = 0.5t R N i ) The band structure for a minimal model of the superconducting NdNiO 2 is shown in Fig. ) which dips across the series The trends in the AF and superconducting responses seen across the series is shown in Fig. The differences in the impact of the two bands can partially be attributed to the relative strengths of the hybridization but our studies indicate a large degree of hybridization (V d ) with the d 2 z for the materials considered would be insufficient as the mechanism for the suppression of antiferromagnetic spin response in the Nickelates. The primary model previously utilized in modeling superconductivity in the Nickelates is the single-band Hubbard model on a two dimensional square lattice with a dispersion given by ξ k = -2t(cos(k x ) + cos(k y )) + 4t cos(k x ) cos(k y ) -2t (cos(2k x ) + cos(2k y )). Discarding the roles of the hybridization (V ) and out of plane hopping (t z ) could be a valid approximation for some parameter regimes, so the results for the 2D Hubbard model can serve as a baseline from which we can measure the impact of accounting for those additional terms. From the ab-initio values for the RN iO 2 series the hopping in the Ni orbital is t N i = 0.375eV with the remaining hopping parameters going roughly as t = 0.25t and t = 0.125t 8 . The local Hubbard interaction of the Nd-Nickelate calculated via cRPA is found to be U = 7t -8t but the restriction of the fRG to moderate coupling limits our studies to U ≤ 4t. We begin this section by analyzing the response of the single band Nickelate model to changes in the Hubbard interaction. The Hubbard model is given by where ξ N i is the dispersion given above. The spin and superconducting response of the model for various values of the Hubbard coupling is shown in Fig. The impact of hybridization with the 3D-R and interstitial-s bands on the 2D NiO 2 layers can be explored at the two dimensional level as the non-interacting conducting bands can be integrated out. Summing over the three dimensional component of the the hybridization potential given in Eq.6, we have where V k and ξ c correspond to the hybridization and dispersion of the R and interstitial-s bands. In the previous sections, the value of the hybridization was fixed to the ab-initio values derived in previous works The response of the system to increasing V d hybridization for the various R bands is shown in Fig. ) is also smallest for the La band which explains the relative ordering of the superconducting response as the hybridization is increased. Similarly, the larger bandwidth of the Dy band appears to lead to an enhanced ferromagnetic order in the hole doped regime. At weak hybridization the s-type superconducting response is essentially degenerate for the R-bands across the doping regime, but as V is increased we see weak suppression in the p < 0 regime which is likely driven by the out of plane hopping (t [0,0,2] R ) which increases monotonically across the R series. Larger hybridization with the R bands also enhances incommensurate charge ordering in the hole doped regime. Charge ordering in the Nickelates is well documented, although it is absent in our results at weak hybridization presented in the previous section. The effects of increasing hybridization with R bands for the La system is shown in Fig. A similar suppression of antiferromagnetic and d-SU is seen for hybridization with the interstitial s band shown in Fig. The role of hybridization with the 3D interstitial-s band in driving a 2D-3D superconducting crossover in the nickelates can be analyzed by coupling the band to the 2D Hubbard model of the Nickleates studied in the previous section. Analysis of the crossover requires retaining the k z dependence of the band, but we start with an initial k z independent Nickelate Hubbard model. At moderate coupling (U = 0.3W ) the Hubbard model shows strong AF order and d-SU correlations across the doping range. The changes to the system's response due to hybridization with the interstitial-s band are shown in Fig. We have utilized the decoupled fRG to study separately the contributions from momentum dependent hybridization and out of plane hopping to the correlated 3d x 2 -y 2 -Ni electron band and their role in determining the details of the superconducting order observed in the system. We began by cataloging the impact of hybridization and frustration at a variety of doping levels and temperatures in Periodic Anderson Hamiltonians (realized in both two and three dimensions). Beyond serving as a test of our methods, we show PAM systems can stabilize a variety of phases, with the 2D model showing regions of anti-ferromagnetism, ferromagnetism, and s and d x 2 -y 2 -superconductivity while the hybridization in the 3D system enhances the extended-s and a d z 2 -r 2 superconducting order in addition to the local orders observed in the 2D system. Frustration due to the momentum dependence of the hybridization drives competition between ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic orders with superconducting fluctuations tucked in at the transition between the spin orders. We find frustrated hybridization with the local and nearest neighbor enhancing d-type superconductivity in 2D while competition between local hybridization and an interstitial-s orbital drives d z 2 -r 2 superconductivity in the 3D PAM . Addressing the role of hybridization in the Nickelates requires specifying the dispersing and conducting bands in the 3D generalized PAM model. Our study utilized a series of previously proposed ab-initio dispersing PAM models of the Nickelates 8 . The fRG flow for these models captures a doping dependent d-type superconductivity accompanied by a strong AF response across the series. Electronic correlations arising from the Hubbard coupling drive a strong antiferromagnetic spin response which due to the quasi-2D nature of the Nickelates peaks at A ((π, π, π)) and M ((π, π, 0)). These spin fluctuations mediate pairing with stronger coupling enhancing the calculated AF and d -SU response of the system. The strong AF is incongruent with experimental results and additional hybridization with the interstitial-s orbital is required to suppress the antiferromagnetic correlations. However, we found the additional hybridization to also suppress the d-superconducting response while the s superconducting response remains unaffected over a wide range of hybridizations. The hybridization does enhance the extended d z 2 -r 2 superconducting response suggesting nodeless superconductivity as the norm in the Nickelates. Of the series of rare earth atoms we considered, we found, in the absence of coupling to the interstitial-s, the d x 2 -y 2 superconducting response peaking in the Eu and Pr systems which at the level of band structure appears due to the quasi-2D nature of the models. Finally, guided by recent experimental studies of the Nickelates that suggest the initial d-type superconductiv-ity in the NiO 2 planes as a precursor that initiates a nodeless 3D superconducting state driven by the hybridization, we considered mechanisms for the superconducting crossover. To this end, we separately analyzed the effects of weak out of plane hopping (t z ) and hybridization with the interstitial-s band (V IS ) on a 2D Nickelate model with d x 2 -y 2 superconducting correlations. With the Hubbard coupling (U/W ) fixed, we found that weak values of t z (< 0.2t) work to the detriment of the AF and d-superconducting order while inducing little change in the s -SU response. The effects of hybridization are more pronounced and leads to a dramatic suppression of antiferromagnetic correlations in the hole doping region of interest with hybridization to the interstitials having the additional effect of enhancing s and d z 2superconducting order in the same region. These results suggest the strength of hybridization to the interstitial-s as a control for the transition between 2D and 3D superconducting order. Given the overall negative effect of electronic correlations on the s-SU, the extended d z 2 -r 2 order is the likely candidate for nodeless superconductivity in the Nickelates. A full resolution of the Nickelate picture requires further studies that address the impact of ordering in the R spacer layer and their interplay with strong hybridization (V ) in the Nickelates. Work in these directions is currently underway. y /2)sin(k x /2) sin(3k y /2) .