Different superconducting pairing mechanisms are markedly distinct in the underlying Cooper pair kinematics. Pairing interactions mediated by quantum-critical soft modes are dominated by highly collinear processes, falling into two classes: forward scattering and backscattering. In contrast, phonon mechanisms have a generic non-collinear character. We show that the type of kinematics can be identified by examining the evolution of superconductivity when tuning the Fermi surface geometry. We illustrate our approach using recently measured phase diagrams of various graphene systems. Our analysis unambiguously connects the emergence of superconductivity at "ghost crossings" of Fermi surfaces in distinct valleys to the pair kinematics of a backscattering type. Together with the observed non-monotonic behavior of superconductivity near its onset (sharp rise followed by a drop), it provides strong support for a particular quantum-critical superconductivity scenario. These findings conclusively settle the long-standing debate on the origin of superconductivity in this system and demonstrate the essential role of quantum-critical modes in superconducting pairing. Moreover, our work highlights the potential of tuning bands via ghost crossings as a promising means of boosting superconductivity. Superconducting phases occurring in various strongly interacting systems Tuning the band parameters in correlated electron systems through the quantum-critical point (QCP) in order to gain insight into the nature of superconductivity has been a subject of wide interest. In most cases, modifying the band structure beyond subtle perturbations is extremely difficult to achieve experimentally. Nevertheless, the dependence on an applied strain has been used to reveal the impact of the van Hove points on the superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 Unlike previously studied systems, in graphene-based superconductors the Fermi surfaces are widely tunable Here, through a detailed quantitative comparison to experimental data obtained by tuning SC in several graphene systems, we demonstrate the occurrence of the collinear backscattering kinematics. Specifically, we find direct evidence linking the onset of superconductivity and the abrupt appearance of "ghost valley crossings" between Fermi surfaces in different valleys. This is distinct from conventional ways to stimulate superconductivity by tuning the Fermi level through van Hove points. Identification of an abrupt onset of SC with such crossings limits the possible soft modes that can serve as pairing glue, excluding many of the previously considered scenarios and pinpointing SC driven by the isospin inter-valleycoherent (IVC) mode pictured in Fig. A salient feature of graphene superconductivity that will be important for our analysis is that the two electrons forming a Cooper pair are located in valleys K and K which are related by time reversal symmetry. Accordingly, Cooper pair kinematics involves valley-conserving scattering of pair states (K+k, K-k) → (K+k , K-k ) with k, k K. Because of this property, the only type of pairing mechanism that can generate collinear backscattering kinematics with k ≈ -k is the pairing mediated by isospin fluctuations that are softened and FIG. a) A diagrammatic representation of the pairing interaction mediated by isospin mode, a soft mode associated with the intervalley phase coherence (IVC). Identifying valleys K and K with spin up and down maps this interaction to the paramagnon pairing mechanism mediated by ferromagnetic spin fluctuations where U , κ, l 0 are model-specific parameters and δ denotes the distance to the QCP [39]. Crucially, the two electrons in a Cooper pair are predominantly scattered from the initial momenta of (K + k, Kk) to the final momenta of (K + k , Kk ) where k ≈ -k, namely, backscattering dominates. Indeed, the soft mode describing the IVC instability, which mediates pairing, is the particle-hole ladder shown in Fig. processes, wherein electrons are scattered by a small angle on the Fermi surface, as, e.g., the pairing mediated by nematic fluctuations in iron-based superconductors Parenthetically, other scenarios may be considered, such as pairing mediated by antiferromagnetic (AFM) fluctuations, where electrons are predominantly scattered between different parts of the Fermi surface by a large AFM ordering momentum. This mechanism is actively studied in iron pnictides We will demonstrate the fundamental idea using the setting of Bernal bilayer graphene (BBG) biased by a transverse electric field, a strongly interacting system with a tunable band hosting a superconducting phase A key experimental finding that points to QCP physics is that the SC phase is a sliver that tracks the phase boundary between a partially-isospin-polarized phase and an unpolarized phase, labeled PIP 2 and Sym 12 in Fig. are both viable candidates for this system. The former involves valley-polarization order due to Stoner valley imbalance instability in BBG However, there is one observation that so far has escaped attention: The SC sliver only exists on a segment of the PIP 2 -Sym 12 phase boundary -it emerges abruptly upon increasing carrier density along this boundary. The same behavior is found recently in the SC 1 phase of BBG/WSe 2 but not in RTG. As we shall show, this behavior favors a pairing mechanism that involves backscattering, as opposed to the Stoner instability type proposed earlier which involves forward scattering Next, we consider the backscattering mechanism for superconductivity and its relation to ghost crossings. As we will see, the pairing gap predominantly opens near the crossings of Fermi surfaces in valleys K and K superimposed by a K → K translation. These points, below referred to as "ghost" crossings, are illustrated in Fig. Crucially, these crossings can be switched on and off by varying transverse electric field, an experimental knob tuning the BBG band structure. We anticipate that this change in the bandstructure, illustrated schematically in Fig. It is also interesting to mention that in the rhombohedral trilayer graphene where the Fermi sea is an annulus with both its inner and outer Fermi surfaces looking like the one in Fig. Next, we present the essential points of the microscopic analysis. Due to the observation that pairing gap predominantly opens at ±Q i 's shown in Fig. where n ±i are the unit vectors normal to the Fermi surface at ±Q i . Applying this model to describe pairing and keeping only the scattering processes in which an electron is scattered from a patch near Q i to a patch near -Q i , which is the most singular contribution, we find , The analysis of this equation is detailed in An interesting behavior of SC that is unique to the three-pocket Fermi sea is an increase in T c near the termination of SC phase. Indeed, upon the appearance of ghost crossings the Fermi pockets in two valleys become nearly tangential at the crossing point. In this case, an approximate nesting at the K-K pocket crossings by a vector 2K allows pairing to occur on a larger Fermi surface segment near the crossing points, which leads to an enhancement in superconducting T c . This behavior is manifest in the expression for T c derived in [39], Sec.E: with θ the angle between the K and K Fermi surfaces at the crossing points (see Fig. Unfortunately, the existing data are insufficient to map out this interesting behavior, though it is somewhat consistent with the superconducting phase in Fig. Next, we use a realistic bandstructure to obtain a condition for the ghost Fermi surface crossings to exist and demonstrate an agreement with the observed onset of superconductivity. We first present the analysis for WSe 2 -supported BBG. In Ref. We predict the onset of valley-crossings by numerically calculating the single-particle band dispersion in the isospin-unpolarized phase. We model the single-particle in WSe 2 -supported BBG using the Hamiltonian The first term H BBG is the four-band tight-binding model given in the basis c η,s A,1 , c η,s B,1 , c η,s A,2 , c η,s B,2 (with A and B the sublattice indices, 1 and 2 the layer indices, η = ±1 a valley label and s the spin index) where π = (ηk x + ik y ), k x and k y are the x and y components of momentum measured from K or K. The quantity u is the interlayer bias, t 1 is the interlayer hopping parameter, v, v 3 , v 4 are associated with microscopic hopping amplitudes of the values given in where η = ±1 for valley K and K, σ z is the Pauli matrix for spin in the out-of-plane direction. To determine how the onset of Fermi surface crossings compares with measured SC phases, two parameters in model ( We determine these two quantities using the quantum oscillations measured in Ref. Using these values, we study the evolution of Fermi seas within the symmetry-unbroken "vanilla" phase. We focus on the Fermi seas of the minority isospin species as the majority isospin species feature a single Fermi sea that does not experience any qualitative change in this regime. In the regime where SC 1 phase occurs, the majority species feature valley crossings of the K and K Fermi seas with an order-one angle θ ∼ O(1) at the crossing and, consequently, no enhancement in superconductivity due to small θ values similar to the one demonstrated by the minority species. We therefore focus on minority species, deferring the analysis of majority species till later. We determine the transition from overlapping to non-overlapping Fermi seas in minority species, finding a transition marked by the yellow lines in Fig. Next, we turn to the BBG/hBN case Namely, quantum oscillation measurements It is worth noting that several experiments have attempted to measure the u/D ratio for BBG, yielding vastly different values that do not fall within the range inferred from our fermiology analysis. Namely, Refs. To restate the main result of our analysis, in both BBG and in BBG/WSe 2 the lines that mark the emergence of ghost Fermi surface crossings match perfectly the points of the onset of superconductivity. As discussed above, the emergence of valley crossings strongly impacts the pair scattering kinematics, favoring backscattering. To the contrary, it has little impact on the density of states at the Fermi level or the e-e interaction strength. Therefore the observed behavior is difficult to understand within a conventional BCS superconductivity framework but is naturally explained by the IVC superconductivity mechanism. This conclusion is further supported by the nonmonotonic behavior of superconductivity near the onset (a rise followed by a drop) observed in BBG/WSe 2 . This observation is explained by the enhancement of pairing at small angles θ between Fermi surfaces at the ghost crossing discussed above. It is interesting to compare the nonmonotonic behavior of superconductivity in BBG/WSe 2 with the monotonic behavior observed at superconductivity onset in BBG/hBN samples. We believe that this difference can be attributed to the constraints imposed by isospin orders and Fermiology. Specifically, the SC phase in BBG/hBN must lie outside the PIP 2 phase which is not necessarily compatible with the SC order, and below the boundary where valley crossings occur (yellow line in Fig. Lastly, we believe that the IVC pairing revealed by our analysis is generally applicable to other observed SC phases, such as the SC 2 phase in BBG/WSe 2 . Here a conclusive analysis would require more knowledge of the isospin phase diagram, which is currently being investigated by several groups In conclusion, the sudden appearance of SC phases coincides with the appearance of the K-K ghost Fermi surface crossings in both BBG and WSe 2 -supported BBG. This behavior suggests that quantum-critical fluctuations drive the pairing in both systems, favoring a backscattering-type pairing interaction due to the IVC order as the glue for superconductivity over other candidates like valley-polarization order Grant No. W911NF-18-1-0116. P. L. acknowledges the support by DOE office of Basic Sciences Grant No. DE-FG02-03ER46076. because the inter-valley zero-frequency momentum-K -K particle-hole excitations have a measure-zero phase space. Namely, in our case, the q = 0 inter-valley particle-hole gap closes only at six points: k = ±Q i , (i = 1, 2, 3). This is distinct from usual particle-hole excitations in Fermi liquid where the q = 0 particle-hole excitation is gapless for any k on the Fermi surface. To see this explicitly, we calculate the frequency and momentum dependence inter-valley particle-hole susceptibility below and find Π K K (iν, q) = Π K K (0, 0) + 3|ν| 4πv 2 F sin θ Here α is a parameter depending on band dispersion details. θ is the angle between the fermi surface in valley K and that in valley K at the valley-crossing points. In the analysis below, we take sin θ ∼ O(1) unless specified otherwise. To see this explicitly, below we pause and derive the frequency and momentum dependence of IVC susceptibility Eq.(B5). As we will see, the susceptibility does not contain a Landau damping term |ν|/|q| in the denominator. This is quite different from the textbook spin-susceptibility (e.g., see Ref. where k ± = k ± q 2 ± K. As a reminder, K = -K. Here θ is the angle between the fermi surface in valley K and that in valley K at the valley-crossing points. To evaluate this integral properly, we calculate the difference between the dynamical polarization function Π K K (iν, 0) and the static polarization function Π K K (0, 0): This result is the leading order frequency dependence in Π K K (iν, 0). Next, we determine the form of leading order momentum dependence from symmetry. We know from C 3 rotation symmetry that the momentum-dependent part of intervalley particle-hole susceptibility Π K K (0, q) has to be a function of q 2 . Therefore, for small q (q k F ), Π K K (0, q) = Π K K (0, 0) + αq 2 . (B12) Here α is a parameter depending on band dispersion details. Then, accounting for both frequency dependence Eq.(B11) and momentum dependence Eq.(B12), we arrive at the expression of intervalley susceptibility Π K K (iν, q) given in Eq.(B5). With the results of IVC susceptibility Eq.(B5) derived above, we proceed to derive the pairing interaction. Plugging Eq.(B5) and Eq.(B4) into Eq.(B2) we find the pairing interaction Γ kk that takes the following form given in main text Eq.( 