We use inelastic neutron scattering to study spin fluctuations in Sr1.8La0.2RuO4, where Lanthanum doping triggers a Lifshitz transition by pushing the van Hove singularity in the γ band to the Fermi energy. Strong spin fluctuations emerge at an incommensurate wave vector Qic = (0.3, 0.3), corresponding to the nesting vector between α and β Fermi sheets. The incommensurate antiferromagnetic fluctuations shift toward (0.25, 0.25) with increasing energy up to ∼110 meV. By contrast, scatterings near the ferromagnetic wave vectors Q = (1, 0) and (1, 1) remain featureless at all energies. This contradicts the weak-coupling perspective that suggests a sharp enhancement of ferromagnetic susceptibility due to the divergence of density of states in the associated γ band. Our findings imply that ferromagnetic fluctuations in Sr2RuO4 and related materials do not fit into the weak-coupling paradigm, but instead are quasi-local fluctuations induced by Hund's coupling. This imposes significant constraints for the pairing mechanism involving spin fluctuations. The pairing mechanism of the Sr 2 RuO 4 superconductor has been the focus of tremendous research activities However, some experimental data such as the absence of edge currents Band structure studies of Sr 2 RuO 4 reveal a van Hove singularity (vHS) in the γ band closely (∼49 meV) above the Fermi level In this paper, we report an INS study of spin fluctuations in Sr 2-y La y RuO 4 at the critical concentration y c = 0.2, where the vHS in the γ band crosses the Fermi level. Strong incommensurate antiferromagnetic fluctuations are observed up to ∼110 meV and disperse from Q ic = (0.3,0.3) to (0.25,0.25). This differs from undoped Sr 2 RuO 4 where the antiferromagnetic fluctuations show little dispersion. On the other hand, no discernible ferromagnetic response has been detected with our experimental sensitivity. These results contradict the weakcoupling scenario that ferromagnetic fluctuations are in-duced by the nesting of the γ band; instead they support the proposal that magnetic responses near the ferromagnetic wave vectors have a quasi-local character. High-quality Sr 1.8 La 0.2 RuO 4 single crystals were synthesized using the floating zone method Figure The dispersion of the incommensurate spin fluctuations can be better visualized in the contour plot of the E-K plane. As illustrated in Fig. We made constant-energy cuts through Q = (0.3,0.3) and (1,0) to quantify the spin fluctuations. As shown in Figs. 4(a)-4(j), the intensity of antiferromagnetic fluctuations displays a maximum at around 16 meV and gradually vanishes above 110 meV. The peak position shifts to a lower Q with increasing energy in a nearly linear fashion [Figs. Previous polarized neutron scattering measurements revealed relatively weak ferromagnetic fluctuations in Sr 2 RuO 4 The prevalent paradigm of a p-wave triplet pairing state involves the exchange of bosonic ferromagnetic modes, while antiferromagnetic fluctuations favor a singlet pairing. The lack of conventional dispersive ferromagnetic fluctuations in Sr 2 RuO 4 seems to make it less likely to host a simple p-wave pairing than other candidates, where substantial well-defined ferromagnetic fluctuations have been observed, such as the heavy Fermion superconductor UCoGe In summary, we used INS experiments to investigate spin fluctuations in Sr 1.8 La 0.2 RuO 4 covering a broad range of energy-momentum space. Strong antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations emanate from the incommensurate position (0.3, 0.3). The excitation extends to above 110 meV and progressively shifts to (0.25, 0.25). On the other hand, there is no clearly increased scattering near ferromagnetic wave vectors. This contradicts the weak-coupling hypothesis, which predicts a divergence of ferromagnetic susceptibility as the vHS approaches Fermi level at this La doping. Instead, the inertia of weak ferromagnetic fluctuations against La doping is in line with the description of quasi-local fluctuations driven by Hund's coupling 