Reentrant superconductivity is a phenomenon in which the destructive effects of magnetic field on superconductivity are mitigated, allowing a zero-resistance state to survive under conditions that would otherwise destroy it. Typically, the reentrant superconducting region derives from a zero-field parent superconductor. Here, we show that in specifically-prepared UTe2 crystals, extremely large magnetic field gives rise to an unprecedented high field superconductor that lacks a zero-field parent phase. This orphan superconductivity exists at fields between 37 T and 52 T, over a smaller angular range than observed in superconducting UTe2. The stability of field-induced orphan superconductivity is a challenge to existing theoretical explanations, and underscores the likelihood of a field-induced modification of the electronic structure of UTe2. Although uranium ditelluride (UTe2) has been known since the mid-1900's to be a paramagnet, To explore the relationship between the superconducting phases in UTe2, we prepared samples of nominally non-superconducting UTe2 via chemical vapor transport. The stability of superconductivity was mapped via magnetoresistance measurements that were performed in applied magnetic fields of up to 60 T with the field-angle rotated between the b and c axes. Our results show that these UTe2 samples host an "orphaned" high field stabilized superconductivity without an accompanying low-field superconducting phase. In addition to being the fieldstabilized superconductor, these findings dramatically limit possible explanations for the stability of high-field superconductivity in UTe2, demanding a new theoretical framework. UTe2 crystalizes in a centrosymmetric orthorhombic structure (Immm, No. 71) with D2h point group symmetry. The anisotropy of this structure, coupled with the strong spin orbit coupling of 5f uranium, leads to strongly anisotropic response to applied magnetic field. Low-field superconductivity in UTe2 persists to at least 8 T in all directions; superconductivity survives to the highest fields (~35 T) when H || b, the low-field magnetic hard axis. Whether the superconductivity along the b-axis consists of more than one phase is an open question. We now consider the orphaned field-induced orphan superconducting phase (SCFP) that occurs at fields greater than Hm in the field polarized state. This SCFP phase, with boundaries defined as 50% of the observed transition, emerges close to a 29 o offset from b to c and extends to 42 o (Fig. The temperature dependence of orphan SCFP gives further information about the robustness of the superconductivity. The zero resistance state, measured at a 38.7 o offset from b to c, persists to 0.5 K (Fig. The challenge of identifying any theoretical mechanism for field stabilization of SCFP is made more difficult by the absence of low-field superconductivity. Existing relevant theoretical attempts to describe high field superconductivity generally require the presence of zero-field superconductivity, Reentrant superconductivity in organic superconductors and several chevrel phases is reportedly stabilized by the Jaccarino-Peter mechanism. Another mechanism for stabilizing high field superconductivity involves field-induced Landau levels. Single crystals of UTe2 were grown as thin plates approximately 3 mm in length by chemical vapor transport with iodine as the transport agent. Approximately 1 g total of elemental U and Te in a 2:3 atomic ratio were sealed in an evacuated quartz ampule with 30 mg of iodine. The ampule was loaded into a two-zone horizontal furnace and the temperature was slowly increased to 800 o C and 710 o C in the charge and growth zones, respectively. Temperature was maintained for 1 week, after which transport was quenched by turning off power to the heating elements. Crystals grew as thin black plates in the ab plane (Fig. Zero-field resistance measurements to 100 mK were performed on a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) using the adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator (ADR) option. Crystals were mounted on a cryogenic single axis goniometer, 