The Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model is fundamental in topological insulators and relevant to understanding higher-order topological phases. This study explores the relationship between the n-dimensional SSH model and its (n -1)-dimensional counterpart, identifying a hierarchical structure in the Hamiltonian that allows us to solve an arbitrary n-dimensional SSH model analytically. By generalizing the bulk-edge correspondence principle to arbitrary dimensions in a higher-order fashion using the vectored Zak phase, we reveal a type of topological insulator called hierarchical topological insulators. In this hierarchical topological insulator, there exist intermediate-order topological interfacial states that are protected by subsymmetries and energy bands topology in a partial Brillouin zone. Furthermore, we compare the n-dimensional SSH model with the Benalcazar-Bernevig-Hughes (BBH) model, another essential model in higher-order topological phases similar to the two-dimensional SSH model with an extra flux of π in each plaque. We find that the BBH model is another example of hierarchical topological insulators. Topology has introduced a new perspective for classifying crystalline systems based on the geometric properties of their energy bands in momentum space, as opposed to their band gap sizes The bulk-edge correspondence has recently been extended to a higher-order fashion, where interfacial states of (n-d) dimensions appear in n-dimensional (nD) systems for d > 1 . This means that topological corner states emerge owing to the bulk-corner correspondence. These corner states usually accompany filling-anomaly-induced fractional charges and have potential applications in fields such as laser cavity and quantum computation This study focuses on the SSH model and extends the 1D model to arbitrary n dimensions by identifying a hierarchical structure in the Hamiltonian of the nD SSH model. Leveraging this hierarchical structure, we provide an analytical solution for the nD SSH model and generalize the bulk-edge correspondence to arbitrary dimensions in a higher-order fashion. For example, we establish the n-0 correspondence using the vectored Zak phase, where n denotes the bulk dimension and 0 denotes the dimension of the topological interfacial states. Furthermore, we show that the topological interfacial states in the nD SSH model are protected by subsymmetry related to the hierarchical structure rather than a specific bulk symmetry. This hierarchical structure can also be applied to the BBH model, and we give a preliminary comparison of the topological nature between the 2D SSH model and the BBH model. Compared to the existing literature that generalizes the BBH model to arbitrary dimensions by using the Clifford algebra and analytical solution of corner states The structure of the remaining parts is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we give the hierarchical structure nD SSH Hamiltonian, its analytical solutions, and the corresponding topological invariants. In Sec. III, we generalize the bulk-edge correspondence in the 1D SSH model to the nD SSH model in a fashion of higher order. In Sec. IV, we compare the 2D SSH model with the BBH model. Finally, we give conclusions and discussions in Sec. V. The unit cell of the higher-dimensional SSH model can be constructed by aggregating its lower-dimensional version, as depicted in Fig. where I 2 is 2 × 2 unitary matrix, and ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product. This process can be performed recursively for 3D, 4D, and eventually for arbitrary nD SSH models. We have the 2 n × 2 n matrix as It is noted that robust corner states could appear if all stacking 1D SSH models in Eq. ( where ρ i = γ i + γ ′ i e iki is the hopping term between the additional dimension. Equations ( where s i takes value ±1 determining the order of energy bands. Expanding Eq. ( n,m are all the permutations of picking (0 ≤ m ≤ n) numbers from n, and S j n,m [f i ] is the corresponding permutation in term of f i . For example, A. 1D SSH model The 1D SSH model Hamiltonian that describes an atomic chain with two types of sublattices and hoppings can be writ- ten as where N represents the number of unit cells, and γ and γ ′ are intra-cell and inter-cell hopping amplitudes, respectively. By Fourier transformation, Eq. ( The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of 1D SSH model is given as with ρ ≡ |ρ|e iφ = γ + γ ′ e ik and k the quasi wave-number in crystalline systems. We plot the bulk energy spectrum of the 1D SSH model in Fig. In the 1D SSH model, there exists a chiral symmetry, which is C = σ z . Effectively, the chiral symmetry can also be regarded as the sublattice symmetry. Under C, we have C -1 HC = -H. Constrained by this chiral symmetry, the Hamiltonian of the 1D SSH model can always be cast in an off-diagonal form. We can define a winding number by the off-diagonal term of the 1D SSH Hamiltonian ρ. The winding number is written as ν = 1 2πi π π dln(ρ(k))/dk, which is determined by the winding of φ(k) around the origin. Interestingly, the winding of φ(k) also coincides with the Zak phase of the wave function |ψ⟩, which is given as The winding number and Zak phase describe the topological property of the 1D SSH model. Depending on the ratio of |γ/γ ′ |, the Zak phase can be π and 0. Using Eqs. ( where s 1 and s 2 take values of ±1. The lowest energy band has s 1 = -1 and s 2 = -1, and its corresponding wavefunction is Similarly, the second and third energy bands have s 1 + s 2 = 0, which are the waves p y (|1/2, -1/2, 1/2, -1/2⟩), and p x (|1/2, 1/2, -1/2, -1/2⟩) at the Γ point. The fourth energy band has s 1 = 1 and s 2 = 1, the d wave (|1/2, -1/2, 1/2, 1/2⟩) at the Γ point In addition to the bulk energy spectrum, we can obtain the ribbon energy spectrum, including the edge states as well. For the ribbon structure, one direction is periodic and the other is finite. The energy spectrum of the 2D SSH model ribbon can be written as where k y is the quasi-continuous wave number, K x is the discrete wave number that takes values of -π/N, -π/N -1, • • • π/N with 2N + 1 the number of the unit cells along the x-direction, and the subscript x denotes that the ribbon is finite along the x-direction (we set lattice constant in all directions as unit). For the edge states, K x = π + iκ x with κ x the decaying length, which is determined by the ratio of γ x /γ ′ x together with the inversion symmetry as cosh κ = (γ 2 x + γ ′2 x )/2γ x γ ′ x . It is noted that the parity of the edge states is determined by s 1 . We plot Eq. ( where (m x , m y ) denotes the index of the unit cell. For the edge states that decay along the x-direction, the wavefunction is given as where a Bloch phase e ikymy are omitted. The 2D SSH model can have topological corner states. For the corner states, they decay along both the xand ydirections, whose wave number has the form k = (π + iκ x , π + iκ y ), where κ i is the decaying length of the corner state along the i-direction. The extra phase π is due to the open boundary condition, as discussed later. The energy of the corner states is given as When the 2D SSH model has the C 4 point group symmetry, the four corner states differed by the values of s 1 and s 2 should be degenerate. In this case, ρ x (π + iκ x ) = ρ y (π + iκ y ) = 0, and the corner states are fixed at zero energy. It is noted that for the 2D SSH model, we can define a chiral symmetry operator , which can also be considered as the sublattice symmetry. The wavefunction of the corner state is given as where we see that the four corner states should appear as two pairs of opposite energies. Constrained by the chiral symmetry C, these four corner states are degenerate at zero energy. The Wilson loop, in general, can characterize the topological properties of quantum systems in terms of parallel transport. The 2D SSH model is not an exception either. In terms of quasi-momentum k, the Wilson loop can be written as where P is path-ordering operator and A α,β = ⟨α, k|i∇ k |β, k⟩ is Berry connection matrix. Taking the k x -direction as an example and substituting the bulk wavefunction into Eq. ( where ∆φ x = φ x (2π/a) -φ(0). There are two eigenvalues of the Wilson loop matrix, which are ∆φ x and 0. The different eigenvalues of the Wilson loop matrix can be considered as gauge choices. For the trivial eigenvalue 0, the corresponding eigenvectors are linear combinations of the s and p bands, which cannot distinguish the topology between the |γ/γ ′ | > 1 and |γ/γ ′ | < 1 regions, since the total winding of the two bands is always trivial. For the eigenvalue of ∆φ x , the eigenvectors are each single band, respectively, and thus can be used to distinguish the topology between the two regions. By choosing the single-band representation, the Wilson loop can be reduced to the Zak (Berry) phase. As there are two primary directions of the reciprocal space, the Zak phase in the 1D SSH model should be vectorized to distinguish the topology in all cases. The vectored Zak phase can be written as Z = (Z x , Z y ). The emergence of topological edge and corner states in the 2D SSH model can be characterized by the vectored Zak phase, as (Z x , Z y ). For the 3D SSH model, its energy spectrum can be written as where s 3 = ±1. The energy spectrum of the 3D SSH model is plotted in Fig. s 2 e -iφy s 1 e -i(φx+φy) s 3 e -iφx s 1 s 3 e -i(φx+φz) s 2 s 3 e -i(φy+φz) s 1 s 2 s 3 e -i(φx+φy+φz) At the Γ point, we have φ i = π, and the different values of s i correspond to the eight distinct eigenstates of the cubic point group. Unlike the 2D SSH model, there is an intermediate-order topological phase in the 3D SSH model, which is neither lowest-order nor highest-order. In the 2D SSH model, its topological phases can be characterized by the vectored Zak phase, where (π, π) indicates a topological phase of the highest order accompanied by the corner states, (π, 0) is a topological phase of the lowest order accompanied by edge states along the y-direction, and (0, 0) is a trivial topological phase. For the 3D SSH model, except for the highest order topological phase of the vectored Zak phase (π, π, π) and the lowest order topological phase of the vectored Zak phases (π, 0, 0), (0, π, 0) and (0, 0, π), there are topological phases that are neither lowest order nor highest order like (π, π, 0). We may call these topological phases intermediate-order topological phases, which are characterized by hinge states without corner states in 3D cases. As shown in Fig. Taking the intermediate-order topological phase that has a vectored Zak phase (π, π, 0) as an example, we expect that the second-order topological states, like the hinge states, appear, but the corner states are absent. This can be verified by the numerical calculation of a finite sample of the 3D SSH model of γ x /γ ′ x = 1/3,γ y /γ ′ y = 1/3, and γ z /γ ′ z = 3. As shown in the eigenenergy spectrum of the finite 3D SSH model in Fig. Here, we discuss the topological protection of these intermediate-order states. Unlike the highest-order topological states like corner states, these lowest-order and intermediate-order states only reflect the band topology in the partial Brillouin zone. For example, the hinge states in the 3D SSH model are determined by the band inversions at X and Y points of the Brillouin only. In other words, no global gaps are required for the lowest-order and intermediate-order topological states. This fact adds extra robustness to these topological states, which we dub hierarchical topological phases, as discussed in detail later. These intermediate-order topological states are determined only by the band topology in the partial Brillouin zone, we call them fractional topological states. For the cases of n > 3 that go beyond the physical dimensions, a possible realization is to use the synthetic dimensions. For example, using photonic modes of different frequencies in a photonic crystal After discussing the 2D and 3D SSH models, we can extend the vectored Zak phase to arbitrary dimensions and apply it to the nD SSH model. Thus, each dimension can define its own winding number ν i separately. The topological invariant of the nD SSH model can be a vector Z consisting of a series of winding numbers such as (ν x , ν y , ν z , • • • ). Recalling that the Zak phase is nothing more than the Wannier center, it is clear that the topological invariant of the nD SSH is its Wannier center. Compared to the strong topological phase, such as the Haldane model, the topology of the nD SSH model is an atomic-obstructed phase. There is no obstruction in defining its Wannier center, and its topological edge states are due to the filling anomaly induced by the mismatch between the atomic and Wannier centers Here, using the open boundary condition, we build the n-(n -l) correspondence in the nD SSH model in terms of Z. Z is a bulk topological invariant, which describes the topological in each direction by Z i . Taking the 2D SSH model as an example, we can connect the nontrivial Z i and a purely imaginary solution of quasi-wavenumber κ i along the i-direction. x-direction where Equation ( ) with the extra term 1/(M x + 1) accounting for the finite size effect. According to the fundamental theorem of algebra, the missing solution around π must be located in a complex regime, which is k x = π + iκ x . Thus, the nontrivial winding of φ x directly leads to an imaginary solution of k x , corresponding to a topological interfacial state. The above discussion can also be generalized to any direction: a complex solution k i = π + iκ i appears if |γ ′ i /γ i | > 1 for a large system size. We can define a lth higher-order topological invariant Q given by the product of Z i as which builds the n-(n-l) correspondence. Specifically, when all directions' Z i s are nontrivial, it results in n-0 correspondence, i.e., the appearance of 0D corner states. It is noted that this definition of the higher-order topological invariant by the product of Zak phases along distinct directions is applied to the nD SSH model only, and the generalization of Q (l) to other systems is not trivial Let's first define the chiral operator C for the nD SSH model, which is written as with the product the direct product. The topological states in the nD SSH model can always be paired with opposite eigenenergies according to Eq. ( In addition to the highest-order 0D topological states, the first-and intermediate-order topological states do not require complete chiral symmetry C to maintain their robustness. This is due to the unique hierarchical structure of the nD SSH model as indicated by Eq. ( where l corresponds to the lth-order topological states, and σ z is picked up within the 2 n sublattice space. Taking the edge states along the x-direction of the 2D SSH model as an example, they are impervious to hopping perturbations in the x-direction even if they break the complete chiral symmetry C. As displayed in Fig. Compared to the 2D SSH model, the 2D BBH model has a flux of π in each unit cell. By choosing one of the y-direction hoppings as the carrier of the π flux phase, we can write the BBH model as where the bases are the sublattice bases of the 2D SSH model such as |00⟩, |01⟩, |10⟩, and |11⟩. Written in a similar form to the Eq. ( whereH BBH 1D is the Hamiltonian of the 1D BBH model that is same as the 1D SSH model. By rearranging the sublattice bases that ensure the diagonal block is zero, Eq. ( Using the determinant of the block matrix det A B C D = det(AB -CD) if C and D commute, we have the eigenvalue The doubly degenerate energy spectrum of the 2D BBH model is and the corresponding eigenfunctions are where the bases are (|00⟩, |01⟩, |10⟩, |11⟩), and the normalization factor 1/ √ 2 is omitted. Unlike the 2D SSH model, the eigenstates in the 2D BBH model are doubly degenerate. Similarly, we can obtain the Hamiltonian of the 3D BBH model, which is written as where the sublattice bases are |000⟩, |011⟩, |010⟩, |001⟩, and |100⟩, |111⟩, |110⟩, |101⟩. After rearranging the sublattices, the 3D BBH Hamiltonian can be cast into an off-diagonal form as The eigenstates can then be solved accordingly, and only half of the sublattices are independent. Imposing the same open boundary condition as the 2D SSH model to the 2D BBH model, we obtain a similar quantization condition of k x , which is This fact suggests that in the 2D BBH model, the topological edge state can exist alone, similar to the 2D SSH model. ± cos 2 θ∆φ y . For the nontrivial ± cos 2 θ∆φ y , it is also determined by the winding of φ i , similar to the nD SSH model. For finite γ i , it shares the same topology as the γ i = 0 case due to continuous change through adiabatic evolution. The modulation function of ∆φ y for finite γ i can be written approximately as (cos 2 θ -θ 2 cos 2θ/2). The 2D and 3D BBH models can be generalized to the nD case following a hierarchical structure similar to that of the nD SSH model. By choosing a proper ordering of the sublattice bases that ensures every dimension carries a π flux, the nD Hamiltonian of the BBH model can be written as where σ z is the Pauli matrix, and H BBH (n-1)D is the Hamiltonian of (n -1)D BBH model. The eigenvalues of the nD BBH model are E = ± i |ρ i | 2 In summary, we have observed a hierarchical structure in the nD SSH model and obtained analytical solutions for the nD SSH model. These solutions include a quantization condition for the quasi-wavenumber, leading to interfacial states for nontrivial winding numbers. We have generalized the bulk-edge correspondence from the 1D SSH model to an n-(n -l) correspondence for arbitrary dimensions, revealing a new type of topological insulator known as a hierarchical topological insulator. This hierarchical topological insulator can host intermediate-order topological states that reflect band topology only in a partial Brillouin zone. Furthermore, we compared the BBH and nD SSH models and discovered that they share a similar hierarchical structure, and the BBH model is another example of a hierarchical topological insulator.