In this review we concentrate on the work of K. Alex Müller in connection with his activities on oxide perovskites and ferroelectrics which were central to his research career long before he successfully discovered the first high temperature superconductor (HTSC) together with J. G. Bednorz in 1986. Not accidentally, but taking his long experience in perovskite ferroelectrics into account, the first HTSC was an oxide perovskite which had never been considered before to be superconducting. My (ABH) first encounter with K. Alex Müller (Alex) was in 1979 in Portoroz, former Yugoslavia, on the occasion of the Fourth European Meeting on Ferroelectricity. At that time Alex was already a superstar in the ferroelectrics community and well-known for his sharp mind and quick comprehension. Compared to all following meetings the ferroelectrics community was of a manageable size and could be considered almost as a family -everyone knew everyone and conflicts and controversies between the different participants were well-known. As a result, fervid discussion rounds occurred after speeches, and for those who were not involved in those heated disputes, an amusing scenario was presented. K. Alex Müller was often involved in such discussions and redoubtable for his punctured responses. Actually, I was extremely impressed by him and looked up to him like to a diva. The first time I (HK) heard the name of "K. Alex Müller" was 1971 when I was a student of physics at ETH Zurich. I was attending a lecture of Prof. W. Känzig on "Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena", where the pioneering work of Alex and Walter Berlinger on the experimental determination of the static critical exponents β of the order parameter of the second-order structural phase transitions in SrTiO 3 (STO) and LaAlO 3 was presented (see below). Then, I first met Alex at the University of Zurich, when, as a PhD student I attended a lecture of Alex on "Group Theory". Since my PhD thesis at the University of Zurich on the critical behavior of quasi two-dimensional magnetic systems with perovskite structure was related to a similar topic Alex was working on, he invited me to give a seminar at the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory. I was very proud to present my work in such a famous laboratory, and Alex at that time was already a world famous expert in the field of phase transitions and critical phenomena. A true scientific collaboration with Alex started shortly after his discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in the cuprates in 1987. Subsequently, I had the great privilege to collaborate with him on different aspects of cuprates, including: isotope effects, symmetry of the order parameter, intrinsic inhomogeneity, for over a period of almost 30 years. I would like to start by elucidating how he became involved in the physics of perovskites and his career paths in the field. Alex studied physics at ETH Zürich where he was intensely influenced and impressed by the lectures of Prof. Wolfgang Pauli. His diploma work was on the Hall effect in grey tin which was supervised by Prof. G. Busch, who was also the supervisor of his PhD thesis in 1958 which dealt with the paramagnetic resonance in the newly synthesized double perovskite SrTiO 3 (STO) After finalizing his PhD thesis, Alex started his professional life as head of the magnetic resonance group at the Battelle Memorial Institute in Geneva. Upon the recommendation of Prof. E. Brun he did his habilitation at the University of Zurich in 1962. In view of his high impact in the scientific research in perovskites, the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory in Rüschlikon offered him in 1963 the position of a researcher where he was subsequently promoted to a group leader of the physics department in 1971, a position which he held until 1985. His research focused on STO and related perovskites with emphasis on their chemical binding, their ferroelectric and soft-mode properties, and later on their critical and multicritical phenomena at their phase transitions. In 1970 he was appointed as titular professor of the University of Zurich and a decisive moment in his career occurred in 1982 when he was nominated as IBM fellow. This enabled him to decide freely and independently about his further research areas -a milestone on his way to the Nobel prize. The favorite experimental tool of Alex was Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR), which had been discovered by the end of the Second World War. This methodology is rather cheap in comparison with related probes and allows testing of the local environment, crystalline surroundings and structural properties of specific ions. His first paper (his PhD thesis) was published in 1958 These results together with EPR studies of manganese and Cr 3+ ions in STO, which also confirm the tetragonal phase of the STO, were published in Related to this topic is a pioneering work of Alex and Walter Berlinger Early on Alex was also interested in the Jahn-Teller (JT) effect which had been predicted by Jahn and Teller in 1937. Notably, using EPR its existence could be proven for paramagnetic impurities in crystals with orbital degenerate ground states. By investigating Ni 3+ , Cu 2+ , Pt 3+ impurities in STO and other oxides, the static as well as the dynamic JT effect were substantiated Aside from the zone boundary related instability in perovskites he was also working on the instability related to the zone center which is accompanied with a soft transverse optic mode. This was intensely investigated, especially in STO, since inelastic neutron scattering (INS) results clearly showed its existence and thereby the possibility of a polar instability towards ferroelectricity. Together with H. Burkard he measured the related dielectric constant down to 4K, much lower than had been done with INS and observed that the dielectric constant achieved huge values, however, started saturating towards a high constant value below ⁓30K. This finding led to his most cited paper (except those related to high temperature superconductivity) "SrTiO 3 : An intrinsic quantum paraelectric below 4K" Another interesting observation of Alex, which suggests a possible origin of ferroelectricity in oxide perovskites, was based on the EPR analysis of Fe 3+ in various systems for which he used a superposition model For a while, Alex considered himself to be a single ion man, but Prof. Harry Thomas introduced him to many particle physics. From EPR experiments he concluded that the dynamics of the phase transitions of perovskites change in the vicinity of the transition. The critical properties of systems are on one hand characterized by the system's dimensionality, meaning linear in one dimension, two dimensional in planes, or three and hypothetical four dimensions, on the other hand by its symmetry class of interactions. It turned out that uniaxial pressure modifies the symmetry class of the phase transition in STO and consequently its critical behavior. These experiments enabled him to classify the transformation as Ising type, bicritical or cubic. It was thus possible to identify a critical end point as a function of temperature and pressure. His measurements were the first ones evidencing a three dimensional Potts behavior BaTiO 3 attracted increased interest by him, since it exhibits three successive phase transitions, which have been classified as order/disorder in the US whereas W. Cochran When he was only 53 he had attained an enormous scientific reputation which could have been the end of his career as a researcher. However, as is well known, he continued with science with much greater success than ever before. Interestingly, his work on perovskite oxides together with his intimate knowledge of the JT effect gave rise to the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity Alex married his wife Inge in 1956, and a year later his son Erich was born, followed in 1960 by his daughter Sylvia. Three grandchildren stem from both. He was extremely devoted to his family and Inge always supported him, giving structure to his life. They enjoyed travelling together and she joined him on his numerous journeys. Besides his family, Alex was very enthusiastic about old cars and especially Jaguars. In order to do repairs himself, his garage was equipped with a lower level from which he managed to work on the underside of the vehicles. In addition to his passion for exact natural sciences, he also showed broad interest in natural philosophy and in the depth psychology of C.G. Jung, as well as in classical music, literature, art, and history. Another of Alex's lifelong hobbies was skiing which he had learned during his time in the Boarding School in Schiers (located in the Swiss alps). He became an excellent skier, constantly practiced and was mostly happy when he could stay in the mountains with his skis. Almost up to the age of 87 he continued with this sport and then only gave up because his muscles weakened with age. His children as well as theirs learned skiing from him until he confessed that they were doing better than him. In addition to skiing, he also practiced swimming close to his house in Hedingen in a small lake regularly in the summer. Alex has inspired the world and initiated the work on ferroelectricity. He was one of the greatest scientists we ever met, but in addition, he was a true friend of not only to us, but also our families as he took enormous interest in their development. We have lost a scientific father, a very good friend, an inspiring scientist, an everlasting teacher who was warm-hearted, friendly, open minded, sharp-witted, and had a large portion of black humor. Good bye, and take care! His words to us: "Macht's gut, Euer Alex!" (which translates to, "Take it easy, yours Alex!") 