Fundamental knowledge of scattering in granular compacts is essential to ensure accuracy of spectroscopic measurements and determine material characteristics such as size and shape of scattering objects. Terahertz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) was employed to investigate the effect of particle size and concentration on scattering in specially fabricated compacts consisting of borosilicate microspheres in a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) matrix. As expected, increasing particle size leads to an increase in overall scattering contribution. At low concentrations, the scattering contribution increases linearly with concentration. Scattering increases linearly at low concentrations, saturates at higher concentrations with a maximum level depending on particle size, and that the onset of saturation is independent of particle size. The effective refractive index becomes sublinear at high particle concentrations and exceeds the linear model at maximum density, which can cause errors in calculations based on it, such as porosity. The observed phenomena are attributed to the change in the fraction of photons propagating ballistically versus being scattered. At low concentrations, photons travel predominately ballistically through the PTFE matrix. At high concentrations, the photons again propagate ballistically through adjacent glass microspheres. In the intermediate regime, photons are predominately scattered. Granular compacts are employed in various industries Terahertz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) has been deployed frequently in the characterization of granular compacts due to its unique ability to determine both the refractive index (RI) and loss coefficient Therefore, if the absorption of the solid media is known, then the scattering component can be obtained by simple subtraction. Scattering in THz-TDS measurements has been previously investigated by both empirical fitting with A and B as fitting parameters. This model has been utilized in various studies, including the non-destructive determination of tablet fragmentation during compaction Previous investigations into the effect of an inhomogeneous distribution of particles in paint emulsions have been of significant interest in the past few decades. Fitzwater et al. derived a theoretical model describing light scattering based on Mie theory. They attempted to account for the concentration of inhomogeneities Latimer et al. A study by Grinchuk et al. This study systematically investigated the effect of particle size and concentration on THz scattering in granular compacts. A set of compacts was devised and fabricated, making it possible to vary the size and concentration of particles in a well-controlled manner. Granular compacts were fabricated using glass microspheres suspended in a PTFE matrix and compacted to create compacts with negligible porosity. Transmission THz-TDS was used to measure frequency-dependent scattering. The study quantified the dependence of the scattering contribution on particle size and concentration. The work studied the power-law dependence of scattering on frequency, identified the dependence of the power-law coefficients on particle size and concentration, and investigated saturation of scattering at higher concentrations. Microspheres of borosilicate glass having five size distributions (Cospheric LLC, 2.2 g cm -3 , 38 -45, 90 -106, 125 -150, 150 -180 and 180 -212 μm) were used with PTFE powder (Sigma Aldrich, free flowing, mean particle size 1 μm, 2.2 g cm -3 ) as the matrix material. PTFE was chosen as the matrix material due to its ability to create samples of negligible porosity under sufficient compaction pressure Batches of ten plane parallel compacts with a diameter of 9 mm and a thickness of 1 mm were fabricated for each particle size and concentration using 392 MPa of pressure THz-TDS measurements were carried out on a commercial system (TeraPulse Lx, Teraview) with a frequency (ν) resolution of 0.04 THz. All measurements were performed in a nitrogenpurged chamber. Sample thickness (L) was measured using a micrometre (±0.005 mm). The frequency-domain field amplitude (E(ν)) and phase (φ(ν)) for the sample (s) and reference (r) were obtained from the time-domain data by applying zero padding (next power of 2), apodisation (Hamming approximation) and fast Fourier transform. The frequency-dependent refractive index (n(ν)) and loss coefficient (αloss(ν)) of each sample were calculated using the standard equations By combining the known absorption of solid borosilicate glass (α abs,glass ) and PTFE (α abs,PTFE ), it is possible to estimate the absorption contributions for the compacts at a given concentration (C (%v/v)) of microspheres. α abs = C α abs,glass + (1 -C) α abs,PTFE Subtracting the estimated absorption contributions from the measured loss coefficient of each compact yields the scattering contribution of the microspheres: The optical properties of media with high concentrations of borosilicate microspheres were measured using index-matching fluid. As it was not possible to prepare compacts with a concentration > 30 %v/v of microspheres, a different method was used for these measurements. First, a cuvette was filled with microspheres, their transmission was measured, and the effective refractive index and loss coefficient were calculated. Then the cuvette was filled with paraffin oil (n paraffin ~ 1.5), which has a similar refractive index to PTFE (n PTFE ~ 1.45), allowing for comparison between sample preparation methods. Using the linear mixing formula, the difference between the two values of the effective refractive index provides the volume fraction, f open , of spheres in the cuvette where ∆n eff is the refractive index difference between the spheres in air and paraffin. An example of the frequency-dependent refractive index and loss coefficient of compacts consisting of borosilicate glass microspheres suspended in a PTFE matrix can be seen in Figure The scattering contribution to the measured loss coefficient was evaluated using Eq. 7, and knowledge of the microsphere concentration and the absorption by glass and PTFE. The calculated scattering values are plotted in Figure As discussed above, scattering is expected to increase linearly at low concentrations until the onset of scattering saturation. When the concentration approaches fully dense packing, scattering is expected to decrease linearly. To experimentally observe the fall of the scattering after the onset of saturation, the method described in Section 2.5 was used to measure scattering for each particle size. This facilitated the evaluation of scattering for concentration levels > 30 %v/v. The normalized curves show that the onset of saturation is independent of both particle size and frequency (Figure We also investigated the effect of scattering on the behavior of the effective refractive index. The frequency-averaged refractive index for all concentration levels of borosilicate microspheres can be seen in Figure n eff = C n glass + (1 -C) n PTFE This behavior may be explained by considering the path length of scattered photons. At low concentrations photons are less likely to undergo multiple scattering, so that scattering events increase linearly with concentration. At the highest concentrations, photons experience multiple scattering, leading to slower propagation through the sample and thus a higher refractive index. In this study, we conducted a systematic investigation of THz scattering in granular compacts with varying particle sizes and concentrations. We fabricated granular compacts formed of spherical particles in a solid medium with negligible porosity. Particle size and concentration was controlled and varied with high accuracy and reproducibility. THz-TDS was used to investigate the effect of varying particle size and concentration on scattering. Using the measured optical properties of borosilicate glass, scattering contributions to the loss coefficient were isolated, allowing the effect of particle size and concentration on scattering to be quantified. It was found that scattering increased linearly at lower concentrations. Scattering saturated at higher concentrations, reaching a maximum level dependent on the particle size. However, normalized scattering curves showed that the onset of saturation is independent of the particle size. By applying the power law function to the scattering component, we reveal the dependence of the power law coefficients on particle size and concentration. It was found that the preexponential factor increased as a function of both concentration and particle size. The dependence on concentration was linear at low concentrations until the onset of saturation. The exponent was similarly dependent on concentration but independent of particle size. The effective refractive index becomes sublinear with increasing particle concentration. At concentrations close to maximum density, it exceeds the linear model. This finding indicates that calculations based on the measured effective refractive index, such as porosity, are liable to have errors in samples with large scattering objects and high concentrations. These findings may be explained by considering ballistic versus scattered photon propagation through the compact. At lower particle concentrations, most photons travel ballistically (without scattering). As the particle concentration increases, scattering increases linearly until the onset of saturation due to multiple scattering. As the concentration of microspheres increases further and approaches fully dense packing, scattering falls again as photons increasingly travel ballistically through the glass. Appendix