We advance a general theory of field correlation revivals of structured random wave packets, composed of superpositions of propagation-invariant modes, at pairs of planes transverse to the packet propagation direction. We derive an elegant analytical relation between the normalized intensity autocorrelation function of thus structured paraxial light fields at a pair of points on an optical axis of the system and a Gauss sum, thereby establishing a fundamental link between statistical optics and number theory. We propose and experimentally implement a simple, robust analog random wave computer that can efficiently decompose numbers into prime factors. A spectacular self-imaging effect, first experimentally discovered by Talbot Lately, wave pattern revivals of structured fields have attracted interest Here we develop a general theory of axial correlation revivals of structured random waves composed of superpositions of diffraction-free modes of any kind. Our theory enables us to derive a remarkably simple analytical relation between the normalized intensity autocorrelation function of structured paraxial random light fields at a pair of points on an optical axis of the system and an incomplete Gauss sum, thereby establishing a fundamental link between statistical optics and number theory. We employ the discovered link to advance and experimentally implement an efficient protocol to decompose even fairly large numbers into prime factors using random light. Number factorization plays a prominent role in network systems and cyber security Although quantum algorithms have enabled seminal advances in number factorization We consider a random wave packet and an associated ensemble of scalar random fields {U }. In the spacefrequency representation, the field of each ensemble realization can be expressed as where z and r are the axial coordinate along and radius vector in the plane transverse to the packet propagation direction, respectively. Further, {a ν } is a set of uncorrelated random amplitudes which obey the second-order statistics as Here the angle brackets represent ensemble averaging and {λ ν ≥ 0} specify powers of individual modes {Ψ ν }. We now specify to a particular class of spatial modes, and drop the irrelevant frequency variable ω hereafter. We can infer from Eq. ( On substituting from Eqs. (1) through (3) into Eq. ( where ∆z = z 2 -z 1 . The analysis of Eq. ( Let us now focus on structured random sources generating uncorrelated superpositions of the so-called dark or antidark (DAD) diffraction-free beams of light, featuring dark notches or bright bumps against incoherent background We show (see Supplemental Material [44] for details) that the cross-spectral density of the DAD beam superposition ensemble at a given radial position r in any pair of transverse planes is given, up to an immaterial constant and overall phase factor, by the expression where J 0 (x) is a Bessel function of the first kind and order zero, and -(+) on the r.h.s of the equation corresponds to a superposition of dark (antidark) beams, respectively. We display the average intensity and the magnitude of W DAD (r, ∆z) in Fig. It follows at once from Eqs. (S8) and (S10) that provided ∆z = nz T , n ∈ N , the fields are perfectly coherent parallel to the optical axis at the transverse planes separated by multiple revival distances, |μ DAD (r, nz T )| = 1. This is a statistical signature of Talbot correlation revivals which holds for random wave packets composed of any propagation-invariant modes {Ψ ν }. The presence of a quadratic exponential factor in Eq. (S8) hints at the possibility of employing correlations of structured random light fields to factor numbers. Indeed, we can establish a link between the normalized intensity autocorrelation function of the peak intensities of antidark (AD) beams I AD , evaluated at different positions along the optical axis, and an incomplete Gauss sum of number theory. To this end, we define the former as AD (0, ∆z) = and the latter as and derive the following fundamental relation (see Supplemental Material [44] for details): AD (0, z T N/p) -1. In Eqs. ( Next, we validate the proposed protocol by carrying out a number factorization experiment. In our experiment, a collimated, linearly polarized quasimonochromatic beam of carrier wavelength λ = 632.8nm, emitted by a He-Ne laser, illuminates a phase-only spatial light modulator (SLM) (Meadowlark Optics, 1920 × 1200 8 μm 2 pixels). To structure random light beams, we encode the desired field distributions into holograms using complex amplitude encoding. The sought beams are then associated with the first diffracted order from the SLM; we refresh speckle patterns by refreshing the holograms, see Supplemental Material [44] for further details. In Fig. AD (r, z T N/p) with the help of Eq. (S16) of the Supplemental Material AD (r, N z T /p) = 2 at any transverse location r, implying that |G (M ) N (p)| 2 = 1 in Eq. (S19). This conclusion is well supported by our experimental results of Fig. To demonstrate the capability of our protocol to factor large numbers, we show theoretical and experimental results, corresponding to left-and right-hand sides of Eq. (S19), respectively, as functions of p in Fig. factors of N . Further, the factors and non-factors of N are clearly discriminated by the threshold value of 1/ √ 2, as anticipated Next, to ensure the accuracy of number factorization, we demonstrate that our protocol is able to detect spurious factors, the ghost factors such that the magnitude of the incomplete Gauss sum can attain values close to unity. To suppress any ghost factor bellow the threshold value, the magnitude of M must be chosen judiciously. Previous work on number factorization with incomplete Gauss sums suggests the criterion M ≈ 0.659 4 √ N for a given N We have employed the developed theory to establish a fundamental link between statistical optical physics and number theory and have proposed and demonstrated a protocol to decompose numbers into prime factors using random light. It is worth noting that, to our knowledge, all previously reported classical physics inspired number factorization techniques relied on coherent superpositions of waves S2. Derivation of the relation between normalized intensity autocorrelation function of an antidark beam ensemble and incomplete Gauss's sum.-We start by introducing the second-order degree of coherence which can be viewed as the degree of coherence of light in a Young-type interference experiment with the pinholes located parallel to the optical axis of the system AD (r, ∆z) = by the following Siegert relation Next, let us take the longitudinal distances such that Here p is a natural number that may or may not be a factor of a given odd number N that we want to factorize. If we take now N = np, where n ∈ N , implying that p is a factor of N , we can infer at once from Eq (S13) that ∆z = nz T . Therefore, all phasors on the right-hand side of Eq. (S8) are equal to unity. It then readily follows from Eqs (S8) and (S10) that SLM. The Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem dictates that each speckle grain be sampled by, at least, two pixels on the SLM screen 