Open-shell benzenoid polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, known as magnetic nanographenes, exhibit unconventional π-magnetism arising from topological frustration or strong electronicelectron (e-e) interaction. Imprinting multiple strongly entangled spins into polyradical nanographenes creates a major paradigm shift in realizing non-trivial collective quantum behaviors and exotic quantum phases in organic quantum materials. However, conventional design approaches are limited by a single magnetic origin, which can restrict the number of correlated spins or the type of magnetic ordering in open-shell nanographenes. Here, we present a novel design strategy combing topological frustration and e-e interactions to fabricate the largest fully-fused open-shell nanographene reported to date, a 'butterfly'-shaped tetraradical on Au(111). We employed bond-resolved scanning tunneling microscopy and spin excitation spectroscopy to unambiguously resolve the molecular backbone and reveal the strongly correlated open-shell character, respectively. This nanographene contains four unpaired electrons with both ferromagnetic and anti-ferromagnetic interactions, harboring a many-body singlet ground state and strong multi-spin entanglement, which can be well described by many-body calculations. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the nickelocene magnetic probe can sense highly-correlated spin states in nanographene. The ability to imprint and characterize many-body strongly correlated spins in polyradical nanographenes not only presents exciting opportunities for realizing non-trivial quantum magnetism and phases in organic materials but also paves the way toward high-density ultrafast spintronic devices and quantum information technologies. The field of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) has witnessed significant advances in recent years, particularly in the area of open-shell nanographenes. Here, we introduce a new conceptual design of polyradical nanographene that features multiple strongly entangled many-body quantum spins arising from the interplay of strong e-e correlation and topological frustration (Fig. According to the hexagonal graphs theorem, To gain further insight into the electronic structure of this system, it is also instructive to analyze the energy spectrum of a single-electron tight-binding model with one pz orbital per carbon atom in the first neighbor hopping approximation described by the Hückel Hamiltonian. The synthesis of the butterfly-shaped nanographene on Au(111) relies on thermal annealing of precursor 1′ (Fig. We then carried out dI/dV spectroscopic measurements to probe the local electronic structures of molecule 1. The dI/dV spectra taken over the corner and the edge of 1 reveal two prominent features located at energies of -0.60 eV and 0.75 eV, respectively (Fig. As the single-determinant density functional theory (DFT) method is inadequate for accurately modeling polyradical systems with a strong multireference character, our DFT calculations consistently overestimate the singlet-triplet excitation energy by over one order of magnitude (see Table As discussed above, Hückel model, although simplistic, provide valuable insight into the electronic structure of molecule 1. In particular, the model predicts the existence of two zeroenergy SOMO orbitals and two additional orbitals (labeled as 1 and 4) separated by a narrow energy gap (Fig. In addition to the ground state (S=0), CASSCF calculations also reveal that the first excited state is a triplet state with a strong multireference character (Table. S3). Moreover, the highlevel DLPNO-NEVPT2/CASSCF(4,4) calculations predict the triplet state (S=1) to be higher in energy by 8 meV than the ground state, in excellent agreement with the experimental value of ~9 meV. To further support the assignment of the IETS feature near EF to the spinexcitation process, CASSCF natural transition orbitals (NTOs) were calculated. To provide a better rationalization of the experimental dI/dV maps, we calculated CASSCF Dyson orbitals, which describe the change in electron distribution during electron ionization/attachment of individual molecules. To determine the mutual coupling of individual unpaired spins in forming the singlet ground state of molecule 1, we calculated the spin-spin correlation function (A ij = 〈S ̂iS ̂j〉 -〈S ̂i〉〈S ̂j〉) between each pair of spins i and j, using a maximally localized basis set representation of four unpaired electrons that are predominantly located on individual triangulene corners of molecule 1. As shown in Fig. We further employed the SPM technique with a nickelocene (NiCp2) functionalized probe to directly verify the magnetic properties of 1 (Fig. The combination of a NiCp2 probe study with theoretical calculations allows us to unravel the exotic magnetic coupling with multiple-entangled spin interactions in product 1, which will be discussed in more detail in the following context. To gain a theoretical understanding of IETS spectra with a NiCp2 probe, we have developed a Heisenberg spin model, which allows us to rationalize the experimental dI/dV spectra acquired over molecule 1 with a NiCp2-fuctionalized tip. The model consists of an effective spin Hamiltonian describing the interaction between effective spin states residing on the NiCp2 probe and molecule 1. The spin model of the molecule consists of four spin sites that are mutually coupled by both ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic exchange interactions, as determined by the spin correlation model presented in Fig. Fig. We have demonstrated a novel approach to designing a polyradical nanographene that incorporates the concepts of both strong e-e interaction and topological frustration. Through advanced multireference quantum chemical calculations, we have revealed that the butterflyshaped tetraradical molecule exhibits a strongly correlated many-body ground state featuring highly entangled four spins. We have also utilized the NiCp2 functionalized STM tip to probe the -magnetism and many-body spin excitation directly. Our findings reveal a new design strategy for imprinting and characterizing many-body strongly correlated spins in polyradical nanographenes. This approach not only provides a promising platform for exploring exciting non-trivial spin entanglement and exotic low-dimensional quantum phases in organic materials (e.g. quantum spin liquid phases), but also opens up new possibilities for highdensity ultrafast spintronic In-solution and on-surface synthesis. The synthetic procedure of the precursor 1′ is detailed in Supplementary Information. Au(111) single crystal (MaTeck GmbH) was cleaned by multiple cycles of Ar + sputtering and annealing. Knudsen cell (MBE-Komponenten GmbH) was used for the deposition of precursor molecules onto clean Au(111) surfaces under ultrahigh vacuum conditions (base pressure, <2 × 10 -10 mbar) for on-surface synthesis of product 1. After the deposition of precursors, the sample was annealed at elevated temperatures as stated in the main text for 20 min to induce intramolecular dehydrogenation. The IETS (d 2 I/dV 2 ) spectra taken with a nickelocene-functionalized tip were conducted using a SPECS LT-SPM at 1.3 K. To deposit nickelocene molecules onto the cold surface in the STM chamber, we pre-pumped the crucible for ten minutes before introducing nickelocene at a pressure of 5 10 -6 mbar through a leak valve (<1s deposition). Nickelocene tip functionalization was achieved by scanning an isolated nickelocene molecule in the constant current STM mode (set-point of VS= 1.4 mV, I= 10 pA) with a Kolibri sensor. The ground state optimized geometries of the freestanding and Au(111)-supported molecule 1 were obtained using the total energy spinpolarized DFT calculations with the AIMS code. The DFT calculations confirmed the absence of chemical bonding between molecule 1 and the metal surface. The NEVPT2/CASSCF(4,4) calculations were carried out in the def2-SVP basis using the Orca code. 