Superconducting radio frequency (SRF) cavities, which are critical components in many particle accelerators, need to be operated in the Meissner state to avoid strong dissipation from magnetic vortices. For a defect-free superconductor, the maximum attainable magnetic field for operation is set by the superheating field, B sh , which directly depends on the surface current. In heterostructures composed of different superconductors, the current in each layer depends not only on the properties of the individual material, but also on the electromagnetic response of the adjacent layers through boundary conditions at the interfaces. Three prototypical bilayers [Nb 1-x Ti x N(50 nm)/Nb, Nb 1-x Ti x N(80 nm)/Nb, and, Nb 1-x Ti x N(160 nm)/Nb] are investigated here by depthresolved measurements of their Meissner screening profiles using low-energy muon spin rotation (LE-μSR). From fits to a model based on London theory (with appropriate boundary and continuity conditions), a magnetic penetration depth for the thin Nb 1-x Ti x N layers of λ Nb 1-x Ti x N = 182.5(31) nm is found, in good agreement with literature values for the bulk alloy. Using the measured λ Nb 1-x Ti x N , the maximum vortex-free field, B max , of the superconductor-superconductor (SS) bilayer structure was estimated to be 610(40) mT. The strong suppression of the surface current in the Nb 1-x Ti x N layer suggests an optimal thickness of ∼ 1.4λ Nb 1-x Ti x N = 261(14) nm. A large accelerating gradient (E acc ) (energy gain per unit length) is required for high energy accelerators to limit their length and therefore their cost One possibility to achieve surface magnetic fields beyond B sh of Nb is to use a different superconducting material with a greater B sh (e.g., Nb 3 Sn or Nb 1-x Ti x N) To overcome this, a different approach has been proposed, wherein superconducting multilayers are used to push the field of first-flux penetration beyond Nb's intrinsic B sh (see e.g., In summary, the maximum field in superconducting heterostructures that can be sustained while remaining in the Meissner state (B max ) depends on the thickness and superconducting properties of all individual layers in a correlated way. This is a direct consequence of Maxwell's equations with continuity conditions enforced at interface boundaries Recall that, for a bulk superconductor in the "local" London limit (see e.g. , z ≥ 0, where d s is the thickness of the top superconducting layer, and the λ i denote the penetration depth in the surface (i = s) and substrate (i = sub) layers, respectively. While Equation ( where the symbols have the same meaning as in Equation ( The current density distribution, J (z) can be obtained from the field screening profiles using the expression J (z) = -1 μ 0 dB(z) dz . Both Equations ( LE-μSR experiments were performed at the Paul Scherrer Institute's (PSI) Swiss Muon Source located in Villingen, Switzerland, using the μE4 beamline When a μ + decays, it emits a positron preferentially along its spin direction at the moment of decay. The emitted positrons are detected as a function of time in a set of positron detectors symmetrically placed surrounding the sample. This allows for the temporal evolution of the muon's spin orientation to be deduced, and consequently, the properties of the magnetic fields it experiences. In this experiment, the asymmetry of μ + decay is determined in a transverse field arrangement wherein a magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the initial direction of muon spinpolarization and parallel to the sample surface. The positron event rate in one (or more) "counters" i, is given by: where τ μ = 2.2 μs is the muon lifetime, N 0,i represents the total number of "good" decay events (i.e., decays from muons stopped in the sample), b i is the time-independent rate from uncorrelated "background" events, and A i (t) represents the time-evolution of the muon ensemble asymmetry: where A 0,i is the experimental decay asymmetry and P(t) is the polarization of the muon ensemble. In a transverse-field experiment, the time-evolution of P(t) is given by: where p(B) is the internal magnetic field distribution sensed by the muons, γ μ = 2π × 135.54 MHz T -1 is the gyromagnetic ratio of the muon, B is the magnitude of the local magnetic field at the muon site, t is the time after implantation, and φ is the phase factor (i.e., angle between the initial muon spin-polarization and the effective symmetry axis of a positron detector). As mentioned in Section II A, LE-μSR has the ability to explore the local field in a depth resolved manner. Muons of a particular energy stop over a specific range distribution when implanted into a sample. In this experiment, a range of implantation energies (∼2 keV to ∼30 keV) were used (see Figure The stopping profile of muons can be accurately simulated where p i (z) is a probability density function, f i ∈ [0, 1] is the i th stopping fraction, constrained such that and z is the depth below the surface. For our SS bilayers, the stopping data are well-described using m = 2 and a p(z) is given by a modified beta distribution. Explicitly, where z ∈ [0, z 0 ] is the depth below the surface and B(α, β) is the beta function: Typical stopping profiles for μ + implanted in (a) Nb 1-x Ti x N(50 nm)/Nb, and (b) Nb 1-x Ti x N(160 nm)/Nb SS bilayer, simulated using the Monte Carlo code TRIM.SP with Γ(s) denoting the gamma function. Further details of the stopping profile simulation can be found elsewhere In this study, Nb 1-x Ti x N/Nb SS bilayer samples were prepared by growing thin films of Nb 1-x Ti x N on "bulk" Nb substrates using direct current (DC) magnetron reactive sputtering (R-DCMS) in a vacuum chamber with a base pressure of low 1 × 10 -10 mbar. The sputtering target consisted of 80/20 (wt. %) Nb/Ti alloy, was used within an Ar and N 2 (P N 2 /P Ar ) gas mixture at a pressure of 2 × 10 -3 mbar. Films with nominal thicknesses of 50 nm, 80 nm, and 160 nm were deposited at 450 °C on 3 mm thick bulk Nb substrates, with respective T c values of 15.8 K, Typical muon spin-precession signals are shown in Figure Figure fields) [see Figure The measured internal field distribution, p(B), in the Meissner state depends on energy via the muon implantation depth profile and the magnetic screening due to the Meissner current. We will now consider how to approximate p(B) in Equation ( where B p is the "peak" field (i.e., not the mean) and σ ± denotes the distribution's "width" on either side of B p . By substituting Equation ( where where Erfi(x) is the imaginary error function. Therefore, the total asymmetry signal A(t) yields: where k reflects the fraction of muons stopping in each component of the SS bilayer, constrained such that To fit the data, the program musrfit was used In order to construct the Meissner screening profile in the Nb 1-x Ti x N (50 nm)/Nb sample, the mean field, ⟨B⟩, needs to be derived from p(B) for each implantation energy E. The ⟨B⟩ is a convenient means of encapsulating the p(B)'s shift to lower fields as the E increases. The ⟨B⟩ is derived using the fit parameters B p,i , σ +,i , and σ -,i (see Appendix A) of Equation ( The field screening profile of Nb 1-x Ti x N (50 nm)/Nb at an applied field of B 0 ∼ 25 mT as a function of energy E (bottom scale) and corresponding mean implantation depth ⟨z⟩ (top scale) in the Meissner (T = 2.7 K) and normal state (T = 20 K) is shown in Figure In order to fit ⟨B⟩, we shall consider a model that describes all essential features of the data. In Equations ( where the dependence on E is accounted for implicitly by ρ(E, z) which is predetermined from fits to simulated implantation profiles (see Figure the Meissner state due to the sample geometry, which needs to be accounted. This is done by using: where the demagnetization factor N depends on the geometry of the sample where λ(0) is the magnetic penetration depth at 0 K. The fits to the normal state data in Figure To be more conclusive about this observation, we measured the field screening profile in three samples with different Nb 1-x Ti x N thicknesses (50 nm, 80 nm, and 160 nm) deposited on Nb substrates, see Figure Nb 1-x Ti x N and Nb as shared fit parameters, this is justified by the fact that when the profiles for each sample were fit separately, identical λ values were obtained. Other fit parameters were the thickness of each film and individual demagnetization factors. The thickness of the Nb 1-x Ti x N (160 nm)/Nb sample cannot be determined from the fit as all muons are stopped in the Nb 1-x Ti x N layer, see Figure The best fit parameters were determined to be: λ Nb 1-x Ti x N (0 K) = 182.5 From Figure Regarding the field screening in the Nb 1-x Ti x N (160 nm)/Nb sample the field decays far more rapidly in the first few nanometers than in the other samples but the whole data can be fitted with a single λ Nb 1-x Ti x N value. Agreement of the film thicknesses extracted as fit parameters with the nominal thicknesses of the films for different measurement conditions further confirm that the counter-current-flow model can very well describe the material properties. Also, the different magnitude of B applied for the 50 nm sample does not have any effect on the other fit parameters. An (apparent) difference in applied fields, B applied for measurements in the normal and Meissner state is observed in Figure We also find that a non-superconducting layer (i.e., "dead layer") at the surface is absent in our model. While such feature is often found in "real" superconductors, its absence here is not unexpected, given the surface roughness of our samples and the chemical stability of Nb 1-x Ti x N. The 50 nm sample is mirrored surface finished and others are prepared by BCP however, we did not observe any effect of surface roughness in the field screening profile. The surface of Nb 1-x Ti x N oxidizes on exposure to the ambient atmosphere (forming NbO x and TiO x ), with the thickness of the oxide layer saturating quickly to ∼1.3 nm As discussed in Sections I and III, the counter-current-flow model predicts that multilayer superconductors can maximize the field of first-flux entry beyond the individual superheating field of its layers and substrate. For a crude estimate of this quantity, the superheating field, B sh and Ginzburg-Landau (GL) parameter, κ ≡ λ/ξ GL (i.e., the ratio between the magnetic penetration depth λ and the GL coherence length ξ GL ), of each layer are required, which we consider below. Through linear stability analysis using GL theory (strictly valid at T ≃ T c ) B sh for κ > 1.1495 was derived to be where B c is the thermodynamic critical field. Following that, κ is calculated for each material from experimentally measured penetration depth with the literature value of the London penetration depth λ L and Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) using the fact that ξ 0 and ξ GL both are correlated to the magnetic flux quantum Φ 0 The next quantity is the lower critical field B c1 , which is derived for both materials from Now, B c of Equation ( To summarize the results of these calculations, the values of κ, B c1 , B c , and B sh for Nb 1-x Ti x N and Nb are presented in Table where B (s) sh and B (sub) sh are the superheating fields of the surface and substrate layers, respectively, and the terms γ 1 and γ 2 arise as coefficients while solving the relation for B max (see Ref. 10 for details). Explicitly, the γ i s are: and In Equation ( B max is plotted in Figure Note that a surface layer thicker than λ s can only remain in the Meissner state above B c1 in the presence of a BL barrier In conclusion, the depth-dependent field screening profile in SS bilayers composed of Nb 1-x Ti x N films (50 nm, 80 nm, and 160 nm) deposited on Nb substrates were measured using LE-μSR. A fit of the magnetic screening profile to a countercurrent-flow model yielded a penetration depth for Nb 1-x Ti x N of 182.5 