This paper is devoted to the study of the M -Wright function (M α (t)) which is the inverse Laplace transform of the single-parameter Mittag-Leffler (ML) function (E α (-s)). Because E α (-s) can be viewed as the fractionalorder generalization of the exponential function for 0 < α < 1, to which it reduces for α = 1, i.e. E 1 (-s) = exp(-s), its inverse Laplace transform, being M α (t), can be viewed as a generalized fractional-order Dirac delta function. At the limiting case of α = 1 the M -Wright function reduces to M 1 (t) = δ(t -1). We investigate numerically the behavior of this fractional-order delta function as well as it integral, the fractionalorder unit-step function. Subsequently, we validate our results with experimental data for the charging of a supercapacitive device. The Dirac delta function or impulse function δ(t) is a generalized function that has a wide range of applications in various fields of sciences and engineering 1 . Conceptually, it represents a function singular at a point on the real axis and zero elsewhere, and the integral of any continuous function when multiplied by the Dirac delta function gives the value of the function at that specific point. Its generalization may provide a convenient way to work around its singular nature, which is the main purpose of this work. Our analysis in this work originates from the fact that the delayed Dirac delta function δ(t -1) is the inverse Laplace transform of the exponential decaying function e -s . From there, a fractional generalization of the delta function associated with the inverse Laplace transform of the Mittag-Leffler (ML) function E α (-s) arises in terms of the M -Wright function M α (t) The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II we present an overview of the standard delta function and its main properties, the ML function and its inverse Laplace transform, as well the representation of a) Electronic mail: aallagui@sharjah.ac.ae b) Also at Center for Advanced Materials Research, Research Institute of Sciences and Engineering, University of Sharjah, PO Box 27272, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates; and Dept. of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, Florida International University, Miami, FL33174, United States c) Also at Nanoelectronics Integrated Systems Center (NISC), Nile University, Cairo, Egypt; and Dept. of Electrical and Software Engineering, University of Calgary, AB, Canada these functions in terms of the Fox H-function. We also provide parametric graphical plots showing how the M -Wright function tends to the standard delta Dirac function. In section III we study theoretically and verify experimentally (on a supercapacitor) a simple example of a fractional-order differential equation involving the M -Wright function used to charge this capacitive device in the form of an applied current. This resembles finding the impulse response of the device using a fractional-order delta function. First, we start by setting the basic definitions and notations to be used throughout the paper. The Laplace transform of a sufficiently well-behaved function FIG. R + ) is defined by: and the inverse Laplace transform of F (s) is defined by: e st F (s)ds, Re(s) = γ (2) The conditions of validity and the main rules are given in any textbook on advanced mathematics A. The Dirac delta function and the Laplace transform pair δ(t -1) ÷ e -s If we consider the function F (s) in 3 to be F (s) = e -s , where then we have the Laplace transform pair (Fig. The (one-dimensional) Dirac delta function δ(t) is known to obey several fundamental properties. For f : R → C being a well-behaved function we have 7 : and if f (t) = 1 for ∀t ∈ R then we have the normalization condition: Also, if we chose the function f (t) = f (0)e ikt we obtain the Fourier transform of δ(t) as: and by inversion we obtain the following representation of the delta function: The delta function can also be expressed as the derivative of the Heaviside unit step function (denoted as H(t), θ(t) or u(t)), i.e.: where 7 Finally, convolving δ(t) with a continuous function g(t) gives: and by virtue of the Laplace convolution theorem: The delta function is the "identity" with respect to the convolution integral. B. The fractional delta function and the Laplace transform pair Mα(t) ÷ Eα(-s) Now we consider the single-parameter (or standard) Mittag-Leffler (ML) function denoted by E α (z) with z ∈ C, α > 0, which is defined by (i) the power series representation 2 : where the Gamma function is given by Γ(z) = ∞ 0 e -ξ ξ z-1 dξ, or (ii) by the integral representation 2 : where Ha indicates the Hankel path of integration. The ML function is a direct (fractional) generalization of the exponential series (Eq. 4) 4 ; for 0 < α < 1 it interpolates between E 1 (z) = exp(z) and E 0 (z) = 1/(1z). A detailed account of its basic properties can be found for instance in the third volume of Batemann Manuscript Project editted by Erdélyi et al. The (classical) Wright function W λ,μ (z) with λ > -1, μ ∈ C is defined by the series representation 2,13 : or by the integral: We note that for 0 < α < 1 an auxiliary function of the Wright type is defined as 14 : where M α (t) is usually referred to as the M -Wright function or the Mainardi function and respectively. The relationship of the M -Wright and ML functions through the Laplace transform can be easily followed for instance from their integral representations, i.e. Like the ML function, the (classical) Wright function has also been extended to the generalized Wright function defining a series generalizing the hypergeometric series. It has also been suggested as the generalized hyper-Airy function The exponential function, the ML function and the Wright (or M -Wright) function can all be represented in terms of the Fox H-function as 21 : and , λ = 0 (29) respectively. The Fox's H-function = H m,n p,q z| (a1,A1),...,(ap,Ap) (b1,B1),...,(bq,Bq) with h(s) given by the ratio of products of Gamma functions: ) m, n, p, q are integers satisfying (0 n p, 1 m q), z = 0, and The contour of integration L is a suitable contour separating the poles -(b j + ν)/B j , (j = 1, . . . , m; ν = 0, 1, 2, . . .), of the gamma functions Γ(b j + B j s) from the poles (1-a λ +k)/A λ , (λ = 1, . . . , n; k = 0, 1, 2, . . .) of the gamma functions Γ(1 ). An empty product in 31, if it occurs, is taken to be one. The H-function contains a vast number of elementary and special functions as special cases. Detailed and comprehensive accounts of the matter are available in Mathai, Saxena, and Haubold 21 , Mathai and Saxena for t ∈ R + and for different values of α ranging from 0 to 0.99 are shown in Fig. In the same way as the Heaviside step function is the integral of the Dirac delta function (Eq. 10), the integral of the function M α (t) (Eq. 32) is given by: which can be viewed as a generalized Heaviside function that we denote by u α (t). A. Fractional-order impulse response In this section we give a simple example for the application of the generalization δ(t-1)÷e -s to M α (t)÷E α (-s). We consider the case of a first-order differential equation with initial value as follows: which can represent for example the dynamics of an ideal capacitor in response to an impulse current excitation. The solution for x(t) (assuming k = 1) is given in terms of the step function as: We rewrite Eq. 34 wherein (i) the first-order derivative dx/dt is replaced with C 0 D β t x(t) where C 0 D β t is the Caputo differential operator defined as: where m ∈ N, m -1 < β m, and (ii) the right-hand side is replaced with the M -Wright function M α (t). The fractional derivative in the Caputo sense is frequently encountered in certain boundary value problems arising in the theory of viscoelasticity, hereditary solid mechanics, and supercapacitor modeling. We now have: This equation can describe the dynamics of a nonideal fractional-order capacitor (electric double-layer capacitors or supercapacitors) known to exhibit distributed time constants or frequency dispersion of capacitance gives: Then x(t) is found by inverse Laplace transform of Eq. 39 using formula 2.21 in Mathai, Saxena, and Haubold 21 : as σ (a p , A p ) (b q , B q ) ; t = t ρ-1 H m,n p+1,q at -σ (a p , A p ), (ρ, σ) (b q , B q ) which gives: x(t) = t β-1 H 1,1 2,2 t -1 (0, 1), (β, 1) (0, 1), (0, α) For β = 1 and α = 1, x(t) reduces to the Heaviside step function x(t) = u(1t). Plots of Eq. 41 for β = 0.99, 0.75, 0.50 and different values of α between 0.90 and 0.99 are shown in Fig. A GHC NanoForce supercapacitor, rated 1 F, 2.7 V, was characterized in response to current excitations of the form of k M α (t) with α = 0.99, 0.95, 0.90 (Eq. 37) on a Biologic VSP-300 electrochemical station. The spectral impedance of the device was first measured at open-circuit condition from 10 mHz till 1 MHz (not shown here), and fitted to a fractional-order capacitor of impedance function: The fitting parameters were found to be C β = 0.853 F s β-1 with β = 0.983 indicating a slight deviation of the device from the behavior of ideal capacitors. In any case, Eq. 37 can be used to describe the timedomain voltage-current relationship in this device, i.e.: The initial condition v(0) = 0 was experimentally imposed by first discharging the device long enough into a 20 Ω resistor until its voltage reached the value of 1 mV (the lower limit of the measuring instrument). The plots of current inputs for the three different values of α (α = 0.99, 0.95, 0.90), and the resulting voltage developed across he device are shown in Fig. In this paper we studied the fractional generalization of the Laplace transform pair δ(t -1) ÷ e -s giving M α (t) ÷ E α (-s) with focus on the behavior and application of (i) the fractional-order delta function M α (t) and (ii) its integral giving the fractional-order unit step function. Both functions are crucial for the evaluation of the impulse response and step response of circuits and systems. We have experimentally demonstrated the current charging of a supercapacitor using the fractional delta function, and hence its fractional impulse response obtained in the form of the measured voltage. The results fully agree with the numerical modeling of the device. The results may find many other applications in problems associated with differential and integral equations of fractional order arising in different disciplines of physical sciences and engineering.