We consider superconductor-normal-superconductor-normal-superconductor (SNSNS) planar Josephson junctions in hole systems with spin-orbit interaction that is cubic in momentum (CSOI). Using only the superconducting phase difference, we find parameter regimes where junctions of experimentally achievable transparency can enter a topological superconducting phase with Majorana bound states (MBSs) at the junction ends. In planar germanium heterostructures CSOI can be the dominant form of SOI and extremely strong. We show analytically and numerically that, within experimental regimes, our results provide an achievable roadmap for a new MBS platform with low disorder, minimal magnetic fields, and very strong spin-orbit interaction, overcoming many of the key deficiencies that have so far prevented the conclusive observation of MBSs. Majorana bound states (MBSs) (1) the level of disorder, which can result in spurious signals that mimic MBSs Despite ultralong MFPs and strong SOI, the small in-plane g factor of Ge (|g| ≲ 1.5) Here, instead we focus on holes in valence bands described by the Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian. We show analytically and numerically that achieving topological superconductivity in SNSNS Josephson junctions with CSOI requires also only phase differences, thereby extending the mechanism proposed for electrons The structure of this paper is as follows. We introduce our setup as well as the corresponding Hamiltonian and show results for toy model parameters in Sec. II. In Sec.III, we present results for realistic parameters for Ge, and, furthermore, discuss the effect of an external Zeeman field. We conclude in Sec. IV. In the Appendix, we give more information on the numerical calculations and give derivations of equations shown in the main text. Materials with CSOI have large differences in velocities at the inner and outer Fermi surfaces; see Fig. , where ψ † s (x, y) creates a particle at position (x, y) with spin s. In this basis, the effective Hamiltonian of a Ge 2DHG, derived using the Luttinger-Kohn formalism, is where m * is the effective mass, σ i (τ i ) are the Pauli matrices acting in spin (particle-hole) space, and α and α a are the strengths of the CSOI. The term α a comes from anisotropic corrections and for Ge α a ≪ α )τ z to avoid spurious additional Fermi surfaces in discretized numerical calculations. The exact size of β does not affect our results. The energy spectrum of the full normal state Hamiltonian H = H eff + H 4 in momentum space has two spinsplit Fermi surfaces, labeled by j = 1 (j = 2) for the inner (outer) Fermi surface. The corresponding Fermi velocities are different; see inset of Fig. The SNSNS junction comprises three sections that are proximitized by superconductors and two normal sections between them; see Fig. with τ ± = τ x ± iτ y and where W N,l (W N,r ) is the width of the left (right) normal section, and W S the width of the middle superconductor. While a Zeeman field is not required to enter the topological phase, we will demonstrate later that it can be beneficial and provide additional features to distinguish MBSs from trivial bound states. The Hamiltonian for a magnetic field of strength B applied in x direction along the junction is H Z = ∆ Z (y)σ x τ z , where for simplicity we use and ∆ Z = gμ B B with g the g factor of the material and μ B the Bohr magneton. The induced superconducting gap is reduced as a magnetic field is applied, however, we focus on small magnetic fields and therefore neglect the reduction of the induced gap. To take into account that the junction does not have perfect transparency, we introduce a potential barrier H b = μ b (y)τ z , where where and W b is the width of the barrier. The full Hamiltonian of the system is For now, neglecting the potential barrier and, for simplicity, assuming that W N,l = W N,r ≡ W N and that the Fermi velocities in both normal conducting sections are equal, the phase transition curves are given by where j = 1 (j = 2) indicates the inner (outer) Fermi surface and v N j (v S,m j ) are the Fermi velocities of the corresponding Fermi surface in the normal conducting (middle superconducting) section. The topological phase is between the two curves defined by j = 1 and j = 2. In Appendix A, we consider a more general case of W N,l ̸ = W N,r as well as of different Fermi velocities in each section. A larger CSOI strength α results in a larger difference of velocities at the Fermi level, which increases the topological region of phase space; see Fig. To study the system numerically, the full Hamiltonian H is discretized. We utilize two different geometries: In (c) the finite geometry, a finite extent in both x and y direction is assumed. In the semi-infinite geometry, it is assumed that the junction has a finite extent along the y direction, but is infinitely extended along the x direction, in this case, the momentum k x along the x axis is a good quantum number. The discretized Hamiltonians for both cases are given in Appendix B. In the following, for simplicity, we also assume a constant pairing potential, ∆ l = ∆ m = ∆ r = ∆ 0 , in the superconducting sections. The topological phase transition is of class D We will refer to the conditions in Eq. ( In an experiment, however, W S and W N are fixed after fabrication. In this case, the chemical potential can be tuned, which changes the Fermi momenta and therefore brings the system into a favorable configuration, where either one of the ideal junction geometry conditions is fulfilled, see Appendix D. Systems in which both conditions of the ideal junction geometry are fulfilled are particularly favorable, as they allow for topological phases with particularly low transparencies. The deviation between the numerical and analytical ideal junction geometry in Fig. Although the topological gap of an SNSNS junction might not be large, as is also the case in SNS junctions So far, using toy model parameters, we have demonstrated that an SNSNS junction based on a material with CSOI is a good candidate to host MBSs and we have shown the qualitative behavior of such systems. It was shown in Ref. Given the small g factor in Ge, a considerable advantage of a planar SNSNS junction compared to SNS junctions is that no Zeeman field is required to enter the topological phase. However, applying a magnetic field parallel to the junction does not destroy the topological region of phase space. In fact, a parallel magnetic field increases the total area of the topological phase region, see Fig. We demonstrated that the dominant cubic SOI in a Ge 2DHG is ideal for hosting MBSs in SNSNS junctions. The SNSNS junction enters the topological phase without any Zeeman term, which eliminates the large magnetic fields that enable many trivial effects to mimic MBSs and provides a route to topological superconductivity in Ge despite the small g factor. Further, we show that an imperfect transparency is detrimental for the topological phase. However, we derive conditions on the ideal junction geometry for which a topological phase exists for experimentally achievable transparencies and parameters. The ideal junction geometry can be approached, e.g., by gating the junction. Finally, although not necessary for MBSs within our setup, we also show that a Zeeman field increases the topological phase region and provides an additional tool to distinguish MBSs from trivial states. In this Appendix, the analytical expression for the topological phase transition curve [see Eq. ( Since a topological phase transition is characterized by a bulk gap closing at k x = 0, we set k x = 0 in the momentum space version of Eq. ( where ky is the momentum operator in y direction and we assume v j > 0 and k j > 0. Since σ x commutes with the Hamiltonian, we will consider only states ψ ± that are simultaneous eigenstates of σ x and the Hamiltonian, the index ± indicating their eigenvalue with respect to σ x . Using the linearized ansatz, ψ ± can be written as To get the linearized version of the superconducting and the Zeeman term, we use where ψ ↑/↓ are spin eigenstates of σ z . Assuming a superconducting term with pairing potential ∆ and phase γ, the superconducting part becomes while the Zeeman term with Zeeman field ∆ Z reads In the following, we neglect the fast oscillating terms In the basis c(k Since the Hamiltonian is block-diagonal, one can calculate the wave function for each block independently. Depending on the block, the Fermi velocity is either positive or negative. Thus, we assume a general Hamiltonian H(vk) as defined in Eq. (A7), where the Fermi velocity v = ±v 1 , ±v 2 can both be positive or negative. First, consider the superconducting region: We assume that there is no Zeeman term in this region, therefore giving the Hamiltonian As such, the energy in this region is given by Since we are interested in a closing of the bulk gap we set E = 0, giving The corresponding eigenvector is In the normal section, we assume a Zeeman energy ∆ Z and thus the Hamiltonian is The energy and eigenfunctions in this region are: and the eigenvectors are We now make an ansatz for the wave function in each section of the SNSNS junction separately. We assume that the junction has perfect transparency, therefore there is no normal scattering. Thus, each block of the Hamiltonian defined in Eq. (A6) can be considered separately. Generally, the chemical potential may be different in each section. Thus, we assume different Fermi momenta and velocities in each section, i.e., k S,l and v S,l , k S,m and v S,m , and k S,r and v S,r in the left, middle, and right superconductors, respectively, and k N,l and v N,l (k N,r and v N,r ) in the left (right) normal section. The widths of the normal sections are W N,l and W N,r , respectively. The left and right superconducting sections are assumed to be infinitely extended, the middle superconducting section has a width W S . The induced superconducting gaps (superconducting phases) are ∆ l (-θ) in the left, ∆ m (φ) in the center, and ∆ r (θ) in the right superconducting sections; see Fig. Because the left superconductor is infinitely extended, only wave functions that are decaying for y → -∞ are valid. Therefore, the wave function in the left superconducting region contains either only ω S + or only ω S -, depending on the sign of v S,l : We emphasize that one gets the same type of the wave function for each of the four blocks defined by the Hamiltonian of Eq. (A6) separately. However, the basis in which Eq. (A15) is defined depends on the block under consideration. Following the same arguments, the wave function in the right superconducting section must be exponentially decaying for y → ∞ and is therefore given by: Ψ S,r (y) = A S,r e -y∆r/|v S,r | i sgn(v S,r )e -iθ 1 . (A16) In the middle superconducting region, the ansatz for the wave function is: The ansatz for the wave function Ψ N,l (Ψ N,r ) in the left (right) normal region is Ψ N,l/r =A N,l/r e iy∆ Z /v N,l/r 0 1 Next, all wave function parameters are determined by matching boundary conditions. As mentioned before, we assume perfect transparency and therefore the matching process can be done for each block defined by the Hamiltonian of Eq. (A6) separately as there is no back-scattering in this approach. Furthermore, since we consider a linearized spectrum, matching only the wave functions is sufficient, it is not required to match their first derivative. At the first interface we get: The second interface is at y = W N,l , between the left normal section and the middle superconducting region. We require: where we define and using D N (W, v) -1 = D N (-W, v) and D S (W, ∆, v) -1 = D S (-W, ∆, v). The third intersection at y = W N,l +W S is between the middle superconducting region and the right normal section: The fourth intersection is at y = W N,l + W N,r + W S and is between the right normal section and the right superconducting region. Here, we require: Using Eqs. (A19), (A21), (A25), and , and equivalently for D S , the left hand side of Eq. (A26) becomes: Now, we require that the ratio between the first and second element of the vector defined in Eq. (A27) equals the ratio on the right hand side of Eq. (A26). This gives: i sgn(v S,r )e -iθ = -ie -2iWN,r∆ Z /v N,r e -iφ e 2iW N,l ∆ Z /v N,l -1 + e 2WS∆m/v S,m + e iθ e iφ sgn(v S,l ) 1 + e 2WS∆m/v S,m e 2iW N,l ∆ Z /v N,l 1 + e 2WS∆m/v S,m + e iθ e iφ sgn(v S,l ) -1 + e 2WS∆m/v S,m . (A28) After some simplification, and using sgn(v N,l ) = sgn(v N,r ) = sgn(v S,l ) = sgn(v S,m ) = sgn(v S,r ), we obtain: For simplicity, we assume ∆ l = ∆ m = ∆ r = ∆ 0 in all numerical calculations. We assume v N,l = v N,r and v S,l = v S,r . Then, to get the equation for the first branch, set v N,l = v N,r ≡ v The area A of the topological phase is given by: with θ 1,2 (φ) defined by Eq. ( (A31) Therefore, the integral in Eq. (A30) is of the form Assuming that W N ∆ Z /v N j ≪ 1, Eq. (A32) can be expanded in powers of ∆ Z , giving which means that the area increases quadratically with ∆ Z . However, it was assumed that the induced superconducting gaps were independent of ∆ Z . Realistically, the induced gap decreases when a magnetic field is applied. Depending on the system parameters, this decrease of the superconducting gap can lead to an overall decrease of the area of the topological phase. However, since we consider only small magnetic fields (compared to the critical field of the superconductor), we assume that the decrease of the superconducting gap is negligible. Appendix B: Discretized Hamiltonian The Hamiltonians given in the main text are discretized on a square lattice with a lattice spacing a. The Nambu basis in the finite geometry is given by where n, m ∈ Z and c † s,n,m creates a particle with spin s at position (x, y) = (na, ma). The full Hamiltonian in the finite geometry is Heff + Hb + H4 + HSC + HZ (B2) with N x and N y the number of lattice points in x and y direction respectively, t = ħ 2 /2m * , and where m b ∈ {N S,l , N S,l + N N,l , N S,l + N S,m + N N,l , N y -N S,r }, N S,l (N S,r ) is the number of lattice points in y direction in the left (right) superconductor, N S,m is the number of lattice points in y direction in the middle superconductor, N N,l (N N,r ) is the number of lattice points in y direction in the left (right) normal conducting regions, N y = N S,l + N S,m + N S,r + N N,l + N N,r , and N b is the number of lattice points in y direction in the barrier. Throughout we set N b = 2. We relate the widths to the number of lattice points as follows: Furthermore, the term describing the induced pairing potential due to the superconductor is The Zeeman term is given by We note that the finite geometry is only used for Figs. 2(d) and 9. All other calculations are done in the semi-infinite geometry. For the semi-infinite geometry, we assume that the junction has an infinite extent in x direction (with periodic boundary conditions). Therefore, the momentum k x along the x axis is a good quantum number. The corresponding Nambu basis is: where c † s,kx,m creates a particle at position y = ma with spin s and momentum k x in the x direction. The Hamiltonian in the semi-infinite geometry is The induced superconducting pairing potential is described by where ∆ m is defined in Eq. (B11). The Zeeman term is: where ∆ Z,m is defined in Eq. (B13). In this subsection, we give the numerical values for all parameters used to generate Figs. where I 0 is a real parameter. Therefore, we estimate the transparency of the system using the current-phase relation of an SNS junction with normal conducting section width W N ≡ W N,l = W N,r . The transparency τ is then obtained by comparing the ratio of the first and second harmonics of Eqs. (C1) and (C2). The analytic calculation of the phase diagram (see Ref. where the Hamiltonian H is defined in Eq. ( where δ labels the overlap between the left-and rightmovers. In this ansatz, we assume that spin is conserved. Perturbatively, the overlap δ can be estimated as the overlap between the left-and right-moving wave functions calculated for the uncoupled system in Appendix A. For the following derivation, we focus on the spin + branch, noting that the derivation for the spinbranch is equivalent. By defining the wave functions we want a condition for which parameters the scattering has a negligible impact. This is the case if there is no overlap between left-and right-movers: where V is the potential that couples the left-and rightmovers, i.e., the potential barrier at the SN interface. For simplicity, we assume a Dirac δ potential at each intersection: where V 0 is real, W N = W N,l = W N,r is the width of each normal conducting section, and W S is the width of the middle superconducting section. Since the largest extent of the topological phase is at φ = 0 (or φ = π), we set φ = 0. Furthermore, we set ∆ Z = 0 and assume that the Fermi velocities and Fermi momenta are equal in all sectors, i.e., v S,l We note that in this step, the oscillating prefactors e ±ik1,2y in Eq. (A2) must be taken into account explicitly. At the first interface, which is at y = 0, the wave functions are [see Eq. (A19)]: where θ L and θ R can be expressed using Eq. ( At the second interface at y = W N , one gets: At the third interface at y = W N +W S the wave functions are [see Eq. (A25)]: Finally, at the fourth interface at y = 2W N + W S , one obtains Therefore, Eq. (D5) becomes: Finally, this gives the condition that the overlap of leftand right-movers is minimized when 0 =2ie -i(k1+k2)(WN+WS) e WS∆m/v1 -e WS∆m/v2 1 + ie WS∆m/v1 1 -ie WS∆m/v2 × 1 + e -i(k1+k2)WN -1 + e i(k1+k2)(WN+WS) . Thus, either one of the following conditions must be fulfilled: 0 = 1 + e -i(k1+k2)WN or 0 = -1 + e i(k1+k2)(WN+WS) , (D19) which are the conditions in Eq. ( , which has to be an odd integer (indicated by the horizontal black dashed lines) to satisfy one of the ideal junction geometry conditions in Eq. ( , which has to be an even integer (indicated by the horizontal red dashed lines) to satisfy Eq. Although no longer giving simple analytical conditions, we have checked numerically that qualitatively, the same conditions on the ideal junction geometry still apply even for the case when W N,l ̸ = W N,r , or having different tunneling barrier heights at each intersection, or when there are different Fermi velocities and wave vectors in each section. We mention in the main text that in an experiment, W N and W S are fixed after fabrication. However, by gating the sample, the chemical potential μ is changed, which affects the Fermi momenta k 1 and k 2 . This changes the conditions on the ideal junction geometry, see Eq. ( where ν is the broadening coefficient. In the inset of Fig. In Fig. In this Appendix we show the energy spectrum E(k x ) in the semi-infinite geometry for realistic Ge parameters in both the trivial and topological phase, as well as at the topological phase transition; see Fig. MBSs are localized at the junction ends and therefore more prominent in the LDOS.