Emerging wide varieties of the two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) magnets with atomically thin and smooth interfaces holds great promise for nextgeneration spintronic devices. However, due to the lower Curie temperature of the vdW 2D ferromagnets than room temperature, electrically manipulating its magnetization at room temperature has not been realized. In this work, we demonstrate the perpendicular magnetization of 2D vdW ferromagnet Fe 3 GaTe 2 can be effectively switched at room temperature in Fe 3 GaTe 2 /Pt bilayer by spin-orbit torques (SOTs) with a relatively low current density of 1.3×10 7 A/cm 2 . Moreover, the high SOT efficiency of ξ DL ~0.22 is quantitatively determined by harmonic measurements, which is higher than those in Ptbased heavy metal/conventional ferromagnet devices. Our findings of room-temperature vdW 2D ferromagnet switching by SOTs provide a significant basis for the development of vdW-ferromagnet-based spintronic applications. Spin-orbit torque (SOT) based magnetic random-access memory (MRAM) is a leading candidate for nonvolatile spin-memory and logic applications. Among them, SOT-driven magnetization switching in vdW ferromagnet is highly pursued for the practical applications due to its energy-efficient and ultrafast advantages. Although SOT switching has been demonstrated in vdW ferromagnets such as Fe 3 GeTe 2 The intrinsic above-room-temperature ferromagnetic vdW Fe 3 GaTe 2 is a very competitive ferromagnet due to its robust PMA with Curie temperature T c ~ 350-380 K, In this work, we utilize a multi-layer Fe 3 GaTe 2 as the magnetic layer and deposit 6 nm Pt onto it to fabricate the bilayer Hall device. With the assistance of an external inplane magnetic field, the perpendicular magnetization switching of Fe 3 GaTe 2 with a low current density of 1.3×10 7 A/cm 2 has been achieved at room temperature (300 K). The low switching current density is attributed to the high dampling-like SOT efficiency in the Fe 3 GaTe 2 /Pt bilayer, which is quantitatively determined to be ξ DL ~0.22 by using the harmonic hall voltage response measurements. Therefore, the room-temperature SOT-driven magnetization switching in a 2D vdW ferromagnet Fe 3 GaTe 2 could pave the way towards the development of 2D vdW spin-based memory, logic and neuromorphic computing. 2.1 Characterizations of Fe 3 GaTe 2 /Pt bilayer Figure , where σ FGT is the longitudinal conductivity of We subsequently examine the possible current-induced magnetization switching in 2D vdW Fe 3 GaTe 2 . With assistance of an in-plane magnetic field H x = ±200 mT, a 1ms direct-current (DC) pulse I is first applied along the x direction of the device for the "write" operation, and then a small current of 0.1 mA is applied to "read" the magnetization state of Fe 3 GaTe 2 . As shown in Figures Additionally, the pinning effect from the Hall voltage probes may exacerbate the incomplete switching since the motion of domain walls is impeded, indicating that the switching ratio can be further improved by shrinking the device size to nano-meter scale. We then evaluate the ability to switch the magnetization of 2D Fe 3 GaTe 2 /Pt bilayer by SOT. As evidenced by the asymmetric magnetoresistance observed in Figure To further quantify the efficiency of SOTs, we employed the harmonic hall voltage response (HHVR) to investigate the SOT effective fields in device A. The experimental set-up and coordiante are shown in Figure as functions of the in-plane magnetic field are exhibited in Figures ⁄ . In summary, we have fabricated 2D Fe 3 GaTe 2 /Pt bilayer Hall devices by depositing 6-nm Pt onto the few-layered Fe 3 GaTe 2 , and the Curie temperature of the device is determined to be 340 K. The robust SOT-driven perpendicular magnetization switching in the 2D Fe 3 GaTe 2 at room temperature have been achieved with a relatively low critical current density of 1.3×10 To fabricate standard Hall bar devices, Fe 3 GaTe 2 flakes were firstly exfoliated onto polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps by adhesive tape. The selected Fe 3 GaTe 2 flake with appropriate thickness and shape was transferred onto the pre-patterned 300-nmthick SiO 2 /Si substrate under an optical microscope. The prepatterned electrodes Cr/Au (5/45 nm) were prepared on a SiO 2 substrate by a standard photolithography process. The entire exfoliation and transfer process were conducted in the N 2 -filled glove box (H 2 O, O 2 < 0.1ppm) to avoid oxidation. To prepare Fe 3 GaTe 2 /Pt heterostructure, the SiO 2 /Si substrates with exfoliated FGT flakes were transferred immediately into the loadlock of our sputtering system. Then a 6 nm layer of Pt was deposited on the Fe 3 GaTe 2 surface, and the obtained Fe 3 GaTe 2 /Pt bilayer is air-stable, which is conducive to the subsequent manufacturing process. Once removed from the sputtering chamber, the Fe 3 GaTe 2 /Pt bilayer were patterned into Hall bar devices with channel width of 6 μm using a standard electron-beam lithography and Ar ion etching technique. The anomalous hall effect measurements (AHE) were conducted using a Model CRX-VF Cryogenic Probe Station (Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc.) with a ± 2.25 T of out-ofplane perpendicular magnetic field. The AHE and longitudinal resistance were measured in the temperature range of 10 to 360 K, a small reading current I read = 0.1 mA was applied during the test. The SOT switching and HHVR measurements were carried out at room temperature. For the HHVR measurement, we used the Keithley 6221 to apply a low-frequency alternation current I (t) =I AC cos(2πft) (with f = 1327Hz). The first-and second-harmonic voltages were measured using double Stanford SR830 Lock-in amplifiers. For current-induced magnetization switching measurements, a pulsed electrical current with a duration of 1 ms was applied, and subsequently, I read was applied to read out the Hall voltage after waiting for 1 s. The cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) samples were prepared by using a focused ion beam (FIB, FEI Helios NanoLab 600i), and were characterized by using an aberration-corrected STEM (JEM-ARM200F NEOARM, JEOL Ltd.) under high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) and annular bright-field (ABF) imaging modes.