Magnetic skyrmions are nano-scale spin textures whose stability, size and ease of manipulation make them strong contenders for next generation data and logic applications. Here we illustrate fine motion control of skyrmions, we show how they can be moved in any direction and for any distance, in the plane. We demonstrate, using simulations, two novel skyrmionic devices whose function is predicated upon the fine planar motion control of skyrmions. The first device is a field configurable logic gate that could be used as a component in a larger skyrmionic processor. The second is a field configurable skyrmion spiking neuron device that could be a component in larger skyrmionic neural networks. Such devices are highly energy efficient and are potentially useful in the field of neuromorphic computing, which seeks to build 'brainlike' computers. Finally we explore the concept that this free planar motion, which enables us to ignore the skyrmion Hall effect, offers an important new paradigm in skyrmionic device theory moving away from the current applications such as racetrack memory. Magnetic skyrmions are topologically stable, particle-like, spin textures in the magnetization of chiral magnets Many different types of skyrmionic device have been considered since the idea of using them as media for data and logic applications was first introduced. The predominant type of device considered is based upon the concept of magnetic racetrack first introduced by Stuart Parkin et al. in 2008 Magnetic skyrmions can be found in the magnetization of certain chiral magnets Present in both bulk magnetic materials and interfacially in magnetic multilayers, they are stabilised by the Dzyaloshinkii-Moriya interaction (DMI) where n (x) is the unit vector field of magnetization. Under this definition, a single stable skyrmion has the degree Q = -1. This quantized degree is the reason for the topological stability of the skyrmion. In the continuous mathematical model the energy cost for moving away from this state is infinite but in real magnetic systems the spins are defined on a discrete lattice at the atomic level and samples are finite in extent meaning that the energy barrier is also finite. Nonetheless the energy barrier is real and high enough that skyrmions in the systems we consider can be thought of as stable with respect to perturbing energies below that barrier. Free planar motion is achieved through the pulsing of current at high frequency in directions orthogonal to each other. This then forms a basis and the almost linear response of skyrmion velocity to applied current is exploited to derive the required vectors. The setup of the two devices is shown in Fig. We apply the Thiele here G = 4πQe z is the gyrocoupling vector, D is the dissipative tensor with components v is the velocity of the centre of mass of the skyrmion, j is the current vector, α is the Gilbert damping constant and β is the dissipative spin transfer torque parameter. For an axially symmetric texture the dissipative tensor D will have components Solving Thieles equation, given v = (v x , v y ), we get If we now solve for two orthogonal currents, j 1 = (j, 0) and j 2 = (0, j), it is clear that the product of the resulting velocity vectors is zero. We know that above the de-pinning threshold the current velocity relationship of skyrmions is close to linear As the currents are pulsed in two separate directions the maximum attainable velocity is approximately half of the velocity attainable with current pulsed in a single direction. This can be reduced if steps are taken to optimise the velocity by increasing pulse magnitude and decreasing pulse time for the shorter vector direction however we do not explore this here. We use the graphics processing unit (GPU) enabled micromagnetic solver Mumax3 To demonstrate the effectiveness of this paradigm we simulate two different basic devices that use 2D skyrmion motion. These devices are designed such that they could be built into digital or analogue architectures as the primary required inputs are current magnitude and pulse duration and the outputs are current from the activation of magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) switches. MTJ's can detect quantised changes in resistivity due to the presence of skyrmions The SCLG can be preconfigured with a given logic gate configuration with each current pairing giving a different vector to a distinct MTJ, see Fig. The SCNN, see Fig. Both devices feature MTJ's at their centres in order to detect the base state. In both cases the skyrmion can be driven, by an opposing applied pulse current, back to that base state. In the case of the SCNN this must be done to push the skyrmion from the MTJ activation site at the end of the arm as the constriction will not allow free passage. Once the skyrmion is free from the MTJ disc in the SCNN case and after activation in the SCLG case the skyrmion will return to the center of each device with no further applied current as this is the lowest energy state, this is however much slower than driving the skyrmion to the center. In both cases the returning current is lower than the activation current as the edge repulsion acts to drive the skyrmion toward the lowest energy state. We have shown that skyrmions can be driven with fine control in 2D. This extra dimension allows us to reconsider the design of many proposed skyrmionic devices. We use this 2D control to demonstrate skyrmion based configurable logic gates that could then be deployed in more complex information processing circuits. We also showed a configurable neural network node device that could have it's firing activation functions altered and could simulate four separate neurons at distinct times. These devices where chosen so that a complete next generation computing architecture could be considered, drawing from classical computing and neuron inspired brain-like computing. One motivation behind this work was the authors attempt to drive skyrmions down arbitrarily shaped tree like structures that could be used to represent the dendritic arbors of a typical human neuron. In conclusion we hope that the shift from 1D to 2D skyrmionic motion will enable a new perspective in the application of skyrmions to modern and future data, logic and brain-like applications. We consider skyrmionic structures in thin film multilayers where the interfacial DMI results in Néel type skyrmions. The simulations where performed using the GPU-accelerated micromagnetic simulation program MuMax3 where γ ≈ 176 rad(ns T) -1 is the electron gyromagnetic ratio, α = 0.3 the dimensionless damping parameter, B eff = δE/δn the effective field and n(x) = N (x)/M s the magnetisation vector field normalised by the saturation magnetisation. The simulations external geometry is a 512 × 512 nm 2 rectangle of 1 nm thickness, in order to represent a typical surface that could be fabricated using lithographic processing. Cell size of 2 × 2 × 1 nm 3 has been used. Material parameters are: saturation magnetisation M s = 580 kAm -1 , exchange 20 pJm -1 , interfacial DMI 3 mJm -2 and uniaxial anisotropy along the +z direction 0.53 MJm -3 The applied current is of Zhang-Li where j A m -2 is the current density, μ B the Bohr magneton and B sat the saturation magnetisation expressed in Tesla.