The extended Hubbard model (EHM) describes fermions on a lattice coupled through on-site, U , and first-neighbor, V , interactions. In the context of high-Tc cuprates, antiferromagnetic fluctuations may lead to an attractive channel, hence to superconductivity. Despite interest in the two-dimensional version of the model, the current knowledge about the phase diagram is still far from complete. Here, we report on the results of extensive determinant quantum Monte Carlo simulations for this model at half filling, in which we have used the average sign of the product of fermionic determinants as an additional observable to locate critical points. We arrive at a ground state phase diagram in the U -V plane in which the boundaries involving antiferromagnetic, charge-ordered, s-and d-wave superconductivity, and phase-separated phases are quantitatively set with good accuracy. We have also proposed a partial phase diagram, Tc(U, V ), featuring critical temperatures for the CDW and s-wave superconducting phases. Soon after the discovery of high-temperature cuprate superconductors In two dimensions, while one expects the ground state phase diagram at half filling to share similarities with that for the one-dimensional model, the picture is far from settled. Indeed, different methods agree with the existence of a CDW-AFM transition near V = U/4 In addition to ground state properties, there are issues related to phase transitions at finite temperatures which are worth examining. Indeed, the addition of a finite nearest-neighbor interaction to the attractive Hubbard model breaks the degeneracy of the superconducting (SUC) and CDW phases at half filling. This bypasses the Mermin-Wagner-Hohenberg theorem With the purpose of shedding light into these unresolved issues, here we perform a detailed investigation of the EHM at half filling through determinant QMC (DQMC) simulations. From the outset we stress that the above mentioned minus sign problem is mitigated through two procedures. One is the use of CHSF in the range |V | ≤ |U |/4 to obtain several response functions whose behavior would be otherwise unattainable, while the other resorts to the recent observations The Hamiltonian for the EHM reads, where i and j denote sites of a square lattice, with ⟨i, j⟩ restricting the sums to nearest neighbor (NN) sites. In standard second-quantized notation, the first term describes fermionic hopping (energy scale t), the second controls the band filling through the chemical potential, μ, while the third and fourth terms describe the onsite and NN interactions, with strengths U and V , respectively. Hereafter, the chemical potential is set to μ = U/2 + 4V to yield a half-filled band (by virtue of particle-hole symmetry), and energies are expressed in units of t. In the DQMC method The type of ordering is characterised by quantities such as the (staggered) charge structure factor, the antiferromagnetic structure factor, and the pairing structure factor, with In the above equations, N = L × L is the number of sites for a linear size L, (-1) |i-j| is ±1 if i and j are on the same or opposite sublattices, S z i = (n i↑n i↓ ) is the zcomponent of the spin operator, and f α (a) is the form factor for a given pair-wave symmetry, α = s, d, p As mentioned before, ⟨s⟩, which is automatically calculated in the simulations, will also play a crucial role in our analyses. When V ̸ = 0 one cannot guarantee that ⟨s⟩ = 1 even at half filling. As shown in Figs. We start with the transition between the AFM (Mott) phase and the CDW phase. As indicated in Fig. In addition, we recall that for U = 2 the sign-free region for CHSF corresponds to V ≤ 0.5, so that we may obtain these structure factors at very low temperatures for V = 0.5; see Figs. Let us now discuss the data for V = 0.7, still with U = 2. Although these parameters lie outside the range of applicability of the CHSF, Fig. Further checks can be carried out by examining the double occupancy, D = ⟨n ↑ n ↓ ⟩ in the region of small U . Since an AFM state should yield D ≲ 0.25, while a CDW state leads to D ≳ 0.25, close to a AFM-CDW transition one may expect D ≈ 0.25, the noninteracting result. As a first-order phase transition may occur between an AFM and a CDW phase, the finite temperature behavior of D would exhibit a sharp change around the transition region. Indeed, this was employed in literature to estimate the critical region of other models with AFM-CDW transition where K σ i,j ≡ (c † iσ c jσ + H.c.). In Figure We conclude our discussion by summarizing the findings of the AFM-CDW transition in Fig. The key observation from Fig. Let us now focus on the second (U < 0, V > 0) and third (U < 0, V < 0) quadrants of the parameter space. Figure Figure The transition to the PS state deserves a complementary look, by examining the density distribution shown in Fig. Returning to the SC state, we must settle the issue of pairing symmetries. To this end, we start with the difference between the effective pairing susceptibilities with s and d symmetries, which presumably dominate the third quadrant. At this point, we investigate the effective pairing (vertex) susceptibility, i.e., χ eff sc (α) = χ sc (α)χsc (α), with χsc (α) being the noninteracting susceptibility Moving on to the fourth quadrant, V < 0 and U > 0, Fig. In view of the recent suggestion that a p-wave SC state could be stabilised Our findings for the ground state properties are summarized in the phase diagram of Fig. The presence of nearest-neighbor interaction breaks the degeneracy of the SUC and CDW phases for U < 0, so that the Mermin-Wagner-Hohenberg theorem In order to determine the critical temperatures, we use the data for the uniform charge structure factor of Fig. where, given that the temperature-driven CDW transition belongs to the two-dimensional Ising universality class, γ = 7/4 and ν = 1; see, e.g. Ref. where i runs over the set of data, and the f i 's are the scaled structure factors, S cdw /L 7/4 , ordered according to the respective (ββ c )L values. When the best collapse is achieved, the distances between consecutive points are reduced, and the value of C is minimized, as shown in the inset of Fig. The behavior of T CDW c thus obtained is shown in Fig. Let us now discuss the critical temperature for superconductivity in the third quadrant of Fig. where K x is the kinetic energy for motion along the x direction, and Λ xx is the current correlator where ρ - s is the value of the superfluid density just below the critical temperature. In Fig. We have also analyzed the d-wave region, starting with an FSS ansatz for the pairing structure factor according to which a Kosterlitz-Thouless transition is signaled by a crossing of the curves for different sizes. In contrast with the third quadrant, no crossing was found for β < 10, with V = -0.5 and for two values of U , namely U = 0 and U = 0.5. Unfortunately, the minus sign problem is much more severe in this region, which precludes any analysis for β > 10; note that this region lies outside the sign-free region through CHSF. Nonetheless, one may conclude that T c is much lower than those found in the third quadrant for swave pairing. This, in turn, allows one to conjecture an exponential behavior with V < 0 for fixed U ≥ 0, i.e. T c ∼ exp(-C/|V |), where C is independent of V ; an alternative linear dependence with |V | emerged from a recent mean-field approach In summary, we have resolved long standing issues relative to the ground state phase diagram of the halffilled extended Hubbard model on a square lattice, such as the pairing symmetries of the superconducting phase, and locations of phase boundaries in all four quadrants of the U -V plane. Indeed, through our DQMC simulations, accurate boundaries involving antiferromagnetic, charge-density wave, s-wave and dwave superconducting, and phase-separated phases were determined. It is worth emphasizing that the 'minussign' problem of QMC simulations was overcome by performing extensive simulations, and by using the recently proposed connection between critical points and strong dips in ⟨s⟩. Indeed, the multitude of phases in the diagram allowed us to verify that dips in ⟨s⟩ only occur at transitions involving different universality classes, such as AFM-CDW, AFM-SC, SC-PS, and CDW-SC, but not between s-and d-waves. We have also determined the critical temperatures for the CDW and s-wave superconducting phases. For the CDW phase, we found that for fixed U the critical temperature increases sharply with V , reaching higher T c 's than in other electronic models for CDW's such as the Holstein model. Hopefully these findings will stimulate experiments with ultracold atoms interacting beyond on-site couplings: phase transitions at temperatures within a feasible range could be probed with a quantum gas microscope. The presence of a d-wave superconducting ground state over a reasonably wide region of the parameter space has bearings on the high-T c cuprates, particularly in the U > 0, V < 0 region. Our analyses of the finite temperature data for the d-wave structure factor suggests β c somewhat larger than 10 (in dimensionless units), which is consistent with actual data for the cuprates; note that the T c 's predicted here for the s-wave pairing in the U < 0, V < 0 region are much higher than those for dwave. These results add credence to the use of the EHM as a minimal single-band model (with U > 0 and V < 0) to describe the high-T c cuprates Due to the sparseness of the matrices R and ∆ σ , Eq. (C4) can be written in terms of matrix elements G σ r,i D i,j (δ j,s -G σ j,s ), (C5) where the matrix D may be cast in a 2 × 2 form, (C6) with i and j being the indices of the sites related with the flip of x ν (i, j, l), and, In order to decide whether a proposed change is accepted we use a combination of the Metropolis and the heat-bath algorithm, similar to the one used in Ref. The parameter γ is tuned self-consistently to achieve an acceptance ratio of approximated 50%. The order of flipping attempts is also a crucial detail in the DQMC method when more than one auxiliary field per site/bond. We have tried four different strategies. As it turned out, the most efficient is the following. A sweep attempting to flip just x 0 (i, l) is carried out over all sites and all time slices, (i, l). This is followed by a sweep over all bonds and time slices, trying to flip just x 1 (i, j, l), then followed by another sweep over the whole space-time lattice attempting to flip just x 2 (i, j, l), and so on and so forth for x 3 (i, j, l) and for x 4 (i, j, l) to complete one Monte Carlo step. Any attempt of grouping more than one flip at any x i , despite speeding up the sweep, leads to much more noisy averages than with the above mentioned strategy. As a final remark, we note that when dealing with CHSF, one is restricted to Metropolis algorithm, since the heat bath algorithm leads to a very low acceptance ratio. Appendix D: Asymptotic behavior of the fermion sign for the AFM-CDW transition. Figure 