Efficient fiber-to-chip couplers for multi-port access to photonic integrated circuits are paramount for a broad class of applications, ranging, e.g., from telecommunication to photonic computing and quantum technologies. While gratingbased approaches are convenient for out-of-plane access and often desirable from a packaging point of view, on lowindex photonic platforms, such as silicon nitride or thin-film lithium niobate, the limited grating strength has thus far hindered the achievement of coupling efficiencies comparable to the ones attainable in silicon photonics. Here we present a flexible strategy for the realization of highly efficient grating couplers on low-index photonic platforms. To simultaneously reach a high scattering efficiency and a near-unitary modal overlap with optical fibers, we make use of self-imaging gratings designed with a negative diffraction angle. To ensure high directionality of the diffracted light, we take advantage of a metal back-reflector patterned underneath the grating structure by cryogenic deep reactive ion etching of the silicon handle. Using silicon nitride as a testbed material, we experimentally demonstrate coupling efficiency up to -0.55 dB in the telecom C-band with near unity chip-scale device yield. In the last decades, photonic integrated circuits (PICs) have captured a growing interest in several areas spanning, e.g., from optical communication The coupling efficiency (CE) of a grating coupler can be modeled as the product of three different contributions: where η1 is the scattering efficiency of the grating structure, η2 is the bidimensional overlap integral between the diffracted optical beam and the fundamental light mode supported by the optical fiber, and η3 is the directionality of the diffraction process. The scattering efficiency η1 and the overlap integral η2 can be boosted to values close to 100% via an accurate design of the surface grating teeth. In contrast, high directionality η3 requires proper engineering of the material stack for reflecting upward the light that otherwise would leak into the substrate. Elaborating further, near-unity scattering efficiencies can be straightforwardly attained in all photonic platforms by designing grating couplers with a large enough number of grating teeth. In the case of low-index platforms the limited grating strength can be bypassed simply by using longer gratings. Achieving an optimal 2D overlap integral requires fulfilling two conditions: i) the diffracted beam must feature a Gaussian-like profile as does the fundamental mode of optical fibers; ii) the mode field diameters (MFDs) of the radiated beam and the fundamental fiber mode must be identical along both the longitudinal and the transverse directions. While the former requirement can be met by exploiting apodization of the filling factor such that the highest amount of optical power is diffracted at the center of the grating rather than at its beginning To elucidate this approach, we design air-clad fully etched grating couplers patterned into a 330 nm thick silicon nitride film on a 3.33 μm thick buried oxide layer (see Fig. Schematic illustration of the grating coupler along its longitudinal direction. The grating coupler features a grating period Λ and a linear apodization on the filling factor FF=d/Λ, such that the light propagating through the structure (yellow arrow) is partly radiated upward with a Gaussian-like shape and focused at a given distance from the circuitry plane. An optical fiber with the MFD of its fundamental mode is also drawn in correspondence of the beam waist of the radiated beam. Highlighted with red labels are also the several portions of the device: the waveguide (WG), the grating and the taper connecting these two elements. (b) Top view of the self-imaging apodized grating coupler. The taper features an opening angle of 70° and a length Lt equal to the distance between the first grating tooth and the longitudinal coordinate of the beam waist. At the intersection with the taper, the waveguide is characterized by a properly engineered width w that allows to match the desired MFD also in the transverse direction, in correspondence of the focal point of the diffracted beam. (c) 2D FDTD simulation of a grating coupler in the outcoupling scheme at λ=1550 nm. The colormap in the figure (a.u.) is the computed optical power |E| 2 of the diffracted beam. The radiated beam features a diffraction angle equal to -12° and a focusing effect at a height of ≃175 μm from the circuit plane. (d) Simulated mode field profile in correspondence of the beam waist (blue curve). The red trace is a Gaussian function with MFD=10.4 μm (MFD of SMF-28 fibers at λ=1550 nm). (e) Poynting flux spectra computed in the 1500-1600 nm wavelength range for upward-(blue) and downward-diffracted (orange) light, for light transmitted at the end of the grating structure (red), and for the back-reflected light (green). The optical power is normalized to the one at the input of the grating. A side view of the grating coupler is shown in Fig. For the experimental implementation of the proposed grating couplers, the fabrication workflow is divided into two main parts: at first, we realize the metal mirror by processing the backside of the chip and, afterwards, we pattern the photonic circuitry. Our starting point is a 20x20 mm 2 die, consisting of a 330 nm thick SiN film deposited via low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) on a 3.33 μm thick SiO2 layer, thermally grown on a 525 μm thick Si handle. Prior to nanoprocessing, the die is annealed at 1100° C for 4 hours in nitrogen atmosphere to reduce the absorption loss of the nitride film To determine the efficiency of the fabricated couplers, we use a V-groove fiber array equipped with SMF-28 fibers and featuring an 8° polishing angle. A 3-axis linear stage is used for optimizing the coupling efficiency in the X-Y-Z directions, while a goniometric and a rotation stage are used for fine-tuning the inclination angle of the array with respect to the surface of the photonic die as well as the angle of the chip in the X-Y plane, respectively. Continuouswave laser light from an external tunable laser source (TSL-550 Santec laser with 1500-1620 nm tuning range) is guided through a 3-paddle polarization controller to ensure that TE-polarized light is coupled into the PIC via one of the two accessible grating couplers. The transmission spectra are acquired by sweeping the wavelength of the laser source and by recording the light exiting from the other coupler with a photoreceiver. The efficiency per coupler is estimated as the square root of the transmission of a device consisting of two identical grating couplers connected by a short waveguide (see Fig. A drawback of self-imaging grating couplers is that light beams with different central wavelength are diffracted at slightly different angles and thus display a non-negligible spatial spreading in the focal point. This decreases the bandwidth measured at a fixed fiber position (3 dB bandwidth ≃ 50 nm for the device of Fig. We have presented a flexible approach for the realization of highly efficient grating couplers, which, in principle, can be applied to any low-index photonic platform independently of the chosen film thickness and grating etching depth. With fully etched grating couplers fabricated on a 330 nm thick silicon nitride film, we have experimentally achieved a coupling efficiency up to -0.55 dB in the telecom C-band. We highlight that this value, measured on a low-index platform, not only is comparable with the best ones obtained at telecom wavelength for grating couplers implemented on silicon-on-insulator 