We investigated the Cu/Ni-O2 bilayer multi-orbital Hubbard model with Cu/Ni impurity approximation embedded in the O lattice by incorporating the 3d 8 multiplet structure coupled to a full O-2p band. For this simplified model of describing the local electronic structure of hole doped homo-bilayer Cu(Ni)O2-Cu(Ni)O2 and hetero-bilayer CuO2-NiO2, we demonstrate that the homo-bilayer system hosts rich phase diagram with inversion symmetry breaking between two layers at strong enough interlayer hybridization, especially the coexistence of two-hole singlet and triplet states in opposite layers. Besides, we show that the interlayer hybridization in hetero-bilayer systems destabilizes the Zhang-Rice singlets or 3d 8 triplets within each layer via charge transfer between layers. The relevance of these electronic redistribution to the bilayer or interface systems of cuprates and/or nickelates are discussed. Bilayer single-orbital Hubbard model has been widely adopted to describe the strongly correlated electronic systems, especially on the magnetic and pairing properties Bilayer models are not simply toy model Hamiltonians given that some cuprate superconductors possess the unit cells consisting of CuO 2 bilayer structure For the newly discovered Ni-based SC The simplest bilayer single-orbital Hubbard model only depicts the physics originating from 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital, which is widely believed to dominate the cuprate physics The argument of its universality of describing the whole family of cuprate superconductors has long been debated All the above consideration including cuprate and nickelate superconductors motivate us to investigate the bilayer multi-orbital model consisting of the full Cu/Ni-3d multiplet structure and explore its low-energy properties. There is no doubt that the many-body treatment of such a model in the thermodynamic limit is extremely challenging and even impossible nowadays Our bilayer model is a direct extension of the impurity model adopted previously to study the hole-doped spin state and symmetries relevant for infinite-layer cuprates and nickelates with the shorthand notation mx ≡ zm x σ x , with x = 1, . . . , 4 denoting spin-orbitals. Note that this model is reminiscent of our previous studied Hamiltonian. More details on the single layer situation and the formalism on the calculation of the ground state (GS) and the spectra for different irreducible representations of D 4h point group are referred to Ref. Here we only remark on the layer z = 1, 2 dependent p (z) for O orbitals and orbital-selective interlayer hybridization, which is our focus in this work. The two layers have the same (different) p for homo-bilayer (hetero-bilayer). The latter situation can be seen as artificially breaking the inversion symmetry while we show that the former case can induce inversion symmetry breaking at large enough interlayer hybridization. Note that our model Eq. 1 assumes the same d = 0 and interaction U matrix in two layers for simplicity. This is partly motivated by the assumption that the Coulomb and exchange interaction for the infinite-layer cuprate and nickelate superconductors do not differ significantly While the single layer problem only requires the treatment of a two-hole problem taking into account the Coulomb and exchange interactions U ( m1 m2 m3 m4 ) for all singlet and/or triplet irreducible representations of the D 4h point group spanned by two d holes 57 , the bilayer system consists of four-hole states, which exponentially enlarge the variational Hilbert space. This strongly limits our simulation to relatively small O lattices. Most of our simulations are performed on 4 × 4 or 6 × 6 O lattices. Nonetheless, fortunately, the impurity approximation implies that our simulations do not sensitively depend upon the lattice size so that even our relatively small lattice can capture the essential physics discussed here. Regarding the parameter choice, throughout the paper, the conventional values A = 6.0 eV, B = 0.15 eV, C = 0.58 eV are adopted, where A normally characterizes the strength of the magnitude of electronelectron interaction and here we do not vary it unlike our previous studies Before proceeding, we briefly discuss some possible hole states within our system. In our simulation, we simplified the Hilbert space by restricting the total magnetization of four spins to be S z tot = 0, namely there are always two holes with spin up and two others with spin down. Note that although the total spin of four holes can be S tot = 0, 1, 2, in this work we mainly quantify the intralayer two-hole total spin by singlet or triplet but neglect the information of interlayer spin states or bonding/antibonding states. Except for the interlayer hybridization, another major control parameter is the charge transfer energies p of two layers. On the one hand, if each layer has the same p , namely the homo-bilayer, then at relatively weak interlayer hybridization, four holes would evenly distribute with exactly the same two-hole states in each layer. In other words, the homogeneity between two independent layers would persist. One goal of this work is to provide evidence that this homo-bilayer will spontaneously break the inversion symmetry between layers at sufficiently large hybridization. On the other hand, for the hetero-bilayer, the aforementioned inversion symmetry between layers is artificially broken, which is realized via distinct p of two layers, so that the holes preferentially locate on the layer with smaller p such that there will be states with one hole on one layer and three holes on the other. To label the four-hole states, we use the notation such as to denote the state on each layer separated by hyphen. Note that for hetero-bilayer, we adopt the convention that the state before/after the hyphen corresponds to the layer with larger/smaller p . In the monolayer situation 57 , p = 3 eV that is typical for cuprates locates the system as Zhang-Rice singlet (ZRS), which is characterized by the dominant b 1 L weight. For p = 7 eV, which is estimated value corresponding to the infinite-layer nickelates A. Homo-bilayer: all d-orbital hybridization We first discuss the homo-bilayer with interlayer hybridization between all d orbitals. Fig. Switching to panel (b) for p = 7 eV roughly corresponding to bilayer nickelates Panel (c) corresponds to a limiting large = 9 case, where the monolayer possesses two-hole triplet GS. Turning on interlayer hybridization rapidly suppresses the weight associated with a 1 b 1 -a 1 b 1 (see inset) and induces double transitions: the first from a 1 b 1 -a 1 b 1 with inversion symmetry to an intermediate GS of a 1 b 1b 1 L similar to the case of = 7 in panel (b) but the second transition to dominant a 1 b 1 -a 1 L with both triplets. Hence, large enough t z prefers a 1 orbital to form triplet state with b 1 or L holes. Interestingly, all weights before the first and after the second transition seem to smoothly connect to each other while interrupted by the intermediate GS between the two transitions. To fully capture the physical picture in this homobilayer system, Fig. Generally, relatively weak interlayer hybridization does not strongly modify the GS nature except around critical points such as p ∼ 7.5; while sufficiently large t z breaks the inversion symmetry between two layers as discussed in Fig. Since the interlayer hybridization can generically mimic the effects of high pressure experiments and given that p ∼ 3, 7 eV are relevant to cuprates and nickelates respectively Besides, the large p homo-bilayer is prone to be influenced by t z , namely relatively weak pressure on infinite-layer nickelates might induce drastic observable effects. Nonetheless, the appearance of triplet a 1 b 1 within one layer (red colored phase) is normally detrimental to the superconductivity Finally, we remark that the right panel of Fig. Clearly, for small p and also around p ∼ 8, turning on t z immediately breaks the inversion symmetry, which is hence a generic consequence of the interlayer hybridization in homo-bilayer. We have mentioned the recent experimental demonstration of H doping's impact so that we also investigated a simplified model with only d z 2 -d z 2 hybridization between layers without considering the electronic state of H -explicitly Further examination reveals that the dominant feature for p = 3 (panel a) is the robustness of all the weights against t z , namely almost completely independent on t z . Besides, the absence of double transitions in the case of p = 9 (panel c) further reveals the immunity of the homo-bilayer system with the presence of only d z 2 -d z 2 hybridization. This robustness potentially serves as the evidence that H blocking preserves the quasi-2D nature of the infinite-layer nickelates, which is claimed to be beneficial to the superconductivity Despite of these detailed difference, the two homobilayer models with different forms of interlayer hybridization share the common features regardless of phase boundary shift. As shown in the phase diagram Fig. Although the GS weights and phase diagrams between two models are seemingly quite similar, we further discovered that the GS degeneracy can host distinct discrepancy between two models. To investigate the GS degeneracy, Fig. Moreover, the inset shows that the "energy gap" defined as ∆E ≡ E 1 -E g has almost exactly the same evolution between two models at relatively weak t z while apparently deviate at large t z after the phase transition. We found that the major difference of GS between two models lies in this large t z regime. Precisely, all d orbital interlayer hybridization induces the system to avoid the GS degeneracy except at the exact critical points, where the GS nature is found to interchange with the first excited state corresponding to E 1 before the transition. In contrast, the model with only d z 2 hybridization tends to result in a degenerate GS after the transition although at p = 9 the transition is not approached in the shown range of t z (see also Fig. Furthermore, as discussed earlier, all d orbital hybridization results in exactly the same weights between a particular state and its parity state, e.g. a 1 L-b 1 L and b 1 L-a 1 L despite that the GS has no degeneracy. Nonetheless, in the presence of only d z 2d z 2 hybridization, this weight degeneracy is replaced by the degeneracy of GS itself, where for each degenerate GS a state has different weight from its parity state; while this weight difference is reversed in the other degenerate GS. Therefore, the inversion symmetry breaking has distinct forms in two models. This remarkable difference hidden in the GS degeneracy reflects the major role played by those d orbitals other C. Hetero-bilayer: all d-orbital hybridization According to the above discussion on the homobilayer systems, the most interesting observation lies in the local inversion symmetry breaking between layers. Now we switch to the hetero-bilayer systems, where the inversion symmetry has been artificially broken. These hetero-structure problem have long been a fruitful platform displaying versatile phenomena, ranging from interface superconductivity to 2D materials with artificial controllability. In this work, we restrict our attention to the hetero-bilayer models with different p and we show that the discrepancy between layers induces drastic impact on the nature of GS in terms of the charge transfer between layers. Fig. In the presence of asymmetric p between layers, the holes preferentially locate on the layer with smaller p such that there are states like one hole on one layer and three holes on the other, which is indeed confirmed as the dominant state d 9 -d 9 L 2 in Fig. As t z increases, as shown in panels b and c, the regime of b 1 L-b 1 L phase shrinks and partly replaced by a 1 L-b 1 L phase (yellow regime) at small p,d , which is consistent with the above discussion in Fig. In summary, we used exact diagonalization to investigate a numerically tractable bilayer multi-orbital Hubbard model in the framework of our previous impurity approximation For the homo-bilayer system, both models with all d-d and d z 2 -d z 2 hybridizations result in inversion symmetry breaking between two layers at strong enough interlayer hybridization, especially the coexistence of two-hole singlet and triplet states in opposite layers. Besides, the interlayer hybridization generically tends to promote the significance of d z 2 orbital. However, the examination of the GS degeneracy indicates the important difference between two models. Specifically, the d-d hybridization leads to non-degenerate GS while the sole d z 2 -d z 2 hybridization always induce degenerate GS. Given that the homo-bilayer model has potential connection to the high-pressure experiments on cuprate and even infinite-layer nickelates, our study uncovers the importance of multi-d orbital description in the highpressure setup. In addition, the mixture of singlet and triplet in separate layers potentially imply its detriment to the bulk superconductivity For the hetero-bilayer system, inversion symmetry has been artificially broken. Our focus is the interplay between the discrepancy between two layers' p and interlayer hybridization. In particular, we investigated a situation relevant for Cu 2+ O 2 -Ni + O 2 with p = 3, 7 respectively, although its experimental realization can be quite challenging. Increasing the discrepancy p,d , namely the difference between p of two layers, generally pushes the system into the states with one and three holes in each layer separately via the charge transfer from the layer with larger p into the other layer with smaller p . However, this charge transfer transition disappears at sufficiently large p,a reflecting the Hund's rule promoted d 8 triplet state within individual layers. In addition, the gradual dominance of d z 2 orbital also in the hetero-bilayer physics at sufficiently large interlayer hybridization is similar to the homo-bilayer systems. Our simplified four-hole simulation reveal the charge transfer across the layers so that destabilize the Zhang-Rice singlets within each layer. Together with the increasing significance of a 1 orbital, this can induce drastic impact on the superconductivity in the realistic Cu 2+ O 2 -Ni + O 2 interface or heterostructure. It would be quite interesting to explore whether the current observation of inversion symmetry breaking persists in the more physical but manageable manybody calculation on similar or the same type of bilayer multi-orbital models. Besides, the potential relevance to the bulk superconductivity in the context of bilayer or heterostructure between Cu 2+ O 2 and Ni + O 2 , their relation to high-pressure settings, and also the significant role of d z 2 orbital are worthwhile for further exploration 