Einstein's general theory of relativity not only revolutionized human understanding of the universe, but also brought many gravitational applications in large scale, such as gravitational-wave astronomy [1], gravitational lensing [2], and the operation of the global positioning system [3]. However, it still remains a challenge to implement applications for gravitational effects at small spacial extensions on Earth. Here, we investigate a structured waveguide system that allows for the control of an x-ray profile at altitude separations of millimeters and even shorter using the nuclear resonant scattering of x rays The Pound-Rebka experiment The system is depicted in Figure where ρ eg is the coherence of a nuclear two-level system, E is the x-ray electric field strength, h is the reduced Planck constant, k is the x-ray wavenumber, and n e is the index of refraction from electrons. Further, we denote the transverse Laplacian , and the coupling constant η = 2hΓξ/ (P L), where L the length of the waveguide, P is the nuclear transition dipole moment, and ξ is the nuclear resonant thickness. The steady state of Eqs. (1-2) leads to the analytic solution ρ eg = P E (i -2∆ t ) / hΓ 1 + 4∆ 2 t and the optical Schrödinger equation with the effective mass m e = hk/c. Equation (3) suggests a structured x-ray waveguide (SXWG) system composed of resonant nuclei, as depicted in Fig. In the following, we use the SXWG to simulate Rabi oscillations of x ray in a finite square well of width L x . As illustrated in Fig. with the eigen angular frequencies ω n = n 2 π 2 c/ 2kL 2 x . Inside the square well |x| ≤ L x /2, we perturb the system by a periodic (gradient) particle distribution of isotope X and carbon along the y direction (x direction), where ξ (x, y) = ( /2) [1 + (2x/L x ) sin (k d y)] and n e (x, y) = 1-δ C (x, y)+ iβ C (x, y)-δ X (x, y)+iβ X (x, y) (see supplemental information for the form of n e ). In Fig. Γ (MHz) δX (10 -6 ) δC(10 -6 ) δPt(10 -5 ) βX (10 -9 ) βC(10 -9 ) βPt(10 Driven by structure represent platinum, carbon and resonant nucleus, respectively. We list other relevant material parameters in Table A propagating x ray experiences a constant SXWG-induced Rabi frequency, and the condition for having a mπ pulse is |Ω n |L/c = mπ. We use m = 2 to demonstrate the Rabi oscillation between the x-ray ground state ψ 1 and the first excited state ψ 2 by numerically solving Eq. ( The solution of Eq. ( The above x-ray Rabi oscillation suggests a systematic way to generate the ψ n mode with a sequence of SXWGs driving ∆n = 1 transitions, where one can raise the quantum number one by one. Specifically, one can connect two different SXWGs to accomplish a ψ 1 → ψ 3 transition, where the upstream SXWG drives a ψ 1 → ψ 2 transition, and the downstream SXWG achieves a ψ 2 → ψ 3 promotion. Moreover, one can even design multiple SXWG modules for ∆n = 2 or any dipole forbidden transitions. Thus, all combinations of SXWG modules open the capability to generate high order xray modes starting from the ground state ψ 1 . It is worth mentioning another possible application using dual SXWGs with a gap in between as an x-ray interferometer. While the upstream SXWG causes the ψ 1 → ψ 2 transition as a beam splitter, the downstream SXWG leads to the return of ψ 2 → ψ 1 as a beam combiner. Furthermore, in the gap between two SXWGs one can introduce a phase modulator to impose a phase shift at one branch of the split state ψ 2 , e.g., x > 0 at y = 2mm in Fig. We are ready to demonstrate the Earth's gravitational effect on our SXWG system. Given that the gravitational redshift ∆ G significantly changes the nuclear coherence ρ eg and Rabi frequency Ω n in Eq. ( We quantify the gravitational sensitivity of the SXWG by the full altitude width ∆Z G at the half maximum Re as indicated by the black-horizontal double arrow in Fig. 