The term defect tolerance (DT) is used often to rationalize the exceptional optoelectronic properties of Halide Perovskites (HaPs) and their devices. Even though DT lacked direct experimental evidence, it became a "fact" in the field. DT in semiconductors implies that structural defects do not translate to electrical and optical effects (e.g., due to charge trapping), associated with such defects. We present the first direct experimental evidence for DT in Pb-HaPs by comparing the structural quality of 2-dimensional (2D), 2D-3D, and 3D Pbiodide HaP crystals with their optoelectronic characteristics using high-sensitivity methods. Importantly, we get information from the materials' bulk, because we sample at least a few hundred nanometers, up to several micrometers, from the sample's surface, which allows for assessing intrinsic bulk (and not only surface-) properties of HaPs. The results point to DT in 3D, 2D-3D, and 2D Pb-HaPs. Overall, our data provide an experimental basis to rationalize DT in Pb-HaPs. These experiments and findings can guide the search for, and design of other materials with DT. For progress in science, distinguishing between ideas or suggestions and solid experimental facts is critical, especially if it concerns a key issue. Such is the case for the widespread use of "defect tolerance" (DT) to explain the exceptionally good properties of Halide Perovskites (HaPs) for solar cells, LEDs and detectors. Although often invoked for HaPs, DT lacked till now direct experimental evidence (and had mixed support from computational theory). We find the missing experimental evidence for DT by comparing the structural quality, as a measure of structural defects, with its optoelectronic properties, as a measure of optoelectronic (active) defects, that normally result from structural defects. Our direct evidence for DT can guide the search for, and design of new materials with DT. Halide perovskite (HaP) semiconductors hold significant potential for applications in several optoelectronic device types due to their excellent relevant properties, which express fascinating fundamental materials chemistry and physics Commonly this unique feature of HaPs has been explained by defect-tolerance (DT), As pointed out, e.g., in ref. The rationale for such a definition is that high optoelectronic quality normally reflects a low density of intrinsic structural defects because such defects can act as efficient electronic charge traps or recombination centers. Notably, the direct implication of this operative definition is that one must provide both structural evidence (from evaluating the structural quality of the material, bulk, or bulk and surfaces) and optoelectronic evidence (assessed via a material's properties, such as optical absorption or emission, electronic transport, etc.) to test proposed defect tolerance of HaPs. In fact, this is correct also when referring to other definitions of DT, as the term relates the effects of existing intrinsic structural defects to the optoelectronic characteristics of HaPs To yield direct experimental evidence for DT in Pb-HaPs, we report and compare the structural quality of pure 3D, 2D, and 2D-3D Pb-HaP single crystals to optoelectronic characteristics that are sensitive to structural defects. We compare a family of Pb-iodide HaPs: -pure 2D HaP -(C4H9NH3)2PbI4 or BA2PbI4 (C4N1), -2D-3D HaPs -(C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)Pb2I7 or BA2MAPb2I7 (C4N2) and (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3I10 or BA2MA2Pb3I10 (C4N3), and the widely studied, archetypical -3D HaP -(CH3NH3)PbI3 or MAPbI3 (MAPI). While most of the HaP-based potential applications use polycrystalline thin films, fundamental understanding requires at least to start with more controllable samples, wherever possible, i.e., high-quality single crystals or epitaxial films. As the latter is not (yet) readily available in macroscopic sizes, if at all, we, as others, have turned to single crystals for fundamental studies. Thus, single crystals of Pb-HaPs with different dimensionalities were grown and are analyzed here, to try to assess possible differences between them in terms of the relationship between structural and optoelectronically active imperfections, if any (also building on earlier studies of ours concerning self-healing differences between 2D and 3D HaPs To assess the quality of such single crystals, one normally relies heavily on X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements with the θ-2θ Bragg-Brentano (θ-2θ, for short) geometry, by identifying the presence of a single set of peaks, corresponding to a single phase with one clear crystallographic orientation. While certainly a necessary condition, it is far from being a sufficient one, as the common θ-2θ XRD experiments are insufficiently sensitive to slight structural inhomogeneities. We evaluate the single crystal quality of these materials using additional XRD measurements, apart from the qualitative results from θ-2θ geometry, namely quantitative rocking curves (RC, see Figure As a result, the XRD analysis done here allows the tracing of 1D line defects (like edge or screw dislocations), 2D planar defects (like stacking faults or grain boundaries), and/or 3D bulk defects (like voids and impurities), as these structural defects directly affect the orientation of a lattice plane, and, thus, result in changes that can be detected experimentally by comparing RCs. For 0D defects, which are reflected in RC tails, the higher dimensional defects can be viewed as including some and/or resulting from arrays of 0D defects with potential optoelectronic activity, while the higher dimensional defects can also have such activity by themselves In parallel, easily applied, quick experimental methods for the preliminary assessment of the crystal quality are described. We then describe how FWHM values of the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) peak, the transient PL decay curves, and a semi quantitative analysis of the sub-bandgap surface photovoltage (SPV) response, are used to assess the optoelectronic quality of the same crystals. All the methods applied here provide bulk information; the X-ray penetration depth in HaPs is 4 μm 2D HaP BA2PbI4 (C4N1), and 2D-3D HaPs BA2MAPb2I7 and BA2MA2Pb3I10 (C4N2 and C4N3, respectively) single crystals were prepared by using the slow cooling method (see Section S1, supplementary information, SI) To check the structural quality of the intact single crystals, we performed θ-2θ XRD scans directly on the crystals. The phase purity of the crystals was verified by grinding them and excluding traces of any secondary phases (see Fig. Note that, being a diffraction method, only periodic structural defects are sampled, which, in the case of HaPs are likely to be of more than one kind, due to the low free activation energies for formation and decomposition of the Pb-iodide perovskites. For C4N1 the RCs will show orientation deviations for the {00l} family of planes. RCs for the two different C4N1 crystals (from Figure On similar lines, in the θ-2θ XRD scans of 2D-3D C4N2 (Figure While the RC analysis was found to provide a quantitative evaluation of the single crystal quality, we find that a quick physical examination can qualitatively indicate about the single crystal quality. For 2D and 2D-3D single crystals, crystal quality can be assessed from simple mechanical exfoliation. After a scotch-tape exfoliation, for HQ crystals, a clean and crack-free surface is observed (C4N1-HQ, Figure For 3D MAPI crystals, a quick qualitative indication can be observed by cleaving the crystal parallel to a crystal plane. If a clean cleavage along a particular crystallographic plane is achieved (which leads to the exposure of mirror-like crystal faces of the two freshly exposed surfaces), it indicates a high-quality single crystal, corresponding to the HQ single crystal (Figure Now that we have established the structural differences between HQ and LQ crystals of various compositions, we further look at two properties that can show evidence for optoelectronically active defects in the C4N1 (2D), C4N2 (2D-3D) and MAPI (3D) crystals: photoluminescence (PL), and surface photovoltage (SPV) measurements. Our hypothesis is that, in the absence of DT, for a given composition and structure, a crystal of higher structural quality (i.e., HQ) will have: 1) a narrower FWHM of the main PL emission peak, indicating a smaller density of band tail states, or, more generally, of shallow defect states near the band edges, 2) longer carrier lifetimes, and 3) smaller sub-bandgap SPV response (indicating a lower density of deep defect states within the forbidden gap) than those of a LQ crystal, i.e., one of poorer structural quality. The reasoning is that, as for common semiconductors, structural disorder implies structural defects, which can be traced to 0D point defects (where a single point in the actual lattice differs from the perfect lattice structure) We find that for a given composition, the FWHM of the PL emission peak is essentially not affected by the structural quality of the crystal (Figure Although time-resolved PL, TRPL, is widely used for assessing the optoelectronic quality of HaP samples, accumulating experimental evidence suggests that, while extracting a single PL lifetime value may be useful for comparing different samples in the same lab (as we tried to do in this study) This point is further supported by the results of a recent meta-analysis by Yuan et al., who studied TRPL data measured on HaPs from many published papers Still, TRPL data of HQ and LQ single crystals of 2D, 2D-3D, and 3D HaPs were collected (see figures S8 and S9, as well as table S1 in the SI) to evaluate if the results can be used as comparative tool. We used two different systems for this, a home-built and a commercial one with comparable results. To remove some of the problems inherent in TRPL lifetime measurements the results that we report here were measured by the commercial system, i.e., the same instrument, for all samples, and using identical excitation conditions for any given set of HQ and LQ HaP samples. We used a low excitation intensity, with photon pulse flux of ~2.5 x 10 9 photons/cm 2 (5 x 10 10 photons/cm 2 for the home-built system). As a result of the overlap between the times of the C4N1 TRPL decay and that of the excitation beam (system response), those data cannot be analyzed meaningfully (see figure We tried to obtain values for lifetimes by fitting the decay data for each of the C4N3 and MAPI single crystals, using both mono-and bi-exponential functions (see SI, Figs. For SPV, we focus solely on sub-bandgap SPV photons and the sample's response. SPV is a technique that, in contrast to the more commonly used PL, does not rely on radiative recombination processes. An SPV signal is observed in cases where the photogeneration of charge carriers results in charge carrier separation in space. Because HaPs are high-quality (i.e., low optoelectronically active defect density) semiconductors, detecting defect-related signals poses a challenge. To meet that challenge, light-modulated SPV measurements in combination with lock-in detection were employed, in order to significantly increase the sensitivity and S/N ratio. In addition to the challenge of detection, there is the as yet unsolved issue of quantifying the defect densities that give rise to the SPV signal. In our case, we propose a comparative semi-quantitative assessment of the defect densities by integrating the area below the SPV curve, at energies less than the bandgap (see more about this in the SI, section S4). Such an approximation was previously employed to compare defect densities in Halide Perovskites from photoemission measurements by Lee et al Optical absorption coefficients for photon energies below the bandgap energy are orders of magnitude lower than those above (at higher photon energies than the) bandgap, at 450 nm for the 2D and 2D-3D samples, or at 640 nm for MAPI, the excitation wavelengths that we used for the TRPL experiments with home-built system (see SI, section S2). This implies that sub-bandgap absorption, and, therefore, any possible carrier generation/release occurs orders of magnitude deeper into the crystals than carrier generation due to photons with energies above the bandgap (which will be limited to a few 100 nm). For sub-bandgap absorption in MAPI, any carrier generation/ release (from traps) will occur up to 10 4 nm, and for C4N1 up to 3x10 3 nm into the sample As extracting defect densities from SPV spectra is still a challenging task (82), we approximate the relative density of defects in the sample volume that is measured (which is constant for all samples) by integrating the area under the curve of the sub bandgap SPV response (above the background signal; cf. figure From comparing the integration results (between HQ and LQ crystals), we find that, in line with the PL results, there are NO consistent differences between their sub-bandgap SPV responses. For C4N1, C4N2, C4N3 and MAPI, the integrated SPV spectral areas for the HQ vs. LQ are either the same or almost identical, as the minor differences between them are close to 3 times the experimental error (Figure The results show that there is no correlation between structural defects and optoelectronically active defects in the 2D, 2D-3D, 3D HaPs that we studied (cf. Table Our results can be explained by the following reasons that are connected to each other: 1. The relative softness of the perovskite lattice has been used to invoke formation of large polarons that would then result in efficient columbic screening of structural defects, to explain the optoelectronic quality of HaPs Following our experimental observations, the plausible mechanism for DT in Pb-HaPs seems to be associated with reasons -2-and -3-, the low lattice deformation energy and dynamic local disorder of Pb-HaPs, which is in line with the conclusions drawn from the computational studies that were reported earlier Overall, our results of rocking curve XRD (RC-XRD) analysis, as a measure of structural quality, and PL and sub-band gap SPV response as a measure of optoelectronic quality, show a lack of correlation between the RC-XRD and the PL/SPV results, for the 2D (C4N1), 2D-3D crystals (C4N2, C4N3) and 3D MAPI crystals. We suggest that the reason for this is the soft and highly dynamic (around a well-defined average) structure of the HaP lattice, especially the inorganic PbI6 octahedra component, the structural backbone of the lead HaPs studied in this work. Such dynamic lattice affects the electronic landscape, to overshadow or compensate electronic effects to an extent that any effects are below the detection limits of the highly sensitive technique/s employed in this work. This result also implies that for Pb-HaPs, the structural quality of crystals is, as far as we can measure by the means employed here, a poor predictor for optoelectronically active defects. We purposely focus on macroscopic-sized single crystals, instead of on polycrystalline films with sub-mm grain sizes (i.e., high surface/volume ratios). Thus, our results do not inform on the relation between surface defects and their effect on the optoelectronic properties of HaPs of various dimensionalities, which requires also the use of specifically surface-vs. bulk-sensitive characterization tools. We posit that the absence of correlation between evidence for defects from structural experiments on the one hand and optoelectronic ones on the other hand provides the first clear experimental evidence for defect tolerance in Pb-iodide HaPs, as DT appears the most obvious (Ockham's razor) interpretative explanation. As such, we look forward to results from high-level computations, including the lattice dynamics, and from higher level (synchrotronbased) RC measurements, possibly complemented by other measurements that can match the sensitivity of SPV, to test our interpretation, and with experimentally-testable predictive power. The present results add to our level of understanding of the fascinating science of Pb-HaPs. The results can furthermore be viewed also in light of our earlier self-healing studies on 2D, 2D-3D, and 3D HaPs. A clear direction for future fundamental experimental work is to design experiments that can test the possible co-existence of defect tolerance and selfhealing in HaPs. In summary, defect tolerance in Pb-HaPs suggests that the dynamic columbic screening in intrinsically "soft" and polarizable materials provides a design principle to achieve some coexistence of structural imperfections and close-to-optoelectronic perfection in materials. As such, DT can bridge any time lag between damage and self-healing to minimize effects of imperfections, to make materials more sustainable. Naga Prathibha Jasti The high-quality MAPbI3 (MAPI) single crystals were prepared by inverse temperature crystallization (1). The higher-quality MAPI (MAPI-HQ) crystals were prepared from 1:1 of MAI:PbI2 (>99.99 %, Greatcell Solar Materials, 99 %, Merck, respectively), 1.4 M solution in gamma-butyrolactone (99+%, Alfa Aesar), under ambient atmosphere. The precursor solution was stirred at 75°C, followed by filtration using PTFE (hydrophilic) filters (pore size: 0.22 μm) into a crystallization dish with a seed crystal (∼1-2 mm in size). The single crystals (∼0.7-1cm in size) formation occurred by ramping the temperature of the oven from 75°C to 120°C in 18 hours. The crystals were extracted by cleaning with filter paper placed on a hot plate at 110°C. The lower-quality MAPI (MAPI-LQ) crystals were prepared from 1.1:1 of MAI:PbI2 (>99.99 %, Greatcell Solar Materials, 99 %, Merck, respectively), 1.1: 1 M solution, respectively, in gamma-butyrolactone (99+%, Alfa Aesar), under ambient atmosphere. The precursor solution was stirred at 60°C, followed by filtration using PTFE (Hydrophilic) filters (pore size: 0.450 μm) into an open vessel to crystallize at 60°C. The solution temperature was increased to 90°C over the course of 1 hour and then to 110°C, over 3 hrs to promote the evaporation of the solvent. The crystallization was stopped just before the level of the solution reached the crystal surface so as to avoid exposure of the crystal surface to air. The crystals were then harvested from the solution and, without rinsing, immediately dried with absorbent paper. Crystals with a size of 0.5-1 cm were obtained. Butylammonium lead iodide (BA2PbI4, C4N1), butylammonium methylammonium lead iodide ((BA2MAPb2I7, C4N2), (BA2MA2Pb3I10, C4N3)) were crystallized using the slow cooling method (2). 5.045 mmol (1.126 g) PbO (ACS reagent, 99.0 %, Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in 5mL HI (57 % in H2O, Sigma Aldrich, stored at 4°C) and 850 μL hypophosphorous acid solution (50 wt.% in H2O, Sigma-Aldrich) in a 20 mL vial by heating and stirring on a hot plate that was set to 110°C. The color of the mixture changed from black to clear yellow within a minute. The stirring and heating continued until the full dissolution of the PbO (1-2 hours). In the meantime, in an ice-bath, 3 mL of HI (4°C) were mixed with 494 μL or 98 μl butylamine (99.5 %, Sigma-Aldrich) for preparation of C4N1 and C4N3, respectively, by vigorously stirring the HI with a magnetic stirrer and adding the butylamine dropwise. In the case of C4N3 preparation, 0.477 g methylammonium iodide (MAI, GreatCellSolar materials), was added to the HI prior to the butylamine addition. The vial was then tightly sealed and stirring continued until no vapor was seen in the upper part of the vial. Once the two above mixtures were ready, the HI+butylamine (+MAI, for C4N2 and C4N3) mixture was added, dropwise, to the Pbcontaining vial while continuing to stir and heat. This led to the formation of an orange powder in the vial of C4N1 and a dark red powder in the vial of C4N2 and C4N3. Then the vial was tightly sealed and heated, while stirring, until the orange powder fully dissolved (the hotplate was set for this purpose to 140-170°C for 10-20 minutes). Once the solution was perfectly clear, the magnetic stirrer was carefully removed, the vial tightly sealed again, and transferred into an oven for controlled slow cooling, which was preheated to 105°C. The temperature of the oven was gradually decreased to RT at a rate of 1°C /h. Once the cooling process was completed, large orange plates of C4N1 crystals and reddish-black plates of C4N2 and C4N3 crystals were seen in the bottom of the vial. C4N2 and C4N3 crystals were both obtained from the same solution. The single crystals were then taken out by evacuating the supernatant and drying them gently with filter paper. To further remove any traces of the solvents, the crystals were then dried in the vacuum oven at 40°C for 12 hours. XRD characterization was carried out in reflection geometry using Rigaku (Tokyo, Japan) θ-θ diffractometers: an Ultima III (for powdered samples, prepared by crushing single crystals; cf. Fig. For single crystals, first, using open slits after a sample, a θ-2θ scan was performed in the 2θ range of 5°-60° (for MAPbI3) and 1.5° to 40° (for C4N1, C4N2, C4N3) with a step size of 0.01° and a scan rate of 10° per minute. Then the rocking curves (illustration in Fig. (0160) (for C4N3) crystallographic planes, parallel to the sample surface. Keeping 2θ constant, the source and the detector stage were synchronously moved (ω/θ scan) along the arc, while the sample remained in a fixed position for each φ position. To reduce the RC broadening due to the divergence of the primary beam, an incident slit 0.1 mm wide was used. As a comparison using the same measurement conditions, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of single crystal silicon (111) was 0.027°. XRD analysis was performed using the Jade Pro (MDI, US) and Origin software packages. NOTE: the asymmetric tails in the diffractograms, shown in Fig. The single crystal samples were excited at 457 nm wavelength using a diode-pumped laser (Cobolt DPL-08). An ultra-steep long-pass edge filter Semrock -458 NM Razoredge (REL 458 nm) was used to filter the excitation laser wavelength. A 10X objective (NA = 0.3) with a collimator was used for exciting and collecting the PL signal. The PL emission spectra were collected using a CCD-based spectrometer (Ocean Optics S2000). The PL-lifetime measurements that are reported, were conducted with a Horiba Scientific Fluoromax-4 spectrofluorometer. The sample was excited by a 375 nm Nano-LED, with ~2.5 x 10 9 photons/cm 2 flux, 45 ps pulse duration, and 1 MHz repetition rate (peak power of 300 mW). The emission was collected at three different wavelengths, 520 nm for C4N1, 615 nm for C4N3, and 780 nm for the MAPI samples, using Time-Correlated Single-Photon Counting (TCSPC) detection. Results similar to the ones obtained with the Horiba system, were obtained with a home-built system, using a ps pulsed diode laser (Picoquant LDH-P-C-640B). The photon flux of the pulse was 5 x 10 10 photons/cm 2 , the pulse duration 2-5 ns and the repetition rate 1 MHz. The PL emission spectra and the PL decay characteristics were recorded using a photomultiplier tube (Hamamatsu model H10721-01). For each of the HaP compositions, the TRPL data were collected by using a monochromator (Shamrock-Andor, SR-193i-Bi). For these measurements the C4N1 and C4N3 crystals were excited at 450 nm, and the MAPI crystals at 640 nm. The microscope images were collected using Olympus BX51 light microscope, equipped with an Olympus U-AN360 rotatable analyzer slider. Modulated SPV spectra were measured in the configuration of a parallel plate capacitor (quartz cylinder partially coated with a SnO2:F electrode, cover glass #0 as an insulator), as described in references (4, 5) under ambient conditions. Layered crystals were first peeled off using a 3M scotch tape prior to the SPV measurements. The SPV signal is defined as the change in the surface potential as a result of the illumination. In our case, the illumination was provided by a halogen lamp, coupled to a quartz prism monochromator (SPM2), and modulated at a frequency of 8 Hz by using an optical chopper. In order to avoid artifacts due to stray light in the sub-bandgap region, an appropriate long pass filter was used, depending on the bandgap of the sample Modulated sub-band-gap SPV spectra for C4N1 HQ crystal with and without surface exfoliation before the measurement. Area represents the area under the curve (grey zone), calculated between the limits of the rectangle edges, (dx) (yellow zone), with the baseline (lower limit on y scale) set at the SPV noise level. For clarity only one such grey zone corresponding to black spectrum is shown here. On the x (= photon energy) axis the upper limit corresponds to the cut-on energy of the 610nm long-pass filter used for C4N1 and the lower limit is around 0.5 eV, the photon energy, where SPV signal disappears in the noise level. In the legend dx is the difference between the low and high photon energy limits, used to calculate the Area. See section 4 for further error calculation details. To avoid artifacts due to stray light in the sub-bandgap region, an appropriate long pass filter was used (610 nm for C4N1, 750 nm for C4N2, 750 nm for C4N3 and 850 nm for MAPI), depending on the bandgap of the sample (C4N1: 2.4 eV, C4N2: 2.1 eV, C4N3: 2.0 eV and MAPI: 1.6 eV). For each sample, integrating the area under the curve of the sub-bandgap SPV spectrum was done between two limits that were set as follows: 1. The energy corresponding to the long pass filter is taken as the upper limit of the energy, and 2. The energy where the SPV signal drops so that the noise level starts to dominate is set as the lower limit of the energy. The energy error of the limits translates into an error for the integrated area; it is estimated from the equation , by considering the error in wavelength of the monochromator (dλ = 5 nm). To estimate the error in the SPV values, we found that the noise levels amounted to a maximum of 0.01% of the peak SPV signals. Using these values, the error in the integrated area is estimated to be, at the very most 4% for the results given in Table 1. Supporting Video 1 demonstrates the mechanical cleaving of a MAPI-HQ crystal, which leads to the exposure of mirror-like crystal faces of the two freshly exposed surfaces. 2. Supporting Video 2 demonstrates the mechanical cleaving of a MAPI-LQ crystal, which leads to multiple fragments of the crystal. *