Transient Photoluminescence Microscopy (TPLM) allows for the direct visualization of carrier transport in semiconductor materials with sub nanosecond and few nanometer resolution. The technique is based on measuring changes in the spatial distribution of a diffraction limited population of carriers using spatiotemporal detection of the radiative decay of the carriers. The spatial resolution of TPLM is therefore primarily determined by the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR). Here we present a method using cylindrical lenses to boost the signal acquisition in TPLM experiments. The resulting asymmetric magnification of the photoluminescence emission of the diffraction limited spot can increase the collection efficiency by more than a factor of 10, significantly reducing acquisition times and further boosting spatial resolution. Transient Photoluminescence Microscopy (TPLM) has emerged as a powerful technique to directly visualize the displacement of energy carriers in a variety of semiconductor materials, including organic semiconductors, Using this method, a movie-like representation of the time-dependent broadening of the carrier population is obtained. By determining the change in variance (σ 2 (t) -σ 2 (t = 0)) of the population for each time-slice, the mean-square-displacement (MSD) of the population can be extracted (MSD = σ 2 (t) -σ 2 (t = 0)). Importantly, the spatial precision with which the expansion can be determined is set by the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) and can be on the order of just 10 nm. Importantly, in many materials, carrier diffusion is isotropic along the different in-plane dimensions. In this case, a line-scan through the centre of the carrier population suffices to obtain the full carrier transport characteristics. The reduced scan area allows for a higher spatial precision within the same acquisition time. At the same time though, a large fraction of the signal is projected outside of the collection area of the line scan and is therefore lost. To further boost the acquisition efficiency of TPLM measurements in isotropic materials, we propose the use of cylindrical lenses to concentrate the majority of the PL signal onto the one-dimensional scan area. We show that this method dramatically improves the SNR for a given acquisition time. While this improvement is significant to all types of materials, it is largest for materials with a large diffusion length where carriers diffuse farther out from the original excitation spot. The use of cylindrical lenses provides a straightforward route toward improved spatial resolution in TPLM measurements. Our basic TPLM setup is based on the original reports by Akselrod et al. To capture signal from carriers moving orthogonally to the scan direction, we implement a detection scheme with cylindrical lenses. In this alternative geometry, we substitute the f = 400 mm spherical lens with a set of two perpendicularly oriented cylindrical lenses to collapse the x-axis of the image plane (see Figure The first cylindrical lens (LJ1363RM Thorlabs) has the identical focal length to the original spherical lens (f1 = 400 mm) and generates the high total magnification of 400 ́ along the scanning direction (y-axis in Figure , where f(x, y) is the carrier distribution and d is the projected and demagnified detector size in the x direction (e.g. for a 20 μm APD and a cylindrical setup with 20 ́ magnification: d = 20 μm / 20 = 1 μm). This integral represents the expected intensity distribution to be measured for a cylindrical lens setup, and hence h(y) has to be used to fit the experimental results. Interestingly, for a Gaussian exciton population, the integral is again Gaussian just like the simple cross section (h(y) ∝ f(x, y = const. )). However, this proportionality is specific to the Gaussian fit and does not hold for other types of fit functions to the distribution. A number of Transient Microscopy studies have shown that simple Gaussian functions often fail to capture the tails of the emission profile in thin films. Figure Importantly though, the error bars for the cylindrical lens setup are dramatically reduced as compared to the spherical lens, as expected from the improved signal collection (see Figure The ability to resolve the displacement of excitons is primarily determined by the SNR in the experiment. While excitons in (PEA)2PbI4 diffuse across several hundreds of nm during their lifetime, displacements in other systems are often much smaller. An example of such a system are colloidal quantum-dot thin films in which transport of excitons relies on Förster-mediated leading to a disordered energy landscape. We have demonstrated a simple method to improve the data acquisition efficiency in Transient Microscopy measurements for materials with isotropic diffusion in the x-y plane using cylindrical lenses. The intensity enhancement for the specific examples in this work is around 10-fold, reducing the needed acquisition time for measurements with equal SNR by the same amount. Importantly, further improvements in the intensity enhancement can be achieved using larger focal length ratios for the two cylindrical lenses, as well as using higher quality lenses. In the presented work, the combination of the two cylindrical lenses (f1 = 400 mm, f2 = 20 mm) were chosen for practical reasons to fit the existing path-length between microscope and detector. Naturally, if chosen freely, larger focal length ratios will yield larger compression along the x-axis and further improved intensity enhancement. Crucially though, the current setup employs a f2 = 20 mm focal length lens with a diameter of 25 mm as the short focal length cylindrical lens, resulting in a small f-number and relatively poor quality of the focus. This limitation is clear when comparing the theoretical demagnification (400 / 20 = 20) and the experimentally obtained demagnification of around 12. Larger f-numbers on both cylindrical lenses would further improve the experimental intensity enhancement and the improvement in the signal collection, although at the cost of a longer optical path of the total setup. Importantly, the intensity enhancement for the cylindrical lens setup also depends on the diffusion length of the carriers in the specific material under study. For materials with long diffusion lengths, larger enhancements can be obtained as the carriers diffuse farther away from the axis of measurement in the conventional spherical lens setup. To simulate the maximum enhancement for different time-integrated population distributions and different magnification ratios for a given detector size (here taken as 20 μm) is displayed in Figure Finally, it is worth mentioning that the use of cylindrical lenses can benefit to other Transient Microscopy techniques beyond TPLM, including for example Transient Absorption Microscopy or Transient Scattering Microscopy (i.e. stroboSCAT). CdSe/ZnS solutions of ~40 mg/mL Subsequently, the QD solutions are drop casted on the functionalized glass substrates. The materials were excited with a 405 nm laser (PicoQuant LDH-D-C-405, PDL 800-D), which was focused down to a near diffraction limited spot. The laser spot images were acquired using 