The capacity to manipulate magnetization in two-dimensional dilute magnetic semiconductors (2D-DMSs) using light, specifically in magnetically doped transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayers (M-doped TX2, where M = V, Fe, Cr; T = W, Mo; X = S, Se, Te), may lead to innovative applications in spintronics, spin-caloritronics, valleytronics, and quantum computation. This Perspective paper explores the mediation of magnetization by light under ambient conditions in 2D-TMD DMSs and heterostructures. By combining magneto-LC resonance (MLCR) experiments with density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we show that the magnetization can be enhanced using light in V-doped TMD monolayers (e.g., V-WS2, V-WSe2, V-MoS2). This phenomenon is attributed to excess holes in the conduction and valence bands, as well as carriers trapped in magnetic doping states, which together mediate the magnetization of the semiconducting layer. In 2D-TMD heterostructures such as VSe2/WS2 and VSe2/MoS2, we demonstrate the significance of proximity, charge-transfer, and confinement effects in amplifying light-mediated magnetism. This effect is attributed to photon absorption at the TMD layer (e.g., WS2, MoS2) that generates electron-hole pairs mediating the magnetization of the heterostructure. These findings will encourage further research in the field of 2D magnetism and establish a novel direction for designing 2D-TMDs and heterostructures with optically tunable magnetic functionalities, paving the way for next-generation magnetooptic nanodevices. Magnetic semiconductors present an exceptional platform for the development of a new generation of highly efficient spintronic devices, including spin field-effect (SFE) transistors However, miniaturization to the nanoscale might substantially impair their performance due to current leakage, rendering such devices inapplicable in ultrafast electronic nanodevices, particularly in supercomputers or future quantum computers Recent advances in the domain of 2D van der Waals (vdW) magnetic materials have yielded unprecedented opportunities for exploiting atomically thin magnets The true appeal of 2D-TMD DMSs for these applications stems from their magnetic tunability in response to external stimuli (electric gating, light, strain). Magnetic state tunability of a 2D-TMD can range from enhancing its magnetic moment, tuning its Curie temperature to inducing magnetism in non-magnetic materials through chemical doping In this Perspective article, we demonstrate how light modulates the magnetization in 2D-TMD DMSs (V-WS2, V-WSe2, V-MoS2) and associated heterostructures (VSe2/MoS2, VSe2/WS2), using an ultrasensitive magneto-LC resonance (MLCR) magnetometer. Supplemented by DFT calculations, these findings enable us to propose innovative design strategies for novel 2D-TMD DMSs and heterostructures with enhanced light-tunable magnetic functionalities suitable for modern nanodevice applications. Figure Introducing small amounts of magnetic atoms (e.g., V, Fe, Cr) into semiconducting TMD monolayers (e.g., WS2, WSe2, MoS2) creates a novel class of 2D dilute magnetic semiconductors (e.g., V-WS2, V-WSe2, V-MoS2). Approach 2: Interfacing 2D-TMD magnets (e.g., VSe2, VS2, MnSe2, CrSe2) with 2D-TMD semiconductors (e.g., WS2, WSe2, MoS2) create a novel class of magneto-optic 2D van der Waals heterostructures (e.g., VSe2/WS2, VS2/MoS2, MnSe2/WSe2, CrSe2/WSe2). The paper is structured as follows: we first introduce the MLCR magnetometry technique and then use this technique to demonstrate the light-mediated magnetism effects in the 2D-TMD DMSs and related heterostructures. We will also discuss emerging opportunities and challenges in the field of study. As ferromagnetic signals become exceedingly weak in atomically thinned magnetic systems, probing small changes in magnetization of the material subject to external stimuli, such as light, presents a considerable challenge To probe the light-induced magnetization of an atomically thin magnetic film, we have developed a novel magneto-LC resonance (MLCR) magnetometer with ultrahigh magnetic field sensitivity (pT regime) The operating principle of the magnetic microwire coil (MMC) can be described using lumped element circuit theory. A simple model for a coil sensor is a lumped element representation of a nonideal inductor. Winding cylindrical conductors close to each other introduces parasitic elements R par and C par , such that the non-ideal inductor can be represented as a series combination of an ideal inductor L and R par , in parallel with C par . The impedance of the coil Z coil can then be written as where Z coil is the impedance of the coil, ω is the angular frequency, and j is the imaginary unit. Resonance occurs when the inductive reactance (X L ) and the capacitive reactance (X C ) have equal magnitudes but differ in phase by 180 degrees. In this case, minimal current flows through the wire, the impedance of the coil becomes very large, and self-resonance is achieved. This resonance frequency is given by: The reactance of the coil is of particular interest to utilize the coil for detecting changes in the magnetic permeability within its core. The impedance of the coil has the general form: Therefore, we can extract the reactance from the imaginary component of Eq. ( To measure the magnetic permeability or magnetization of a magnetic thin film, such as a 2D-TMD DMS, subjected to an external stimulus such as light, the magnetic film is positioned within the core of the coil, and the reactance of the coil is measured during light irradiation. According to Eq. ( Since the film is ferromagnetic, it will alter the relative permeability of the space within the coil, thereby changing the magnetic flux through the coil and consequently the reactance of the coil. As the microwire itself is ferromagnetic, the magnetization of the film will also lead to a change in the effective permeability of the microwire. Thus, the reactance of the sensor depends on this effective permeability, X = X(μ eff ). Changes in the permeability of the film upon light illumination (i.e., the presence of additional holes mediating the magnetism in 2D-TMDs) will influence the effective permeability of the coil, which can be accessed through the change in its reactance: X = X(μ eff , laser on) -X(μ eff , laser off). This change in reactance (X) is proportional to the change in magnetization M of the film upon light illumination, as illustrated in Fig. Among 2D vdW materials, 2D-TMDs are a fertile ground for novel quantum phenomena including nontrivial electronic topology, non-saturating giant magnetoresistance, and topological field-effect transistors By varying V-doping concentrations, we have demonstrated an enhanced magnetization and achieved the highest doping levels ever attained for atomically thin vanadium doped TMDs (~2 at.% for V-doped WS2 monolayers Duong et al. studied the effect of electric gating on the magnetization of V-doped WSe2 monolayers and found that hole injection enhances the magnetization, while electron injection significantly decreases it The combination of magnetic and semiconducting properties in 2D-TMD DMSs has indeed enabled light modulation and tunability of magnetization, as demonstrated for V-WS2 and V-WSe2 monolayers (Fig. Although the V-WS2 and V-WSe2 systems share a similar light-mediated magnetization effect (Fig. These findings suggest that the light-mediated magnetism effect is universal to the class of 2D-TMD DMS and should be fully exploited for applications in opto-spintronics, opto-spincaloritronics, spin-valleytronics, and quantum communications. Typical vdW TMD monolayers offer extensive flexibility and integration with one another Recent studies have demonstrated that the magnetic or magneto-optical properties of a non-magnetic TMD (e.g., WS2, MoS2) can be induced or enhanced by stacking it with another magnetic TMD (VS2, VSe2, CrSe2, MnSe2) As demonstrated above for V-WS2 and V-WSe2 monolayers, the magnetic and semiconducting properties coexist, giving rise to their magneto-optical properties and granting access to the rich electronic properties of 2D semiconductors, enabling the light tunability of magnetization. These findings suggest a similar phenomenon in VSe2/WS2 and VSe2/MoS2 heterostructures. An intriguing feature of the VSe2/WS2 or VSe2/MoS2 heterostructure is the presence of strong interfacial magnetic coupling and the potential for charge transfer between the two layers, which may play a key role in mediating the magnetization of the film. Bilayer MoS2 shows a strong photon absorption peak around 600-700 nm, and by illuminating the VSe2/MoS2 film with energy close to the peak, we expect considerable photogeneration of electron-hole pairs. These pairs may be separated through the electric field at the heterointerface, which leads to the observed light-tunable magnetism in the film. respectively. Representative results of the VSe2/WS2 and VSe2/MoS2 samples are displayed in Fig. It is noteworthy to observe that both the 1L-VSe2/1L-WS2 and 1L-VSe2/2L-MoS2 samples exhibit a pronounced ferromagnetic signal at room temperature (Fig. Comparison of the light-mediated magnetization results of 1L-VSe2/2L/MoS2 and 1L-VSe2/BSC MoS2 (BSC: Bulk single crystal) samples has shown that the change in magnetization in 1L-VSe2/2L-MoS2 is approximately 4 times greater than that of 1L-VSe2/BSC-MoS2 (Fig. To elucidate the mechanism of light-enhanced magnetism in the 1L-VSe2/2L-MoS2 system, we conducted first-principles defect calculations [114] based on the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE) hybrid functional (with the mixing parameter set to 0.15) [115] as implemented in VASP [116] and with the van de Waals correction [117] and finite-supercell size effects [118] included. The calculations suggest that this enhancement can be tentatively attributed to the presence of sulfur vacancies (VS) in 2L-MoS2 (Fig. Our findings have established that the light-modulated magnetism effect is universal to 2D-TMD DMSs, including V-doped TMD monolayers (V-WS2, V-WSe2, and V-MoS2). In addition to their electrically tunable magnetic functionalities, the optically tunable atomic-level magnetism at room temperature makes 2D-TMD DMSs even more attractive for applications in spintronics, spin-caloritronics, and valleytronics. It is worth noting that both electrons and holes are populated in lightilluminated MLCR experiments, while the DFT simulations consider the separated effect for each type of carrier. The coexistence of magnetic and semiconducting properties is necessary; therefore, higher doping concentrations are unlikely to exhibit this effect, as their semiconducting qualities are strongly suppressed. On the other hand, lower V-doping concentrations are interesting to study, since excellent semiconducting properties are preserved while the magnetic moment is slightly smaller compared to optimally V-doped TMD samples. Investigating the influence of different V doping concentrations on 2D-TMDs' light-mediated magnetism effect is an intriguing direction for future research. Further studies are necessary to understand the relationship between doping concentration and light-enhanced magnetism. In addition, we have demonstrated the universality of the light-mediated magnetism effect in 2D-TMD ferromagnet/semiconductor heterostructures, including VSe2/WS2 and VSe2/MoS2 systems. Charge transfer, proximity, and confinement effects play a crucial role in enhancing light-mediated magnetization in these 2D systems. However, other effects such as interdiffusion, intercalation, twisting, and moiré patterns, which could occur during heterostructure formation remain largely unexplored From an application perspective, the optically tunable magnetic properties of 2D-TMD DMSs and heterostructures are desirable for opto-spintronics, opto-spin-caloritronics, and valleytronics. Ghiasi et al. demonstrated charge-to-spin conversion across a monolayer WS2/graphene interface due to the Rashba-Edelstein effect (REE) highlighted the novel application perspectives of opto-spintronics Thermally induced spin currents based on the spin Seebeck effect (SSE), a phenomenon discovered by Recently, Kalappattil et al. showed that inserting a thin (~5 nm) organic semiconducting layer of C60 can significantly reduce the conductivity mismatch between YIG and Pt and the surface perpendicular magnetic anisotropy of YIG, resulting in a giant enhancement (600%) in the longitudinal SSE We have established the universality of the light-modulated magnetization effect in 2D-TMD DMSs, including V-doped TMD monolayers (V-WS2, V-WSe2, V-MoS2). This effect is attributed to the presence of excess holes in the conduction and valence bands, as well as carriers trapped in the magnetic doping states, which mediate the magnetization of the TMD layer. Additionally, we have demonstrated the universality of the light-mediated magnetism effect in 2D-TMD ferromagnet/semiconductor heterostructures such as VSe2/WS2 and VSe2/MoS2. This effect is attributed to photon absorption at the TMD layer (e.g., WS2, WSe2, MoS2), generating electron-hole pairs that mediate the magnetization of the heterostructure. These findings pave a new pathway for the design of novel 2D-TMD van der Waals heterostructures that exhibit unique magneto-optical coupling functionalities that enable the next generation of high-performance optoelectronics, ultrafast opto-spintronics, opto-spin-caloritronics, valleytronics, and quantum technologies. We have demonstrated the importance of proximity, charge-transfer, and confinement effects in enhancing light-mediated magnetization in 2D-TMD heterostructures, but other effects such as interdiffusion, intercalation, twisting, and moiré patterns may also be significant Additionally, 2D-TMD DMSs can serve as novel 2D spin filters to boost the spin-to-charge conversion efficiency via the SSE in FM/2D-DMS/HM systems Compared to their 2D-TMD counterparts, 2D-TMD DMSs appear more promising for use in valleytronic devices To provide insightful guidance on the development of 2D-TMD-based devices, we present in Table As noted earlier, the high concentrations of magnetic dopants or the presence of abundant defects (transition metal/chalcogen vacancies) in 2D-TMD semiconductors lead to the strong suppression of photoluminescence V-WS2 (1L) optimal ~2 at.% ~300 -400 K Unexplored optical control of valleytronic states; Less sensitive to air. [52] V-WSe2 (1L) optimal ~4 at.% ~300 -400 K Unexplored optical control of valleytronic states; Less sensitive to air. [53] V-MoSe2 (1L) optimal ~2 at.% ~300 -400 K Unexplored optical control of magnetism and valleytronic states; Less sensitive to air. [63] V-MoS2 (1L) ~300 -400 K Unexplored optical control of magnetism and valleytronic states; Less sensitive to air. [70] Fe-MoS2 (1L) ~300 -400 K Unexplored optical control of magnetism and valleytronic states; Less sensitive to air. [58] (Co,Cr)-MoS2 (1L) ~300 K Unexplored optical control of magnetism and valleytronic states; Air stability. [71] Co-SnS2 (SC) ~120 K Unexplored optical control of magnetism and valleytronic states; Air stability. [138] Fe-SnS2 (1L) ~30 K Unexplored optical control of magnetism and valleytronic states; Air stability. [139] Mn-SnS2 (SC) ~150 K Unexplored optical control of magnetism and valleytronic states; Air stability. [137]