We model near-field thermal emission from metasurfaces structured as two-dimensional arrays of ellipsoidal SiC particles. The modeling approach is developed from fluctuational electrodynamics and is applicable to systems of ellipsoidal particles within the dipole limit. In all simulations, the radial lengths of particles are restricted to the range of 10 to 100 nm, and interparticle spacing is constrained to at least three times the particle characteristic length. The orientation and dimensions of constituent ellipsoidal particles are varied to tune localized surface phonon resonances and control the near-field energy density above metasurfaces. Results show that particle orientation can be used to regulate the relative magnitude of resonances in the energy density and particle dimensions may be changed to adjust the frequency of these resonances within the Reststrahlen band. Metasurfaces constructed from particles with randomized dimensions display comparatively broadband thermal emission rather than the three distinct resonances seen in metasurfaces made with ellipsoidal particles of equivalent dimensions. When the interparticle spacing in a metasurface exceeds about three times the particle characteristic length, the spectral energy density above the metasurface is dominated by individual particle self-interaction and can be approximated as a linear combination of single-particle spectra. When interparticle spacing is at the lower limit of three times the characteristic length, however, multiparticle interaction effects increase, and the spectral energy density above a metasurface deviates from that of single particles. This work provides guidance for designing all-dielectric, particle-based metasurfaces with desired near-field thermal emission spectra, such as thermal switches. Metamaterials are engineered materials composed of structures much smaller than the operational electromagnetic wavelength and display properties unique from those of their constituent materials For full characterization and informed design of metamaterials across length scales, it is important to resolve thermal radiation in the near field One metamaterial structure that has shown promising thermal behavior is the particle-based structure To handle the scale of particle-based metamaterials, near-field thermal radiation models must support large numbers of particles. Since fluctuational electrodynamics models of near-field thermal radiation are often computationally intractable for metamaterials made of many unique, complex-shaped particles, simplified dipole approximations have been developed to reduce computational costs in particle-based designs In this article, we address this knowledge gap by presenting a model of near-field thermal emission above dielectric-based metasurfaces constructed of ellipsoidal particles. By focusing on ellipsoidal particles, we can control the geometry of particles along three separate axes, thereby broadening the scope of what types of particles may be modeled, from needle-like structures to asymmetric flat disks and beyond. Here, metasurfaces are composed of a single layer of ellipsoidal SiC particles with particle radii between 10 and 100 nm. Interparticle spacing is at least three times the particle characteristic length, a regime in which the accuracy of dipole approximations is deemed acceptable We implement an extension of the many-body theory of near-field radiative heat transfer In this work, the semiaxes are defined as a < b < c. For a system of thermal objects in a nonabsorbing background reference medium, the thermally generated electric field at location r is defined as where i = √-1, ω is the angular frequency, μ * is the vacuum permeability, G C (r, r + , ω) is the system Green's function, J (-.) (r + , ω) is the equivalent electric current density, and integration is taken over the three-dimensional space V occupied by all thermal objects and the background reference medium. The equivalent electric current density is defined as where V 5"-26 is the volume occupied by the thermal objects, and V 2-3 is the domain occupied by the nonabsorbing background reference medium characterized by a purely real dielectric function ε 2-3 (ω). The fluctuating source current density J (34) (r′, ω) arises from the thermal excitation of microcharges and is defined in terms of its autocorrelation function via the fluctuation-dissipation theorem as where † specifies the conjugate transpose, ε * is the vacuum permittivity, and δ is the Dirac delta function. The mean energy of an electromagnetic state at temperature T and frequency ω is given by Θ , where ħ is the reduced Planck constant and k 9 is the Boltzmann constant. The system Green's function G C (r, r + , ω) in Eq. ( where r = |r -r + |, r e = Dr7r . F |r7r . | , and k 2-3 = ω`ε 2-3 (ω)ε * μ * . When r + = r, the analytical expression for the free-space dyadic Green's function has a singularity and must be solved using principal value techniques Near-field thermal emission from metasurfaces is characterized by the spectral energy density at an observation point above the metasurface. The spectral energy density above a metasurface at location r within the background reference medium is defined as where ⋅ represents the dot product, the superscript * is the complex conjugate, and μ 2-3 is the relative permeability of the background reference medium. In this paper, we focus on modeling SiC, a material for which the magnetic contribution to the energy density is negligible in the dipole limit Substituting in the expression for the electric field given by Eq. ( For a single dipole or a metasurface constructed of N thermal objects modeled as dipoles, Eq. ( takes the discrete form u(r, ω) = where ΔV L is the volume of the jth dipole. Here, G C ur, r L , ωv is the system Green's function relating the location r at which energy density is calculated with the center-of-mass location r L of the jth dipole. This system Green's function G C ur, r L , ωv is the main defining parameter of near-field thermal emission from a system of dipoles and is found by discretizing Eq. ( The discretized free-space Green's function G C * ur, r L , ωv found in both terms on the right-hand side of Eq. ( ] ur e rL r e rL C vz, . Eq. ( The discrete system Green's function G C ur ? , r L , ωv given in the second term on the righthand side of Eq. ( The dyad L ̅ ̅ = • L 8 0 0 0 L : 0 0 0 L 1 † accounts for the depolarization of ellipsoidal dipoles and has components These geometrical factors L 8 , L : , and L 1 are used in calculating the polarizability tensor of ellipsoidal dipoles in standard light-scattering theory System description. We model the near-field spectral energy density above single ellipsoidal particles and above metasurfaces formed from a 25-by-25 array of ellipsoidal particles. Energy density is calculated at a distance d UVW along the vertical z-axis from the center of mass of single-particle systems and above the center of mass of the central particle in metasurfaces (see Fig. All particles are made of SiC, supporting LSPhs in the infrared spectral band. The particles are embedded in a nonabsorbing medium with dielectric function ε 2-3 = 3. The value of ε 2-3 = 3 was used because it leads to increased near-field thermal energy density from SiC particles as compared with SiC particles embedded in vacuum Each particle in a system is set to room temperature (T = 300 K) and is of volume ΔV L = (4 3 ⁄ )πR -. 1 , where R -. = 35 nm is the radius of a sphere of equivalent volume. All particles are restricted to radial values 10 nm ≤ {a, b, c} ≤ 100 nm. This range was chosen because the weak form of the free-space Green's function given in Eq. ( To act as a reference for subsequent metasurface calculations, we first model the energy density above single ellipsoidal particles of variable dimensions. Sphericity Ψ is used to quantify the dimensions of an ellipsoid by a single representative value. Sphericity is defined as the ratio of the surface area of the ellipsoidal particle A -44X<WUXY to the surface area of a sphere of equivalent volume A W<"-2-, For a given sphericity value, there are 3! = 6 possible ellipsoid realizations that arise from permutation of the three distinct ellipsoid semiaxes a, b, and c. For these single-particle simulations, we calculate the spectral energy density at a distance d UVW = 2L !" above the center of mass of each ellipsoidal particle. Five different sphericity values are considered for ellipsoidal particles, Ψ = 0.54083, 0.69050, 0.83094, 0.91693, 0.98926 (Fig. For the six geometric permutations of particles at a given sphericity value, there are only three unique spectra of energy density at the chosen observation point (Fig. where L = refers to the geometrical factors given in Eqs. ( In these single-particle systems, the range over which the LSPh resonances occur tends to shrink as particle sphericity increases, eventually becoming a single resonance for spherical particles (see Supporting Information, Sec. S3, Fig. Next, we model six different metasurfaces with constituent particles of variable sphericity and compare the resulting spectra to that of single-particle systems. All particles within a given metasurface are of the same dimensions and orientation, and particle sphericity is chosen to be consistent with that modeled in the single-particle systems of the previous section (i.e., Ψ = 0.54083, 0.69050, 0.83094, 0.91693, 0.98926, 1). While we present results for observation points at d UVW = 2L !" , similar spectral behavior is seen for farther observation points tested at d UVW = 7L !" (not shown). The spectral behavior of thermal emission from metasurfaces with close interparticle spacing (i.e., d = 3L !" , see Fig. u " <a25X!4-(r, ω)] ≲ 21% over the Reststrahlen band for all metasurfaces modeled). These trends have been observed for arrays of spherical dipoles Next, we model metasurfaces for which the constituent ellipsoidal particles are all rotated by the same angle θ & around the y-axis in the local coordinate system of every particle (Fig. All local coordinate systems are parallel to the global Cartesian coordinate system. In the metasurface modeled, the constituent ellipsoidal particles are all the same dimensions (i.e., a = 10.06 nm, b = 56.62 nm, c = 75.24 nm, Ψ = 0.54083), and interparticle spacing is d = 3L !" . Energy density is calculated at a distance d UVW = 2L !" above the center of mass of the central particle. The spectral profile at the observation point d UVW = 2L !" is consistent with the spectra at farther separation distances (e.g., d UVW = 7L !" , not shown), with only differences in magnitude. Rotation of all particles in the array results in damping of the low-frequency resonance at The total, spectrally integrated energy density at θ & = 0 rad is almost double that at θ & = π/2 rad/s (see Supporting Information, Sec. S7). As such, metasurfaces like this one with dynamic control of the orientation of constituent particles could be implemented as thermal switches. Metasurfaces with randomized constituent particles. Next, we introduce randomization into metasurfaces. Randomization is incorporated in three different ways: (1) random particle dimensions, (2) random particle orientation, and (3) both random particle dimensions and random particle orientation. In all systems, particle semiaxes are constrained as 10 nm ≤ {a, b, c} ≤ 100 nm with a < b < c, and the particle characteristic length is defined as the maximum radial dimension over all particles in the metasurface: Metasurfaces with interparticle spacing of d = 3L !" (Fig. (Supporting Information, Sec. S8) are modeled. The spectral energy density is calculated at six different distances above the central particle in each metasurface, from d UVW = 2L !" to 7L !" . In the random particle dimensions metasurfaces (Figs. to thermal emission as the same solid angle from the observation point encompasses a larger number of particles. This same logic may be applied in interpreting the spectral energy density above the metasurface with interparticle spacing d = 6L !" . This implies that it is critical to control particle dimensions to obtain narrowband thermal emission from metasurfaces made of dielectric particles. In all of these cases, the spectral energy density may be approximated as the summation of all single-particle spectra weighted by the distance from the individual particle to the observation point. This approximation will begin to deviate from actual thermal emission spectra when interparticle spacing is small enough that multiparticle interactions become important. Next, we model a metasurface composed of randomly orientated particles of low-sphericity ellipsoids (i.e., Ψ = 0.54083) and random rotation angles θ $ , θ & , and θ ( for each particle (Fig. interaction effects are inferred to be less significant. These results imply that tunable, narrowband thermal emission can be achieved from metasurfaces made of dielectric particles dominated by individual particle self-interaction effects if the dimensions of constituent particles are wellcontrolled, irrespective of particle alignment. Finally, we model a metasurface composed of particles with random dimensions and random orientations (Fig. We have presented an exact method for calculating near-field energy density from metasurfaces composed of ellipsoidal particles in the dipole limit. This method is derived using a variation of the discrete system Green's function method and can be applied to resolve unique trends in the spectral energy density at arbitrary observation points above particle-based metasurfaces. We applied this method to model a variety of metasurfaces composed of SiC ellipsoidal particles of variable dimensions and orientation. The main finding of this work is that the geometric parameters of constituent particles can be used to control the frequency and bandwidth of LSPh resonances, thereby providing tunability of the spectral energy density from dielectric particle-based metasurfaces. Metasurfaces with interparticle spacing larger than a few times the characteristic length of the constituent particles are dominated by individual particle selfinteraction. As such, the spectral thermal emission of these metasurfaces may be approximated as a linear combination of individual-particle spectra. For metasurfaces with interparticle spacing below this limit, multiparticle interactions come into play, and full-system models are required to accurately resolve the spectral energy density. These results are important for characterizing dielectric particle-based metasurfaces that are constructed of particles defined by distributions of geometric parameters rather than exact values. The Supporting Information is available free of charge at [URL to be included by the publisher]. The total (i.e., spectrally integrated) energy density above single particles at an observation point d ,-. = 2L !" is presented in Fig. 