Bringing magnetic metals into superconducting states represents an important approach for realizing unconventional superconductors and potentially even topological superconductors. Altermagnetism, classified as a third basic collinear magnetic phase, gives rise to intriguing momentum-dependent spin-splitting of the band structure, and results in an even number of spin-polarized Fermi surfaces due to the symmetry-enforced zero net magnetization. In this work, we investigate the effect of this new magnetic order on the superconductivity of a two-dimensional metal with d-wave altermagnetism and Rashba spin-orbital coupling. Specifically we consider an extended attractive Hubbard interaction, and determine the types of superconducting pairing that can occur in this system and ascertain whether they possess topological properties. Through self-consistent mean-field calculations, we find that the system in general favors a mixture of spin-singlet s-wave and spin-triplet p-wave pairings, and that the altermagnetism is beneficial to the latter. Using symmetry arguments supported by detailed calculations, we show that a number of topological superconductors, including both first-order and second-order ones, can emerge when the p-wave pairing dominates. In particular, we find that the second-order topological superconductor is enforced by a C4zT symmetry, which renders the spin polarization of Majorana corner modes into a unique entangled structure. Our study demonstrates that altermagnetic metals are fascinating platforms for the exploration of intrinsic unconventional superconductivity and topological superconductivity. Magnetism and superconductivity are two fundamental phenomena in nature, whose interplay in materials is one of the central topics in condensed matter physics In this work, we address these questions in the context of two-dimensional (2D) metals with d-wave AM We consider a 2D metal with d-wave AM described by the Hamiltonian Ĥ0 = kσ h σσ ′ (k)c † kσ c kσ ′ . Expressed in terms of the Pauli matrices σ x,y,z and the identity matrix σ 0 , h σσ ′ (k) is given by (lattice constant is set to unity throughout) 32 where the t AM term and the λ term describe the exchange field associated with AM and the RSOC respectively. We note that the momentum dependence of the AM exchange field resembles that of the d-wave pairing in high-T c superconductors Another interesting fact about the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The pairing mechanism in a magnetic metal is known to be non-unique where n iσ is the density operator for electrons of spin σ on site i, and V s and V p are respectively the strengths of the onsite and nearest-neighbor attraction. Equation ( Following the standard BCS theory, we define the gap function as where N L is the number of lattice sites and V σσ ′ (q) = -(1-δ σ,σ ′ )V s -δ σ,σ ′ 2V p (cos q x +cos q y ) is the interaction in Fourier space. The pair correlation can be calculated in terms of the Bogoliubov amplitudes as These amplitudes are determined by the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equation , where E k,l with l = {1, 2} refer to the two positive eigenenergies, ] T are the corresponding eigenstates, and (5) Here Λ(k) = 2λ(sin k y + i sin k x ) and ξ ks = -2(tst AM ) cos k x -2(t + st AM ) cos k y -μ where s = 1 (-1) for spin up (down). To determine possible pairing channels, one may expand both V σσ ′ (k -k ′ ) and Ξ σσ ′ (k) in terms of the so-called square lattice harmonics g η (k) (see Appendix B), i.e., where γ η σσ ′ is the strength of the pairing interaction in the η-channel. For the attractive interaction given in Eq.( ; and (ii) mixture of s-wave and helical p-wave pairing for which ↑↑ g p+ (k). We note that for the chiral p-wave pairing, another degenerate solution exists corresponding to The fact that the solutions are exclusively mixed parity is a natural consequence of the lack of inversion symmetry in the system Both types of the pairing solutions are found in the same parameter space and so we need to compare their corresponding condensation energies to determine the pairing ground state. The resulting pairing phase diagram takes the generic structure shown in Fig. The two phases in Fig. Based on the pairing phase diagram and the BdG Hamiltonian ( We focus on the chiral p-wave pairing for the moment and move into regions of finite λ in the phase diagram, where the pairings are now mixed with an s-wave component. In this case, whether such a mixed-parity superconducting phase supports a chiral TSC hinges on the relative weight between the two pairing components. When the s-wave component dominates, the superconducting phase is topologically trivial since it is adiabatically connected to the pure s-wave limit with C 4z T symmetry as long as the bulk gap remains open. Similarly, when the chiral p-wave pairing dominates, the superconducting phase is adiabatically connected to the pure chiral p-wave limit and retains the topological properties of that limit. A calculation of the energy spectrum of a cylindrical sample shows the existence of two chiral Majorana modes on an open edge, also confirming the realization of a chiral TSC with C = -2 when the chiral p-wave pairing dominates, as shown in Fig. The arising of a second-order TSC in the region with dominant helical p-wave pairing can also be understood via adiabatic and symmetry arguments. As mentioned above the helical Majorana modes in the λ = 0 limit are protected by the mirror symmetry M z or subsystem chiral symmetries (see Appendix C). However, all these symmetry protections are removed once λ becomes finite, giving rise to a Dirac mass on the boundary to gap out the helical Majorana modes. On the other hand, the C 4z T symmetry is retained in this mixed parity superconductor, which forces the Dirac masses on two nearby C 4z -related edges to be opposite, and hence leads to the emergence of Majorana corner modes according to the Jackiw-Rebbi theory In experiments, such entangled structures of spin polarization can be detected by spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopes as a defining signature of this second-order TSC We have investigated the basic question of what kind of superconductivity and TSCs may emerge in 2D AM metals. A set of important symmetries relevant to the 2D AM metal with RSOC are unveiled, which place various constraints on the band structure, spin textures, and the pairing types for the realization of TSCs. Guided by the symmetry analysis, we have shown that the AM metal favors mixed parity pairings, and a multitude of TSCs, including both first-order and second-order TSCs, can emerge when the spin-triplet p-wave pairings dominate. We have also shown that the spin polarizations of Majorana corner modes on a square lattice take intriguing structures as the second-order TSC is enforced by the C 4z T symmetry. All these findings prove that AM metals have unique band structures and can give birth to unconventional pairings and TSCs with fascinating properties. Appendix A: Chern metals driven by an out-of-plane magnetic field By applying an out-of-plane magnetic field and only taking into account the resulting Zeeman-splitting effect, the Hamiltonian becomes where the last term, B z σ z , denotes the Zeeman field. It is readily checked that the Zeeman field preserves the C 4z rotational symmetry but breaks the time-reversal symmetry, thereby breaking the combined C 4z T symmetry. As a result, a nonzero Chern number becomes allowed. For the two-band Hamiltonian, the Berry curvature can be simply determined by the following formula 76 where ± refer to the upper and lower band respectively, In the limit of B z = 0, the Berry curvature has the property , also implying that the Chern number, which is the integral of the Berry curvature over the Brillouin zone, identically vanishes. For a finite B z , a calculation of the Chern number yields This result shows that an arbitrarily small out-of-plane magnetic field will open a gap to the spectrum, and renders a nonzero Chern number to the bands. In addition, it is easy to see from Eq.(A4) that a reversal of the magnetic field's direction will reverse the Chern number of the two bands, indicating that the Hamiltonian (1) describes a critical metallic phase. In this part, we provide more details on the determination of the pairing phase diagram. We consider density-density interactions between electrons and assume the existence of discrete translational symmetry. Accordingly, the interaction takes the generic form where R i is the lattice site, N L is the total number of sites, and For the last equation, we have used the property Following the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, the pairing interaction is simplified as where the gap function is defined as Fermi statistics and the fact that V σσ ′ (q) = V σ ′ σ (-q) lead to the following property of the gap function, To determine possible pairing channels, one may expand V σσ ′ (k -k ′ ) in terms of the so-called square lattice harmonics g η (k) where γ η σσ ′ is the strength of the pairing interaction in the η-channel. Examples of the harmonics include the s-wave g s (k) = 1, the extended s-wave g es (k) = cos k x + cos k y , the p-waves g p± (k) = sin k x ± i sin k y and the d-wave g d (k) = cos k x -cos k y . The gap function can similarly be written as Substituting Eq. (B8) into Eq. (B5), we obtain the amplitudes of each pairing channel as Introducing the Nambu basis Ψ k = (c k↑ , c k↓ , c † -k↑ , c † -k↓ ) T , the BCS Hamiltonian can be written as with where (B12) The above Hamiltonian can be diagonalized by the following Bogoliubov transformation where u σ,l , v σ,l with l = {1, 2} are the Bogoliubov amplitudes and b k,l refer to the two quasiparticle operators. The Bogoliubov amplitudes are obtained from the eigenvalue equation where E k,l refer to the two positive eigenenergies, and T are the corresponding eigenstates. Using Eq. (B13), the gap equation (B9) can be written as Once the gap functions are obtained, the free energy of the superconductor at zero temperature can be calculated as The condensation energy is where F N is the free energy of the normal state where the energy spectra ε Now we turn to our specific short-range interaction (an extended attractive Hubbard interaction) for which In terms of g η (k), one finds It is worth mentioning that, in the above decomposition, V ↑↑ and V ↓↓ not only contain p-wave harmonic components, but also contain extended s-wave and d-wave harmonic components. However, because this attractive interaction occurs between electrons with the same spin, it can not result in extended s-wave pairing or d-wave pairing due to the Fermi statistics. As extended s-wave and d-wave pairings are spin singlet, their formation requires an attractive interaction between two electrons possessing opposite spins and located at two nearest-neighbor sites, i.e., -V sd ⟨ij⟩ n i↑ n j↓ . To have pairings with even higher angular momentum, such as an f -wave spin-triplet pairing, one needs to further consider longer-range attractive interactions, such as the next-nearestneighbor attractive interaction. In this work, to have a neat understanding of the pairing phase diagram and the potential topological superconducting phases, we will focus on the simple interaction given in Eq.(B19). Accordingly, only onsite s-wave pairing and p-wave pairing will show up. Despite focusing on this simple interaction, we would like to emphasize that it is sufficient to capture all key physics, including the competition of even-parity and odd-parity pairings in an inversion-asymmetric system, and all possible topological superconducting phases at a qualitative level. In the following, we explain how we determine the superconducting ground state and the pairing phase diagram. As a result of the pairing interaction and the symmetry property of the gap function in Eq. (B6), we have The general forms of Ξ ↑↑ (k) and Ξ ↓↓ (k) do not necessarily preserve the lattice symmetry. The two types of solutions that do are: (i) chiral p-wave with . It is noteworthy that for the chiral p-wave pairing, the two situations, (Ξ ↑↑ , Ξ ↓↓ ) = (∆ p+ ↑↑ g p+ , ∆ p+ ↓↓ g p+ ) and (Ξ ↑↑ , Ξ ↓↓ ) = (∆ p- ↑↑ g p-, ∆ p- ↓↓ g p-), lead to the same condensation energy and similar topological property for the superconducting phase (only the sign of the Chern number will be different since the pairings for the two cases carry opposite angular momentum). For this reason we only discuss the case of (Ξ ↑↑ , Ξ ↓↓ ) = (∆ p+ ↑↑ g p+ , ∆ p+ ↓↓ g p+ ). For the helical p-wave pairing, similarly, the two situations, , lead to the same condensation energy and similar topological property for the superconducting phase, so we also only need to focus on one of the cases. Below, we focus on the case (Ξ ↑↑ , Ξ ↓↓ ) = (∆ p+ ↑↑ g p+ , ∆ p- ↓↓ g p-). When both chiral p-wave pairing and helical p-wave pairing are solutions in the same parameter region, we need to compare their corresponding condensation energies in order to determine the ground state. When the Rashba spin-orbit coupling is absent, we find that the pairing has definitive parity, i.e., either even-parity or oddparity. Whether the ground state favors the even-parity spinsinglet s-wave pairing or the odd-parity spin-triplet p-wave pairing naturally depends on the relative strength of V s and V p . It turns out that helical p-wave and chiral p-wave pairings are degenerate in ground-state energy in the limit λ = 0. If both t AM and the spin-orbit coupling constant λ are finite, we find that the general solution is a coexistence of s-wave and p-wave pairings (either chiral or helical); in other words pure s-wave or pure p-wave pairings are absent when the Rashba spin-orbit coupling enters. In Fig. The phase diagram in the main text is obtained by first comparing the condensation energies of the s+ chiral p-wave and the s+ helical p-wave pairing solutions. Shown in Fig. Appendix C: Topological properties of the superconducting phase with mixed s + helical p-wave pairing When the pairing is a mixture of s-wave pairing and helical p-wave pairing, the BdG Hamiltonian is given by where ∆ p+ ↑↑ = -∆ p- ↓↓ = ∆ p is set for notational simplicity. In this section, we give a detailed discussion about the symmetry protection of the topological superconducting phase in the λ = 0 limit. When λ = 0, our numerical calculations in fact show that the pairing has fixed parity for the investigated parameter region. Here for a generic discussion of the symmetry protection of the band topology we ignore this parity constraint and still assume that the s-wave and helical p-wave pairings can coexist even in the λ = 0 limit. We first consider the ∆ s ↑↓ = 0 limit. For this case, the BdG Hamiltonian (C1) reduces to This reduced Hamiltonian has mirror symmetry M z , i.e., M z H p (k)M -1 z = H p (k) with M z = iτ 0 σ z . According to the two possible eigenvalues of M z , i.e., ±i, the Hamiltonian can be decomposed as Each sector is a chiral p-wave superconductor and is accordingly characterized by a Chern number. The Chern numbers characterizing the two mirror-graded Hamiltonians are simply given by 76 where d ±i = |d ±i | denotes the norm of the d ±i vector. Without loss of generality, we take t > t AM > 0. Then a straightforward calculation yields The result suggests that the total Chern number, which is given by the sum of the two mirror-graded Chern numbers, is always zero. We have previously explained that this is a natural result due to the constraint from the C 4z T symmetry. Although the total Chern number is zero, the mirror Chern number, which is defined as Since the s-wave pairing term anticommutes with the mirror symmetry operator, i.e., {∆ s ↑↓ τ y σ y , iτ 0 σ z } = 0, the mirror symmetry is broken. Without the protection of mirror symmetry, the helical Majorana edge modes are expected to be gapped due to potential hybridization. However, we find that the helical Majorana edge modes remain robust, suggesting that there exists some additional symmetry protection. This can be seen as follows. From the view point of dimensional reduction, we may view the momentum for the direction with periodic boundary conditions as a tuning parameter. Then the spectrum crossing of the helical Majorana edge modes suggests that the one-dimensional Hamiltonian is a topological superconductor with two Majorana zero modes at each boundary. To be more specific, let us take k x as a tuning parameter. We can then view the two-dimensional Hamiltonian as a one-dimensional parameter-dependent Hamiltonian H kx (k y ). Now only the argument k y in the bracket has the meaning as a momentum. For this parameter-dependent Hamiltonian H kx (k y ), one finds that the Hamiltonian has an emergent chiral symmetry at k x = 0 and k x = π, i.e., {C, H kx (k y )} = 0. The explicit form of the chiral symmetry operator is C = τ x σ 0 . The existence of chiral symmetry suggests that a winding number can be assigned to characterize the band topology of H 0 (k y ) and H π (k y ) 84 . To determine the winding number, the first step is to rewrite the Hamiltonian by changing the original basis to a new one in which the chiral symmetry operator takes a diagonal form, i.e., C = τ z σ 0 . Apparently, this can be realized by a unitary operation of the form U = e iπτyσ0/4 , i.e., U CU -1 = C. In the new basis, the form of the Hamiltonian becomes off-diagonal. Let us take H 0 (k y ) as a specific example. It is straightforward to find where Q 0 (k y ) is a two-by-two matrix of the form where q ± (k y ) = [2(t ± t AM ) + μ + 2(t ∓ t AM ) cos k y ] + 2i∆ p sin k y . The winding number is given by 84 The winding number W 0 also does not change its value as long as the energy gap of H 0 (k y ) remains open. Again let us first focus on the limiting case of ∆ s ↑↓ = 0, for which Q Accordingly, it is easy to find that where A straightforward calculation yields and Similar analysis shows that for H π (k y ) with ∆ s ↑↓ = 0, and Based on the above analysis, we reach the following result, Comparing with the mirror Chern number, we see that C M = 1 and C M = -1 correspond to (W 0 , W π ) = (-2, 0) and (0, -2), respectively. Obviously, the value -2 of the winding number also guarantees the robustness of the spectrumcrossing feature of the helical Majorana modes. Interestingly, using the winding number, we find that the superconducting phase is also topologically nontrivial in the region -4t AM < μ < 4t AM even though the mirror Chern number is zero. In this region, the two winding numbers W 0 and W π both take value 1. It means that if the translational symmetry is preserved in the x direction, on each y-normal edge there are two branches of chiral Majorana modes with opposite chiralities, with one branch traversing the gap at k x = 0, and the other traversing the gap at k x = π, as shown in Fig. Below we provide a discussion on the condition for the change of winding number when ∆ s ↑↓ is nonzero. Without loss of generality, we focus on the Hamiltonian H 0 (k y ) in Eq.(C7) for a detailed discussion. The energy spectra of H 0 (k y ) can be analytically determined, which read where h 1 = 2t(1 + cos k y ) + μ, h 2 = 2t AM (1 -cos k y ), h 3 = ∆ s ↑↓ , and h 4 = 2∆ p sin k y . The band gap becomes closed when the parameters fulfill either one of the following two conditions, (I) : h 4 = 0, h 2 = h 2 1 + h 2 3 ; (II) : For case (I), if ∆ s ↑↓ is nonzero, the band gap closes only at the time-reversal invariant momentum k y = π and only when 4t AM = (∆ s ↑↓ ) 2 + μ 2 . For case (II), the band gap closes at the momenta According to the number of band-closing points, the winding number W 0 will change by 1 for the case (I) and by 2 for the case (II). When λ ̸ = 0, both the mirror symmetry M z and chiral symmetries along the high symmetry lines are broken, and the helical Majorana modes become gapped. The gapped helical Majorana modes on the open edges can effectively be described by a low-energy massive Dirac Hamiltonian where v denotes the velocity of the Majorana modes, ρ y,z are Pauli matrices acting on the Hilbert space spanned by the edge states, and x b denotes the coordinate along the edges 