Electric manipulation of skyrmions in 2D magnetic materials has garnered significant attention due to the potential in energy-efficient spintronic devices. In this work, using first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations, we report the electric-field-tunable magnetic skyrmions in MnIn2Te4 monolayer. By adjusting the magnetic parameters, including the Heisenberg exchange interaction, DMI, and MAE, through applying an electric field, the formation or annihilation of skyrmions can be achieved. Our work suggests a platform for experimental realization of the electricfield-tunable magnetic skyrmions in 2D magnets. Magnetic skyrmions are spin structures that exhibit a localized vortex-like configuration Recently, the discovery of long-range magnetic order in two-dimensional (2D) materials, represented by CrI3, CrGeTe3, and Fe3GeTe2, open up a new platform for exploring exotic magnetic phenomena down to the 2D scale Subsequently, several strategies in both theory and experiments have been proposed to break the symmetry of 2D magnetic materials, which can induce a significant DMI and facilitate the formation of skyrmions. In particular, stable skyrmion lattices are observed in 2D magnets van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures such as Fe3GeTe2/WTe2, Fe3GeTe2/Co/Pd multilayer, and Fe3GeTe2/Cr2Ge2Te6, which can be attributed to the DMI induced by the interfacial proximity effect In order for skyrmions to be effectively utilized in practical applications, it is imperative not only to develop new materials that can host these magnetic structures, but also to explore and employ methods for manipulating and controlling them. The formation of magnetic skyrmions usually involves a delicate interplay between Heisenberg exchange, magnetic anisotropy (MAE) and DMI In the present work, via first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations, we unveil that the dn-MnIn2Te4 monolayer (ML) is promising 2D magnet with skyrmionics physics. Despite having inherent large DMI, the pristine dn-MnIn2Te4 ML exhibits a large MAE that prevents it from holding a skyrmion state. However, applying an electric field results in a significant decrease in MAE and a gradual increase in the isotropic Heisenberg exchange couplings J1 and J2, whereas the DMI shows a negligible response. As a result, electrically controllable skyrmions can be created or annihilated by the applied electric field, leading to exotic skyrmionic phenomena. Such phenomenon is revealed to be closely related to the physical quantities of κ and J2/ J1 ratio, which can describe the required conditions for such physics. Our work illustrates the potential of manipulating magnetic skyrmions in 2D magnets nonvolatility through electric field manipulation, which may have promising device applications. In the present work, we utilize first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations to investigate the potential of dn-MnIn2Te4 monolayer (ML) as a promising 2D magnet with skyrmionics physics. Despite having an inherent large DMI, the pristine dn-MnIn2Te4 ML is found to have a MAE that prevents it from holding a skyrmion state. However, when an electric field is applied, the MAE is significantly reduced, and the isotropic Heisenberg exchange couplings J1 and J2 are gradually increased, while the DMI shows negligible response. As a result, skyrmions could be created or annihilated by the applied electric field, resulting in exotic skyrmionic phenomena. We further reveal that such phenomenon is closely related to the physical quantities of κ and J2/J1 ratio, which can describe the necessary conditions for such physics. Our work demonstrates the potential of using electric field manipulation to non-volatilely control magnetic skyrmions in 2D magnets, which holds promise for novel device applications. Figure Additionally, by shifting the Te atoms of the fifth layer downwards, we could construct a structure with an upward polarization of In2Te3, which is named as up-MnIn2Te4 (Figure To explore the salient features of magnetism in our systems, we adopt the following spin Hamiltonian: where Si is the unit vector of a Mn atom at site i. The isotropic Heisenberg exchange coupling, denoted by Jij, spans over all first and second nearest-neighbor (NN) Mn pairs. Second term dij represents the vector that characterizes the DMI for the first NN Mn pairs. The third term is the anisotropic symmetric exchange that runs over all the NN Mn sites. K is the single ion anisotropy (SIA). In the last term, B indicates the strength of the external magnetic field along z axis. Magnetic anisotropy is also a crucial factor that influences the formation of magnetic topological states. In the case of dn-MnIn2Te4 ML, the anisotropic exchange interaction parameter λ is estimated to be 0.217 meV, indicating the out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy. The SIA parameter K is calculated to be -0.048 meV, which favors in-plane magnetic anisotropy. It is apparent that λ plays a dominant role in estimating the out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy for dn-MnIn2Te4 ML. Meanwhile, up-MnIn2Te4 ML exhibits λ = 0.301 meV and K = 0.893 meV, suggesting a rather stronger out-ofplane magnetic anisotropy. If we look deeper into the structures of two types of MnIn2Te4 ML, we have: for dn-MnIn2Te4 ML, the bond length l1 and l2 is 2.679 and 2.736 Å, respectively, while or up-MnIn2Te4 ML, l1 and l2 are 2.649 and 2.843 Å, respectively. The bond length l2 can be regarded as the interlayer distance between MnTe layer and In2Te3 layer, where a smaller interlayer distance implies stronger interlayer interactions. To illustrate this, we carry out the Bader charge analysis Our results indicate that for dn-MnIn2Te4 ML, MnTe layer transfers 0.124 electrons to In2Te3, while for up-MnIn2Te4 ML, MnTe loses 0.077 electrons to In2Te3. This is also clearly reflected in the planar-average charge-density difference plotted in Figure Once we obtained all the parameters in the spin Hamiltonian of Eq. ( As expected, due to the relatively small DMI of up-MnIn2Te4 ML, its ground state is determined to be out-of-plane 120° AFM, as shown in Figure Therefore, it is possible to obtain topological spin textures by tuning the balance between MAE and DMI. To this end, within the rigid band model To gain further insights into this effect, after calculating the magnetic parameters under different electric fields using DFT, the ground states of dn-MnIn2Te4 ML at 0 K without external magnetic field are first determined by employing the same strategy as used for the zero electric field case. We find that when the electric field is below 0.08 V/Å, the ground state of dn-MnIn2Te4 ML is determined to be out-of-plane ferromagnetism (FMz), of which the energy is set to be zero as the reference energy level. At an electric field of 0.08 V/Å, the ground state is identified as labyrinth domain, with an energy of -0.0022 meV per spin, as shown in Figure To summarize, we propose that dn-MnIn2Te4 ML is appealing 2D magnets with skyrmionics physics based on first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations. Upon applying an electric field from 0 to 0.3 V/Å, except the DMI that shows negligible response to the electric field, the MAE can be significantly decreased and isotropic Heisenberg exchange coupling J1 and J2 exhibit a gradual increase, which can be attributed to the charge transfer occurring between the MnTe and In2Te3 layers. Thus, by applying an electric field, the creation and annihilation of skyrmion state can be realized, giving rise to the exotic electrically controllable skyrmionics. Such phenomenon is revealed to be closely related to the physical quantities of κ and J2/ J1 ratio, which can describe the required conditions for such physics. Our work demonstrates a possibility of the nonvolatile control of magnetic skyrmions in 2D magnets by applying electric field, which is promising for the potential device application of skyrmion systems. . The calculated magnetic parameters of dn-and up-MnIn2Te4 ML. J, d, λ, and K represent the isotropic Heisenberg exchange, DMI, anisotropic symmetric exchange, and single ion anisotropy, respectively. m is the magnetic moment of Mn atoms.