Superconducting germanium films are an intriguing material for possible applications in fields such as cryogenic electronics and quantum bits. Recently, there has been great deal of progress in hyperdoping of Ga doped Ge using ion implantation. The thin film growths would be advantageous allowing homoepitaxy of doped and undoped Ge films opening possibilities for vertical Josephson junctions. Here, we present our studies on the growth of one layer of hyperdoped superconducting germanium thin film via molecular beam epitaxy. We observe a fragile superconducting phase which is extremely sensitive to processing conditions and can easily phase-segregate, forming a percolated network of pure gallium metal. By suppressing phase segregation through temperature control we find a superconducting phase that is unique and appears coherent to the underlying Ge substrate. High-quality thin films of covalent superconducting material is enticing for pushing towards up-scaling current stateof-the-art quantum devices. Proposals calling for highly scalable device platforms such as cryogenic CMOS circuitry Here we present the first report of molecular beam epitaxial (MBE) growth of superconducting hyperdoped Ga:Ge thin films. We show that under the appropriate growth conditions Ga-segregation is suppressed and a unique superconducting phase is obtained. We find distinctive signatures between superconductivity that is originated from Ga-metal as well as dispersive hyperdoping, schematically shown in Figure The materials presented here were all grown in a custom Varian Gen II MBE chamber on 2" un-doped Ge (001) wafers. Prior to growth, wafers are etched ex-situ in DI-water at 90 • C and then immediately loaded into vacuum. The wafers were then outgassed in-situ at 400 • C for 30 minutes and then finally flash annealed at 650 • C for 5 minutes before cooling to the growth temperature. Pure Germanium and silicon are deposited via Thermionics HM2 e-Gun operating with a 10 kV acceleration voltage. Gallium doping is done with a standard knudsen cell source (MBE Komponenten) at a source temperature of 950 • C, or an approximate flux at the source opening of ∼1.5×10 16 /cm 2 s as estimated by the kinetic theory of gases. The Ge source is operated at a 10kV acceleration voltage at 0.05A emission current while Si is evaporated with 0.01A emission current. Substrates are mounted in indiumfree bayonet style holders and the reported substrate temperatures are measured with a thermocouple in close proximity to the backside of the wafer. The substrate is rotated at a constant 10 rpm throughout film growth to promote uniformity. In this study, we discuss two different sample growths and processing methods to help illuminate the Ga dopant atom behavior. The first method A seen in Figure temperature co-deposition of Ga and Ge onto the substrate followed by a capping layer of silicon under UHV. We oxidize the capping layer in the chamber load lock. The sample is then re-introduced to the growth chamber and flash annealed at 700 • and cooled back down, emulating the processing conditions of ion implantation samples Where λ ep is the electron-phonon coupling parameter and μ * is the screened retarded Coulomb repulsion parameter. Growth method B attempts to utilize the McMillan formula The crystallinity, compositional distribution, and film morphology of the films grown in this study were examined with scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) in a JEOL ARM200F, equipped with a spherical aberration corrector for probe mode, and operated at 200 keV. The samples were prepared with cross-sectional tripod polishing to 20 μm thickness, followed by shallow angle Ar+ ion milling with low beam energies([1]3 keV), and LN2 stage cooling in a PIPS II ion mill. Cross-sectional STEM images of a sample grown using Method A are seen in Figure Zooming into the interface between the droplet and the underlying Ge, we confirm the amorphous nature of the Ga metal, as seen in Figure To suppress this Ga metal segregation, in our method B we deposit the heavily doped layers at room temperature, however this time we do not anneal at elevated temperatures. Removing the anneal step allows for maintaining a nominally consistent film composition and eliminate the observed Ga metal precipitates. Such behavior is pictured in Figure In the second method in which we utilize no post-anneal for carrier activation, Fig. Electrical measurements are conducted in an Oxford Triton pulse-tube dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 15 mK and magnetic field capabilities up to 14T. Measure-ments are collected using a standard Van der Pauw wiring configuration on square pieces from near the center of each wafer. On-chip contacts are annealed In-Sn eutectic at each of the four corners. Transport measurements for both methods are presented in Figure Looking closer at the sheet resistance as a function of temperature, many kinks are observed between the range of ∼7K and the total superconducting transition at 0.7K. We attribute the high temperature kink to the formation of Ga metal crystalline polymorphs as a result of the anneal, all of which have been shown previously to exhibit a superconducting transition temperature of 6K or greater Fig. Ga is not reported in literature, however reported values for nanoconfined particles of β -Ga are on the order of ∼430 Oe To help understand the superconducting phase in the sample grown using method B, we conduct Hall measurements, above B c , in the Van der Pauw geometry and compare against the theorized quantities for an electronic origin. We measure a 2D hole concentration of roughly 2.86×10 12 /cm 2 for the specific sample presented in this work, or a density of ∼1×10 19 /cm 3 carriers. Comparing to previous reports of covalent superconductivity in this and related systems In conclusion, we have presented here our report of superconductivity in Ga-doped Germanium achieved via molecular beam epitaxy. The superconducting phase is sensitive to processing conditions and we observe that high temperature flash anneals strongly promote Ga-segregation in the matrix. Furthermore, we find that the MBE deposition process enables carrier activation even without a post-anneal in which superconductivity is attained. The hyperdoped film we presented here exhibits a critical temperature of T C = 5.27K and crit-ical field values of B ⊥ C = 0.43T, B ∥ C = 1.03T at 15 mK. We lastly found that the interface between un-doped Ge and the hyperdoped Ge layer remains highly coherent after growth. Therefore the results shown here present MBE-growth of superconducting group IV material as a highly promising approach for the integration of superconducting Ge films, though much more work is required to fully realize full group IV superconducting circuitry.