In this study, using non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulation, the flow of water in deformed carbon nanotubes is studied for two water models TIP4P/2005 and SPC/FH. The results demonstrated a non-uniform dependence of the flow on the tube deformation and the flexibility imposed on the water molecules, leading to an unexpected increase in the flow in some cases. The effects of tube diameter and pressure gradient are investigated to explain the abnormal flow behavior with different degrees of structural deformation. Under spatial confinement, water exhibits unusual properties, and its flow velocity may be a thousand times faster than that predicted by hydrodynamics. The large surface area-to-volume ratio inherent to the nanoscale plays a central role in the water transport properties. From the molecular modeling perspective, the water transport in nanotubes Most computer-based studies on fluid transport analyzed perfect cylindrical CNTs, and few works considered a more realistic description by including structural deformations. We performed a systematic study to investigate the effect of structurally deformed CNTs on water transport properties within the classical non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations approach. The water flow rate was related to the tube chirality, diameter, and deformation level. We compared the results from rigid and flexible water models to evaluate their transferability to a confined environment context. The remaining of this manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II we present the methodology used in this analysis and the simulated models are defined. In Sec. III the discussion of the results is exposed and in Sec. IV we present the conclusions. Our system setup is similar to the molecular model proposed by Huang et al. where F is the external force in the z direction applied to each atom in the graphene sheet, n is the number of carbon atoms, and A is the surface area. While the pressure in piston 1 ranges from 200 to 800 bar, piston 2 has a fixed value of 1 bar to impose a pressure gradient on the system. Here we study the armchair and zigzag nanotubes with the diameters shown in Table The SHAKE and an effective diameter of σ CC = 3.4 Å. and the effective carbon-oxygen diameter σ CO = 3.28218 Å. where A is the graphene layer area (34x34 Å 2 ), and v is the water flow velocity acquired from the least-square linear regression line fitted to the data cloud which relates the average molecular displacement along the tube axis as a function of the time as taken from the MD trajectory file. The simulation protocol involves the following steps: 1. Pre-equilibrium in the NVE ensemble with a 0.5 ns MD run to minimize system energy keeping the pistons frozen (net force equal to zero). 2. Forces are applied in the pistons in order to impose 1 bar in each system to reach the water equilibrium densities at 300 K. Equilibration in the NPT ensemble during 1.0 ns. Water transport in carbon nanotubes is highly dependent on the diameter of the tubes. For the perfect CNT (9, 9) and (16, 0) illustrated in Figure We investigated the influence of deformations on carbon nanotubes with different chiralities and subjected to different pressure gradients for the transport of confined water, helping to understand the relevance of the water model and these defects in improving the flow. We considered the TIP4P/2005 and SPC/FH models for the study. The simulations showed how deformations on carbon nanotubes cross-section affect the internal flow dynamics. The inclusion of deformations in tubes of smaller diameters, (7, 7) and (12, 0) tend to considerably reduce the fluid velocity for larger deformations. The flow rate is further affected by a reduction in the overall density of the fluid caused by the presence of deformations. For large deformations, e = 0.8, the inclusion of strains disrupts the smooth, continuous potential energy landscape that a CNT provides, causing greater pressure losses along it, and reducing the overall fluid velocity. The overall observation indicates that flow enhancement factors exhibit a considerable reduction when subjected to substantial degrees of deformation. However, there are specific cases in which tubes with diameters measuring 12.2 and 12.4 Angstroms demonstrate an opposite trend, with flow rates tending to increase as the level of deformation rises. Water transport is not strongly affected by CNT chirality for different diameters and strains for both models, except for CNTs (9, 9) and (16, 0). This diameter is quite different when compared to smaller and larger nanotubes because only a layer of water close to the wall is formed. This layer of water behaves quite differently depending on the chirality. The higher value deformations, in general, showed much less flow when compared to the perfect nanotube. The number of molecules passing through the pore gradually decreases with an increasing degree of deformation. For some cases, the flow does not show any significant variation. When analyzing the rate at which water molecules pass through the nanochannels, the values found for the different diameters suggest that carbon nanotube membranes apparently can be competitive systems with currently existing water filtration processes. These results indicate that carbon nanotube membranes are promising for use as filters for impure water or saline water, although more studies are needed to categorically affirm their viability. Furthermore, advances in experimental measurements of nanoconfined water will lead to more accurate models of water in carbon nanotube simulations. Currently, atomistic water models can provide a reasonable range of results for water flowing through CNTs. Understanding the im-pacts of simulation choices aids in the analysis of past results and improves the design of future simulation studies.