The organic spacer cation plays a crucial role in determining the exciton fine structure in two-dimensional (2D) perovskites. Here, we use low-temperature magnetooptical spectroscopy to gain insight into the influence of the organic spacer on dark excitons in Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) perovskites. We show that by using modest magnetic field strengths (<1.5 T), the spin-forbidden dark-exciton state can be identified and its emission properties significantly modulated through the application of in-plane magnetic fields, up to temperatures of 15 K. At low temperatures, an increase in collected photoluminescence efficiency of >30% is demonstrated, signifying the critical role of the dark exciton state for light-emitting applications of 2D perovskites. The exciton fine structure and the degree of magnetic-field-induced mixing are significantly impacted by the choice of organic spacer cation, with 4-methoxyphenylethylammonium 1 Two-dimensional (2D) perovskites have attracted significant attention in recent years due to their unique optoelectronic and structural properties. These materials consist of inorganic perovskite layers separated by organic cations which provide criteria that violate the Goldschmidt tolerance factor, forming natural quantum wells of varying thicknesses. The increased quantum and dielectric confinement produced by the structure of 2D perovskites leads to a large exciton binding energy (E B ) in the range of 150-750 meV. Figure We firstly produced the following RP phase perovskites: (PEA) To investigate the nature of the exciton fine structure in 2D perovskite thin films we first carried out measurements of steady-state photoluminescence in the temperature range of 2.4-300 K, as shown in Figure In general, such features are often observed at temperatures where structural phase changes occur, For the low-energy emission in (BA) 2 PbI 4 , similar features have been observed previously and were attributed to emission from the interior, in contrast to the surface emission which was assigned to the high energy peak. A biexciton is the simplest type of multiexciton state, formed from two excitons and typically observed at higher excitation intensities. These states have an energy which is lower than the single-exciton state, separated by the biexciton binding energy. Relaxation to the singly excited state can occur through the photon emission (radiative) or via non-radiative Auger processes. The presence of photoexcited biexcitons in 2D RP phase perovskites has been the subject of debate where A is the inverse of the photoluminescence intensity at 0 K, (1/I(0)), and B is the ratio of the biexciton dissociation rate to the emission rate, k dis /k r . We applied this fitting process to the data in the temperature range of 30-200 K for (PEA) 2 PbI 4 , where the intensity decreases monotonically and smoothly (Figure The result of this fitting is shown in Figure To provide further insight into the photophysics of the exciton states discussed, we performed photoluminescence measurements at low temperatures with a magnetic field applied parallel to the plane of the substrate and interlayers, perpendicular to the direction of the excitation beam (Voigt configuration), as described in the experimental section. Figure This can be almost directly translated to an increase in photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) within the collection scheme used, since the change in absorption under applied fields of < 1.5 T has been previously found to be negligible. An increase in photoluminescence in (BA) 2 PbI 4 and (OA) 2 PbI 4 is observed in the region of the highest intensity peak, attributed to bright-exciton emission (Figures In the temperature-dependent photoluminescence data, (Figure the dark and bright exciton states seem to abruptly split further on increasing temperature beyond 20 K, with the apparent dark exciton state shifting to a lower energy, while the bright exciton emission energy is almost unchanged. This is accompanied by a concurrent increase in intensity of both the dark and biexciton states. We find that these results are repeatable and have been observed in previous studies, with the process responsible for the abrupt energy shift remaining unclear. The photoluminescence spectrum of (BA) 2 PbI 4 at low temperatures exhibits two additional peaks at lower energy, which are not observed in the spectra of the other compositions (Figure As mentioned, above temperatures of 2.4 K, the photoluminescence change with magnetic field was undetectable in (BA) 2 PbI 4 and (OA) 2 PbI 4 . In (PEA) 2 PbI 4 and (MeO -PEA) 2 PbI 4 however, the change in photoluminescence with magnetic field can be observed up to temperatures of 15 K (Figures At first glance, this interpretation appears to contradict the centre-energy positions of the emission peaks observed, since the difference in energy between the biexciton and dark exciton emission ranges from ∼25 meV at 4 K, to ∼18 meV at 120 K (Figure Response of individual exciton transitions to an applied in-plane magnetic field. (A) Schematic showing the effect of bright-dark exciton splitting on the magnetic-field-induced brightening. The width of the lines represent the oscillator strength of the transitions. For larger bright-dark exciton splitting, the population difference is larger and when the in-plane magnetic field is applied, a large difference in photoluminescence intensity is observed when oscillator strength is transferred. For a smaller splitting, the population difference is smaller and hence when the field is applied, the brightening is less pronounced. (B) Magnetic-field dependent photoluminescence spectra of (PEA) 2 PbI 4 at 6 K. The inset shows the spectral decomposition by fitting multiple Gaussian functions. (C) Integrated intensity (amplitude) of Gaussian components versus magnetic field for the individual bright exciton (BX), dark exciton (DX), and biexciton (XX) transitions. it is difficult to estimate the biexciton binding energy directly from the positions of emission peaks since the small Stokes shift and the overlap of different spectral contributions from the exciton fine structure cause the precise energetic position of the exciton emission to become contaminated by self-absorption effects, leading to a systematic underestimation of the binding energy (E B ). This explains why the difference in energy between the dark and biexciton emission peaks is significantly lower than the value of ∼ 36.5 meV for the biexciton binding energy obtained from equation 1. Moreover, these considerations oppose the possibility of biexcitons forming from (or dissociating into) one of the bright exciton states, since the spectral energy difference between these is larger than 36.5 meV, instead ranging from ∼40-42 meV. In conclusion, our study reveals the crucial role of organic spacer cations in determining the exciton fine structure in two-dimensional perovskites. By using modest magnetic fields, we have been able to identify and modulate the emission properties of the optically inactive dark exciton state, which is known to play a vital role in semiconductor light emission processes. The degree of magnetic-field-induced mixing and the characteristics of these states were found to be significantly influenced by the choice of spacer cation, with phenylethylammonium and perovskite layers were deposited on the substrates by spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 30 s, with an acceleration of 4000 rpm/s. Following this, the coated substrates were transferred onto a hotplate and annealed at 100 • C for 5 mins. Photoluminescence Spectroscopy: The photoluminescence was measured using a 405 nm Thorlabs M405L2 mounted LED for the excitation beam. The excitation was reflected from a 400 nm dichroic mirror, and the collection is obtained through the same lens as the excitation. The collection is then passed through a 450 nm long-pass filter and into a Thorlabs CS200 fibre-coupled spectrometer. The temperature was controlled using a cryogen-free variable temperature cryostat (Cryogenic Ltd), with a model 350 temperature controller (Lakeshore). The magnetic field was applied in the Voigt configuration using an electromagnet as part of a E500 electron spin resonance system (Bruker). UV-Vis Spectrophotometry: UV-visible absorbance of the thin films was measured using UV-2600 Shimadzu spectrophotometer with integrating sphere attachment ISR2600. The integrated intensity change is calculated by first fitting each measured spectra with the sum of multiple Gaussian functions, which are attributed to the bright, dark, and biexciton emission: where A i is the amplitude, E i is the peak centre energy, and σ i is the standard deviation. The decay rate constant (k ex ) for excitons can be expressed as the sum of individual contributions, given by, where k r and k nr are the temperature-independent radiative and nonradiative decay rate constants, respectively, k dis is the temperature-dependent dissociation constant, and k B is the Boltzmann constant. E B is the 'activation energy' for exciton dissociation, which is equivalent to the exciton binding energy. Given that the photoluminescence quantum yield φ at a certain temperature T and 0K can be defined by k r /k ex and k r /k r + k nr , respectively, the inverse of PL emission quantum yield, 1/φ(T ), as a function of temperature thus can be expressed as: 1/φ(T ) = 1/φ(T = 0) + (k dis /k r )e The biexciton emission component of the PL is extracted from equation S3 and its temperature-dependent integrated intensity is determined. The biexciton binding energy E B can be determined by fitting the following equation: where A corresponds to the inverse PL intensity (1/I 0 ) at T = 0K, and B is equal to k dis /k r . a methoxy functional group (4-methoxyphenylethylammonium), BA is n-butylammonium, and OA is n-octylammonium.