We present results of magnetoresistance (MR) measurements in granular NiBi 3 nanowires in the resistive state below the superconducting transition temperature. MR of 100 nm wide nanowires fabricated by focused Ion beam lithography from granular films of NiBi 3 with and without magnetic Ni impurity were compared. The nanowire containing high concentration of Ni impurity showed oscillations in MR and also exhibited a negative MR in certain temperature and field range. None of these effects were observed in the nanowire with no Ni impurities. Therefore, we argue that this effect is a result of the random Josephson couplings realized across superconducting NiBi 3 grains via magnetic inter grain regions. Such random couplings can cause local fluctuations in the density and sign of supercurrent, which can lead to negative MR and oscillations in MR, as proposed by Kivelson & Spivak [Kivelson et al. Phy. Rev. B. 45, 10490 (1992)]. Transport in granular superconducting films is often interpreted in terms of a coupled network of Josephson junctions, where individual grains with well defined superconducting order parameters couple across the grain boundaries. Abeles In order to test this hypothesis here we report the results of temperature dependent magnetoresistance measurements on a superconducting NiBi 3 nanowire fabricated by focused ion beam patterning from a granular NiBi 3 films. The choice of Superconducting NiBi 3 films was motivated by two factors. Firstly, our earlier work on this system From our previous studies In this section we compare the transport behavior of the low-Ni and high-Ni nanowires below the superconducting transition temperature. Figure Although this random process is ubiquitous in all superconductors, the collective time averaged effect of these phase slip events become apparent in superconducting nanowires In this section we discuss the low field magnetoresistance of the high-Ni and low-Ni samples as a function of temperature. Measurements were performed with a current of 70 μA within a field range of ∼ 2800 Oe between 1.8 K and 5 K. The present work is concerned with the resistive state of the nanowire, where the current density is important in the context of the phase slip. With increasing current density, more phase slip events occur and may drive the nanowire into a fully normal state An early signature of negative MR (nMR) in superconducting Pb stripes They have speculated that fluctuations in the sign and amplitude of superconducting order parameter may be the cause of this effect. In these experiments, however, there is no clear basis for the negative sign of the order parameter. In contrast, the magnetic inter grain regions in our NiBi 3 nanowire is a clear precursor for realizing negative inter grain currents. The other important aspect of Fig. The only unified model describing both nMR and oscillatory MR in a superconductor was proposed by Kivelson and Spivak In summary, NiBi 3 nanowire is the only system which allows fluctuations in both magnitude and sign of the order parameter, due to the natural granularity and magnetic inter grain regions, respectively. Magnetoresistance of a NiBi 3 nanowire with high Ni impurity concentration was compared with the MR of a nanowire containing negligible amount of Ni impurity in their phase-slip driven resistive states, below the superconducting transitions. It was found that the resistance of the nanowire with high Ni impurity undergoes periodic oscillations as a function of magnetic field. In addition, a negative MR also evolves in certain temperature range. Both these effects were absent in the NiBi 3 nanowore containing negligible Ni impurities. Observation of both effects (oscillatory MR and nMR) in a single system strongly supports the model of Kivelson & Spivak, which shows that both these effects are natural outcomes of fluctuations in amplitude and sign of the superconducting order parameter in a system. As superconducting nanowires are highly desirable as lossless interconnects for nanoscale quantum devices where ∆F I is the difference in free energy between two adjacent minima, e is the electronic charge, I is the current. Zero-field resistance vs temperature curves were measured at different bias currents for the low-Ni and high-Ni nanowires. With increasing bias current the probability of phase slips also increases The first and second term of the right hand side of Eqn. 2 corresponds to the thermally activated phase slip resistance and quantum phase slip resistance, respectively. Here, Ω T AP S = (L/ξ)(∆F T AP S(QP S) /kT) 1/2 is the attempt frequency We fit our RT data according to the Eqn. 3 where a,b,c,d are temperature independent, dimensionless parameters of the model, taken as fitting parameters. The high-Ni NiBi 3 nanowire showed oscillation in magneto resistance at all temperatures in the resistive state. The effect was most pronounced around 3. The nanowires of NiBi 3 were fabricated from the films only. Since transport measurements require contact pads for connecting current source and voltmeter, we have used a focused ion beam to define the nanowire and the contact pads at the same time, without needing to deposit a separate contact layer. This process avoids unnecessary issues arising from contact resistances. A focused Gallium ion beam at 30 keV from a Zeiss Crossbeam 340 system was used for this purpose. Prior to the patterning, the dose and exposure time was optimized for milling the NiBi 3 in a desired area down to the substrate. As shown in the 