The high susceptibility of ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) material resonators to force and temperature makes them ideal systems for sensing applications and exploring thermomechanical coupling. Although the dynamics of these systems at high stress has been thoroughly investigated, their behaviour near the buckling transition has received less attention. Here, we demonstrate that the force sensitivity and frequency tunability of 2D material resonators are significantly enhanced near the buckling bifurcation. This bifurcation is triggered by compressive displacement that we induce via thermal expansion of the devices, while measuring their dynamics via an optomechanical technique. We understand the frequency tuning of the devices through a 1 A flat mechanical plate subjected to a sufficiently high in-plane compressive stress becomes unstable, as its out-of-plane stiffness gradually reduces to zero. In this work, we study the effect of the buckling bifurcation on the dynamics of optothermally driven nanomechanical resonators made of FePS 3 membranes. By varying temperature, the membranes expand, causing a compressive displacement that triggers the membranes to deflect out-of-plane. Interestingly, this buckling bifurcation does not only cause a large change in the temperature-dependent resonance frequency, but also gives rise to a significant enhancement of vibration amplitude of the resonators when driven on-resonance. To account for these observations and relate them to the device parameters, we fit a mechanical buckling model to the experiments that quantifies central membrane deflection and boundary compressive displacement of the membrane. Based on the model we attribute the force response to a significantly reduced out-of-plane stiffness at buckling transition. The large frequency tuning and high responsivity to forces of 2D resonators near the buckling bifurcation might be utilized to enhance sensitivity in future designs of 2D NEMS devices like microphones and pressure sensors. We fabricated 2D nanomechanical resonators by transferring exfoliated 2D flakes over etched circular cavities with a depth of d p = 285 nm and varying radius R in a Si/SiO 2 substrate Table 33.9 69.9 (Methods). In total, we made three FePS 3 devices D1-D3. Figure , where D = Eh 3 /(12(1 -ν 2 )) is the bending rigidity of the membrane, ν is Poisson ratio, n 0 = Ehε 0 /(1 -ν) is the pre-tension in the membrane, and ε 0 is the built-in strain. From the fit (black line, Fig. The extracted Young's moduli of all devices are listed in Table , where f 0 is resonance frequency, A res is the vibration amplitude at resonance and Q is quality factor. Here, we extract f 0 = 5.57 MHz, Q = 195.93 and A res = 1.64 V/V for device D1. We will now outline how the characteristics of the resonance frequency (f 0 and A res ) can be used to provide information about the temperature dependent properties of 2D material resonators, in particular near the buckling bifurcation. Figure Due to the buckling, we cannot use the standard equation for the resonance frequency of a pre-tensioned plate or membrane for further analysis. Therefore, we use a mechanical buckling model for clamped circular plate, as illustrated in Fig. where U is the in-plane edge displacement of the plate, ρ is the mass density, z is the central deflection of the plate, z f ree is the central deflection of free plate without loading (when U = 0), and β is a fitting constant and equal to 0.52 when ν = 0.304 (see SI section 1). Both U and z depend on temperature T . The details of derivation of Eq. 1 can be found in SI section 1. In contrast to the standard equation for the resonance frequency of a prebending plate, To find the relation between U and z, we consider a uniformly-clamped plate as depicted in Fig. Therefore, the change of central deflection z of the plate versus U as buckling happens can be extracted from Eq. 2. We further use COMSOL simulation method to obtain z and f 0 as the function of U , showing good agreements with the analytical solution obtained from Eqs. 1 and 2 (see Fig. In order to investigate the effect of buckling on the resonance frequency f 0 , we substitute the relation between z and U into Eq. 1. This results in a relation between f 0 and z f ree , as plotted in Fig. Both the experimental curves in Fig. Let us now quantify U and z as a function of T for device D1, using a model that follows the flow chart depicted in Fig. By substituting the obtained z f ree into Eqs. 1 and 2, we further extract U and z as a function of T from the measured f 0 at each temperature for device D1. In Fig. for device D1 quantitatively matches the estimated z(T ) (orange line), which confirms that device D1 exhibits mechanical buckling. In addition, the total strain in the FePS 3 membrane also changes from the initial tensile strain to a strong compressive strain. From the obtained U 0 = 0.08 nm and z f ree = 20.1 nm, we extract the initial strain ε 0 = 1.84 × 10 -5 for device D1 using Eq. S26 and the relation N r = Ehε 1-ν . All obtained ε 0 for devices D1 to D3 are listed in Table We now focus on the vibration amplitude of the fundamental mode of the membrane. As shown in Fig. The implications of the observed phenomena extend beyond FePS 3 resonators. Even for 2D materials with a negative TEC such as graphene, buckling might occur if it is cooled down and the initial tensile stress is low enough. A key assumption in Eqs. 1 and 2 is a uniform compressive force at the boundary of the membrane and a constant Young's modulus over the measured temperature range. In reality, inhomogeneities due to uneven adhesion between membrane and substrate could lead to multiple smaller corrugations and wrinkles superimposed in the membrane when buckling occurs. This potential limitation, which we did not observe for the devices studied in this work, deserves future study as the buckled mode shape as well as the Young's modulus depend on it. Despite the fact that the temperature-dependence of resonance frequency has been inves-tigated in earlier works on 2D membranes, 30-32 mechanical buckling has not been reported yet. It seems that one study on MoS 2 resonators might have almost reached the buckling point ( df 0 dT → 0) at around 373 K. for device D1, which is at least 2.3 times higher than reported in earlier studies. This value is comparable to state-of-the-art temperature sensors In summary, we reported the experimental observation of thermally-induced buckling in 2D nanomechanical resonators made of suspended FePS 3 membranes. Using an optomechanical method, we probed their dynamic responses as a function of temperature. A mechanical buckling model was developed to explain the observed large turning of the resonance frequency with temperature, which allows to determine the boundary compressive displacement and center deflection of the fabricated devices. Using white light interferometer, we independently validated the extracted deflection of the membrane versus temperature from buckling model. We found an enhancement of up to 14× vibration amplitude near buckling bifurcation, which we attributed to the decrease in out-of-plane stiffness of the membrane. The gained insight not only advances the fundamental understanding of buckling bifurcation membranes made of 2D materials, but also enables pathways for buckling-enhanced designs and applications such as temperature detectors, thermoelectric and NEMS devices. Sample Fabrication. A Si wafer with 285 nm dry SiO 2 is spin coated with positive e-beam resist and exposed by electron-beam lithography. Afterwards, the SiO 2 layer without protection is completely etched using CHF 3 and Ar plasma in a reactive ion etcher. The edges of cavities are examined to be well-defined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and AFM. After resist removal, FePS 3 nanoflakes are exfoliated by Scotch tape, and then separately transferred onto the substrate at room temperature through a deterministic dry stamping technique. More details about the fabrication of etched substrate with circular cavities, as well as the Scotch tape transfer method can be found in. Laser Interferometry Setup. We present temperature-dependent optomechanical measurements in a laser interferometry setup. The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://xxxxxx.