Three-dimensional topological Dirac semimetals have recently gained significant attention, since they possess exotic quantum states. When constructing Josephson junctions utilizing these materials as the weak link, the fractional ac Josephson effect emerges in the presence of a topological supercurrent contribution. We investigate the ac Josephson effect in a Dirac semimetal Cd3As2 nanowire using two complementary methods: by probing the radiation spectrum and by measuring Shapiro patterns. With both techniques, we find that conventional supercurrent dominates at all investigated doping levels and that any potentially present topological contribution falls below our detection threshold. The inclusion of thermal noise in a resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) model allows us to reproduce the microwave characteristics of the junction. With this refinement, we explain how weak superconducting features can be masked and provide a framework to account for elevated electronic temperatures present in realistic experimental scenarios. Topological superconductivity is a hot topic in condensed matter physics, since the quasi-particle excitations that govern its attributes, so-called Majorana fermions, follow non-Abelian exchange statistics -a property that could revolutionize quantum computation, as it allows the implementation of fault-tolerant operations We employ Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 nanowire Josephson junctions as a platform for the search of topological superconductivity. Dirac semimetals possess exotic electronic properties emerging from three dimensional Dirac cones -crossings between valence and conduction bands with linear dispersion relations In our Cd 3 As 2 nanowire junctions, we hunt for signatures of the fractional ac Josephson effect arising from 4π-periodic contributions in the current-phase relation (CPR) that are a direct consequence of topologically protected Andreev bound states, i.e., Majorana modes In the latter experiment, missing odd Shapiro steps are the fingerprint of topological supercurrent admixtures When measuring Josephson radiation, the signature of a topologically non-trivial supercurrent is the halving of the fundamental Josephson frequency f J = q * V /h, with q * being the effective charge, V the dc voltage bias and h the Planck constant. This occurs since the topological supercurrent is carried by single electrons (q * = e) instead of Cooper-pairs in the case of conventional junctions (q * = 2e) The (fractional) ac Josephson effect principally distinguishes conventional from topological junctions, but many experimental aspects pose a challenge to unambiguously prove the emergence of Majorana states such as: marginal 4π-supercurrent contributions, elevated electronic temperatures, environmental circuit effects In this work, we investigate a gate-tunable Cd 3 As 2 nanowire Josephson junction by assessing the dc and the ac Josephson effect. By including thermal fluctuations in the resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) model, we successfully reproduce the obtained IV -curves, Josephson emission spectra and Shapiro patterns using only a conventional, sinusoidal 2π-periodic CPR. The comparison enables us to determine the effective electron temperature of the system which, in turn, imposes limitations to the sensitivity and may serve as a possible explanation for the absence of fractional signatures in the ac Josephson effect. The measurement setup shown in Fig. Our dc setup sources a current using a bias resistor R b = 1 MΩ in series with a dc voltage source with a small ac component with frequency f = 177 Hz supplied by a lock-in amplifier. This current is applied via a bias tee to the microwave line that directly connects to the source of the sample. The other side of the sample is galvanically connected to ground, closing both the lowand high-frequency circuits. When the sample is in the non-superconducting regime, the signal is converted to a stable voltage bias by shunting the device with a resistor R s = 10 Ω. This shunt resistor is directly placed between the central conductor of the transmission line and the galvanic ground on the sample holder. We measure the differential resistance of the shunted device using a voltage amplifier and lock-in techniques. All measurements are performed in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of ∼ 15 mK. Details about the fabrication, the measurement setup and the device integration on the PCB are given in the supplementary material (SM) Sec. SII and Sec. SIII We first probe the gate dependent dc response of the junction, which is presented in Fig. In Fig. In the next step, we investigate the Josephson radiation spectrum at V tg = 0 V, for which I c = 570 nA. In Fig. Next, we look for the emergence of a topological phase as a function of doping level in Fig. To estimate a lower bound of sensitivity in terms of I c , we relate the emission strength to the critical current. We first convert the raw data from dBm/Hz-scale to Watt/Hz-scale and subtract for each gate voltage a linear background such that regions far away from the radiation peaks have vanishing small contributions. The hereby obtained relative emission density (∆PSD det ) as a function of V is shown in Fig. We now expand the investigation of the ac Josephson effect by measuring the Shapiro step pattern. Here, the junction is irradiated by a microwave tone of fixed frequency f d = 2 GHz at variable output power P s of the signal generator. We probe the differential resistance dV /dI as a function of current bias I and P s for a constant gate voltage V tg = 0 V. The resulting map shown in Fig. To gain a deeper understanding of the junction dynamics, we aim to reproduce our experimental results in the framework of the resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) model. To be able to reproduce our experimental data, we include a noise term to account for thermal fluctuations with ħ = h/2π. First, we consider the time-averaged results of the modified RCSJ model to fit the experimentally obtained IV -curve at V tg = 0 V as presented in Fig. In the next step, we employ the extracted parameters and focus on the time-dependent V (t) solutions of the RCSJ model to reproduce the emission spectrum. By taking the squared magnitude of the Fourier transform of V (t), we calculate the voltage noise spectral density as a function of frequency f , and convert it to power spectral density (PSD). Here, we do not include any amplification of the signal; the comparison of absolute signal levels between the experiment and simulation is discussed in the SM Sec. SIV. In Fig. We now direct our attention to the modeled emission strength as a function of I c . Fig. By adding an ac current bias excitation in the RCSJ model expressed in drive power P d at the device, it is also capable of generating Shapiro step patterns. Employing the same model parameters as before, we find good agreement in the Shapiro pattern between the simulation presented in Fig. We investigated the dc and ac Josephson effect in a single Cd 3 As 2 nanowire Josephson junction. Although we observe an anomalous evolution of the critical current as a function of gate voltage that points to the presence of supercurrent carrying surface states, no direct evidence of topological superconductivity is found in both the Josephson radiation measurement and Shapiro pattern evaluation. Importantly, we reproduce our experimental findings using a refined RCSJ model that includes thermal fluctuations, and we obtain an effective electronic temperature T ≈ 250 mK which masks emission signals from supercurrents < 55 nA, highlighting the importance of reducing thermal noise. The work on (Bi 1-x Sb x ) 2 Te 3 Supplementary Material: AC Josephson effect in a gate-tunable Cd 3 As 2 nanowire superconducting weak link In the RCSJ model where C is the junction capacitance, R is the parallel resistance, f (φ) is the dimensionless shape of the current-phase relation, I c is the critical current, I F (t) is the fluctuating noise term, and I(t) = I dc + I ac sin(ωt) is the bias current. To be able to accommodate a mixture of a trivial and a topological supercurrent contribution in the current-phase relation, we set where we encode the weight of the two components in the dimensionless parameters a and b. We remark that if both a and b are non-zero, the maximal supercurrent can be larger than the I c parameter. We assume thermal noise for I F (t), which is characterized by where δ(x) is the Dirac function. Let us introduce the normalized units i = I/I c , i F = I F /I c and τ = t/t c , with Using these normalized units, the differential equation takes the form of where β is the Stewart-McCumber parameter, The noise term in normalized units satisfies The second-order differential equation in S6 can be written as two coupled first-order equations. By introducing y = [φ, φ] T , where φ = dφ/dτ , we write S6 as Let us write the equation set in a matrix form, and separate the deterministic and random terms, Radiation maps: Power spectral density (PSD) as a function of mean voltage V and frequency f . The bottom row shows cuts through the different maps at V = 5 μV. Guides for the eye: topological feature V = hf /e (black dashed), trivial feature V = hf /(2e) (red dashed), higher-order feature V = hf /(4e) (green dashed). Guides for the eye: topological feature V = hf /e (black dashed), trivial feature V = hf /(2e) (violet dashed), higher-order topological feature V = hf /(3e) (blue dashed), higher-order feature V = hf /(4e) (red dashed). Cd 3 As 2 nanowires were grown by K. Park with the vapor transport method Both Josephson radiation and Shapiro step measurements are performed in a Triton 200 dilution refrigerator, of which the experimental setup is similar to Ref. We start our description with the PCB shown in Fig. The radiation generated by the junction is amplified using a cryogenic HEMT amplifier at the 4 K stage, a room temperature amplifier, and finally measured with a spectrum analyzer. Two circulators at the HEMT input limit back-action noise, but limit the detection bandwidth to 2.5 -3.8 GHz. The following parameters on the spectrum analyzer were used: detection bandwidth 20 MHz, span 24 MHz, radio bandwidth 10 MHz, video bandwidth 5 MHz and 1001 points resulting in a sweep time of 2 s over the detection frequency range. In addition to the sensing line, a drive line links to the device via a directional coupler used for irradiating the junction with a signal generator in Shapiro step measurements. In this section, we discuss the difference in absolute power level between experiment and simulation. For this purpose, we calculate the total radiation power P by integrating the spectral density of the conventional radiation peak defined with the relation V = (h/2e)f , for different values of the critical current. The experimental relation P det (I 2 c ) is fitted with a line going through the origin, and results in a slope of s V exp = 1.425 × 10 4 Ω as shown in gray dashed in Fig. This yields a correction factor of We model the junction source impedance with the shunt resistor R in parallel with the shunt capacitor C as shown in Fig. Next, we compare this amplification to the gain of the amplification chain present in the experimental setup (see Fig. which gives us a reasonable agreement between the power level in the experiment and the simulation. After the experiment has been conducted, it turned out that the supply lines to the HEMT-amplifier were high-ohmic, such that its ideal working point with the highest gain (nominally +40 dB) and lowest thermal noise could not be reached. The small discrepancy between g eff and g exp can be attributed to uncertainties in the experimental setup. Interpretation of the P (I 2 c )-relation We explain the quadratic dependence between P det and I c as follows. We model the junction as a sinusoidal current source, with a current amplitude I c and source impedance Z s as illustrated in Fig. With C = 8.8 pF, R = 9 Ω and Z L = 50 Ω, we obtain at f = 3 GHz, P L ≈ 0.224 Ω • I 2 c , which resembles the P (I 2 c )relation extracted from the model. In the experimental configuration, the transferred power is amplified with a gain of g, and the detected power is P det = gP L = RI 2 c /2. We note that formula S23 should be considered when designing experiments. For a high power transfer, Z s ≫ Z L is preferred, however, for stable biasing in the finite detection window, the junction should not be in the hysteretic regime. The trade-off between the sufficient damping of the junction and the optimization of the power transfer could be balanced with an in-situ variable shunt resistance. We obtained the normal state resistance R N from measurements carried out in a magnetic field of 20 mT, above the critical field of the junction. We use a 100 nA ac excitation on the lock-in amplifier and correct for the parallel shunt resistor R s . In Fig. In this section, we compare simulated Shapiro step patterns with measurement data, and use parameters that describe the modification of the pattern due to the presence of a topological supercurrent. In a conventional Josephson junction with a 2π-periodic CPR, steps at the Shapiro voltages V k = k h 2e f d appear. Here, f d is the drive frequency and k is an integer that represents the number of 2π phase evolutions that the particle undergoes in the tilted washboard potential. For topological supercurrents, a 4π-periodic CPR results in a 4π phase evolution and thus results in Shapiro voltages of height V k = k h e f d , double compared to the trivial Shapiro voltage. In Shapiro step patterns, the presence of topological supercurrent therefore effectively suppresses the relative current magnitude associated with odd steps with 2π supercurrent periodicity, in favor of the even current steps which entail both 2π and 4π contributions Fig. The Q 12 and Q 23 ratios for the conventional case (a = 1, b = 0), are monotonically decreasing for each successive lobe, while Q 12 is always larger than Q 23 . Comparing this case a = 0.95 and b = 0.05, the small fraction of topological current moves Q 12 and Q 23 value closer together (the second lobe values almost overlap), indicating that the odd n = 1 step decreases in relative magnitude. For b = 0.2, Q 12 is smaller than Q 23 for all lobes, a trend that continues until for b = 1, the n = 1 step almost completely disappears, reflected by the high value of Q 23 . We now compare our results from the simulation with experimental results shown in Fig. 