Spin-transfer and spin-orbit torques allow controlling magnetic degrees of freedom in various materials and devices. However, while the transfer of angular momenta between electrons has been widely studied, the contribution of nuclear spins has yet to be explored further. This article demonstrates that the hyperfine coupling, which consists of Fermi contact and dipolar interactions, can mediate the application of spin-orbit torques acting on nuclear spins. Our starting point is a sizable nuclear spin in a metal with electronic spin accumulation. Then, via the hyperfine interactions, the nuclear spin modifies the an electronic spin density. The reactions to the equilibrium and nonequilibrium components of the spin density is a torque on the nucleus with field-like and damping-like components, respectively. This nuclear spin-orbit torque is a step toward stabilizing and controlling nuclear magnetic momenta, in magnitude and direction, and realizing nuclear spintronics. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a powerful tool for investigating the physical and chemical properties of matter. However, nuclear magnetic momenta are three orders of magnitude smaller than the electronic ones, leading to weak nuclear polarization even at low temperatures and under high magnetic fields, hindering the NMR detection sensitivity The techniques above employ angular-momentum transfer from the electron to the nuclear spin via the contact hyperfine interaction, and they have shown remarkable success in semiconductors with an s-wave conduction band, such as GaAs However, these studies are primarily limited to GaAs semiconductors, and the possibility of observing similar phenomena in other platforms systems, such as magnetic multilayer devices has yet to be explored, both theoretically and experimentally. This motivates the quest for a spintransfer-driven manipulation of the size and direction of nuclear spins in spintronic devices, such as magnetic heterostructures or metals with spin accumulation, i.e., the search for a nuclear spin-orbit torque (NSOT). In magnetic heterostructures, the exchange interaction between the magnetization and conduction electrons can generate a spin-transfer torque a heavy metal, as shown in figure The spin-mixing conductance is the parameter ruling the strength of the spin-orbit torque In this article, we predict a nuclear spin-orbit torque from a spin accumulation. Our model consists of a stable nuclear spin I, that we model as a classical vector, embedded in a free electron gas with a uniform spin accumulation μ. The interaction between the nuclear and electronic spins is the hyperfine coupling. While the interactions between the nuclear spin and its environment, such as the Zeeman and quadrupolar couplings, and indirect exchange, may alter the magnetization equilibria or dynamics of a nuclear ensemble, our aim is to predict the nuclear spin-orbit torque, and such a derivation only requires the stable nuclear spin, the spin accumulation, and the hyperfine interaction between them. The rest of this article is organized as follows. In section 2, we obtain the spin density of the electron gas. In section 3, we study the torque exerted by the electronic spin density on the nuclear spin. Section 4 summarizes our results. Finally, the detailed mathematical derivation of our results is in the supplementary material. Let us consider a uniform spin accumulation μ, the electronic spin operator s = ħσ/2, and the following electron-gas Hamiltonian where ħ is the reduced Plank constant, σ is the vector Pauli matrices, m e is the electron mass at rest, and p is the momentum operator. We employ a free electron gas model with plane waves parametrized by their wavevector p (eigenvalue of p/ħ). The conductionelectron magnetization M is related to the ensemble expectation value of the electronic spin, ⟨s⟩, via M = -e⟨s⟩/m e , where e is the modulus of the electron charge. The interaction between M and the net magnetic-type field acting on it, B, is given by the Zeeman Hamiltonian where r is the position vector. The effect of H Z on M(r) is studied using linear response theory where θ(x) is the Heaviside step function, the brackets ⟨f ⟩ 0 stand for the ensemble mean value of f when B = 0, and [f, g] is the commutator between f and g. In the steady state, B, μ, and χ ab are timeindependent. The contribution to M from the spinaccumulation is (see supplementary material ) where k F is Fermi wavenumber. In reciprocal space, the susceptibility tensor reads χ ab (q) = δ ab χ 1 (q) + ε abc μ c χ 2 (q), where q = |q| is the modulus of the wavevector q, μ c is the c-th component of μ, and δ ab and ε abc are the Kronecker delta and Levi-Civita symbol, respectively. The functions χ 1 and χ 2 are where f p = 2θ(k F -p) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution of conduction electrons at zero temperature with energy E p = ħ 2 p 2 /(2m e ). In terms of χ 1 and χ 2 , the magnetization of conduction electrons reads It is illustrative to evaluate the above expression for a static localized magnetic field, B (r) = B local δ(r). In this case, the magnetization is the sum of three terms: being the Friedel or RKKY oscillation function (2) con (k F r) μ × B local is the nonequilibrium polarization given by the following response function Let us consider a nuclear spin I at r = 0 that we model as a classical vector of magnitude |I| = ħI p . For a fully polarized nuclear spin, I p = I (I + 1) with I being the nuclear spin quantum number. The magnetic hyperfine Hamiltonian where γ I is the nuclear gyromagnetic ratio; μ r and μ 0 are the relative permeability and the permeability of free space, respectively. The magnetic hyperfine interaction is responsible for spin wave excitation in nuclear ferromagnets (ii) Dipolar magnetic field, as illustrated in figure 3a It is worth noting that B con (r) is equivalent to the exchange field by a local 3d or 4f magnetic moment. In the present case, it represents the coupling that emerges when the conduction-electron wavefunction reaches the nucleus Replacing these fields in equation ( is the magnetization due to Fermi contact field, shown in figure and it is illustrated in figure are illustrated in figure Let us stress that terms proportional to f (2) con and f (2) dip in M con and M dip , respectively, are nonequilibrium because they require the finite nonequilibrium spin accumulation μ. The spin-orbit torque acting on the nuclear spin, τ NSOT = (dI/dt) NSOT , can be determined from Using M(r) = M 0 + M con (r) + M dip (r), we obtain the following torque per unit area (see Supplemental Material for the detailed derivation) Figure where a is the lattice constant, m = I/|I| and g nuclear ≡ g damp + ig field is the nuclear version of complex-valued spin-mixing conductance. The dipole contribution is four times smaller than the the exchange-like Fermi contact field. Figure Dependency of the torques on μ r μ 0 indicates that NSOT is large for a bilayer of ferromagnet with high spin nucleus and nonmagnetic metal with high magnetic permeability, such as Fe (μ r μ 0 ∼ 0.25 H/m Note that the field-type contribution dominates over the damping-like one, g field ≫ g damp . This relationship is opposite to the one between the real and imaginary parts of the electronic spin-mixing conductance, in which the damping-like contribution is substantially larger. The value of g damp is similar measurement of nuclear spin pumping in Ref The set of Eqs. and it can cancel the transverse relaxation term of the Bloch equation Finally, let us stress that our main assumption is the existence of a stable nuclear spin that can be modeled by a classical vector. The time evolution of this vector, or an ensemble of nuclear spins, is given by the appropriate Bloch equation This work predicts a torque acting on nuclear spins embedded in an electronic spin accumulation, namely a nuclear spin-orbit torque (NSOT). Our model consist of a sizable nuclear spin in a simple metal described by plane waves. represented by a classical vector in a simple metal described by plane waves. The use of a classical vector for the spin assumes a spin polarization given by, e.g., a large magnetic field or the exchange coupling with atomic (3d) magnetic moments. Consequently, it is worth noting that our results are independent of the interactions between the nuclear spin and its the environment, such as the Zeeman, dipolar, quadrupolar couplings, indirect exchange with other nuclei, interactions with the lattice, as far as the model assumptions are satisfied. By using linear response theory, we show that the magnetic hyperfine interaction induces a magnetization on conduction electrons around the nuclear spin. When the metal has spin accumulation, the electronic magnetization is not parallel to the nuclear spin and exerts a NSOT on the nucleus. The NSOT has field-like and damping-like components, characterized by g field and g damp , respectively. g field and g damp are analogous to the imaginary and real parts of complex-valued spin-mixing conductance which describes spin-transfer and spin-orbit torques in electronic systems. Furthermore, g damp comes from the nonequilibrium part of the response function, χ 2 , which is also responsible for damping-like spin-transfer torque Dependency of the torques on I and μ r μ 0 indicates that the NSOT is large for a bilayer of ferromagnet with high spin nucleus and nonmagnetic metal with high magnetic permeability, such as Fe, which has a naturally occurring and stable isotope 57 Fe. In NMR quantum computing, nuclear spin is a candidate for qubit. Since qubit has the potential to the miniaturization of memory, the application of nuclear spin by means of NSOT could lead to further miniaturization of spintronics devices.