We implemented, optimized and fully tested over multiple runs a superconducting Josephson junction fabrication process tailored for the integrated digital circuits that are used for control and readout of superconducting qubits operating at millikelvin temperatures. This process was optimized for highly energy efficient single flux quantum (ERSFQ) circuits with the critical currents reduced by factor of ~10 as compared to those operated at 4.2 K. Specifically, it implemented Josephson junctions with 10 A unit critical current fabricated with a 10 A/m 2 critical current density. In order to circumvent the substantial size increase of the SFQ circuit inductors, we employed a NbN high kinetic inductance layer (HKIL) with a 8.5 pH/sq sheet inductance. Similarly, to maintain the small size of junction resistive shunts, we used a nonsuperconducting PdAu alloy with a 4.0 ohm/sq sheet resistance. For integration with quantum circuits in a multi-chip module, 5 and 10 m height bump processes were also optimized. To keep the fabrication process in check, we developed and thoroughly tested a comprehensive Process Control Monitor chip set. The low integration scale of superconducting Josephson junction circuitry has always been a concern, especially for Single Flux Quantum circuits, where the product of the junction critical current Ic and circuit inductance L should be in the range from 0.1 to 1.0 0, where 0 is flux quantum. This becomes an even bigger problem when SFQ circuits are scaled to work in the millikelvin environment necessary for various applications where they are integrated with other technologies operating at this temperature, including quantum circuits (qubit arrays) [1,2], sensor arrays [3], etc. The delicate nature of qubits and the limited cooling capacity of the cryogenic platforms call for the minimization of the power dissipation, while still retaining the speed advantage of SFQ technology. The straightforward way to achieve this is to scale down the Josephson junction critical currents Ic as the energy dissipated during SFQ switching at JJ is ESFQ ~ Ic 0. The reduction of critical currents is possible due to the lower thermal noise at mK. However, simply scaling down the critical current of a Josephson junction causes a proportional increase in circuit inductances and Josephson junction shunt resistances necessary to retain circuit functionality. In addition, the bias inductors of ERSFQ circuits [4] grow so large that inductive coils become necessary. As a result, the ERSFQ circuit area substantially increases, hindering the prospects of scaling to greater circuit complexities. To tackle these issues, new materials should be employed. A superconducting high kinetic inductance layer (HKIL) can address the inductors' physical size issue. In this superconducting film, the London penetration depth is larger than the film thickness, leading to substantially higher kinetic inductance. The first successful application of the HKIL was done for the implementation of large bias inductors in the ERSFQ 8 bit arithmetic logic unit (ALU) The new fabrication process for SFQ integrated circuits capable of operating at millikelvin temperatures and integrated with qubit chips (SFQuClass circuits We divide the integrated circuit fabrication into a sequential execution of unit processes. Each unit fabricates a layer of either a superconducting metal or an interlayer dielectric. A typical unit process starts with the deposition of the respective material layer with the required thickness onto a wafer, followed by photolithography, and then patterning of the layer and removal of the residual photoresist. As described below, we use chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP) and anodization steps for selected layers. In process characterization, we performed measurements of thickness, sheet resistance, and dielectric integrity using a profilometer, ellipsometer, four-point prober, wafer prober, scanning electron microscope (SEM) and atomic force microscope (AFM). All superconductor materials are deposited by DC magnetron sputtering in high vacuum chambers. The bilayer SiN/SiO2 is deposited in two separate systems using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). Most of the photolithography is done on a 5x reduction deep-UV stepper and some on an i-line laser writer with 0.6 um resolution. The patterned metal or dielectric surfaces are dry-etched in either reactive ion etcher (RIE) or inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etcher. All processes are performed at less than 180 ο C process temperature so the residual photoresist can be easily removed with standard solvents. Thickness Nb layer placed between two ground planes. This allows a ~20x reduction of the length of the inductor, which is critical for the circuit area. The patterning, etching and passivation of this HKIL requires a special development that results in a more controllable process. The particular problem is in etching: most chemistries for etching NbN etch Si even faster, risking a deep overetch into the silicon substate and resulting in edge coverage issues and potential shorts. Ground plane (M0, I0): M0 is the second superconducting layer of the process and is deposited after the patterning and etching of the IN1 vias to the MN1 layer. The interlayer dielectric between M0 and MN1 is a 100 nm thick SiN/SiO2 bilayer. M0 is a 200 nm thick layer to which all ERSFQ circuits are grounded. It also has intricate patterns, such as moats, to mitigate flux trapping The CMP process is carefully monitored and kept at a 20 nm standard deviation in thickness. This CMP step is necessary for preventing the topography from translating to the upper layers and potentially inducing shorts between layers due to edge coverage issues. Josephson Junction (JJ, A1, M1): The next superconducting layer to be deposited is the base electrode of the Josephson Junctions (M1), a 150 nm Nb layer with a 10 nm Al layer underneath. The thin Al layer under the Nb layer serves as a hydrogen diffusion barrier After that, the wafer is transferred to an oxidation chamber to grow the tunnel barrier in a controlled manner by oxidizing the aluminum at specific pressure and time to achieve critical current density of 10 A/m 2 . Then, the wafer is placed back into the sputter chamber without breaking the vacuum to deposit 50 nm of Nb (the counter electrode of the junction). After that, the wafer is passivated by a 25 nm low-stress PECVD SiN layer deposited at 150 °C before patterning the J1 layer. After patterning J1, the whole wafer is anodized to grow oxide around the JJs, providing protection from accidental shorts during the IN1 via etching. Such a protective layer is only necessary around a JJ and is removed everywhere else. This is implemented by the A1 mask patterning and dry etching everywhere except the area around a JJ. Finally, the M1 (a third superconducting layer) is patterned. Shunt Resistors (I1-1/R2/I1-2): In ERSFQ, resistors are needed for shunting Josephson junctions, impedance matching, etc. Our current material of choice is a Pd/Au mixture, since the resistors have to stay nonsuperconducting at millikelvin temperatures. We start with depositing a 100 nm interlayer dielectric (I1-1) of PECVD-SiN. Then we deposit and pattern a photoresist with the R2 mask, followed by the resistor film evaporation deposition, with the target sheet resistance of 4.0 ohm/sq at 4.2 K. Afterwards, the resistors are patterned using a lift-off process. The next step is a deposition of the interlayer dielectric (I1-2) of PECVD-SiO2. The I1 patterning by high-selective etching is used to open vias to the junctions' counter electrodes, the base electrodes, and to the resistors. Superconducting wiring layer (M2/I2): The fourth superconducting layer is the M2 layer with a 300 nm thickness. This layer is used for wiring and for connecting resistors and junctions. Some circuit inductors are also defined in this layer. The fifth superconducting layer is M3 -the top ground layer that is also referred to as the skyplane. It shields most of the area of the carrier facing the qubit chip. The areas that interact with qubits, like the feedthrough and control tips, are etched with I3 pattern to remove all exposed dielectric. This way we can decrease the participation ratio of the dielectric and preserve high qubit performance The contact pads need to be coated with non-oxidizing metal to ensure good contact during the testing. This is done with a lift-off process. A 70 nm molybdenum film is deposited by sputtering, followed by the evaporation of a 100/200 nm Pd/Au bilayer. The molybdenum layer acts as a hydrogen diffusion barrier  Several arrays of nominally shunted JJs of varied sizes for monitoring the critical current density and the process and lithography bias (also called "missing radius" (dr)).  A single unshunted JJ for monitoring trilayer quality parameters, like Nb gap voltage (Vg), sub-gap resistance parameter (Vm), etc.  A test structure for measuring R2 sheet resistance comprising a chain of resistors of varying widths and lengths.  SQUID-based inductance test structures  A mesh in MN1 covered by the identical, 90° rotated mesh in M0 layer, covered by 90° rotated mesh in M1, covered by 90° rotated mesh in M2, and finally covered by 90° rotated mesh in M3 to assess quality of planarized and non-planarized insulation between these layers by testing for interlayer shorts.  Arrays of vias between MN1-M0-M1 and all neighboring metal layers (MN1-M1, M0-M1, etc.) to measure their critical currents.  Long gap test structures in all metal layers with gap sizes ranging from 0.5 m to 1.6 m by testing for shorts. The analog PCMs are routinely tested at room temperature and 4.2 K, with some structures tested at both temperatures and others only at 4.2 K. We test unshunted JJs to monitor the Nb gap voltage (Vg = 2.65 ± 0.05 mV) and sub-gap resistance parameter (Vm in excess of 30 mV). The critical current of shunted JJs can be well fitted with the following equation Ic = π•jc•(r-dr) 2 , where r is the designed junction radius and dr is the proc.ess/lithography bias, jc is the critical current density. Here we use shunted JJs because they are less susceptible to noise. Based on the results of these measurements, oxidation parameters for the trilayer fabrication were calibrated and on-mask compensation for the overetch was accounted for. A variation in jc of 1σ less than 3% over a 150 mm wafer was measured. Since HKIL MN1 layer is used not only in the biasing but also within the ERSFQ circuits themselves, the tight control of the run-to-run variations and wafer spread of the MN1 sheet inductance becomes imperative. We calculated MN1 sheet inductance Lsq and overetch dw by computing the linear regression Ls=Lsq*(w +dw) for the inductances of six different width inductors ranging from 1.0 m to 2.2 m. From wafer to wafer, we regularly hit sheet inductance for MN1 layer within +10% of target value of 8.5 pH/sq with a 1σ spread over a 150 mm wafer of 8% or less. Figure While the most reliable MN1 sheet inductance is measured at 4.2 K, we are developing a method to characterize it at room temperature as well. The inductance is not expected to change significantly at the intended temperature of operation according to the theoretical considerations [14] and measurements The digital PCM chip comprises seven ERSFQ circuits. They are, in order of increasing complexity (in terms of JJ count and function), as follows: two chains of DC/SFQ-JTL-SFQ/DC, where JTL is a Josephson transmission line, (one realized with HKIL inductances and the other without them), a D flip-flop (DFF) To show the effect of the HKIL-implemented ERSFQ circuit inductors, Figure show identical value inductances realized in M2 Nb and MN1 NbN layer, respectively. The MN1 circuit inductors in Figure All ERSFQ circuits from the digital PCM chip were designed and optimized for at least +25% bias margins. Note that all PCM circuits have one shared bias line for the cell and the input/output monitors. As with the analog PCM, the digital PCM chips from the center and four corners of all fabricated wafers are routinely tested. Figure Since kinetic inductances are not suitable for the implementation of magnetic transformers needed for ac-biased superconducting circuits, they can instead be fabricated using the conventional Nb layers M1/M2, although with the inevitable increase in circuit area. Potentially, one could implement very compact transformers using layered magnetic structures similar to those described in 