Vibrational spectroscopy is a ubiquitous technology that derives the species, constituents, and morphology of an object from its natural vibrations. However, the vibrational spectra of mesoscopic particles -including most biological cells -have remained hidden from existing technologies. These particles are expected to vibrate faintly at megahertz to gigahertz rates, imposing unpractical sensitivity and resolution for current optical and piezoelectric spectroscopy. Here we demonstrate the real-time measurement of natural vibrations of single mesoscopic particles using an optical microresonator, extending the reach of vibrational spectroscopy to a new spectral window. Conceptually, a spectrum of vibrational modes of the particles is stimulated photoacoustically, and correlated to a high-quality-factor optical resonance for the ultrasensitive readout. Experimentally, this scheme is testified by measuring mesoscopic particles with different constituents, sizes, and internal structures, showing an unprecedented signal-to-noise ratio of 50 dB and detection bandwidth over 1 GHz. This new technology is further applied for the biomechanical fingerprinting of single microbial cells with different species and living states. The present method opens up new avenues to study single-particle mechanical properties in vibrational degrees of freedom, and may find applications in photoacoustic sensing and imaging, cavity optomechanics and biomechanics. It is first discovered by Pythagoras that the vibrations of strings are drastically enhanced at certain frequencies, which forms the basis of our tone system. Such natural vibrations ubiquitously exist in objects regardless of their size scales and have widespread impacts on modern science and industry (Fig. Recently, natural vibrations of particles at the mesoscopic scale have received growing interest, since this category includes a wide range of functional particles Here we demonstrate the real-time measurement of natural vibrations of single mesoscopic particles using an optical microresonator, extending the reach of vibrational spectroscopy to a new spectral window. With the formation of whispering galleries through total-internalreflections, the microresonator offers high-Q optical resonances that respond to minute changes of the environment Standard spherical polystyrene particles are first tested to benchmark the detection performance. A single particle is deposited on the silica microspherical resonator with the radius of 30 μm. By setting the energy density of the incident pulse to 2 pJ μm -2 , oscillations are observed in the transmission of probe laser (Fig. We further investigate optical sensitivity of the microresonator. For vibrational modes with frequency ν, the sensitivity should follow the theoretical trend (see Supplementary Note II) where Q o and f o represent the quality factor and resonant frequency of the optical mode, respectively. The coefficient α is determined by the geometry and material of the microresonator. As shown in Fig. Figure Three types of microorganisms, the living cyanobacteria (Synechocystis sp. PCC6803), living Aspergillus sydowii and Aspergillus niger spores, are deposited onto the microresonator's surface (see Methods). The pulse energy density is set to be less than 5 pJ μm -2 to avoid photodamage. Their temporal and spectral characterizations could be obtained routinely, showing an SNR exceeding 20 dB (see Extended Data Fig. To conclude, we have demonstrated the real-time measurement of natural vibrations of single mesoscopic particles using an optical microresonator, extending the reach of vibrational spectroscopy to a new spectral window. The detection capability of this technology was testified by particles with different constituents, sizes, and internal structures. The detection bandwidth exceeding 1 GHz meets the requirements for a wide range of mesoscopic particles, offering invaluable opportunities to investigate biomechanics and nanomechanics at the single-particle level the laser pulse is so short that thermal diffusion can be neglected, the vibration amplitude of the eigen-mode is derived as where ω j and γ j denote the angular frequency and damping rate of the j-th vibrational mode, respectively; d j = ́uj (r) • u e (r)d 3 r represents the spatial overlap of normalized mode displacement field u j (r) with that imposed by the absorption-induced thermal expansion u e (r). The time-domain vibrations of a homogeneous spherical particle triggered out by a laser pulse is theoretically analyzed (Extended Data Fig. A pulsed laser (Standa STA-01-MOPA-SH-3, wavelength 532 nm, pulse width 200 ps, repetition rate 1 Hz-1 kHz) is passed through a variable neutral-density filter to adjust its power, a silver mirror controlled via a threedimensional translation stage to scan its position, and focused onto the target particles with a microscope objective (20×, NA=0.4). The probe light from a tunable continuous-wave diode laser (Toptica, 1550 nm) is coupled to the microresonator via a contacting tapered fiber, and its transmission is received by a 45-GHz-bandwidth photodetector. The detected electrical signals are amplified (SHF 806E, 26 dB at 40 kHz-38 GHz) and recorded by an oscilloscope. To improve the SNRs, 64 traces are averaged in a single measurement. A time-windowed portion of the oscillatory signals is chosen for Fourier transformation according to the desired SNRs and spectral resolution (3.2 μs for most cases, 0.4 μs for the weak signals of the 350-nm-radius hollow polydopamine sphere in Fig. The dye-doped polystyrene spheres (mean radii: 2.8 μm, 2.2 μm, 1.5 μm and 1 μm; Xi'an ruixi Biological Technology Co., Ltd) and hollow black polydopamine spheres (mean radii, 1.8 μm, 700 nm and 350 nm with the thicknesses of about 300 nm, 200 nm and 100 nm respectively; Xi'an Confluore Biological Technology Co., Ltd.) are purchased from commercial suppliers. The suspensions of these particles are treated by ultrasonication, and then transferred onto the microresonator's surface via a fiber microtip. The living cynobacteria (Synechocystis sp. PCC6803), Aspergillus niger spores (ATCC 16404) and living Aspergillus sydowii (ON408995.1) are cultured on a growth medium solidified with agar. To transfer them onto the microresonator, the microorganisms are spread out on the agar medium, and the spherical microresonantor on a standard silica fiber functions as a probe to adsorb the monodisperse microbial particles. Then, the measurements are performed in atmospheric environment shortly. Extended Data Fig. (2) The latter u v depicts the vibration around the equilibrium position. It satisfies the equation of motion and the homogeneous boundary condition The operator L is an Hermitian operator when the boundary condition is homogeneous with a j (t) and u j (r) being the amplitude and the normalized displacement field of the j-th vibrational eigen-mode of the particle, respectively. The equation of motion for each mode is derived simply as where d j = ́uj (r) • u e (r)d 3 r characterizes the spatial overlap of normalized mode displacement field u j (r) with that imposed by the absorption-induced thermal expansion u e (r), and ω j is the angular frequency of the j-th vibrational eigen-mode of the particle. Therefore, the vibration amplitude for the j-th mode after the pulse excitation is derived as Furthermore, consider the energy dissipation rate of mechanical mode γ j that is typically slow enough to be neglected in the transient excitation process, and the vibration amplitude after the excitation can be written as II. High-Q-microresonator-enhanced sensitivity In the microresonator-based vibrational spectrum measurement, the vibrational modes of the particle with oscillation amplitude A and frequency ω = 2πν are acoustically coupled to the microresonator via mechanical contact, which stimulates acoustic waves to alter the refractive index and the boundary of the microresonator; Such acoustic modulation can be equivalent to the modulation on the effective refractive index n eff of the optical mode, and leads to a perturbation on its resonant frequency f o , which is read out in the transmission T of a probe light slightly detuned from the optical resonance with ∆. Therefore, the detection sensitivity of the microresonator to particle vibrations is written as S(ω) = |χ m |S o with the mechanical susceptibility χ m = δn eff A and the optical sensitivity δn eff |. Here, the mechanical susceptibility χ m is determined mainly by the acoustic coupling between the particle and the microresonator, as well as the distance between the particle and the optical mode. In the following, we analyze the optical sensitivity of the microresonator. Theoretically, vibration-induced acoustic waves impose a temporal perturbation on the frequency detuning δ∆(t) between the probe light and the optical mode, which can be written as with its Fourier transform being The equation of motion for the microresonator-microfiber coupled system where a is the optical field inside the cavity, a in is the input optical field, κ = κ 0 + κ ex with κ 0 and κ ex being the intrinsic loss and coupling dissipation of the cavity mode, respectively. The stable solution of the cavity optical field can be acquired as Suppose acoustic modulation results in a perturbation δa(t) from the stable cavity optical field a 0 as with its Fourier transform By substituting Eqs. S13, S17 and S16 into Eq. S15, the input-output equation becomes which is equivalent to According to the input-output relation a out = a in -√ κ ex a = a in -√ κ ex a 0 -√ κ ex δa (t), the transmission of the microresonator-microfiber coupled system is obtained as Here ́ei(ω-ω ′ )t /2π = δ(ω -ω ′ ); Since δ∆(t) is real, we have δ∆(-ω) * = δ∆(ω). Then, the Fourier transform of the transmission can be obtained, whose amplitude |δT (ω)| is (the DC term corresponding to the unperturbed response is ignored) The intensity variation of the transmitted probe light to a perturbation δ∆(ω) on the optical resonance is then derived as When the optical microfiber is critically coupled to the microresonator with κ ex = κ/2 and the cavity detuning is set at ∆ 0 = κ/2, Eq. S23 is simplified as |δT (ω)|/|δ∆(ω)| = (κ 2 + 4ω 2 )/(κ 4 + 4ω 4 ). Therefore, the optical sensitivity to particle vibrations with frequency ω = 2πν can be derived as The natural vibrations of cells are analyzed using a core-shell model which accounts for the elasticity of the rigid cell envelop (including cell membrane, cell wall, and outer membrane) and the viscoelastic properties of the soft cytoplasm The frequency shifts of the (1,2) quadrupole vibrational modes of the Aspergillus Sydowii induced by the microwave irradiation are also analyzed. In our experiment, since no apparent change in external morphology of cell is observed under optical microscopy, the large resonance shifts are expected to mainly result from protein denaturation as well as the drying of free water. The heat-induced protein denaturation occurs typically at a specific temperature and could largely increase cell stiffness (i.e., Young's modulus) After microwave radiation 