We show that spectral form factors of unconventional gapped superconductors have singularities occurring periodically in time. These are the superconductors whose gap function vanishes somewhere in momentum space (Brillouin zone) but whose fermionic excitation spectrum is fully gapped. Many, although not all, of these superconductors are topologically nontrivial. In contrast, conventional fully gapped superconductors have featureless spectral form factors which are analytic in time. Some gapless superconductors may also have singularities in their spectral form factors, but they are not as ubiquitous and their appearance may depend on the details of the interactions among fermionic particles which form the superconductor and on the underlying lattice where the particles move. This work builds on the prior publication Spectral form factor is a way to characterize the energy spectrum of quantum systems. It is defined as a trace of the evolution operator and can be written as a sum over all the energy levels E n of a quantum system. It is closely related to the thermal partition function of a quantum system, coinciding with its formal analytic continuation to the complex values of temperature. Fourier transform of the absolute value square of the spectral form factor produces the correlation between energy levels of the system Behavior of the spectral form factors in quantum many body systems attracted some attention recently Here we show that spectral form factors in unconventional gapped superconductors have singularities which occur periodically in time, while their conventional counterparts have featureless spectral form-factors. More precisely, consider the gap function ∆(p), where p is the (quasi)momentum. In unconventional and especially in topological superconductors it cannot be nonzero everywhere. Rather it vanishes at points, lines or surfaces in the momentum space or in the Brillouin zone. Consider the spectrum of Bogoliubov quasiparticles E(p) for those values p where ∆(p) = 0. Suppose E -is the minimum of E p for all such p. If ∆(p) vanishes at a single point, then we obviously cannot minimize E p and instead take E - to be equal to E(p) calculated at this point. Then the singularities occur at times t n = π(1 + 2n)/(2E -) where n is an arbitrary integer. We show that the nature of the singularities depends on the dimensionality of space and is given by in two dimensional superconductors and in three dimensional superconductors. For superconductors whose underlying fermionic particle move on a lattice, the singularities could also occur at , where E + is the maximum of the excitation spectrum computed where ∆(p) = 0 (if E + is different from E -). The existence of these singularities is not as ubiquitous as that of the ones associated with E -. Let us now demonstrate this by first studying the example of the two dimensional p x + ip y (often abbreviated as p + ip) superconductor. Specifically, we have in mind attractively interacting identical fermions with the Hamiltonian is the kinetic energy of these interacting spinless fermions, λ is the interaction constant and V is the volume of the system. These fermions are known to form a p x + ip y paired fermionic superfluid, which for brevity we will refer to as a p-wave superconductor. It is a class D superconductor Here ∆(p) = (p x + ip y ) ∆ p and ∆(p) = (p x -ip y ) ∆p are the gap functions. ∆ p and ∆p are the magnitudes of the gap functions (the subscript p emphasizes that these are p-wave gap functions). To avoid double counting, the summation over p is restricted to p y > 0. Below all the sums over p for p-wave superconductors will be restricted in this way. Let us use the BdG Hamiltonian to calculate the spectral form factor. To do that, we diagonalize the BdG Hamiltonian for each p. Its eigenvalues ω ± (p) are where Therefore the trace of its evolution operator is (10) Before proceeding to study Z, let us briefly discuss its analytic properties. Each factor S p is obviously an analytic function of time t. However, if S p vanishes for some values of p at some critical time t = t c with all S p remaining nonzero if t deviates from t c , this could make Z nonanalytic at t c (we postpone the discussion whether S p can indeed behave in this way until later). Indeed, suppose S p vanishes at t = t c if p = p c . Quite generally we should expect that in the vicinity of p = p c and t = t c , S p has the following expansion where α and C are some complex constants (we will see later that, even though it may not be obvious right now, the factors S p are generally complex valued). This immediately leads to On the right hand side above the approximate expression for S p valid with p in the vicinity of p c and t -t c small is substituted. The sum above is obviously a singular function of time at t = t c , with the details of the singularity dependent on the dimensionality of space and on whether p c is zero or nonzero. This makes ln Z as well as Z itself a nonanalytic function of time at t = t c (note an obvious similarity between the thermal free energy and ln Z introduced above). Let us now go back to Eq. (10). For a Hamiltonian (7) with given ∆ p , ∆p , and ǫ(p), Eq. ( where T is the temperature and k B is the Boltzmann constant. This equation is solved for the product ∆p ∆ p which enters E(p). The solution to this equation can be used for example to calculate the thermal partition function of the superconductor. In order to adapt this to calculating the spectral form factor, we replace 1/(k B T ) → it, with the result This should be understood as an equation to determine ∆p ∆ p , which should then be substituted into Eq. ( In principle, there could be many solutions of the equation (14). To find the one we should use we should first find the solution of equation ( As a result, the factors cos (tE(p)) generally do not vanish at any t. The exception to that is p = 0 where E(0) = |ǫ(0)| = |μ|, and is independent of ∆p ∆ p . Quite remarkably, this takes us to the previously discussed scenario given by the Eq. ( with an arbitrary integer n, we can write Here and Importantly, α is complex due to ∆p ∆ p being complex. Note that this matches the conjectured form (11). Working in the large V limit and replacing summation over p with integration we find The integral above is taken over p varying from 0 to infinity, although we must remember that only the approximate value for the expression being integrated is written above valid for small p only. In particular, that means that the integral above can be cut off at some momentum scale, avoiding any divergencies at large p. It is then straightforward to see that the leading singularity is The expression here is approximate, valid when t is in the vicinity of t n . Therefore we arrive at a conclusion advertised earlier. The spectral form factor for the 2D p-wave chiral superconductor has periodic logarithmic singularities which occur at times t n , defined above in Eq. (15). It is important for this argument that α is complex and is not real, which in turn is related to ∆p ∆ p being complex. Let us contrast this behavior with that of a conventional s-wave superconductor. Its Bogoliubov-de-Gennes Hamiltonian takes the form Here ∆ s , ∆s are momentum-independent s-wave gap functions. The spectral form factor takes the same form (10) but with the spectrum Here ∆s ∆ s is controlled by the gap equation almost identical to the one for the p-wave superconductor, given by The main point is that, just like in case of Eq. ( (24) This enforces that the gap function must always vanish at p = 0 even if it is a solution of the analytically continued gap equation ( A good second example of a p-wave superconductor is class DIII 3D topological superconductor where σ y and σ μ are Pauli matrices acting on the spin indices of the operators âp and â † p . Its spectrum is also given by the equation ( On the other hand, let us examine 2D spin-singlet chiral d-wave superconductor, which belongs to the symmetry class C. The corresponding Bogoliubov-de-Gennes Hamiltonian is ∆d . What sets this example apart from others is that while the gap function vanishes at p = 0, it is not automatically obvious that the gap function analytically continued to imaginary temperature would still vanish in this limit. To elucidate this further, we suppose that the gap function consists of both d-wave and s-wave pieces, ∆d . With rotationally invariant interactions, the gap equation should decouple into two separate equations for ∆ s , ∆s and for ∆ d , ∆d . If ∆ s is equal to zero for any temperature T , its analytic continuation to imaginary values of T should also be zero. At the same time, just as earlier, ∆d ∆ d becomes a complex number, with the spectrum given by E(p) = ǫ 2 (p) + p 4 ∆d ∆ d /2. leading to the following singularity in the spectral form factor (below β is real, while α is complex) (28) However, if ∆ s is nonzero at some range of temperature, then it may still be nonzero after the analytic continuation 1/(k B T ) → it. Then the superconductor will have a non-singular spectral form factor. To decide whether a particular superconductor of this form will have singularities in its structure factor we need to examine the original Hamiltonian of the interacting fermions which led to this superconductor and see if any s-wave pairing is possible in addition to the d-wave pairing. Therefore, the singularities in this case are not as ubiquitous as in the p-wave case. All superconductors that we looked at so far were gapped to fermionic excitations. Let us now look at an example of a gapless superconductor. As an example, consider a 3D p-wave spin-triplet superconductor which has the Bololiubov-de-Gennes equation This gap function vanishes if p x = p y = 0, for all p z . Furthermore, given ǫ(p) = p 2 /(2m) -μ with μ > 0, the excitation spectrum vanishes at p x = p y = 0, p z = √ 2mμ. Suppose just as in the previous examples, once the temperature is made imaginary, ∆p ∆ p becomes complex, but otherwise no other terms appear in the gap function. However, unlike the previous examples of gapful superconductors, setting p x = p y = 0, we find that E(p z ) now ranges from zero to infinity. As a result, the spectral form factor Z(t) is now an analytic function of time t. Now it is further possible to imagine that the fermions which formed this superconductor move on a lattice, as opposed to a continuous space. If so, then E(p z ), at p x = p 0 now has a maximum somewhere as p z is varied. Denoting the maximum E + it is straightforward to see that this would lead to a singularities in the spectral form factor occurring at times t n = π(2n + 1)/(2E + ). These arguments show that singularities are possible even in gapless superconductors, but they are not as ubiquitous and their existence requires some assumptions. Note however that if μ < 0, then the resulting superconductor is gapful, although not topological. It will still have singularities controlled by E -= |μ|. Coming back to the gapful (topological) superconductors, we can rely on the classification of the topological superconductors Gap function Spectral Form Factor The first three entries in the table above were already worked out above. In particular, class D and class DIII superconductors are p-wave and the singularities in their spectral form factor are ubiquitous. The class C superconductor may have singularities in their spectral form factor if its gap equation excludes the possibility of an additional s-wave gap function. The last entry refers to the class CI topological spin-singlet superconductor in three dimensions Starting from the point on the surface where E(p) has its minimum, following the arguments given here it is easy to see that Here q 1 is the coordinate parametrizing the surface and q 2 is the direction perpendicular to the surface, α is real while β is complex. By analogy with (26) we find just as stated in the table above. Therefore, we see that the type of the singularity in the spectral form factor which occurs in topological superconductors depends only on the dimensionality of space. Finally, we would like to remark that spectral form factors nowadays are accessible to measuring in experiment, using the techniques of the atomic physics. For example, if the superconductor is realized by means of cold ions 