In this study, we investigate the bulk electronic structure of Pb-substituted LaO0.5F0.5BiS2 single crystals, using two types of hard-x-ray spectroscopy. High-energy-resolution fluorescence-detected xray absorption spectroscopy revealed a spectral change at low temperatures. Using density functional theory (DFT) simulations, we find that the temperature-induced change originates from a structural phase transition, similar to the pressure-induced transition in LaO0.5F0.5BiS2. This finding suggests that the mechanism of bulk superconductivity induced by Pb substitution is the same as that under high pressure. Furthermore, a novel low-valence state with a mixture of divalent and trivalent Bi ions is discovered using hard x-ray photoemission spectroscopy with the aid of DFT calculations. More than 20 years have passed since the beginning of the 21 st century, during which several superconductors have been discovered Nevertheless, an unusual property, i.e. anisotropic upper critical field beyond the Pauli limit, has recently been reported in the BiS 2 -based superconductors Recently, it has been reported that bulk superconductivity appears at relatively low Pb concentrations (8-9%) after the disappearance of filamentary superconductivity when the key element for superconductivity, Bi, is partially replaced by Pb In this study, we investigate the bulk electronic structure of LaO 0.5 F 0.5 Bi 1-x Pb x S 2 single crystals with the above Pb concentration using two types of hard x-ray spectroscopy: x-ray absorption spectroscopy and photoemission spectroscopy. Our goal is to gain insight into the bulk superconductivity and the anomaly around 100 K induced by Pb substitution. To reveal subtle temperature changes in the electronic structures, we use a highenergy-resolution fluorescence detection mode for x-ray absorption near edge structure (HERFD-XANES), which can suppress the lifetime broadening effect in the spectrum. Density functional theory (DFT) simulations show that the spectral change is explained by a temperatureinduced structural phase transition, suggesting that the bulk superconductivity is driven by a mechanism similar to that in the high-pressure phase of LaO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 . Hard-x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (HAXPES) results for the Bi valence are in good agreement with the DFT results, indicating the observation of a low-valence state with a mixture of divalent and trivalent Bi ions. Single crystals of LaO 0.5 F 0.5 Bi 1-x Pb x S 2 (x=0, 0.05, 0.09) and LaOBiS 2 were grown by a flux method using CsCl and KCl as flux materials, where x is the nominal content. Filamentary and bulk superconductivity appeared at 3 K for x=0 and 4 K for x=0.09, respectively, while no superconductivity above 2 K was observed for x=0.05. Details of the sample preparation and their properties have been reported elsewhere The HERFD-XANES experiments were performed at the beamline BL39XU of SPring-8 The HAXPES experiments were performed at the beamline BL19LXU of SPring-8 To reproduce the spectra, we performed scalarrelativistic DFT calculations using the WIEN2k code A. HERFD XANES Figure To reproduce the temperature dependence of the HERFD-XANES spectrum for x=0.09, we performed DFT calculations and simulated the spectra using the XSPEC program We also investigated the Pb-derived electronic states. Figure The Bi-and Pb-derived electronic states were further investigated by HAXPES, which is a complementary method for probing bulk electronic structures. Bi 4f core-level HAXPES spectra of LaOBiS 2 and LaO 0.5 F 0.5 Bi 1-x Pb x S 2 for x=0 and 0.09 are shown in Fig. Line-shape analysis shows that the spectral shape of each of the Bi 4f 7/2 or 4f 5/2 state in all three compounds can be accurately reproduced by two Voigtian peaks, as shown in Fig. To investigate the effects of element substitution and temperature variation on the electronic structures near E F , we measured VB-HAXPES spectra. Figure As shown in Fig. As for the temperature dependence of the spectrum at x=0.09, a slight change in the spectral shape was observed, accompanied by a shift of about 110 meV to the high E B side in the low-T phase compared to the high-T phase, rather than a large change in the broad energy range as in the HERFD-XANES spectrum. This spectral shift is larger than those in the Bi 4f and Pb 4f core levels (60 meV and 30 meV, respectively) and is thought to reflect a change in the VB electronic structure with symmetry lowering caused by the structural phase transition to the low-T phase. Next, we discuss the validity of the experimentally obtained valences, which are summarized in Table Note that the above estimates are based on the assumption that all collected photoelectrons came from the bulk. At the surface, the Bi valence has been reported to be closer to +3 than in the bulk Taking advantage of the high energy resolution, we found that the HERFD-XANES spectra show a clear temperature change only in LaO 0.5 F 0.5 Bi 1-x Pb x S 2 (x=0.09), where bulk superconductivity is observed. This change is due to the symmetry lowering of the crystal at low temperatures, suggesting that the bulk superconductivity in the Pb-substituted BiS 2 compound is driven by a mechanism similar to that in the HP phase of LaO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 . The HERFD-XANES, core-level HAX-PES, and VB-HAXPES spectra are consistently understood by the DFT calculations. With the help of the DFT calculations, Bi 4f core-level HAXPES revealed that the doped BiS 2 -based compounds host a mixed state of divalent and trivalent Bi ions at the site of broken local inversion symmetry. This is a novel case for Bi compounds.