Quantum sensors offer unparalleled precision, accuracy, and sensitivity for a variety of measurement applications. We report a compact magnetometer based on a ferrimagnetic sensing element in an oscillator architecture that circumvents challenges common to other quantum sensing approaches such as limited dynamic range, limited bandwidth, and dependence on vacuum, cryogenic, or laser components. The device exhibits a fixed, calibration-free response governed by the electron gyromagnetic ratio. Exchange narrowing in the ferrimagnetic material produces sub-MHz transition linewidths despite the high unpaired spin density (∼ 10 22 cm -3 ). The magnetometer achieves a minimum sensitivity of 100 fT/ √ Hz to AC magnetic fields of unknown phase and a sensitivity below 200 fT/ √ Hz over a bandwidth ≳ 1 MHz. By encoding magnetic field in frequency rather than amplitude, the device provides a dynamic range in excess of 1 mT. The passive, thermal initialization of the sensor's quantum state requires only a magnetic bias field, greatly reducing power requirements compared to laser-initialized quantum sensors. With additional development, this device promises to be a leading candidate for high-performance magnetometry outside the laboratory, and the oscillator architecture is expected to provide advantages across a wide range of sensing platforms. For the published version, refer to Physical Review Applied, DOI: doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.19.044044 In recent years, tremendous experimental effort has advanced quantum sensors Though recent efforts have focused on optically-active paramagnetic defects Consequently, magnetic sensors employing spin-wave interferometry in ferrimagnetic films Here we report a magnetometer using FMR as the magnetically-sensitive frequency discriminator in an electronic oscillator. With this construction, the frequency of the output voltage signal tracks the FMR frequency, which varies linearly with the applied magnetic field. This ferrimagnetic oscillator magnetometer exhibits a minimum sensitivity of 100 fT/ √ Hz to magnetic fields near 100 kHz and sensitivities below 200 fT/ √ Hz from 3 kHz to 1 MHz. As the device encodes the measured magnetic field directly in frequency, superior dynamic range is achieved relative to devices employing amplitude encoding. In addition, the sensor head is simple, compact, and lower power than existing quantum magnetometers of comparable sensitivity. Quantum sensors based on atomic vapors or electron spins in solid-state crystals operate by localizing resonances which vary with a physical quantity of interest. For example, the ambient magnetic field may be determined by measuring a ferrimagnetic material's uniform precession frequency As an alternative to probing the spin system with external signals, however, an oscillator architecture can be arranged to generate a microwave (MW) signal that directly encodes the spin resonance location. Such an oscillator consists of two main components: a frequency discriminator and a gain element, arranged in a feedback loop. The frequency discriminator can be constructed by coupling input MW signals to the discriminator's output through the quantum spins. If the discriminator's input and output are each coupled to the quantum spin resonance, but not directly to each other, the resulting frequency discriminator will pass frequencies near the spin resonance ω y while rejecting all others. The needed gain can be provided by an ordinary RF amplifier; by amplifying the frequency discriminator's output and returning a fraction of this signal to the discriminator's input, sustained self-oscillation can be realized Thus, the oscillator architecture eliminates the need for an external RF source. The limited component count of the oscillator architecture is advantageous for compactness and design simplicity. In addition, the oscillator architecture encodes the spin resonance in frequency, which can offer greater dynamic range and improved linearity compared to amplitude-encoded measurements For an oscillator to operate at steady state, losses through the frequency discriminator and other elements must be exactly compensated by the amplifier, producing unity gain around the oscillator loop. Additionally, the phase-length around the oscillator loop must equal an integer number of wavelengths at the steady-state oscillator output frequency. Together, these requirements constitute the Barkhausen criterion, and with reasonable assumptions the requirements result in Leeson's equation where L 1 2 (f m ) is the single-sideband phase noise amplitude spectral density at offset frequency f m from the carrier, f L is the Leeson frequency (equal to the frequency discriminator's loaded half width at half maximum linewidth), f c is the 1/f flicker noise corner The material with the narrowest known ferrimagnetic resonance linewidth and lowest known spin-wave damping is yttrium iron garnet (YIG), a synthetic, insulating crystal ferrimagnet with chemical composition Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 . Other attractive aspects of YIG are low acoustic damping, less than that of quartz, and well-developed growth processes which yield samples of high crystal quality In crystallographically-perfect YIG, five of every twenty lattice sites, equivalent to one unit formula Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 , are populated by trivalent iron (Fe 3+ , electronic spin S = 5/2). The five trivalent iron atoms occupy three tetrahedral lattice sites and two octahedral lattice sites. Strong superexchange interactions, mediated by oxygen ions between the iron ions, align the three tetrahedral Fe 3+ antiparallel to the two octahedral Fe are desired to achieve better oscillator phase noise performance. Additional relevant properties of YIG are detailed in SM Sec. C [66]. Kittel's formula for the uniform precession frequency of ferromagnetic resonance where γ is the electron gyromagnetic ratio; B = B z ẑ is the applied magnetic field and defines the system's ẑ axis; M z is the magnetization along ẑ, where M z is assumed equal to the saturation magnetization M s with no MW power applied; N x , N y , and N z are the demagnetization factors; and all quantities are in SI units. Demagnetization factors characterize the shape-dependent reduction in internal magnetic field due to the magnetization 3 , and Kittel's formula becomes Kittel's above formula neglects crystal anisotropy, but such effects can be treated perturbatively if needed, as detailed in SM Sec. L [66]. A ferrimagnetic resonance can be used to implement the frequency discriminator discussed in Sec. II, as shown in Fig. where κ 0 , κ 1 , and κ 2 are the unloaded FMR linewidth, input coupling rate, and output coupling rate, respectively, in angular frequency units (see SM Sec. D [66]), and the π/2 phase retardation arises from the gyrator action of the ferrimagnetic material. The power transmission |S 21 | 2 exhibits a Lorentzian line shape, with a maximum at the FMR frequency ω y and a loaded full-width half-maximum (FWHM) linewidth As discussed above, changes in the external DC magnetic field alter the FMR frequency ω y and therefore the oscillator output frequency. The FMR frequency also responds to AC magnetic fields; the mechanism by which AC fields alter the magnetometer output waveform is discussed in SM Sec. F [66]. Operationally, AC magnetic fields are encoded as frequency modulation of the oscillator's output waveform. For example, an AC magnetic field with root-mean-square (rms) amplitude B rms sen and angular frequency ω m produces sidebands at ±ω m relative to the oscillator carrier frequency when applied parallel to B 0 . These two sidebands each exhibit a carrier-normalized amplitude of The oscillator magnetometer's sensitivity can then be determined from the sideband amplitude and the measured phase noise L 1 2 (f m ), which represents the background against which the sidebands are discerned; see SM Sec. F and G [66]. The expected sensitivity is We note a striking feature of the oscillator magnetometer architecture: assuming the oscillator phase noise is well-described by Leeson's equation (Eqn. 1), the signal s ∝ 1/ω m = 1/(2πf m ) and the phase noise amplitude spectral density L 1 2 (f m ) are expected to exhibit nearly identical scaling within a range of frequencies between the noise corner f c and the Leeson frequency f L . Thus, the sensitivity of the device versus frequency f m is expected to be approximately flat for While all presently commercially-available YIG oscillators The device's sensing element is a 1-mm-diameter YIG sphere mounted on the end of an insulating ceramic rod. As shown in Fig. Two cylindrical permanent magnets positioned symmetrically relative to the YIG sphere create a uniform bias magnetic field B 0 = B 0 ẑ of approximately 0.178 T, as depicted in Fig. The YIG sphere's precessing magnetization continuously induces a sinusoidal voltage on the output coupling loop at the magnetization's precession frequency. This MW voltage signal is first amplified and then mechanically phase shifted before passing through a 6 dB directional coupler, as shown in Fig. Under operating conditions, the input power to the sustaining amplifier is P s ≈ 3 dBm. The sustaining amplifier has a measured gain of 10 dB at P s = 3 dBm so that, after accounting for ≈ 2 dB of additional loss, ≈ 11 dBm of MW power is delivered to the input coupling loop. This MW power is estimated to tip the magnetization by ≈ 0.1 radians from the z axis; see SM Sec. H The signal sampled by the 6 dB directional coupler is first amplified by a buffer amplifier and then sent to either a phase noise analyzer for diagnostics and device optimization, or to a mixer which downconverts the signal to an intermediate frequency, ω i , in the MHz range appropriate for a digitizer. The downconverted signal is demodulated to recover the magnetic field time series as described in SM Sec. I The sensitivity of a magnetometer can be determined from the response to a known applied magnetic field along with the measured noise. As AC magnetic fields are frequency-encoded in the oscillator magnetometer's ≈ 5 GHz output waveform, the measured phase noise sets the magnetic sensitivity of the device; see SM Sec. F and G [66]. The oscillator magnetometer's singlesideband phase noise power spectral density L(f m ) is shown in Fig. To verify the device's response matches that predicted a) F r e q u e n c y ( H z ) b) R M S m a g n e t i c f i e l d ( T / H z 1 / 2 ) F r e q u e n c y ( H z ) c) FIG. ). (c) Single-sided magnetic field amplitude spectral density of the ferrimagnetic oscillator magnetometer. The device achieves a minimum sensitivity of approximately 100 fT/ √ Hz at frequencies near 100 kHz, with sensitivities below 200 fT/ √ Hz from 3 kHz to 1 MHz. Blue depicts smoothed data while the raw data is gray. We note that by convention the single-sideband quantity L(f ) is the positive-frequency half of the double-sided phase noise spectral density, distinct from a single-sided spectrum, which is the sum of positive-and negative-frequency components; see Ref. by Eqn. 4, a sinusoidal magnetic field with rms amplitude B rms sen = 2.12 μT is applied to the sensor, the angular frequency ω m of this field is varied, and the carrier-normalized amplitude of the resulting sidebands is recorded. The measured data are in excellent agreement with the theoretical prediction of Eqn. 4, as shown in Fig. Having confirmed the device's frequency response is indeed governed by Eqn. 4, the measured phase noise spectrum can be converted to a sensitivity spectrum by Eqn. 5, and the result is shown in Fig. To operate the device as a practical magnetometer, the oscillator output is mixed down and digitized. The magnetic field time series is recovered from the digitized voltage waveform as described in SM Sec. I [66]. To confirm device performance, a 35 kHz sinusoidal test field B rms sen = 0.9 pT is applied along the sensor's z axis. The resultant amplitude spectral density with the test field on and off is shown in Figs. 3a and 3b respectively, and a time series of the 35 kHz signal size with the test field chopped on and off is shown in Fig. The device phase noise of -132.8 and -154.4 dBc/Hz at 10 and 100 kHz offset frequencies compares favorably to the lowest-phase-noise commercial YIG oscillators presently available The device demonstrated here provides the best AC sensitivity achieved to date for a solid-state quantum magnetometer On the other hand, methods to improve oscillator phase noise would also improve sensitivity and are wellestablished. Increasing the sustaining power P s is a common method to improve oscillator phase noise. However, FIG. this approach would likely improve phase noise only at frequencies above the flicker noise corner f c , and f c itself may increase with larger values of P s Other approaches to improving overall phase noise might focus on the amplifier's additive phase noise. Amplifier-induced phase noise can be mitigated using oscillator-narrowing techniques such as Pound-Drever-Hall locking In conclusion, the magnetometer design reported here offers a unique combination of state-of-the-art sensitivity with realistic prospects for improvement, high dynamic range, compactness, and low power requirements. These advantages could drive widespread adoption of similar quantum sensing devices in the near future. The oscillator architecture can be adapted to simplify highperformance ensemble sensing with a range of quantum materials and in a variety of sensing applications, such as sensing of electric fields A. Variable names and symbols A list of variables and constants referenced in this work is given in Table The phase noise predicted by Leeson's equation can be interpreted as follows: Additive phase noise in the oscillator loop below the Leeson frequency f L passes through the FMR frequency discriminator and is regeneratively amplified into the oscillator's output waveform. Consequently, the system's aggregate phase noise depends strongly on both the Leeson frequency f L and additive phase noise from components within the oscillator loop. The sustaining amplifier, with both flicker phase noise below approximately f c and wideband phase noise characterized by the amplifier noise factor F For a single magnetic domain at absolute zero, YIG exhibits a net magnetic moment equal to that of one Fe 3+ atom per every 20 lattice atoms Magnetometer performance depends upon localizing the ferrimagnetic resonance with precision, accuracy and speed. The precision with which the FMR resonance can be localized, and therefore the ambient magnetic field determined, depends on the FMR intrinsic linewidth κ 0 . Single-crystal YIG exhibits the lowest linewidth of all known ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic materials, with highly polished YIG spheres Minimal values of κ 0 occur when the YIG crystal's magnetic domains are uniformly oriented, which is achieved by applying an external bias magnetic field with sufficient strength to saturate the magnetization The equivalent circuit for a transmission-topology YIG with orthogonal coupling loops (e.g., two coupling loops in planes rotated from each other by π/2, the geometry of this device) is shown in Fig. where ω d is the drive frequency, ω y is the FMR frequency, 1 L is the input coupling rate, and κ 2 = Z0 n 2 2 L is the output coupling rate; the resistance R, the inductance L, the line impedance Z 0 , and the transformer turns ratios n 1 and n 2 are parameters of the RLC model. The parameters ω d , ω y , κ 0 , κ 1 , and κ 2 are all in angular units. The intrinsic linewidth of the FMR filter is given by κ 0 = ωy Q0 where Q 0 is the unloaded quality factor of the YIG sphere, extracted from measurements performed by sweeping ω d while B 0 is fixed. The intrinsic linewidth can also be determined by sweeping the value of B 0 for a fixed value of ω d , and literature values of YIG linewidths are often given in magnetic field units rather than frequency units While changing the coupling loop diameters allows adjustment of κ 1 and κ 2 , the value of κ 0 is less easily varied and depends in part on the chemical purity of the YIG material, the sphere's surface finish, and the uniformity of the bias magnetic field. In practice, we found that the requirement of orthogonal coupling loops is not stringent; minor twisting and positional variation of the coupling loops did not produce problematic off-resonant coupling. We wish to determine the intrinsic linewidth κ 0 of the uniform mode ferrimagnetic resonance from S-parameter data measured by a vector network analyzer (VNA) on a two-port YIG transmission filter, as shown in Fig 4 . From Eqns. 7 and 8, we determine the maximum and minimum of the power transmission and reflection, respectively, The value of the loaded linewidth, can be determined from the distance in frequency between the points where |S 21 | 2 is reduced by 3 dB from its peak value. The system can then be solved for κ 0 , κ 1 , and κ 2 , as there are three equations and three unknowns. Thus, we have For the uniform mode of ferrimagnetic resonance in a spherical sample with saturated magnetization, the time derivative of the instantaneous phase φ(t) obeys where B(t) is the externally applied magnetic field and γ = geμ B ħ (with the electron g-factor g e ≈ 2, the Bohr magneton μ B , and the reduced Planck's constant ħ, so that γ ≈ 2π×28 GHz/T). For the purpose of this discussion, we neglect crystal anisotropy (see SM Sec. L) which introduces higher-order terms into Eqn. The precessing magnetization of the sphere described by Eqn. 16 inductively couples to the output coupling loop, producing a voltage signal which is then amplified by the sustaining amplifier and inductively coupled back to the precessing magnetization; this closed feedback loop produces sustained self-oscillation as described in the main text. The oscillator output voltage is then v(t) = V 0 cos[φ(t)] where V 0 represents the oscillator's voltage amplitude The oscillator phase φ(t) is continuous in time and given by where we have set φ(t = 0) ≡ 0. The total magnetic field B(t) seen by the sensor is the vector sum of a static field B 0 = B 0 ẑ created by the permanent magnets and the ambient field B sen (t) external to the sensor. For simplicity we assume B sen (t) lies along ẑ, but the case of arbitrary B sen (t) is easily worked out (see SM Sec. N). The value of B 0 is assumed to exhibit only slow temporal variation (e.g., due to thermal drift of the magnets or vibration of the mechanical structure holding the magnets) on time scales below the frequencies of interest, so that B 0 can be treated as constant. Then the total magnetic field seen by the ferrimagnetic sphere is B(t) = B 0 + B sen (t), allowing the oscillator phase to be expressed as An arbitrary real waveform B sen (t) can be decomposed into its Fourier series as For simplicity we assume B sen (t) consists of a single spectral component such that B sen (t) = √ 2B rms sen cos ω m t , where ω m is the angular frequency of the ambient external magnetic field and B rms sen is the rms field amplitude. With this simplification, the oscillator phase is The oscillator waveform is then We now outline the steps to manipulate Eqn. 20 to a more convenient form. A similar derivation can be found in Ref. For k ≥ 0, J k (β) may be expressed to leading order in β as [125] where Γ denotes the gamma function, and for integer k the Bessel functions satisfy [125] For β ≪ 1, only terms with small |k| contribute. The series in Eqn. 21 can then be approximated using only the k = -1, 0, 1 terms, giving cos(ω c t + β sin(ω m t)) ≈ cos(ω c t) Comparing Eqns. 20 and 24, we identify ω c = γB 0 and β = √ 2 γB rms sen ωm . Then if γB rms sen ≪ ω m , we have β ≪ 1 and Eqn. 20 can be rewritten as For external fields satisfying γB rms sen ≪ ω m , the B-field FM-modulation results in two antisymmetric sidebands at ±ω m , each with amplitude γB rms sen /( √ 2ω m ). For example, a 1 pT RMS magnetic field at 100 kHz produces two sidebands each with power -134 dBc. As detailed in the preceeding section, a singlefrequency AC magnetic field applied to the sensor results in frequency modulation of the oscillator's carrier at angular frequency ω m . In the frequency domain, this modulation manifests as two sidebands offset by ±ω m from the oscillator's carrier frequency, each with a carriernormalized amplitude of Magnetic field detection then reduces to resolving these two sidebands from the oscillator's measured phase noise. The magnetic sensitivity η(f m ) may be written as a ratio between the phase noise amplitude spectral density L 1 2 (f m ) and the signal due to these FM sidebands, each with carrier-normalized amplitude s. Thus the sensitivity is where L 1 2 (f m ) is the single-sided phase noise spectral density of the oscillator. With optimal synchronous detection of a magnetic field with known phase, the sensitivity is improved by √ 2 over that expected from Eqn. 27, which assumes the phase of the B field is unknown. We also note that for realistic oscillators the phase noise power spectral density is symmetric about the carrier, and thus there is no improvement to be gained by processing both the upper and lower sideband (see SM Sec. J). To predict the frequency dependence of the sensitivity, we can apply Leeson's model of oscillator phase noise to Eqn. 27. Leeson's equation for the single-sideband phase noise of an oscillator as a function of the offset frequency where 2π denotes the Leeson frequency (29) Equation 29 suggests that best sensitivity will occur for frequencies f m satisfying f c < f m < f L . In this region, both the signal and the noise scale as ≈ 1/f m , resulting in an approximately flat frequency response. For the results reported here, we find f c = 6.6 kHz and f L ≈ 600 kHz, and the device's best sensitivity is observed between those two frequencies as expected, as shown in Fig. If We note that setting F = 1 in Eqn. 30 yields a sensitivity equivalent to that of an idealized (that is, thermal noise limited and with ideal amplifier), optimallycoupled (κ 1 = κ 2 = κ 0 /2, assuming an ideal amplifier The above discussion reflects what appear to be fundamental limits of oscillator phase noise. Quantitatively the Leeson effect where S ψ (f m ) is the single-sided power spectral density of additive phase shifts inside the oscillator loop, and S φ (f m ) denotes the single-sided power spectral density of the oscillator's output phase noise. As thermal noise sets a lower bound on S ψ (f m ) and this noise is effectively enhanced in S φ (f m ) for frequencies below f L , an oscillator would appear to be forbidden from reaching the naive thermal phase noise limit [L(f m ) = -177 dBm/Hz, equivalent to S φ (f m ) = -174 dBm/Hz] for frequencies below f L , regardless of any oscillator narrowing techniques that may be used. The same limits are observed in inferometric frequency discriminators The RF magnetic field B rf tips the precessing magnetization away from the applied DC magnetic field B 0 . Given the 11 dBm of MW power applied to the YIG sphere, B rf ≈ 2 × 10 -6 T is estimated from the known geometry. The tip angle is then calculated using For T 2 = 1 π×790 kHz = 400 ns, and approximating T 1 = T 2 /2, we expect θ tip ≈ 0.1 radians. The magnetic field B(t) applied to the sensor is encoded in frequency modulation of the oscillator's output waveform. By demodulating the output waveform, the original time-domain magnetic field signal B(t) may be recovered. We describe that process here. The oscillator's instantaneous phase φ(t) is governed by Eqn. 18, where we assume operation with a sufficiently large bias field to saturate the YIG's magnetization. Differentiating the oscillator's instantaneous phase yields The time domain magnetic field waveform B sen (t) is then determined by calculating As a practical matter, we note the demodulation process is facilitated by applying the Hilbert transform to the (real-valued) voltage waveform of the oscillator, producing a complex signal that allows the instantaneous phase φ(t) to be determined in a simple manner. The phase is then "unwrapped" if necessary so that it is continuous and free from 2π jumps, and finally dφ(t) dt is calculated numerically using the difference in phase between successive points in the digitized signal. The demodulation scheme described above determines the value of the magnetic field from the instantaneous phase of the oscillator. We now detail how the Hilbert transform allows the instantaneous phase φ(t) to be determined, and in particular how φ(t) is isolated from variations in the instantaneous amplitude. Use of the Hilbert transform to achieve this objective requires two conditions be met: first, the additive phase noise φ(t) must be small, i.e. |φ(t)| ≪ 1, and second, the additive phase noise φ(t) and additive amplitude noise α(t) must vary slowly compared to the intermediate frequency out of the mixer ω i (that is, both must have negligible frequency components above ω i ). Both conditions hold for the device in this work. The output of the mixer is digitized and may be written as a real-valued waveform, Given |φ(t)| ≪ 1 (the first condition), trigonometric identities and the small angle approximations (cos φ(t) ≈ 1 and sin φ(t) ≈ φ(t)) allow Eqn. 35 to be rewritten as From Bedrosian's theorem, the second condition (that α(t) and φ(t) vary slowly compared to ω i ) allows the Hilbert transform of v(t) to be calculated by transforming only the high-frequency components cos[ω i t] and sin[ω i t] Again using small angle approximations and trigonometric identities, we obtain the resulting signal, The instantaneous phase of the mixed-down signal ω i t + φ(t) is easily determined by taking the argument of the above. As the quantity [1 + α(t)] is common to both the real and imaginary components, the additive amplitude noise α(t) is thereby isolated from the instantaneous phase. This approach should be compared to the realvalued waveform of Eqn. 35 where there is no direct way to isolate the instantaneous phase from additive amplitude noise. Note that φ(t) is real, so its double-sided power spectrum is symmetric about zero frequency. Therefore, in the frequency domain picture, it is clear we cannot gain any sensitivity by processing both the positive and negative frequency sidebands, as their information is redundant. The test field B rms sen is created by a single-turn coil near the sensor. The coil is connected in series with a 50 Ω resistor and driven by a function generator. The value of B rms sen = 0.9 pT used to evaluate sensitivity is checked by increasing the function generator's voltage by 10 3 × and measuring the field with a commercial magnetic field probe (Beehive Electronics, 100C EMC Probe). The commercial probe measures an rms field of 1.2 ± 0.4 nT, with nearly all uncertainty attributed to the probe's specified calibration uncertainty. This measurement suggests the field during testing is 1.2 ± 0.4 pT rms, consistent with the expected value of 0.9 pT rms using our sensor's known response tied to the electron gyromagnetic ratio. Due to the Coulomb interaction, the wavefunctions of unpaired electrons within a crystal lattice deviate from those of an isolated atom. The distorted spatial wavefunctions couple to the electron spin via the spin-orbit interaction, breaking the isotropy of the spin Hamiltonian. This anisotropy causes the crystal to magnetize more easily along certain directions, giving rise to easy and hard magnetization axes, and introduces a crystalorientation-dependent term into the FMR frequency. Although calculating the value of this term for the general case of an arbitrary-direction magnetic field is somewhat involved where θ is the angle in the {110} plane between the < 100 > crystallographic axis and the externally applied magnetic field, and K1 μ0Ms ≈ -4.2 mT for YIG As the anisotropic contribution to the FMR frequency in Eqn. 39 is additive, anisotropy-induced frequency shifts are not expected to alter the device response to AC magnetic fields to first order in B sen /B 0 . Higherorder anisotropic effects also exist beyond those included in Eqn. 39, but these effects are considered to be negligible for YIG The ZTC alignment described above can mitigate temperature-induced frequency shifts of the FMR; for example, the YIG sphere's temperature might vary as the power applied to the YIG sphere fluctuates. However, fluctuations in applied power could shift the YIG frequency in other ways, for example by reducing M z as the magnetization is tipped away from the z-axis. Here, Kittel's formula in the main text illustrates a key advantage for a sphere over other geometries such as a rod or plane The spin-projection-limited magnetic sensitivity η spl for a spin-based DC magnetometer is where N is the number of total spins and T * 2 is the free induction decay time (i.e. dephasing time). Importantly, Eqn. 40 assumes the N spins are independent. In YIG, there are 4.22 × 10 21 unit formula of Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 per cm 3 , with each unit formula contributing 5 unpaired electrons. For a 1 mm diameter YIG sphere at room temperature We now examine one such additional limit on device performance that may prove to be fundamental. Ther-mal variations in the YIG sphere's magnetization are expected to translate to variations in the sphere's magnetic field. If large enough, such variations could limit the sensitivity of the device. Using the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, the expected thermal magnetic noise can be estimated as where V y is the volume of the YIG sphere. Evaluation at room temperature with M s = 142000 A/m for a 1 mm diameter YIG sphere with Q 0 = 5 GHz / 560 kHz = 8900 gives η the ≈ 190 aT √ s. Under these conditions, this noise is approximately 70 times higher than the spin projection noise calculated above. We note that several papers employ a similar formula Finally, regardless of the fundamental limits, more restrictive practical limits may emerge. For example, the coupling between spins may produce limits on the power that can be applied to probe the resonance, as this coupling gives rise to degenerate spin-wave modes coupled to the uniform precession mode Nominally, the sensor measures the projection of the external magnetic field B sen along the direction of the bias magnetic field B 0 created by the permanent magnet pair, so that the device operates as a vector magnetometer. However, slight errors are introduced by components of B sen orthogonal to the bias magnetic field B 0 . We analyze the origin and magnitude of this error here. The total field seen by the sensor arises both from the permanent magnet which is defined to produce field B 0 along the ẑ direction (i.e. B 0 ≡ B 0 ẑ) and the field to be sensed, B sen . The MW magnetic field applied at the FMR frequency is assumed to oscillate rapidly compared to the sensing bandwidth, allowing its contribution to be neglected. With this approximation, the total field seen by the sensor is Neglecting the perturbative effects of crystal anisotropy (see SM Sec. L), the FMR frequency depends only on |B|. In the limit where B 0 ≫ B sen , the device responds linearly to the component of B sen parallel to B 0 and responds weakly to the component of B sen perpendicular to B 0 , as will be shown. The external field may be decomposed as B sen = B ∥ sen +B ⊥ sen , where B ∥ sen and B ⊥ sen are the external field components parallel and perpendicular to B 0 , respectively. The scalar field is then