Global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) are widely used for navigation and time distribution 1,2,3 , features indispensable for critical infrastructure such as mobile communication networks, as well as emerging technologies like automated driving and sustainable energy grids 3,4 . While GNSS can provide centimetre-level precision, GNSS receivers are prone to many-metre errors due to multipath propagation and obstructed view of the sky, which occur especially in urban areas where accurate positioning is needed most 1,5,6 . Moreover, the vulnerabilities of GNSS, combined with the lack of a back-up system, pose a severe risk to GNSS-dependent technologies 7 . Here, we demonstrate a terrestrial positioning system which is independent of GNSS and offers superior performance through a constellation of radio transmitters, connected and time-synchronised at the sub-nanosecond level through a fibre-optic Ethernet network 8 . Employing optical and wireless transmission schemes similar to those encountered in mobile communication networks, and exploiting spectrally efficient virtual wideband signals, the detrimental effects of multipath propagation are mitigated 9 , thus enabling robust decimetre-level positioning and subnanosecond timing in a multipath-prone outdoor environment. This work provides a glimpse of a future in which telecommunication networks provide not only connectivity, but The limitations of GNSS in urban areas are difficult to overcome. The limited radio bandwidth (~20 MHz) of GNSS systems implies metre level positioning errors due to multipath propagation, i.e. signals reflected off buildings and objects that interfere with the direct line-of-sight (LoS) signal Several systems have been developed to cope with the limitations of GNSS. These include low Earth orbit satellite constellations Here, we describe a terrestrial networked positioning system (TNPS) based on a hybrid opticalwireless telecommunication infrastructure, which provides positioning in urban environments with centimetre to decimetre level uncertainty as well as sub-nanosecond time synchronisation. The system operates independently of GNSS, and many of the risks associated with GNSS are eliminated by the use of a fibre-optic infrastructure in combination with a constellation of terrestrial transmitters that enable received signal power levels one million times higher than typically received GNSS-signal powers. The TNPS demonstrated here is depicted schematically in Fig. The TNPS transmitters and receiver (Rx) are based on programmable universal software radio peripherals (USRPs). Tx stations transmit bursts of modulated radio signals for positioning, navigation and timing (PNT) at a carrier frequency of 3.96 GHz and an effective radiofrequency thus creating a multiband-OFDM signal. Good positioning performance can also be achieved using sparse signal bands (in our case employing only 7 out of 16 subbands), provided that the bands at the bandwidth edges are included The position of the receiver is found from the arrival times of the OFDM signals as follows. The first step consists in determining the delay, τ̂r i , between transmission by Tx-i and reception by the receiver (Methods). From τ̂r i the pseudo-range, ρ r i , is derived, which (at a given time t) can be expressed as In Eq. ( represents the unknown time-dependent clock offset of the receiver, and ε r i (t) is a term that lumps together all errors due to multipath, unknown residual hardware delays, and timing jitter. From the received OFDM signals the receiver determines for each transmitter the delay τ̂r i and pseudo-range ρ r i , from which the receiver position x r (t) and clock offset  r (t) are subsequently solved by maximum likelihood estimation To assess the TNPS performance in an urban environment, static and slow kinematic tests (with the receiver unit carried by either a trolley or a car) were conducted at TGV, and seven test runs were performed in total (see also Methods and Extended Data Fig. Results from full-band and sparse-band OFDM-TD measurements are compared with CP results in Fig. The spread in the record of position errors is partly due to jitter and wander in the transmission times of the PNT signals. We experimentally determined an upper limit of 0.2 ns for these timing variations, which consequently contribute at most 3-5 cm (EW-NS) to the RMSE. The empirical RMSE of the TD positions, however, is appreciably greater, which we attribute to multipath effects. Indications of multipath are also found in the measured pseudo-ranges; Fig. Multipath is therefore a limiting factor in our TNPS, albeit at a much lower level -decimetre instead of metre -than in GNSS positioning by virtue of the much wider BW employed. This is illustrated in Fig. Apart from multipath, radio navigation systems suffer from scenarios where the direct LoS to the transmitter is blocked, but where non-LoS (NLoS) multipath signals are still detected by the receiver, thus leading to position errors. Various strategies to detect and mitigate NLoS propagation in (ultra)wideband systems exist Errors of a few decimetres may also occur for situations in which three base stations -half of the constellation -are excluded. For CP positioning, at least five base stations are required The TNPS also enables accurate wireless time distribution, because the Rx clock offset with respect to WR network time is determined with sub-nanosecond uncertainty (Table The TNPS reported here represents a milestone towards robust, network-based decimetre-level positioning and wireless sub-nanosecond time distribution in urban environments, based on signals that are significantly more difficult to tamper with than GNSS radio signals (because the relatively high signal levels and anticipated density of base stations will limit jamming and in particular spoofing attacks to a small geographic area). However, the potential of any PNT technology to serve as a GNSS backup or next-generation positioning system also depends on the effort needed for its deployment. We here point out several crucial features of our TNPS which enhance its compatibility with existing telecommunication networks, thus reducing the barrier to implementation. First, there is the high technological readiness level of WR: the WR protocol has been standardised Second, our TNPS system may be implemented in ways that circumvent the scarcity of radio bandwidth. Present terrestrial PNT systems primarily make use of unlicensed frequency bands (e.g. the Industrial, Scientific and Medical band at 2.4 GHz in which Wi-Fi operates), while some other systems operate in proprietary spectrum (such as the NextNav Metropolitian Beacon System, which operates in an 8-MHz band around 923.75 MHz Extended Data Fig. Strong reflections are also expected for the antenna of Tx-3, which is affixed to the corner of an adjacent building using a 0.2-m spacer. Five test runs were conducted with the Rx unit carried by a trolley, and two runs were performed with the Rx unit carried in a car (with the antenna mounted on top of the roof of the car; see Extended Data Fig. PNT burst transmissions are driven at a rate of 1 kHz and a duty cycle of 0.14, with each USRP delivering 8.9 dBm to the antenna during a burst. The Rx gain is kept at 20 dB; higher gains are possible but these lead (in our setup) to occasional impairment of the received signals The TDM transmission scheme, shown in Fig. Alternatively, one could maintain the original PNT signals, but lower the PNT transmission rate by a factor of 160 to achieve the same rate as in 4G positioning at an overhead of 0.09%. The 160 MHz BW of the PNT signals is limited by the maximum effective BW of the USRPs. The choice for a 3.96 GHz carrier frequency derives from a radiocommunications license for experimental research, obtained from the Dutch Telecom Agency. Two robotic land-surveying total stations were used to determine the receiver's position during test runs. To this end, two 360° prisms were mounted onto the Rx vehicle, which were tracked by the total stations (see Extended Data Fig. After reception of the OFDM signals, packet synchronisation, Fourier transformation, and channel estimation, the receiver determines for each transmitter the sampled channel frequency response, H, of all used subcarriers The variance of the pseudo-ranges depends inherently on the received SNR level and the spectral configuration of the frequency bands used. As can be seen from Eq. ( From Eq. ( 41. OpenStreetMap. https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright.