Color centers in diamond are one of the most promising tools for quantum information science. Of particular interest is the use of single-crystal diamond membranes with nanoscale-thickness as hosts for color centers. Indeed, such structures guarantee a better integration with a variety of other quantum materials or devices, which can aid the development of diamond-based quantum technologies, from nanophotonics to quantum sensing. A common approach for membrane production is what is known as "smart-cut", a process where membranes are exfoliated from a diamond substrate after the creation of a thin sub-surface amorphous carbon layer by He + implantation. Due to the high ion fluence required, this process can be time-consuming. In this work, we demonstrated the production of thin diamond membranes by neon implantation of diamond substrates. With the target of obtaining membranes of ∼200 nm thickness and finding the critical damage threshold, we implanted different diamonds with 300 keV Ne + ions at different fluences. We characterized the structural properties of the implanted diamonds and the resulting membranes through SEM, Raman spectroscopy, and photoluminescence spectroscopy. We also found that a SRIM model based on a two-layer diamond/sp 2 -carbon target better describes ion implantation, allowing us to estimate the diamond critical damage threshold for Ne + implantation. Compared to He + smart-cut, the use of a heavier ion like Ne + results in a ten-fold decrease in the ion fluence required to obtain diamond membranes and allows to obtain shallower smart-cuts, i.e. thinner membranes, at the same ion energy. Diamond is one of the leading material platforms for quantum information science (QIS) not only for its unique material properties, but for the presence of optically-active lattice defects, known as color centers. Indeed, these diamond defects' properties -such as spindependent optical transitions To make this process more efficient, by reducing beamtime and cost, the smart-cut can be performed with a heavier ion, such as neon. In this work, we report the fabrication of ultrathin diamond membranes through Ne + implantation of diamond. We used Ne + instead of other heavier noble gases because smart-cut requires substrate atoms and irradiating ions to have comparable size. Larger ions, such as Ar + , Kr + or Xe + , do not penetrate the surface easily, leading to structural damage limited at the target surface resulting in an increased sputtering yield Diamond membranes were obtained by implantation of 3×3×0.25 mm 3 optical-grade (≤ 1 ppm [N]) singlecrystal diamonds produced by Element Six. Diamond plates were implanted with 20 Ne + with an energy of 300 keV with a fluence ranging from 1.38×10 15 to 11×10 15 ions/cm 2 (see Table The implanted diamonds were glued in the center of a Petri dish, which was then filled with a saturated solution of boric acid in deionized (DI) water To simulate the defect density profile generated by Ne + implantation of diamond, we used Stopping Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) Monte Carlo simulation software FIB milling and SEM imaging were performed with a FEI Nanolab 650 microscope. We used a Ga + FIB accelerated at 30 kV with a current of 3 nA to obtain a substantial diamond etching rate, whereas SEM was operated in secondary electron mode with an acceleration voltage of 5 kV. To reduce charging effects during the analysis, a layer of Pt was deposited over the region of interest before FIB milling. This layer also helped to clearly determine the position of the sample surface during SEM imaging of the diamond cross section, thus allowing to correctly determine the damaged layer depth. Raman and PL analysis were obtained with a WITec alpha300 Raman system. The excitation was provided by a 532 nm laser with 3.4 mW output power which was focused on the sample surface with a 100× 0.9 NA objective to a laser spot diameter of ∼ 20 μm. The emitted light was dispersed with a 1800 g/mm grating and collected by a CCD camera. Schematics of the Ne + smart-cut process are given in Fig. relative Ne + implantation fluence are reported in Table To measure the thickness and the depth of the amorphous layer, we FIB-milled the implanted substrate until the damaged layer was exposed, then used SEM to image the diamond cross section, as shown in Fig. To release the diamond membrane, we removed the amorphous carbon layer by EC etching. The samples were partially etched, so that the membranes were still attached on the diamond substrates after the EC etching, as shown in Fig. Results for the structural analysis performed with Raman spectroscopy are shown in Fig. When observing the amorphous carbon layer thickenss and depth, we could observe that simulations (Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated the fabrication of thin diamond membranes by Ne + implantation of diamond plates. The resulting membranes have tunable thicknesses, ranging from 39 ± 4 nm to 222 ± 11 nm, depending on the Ne + ions fluence. Moreover, by addressing the discrepancy between the experimental results and SRIM simulation, we obtained an estimate for diamond amorphization threshold. The use of a heavier ion, compared to the standard He + "smart-cut", has two main advantages. Firstly, it allows to reduce the implantation fluence required to form the amorphous layer by more then a factor 10. Furthermore, at the same ion energy Ne + has a smaller implantation depth compared to He, leading to a shallower damaged layer in turn resulting in a thinner diamond membrane. These two points, when considering that these smart-cut membranes are a sacrificial layer etched after being used as seeds for high-quality diamond overgrowth, show the relevance of our findings. A faster and more efficient method to produce thin diamond membranes to use as CVD templates for highquality diamond overgrowth may benefit a wide range of diamond membranes applications, such as quantum information processing, nanophotonics, or diamond-based electronics.