Manipulating the electromagnetic (EM) reflection behavior from an arbitrary surface dynamically on arbitrary design goals is an ultimate ambition for many EM stealth and communication problems, yet it is nearly impossible to accomplish with conventional analysis and optimization techniques. In this paper we present a reconfigurable conformal metasurface prototype as well as a workflow that enables it to respond to multiple design targets on the reflection pattern with extremely low on-site computing power and time. The metasurface is driven by a sequential tandem neural network which is pre-trained using actual experimental data, avoiding any possible errors that may arise from calculation, simulation or manufacturing tolerances. This platform empowers the surface to operate accurately in a complex environment including varying incident angle and operating frequency, or even with other scatterers present close to the surface. The proposed data-driven approach requires minimum amount of prior knowledge and human effort yet provides maximized versatility on the reflection control, stepping towards the end form of an artificial-intelligence-based tunable EM surface. It has been decades since the idea was first proposed to control EM field behaviour with metamaterials -structures with subwavelength geometrical details Meanwhile, recent years have witnessed the emergence of exploiting neural networks (NNs) in complicated EM/photonic systems. On the one hand, as a good regressor of highly non-linear functions, NNs provide a cost-efficient solution to many analysis problems, from solving Poisson's equations This Article aims to demonstrate one possible universal NN-driven scheme to realize an intelligent conformal surface that can respond to arbitrary design goals. We start by demonstrating a practical realization of a tunable conformal surface operating at microwave frequencies, whose reflection pattern can be controlled with multi-channel bias voltages. A sequential neural network architecture is then proposed, which can take free-form design targets on the pattern and environmental factors as the input. Instead of using data obtained with full-wave simulations to train the network, as is a common practice in most NN assisted EM research, we propose using actual measurement data, which turns out to be fast, accurate and very adaptive to different environments. Considering the versatility of the proposed workflow, we believe this work paves the way for the next generation of tunable EM devices working under extremely complex and dynamic environments. The conformal metasurface design is based on a classical tunable reflective metasurface topology in While this continuous-phase tuning approach generally provides greater degrees of freedom than discrete-state tuning methods like binary phase states with pin-diodes (also known as phase coding) Fig. Determining the relationship between the reflection pattern and a given bias combination D(θ) = f (V) can be challenging, due to the non-linear relationship between bias voltages, local reflection phases and directivity to certain directions. Additionally, the multireflection effect in the concave regions invalidates any theoretical models that consider the surface as simply a reflective antenna array Consider the fact that a simple feed-foward network (FFN) can theoretically approximate any given function provided large enough scale, it is tempting to believe it can be used to find the underlying pattern-voltage mapping V = f -1 (D). The pitfall lays in that the design parameters and design goals usually have a multiple-to-one relationship. In our case, similar or even identical reflection patterns may correspond to very different bias voltage combinations. When the network is trained with gradient descent methods, conflict gradients may arise from data with very similar input (i.e. pattern) but very different labels (i.e. bias voltages), preventing the parameters from converging. For a problem where the input contains less information than the output, as in this case, a generative type of neural network is necessary. Recent large generative models such as diffusion In tandem architectures, a predictor is first trained to solve the analysis problem, in our case, the bias-pattern mapping; then another network, the desinger, is trained to handle the synthesis procedure -determining the bias combination given a specific pattern. The designed bias can be fed into the predictor to produce an expected pattern D, and the performance can be evaluated by comparing the discrepancy between D with the design goal D, which serves as the loss function for training designer network. Importantly, the second step does not involve D -V mapping from any dataset, thus there is expected to be no gradient conflict. Essentially, instead of fitting the reverse function f -1 (•), the network aims at seeking any function that simply optimizes the design performance. Notice in conventional tandem networks reported by previous works, a design target with the exact form as the predictor's output is required, which largely limits its practicality. In many cases, free-form design goals are required, for example, one may want to specify several target directivity values in certain directions without having to constructing the entire pattern. To enable this free-form input, we introduce the recurrent neural network (RNN) layer in the designer. RNN is typically utilized to process temporal signals such as video and speech For the predictor, convolutional layers are employed, which is based on the physical knowledge of a linear phased array To allow the surface to operate with changing incident frequency and under different incident angles, this varying environmental information can be also cascaded to the input design goal vectors in the designer, and to the input bias-voltage vectors in the predictor (Supplementary Note 5). Here we demonstrate four scenarios in which the conformal metasurface may operate, with an increasing complexity as follows: A) the simplest case of a flat surface operating under a normally incident plane wave at a single frequency; B) a curved surface, under normal incidence, at a single frequency; C) a curved surface working in a varying environment: with incident wave angles ranging from -30 • to 30 • , and a frequency band from 4.5GHz to 4.7GHz, and D) a curved surface under varying incident angle and frequency, with a plastic scattering object present in front of the surface, disturbing the reflective pattern. The pattern data is gathered using a setup in an anechoic chamber shown in Fig. For cases with constant environment (case A and case B), 20,000 samples are collected with random combinations of bias voltages ranging from 0 V to 18 V on each channel, and for case C and D, 4,000 random bias samples are collected for each incident angle, with 13 incident angles; 5 random frequencies within the band of interest are sampled for each incident/bias setup, making a total 260,000 samples (Supplementary Note 4). As the response time of the varactor diodes is relatively fast, on the order of nanoseconds, the data collecting speed is mostly limited by the response time of the control/measurement instrument being used, generally on the order of milliseconds. To obtain a stable result for our setup, 20 ms wait time is used in between samples and the total data collection time is on the order of several hours, details listed in Table The data is split 80/20 as the training/test set to train and evaluate the predictor. Extended Data Fig. Training the designer network is a non-supervised learning process, since the label for any design targets is itself: the loss function is defined by the masked means square error (MSE) on target directions L(T, D) = 1 nt nt i=1 (D i -Di ) 2 . In this demonstration, we randomly generate sequences with up to five targets. In practice we find each goal needs to be repeated for three to four times in order for the network to fully memorize it, thus for the result to converge, the sequence length l t is chosen to be 20. Considering the energy distributing effect for multiple targets, the directivity ranges for different target numbers n t is [0, D max / √ n t ], where D max = 8.85 is the maximum directivity that can be ideally achieved with the surface aperture. For case A and B, 100,000 samples are generated, and for case C and D, 260,000 samples (Supplementary Note 5). The data is again split 80/20 for training/test set, and the performance is shown in Fig. It is worth noticing that this performance is evaluated on random targets that is not necessarily physically feasible, such as the existence of a peak and a null in close proximity, or strong beams at the end-fire direction. By using large training set, the physical limit of the surface capability is approached. Compared with the training process, the prediction of the network consumes minimal computing resources. Therefore, this trained network can be deployed on modest micro-controllers with very limited computing power. In Table 2 On a lite micro-controller Raspberry Pi 4, specs given in Methods. Being able to specify target directivities at multiple directions makes the surface suitable for numerous applications. One simple example is to reduce the back-scatter of a surface for manipulating RCS in a dynamic environment -by specifying a null at the direction of the incoming wave, the surface can be constantly optimized to reduce the mono-static RCS to a single station, as shown in Fig. In this paper, we present a prototype of a flexible programmable reflective surface working at microwave frequencies, and a machine learning model that allows it to respond to real-time free-form targets. We demonstrate how powerful a small-scale neural network is in solving inverse design problems in a highly non-linear photonic/EM system. We also demonstrate how an experimental-data-driven model enables the platform to be inherently immune to errors and uncertainties within the design, allowing an accurate analysis/synthesis of the system with minimum effort in theoretical analysis and modeling. The proposed sequential tandem architecture can potentially be accommodated to any real-time inverse design problem in different science/engineering fields by simply adjusting the detailed network layer structure and dimensions. The rigid layer is made with 62 mil Rogers RT/Duroid 5880 material and the flexible layer is made with 2 mil polyimide substrate, bonded together with 6 mil preprag. The unit periodicity is 13 mm along the column and 13.76 mm across the column with 0.76 mm separation in between columns (Supplementary Note 1). The top copper layer is protected with ENIG finish and the soldermask is only around varactor footprints for soldering purposes. Ground plane copper layer and d.c. bias feeding network copper layer are protected with flexible coverlay. GaAs Hyperabrupt varactor diode Macom MA46H070-1056 are used across the units. Each channel is protected by a 10kΩ series resistor RNCF0603TKY10K0 by Stackpole Electronics Inc. The static reflection spectrum of a flat metasurface is measured with a single horn RCDLPHA2G18B by RF-Lambda. S 11 is recorded with an Agilent E5071C VNA for 3 cases: 1) bare horn, 2) metatasurface in front of the horn, and 3) an aluminium plate of the same size in front the horn. The effective reflection amplitude and phase are then calculated (Supplementary Note 2). The example curve in case B,C and D is a spline with 4 anchor points. The plastic scatter in case D is a 3-D printed 3 cm x 3 cm x 20 cm PLA cylinder (Supplementary Note 3). The pattern collection test bench is controlled by a single controller PXIe-8135 by National Instruments(NI) running python 3.7. For the bias voltage supply, three 8channel 16-bit DAQ cards NI PXI-6733 and a d.c. source Keithley 2410 are used. The azimuth scanning is realized with an ETS Lindgren 2005 motor and the incident control is facilitated by a ZOSKAY DS3235SG servo motor, driven by an Adafruit FT232H breakout and a Adafruit 12-bit PMW driver (Supplementary Note 3). Directivity and RCS are calculated with respect to the measured reflection from an aluminum plate of the same size as the board. Blank case calibration and time-gating are used in post-processing to reduce noise and undesired reflection from the experiment setup (Supplementary Note 4). The neural network is implemented using TensorFlow 2.6.0 under Python 3.9.5, and is trained on the UCSD Data Science/Machine Learning Platform (DSMLP) using four Intel XeonGold 6130 CPU @2.1 GHz core and one NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU. The designer consists of 3 recurrent layers and 3 flat fully connected layers. The predictor consists of 3 convolutional layers and 3 flat fully connected layers. The parameters are trained with ADAM For visual examples in Fig. 