Optical imaging through scattering media is an important challenge in a variety of fields ranging from microscopy to autonomous vehicles. While advanced wavefront shaping techniques have offered significant breakthroughs in the past decade, current techniques still require a known guide-star and a high-resolution spatial-light-modulator (SLM), or a very large number of measurements, and are limited in their correction field-of-view. Here, we introduce a guide-star free noninvasive approach that is able to correct more than 3 • 10 5 scattered modes using just 100 holographically measured scattered random light fields. This is achieved by computationally emulating an image-guided wavefront-shaping experiment, where several 'virtual SLMs' are simultaneously optimized to maximize the reconstructed image quality. Our method shifts the burden from the physical hardware to a digital, naturally-parallelizable computation, leveraging state-of-the-art automatic-differentiation optimization tools used for the training of neural-networks. We demonstrate the flexibility and generality of this framework by applying it to imaging through various complex samples and imaging modalities, including anisoplanatic multi-conjugate correction of highly scattering layers, lensless-endoscopy in multicore fibers, and acousto-optic tomography. The versatility, effectiveness, and generality of the presented approach have great potential for rapid noninvasive imaging in diverse applications. High resolution optical imaging and light control in complex media are crucial for a diverse array of applications, spanning from microscopy While scattering of coherent light is a complex and random process, it is also a deterministic one, and it can be physically undone by high resolution wavefrontshaping using computer controlled spatial light modulators (SLMs) or nonlinear phase-conjugating crystals Although the performance of wavefront-shaping in laboratory experiments is well beyond the capabilities of any conventional microscope When sufficient isoplanatism is present, i.e. when the scattering is tilt-invariant to a sufficient degree, also known as the 'optical memory-effect' Recently, to overcome the requirement for guide-stars, noninvasive focusing and imaging was performed via fluorescence variance optimization The proposed approach builds upon image-guided wavefront shaping Interestingly, computational image-guided correction is also employed in computational adaptive-optics (CAO) To showcase the effectiveness and flexibility of our approach we experimentally apply it to various complex media and measurement approaches, including highly scattering layers, flexible multi-core fibers, and acousto-optical tomography datasets. The simple gradient-descent code naturally lends itself to adaptation to different targets or imaging modalities. Over 70 years ago, Dennis Gabor invented holography as an approach to overcome aberrations in electron microscopes The principle of image-guided computational wavefront-shaping together with a schematic representation of the experimental setup and a sample experimental result are presented in Fig. In image-guided wavefront-shaping a physical wavefront correction is found by varying an SLM phase-pattern to optimize the spatially-incoherent image quality metric The object image is reconstructed by digitally reversing the physical propagation through the complex medium, most simply modeled as a thin phase mask (see Methods), a simplification that will be relaxed below. Specifically, at each iteration of the algorithm, t, the incoherently-compounded object image is reconstructed by tracing back each of the measured fields through a correction mask, e -iφt(r) , and digital backpropagation of a distance -z prop to the estimated plane where the object lies. Since the computationally reconstructed image quality depends in a well defined fashion on the virtual SLM phase pattern (see Methods), efficient automatic-differentiation based gradient-descent search after the phase pattern yielding the optimal image quality can be performed. This is done in a straightforward fashion using a GPU-optimized Python library developed for the training of deep neural networks Importantly, while the digital reconstruction process is based on back-propagating the recorded fields by the estimated distance to the object plane, knowledge of this distance is not required since the phase-mask optimization also effectively finds the object position through the possible addition of a spherical phase mask in a computational autofocus process. Applying a digital correction with a 'virtual SLM' rather than a physical SLM carries several important advantages as we demonstrate below: it allows for a fast acquisition process that is adapted to dynamically varying media, it allows parallel optimization of a very large number of controlled DoFs, orders of magnitude more efficient than current wavefront-shaping optimization approaches such as genetic algorithms. Finally, the computational correction allows the use of multiple virtual SLMs conjugated to different planes in the complex medium. This enables the correction of anisoplanatic distortions and imaging objects that extend beyond the memoryeffect range. All of these features are not possible with physical iterative wavefront optimization and carry great potential for many applications. As a first demonstration of guidestar-free, high DoF widefield computational wavefront-shaping we present results of imaging a USAF resolution target through a highly scattering diffuser (60 • light shaping diffuser, Newport). Using only 100 holographic measurements we are able to effectively correct the wavefront distortion using a virtual SLM with 600×600 DoFs. The results presented in Fig. As mentioned above, it is not required to know in advance the object distance, z obj . The optimization successfully recovers the object even when a different backpropagation distance, z prop , is used. It compensates for the propagation difference by an additional spherical phase mask correction (see Supplementary Fig. The results of Fig. Figure To demonstrate the versatility of our approach we have applied it to several lensless endoscopic imaging experiments performed with MCFs having either ordered and disordered array of cores, with negligible and non-negligible cross-talk, correspondingly. Importantly, this was achieved using the same setup and reconstruction algorithm as in Fig. Using N = 100 captured holograms of the field at the proximal MCF facet (Fig. As a final demonstration of the applicability of the presented approach to a wide range of experimental settings and imaging modalities, we apply it to a holographic dataset from an acousto-optic tomography (AOT) experiment (Fig. In AOT a focused ultrasound spot is used to locally modulate light at chosen positions inside the sample (yellow circles in Fig. Here, we utilize an experimental holographic dataset obtained from an AOT setup to reconstruct the image of an extended object hidden inside a complex sample with optical diffraction-limited resolution. This order-of-magnitude improvement in resolution over the state-of-the-art wavefront-shaping AOT techniques Imaging the target object by wavefront-shaping without the acousto-optic modulation is extremely challenging for two reasons: first, the diffused illumination illuminates an area that can be considerably larger than the object, resulting in very low contrast incoherently-compounded initial images. Second, the object may extend well beyond the memory-effect of the sample. Acousto-optical modulation allows to noninvasively isolate small portions of the object that can be reconstructed with high fidelity with our approach when a sufficient memory-effect is present, as we demonstrate below. For each of the m = 1..M ultrasound focus positions, the N measured fields (Fig. We have demonstrated a holography-based computational method for noninvasive guide-star free high-resolution imaging through complex media. Our approach eliminates the need for guide stars or SLMs, does not require knowledge or measurement of the medium's reflection-matrix, control or knowledge of the illumination, or labeling of the target. By leveraging state-of-the-art automatic-differentiation optimization tools used for the training of neural-networks, our physical-model based method allows an efficient parallel multi-conjugate correction of a number of DoFs significantly exceeding the number of frames, captured using a simple experimental setup. In the presented embodiment, only the correction phase masks were optimized. However, the optimization can be extended to additional parameters, such as the distances between correction planes, object position, and experimental imperfections. We note that while the presented implementation allows automatic determination of the object axial position, it is agnostic to its lateral position, as transverse shifts have no effect over the image metric. In our experiments we have used randomly varying illumination to generate the required number realizations. These may also be generated by natural dynamics of the object or sample at the illumination path, as long as the scattering between the object and the camera remains constant. The number of captured frames can be potentially reduced by a higher pixel-count acquisition, where the incoherent compounding is of different sub-apertures rather than sequential acquisitions. The challenge of imaging and sensing through complex media has great practical importance in optics, but also a deep fundamental physical nature and a long history, stretching well beyond optics, through the fields of medical ultrasound, geophysics, and radar, as some examples. The generality of our approach lends itself to this wide variety of applications. One can easily modify the image metric or physical model to tackle various imaging tasks, domains, and modalities, from acoustics to radar. Considering an object that is described by an amplitude and phase mask, whose complex field transmission is given by O(r). Our goal is to reconstruct the transmission function |O(r)| 2 using N holographic complex-valued field images recorded at the proximal facet of the complex medium, E prox,n (r), n = 1, . . . N . Each field is obtained when a different random and unknown spatially-coherent speckle field illumination of the object, S n (r). The forward physical model connecting the desired object pattern with the field measured by the camera at each speckle illumination is obtained by propagating the object field, O n (r) = O(r)S n , through the scattering medium. Considering isoplanatic scattering, i.e. assuming that the object extent is within the memory-effect range where P z (•) represents a propagation over a distance z Given the holographically-measured proximal fields, E prox,n (r), the iterative computational inversion process aims at simultaneously finding both the phase mask representing the complex medium, φ(r), and the object pattern. This is performed by computationally emulating an image-guided wavefront-shaping experiment, where the spatial phases of a 'virtual SLM' correction phase mask are optimized to enhance the quality of the reconstructed incoherently-compounded object image. At each iteration, t, the incoherently-compounded object image is reconstructed by tracing back each of the measured fields through the correction mask, e -iφt(r) , and propagating a distance -z prop to the object estimated plane by the angular spectrum method The incoherently compounded image is formed by averaging the intensity patterns of the back-propagated fields: The computational inversion process begins by drawing an initial virtual SLM phase pattern φ 0 (r), with the subscript index denoting the iteration number. To achieve a reconstruction of |O(r)| 2 , the phase φ t (r) is varied via a gradient-descent algorithm aimed at optimizing the image quality metric Q t . A large variety of image quality metrics can be used Once the image quality of I t (r) is calculated, it can be easily differentiated with respect to φ t (r) using automatic differentiation. The gradient-descent algorithm works by updating the phase mask by taking a step of size α in the direction of optimal image quality: Using this updated phase, the process is iteratively repeated until a predefined maximum number of iterations is passed or if another heuristically pre-determined stopping condition is reached, ∆φ t = α ∂Qt ∂φt(r) ≤ ∆φ stop . A detailed description of the experimental setup is given in Supplementary Section 1. Briefly, the random realizations of illuminations were generated by illuminating an optical diffuser (Newport light shaping diffusers of either 30 • or 60 • scattering angle) placed on a controllable rotation mount (Thorlabs K10CR1). In all experiments except the acousto-optic experiment, the laser source was a 20-mW Helium-Neon laser (Thorlabs HNL210L), and the rotating diffuser was placed at a small distance (∼ 1.4cm) from the USAF-1951 resolution target (Thorlabs R1DS1N). In the acousto-optic experiment (Fig. In the experiment presented in Fig. In all experiments except for the acousto-optic experiment, a 4-f telescope composed of a microscope objective (Olympus PLN 20X -1-U2B225), and an f = 100mm tube lens, images the proximal facet of the complex medium on the camera plane (Andor Zyla 5.5 sCMOS). The results presented in Fig. 