Recently the superconducting diode effect (SDE) has attracted a lot of attention due to new possibilities in the field of superconducting electronics. One of the possible realizations of the SDE is the implementation in superconducting hybrid structures. In this case the SDE is achieved by means of the proximity effect. However, the optimal conditions for the SDE quality factor in hybrid devices remain unclear. In this study we consider the Superconductor/Ferromagnet/Topological insulator (S/F/TI) hybrid device and investigate the diode quality factor at different parameters of the hybrid structure. Consequently, we reveal important parameters that have crucial impact on the magnitude of the SDE quality factor. The superconducting (or supercurrent) diode effect (SDE) is the superconducting analog of the semiconducting diode effect in p -n junctions. While in normal systems the diode effect corresponds to the conduction of the normal current in the only one direction, the superconducting diode effect involves the nonreciprocity of the supercurrent 1 . The discovery of such effect brings many potential applications in low-power logic circuits as quantum computing and spin-based electronics 2,3 . Various systems that can behave as superconducting diodes have been recently theoretically proposed The "conventional" SDE devices require both inversion and time-reversal symmetry breaking in 2D superconducting films 1 . The inversion symmetry can be broken by introducing the spin-orbit coupling. Experimentally it can be achieved in hybrid structures by proximity to a three-dimensional topological insulator (TI), in su-perconductors with Rashba spin-orbit coupling (like in polar SrTiO 3 films 40 , few-layer MoTe 2 in the T d phase or MoS 2 6,41,42 , and twisted bilayer graphene The breaking of inversion and time-reversal symmetries in 2D superconductors allows for a formation of the helical superconducting phase The situation when the exchange field, superconductivity and SOC coexist intrinsically is rare and largely unexplored from the point of view of magnetoelectrics At the same time bringing all ingredients together can be easily achieved in hybrid devices based on a combination of conventional materials: superconductors (S), three-dimensional topological insulators (TI) and ferromagnet (F). Hybrid superconducting diode can be realized as a F/S/TI/S/F Josephson junction (Josephson SDE) The nonreciprocity of the critical current can be quantified by the superconducting diode quality factor, where the I ± c are external positive and negative currents parallel to the S/FI interface. We have already shown that η is finite in the considered system The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we formulate theory of the superconducting diode effect in the framework of the quasiclassical Usadel equations for mesoscopic superconductors. In Sec. III we use this theory to calculate the phase diagrams of the superconducting diode effect for various parameters of the hybrid structure under consideration. Finally, we summarize the key points of the research in Sec. IV. In this section we present the system under consideration depicted in Fig. where Here Ψ † (r) = (Ψ † ↑ (r), Ψ † ↓ (r)) is the creation operator of an electron at the 3D TI surface, ẑ is the unit vector normal to the surface of TI, α is the Fermi velocity of electrons at the 3D TI surface and μ is the chemical potential. σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is a vector of Pauli matrices in spin space and h = (h x , h y , 0) is an in-plane exchange field, which is assumed to be nonzero only at x < 0. The superconducting pairing potential ∆ is nonzero only at x > 0. Therefore, effectively the TI surface states are divided into two parts: one of them at x < 0 possesses h = 0 and can be called "ferromagnetic", while the other part corresponding to x > 0 with ∆ = 0 can be called "superconducting". Below we will use subscripts f and s to denote quantities, related to the appropriate parts of the TI surface. The potential term V (r) includes the nonmagnetic impurity scattering potential The superconductivity and in-plane exchange field is assumed to be proximity induced due to adjacent superconducting and ferromagnetic layers. Thus we can imagine the system to be a planar hybrid structure that consists of superconductor S and ferromagnetic layer F on top of three-dimensional topological insulator TI as shown schematically in Fig. where ĝs(f) is the spinless Green's functions matrix in the particle-hole space in the superconducting (ferromagnetic) part of the 3D TI layer, n F = p F /p F = (n F,x , n F,y , 0) is a unit vector directed along the quasiparticle trajectory and n ⊥ = (n F,y , -n F,x , 0) is a unit vector perpendicular to the quasiparticle trajectory and directed along the quasiparticle spin, which is locked to the quasiparticle momentum. In our theoretical analysis, we consider the diffusive limit, in which the superconducting coherence length is given by expression ξ s = D s /2πT cs , where D s is the diffusion coefficient and T cs is the critical temperature of the bulk superconductor (we assume = k B = 1) and the elastic scattering length ξ s . We also neglect the nonequilibrium effects in the structure In the following we outline the nonlinear equations to calculate the SDE effect in the system under consideration. The quasiclassical Usadel equation for spinless Green's functions is Here D is the diffusion constant, τ z is the Pauli matrix in the particle-hole space, ∇X = ∇X + i (h x êy -h y êx ) [τ z , ĝ] /α. The gap matrix ∆ is defined as ∆ = Û iτ x ∆(x) Û † , where ∆(x) is a real function and transformation matrix Û = exp (iqyτ z /2) . The finite center of mass momentum q takes into account the helical state. The Green's function matrix is also transformed as ĝ = Û ĝq Û † . Inclusion of the magnetization component h y produces no quantitative effect neither on the supercurrent in y direction of the bilayer nor on the critical temperature in the S part. It only enters the solution f f as a phase factor exp (2ih y x/α) In the hybrid structure under consideration the helical state appears in the system in the following way. In our system the Zeeman field and superconducting region are spatially separated so that the helical state is realized via the proximity effect through the S/F interface. The helical state in the system is also characterized by the order parameter with spatially inhomogeneous phase, however the supercurrent density is not uniform in the structure. The total current across the hybrid structure is equal to zero. Thus, this state is called hybrid helical state To facilitate the solution procedures of the nonlinear Usadel equations we employ θ parametrization of the Green's functions Substituting the above matrix into the Usadel equation (7), we obtain in the S part of the TI surface x > 0: and in the F part x < 0: where ξ f = D f /2πT cs , and D f is the diffusion coefficient of the ferromagnetic layer. q m = q+2h/α and X s(f ) means the value of X in the S(F) part of the TI surface, respectively. The self-consistency equation for the pair potential reads, ∆(x) ln We supplement the above equations with the following boundary conditions at the S/F interface (x = 0) where γ = ξ s σ f /ξ f σ s , γ B = Rσ f /ξ f , and σ s(f ) is the conductivity of the S (F)layer. The parameter γ determines the strength of suppression of superconductivity in the S lead near the interface compared to the bulk: no suppression occurs for γ = 0, while strong suppression takes place for γ 1. While for identical materials γ = 1, in general this parameter may have arbitrary value. The parameter γ B is the dimensionless parameter, describing the transparency of the S/F interface To complete the boundary problem we also set boundary conditions at free edges, In order to calculate the superconducting current we utilize the expression for the supercurrent density Performing the unitary transformation U , the current density transforms as follows: The total supercurrent flowing via the system along the y-direction can be calculated by integrated the current density of the total width of the S/F bilayer d f + d s : In the next section we present the phase diagrams of the quality factor defined in Eq. (I). In order to compute η we find the critical supercurrents by calculating the total supercurrent as a function of q and finding the maximum and minimum values of I(q). In the present section we introduce the results of the calculations. Here we use ξ f = ξ s and dimensionless exchange field H = ξh/α. In Fig. Here we can see that the quality factor is governed by the parameters of the F part, d f and H. From this expression we can see that as long as the exchange field H and the width d f are finite the quality factor is distinct from zero. These parameters are non zero in our case, hence the SDE should be present even at the vicinity of the critical temperature T c . For this reason it is safe to note that this boundary corresponds to the critical field H c . It is important to note that in the system under consideration it is impossible to observe the sign change of the SDE. i. e. when η < 0 4,8 . We consider the system in which the spin structure of the correlations is projected onto a single helical band. In this case we do not take into account the competition between the bands with the opposite helical states, since the second band is not considered. In Fig. Another important aspect of this study is to investigate the parameters that control the proximity effect. In Fig. In this work we have investigated the details of the superconducting diode effect in the S/F/TI hybrid structure. Employing the quasiclassical formalism of the Usadel equations we have introduced a simple model of the S/F/TI structure to study the diode quality factor η as a function of various parameters of the structure. For this purpose we have examined the phase diagrams of η revealing the most favourable conditions for the SDE in the system. From H -T diagram we have found that the highest diode quality factor is achieved at lower temperatures and at a specific H. From the same diagram we have recognized the critical field of the superconducting system. We have found the critical width d crit s on d s -d f diagram that corresponds to the minimal d s for the system to be in a superconducting state. Finally we have analyzed the diode quality factor as a function of the interface parameters. It has been shown that to reach the highest η it is optimal to have finite transparency of the interface. These findings may help designing and developing the SDE devices based on the proximity effect. The formulation of the model and the calculation of 