Rydberg electric field sensors exploit the large number of Rydberg resonances to provide sensitivity over a broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum. However, due to the difficulty of accessing resonant Rydberg states at ultra-high frequency (UHF) and below, ubiquitous bands in the world's current wireless communications infrastructure, they currently fall short in sensitivity in this range. We present a resonant Rydberg electric field sensor operating in the UHF band using a dual-optical dual-microwave spectroscopy scheme. Adding an additional microwave photon allows us to access transitions between Rydberg states with higher angular momentum (L = 3 → 4), which have lower resonant frequencies than transitions typically used in Rydberg sensors. We discuss the applicability of this type of sensor across the UHF band and below, and measure the resonant sensitivity of our system at 2.3 GHz to be 70(5) μVm -1 Hz -1/2 , 50 times better than the measured sensitivity with a far off-resonant probing scheme at this frequency. We also show the effectiveness of this sensing scheme by measuring Sirius XM satellite radio (2.320 -2.345 GHz) received outside the laboratory and rebroadcast onto the atoms. Detecting radio frequency (rf) electromagnetic waves with frequencies between 30 MHz and 3 GHz is a ubiquitous and crucial task for many commercial applications including television, Wi-Fi, and cellular phones. Quantum electric field sensors based on Rydberg atoms have received considerable attention for such detection. A multitude of accessible discrete atomic resonances between Rydberg states with large electric dipole moments enable sensitivity to fields with frequencies spanning quasi-DC 1 to THz 2 . Simultaneous wideband detection is possible Most contemporary Rydberg electric field sensors use twophoton electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) to establish a superposition between ground and Rydberg states. From there, rf fields can couple this superposition to additional Rydberg states, shift the EIT signal, and be readout on the amplitude or phase of a probe laser. Resonant couplings results in Autler-Townes (AT) splittings and can lead to relatively high sensitivities, while off-resonant couplings can be detected through light shifts to the EIT signal and generally result in lower sensitivities Rather than using high n with two-photon EIT, adding additional "dressing" fields can allow access to higher L angular momentum states which have lower resonant frequencies at moderate n. This can be done with additional optical fields In this work, we demonstrate a resonant dual-optical, dualmicrowave (2O2M) sensor configuration for detecting signals with frequencies near 2.3 GHz using an L = 3 → 4 Rydberg transition in Rb. We discuss the applicability of this scheme across the UHF band utilizing both Rb and Cs, and we model and experimentally compare the sensitivity of this scheme to a more traditional far off-resonant measurement scheme. Finally, we use the 2O2M scheme to measure SiriusXM satellite radio rebroadcast from a waveguide coupled to the atoms. In order to detect satellite radio frequencies with our Rb vapor cell based sensor we must be sensitive to 2.3 GHz, near the top of the UHF band. Resonantly working with frequencies below 2.5 GHz would require the typical EIT scheme to strongly couple to Rydberg levels with n above 90 in Rb, which is generally impractical as mentioned above. Lower frequencies can be achieved with Cs, but applications below 1 GHz would still require pushing to n > 88. Rather than pushing higher in n, coupling to higher L states can reach these lower frequencies at much lower n. Fig. To reach an L = 3 Rydberg state at least three photons must be used. In our scheme, corresponding to the level diagram in Fig. Using a semi-classical master equation numerical analysis we now compare the effectiveness of a near-resonant sensor using the 2O2M scheme to a far off-resonant (δ LO Ω LO ) sensor where the dressing field is not present and the signal is sensed through light shifts of the n d D state. For the far off-resonant case we can write the response as where α(n) is the polarizability of the Rydberg state at the signal frequency, and ν is the center frequency of the EIT window shifted by the LO and signal fields. We assume that the EIT lineshape and amplitude are independent of E LO . For this case, we modeled a three level EIT system with fixed probe and coupling Rabi frequencies matching our experiment (2π × 6 MHz and 2π × 7 MHz respectively). We kept the probe on resonance and optimized over the coupling detuning to find an optimal dη/dν = 7.6 × 10 -4 MHz -1 , which is independent of the specific Rydberg state, signal frequency, and LO field amplitude. For the 202M case we can instead write the response as where μ is the dipole matrix element of the signal transition, and dη/dΩ s is independent of the chosen Rydberg state. For this case we modeled the full five-state system with coaligned linear polarization of all fields. We maintain the same probe and coupling Rabi frequencies as above, fix the probe laser to be on resonance, and treat the signal as a perturbation of Ω LO . Then we optimize over Ω d , Ω LO , δ d , and δ c . First we fix the LO on resonance and find an optimal dη/dΩ s = -9.2 × 10 -5 (Mrad/s) -1 . We then investigate the optimal response of the 2O2M sensor as we detune the signal and LO off-resonance. We empirically find that once we pass a threshold LO detuning the optimal response is achieved with three robust conditions that are independent of the particular bare EIT signal, or equivalently independent of Ω p and Ω c in our simulation. These are that we are on three photon resonance, δ c + δ d + δ LO = 0, that the coupling laser is resonant with the further detuned Autler Townes peak due to the dressing field, δ c =δ d + (δ 2 d + Ω 2 d ) /2, and that Ω d , δ d and δ c scale linearly with δ LO . Other aspects of the optimization are dependent on Ω p and Ω c . These include the δ LO threshold to reach this detuned regime (δ LO > 2π × 1.5 MHz), the generally small Ω LO relative to the other Rabi frequencies (Ω LO ≈ 2π × 0.1 MHz), and the particular proportionality constant of Ω d , δ d and δ c with δ LO (Ω d ≈ 8 • δ LO ). We have listed the specific scaling of Ω d with δ LO above, which, along with the robust conditions listed above, fully constrains Ω d , δ d and δ c . With these conditions met, the response of the sensor is -1.5 × 10 -4 (Mrad/s) -1 and constant with δ LO . This is an improvement over the on-resonance case, but in practice the necessary Ω d will be limited by experimental concerns like the homogeneity of the field and sublevel splittings which are not modeled here, in which case a different local optimum can be found as in our demonstration. Using the values for dη/dν and dη/dΩ s found above we can calculate the responses for the specific Rydberg states used in our experiment: n d = 35 for the far off-resonant case, and n s = 33 for the transition used in the 2O2M measurement. For the 2O2M measurement in the detuned regime we get a response of dη/dE s = -0.01 (V/m) -1 , and for the far offresonant case, using the polarizability of the m J = 1/2 state, we get dη/dE s = -2.8 × 10 -8 (V/m) -2 • E LO . In this case to reach the 2O2M sensor response with the far off-resonant scheme would require an LO field amplitude of 0.4 MV/m, however this field breaks many assumptions we have made in our analysis. In our sensor the optical and microwave fields couple the chain of states: 5S 1/2 → 5P 1/2 → 35D 3/2 → 33F 5/2 → 33G 7/2 in 85 Rb. This level diagram is shown in Fig. A diagram of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. A horn 33 cm away from the cell, and emitting colinear with the probe beam, provided the vertically polarized dressing field, while the LO and signal fields were supplied by a 50 Ω coplanar waveguide 3 mm from the optical interaction region. The waveguide had a trace width of 3.65 mm, a 0.5 mm gap, and forward voltage gain of S 21 = -3 dB. Coupling to the waveguide allowed for field confinement and higher sensitivities at a given input power when compared to a horn. To convert from input power on the waveguide to the field at the atoms we looked at light shifts of the 35D 3/2 , |m J | = 1/2 states 17 from the 2.3 GHz field without the dressing field present, and modeled the shifts using a Floquet analysis described in Ref. 6. Finally, we detected the signal field, whether from a generator or a real world source, by detuning the LO below the desired frequency and measuring the rf heterodyne signal in the transmission of the probe beam. We measured the noise equivalent field of our sensor, both on resonance and detuned from resonance using the 2O2M scheme, and compared it to traditional far off-resonant detection. Here we define the NEF referenced to the peak field amplitude rather than the root mean squared field amplitude. These measurements were done by setting the input signal power to a low value where the response of the sensor was confirmed to be linear, then taking the ratio of the power in the heterodyne beatnote to the noise power spectral density at the output of the sensor, extrapolating to find the input power where this ratio would be 1 in a 1 Hz bandwidth, and finally converting from power to field as described previously. FIG. First, we measured the NEF of the on-resonance 202M system to be 70(7) μVm -1 Hz -1/2 . For this measurement, the signal field was on resonance at 2.281 GHz, with a peak field amplitude of 44(4) mV/m corresponding to an input power to the waveguide of -55 dBm. The dressing field had a Rabi frequency Ω d = 2π × 12 MHz, and was on resonance at 119.016 GHz. The LO was set to 300 kHz below the signal field, and had a field amplitude of 1.5(1) V/m corresponding to an input power of -24 dBm. To demonstrate the sensitivity away from resonance and prepare for our measurements of satellite radio we detuned the signal field by 58 MHz to 2.339 GHz, the center of the XM portion of the Sirius XM spectrum. To optimize the sensitivity at this frequency we increased the LO field to 4.3(3) V/m (-15.2 dBm), while maintaining the frequency at 300 kHz below the signal field. The dressing field was optimal at a Rabi frequency of Ω d = 2π × 9 MHz, and was kept on resonance, while the probe laser was detuned 2.7 MHz above resonance. These are likely not the globally optimal values, as the numerically found optimum is inaccessible due to the required Rabi frequencies. With this optimization we found a NEF of 150(10) μVm -1 Hz -1/2 . Then we compared the sensitivity from the 2O2M scheme to the more traditional far off-resonant detection at 2.339 GHz in the absence of the dressing field. In the far off-resonant case the sensitivity can generally be improved by increasing the LO field, so for a fair comparison we amplified our LO up to 520(40) V/m (26.5 dBm) where we no longer saw improvement in the sensitivity. In practice, it is often not practical to use such a large LO field, especially without a waveguide or similar structure to provide field confine-ment. With this far off-resonant scheme we found a NEF of 4.0(3) mVm -1 Hz -1/2 . This is a factor of 57 (35 dB in power) worse than the 2O2M resonant sensitivity and a factor of 27 (29 dB in power) worse than the detuned 202M sensitivity. Finally, to demonstrate the viability of this scheme we measured Sirius XM satellite radio from 2.320 -2.345 GHz 18 using the experimental parameters for the detuned 2O2M case. The satellite signal was received by a 10 dBi antenna, filtered and amplified by 54 dB before traveling though roughly 100 m of LMR-400 cable. The amplification was done in two stages with a bandpass filter in between to avoid saturating the second amplifier. The cable and the other connections caused ∼20 dB of loss on average between the amplifiers and the waveguide. In total, the field at the atoms from the waveguide was around 166 times larger than the field received by the antenna. Fig. In conclusion, we show that by adding an additional resonant microwave field the opportunity for resonant detection can extend down to hundreds of MHz, at reasonable n levels, and without the need for additional lasers. We demonstrate an improvement in the NEF by a factor of 50, from 4.0(3) mVm -1 Hz -1/2 in the far off-resonant regime, which additionally requires a high power LO, to 70(5) μVm -1 Hz -1/2 with our resonant 2O2M probing scheme at 2.3 GHz. In addition, we demonstrate the utility of this technique by detecting Sirius XM signals transmitted from satellites and terrestrially. Extending this work by adding multiple microwave fields to access even higher L states would allow sensitive detection of further lower frequencies. In addition, combining this scheme with sensing off of the intermediate Rydberg state could allow for simultaneous detection of multiple frequencies as in Ref. 3 without the requirement that they all couple off of a single Rydberg state.