Microwave impedance microscopy (MIM) is a near-field imaging technique that has been used to visualize the local conductivity of materials with nanoscale resolution across the GHz regime. In recent years, MIM has shown great promise for the investigation of topological states of matter, correlated electronic states and emergent phenomena in quantum materials. To explore these low-energy phenomena, many of which are only detectable in the mil-liKelvin regime, we have developed a novel low-temperature MIM incorporated into a dilution refrigerator. This setup, which consists of a tuning-fork-based atomic force microscope with microwave reflectometry capabilities, is capable of reaching temperatures down to 70 mK during imaging and magnetic fields up to 9 T. To test the performance of this microscope, we demonstrate microwave imaging of the conductivity contrast between graphite and silicon dioxide at cryogenic temperatures and discuss the resolution and noise observed in these results. We extend this methodology to visualize edge conduction in Dirac semimetal cadmium arsenide in the quantum Hall regime. Microwave imaging techniques have been developing rapidly over the past several decades, which involve transmitting MHz to GHz microwave signals to sample surface through sharp-ended probes, and collecting the microwave response. To date there are several implementations of the scanning microwave microscope, such as sharp tips in coaxial resonators, microwave resonators on quartz tuning forks, and probes with impedance matching networks Here we report on the construction of a novel milliKelvin MIM, which will support spatially-resolved detection of quantum electronic states at ultra-low temperatures. This setup consists of scanning probe microscope with tuning-fork-based height feedback integrated into a dry dilution refrigerator. A sharp metallic probe driven by an AC signal at microwave frequency is coupled to the tuning fork and scanned over the sam-ple. Using reflectometry, MIM detects the sample's response to high frequency electromagnetic fields emanating from the probe. To demonstrate the measurement capabilities of this setup, we present MIM images of the conductivity contrast between graphite and SiO 2 down to temperatures of 70 mK. Finally, we also demonstrate microwave imaging of edge states in Cd 3 As 2 thin films in the quantum Hall regime at the base temperature. This setup consists of an custom-designed tuning fork based atomic force microscope (AFM) integrated into a Leiden Cryogenics CF-CS110 dilution refrigerator. The microscope housing is in thermal equilibrium with the mixing chamber plate on the cold-insertable probe, which is loaded into a dilution refrigerator, as shown schematically in Figure On the MIM circuitry side, GHz signals are generated by an analog signal generator, and one split branch of the signal is coupled to the tip via an impedance matching network (IMN) The signal from the sample is then amplified by a cryogenic amplifier (Cosmic Microwave Technology CITCRYO1-12) mounted on the 3 K stage, after which the signal propagates out of the probe and gets further amplified and demodulated at room temperature, as shown in Figure During the tip approach procedure, active height feedback can be performed by monitoring either the TF oscillation amplitude or the MIM signal. Here we use a Nanonis SC5 controller to excite and track the TF oscillation and control the fine scanners during imaging The main technical challenge of microwave imaging in a dry dilution fridge is the emergence of new noise sources, which impact both spatial resolution and the signal-to-noise of the microwave reflectometry measurements. There are two main sources of increased noise: (1) mechanical pulse tube vi-brations, which are associated with the cooling mechanism of the dilution fridge, place limits on the lateral spatial resolution and add noise to the measured MIM signal, and (2) the high Q factor of the tuning fork at mK temperatures leads to fluctuations in the tip-sample distance, which also couples with the pulse tube vibration. Our fridge is equipped with a pulse tube cryocooler operating at ∼ 1.4 Hz We found that performing AC-mode MIM imaging, described below, largely eliminates background oscillations in the images that arise from pulse tube vibrations. In AC height- modulated imaging mode, a low frequency lock-in amplifier (SR830) is added to the output of the GHz frequency mixer to demodulate the reflected MIM signal at the tuning fork resonance frequency (32 kHz), after which low-pass filters can be used to attenuate noise We characterized the low temperature performance of the AFM on a sample consisting of an array of etched SiO 2 holes patterned on a Si wafer, as depicted in the optical image in Figure Next, to demonstrate our combined AFM and MIM imaging capabilities at low temperatures, we measured the spatial contrast of the MIM response across the boundary between graphite and SiO 2 at 70 mK. Figure In Figure We also apply this methodology to visualize edge states at the boundaries of thin film cadmium arsenide (Cd 3 As 2 ), a novel three-dimensional Dirac semi-metal, in the quantum Hall regime To shed light on the real-space conductivity profile of Cd 3 As 2 in the quantum Hall regime and monitor its evolution across the topological phase transition between plateaus, MIM measurements were performed at a series of magnetic fields at a base temperature of 90 mK. Microwave imaging reveals a sharp enhancement of the reflected MIM signal at the boundaries of the sample in the quantum Hall insulator state, which rapidly decays into the bulk of the sample, as shown in Figure To more clearly compare the spatial dependence of the MIM signal in these two regimes, in Figure We note that one way to improve signal quality is to use "floating" AC-mode MIM, where imaging is performed with the tip retracted a fixed distance (60-100 nm) above the sample surface. At this distance, the AFM channel will not be modulated due to the topography feedback, but the MIM tip can still interact with the sample via the electromagnetic fields in the vicinity of the tip (when operated in the near-field regime). Because periodic oscillations in the tip-sample distance at the tuning fork resonance are decoupled from the surface roughness of the sample, noise in the MIM response can be dramatically reduced in floating mode. Figure The choice of tip-sample distance for floating-mode measurements is a compromise between maximizing signal sensitivity and minimizing the risk of a tip crash due to vertical fluctuations in the tip-sample distance, which arise from pulse tube vibrations and are aggravated by the large Q factor of the tuning fork at mK temperatures. For larger scan windows or rougher sample surfaces, the tip may need to be retracted fur-ther. We expect the sensitivity of floating mode to be around 0.01 -0.1 aF/ √ Hz at 0.1 uW input power, and in our case the noise is mostly due to vertical modulations of the tip-sample distance In summary, we report on the development of a microwave impedance microscope that operates at temperatures down to 70 mK. This is achieved by incorporating a TF-based AFM with near-field GHz imaging capabilities into a dry dilution refrigerator. Pushing the limits of MIM into new low temperature regimes should enable local sensing of quantum phenomena that only exist at low energy scales, including certain topological states of matter, domain wall physics at phase transitions, quantum states arising from geometric confinement in mesoscopic devices, and correlated states in two-dimensional materials and van der Waals heterostructures. Because this instrumentation is equipped with combined transport and imaging capabilities, it can also illuminate the correspondence between macroscopic transport behavior and the underlying microscopic nature of electronic states, including the real-space disorder landscape or presence of edge modes. During the preparation of this manuscript, we became aware of an article on a related topic The supplementary material includes more information on the analysis of the pulse tube vibration frequency, a description of the lumped element model of MIM, and the determination of the MIM spatial resolution. Scientific Instruments 82, 033705 (2011).