We present an extensive study of resonant two-dimensional (2D) plasmon excitations in grating-gated quantum well heterostructures, which enable an electrical control of periodic charge carrier density profile. Our study combines theoretical and experimental investigations of nanometer-scale AlGaN/GaN grating-gate structures and reveals that all terahertz (THz) plasmonic resonances in these structures can be explained only within the framework of the plasmonic crystal model. We identify two different plasmonic crystal phases. The first is the delocalized phase, where THz radiation interacts with the entire grating-gate structure that is realized at a weakly modulated 2D electron gas (2DEG) regime. In the second, the localized phase, THz radiation interacts only with the ungated portions of the structure. This phase is achieved by fully depleting the gated regions, resulting in strong modulation. By gate-controlling of the modulation degree, we observe a continuous transition between these phases. We also discovered that unexpectedly the resonant plasma frequencies of ungated parts (in the localized phase) still depend on the gate voltage. We attribute this phenomenon to the specific depletion of the conductive profile in the ungated region of the 2DEG, the so-called edge gating effect. Although we study a specific case of plasmons in AlGaN/GaN grating-gate structures, our results have a general character and are applicable to any other semiconductor-based plasmonic crystal structures. Our work represents the first demonstration of an electrically tunable transition between different phases of THz plasmonic crystals, which is a crucial step towards a deeper understanding of THz plasma physics and the development of all-electrically tunable devices for THz optoelectronics. Terahertz (THz) plasmonics The history of 2D plasmons began more than 50 years ago with the publication of a seminal paper by A. V. Chaplik The first experimental observations of 2D plasmon resonances are related to the structures formed by metallic grating gates integrated with silicon inversion layers The field of 2D plasmonics has seen a surge of interest since the landmark work of Dyakonov and Shur For the case of PC structures, there are several theoretical predictions Very important experimental results Indeed, comprehensive theoretical and experimental analyses of the resonant plasmon properties of such structures are missing in the literature. This comes from two main reasons: (i) experimental/technological difficulties -THz experiments require systems of millimeter size (the wavelength of 1 THz radiation is ∼ 0.3 mm) whereas typical THz oscillating plasmon cavity is of a few hundred nanometers, which means that in THz experiments one needs samples composed of thousands of gates (grating fingers) with negligible leakage currents (zero defects large surface gate isolation) -to reach the regime of an efficient electrical tuning of plasmon resonances; and (ii) theoretical challenges -the grating gate on 2DEG forms a nonuniform system composed of intercalated gated and ungated plasmon cavities, for which no analytical solution exists. Theoretical predictions/interpretations require advanced numerical calculations. In this work, we addressed these two key issues and conducted both experimental and theoretical investigations of 2D plasmons in grating-gate PC structures based on AlGaN/GaN heterojunctions as a function of the gate-to-channel voltage. We hereby present: (i) technology of large surface (a few square mm) gratinggate structures with thousands of nanometer gates controlling carrier density (more than two decades) and negligible gate leakage currents (below 100 nA/mm 2 ); and (ii) rigorous electrodynamic approach that enables accurate numerical simulations of the optical characteristics of PCs. This approach has been validated through excellent agreement with experimental data, enabling a better understanding of the basic tuning mechanisms of plasmon resonances in PCs. Furthermore, this approach also allows for a comprehensive discussion of existing phenomenological approximations. In particular, we have identified two distinct plasmonic crystal phases: a delocalized phase observed at a low carrier density modulation degree and a localized phase dominating when the gated part of the 2DEG approaches a total depletion regime (strong modulation). Additionally, we have demonstrated an electrically-controlled continuous phase transition between these two phases. For experimental studies, we have chosen grating-gate structures based on AlGaN/GaN heterojunctions. However, our results have a general character and are applicable to any other semiconductor-based PC struc-tures. The paper is organized as follows: Section II includes the theoretical model, formalism and mathematical details of a numerically stable and fast-convergence algorithm developed for the solution of Maxwell's equations. Preliminary calculations of far-field characteristics, particularly transmission coefficients at different modulation degrees of 2DEG are also presented here. Details of the fabrication, basic characterizations and THz measurements are collected in Section III. The main experimental results and their comparison with electrodynamic simulations of particular PC structures are presented in Section IV. Section V is dedicated to detailed analyses of the results based on the calculations of near-field characteristics, particularly, the spatial distribution of em field and local absorptivity in different PC phases. This section is finalized with conclusions. The oscillation frequency of 2D plasma excitation propagated along infinitely-long and the delta-thin conductive layer is given by the following formula where e is the electron charge and n is the concentration of 2DEG. Throughout this article, all units in formulas are given in the CGS system of units. This formula is obtained in the hydrodynamic consideration of electron transport (i.e. as a solution of the eigenvalue problem of the Euler-Poisson system of equations) neglecting viscosity effect In literature, the two simplest types of 2D plasmons are mainly discussed. The first type is the ungated 2D plasmons, which can be excited in the conductive layer of the QW heterostructure. For these plasmons, where buf and bar are dielectric constants of a buffer and barrier layers, respectively, and d is the thickness of the barrier layer. At this, the thickness of the buffer layer is assumed to be much larger than the plasmon wavelength. The second type is the gated 2D plasmons. These plasmons can be excited in the screened QW heterostructure where the barrier layer is covered by a perfect metallic gate. For them, FIG. If |q|d << 1, then eff (q) ≈ ( buf + 1)/2 for ungated plasmons and eff (q) ≈ bar /2|q|d for gated ones. As a result, in this limit, ungated plasmons have square-root dispersion, ω O (q), and gated plasmons are described by the linear dispersion, ω G (q): Remarkably, for typical parameters of QW heterostructures, characteristic frequencies of both types of 2D plasmons belong to the THz frequency range at the micron and submicron scale of their wavelengths, λ p = 2π/|q|. The latter is illustrated in Fig. It should be noted that 2D plasmons, as well as another class of surface em waves, such as surface plasmon polaritons In order to provide an effective coupling between the 2D plasmons and em waves, the electron conductive channel should be supplemented by a lateral microstructure of the sample (plasmonic structure), for example, by using subwavelength metallic grating (Fig. In the framework of the simple physical interpretation, the incoming THz wave with p-polarization (electric field is oriented perpendicularly to the grating strips) induces the instantaneous dipoles (electrical vibrators) at the edges of the strips. In turn, these dipoles excite the particular 2D plasmons. The efficiency of such coupling and selection of the resonant plasmonic mode is controlled by the grating geometry: grating period, a G , grating filling factor, f = L G /a G , as well as by the thickness of the barrier layer, d. On the other hand, the interaction of the incident wave with metallic grating stipulates the formation of the strongly nonuniform distribution of the em field (near-field) in the proximity of the grating coupler. For the actual case of subwavelength grating, the near-field is composed of k evanescent (k = 1, 2, 3...) waves and one propagating (k = 0) wave. Evanescent waves decay exponentially away from the grating plane ∼ exp(-2πkz/a G ) with the periodicity in the lateral direction. The evanescent waves with in-plane wavevector q = 2πk/a G excite plasmons of different k-orders when the frequency of the incident THz wave coincides with the frequency of a particular eigen plasmon mode of 2DEG under the grating. As a result, part of em energy transfers to the electron subsystem and resonant absorption of incident radiation occurs. More rigorously, the presence of the metallic grating leads to the "folding" and splitting of plasmon dispersion branches (see Fig. The response of the grating-gate PC structures to THz radiation is analyzed by the rigorous electrodynamic simulations based on numerical solutions of Maxwell's equations in the framework of the integral equations (IEs) method following the pioneering work of Ref. In general, the PC structure can be considered as a multilayer semiconductor heterostructure with 2DEG conducting channel integrated with metal grating. The geometry of such a structure is sketched in Fig. where both, metallic grating and 2DEG are assumed as delta thin. The 2DEG conductive layer has the coordinate z = z 1 and it is described by the 2D conductivity, σ 2D (x) with the following spatial profile: are dimensionless conductivity profiles of the metallic grating strips, gated and ungated regions of the 2DEG, respectively. Under applied gate voltage, V G , the concentrations n G and n O can be essentially different. Also, we introduced the parameter, ∆x, which describes the effective width of the ungated region of 2DEG, G -2∆x (note, the method in Ref. We suppose that the whole structure is uniformly illuminated by the plane em wave at the incidence angle, θ, having TM-polarization, i.e, x-component of the electric field E 0,x orients perpendicularly to the grating strips. At this, the electric field of the em wave induces in the grating strips instantaneous dipoles (see, for example, Ref. In such geometry, the non-zero components of the em wave are E x , E z , H y . The master equation for the electric components, E(r, t), of the em field which is a result of the interaction of incident wave with plasmonic structure is: Here, the term of the displacement current contains dielectric permittivity (r) which is a step-like function and constant within each medium. Conduction current includes the current density in the metallic grating, j G (r, t), and in the 2DEG conduction layer, j 2D (r, t). In the delta-thin treatment of both currents, where δ denotes the Dirac delta function. Because of the periodicity of the plasmonic structure, we can introduce the spatial Fourier transform of the electric field and the currents with respect to the x-coordinate: In Eq. ( ). Now, the wave equation ( where the characteristic parameter describes the spatial localization of k-spatial Fourier harmonic. In Eq. ( The formal solutions of system (10) can be presented as superposition of transmitted ('+') and reflected('-') waves and one reads as: (12) This system should be supplemented by the following boundary conditions at r-th interface: Here, δ r,r being the Kronecker delta-symbol. Eq. ( After some algebraic transformations, we can come to the relationships between Fourier harmonics of the x-component of the electric fields in the plane of the metallic grating (z = z 0 ) and 2DEG conductive layer (z = z 1 ), and Fourierharmonics of the corresponding currents: Here x,ω,k (z 0 ) and E x,ω,k (z 1 ), respectively. The explicit form of the introduced parameters is specified in Supplemental Material In the frameworks of the IE method, the system (15) should be transformed into coordinate space and formulated as a system of 3 linear integral equations with respect to currents j G (x), j 2D G (x), j 2D O (x) induced by em wave in the grating strip, gated and ungated regions of 2DEG, respectively. For this, it is necessary to multiply both sides of the system (15) by exp(iQ k x), then sum them overall k taking into account local approximation for the currents, The mathematical details of this procedure, including the method of solution for the obtained IEs and the final formulas used for calculating the transmission, reflection, and absorption spectra (including near-field patterns), are provided in Supplementary Material In order to describe the different phases of the plasmonic crystals, we introduce the dimensionless parameter that characterises the modulation degree, ρ. It is defined as , where n O and n G are concentrations of 2DEG in ungated and gated regions of 2DEG, respectively. The n G (V G ) can be controlled by the applied gate voltage V G . For the case of the uniform spatial profile, n O = n G , and ρ = 0. For the case when |V G | is larger than the threshold voltage |V th |, ρ ∼ 1. In the latter case, the space between the drain and source is divided into highly conductive ungated regions and almost depleted gated regions. As shown below, the resonant peculiarities of the transmission spectra strongly depend on modulation degree ρ(V G ). First, we imply that conductivity profiles of the metallic grating and 2DEG have an abrupt step-like form, i.e., In calculations, we used the parameters of the typical GaNbased high electron mobility heterostructure used in the experiment (see Section III). The whole structure consists of 4 bulk-like dielectric layers: AlGaN barrier layer with thickness d 1 = 23 nm, GaN buffer layer with d 2 = 255 nm placed directly on AlN nuclear layer with d 3 = 62 nm (see Table For the 2DEG densities we assumed the linear dependence of n G (V G ) provided by so-called "plane capacitor" approximation: where V 0 = V G -V th is the gate voltage swing, V th is the threshold voltage of channel depletion. At this, we set that n O is a constant and equal to 9 × 10 12 cm -2 , threshold voltage V th = -2.9 ± 0.3 V and ε 1 = 8.9 (see Section III). The metallic grating is assumed to be gold and delta-thin with 1.5 μm period, grating filling factor, f = 0.6, and dispersionless 2D conductivity σ M = 2 × 10 12 cm/s. It corresponds to the bulk conductivity of 4 × 10 17 s -1 and the grating thickness of 50 nm. High-frequency mobilities of 2DEG in the gated and ungated region are assumed to be equal, μ G = μ O , and both obey to Drude-Lorentz model, μ G,O = μ/(1 -i2πντ) with frequency, ν, and effective scattering time, τ = μm * /e. Here, we set μ = 7500 cm 2 /Vs that corresponds to the scattering time τ = 0.85 ps at electron effective mass in GaN, m * = 0.2 × m e . All calculations are performed at normal incidence, θ = 0. Fig. With the decrease of V 0 (an increase in modulation degree), these resonances are red-shifted and the resonances of a higher order appear to show even up to six resonances as it is seen in the transmittance spectra for V 0 = 0.9 V in Fig. With even further gate voltage swing decrease one can observe the gradual transition to the second plasmonic crystal phase with gate voltage independent modes. This transition is clearly seen in the swing voltage range of 0.4-0 V (see curves in Fig. the specific evolution of THz transmission spectra with initialization of the formation of single resonant mode regime in the frequency range of 0.1 -4 THz occurs. At negative swing voltages, the carrier density under the gated regions is negligible and, therefore, this mode corresponds to the resonant excitation of the plasma oscillations in the limiting case of electrically-formed 2DEG-strip grating As we will show later, while the phase of PC above the threshold voltage (V 0 > 0) is characterized by em energy absorption both, in the gated and ungated regions, in the phase at V 0 < 0 em energy is absorbed only in ungated regions. Therefore, we call these phases delocalized and localized ones, re-spectively. The contour plot in Fig. AlGaN/GaN high electron mobility material system was chosen for the experimental studies. This kind of heterostructure provides high electron density (up to 10 13 cm -2 ) on the AlGaN/GaN interface, which is difficult to achieve in any other 2D system. Thanks to that plasma oscillations in 2D GaN-based structures of micrometer size can easily reach THz frequencies. AlGaN/GaN heterostructures were grown by the metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) method on a 4-inch diameter, 500 μm-thick semi-insulating SiC substrate. The semiconductor stack consists of a 2.4 nm GaN cap, a 20.5 nm Al 0.25 Ga 0.75 N barrier, and a 255 nm GaN buffer grown directly on 62 nm-thick AlN nuclear layer on SiC substrate. Heterostructure parameters including the permittivity of each layer are listed in Table The ohmic source and drain contacts (marked as S -source and D -drain in Fig. In order to achieve the low leakage current in high-area grating-gate structures, a special procedure was used to fabricate the Schottky contacts. It started with chemical cleaning of the AlGaN surface. It included the following steps: removing the possible organic contaminants by immersing the samples into an ultrasonic bath filled with dimethyl sulfoxide for 5 minutes followed by cleaning in acetone and isopropanol. Then the natural surface oxides were removed by immersing the samples into 10% hydrofluoric acid for 5 minutes and 37% hydrochloric acid for 10 minutes. The chemical cleaning was finished by rinsing in deionized water and drying with an N 2 gun. To avoid any oxidation, after cleaning the samples were immediately placed in the vacuum chamber of an electron beam lithography (EBL) system. EBL patterning was performed on large 1.7 × 1.7 mm 2 active areas defining the grating gates. The exposed and developed samples were precisely cleaned from any photoresist residue using oxygen plasma in an inductively coupled plasma-reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) system. Finally, the grating gates were formed by thermal evaporation of Ni/Au (150/350 Å) and metal lift-off. The described procedure allowed us to reach the gate leakage current density as low as J GS ≈ 10 -6 A/cm 2 , which was sufficient to effectively control the 2DEG density under the large area (> 1 mm 2 ) metal gratings. Three samples with different geometry of the gratinggate coupler were fabricated and investigated. A schematic cross-section of investigated plasmonic structures is shown in All structure terminals were provided with special pads for the bonding wires marked in Fig. Before the grating deposition, the bare AlGaN/GaN heterostructures were characterized by capacitance-voltage measurements at 10 kHz using a mercury probe in order to estimate the ungated 2DEG concentration. The extracted value of n O was of 8.7 ± 0.9 × 10 12 cm -2 at room temperature. The transfer current-voltage characteristic of one of the grating-gate samples at T = 10 K is shown in Fig. The 2DEG concentration under the gate, n G , for the above threshold regime can be found from the transfer currentvoltage characteristics using Eq. ( Transfer current-voltage characteristic of the investigated PC structure measured at 10 K and drain-to-source voltage V D = 10 mV. The red line shows n G concentration calculated using Eq. ( THz transmission spectra measurements of the bare Al-GaN/GaN heterostructure as well as PC structures were performed by Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) vacuum spectrometer (Vertex 80v from Bruker, Billerica, Massachusetts, USA) integrated with continuous flow liquid helium cryostat. In order to reduce optical losses, the original cryostat windows were replaced by polymethylpentene (TPX) windows. The FTIR spectrometer was equipped with a mercury lamp source, FIG. FTIR measurements were taken in fast scanning mode at a mirror movement frequency of 5 kHz, with an interferogram average of 100 scans. Spectroscopy measurements were taken with a 1.5 mm aperture positioned close to the grating structure, allowing em radiation to transmit only through the grating-gate active region. A polypropylene film-based linear polarizer was also used in front of the sample. In Fig. As was pointed out in Section II, the resonant structure of the transmission spectra is strongly dependent on the modulation degree of 2DEG. The latter can be controlled by the application of the gate voltage. Fig. As can be seen in Fig. In the sub-threshold regime, V 0 < 0, the localized phase of the PC is realized with only one resonance in the considered frequency range (see Figs. In the fitting procedure for sub-threshold voltages, we varied ∆x in order to account for the decrease of width L 2D O = a G -L G -2∆x at constant value of n O and n G = 0. Note, hereafter, all theoretical curves relating to transmission spectra are presented in terms of the quantity < T ν > FP which is the transmission coefficient calculated for an optically thick substrate with following averaging over a period of FP fringes. Figure The plots in Fig. As seen in Fig. For completeness, we present the same experimental contour plots for 13s and 8s PC samples in Fig. However, the sharpness of both plasmon phases: delo- general property of the grating-gated PC structures for which the wider-slit metallic gratings provide the weaker coupling between em wave and plasmon oscillations of 2DEG. Moreover, due to the symmetry of the metallic grating of this sample (L 0 = L G ), the plasmon modes in uniform 2DEG channel with k = 2, 4, ... are very weakly excited (this peculiarity was pointed out in Ref. In the fitting procedure, we used carrier density in the gated region n G as the fitting parameter. The obtained values are shown in Fig. Figure A. Delocalized phase of plasmonic crystal (V 0 > 0) To better understand the importance of plasmonic crystal approximation let us consider in more details the experimental transmission spectra for the structure 7s at V 0 = 2.9 V reproduced once again in Fig. for the ungated plasmons localized under the grating openings, and for the gated plasmons localized under the grating strips. The frequencies of the first and second harmonics for the gated plasmons are shown in Fig. To get a better understanding of the physical situation we performed the numerical calculations of the electric field profile and absorptivity. Figure where Re[σ 2D (x)] is the real part of the conductivity profile of 2DEG and z 1 is the z-coordinate of 2DEG. As seen in Fig. Since these calculations show that the em energy absorbs both, in the gated and ungated regions, we can indeed call this regime delocalized plasmonic crystal. B. Localized phase of plasmonic crystal (V 0 < 0) Figure The near-field calculations emphasize the main physical differences between delocalized and localized phases. For the delocalized phase, the effective absorption of em energy occurs in both, gated and ungated regions of 2DEG. For the localized phase, the plasmon is locally excited in the ungated regions of 2DEG and only these areas work as absorbers of THz waves. The experimental transmission spectra for the structure 7s at V 0 = -0.6 V are reproduced once again in Fig. Considering different simplified approaches we conclude that even in the absence of carriers under the gated regions, the plasma oscillations of the system cannot be simplified as a sum of independent plasmonic oscillators in the ungated sections. Therefore, the plasmon resonances can only be accurately described using the full PC approximation. We have experimentally and theoretically investigated resonant properties of large area (1.7 × 1.7 mm 2 ) grating-gate Al-GaN/GaN plasmonic crystal structures in the THz frequency range. Advanced nanometer grating-gate technology allowed us to investigate THz plasma excitations in a wide range of gate voltages, thereby exploring various regimes of carrier density modulation. The results of the THz measurements were analyzed by rigorous electrodynamic simulations including the contour plots of the em field in the near-field zone of the PC structure. The computational algorithm was based on the numerical solution of Maxwell's equations within the method of the integral equations. The developed method exhibited a high efficiency with respect to convergence and computational time. We found that the experimental and calculated resonant structure of the transmission spectra including its modification vs gate voltage corresponds to the formation of two different phases of PC structure depending on the 2DEG carrier density modulation profile. Particularly, at above-threshold voltages, V 0 > 0, and small modulation degree ρ ≤ 0.2, the well-developed delocalized phase of PC is realized. This phase is associated with several resonances in transmission spectra corresponding to different orders of 2D plasmon excitations under the grating. The spatial distribution of the electric field associated with these plasmon excitations (as well as the local absorptivity of THz radiation) extends over the whole period of the structure, i.e. 2D plasma is simultaneously excited in both ungated and gated regions of 2DEG. With further gate voltage decrease and approaching the threshold voltage, the transition between delocalized and localized phases of PC starts to form. At this, the multi-resonant structure in transmission spectra disappears, higher order harmonics with frequencies resonant with localized plasmons are amplified and finally, they transform into a new strong localized phase. In contrast to the delocalized phase, the localized phase has spatial localization of the electric field (as well as the local absorptivity of THz radiation) in the ungated part of 2DEG. However, the metal grating still plays an important role and the whole structure behaves like a PC. Even if almost the whole em energy is absorbed in the ungated parts the experimental results cannot be explained using only single cavity approaches. This is due to the fact that one always has to consider the presence of the metallic grating that partially screens the plasmon oscillations in the 2DEG strips and enhances the coupling of this plasmon resonance with incident radiation. The general picture of the transformation of PC states from delocalized to localized phases was traced in THz experiments for all three samples with different geometry of the grating coupler. Moreover, we observed that a decrease of V G below the threshold (ρ ∼ 1) leads to the essential blue shift of the resonance in the localized phase of the PC structure. This phenomenon was explained by the reduction of the ungated part's effective width by negative gate voltage below the threshold (side/edge gate effect). Our research presents the first experimental evidence of electrically tunable transitions between different phases of THz PCs. The remarkable congruence between our experimental data and calculated values supports the theoretical approach and affirms the physical understanding of all observed phenomena. While our experiments focused on grating-gate structures based on AlGaN/GaN heterojunctions, the findings hold general relevance and can be extended to other semiconductor-based PC structures. Therefore, our experimental and theoretical results are crucial steps towards a deeper understanding of THz plasma physics and the development of all-electrically tunable devices for THz optoelectronics.