We report the discovery of a giant out-of-plane coercivity in the Fe-doped Mn3Sn single crystals. The compound of Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn exhibits a series of magnetic transitions accompanying with large magnetic anisotropy and electric transport properties. Compared with the ab-plane easy axis in Mn3Sn, it switches to the c-axis in Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn, producing a sufficiently large uniaxial anisotropy. At 2 K, a giant outof-plane coercivity (Hc) up to 3 T was observed, which originates from the large uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy. The modified Sucksmith-Thompson method was used to determine the values of the second-order and the fourth-order magnetocrystalline anisotropy constants K1 and K2, resulting in values of 6.0 × 10 4 J/m 3 and 4.1 × 10 5 J/m 3 at 2 K, respectively. Even though the Curie temperature (TC) of 200 K for Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn is not high enough for direct application, our research presents a valuable case study of a typical uniaxial anisotropy material. Magnetic materials possessing high Hc and perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) demonstrate great potential for a range of applications such as ultrahigh-density perpendicular magnetic recording media, high-performance permanent magnets, and spintronic devices Therefore, there is an urgent need to find high-performance permanent magnets without rare earth elements to replace the widely used rare earth magnets. In recent years, Mn3Sn, with hexagonal structure (Fig. Therefore, substituting Fe atoms at Mn sites of Mn3Sn to enhance the magnetic properties of Mn3Sn is greatly expected as Fe substitution introduces ferromagnetism to the system. In this letter, we investigated the magnetic phase transitions of Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn single crystals and observed a giant out-of-plane Hc up to 3 T at 2 K. We find that doping Fe into Mn3Sn causes the easy magnetization axis of Mn3Sn to switch from the abplane to the c-axis, producing a sufficiently large uniaxial anisotropy in Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn. We use the modified Sucksmith-Thompson method which takes into account magnetization anisotropy and high-field susceptibilities to obtain magnetocrystalline anisotropy constants K1 and K2, resulting in values of 6.0 × 10 4 J/m 3 and 4.1 × 10 5 J/m 3 at 2 K, respectively. Both Hc and K2 increase with decreasing temperature (T), while K1 is non-monotonically independent of T. Our result presents a typical uniaxial anisotropy system with potential to obtain the large magnetocrystalline anisotropy through Fedoping. Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn single crystals were synthesized by the Sn-flux method with a molar ratio of Mn: Fe :Sn =7:1.5:3 The powder XRD pattern at room temperature of the Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn (Fig. shows that all the diffraction peaks of the sample can be indexed as the D019 type hexagonal structure with space group P63/mmc. The peaks of Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn shifts to right compared to the reflection peaks of Mn3Sn due to the smaller atomic radius of the Fe substituting for Mn. Laue pattern of a polished (0 0 0 1) plane displays good symmetry and sharpness of the diffraction spots as shown Fig. Consistent with the strong magnetic anisotropy in the Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn, the large anisotropy is also reflected in the electrical transports as shown in Fig. To further understand the large anisotropy in both the magnetic and transport properties, we measured the magnetization isotherms M(H) at various temperatures for both H⊥z (Fig. To further investigate the large out-of-plane Hc and perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, we plotted Hc as a function of temperature for H∥z orientation in Fig. It can be seen that Hc increases with decreasing temperature, and the maximum value reaches 3 T at 2 K. Considering the origin of the Hc, we know that the formation of hysteresis during the demagnetization process is related to the irreversibility of M caused by stress fluctuations, impurities, and general magnetic anisotropy present in ferromagnetic materials Further, we estimate the magnetocrystalline anisotropy constants by using the modified Sucksmith-Thompson (ST) method. The anisotropy energy for hexagonal crystals is represented by the phenomenological expression: where K1 and K2 are magnetocrystalline anisotropy constants and θ is an angle between the magnetization M and c axis. The values of K1 and K2 generally can be evaluated by applying the Sucksmith-Thompson (ST) method , where MS-EA and MS-EH are values of the saturation magnetization for field applied along the easy and hard magnetization directions, respectively Since the geometric shape of the measured samples is processed as a rectangle, the demagnetization factors are estimated to be Nx = 0.85(H⊥z) and Nz = 0.8(H∥z). The case of easy axis magnetic anisotropy satisfies the equation: The M(H) curve measured along the hard axis demonstrates nonlinear behavior in Fig. The high-field susceptibility in both direction increases with increasing temperature and the ratio χHA > χEA is typical in Fig. In summary, we found a giant out-of-plane coercivity (3 T) in high quality Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn single crystals with a typical easy axis along z direction due to the Fe doping. This unusually large coercivity originates from the perpendicular magnetocrystalline anisotropy. The modified Sucksmith-Thompson method, which takes into account magnetization anisotropy and high-field susceptibilities, has been used to obtain the magnetocrystalline anisotropy constants K1 and K2. At 2 K, K1 and K2 result in values of 6.0 × 10 4 J/m 3 and 4.1 × 10 5 J/m 3 , respectively. We found that both the values of Hc and K2 increase with decreasing temperature T, while K1 is nonmonotonically independent of T. Though the TC of 200 K for Mn2.42Fe0.58Sn is not high enough for direct application, our study provides a model to obtain the perpendicular magnetocrystalline anisotropy through Fe-doping in the Mn3Sn compound. The Curie temperature TC, saturation magnetizations Ms at 0 K and shape parameters s 