Exceptional points (EP) in non-Hermitian systems have been widely investigated due to their enhanced sensitivity in comparison to standard systems. In this letter, we report the observation of higher-order pseudo-Hermitian degeneracies in an electronic platform comprised of three inductively coupled gain-loss-loss LC resonators. Theoretical analysis demonstrates that the proposed system can realize third-order EP with asymmetric coupling between adjacent inductors and an arbitrary scaling factor between two loss resonators. When capacitive perturbation is introduced on the middle resonator, the perturbed eigenfrequencies follow a cube-root dependence on the perturbation parameter; in this case, the sensitivity is significantly greater than conventional wireless readout methods. Our work enriches the explorations of higher-order EP on electronic platforms and provides a new degree of design freedom for the non-Hermitian-EP-enhanced wireless sensing system. An exceptional point (EP) is a singularity in the parameter space of the system where the eigenvalues and their corresponding eigenvectors coalesce The idea of wirelessly monitoring physiological parameters through inductively interrogating LC mircosensors was first proposed by Collins to measure intraocular pressure In this letter, we propose a pseudo-Hermitian wireless sensing system consisting of gain-loss-loss LC resonators. Theoretical analysis based on coupled mode theory shows that the proposed system can realize third-order EP under an asymmetric adjacent coupling condition, which has been experimentally verified. When capacitive perturbation is introduced on the relay resonator, the perturbed eigenfrequency follows a cube-root dependency on the perturbation parameter. The sensitivity at EP3 is much higher compared to the conventional wireless readout method. Our work demonstrates that EPenhanced sensing can be utilized under arbitrary coupling and gain-loss parameters given that the pseudo-Hermitian condition is satisfied, offering a new degree of design freedom for the HOEP-based wireless sensing system. The schematic of the proposed pseudo-Hermitian electronic trimer, consisting of three planarly inductively coupled RLC series resonators, is shown in Fig. where is the inductive coupling coefficient where M n is the mutual inductance; Ĥ0 is the effective Hamiltonian operator. After a substitution λ = ω/ω 0 -1, the real and imaginary parts of the characteristic equation det( Ĥ0 -ωI 3 ) = 0, with I 3 being a 3 × 3 identity matrix, respectively reads where m = 1, 2, 3 and n = 1, 2, 3. Here ω 0 is normalized to one for concision. With the characteristic equation, we can then determine the conditions for the system to be pseudo-Hermitian as well as the conditions for the emergence of thirdorder EP. In order to guarantee pseudo-Hermiticity, the Hamiltonian should satisfy det( Ĥ0 -ωI 3 ) = det( Ĥ * 0 -ωI 3 ), i.e. Im[det( Ĥ0 -ωI 3 )] = 0, which yields 3 Here, the condition (3a) implies that balanced total gain and loss of the system should be satisfied. As can been seen from (2a), the third-order EP λ EP3 arises when Taking into account the structure of the wireless sensing system and utilizing the gain introduced by the VNA, we consider the case where γ 1 = -g and γ 2 = αγ 3 , i.e., the first resonator is gain while the remaining two resonators are lossy with loss parameters that differ by α. From (3a), γ 2 and γ 3 can be derived as γ 2 = gα/(1 + α) and γ 3 = g/(1 + α), respectively. Note that when α = 0, the system is a PT-symmetric trimer with a neutral relay resonator. By solving (3b) and ( Figures Next, we analyze the perturbation behavior at the thirdorder EP of the proposed pseudo-Hermitian system, aiming to theoretically validate the enhanced sensing characteristics. When introducing a capacitive perturbation on all three resonators, the perturbation Hamiltonian Ĥp can be written as Here, we only consider the case when a capacitive perturbation on the relay resonator is introduced, i.e., ε 1 = ε 3 = 0 and ε 2 = ε, where the perturbation parameter ε = -∆C/(C + ∆C) is related to the capacitive perturbation ∆C. For the same gain parameter g, the frequency response is the most significant when perturbing the relay resonator. The other two scenarios are discussed and compared in the supplementary material By expanding the eigenvalues with a Newton-Puiseux series where β = α/[4(1 + α)]. Solving the last two terms of (7), i.e., g 2 β /(2α)c 3 1 = 0 and 3c 1 c 2 + iβ g = 0, the coefficients (c 1 , c 2 ) of the Newton-Puiseux series can be obtained, which are c 1 = (1 + α) -1/3 g 2/3 /2 and c 2 = -iα(1 + α) -2/3 g 1/3 /6. It can be seen that both c 1 and c 2 are decreasing functions of the scaling factor α for a fixed g. Therefore, as α increases, the bifurcation of the perturbed eigenvalue will decrease, resulting in an reduction in sensitivity. Thus, in practical use, the loss parameter of the second resonator should be as small as possible. Details of the circumstances under which α is taken at different values are discussed in the supplementary material The characteristic equation at EP3 when α = 1 yields λ 3ελ 2 /2 + igελ /8g 2 ε/16 = 0, by solving which the following set of perturbed eigenfrequencies can be obtained, i.e., λ 2 = (g 2 ε/16) 1/3 e i2π/3i(gε 2 /4) 1/3 e -i2π/3 /6 + . . . , (8b) λ 3 = (g 2 ε/16) 1/3 e -i2π/3i(gε 2 /4) 1/3 e i2π/3 /6 + . . . . (8c) The real and imaginary parts of the perturbed eigenvalues (8) when g = 0.1 are plotted in Fig. A printed circuit board (PCB)-based prototype of the pseudo-Hermitian sensing system was constructed for experimental validation. The experimental setup is depicted in the inset of Fig. In summary, we proposed a more general pseudo-Hermitian system based on a radio-frequency circuit that can realize third-order EP under an asymmetric adjacent coupling condition and arbitrary loss parameters. A prototype is built to demonstrate the theoretical proposal experimentally. A cuberoot dependency on the perturbation for the perturbed eigenfrequencies is observed when capacitive perturbation is introduced on the Resonator II (relay resonator), showing a more significant response than perturbing Resonators I and III. The sensitivity of the proposed system is much higher compared to the conventional wireless readout method, with the greatest sensitivity enhancement appearing at EP3. Compared with the conventional wireless sensing system, the proposed circuit shows enhanced resolution of the measured reflection spectrum. Our work demonstrates that HOEP-enhanced sensing can be utilized under arbitrary coupling and gain-loss parameters, given that the pseudo-Hermitian condition is satisfied, showing potential applications in scenarios such as wireless intraocular pressure monitoring, parameter detection in harsh environments, etc. T.D. is grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) for their funding under grant no. 51977165.