This work is aimed at numerically investigating the behavior of the Fermi energy in Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate, using a numerical zero temperature elastic scattering cross-section procedure in the unitary collision regime. The main task is to vary the zero temperature superconducting energy gap from its zero value in the normal state, to the highest value of 60 meV. We find that there are two different reduced phase space regimes for the first harmonic line node's order parameter. The first one, represented by a Fermi energy with a value of -0.4 meV, where the rest of the material parameters, and the degrees of freedom of the normal to the superconducting phase transition are not sensitive to the self-consistent variation of the zero temperature superconducting energy gap. A different case is found when in the self-consistent numerical procedure, the Fermi energy takes a value of -0.04 meV, indicating that the fermion-dressed quasiparticles have material parameters strongly sensitive to the numerical changes in the zero temperature gap, resulting in a reduced phase space, where the input and output zero superconducting energy values, and the degrees of freedom are separated by the self-consistent numerical analysis. The first scenario considers that when the Fermi energy and the nearest hopping terms have the same order of magnitude, the physics can be described by a picture given by nonequilibrium statistical mechanics. A second scenario indicates, that when the Fermi energy parameter and the hopping term have different order of magnitude; the physical picture tends to be related to the nonrelativistic quantum mechanical degrees of freedom coming from quasi-stationary quantum energy levels, with a damping term seen in the probability density distribution function, that is described in the configuration space. Henceforth, it is concluded that the use of the zero temperature elastic scattering cross-section links the phase and configuration spaces through the inverse scattering lifetime, and helps to clarify the role of the degrees of freedom in Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate. Finally, we think that the self-consistent numerical procedure with the reduced phase space, induces nonlocality in the inverse scattering lifetime. The field of high-temperature superconductivity started with the discovery by Bednorz and Müller in 1986 of the ceramic composite known as Barium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate (BaLaCuO system) with a transition temperature (T c ) of 30 K The first experiments investigating the influence of impurities in HTSC showed that nonmagnetic disorder suppresses superconductivity In the same order of experimental ideas, La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 possesses a robust structure with stronger bonds than other HTSC ceramics, allowing larger crystals to be grown, and neutron scattering experiments can probe the material's magnetic structure with LSCO large bulk single-crystals It was found out that κ 0n (x) (the normal state electronic thermal conductivity) is larger than κ 0s (x) (the superconducting thermal conductivity) in the overdoped superconducting region Hussey also discussed from an experimental point of view, the nodal dressed quasiparticle spectrum of a d-wave superconductor, and the effects of impurities in normal and superconducting metallic alloys within the self-consistent T-matrix approximation This work is summarized as follows. Section 1, introduces some experimental works of interest for the compound Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate that points towards a unitary scattering regime scenario within the ZTCS. Section 2, addresses briefly some points of the ZTCS formalism in unconventional superconductors. Thus, it is explained the use of a singlet 1 st harmonic OP with linear nodes including self-consistency, and the use of the Edwards nonmagnetic disorder scattering technique within a tight-binding (TB) framework, with the following parametrization: the zero temperature superconducting gap, the Fermi energy, the first neighbor's interaction, the strength of the elastic scattering, and the concentration of nonmagnetic impurities. Section 3 is devoted to the study of the variation of the zero temperature superconducting gap (∆ 0 ) for La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , contrasting some points with the values found for the compound Strontium Ruthenate Section 3 is considered the most important in this work and extensively discusses from a numerical perspective, two regions of importance for the Fermi averages, where the degrees of freedom of the dressed quasiparticles in the NS transition are separated depending on the value for the Fermi energy "ε F ", and shows how the self-consistent procedure with the ZTCS finds in the reduced phase space (RPS) the NS transition, when the frequency window is sufficiently large. Namely, there are found different zero gaps, namely, ∆ 0 (input) and ∆ 0 (output). Additionally, numerically the properties of τ -1 with a nonlocal self-consistent character, and the minimum value of the imaginary part of the ZTCS is found to be positive for a line nodes OP, with a geometrical sharply peak, contrasting that the separation of the degrees of freedom has two different physical mechanisms. Section 4 concludes, and section 5 outlines some recommendation for future works in this direction, comparing Strontium Ruthenate, and metallic normal thin films, with the layered behavior in Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate. Scattering Cross-Section (ZTCS) In this subsection, we recall the role of two fundamental physical parameters used in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics The function τ -1 is calculated for Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate considering five parameters in the equation for the ZTCS, when there are used rationalized Planck units (h/2π = k B = c = 1). The ZTCS is given for the superconducting state by ω (ω + 0 ) with the inverse strength parameter ( = (" ) ) * where N F is the density of states at the Fermi surface and U 0 is the strontium impurity potential. The parameter Γ = + ,-! (" ) is proportional to the impurity concentration n imp in its first power ( We are only interested in the unitary collision regime which applies if c << 1 and l a -1 ~ 1. Thus, (1) and ( The Fermi surface average 〈... 〉 FS is performed in two limits of relevance for " B3; < , ; = 7 " according a technique successfully used to fit experimental out of equilibrium data on the low temperature limit, i.e., the superconducting sound attenuation The mean free path "l" does not have an equation in the unitary limit, and can be considered an input parameter, since the relationship that holds is l k F ~ l a -1 ~ 1, it means that the mean free path is equal to the lattice constant, and to the inverse k F -1 Fermi momentum (check Table In this model, Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate OP, possesses a linear nodal structure We distinguish two equations where the imaginary ZTCS plays a fundamental role in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics following the Gibbs distribution in phase space In both situations, the type of nonlocality, and the degrees of freedom come within in the inverse scattering lifetime described by collisions "coll" or a quasi-stationary damping "qsd" in the first partial derivatives with respect to time in the previous expressions. The imaginary function I I/ ω 0 J expresses nonlocality, if the irreducible representation B 1g with even parity follows an interplay between onsite and hopping terms in the Fermi average. It can be seen from the visualization of the RPS, and from the union of the phase space in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, with the configuration space in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics (see figure The Fermi-Dirac distribution describes the behavior of the quasiparticles on the quasi-stationary quantum energy levels Therefore, it is important to recall that the Fermi energy ε F , enters as a parameter in the Fermi-Dirac distribution f n . It can be numerically controlled when the Fermi averages 〈... 〉 FS are performed. In addition, the consequence of increasing the number of dressed negative fermion quasiparticles in the system results in an increase of the Fermi energy from negative to positive values In order to show the link with the degrees of freedom mechanism and nonlocality in this case, small colored insertion in figure The ZTCS for Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate is more difficult to simulate than for Strontium Ruthenate (∆ 0 = 1 meV), because the real frequency window should suffix to locate NS transition point; and in addition; we cannot extend this procedure to the antiferromagnetic phase. This is due to the existence of gap values that strongly depend on Edwards type of disorder We use for simulation (check Table However in the literature is also found the value ∆ 0 /2 for the function i3; < , ; = 7 Yoshida et al., performed detailed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy experiments (ARPES) in several cuprates including Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate Temperature Superconducting Gap The determination of the crossover between the normal, and superconducting phases (NS) in HTSC cuprates including the ceramic Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate is still one of the main task, from the experimental, theoretical and numerical points of view. It continues to be a matter of an intense debate, despite this compound is one among the first discovered cuprates. The experimental presence of fermion incoherent carriers in its transport properties for different doping levels, and the localization of the NS transition temperature using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy experiments, help to clarify several points, such as, the presence of different types of superconducting gaps We have noticed, that using the ZTSC formalism in the unitary regime, there are not small parameters in the solution of the self-consistent scattering lifetime for an OP with linear nodes. The minimum observed at the NS transition is finite and greater than cero, preserving its geometrical shape in all cases, except for a small positive value when the formalism with a very dilute doping is numerically solved, as seen in the insert of figure The 1 st simulation (sim) performed in this subsection, refers to a set of parameters corresponding to the nearest neighbor TB expression for a single band centered at the corners (±π/a, ±π/a) of the 1 st Brillouin 2D zone (figure Figure These results indicate that the input zero superconducting energy gap parameter for the four values has the following characteristics in the RPS: 1) The unitary peak in the imaginary function is increased with the input of higher values of ∆ 0 from the constant value of 0.16 meV in the normal state to almost 1.75 meV for the maximum ∆ 0 = 60.00 meV. Cuprate has a cero slope line, indicating a constant imaginary value, and therefore a constant unitary scattering lifetime, when the doping is fixed. Its value is approximately 0.16 meV, and it agrees with (3b). 3) The transition from the normal to the superconducting phase (NS) remains fixed as having the same input and output values for the zero energy superconducting gap ∆ 0 = (20.0, 33.90, 60.0/60.01) meV, when the Fermi energy parameter is ε F = -0.4 meV. Thus, in this case ∆ 0 , and also, the degrees of freedom are not sensitive to the material parameters. 4) The minimum in the imaginary part of the reduced phase space, i.e., the function I I/ ω 0 J has two features: a) First, an almost equal finite value for the zero energy superconducting gap values equal to (20.0, 33.90, 60.0) meV is given respectively by the values (0.06, 0.06, 0.05) meV. b) Second, there is a sharp minimum with a similar geometrical shape at the three NS points. If the 2 nd sim is performed, with real frequencies in an interval [-100, +100] meV, the plots are shown in figure 2) The normal state is a zero slope line, indicating a constant imaginary value, and therefore, a constant inverse unitary scattering lifetime, when the doping is fixed. Its value, now is increased with respect to the diluted doping case, and is 0.63 meV. The same situation happens in the superconducting phase. Therefore, normal incoherent dressed states scatter with more frequency. Henceforth, the main numerical results from section 3.2 are summarized as follows: The position in the reduced phase space from the normal to the superconducting transition (NS) remains almost at the same zero temperature energy gap input value (within a numerical difference rounding 1% between input and output values), and therefore, it is easier to determine the real frequency needed for the self-consistent simulation. This happen only for values of the Fermi energy, where hold the following conditions: The absolute Fermi energy value |ε F | ≈ 2 |t|, and the ε F value, it is found to be negative, and geometrically happens for circular shapes at the four corners of the 1 st Brillouin zone. It is seen from the simulation, that when the study is performed, the NS transition, and thus, the ∆ 0 value in the RPS does not depend on the material parameters, and there is a single frequency point, where the degrees of freedom are separated into two groups: Those of the nonequilibrium statistical mechanics phase space, corresponding to the normal state, and the ones from the configuration space of nonrelativistic quantum mechanics corresponding to the superconducting phase, remaining, the zero gap input and output values, within 1% of numerical difference if ε F = -0.4 meV. This case corresponds to the infographic chart given by figure The simulation performed in this subsection, refers to a set of nearest neighbor parameters for a single band with almost flat sheets centered at the corners (±π/a, ±π/a) of the 1 st Brillouin 2D cell, shadowed moccasin color in figure The implicit plot given according to 0 0.04 B D?! ; < , ; = being C 0.04 meV (|ε F | << 2 |t|) resembles a geometrical ongoing transition to the half-filled antiferromagnetic ground state, and a geometrical flattening of the four circular pockets, centered symmetrically at points p3; < , ; = 7 p ", "). The main signature in the dispersion B ; < , ; = is that for C 0.04 meV, the dominant behavior comes from the quantum mechanical nearest hopping term B D?! 3; < , ; = 7, closer to the insulator La 2 CuO 4 , as can be seen from figure In such a hypothetical case, the average over the Fermi surface converts the 2D integration in (3a) into a line integral, and complicates the numerical procedure. Therefore, the value C 0.04 meV suffixes our duty, allowing numerically, to compute a new behavior of the imaginary ZTCS. Additionally, the yellow lines represent, the implicit sketch of the linear OP nodes, i.e., Δ3k w , k x 7 0. If the Fermi energy is C 0.04 meV, the scattering strength used for the new simulation is given by the same expression in the unitary scattering limit (c = 0). The doping Γ + in this subsection has the same previous two values. A diluted doping Γ + = 0.05 meV, and an optimal doping value Γ + = 0.20 meV. Using these parameters, we change the values of the zero temperature energy gap in the imaginary part of the ZTCS within same range. The value ∆ 0 = 0.0 meV, indicates the normal state given by (3b). The input zero gap values are the same four, i.e., ∆ 0 = (20.0, 33.90, 60.0) meV. The results of the 5 th self-consistent sim, using a real frequency window between p 80.0 rVs are shown in figure Henceforth, figure If the 6 th simulation is performed using same material parameters in an interval I 400.00, 400.00J meV, the results are shown in figure In another order of ideas, the self-consistent reduced phase space, using the set of five simulation parameters (ε F , t, ∆ 0 , Γ + , c) is able to answer when the degrees of freedom given by the phase space in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, and the configuration space in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics are more sensitive to material parameters in the case of having nonmagnetic doping with strontium in the NS phase transitions, as we have numerically demonstrated in this work. The physics corresponds to a quantum mechanical quasi stationary level case, and remains hidden in the Gibbs distribution 1) The unitary peak in the imaginary function is increased for higher values of the ∆ 0 , from 0.16 meV in the normal state to 2.61 meV for the maximum gap, i.e., ∆ 0 = 60.0 meV, and C 0.04 meV. This shows that in the case, when the Fermi energy is closer to a cero value, the scattering lifetime is smaller than when C 0.4 meV for a dilute doping (Γ + = 0.05 meV). 2) The normal state in the reduced phase space is represented by a cero slope line, as in the previous case, and the imaginary elastic scattering term has a constant value of 0.16 meV, so C does no change the normal state unitary lifetime. 3) The minimum in the imaginary part of the reduced phase space has almost the same finite value for the new zero energy gap ∆ 0 (output)= (38.00, 64.40, 114.00) meV, and it is given approximately by the value I I/ ω 0 J = 0.04 meV (it is almost the same value obtained from figure In accordance with the previous statement, all output zero energy superconducting ∆ 0 values are given in table 4. Figure 1) The unitary peak in the imaginary function is increased with higher values of ∆ 0 , from a normal state imaginary output of 0.63 meV to 5.60 meV for ∆ 0 (output) = 64.0 meV and ε F = -0.04 meV. This shows, that in the case when the Fermi energies are closer to a cero value, the scattering lifetime is smaller than when ε F = -0.4 meV for an optimal doping (Γ + = 0.20 meV). 2) The normal state is a zero slope line as in the previous case, and the imaginary elastic scattering term has a value of 0.63 meV, indicating that in the unitary limit, optimal doping, gives the same constant lifetime as for dilute doping, and ε F = -0.04 meV. 3) The minimum in the imaginary part of the RPS has almost the same finite value for the ∆ 0 (output) = (38.00, 64.40, 114.00) meV, and it is given by the values: I I/ ω 0 )J = (0.20, 0.19, 0.17) meV. The present work was aimed at numerically investigating the behavior of the Fermi energy parameter (ε F ) in a singlet 2D layer of Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate, using a self-consistent numerical zero temperature elastic scattering cross-section procedure in the unitary collision regime, varying the values of the zero temperature superconducting energy gap (∆ 0 ). We found that there are two different reduced phase space tight-binding regimes: 1) One picture, where ε F = -0.4 meV indicates an asymmetric dressed quasiparticles scenario (holes), where material parameters and degrees of freedom of the NS transition are no sensitive to the numerical change on the microscopic parameter ∆ 0 in the unitary limit with a constant mean free path z ∼ H . This scenario considers that the physical mechanism is induced by the parameters (t, ε F ), that have the same order of magnitude. 2) A different picture, where ε F = -0.04 meV indicates a dressed electron almost symmetric quasiparticles scenario, and where the material parameters are strongly sensitive to the numerical change of ∆ 0 and the degrees of freedom. The unitary limit with z ∼ H still prevails. The 2 nd picture considers that the physical mechanism is induced by the small value of the Fermi energy parameter ε F = -0.04 meV with |t| > |ε F |, and this picture tends to be related to the hopping nonrelativistic quantum mechanical degrees of freedom at the quasi-stationary quantum mechanical level. 3) We think that self-consistent nonlocality is an intrinsic property of the reduced phase space, where holds that / (/ ) ~ 1, and that in order to check for the ε F scenario that takes place, we need also to consider in the reduce phase space, real frequencies of the order of / ~ 4 Δ . To compare with other works, nonlocality can be also found for the mean free path "z" in thin metallic films when considering the anomalous skin effect, using Fermi averages for complicated Fermi surfaces. Theoretical details for the mean free path within the anomalous skin effect, can be found in the works On the other hand, in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, the ground state and the phase space for N particles are related quantities i.e., E -E 0 = f N (<ε> -ε 0 ), since it contains the degrees of freedom f and the averaged energy <ε> linked to a quantum number for each particle. The configuration space, and the phase space are related spaces, since <ε> includes an average using a distribution function which depends on time f(t), and we can make used of the Boltzmann kinetic equation for the τ-approximation (we called this a Wigner probabilistic distribution approach in our previous works, since it gives a classical window to the quantum world as Wigner probabilistic distributions are able to accomplish We have found that a space that links the two mentioned above spaces is the reduced phase space (RPS), where energy is conserved for the scattering processes. The RPS is given by two coordinates, i.e., the axes representing the real frequencies, and imaginary part of the zero temperature elastic scattering cross-section (RI/ (ω + 0 )J, II/ (ω + 0 )J). The RPS has some important properties for the nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, when we make use of the parameters "l" and " "; for a gas of dressed fermion quasiparticles, because is possible to move from a complete description of a non-equilibrium state, to an abbreviated description, using a single distribution function for one quasiparticle. Additionally, a numerical analysis in the reduced phase space, finds the position in which the degrees of freedom change, indicating a transition between different physical phases, such as, the normal to the superconducting phase transition, and it is able to remarkably distinguish different physical behaviors within these phases (if we consider crystal group theory, alongside with a proper Fermi surface average of the elastic scattering cross-section, within the unitary limit for a 2D layer of Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate). The use of the reduced phase space based on the zero elastic scattering cross-section is a well-established procedure to study unconventional superconductors, where strontium atoms are present, as in Strontium-doped Lanthanum Cuprate, and Strontium Ruthenate. The direct analysis of the RPS using group theoretical considerations allowed us in the research However, we think that a world opens to study the inclusion of several quantum mechanical properties given by the number of states when considering quantities, such as, the density of states using the reduce phase space within the zero temperature scattering cross-section formalism.