Additive manufacturing technologies enable the production of complex and bioinspired shapes using magnetoresponsive materials, which find diverse applications in soft robotics. Particularly, the development of composites with controlled gradients in mechanical properties offers new prospects for advancements in magneto-active materials. However, achieving such composites with gradients typically involves complex multi-material printing procedures. In this study, a single-step laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) process is proposed that enables precise local adjustments of the mechanical stiffness within magneto-active composites. By utilizing distinct laser parameters in specific regions of a composite containing thermoplastic polyurethane and atomized magnetic powder derived from hard magnetic Nd-Fe-B, the stiffness of the composite can be modified within the range of 2 to 22 MPa. Various magneto-responsive actuators with locally tailored stiffness are fabricated and their magnetic performance is investigated. The enhanced response exhibited by actuators with locally adjusted mechanical properties in comparison to their homogeneous counterparts with identical geometries is shown. As a demonstration of biomedical application, a magnetically responsive stent with localized adjustment is presented with the ability to meet specific requirements in terms of geometry and local stiffness based on an individual's anatomy and disease condition. The proposed method presents an approach for creating functionally graded materials using LPBF, not only for magneto-active materials but also for several other structural and functional materials. Mechanically soft actuators and sensors enable a safe and compliant interaction between humans and their environment In additive manufacturing, achieving localized variations in the mechanical properties of different structural materials is typically accomplished through multi-material printing, aiming to realise a diverse range of stiffness within a given structure. This includes, for example, combining nozzles for different resins In this study, an approach is presented for modifying the stiffness of a magneto-active composite at specific local regions. The proposed method utilizes a single-step laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) process. The composite consists of hard magnetic Nd-Fe-B particles within a thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) matrix. The LPBF process involves selectively fusing layers of powder using a laser beam Magneto-active composites were produced using the thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) based polymer "Flexa Grey" from Sinterit (Poland) in combination with the spherical hard magnetic powder "MQP-S" which is based on the Nd2Fe14B system from Neo Magnequench (Singapore). TPU-based polymers are composed of block copolymers containing alternating rigid and flexible segments. The rigid crystalline segments serve as crosslinks, while the flexible amorphous segments contribute to the flexibility. The properties of the initial powders, as provided by the literature For structural and chemical investigations a thin lamellae of from the MQP-S powder was prepared using focused ion beam lift-out technique (FIB: JEOL JIB-4600F), and the lamellae were studied using transmission electron microscope (TEM: JEM-2100, JEOL) in both transmission and scanning transmission modes. The machine was equipped with an Oxford X-Max80 energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) detector, thus chemical analysis was also done in scanning transmission mode. The feedstock for the LPBF was produced by mixing the two powders with the shaking mixer from TURBULA® (WAB-GROUP, Switzerland) for 30 min. The nominal filler fraction ω f was 50 weight % (wt. %) which corresponds to a volume fraction φ f of around 12.7 %. The conversion was calculated with the following equation: Where ρ f is the density of the filler (MQP-S) and ρ m the density of the polymer matrix. The filler fractions of the produced samples were verified by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). An STA 409 CD Simultaneous thermal analyzer (Netzsch, Germany) was used with a heating rate of 10 °C/min. The experiment was performed under nitrogen atmosphere and a temperature ranging from 30 °C to 600 °C. For the LPBF process, the commercial device "Lisa Pro" from Sinterit (Poland) was used which is equipped with a continuous-wave mode 5 W (λ = 808 nm) infra-red (IR) laser diode. The powder bed is heated by resistive heaters whereas the powder surface is heated with infrared lights. The print chamber has the dimensions 150 x 200 x 260 mm. The laser scanning direction is rotated by 90° for each layer. The process parameters are listed in Table The Sinterit software allows the assignment of one parameter set per digital file, for example, an STL (Standard Tessellation Language) file. To realize locally tailored properties, the energy scale parameter is varied locally. For the process, the digital model of the sample needs to be separated into distinct regions representing the desired varied properties. In situations where a gradient in the x-y direction is required, areas featuring different process parameters can be positioned adjacently to one another [Figure , where the height l of the digital parts must be an integer multiplier of the process parameter layer height. The mechanical properties of the composites were investigated with tensile and nanoindentation tests and the magnetic properties were studied with a pulsed field magnetometer. The actuator shapes were magnetized in a pulsed field magnetometer and their actuation behavior was investigated with an electromagnet. Details about the sample geometries and analysis methods are provided in this section. Different geometries were produced by LPBF. Three cubes with a side length of 7.5 mm were produced for each energy scale parameter for the determination of the geometrical density and the magnetic properties. To visualize the microstructure of the composites, light microscopy was done on the cubes which were produced with 0.6 and 3.0 energy scale process parameter. For the mechanical characterization, five dumbbell-shaped samples for each energy scale parameter according to the ASTM D638 standard with sample type IV were produced. In ordert to reduce the powder consumption, the size of the mechanical tensile test geometries was reduced to 50 % compared to the standard. The orientation of the parts in relation to the build-up direction has an influence of the properties of TPU produced with LPBF Samples with a linear increase in energy scale from 0.6 to 3.0 were produced to verify a mechanical gradient within a sample. Two square cuboid samples with a side length of 10 mm were produced vertically with a height of 20.25 mm, consisting of 54 segments with a layer height of 375 μm (3x "layer height"). The dimensionless energy scale parameter was varied linearly in the digital segments from 0.6 to 3.0 in steps of 0.05. In one sample the energy scale was linearly increasing with the build-up direction and in the other one decreasing with the build-up direction. Another sample was produced with a linear gradient in the energy scale, but with the gradient in the horizontal direction, perpendicular to the build-up direction. Here, the digital segments had a thickness of 316 μm (hatch distance). In total 72 segments were used, which resulted in the total dimensions of 10x10x22.75 mm. Also, magneto-responsive actuators were produced with different shapes. Foldable cubes, consisting of four 10x10x1 mm plates connected with 2.5 mm segments with a thickness of 0.5 mm. Here, cubes with a homogenous energy scale parameter of 3.0 were produced as well as cubes where the platforms were produced with 3.0 and the smaller segments with 1.0. The foldable cubes were magnetized in their folded state within a pulsed field magnetometer (HyMpulse from Metis Instruments, Belgium) with 6.85 T. Two different artificial muscle shapes were produced with an upright printing position and a length of 20 mm. The detailed shape and dimensions are depicted in The tensile tests were performed at room temperature and according to the ASTM D638 standard for five samples per laser parameter. An Inspekt table The magnetic properties of the composites produced with different laser parameters were evaluated at room temperature with external fields of 6.85 T with the HyMpulse pulsed field magnetometer. For the demagnetization correction, a value of N = 1⁄3 was used due to the spherical morphology of the magnetic powder. An isothermal magnetization measurement at room temperature, with an external magnetic field up to 14 T, of the pure MQP-S powder was carried out using PPMS-VSM (Quantum Design PPMS-14). For the measurement the MQP-S particles were embedded in an epoxy to immobilize the particles. The hardness gradient within each sample was measured via nanoindentation testing using a G200 nanoindenter from KLA instruments (USA) equipped with a Vickers geometry indenter tip. The instrument was operated in constant strain rate mode with a 0.05 s -1 target strain rate. Vickers indentations of 20 μm depth were placed every 500 μm over 20 mm. Since adequate surface finish is required for these tests, the specimens were ground and polished with up to 4000 grit. The actuator geometries were magnetized with a 6.85 T pulse with the HyMpulse pulsed field magnetometer. The actuation tests were then performed between the poles of the water-cooled electromagnet (model 3474-140 from GMW, USA). The setup is shown in Figure A 5 with the corresponding magnetic field distribution in the different directions. The applied magnetic field strength was measured with a Hall sensor which is attached to one of the pole shoes. The deformation was analyzed optically with the software ImageJ. The imprinted magnetization profile of the cubes was measured with a custom build setup consisting of linear motors and a 3MTS Teslameter. The sensor and linear motors were controlled with the LabVIEW software (National Instruments, USA). The Hall sensor moves above the sample with 1 mm steps and then the components of the magnetic field produced by the magnetization of the sample are measured with a spatial resolution of 150 μm at each measurement point. For the magneto-mechanical modeling of the artificial muscles numerical simulations were carried out using the commercial software Ansys (Ansys® Academic Research Mechanical, Release 2021R2). The force on the top surface of the artificial muscles was measured and used as a boundary condition in the software. In addition, a zero displacement boundary condition was applied on the bottom of the artificial muscles, and the plates' surfaces are constrained in the orthogonal direction to the surfaces. The fabricated polymer composites exhibit a nonlinear stress-strain relation and experience finite deformations The filler fraction of magneto-responsive composites is a crucial parameter influencing the magnetic and mechanical properties of the material and influences the resulting forces in an magnetic actuator In order to explore the extent to which material properties can be modified, the density, magnetic characteristics, and mechanical performance of the composite are examined across various energy scale values used during production. The geometric densities of the composites as a function of the energy scale are presented in The magnetic properties of the composites at room temperature are presented in Figure Referring to the data sheet of the manufacturer, the elastic modulus of the pure TPU is 7.8 MPa, the tensile strength is 3.6 MPa and the strain at break is 210% In order to verify the local mechanical property adjustment within one composite sample, nanoindentation can be used In this section, examples are presented where the local property adjustment can be used in soft robotic applications to enhance the actuation performance. Actuators like artificial muscles, foldable cubes and an airway stent are explored to demonstrate that the method is useful for different soft robotics applications. First, two designs acting as artificial muscles are investigated with graded and ungraded properties repectively. Two different designs are presented, one which only shows contraction and one which demonstrates contraction and slight rotation. Artificial muscles are actuators that contract, expand or rotate reversibly driven by an external stimulus A similar behaviour is also presented in Figure Another example of an application for the locally adjusted magneto-active composites is a foldable cube. The hinges can be made soft while the faces of the cube remain stiffer. The idea is to allow higher deformation where it is needed and remain stiffer where higher structural integrity is required. This can be utilized in assembly applications including origami techniques Magneto-active composites are already explored for biomedical applications The aim of this study was to develop magneto-active materials with locally varying stiffness by LPBF using commercially available machines, materials and locally adjusting the energy scale process parameter. For local adjustment, the digital files of the samples must be divided as follows: in the x-y plane, the sections of the digital files must possess the same dimensions as the hatch distance. For local adjustment in z-direction, parallel to the build-up direction, the digital files must have dimensions in z-direction which are integer multipliers of the layer height. The minimum step size where the properties can be tailored are therefore the layer height in z-direction and the hatch distance in the x-y plane. This method was validated with a composite of TPU polymer matrix and hard magnetic atomized Nd-Fe-B particles. The range of processing parameters was determined by density, magnetic and mechanical property characterization. The change of the laser parameters results in a different level of porosity, ranging from 2% to 24% for decreasing laser power, affecting the magnetic properties. For low laser powers, the presence of high porosity leads to magnetic particles that are weakly embedded, causing them to rotate during the demagnetization process. Since this effect is limiting the actuation performance, the corresponding process parameter (0.6) is here the lower boundary condition. Tensile tests showed a range of Young's moduli between 2 and 22 MPa. The gradient in mechanical properties was verified by a sequence of local hardness measurements on samples printed with different orientations towards the build-up direction. The actuation behavior of magneto-responsive actuators with locally tailored stiffness was then studied under a magnetic field. Importantly, higher deformation at the same field or enhanced deformation at lower magnetic fields in comparison to their homogenous counterparts is observed. That the actuation can be completed with lower actuation field results in an increase the energy efficiency of a system. Also, the presented actuators were tailored specifically for an application where the material properties can be adjusted to the requirements. One biomedical example is a magnetically actuated airway stent, where the location of the contracted stent within the airway can be controlled by the field and the removal of the field results in the expansion of the diameter at the desired location. Here the stiffness was adjusted to increase the expansion forces at the site of an external compression. Next steps are the production of highly porous structures with a strong filler matrix adhesion to prevent particle rotation to expand the range of tailorable stiffness to lower values. The usage of non-spherical particles can help to tackle this challenge. Simultanous optimization of the geometry and the materials property by simulation will help to design actuators and parts specifically for applications while mitigating contrains in their weight, maximal dimensions and required actuation fields. 