Vanadium dioxide (VO2) exhibits a hysteretic insulator-to-metal transition near room temperature, forming the foundation for various forms of resistive switching devices. Usually, these are realized in the form of two-terminal bridge-like structures. We show here that by incorporating multiple, parallel VO2 bridges in a single two-terminal device, a wider range of possible characteristics can be obtained, including a manifold of addressable resistance states. Different device configurations are studied, in which the number of bridges, the bridge dimensions and the interbridge distances are varied. The switching characteristics of the multibridge devices are influenced by the thermal crosstalk between the bridges. Scanning Thermal Microscopy has been used to image the current distributions at various voltage/current bias conditions. This work presents a route to realize devices exhibiting highly non-linear, multistate current-voltage characteristics, with potential applications in e.g., tunable electronic components and novel, neuromorphic information processing circuitry. To overcome limitations of computing systems based on von Neumann architectures, like excessive data transfer between memory and logic units, neuromorphic device concepts that mimic the function of neurons and synapses are of particular interest. In Figure In the double-bridge devices, the switching behaviors of the parallel bridge devices are determined by the intrinsic IMT of individual bridges and the thermal interaction between them. In this work, several available knobs at a device level are tuned for manipulation of the switching behaviors. Double-bridge devices, multiple-bridge devices, and multi-width bridge devices are discussed in the following sections. Despite the rising complexity, there are some basic trends that have been observed. One is that more potential switches and intermediate resistive states can be achieved by adding more bridges in parallel. Also, the spacing between bridges influences the number of switching events and the power required for subsequent switches. This is clear from Figure From the current-controlled I-V characteristics, the differential conductance (dI/dV) of the measured devices is calculated and plotted as a function of applied current, see Figures Interestingly, there are several NDR regions in the current-controlled sweep, where the differential resistance (dV/dI) of the device is negative. NDR can generally be found in materials that form higher current density channels relative to the rest of the material under electrical stimuli. The reset process is basically the inverse process of the set behavior, but follows a different trace, due to the hysteretic resistance versus temperature characteristics of the VO2. Starting with two bridges in the low-resistance state (scan D), the right bridge is switched OFF when the current decreases (scan E), and finally the remaining bridge is also switched to the highresistance state and the current is almost evenly distributed over both bridges again (scan F). While in principle the switching sequence between the two bridges for the set and reset process could be different, we see in Figure In the supplementary information (Figure However, due to fluctuation in the thermal crosstalk, there is also potential individual switching within the device and sometimes it dominates the switching behavior. The power difference (P) between P2 and P1 scales with the bridge spacing, in line with the consideration that more power is required for the secondary switch when the thermal crosstalk becomes less significant. Temperature-dependent measurements are also performed on double-bridge devices (see Figure Based on the systematic studies on double-bridge devices, we further fabricated triple-bridge devices (Figure It is observed that, in this particular measurement, the bridges are switched in sequence from right to left as the applied current increases, corresponding to the individual snapbacks in the I-V curves. To obtain even more resistance states, two more bridges are added to the device design, thus forming a quintuple-bridge device (Figure The SThM thermal maps in Figure As discussed above, due to the additional complexity, the intrinsic switching behavior is not always as straightforward as the current-controlled I-V characteristic would indicate. The competition among the nominally identical bridges for the first switch makes the set process in the low current range chaotic, leading to the unpredictable first switched bridge. Furthermore, more than one bridge can be switched ON simultaneously, sometimes accompanied by an ONstate bridge switching back to the OFF state. The surprising observation of an apparently stochastic order of switching for L <~ d cannot be explained fully by thermal crosstalk between steady-state bridges. We theorize that local thermal fluctuations could drive the observed stochasticity, which will be the subject of further research. This complexity may be further optimized and utilized in applications, for example in finite-state machine devices. In the parallel-bridge devices, there are several variables to manipulate the switching behaviors, including the intrinsic IMT properties of the VO2 bridges, the configuration of the devices, and the operating temperature. There is also an interplay between these factors, as was shown above. The intrinsic IMT determines the required switching power and the resistive states of the device. However, by tuning the operating temperature, the switching characteristic and critical spacing for synchronized/sequential/stochastic switching in multi-bridge devices can be changed. In the following, we will show an example of an additional degree of freedom, namely the geometry of the bridge. So far, all the bridges in one device are identical with the same length, width and spacing. However, as mentioned in a previous section, competition between identical bridges can lead to unpredictable inherent switching behavior. We expect the geometry of bridges to strongly influence the switching behavior, as it affects the initial resistance, the switching power, and the generated heating of the bridges. The measurement results of two triple-bridge devices with multi-width bridges are shown in Figure The behavior of measured multi-width bridge devices shows several recurring aspects. The narrow bridges in the devices tend to win the competition in the low current range and can be triggered first. This is because they exhibit more confined Joule heating due to their small dimensions and larger resistance. Moreover, once the wide bridges are switched ON, they dominate most of the current flowing through the device due to their small resistance in the low-resistance state. This can also lead to narrow bridges switching back to the OFF state. If one wants to avoid this, it is wise to place the wider bridge at the edge, like in Device I. From the examples above, it is clear that there are many possibilities for tuning the device configuration by varying the lengths, widths and spacing of the bridges. For example, a multiple-bridge device containing bridges of different widths, growing from one side to the other, is expected to display a 'waterfall switching' sequence from the narrowest bridge to the widest. The spacing can be adjusted to allow the thermal interaction assisting the subsequent switches instead of interfering with them. In conclusion, we have investigated the resistive switching behaviors of VO2-based parallelbridge devices in a two-terminal configuration. The current-controlled measurements allow a higher degree of control over the resistive states compared to the voltage-controlled ones. The current-controlled switching behaviors are influenced by the intrinsic switching properties of the bridges and the thermal interaction among them. The switching behavior can be manipulated at the device level by adjusting several key factors, including bridge numbers, bridge spacing and bridge geometry, which also interact with each other. With more bridges, there is potential to achieve more switching events and resistive states. The spacing between bridges affects the number of switches and the potential switching bridge. In the limit of small device length and current, stochastic behavior can emerge. The switching principles of single-bridge devices can be extended to multiple-bridge devices, which can act as building blocks for versatile reconfigurable devices. A further degree of freedom that can be introduced to enhance the functionality of such VO2 devices with complex topologies is the incorporation of multiple current/voltage terminals. This will be a topic of further study. Fabrication of VO2-based parallel-bridge devices: Epitaxial VO2 thin films with an estimated nominal thickness of 11 nm were deposited on single crystal TiO2 (001) substrates using pulsed laser deposition (PLD) from a polycrystalline V2O3 target. Electrical measurements: The switching characteristics of the VO2-based parallel-bridge devices are investigated in a Janis cryogenic probe station with a Keithley 4200A-SCS parameter analyzer applying voltage or current sweeps at room temperature (T0 = 295 K), unless otherwise stated. Scanning Thermal Microscopy (SThM): SThM is performed using an Asylum AFM and an SThM thermo-resistive probe (Pd on SiN from Bruker). These SThM probes can correlate changes in their electrical resistance with temperature variations in the tip (Rprobe ∝ Tprobe). SThM measurements are performed in passive mode, with a 0.5 V set point and a 0.5 V tip bias. The potential measured across the bridge (VSThM) allows to determine accurately the changes of the electrical resistance of the probe and, hence, temperature variations on the surface of the device. The sample is coated with a 90 nm-thick PMMA-A2 layer for the SThM scans, in order to protect the SThM tip from electrical discharges while biasing the devices. During the SThM scans, the device is biased at constant current bias values when the resistance is settled. The current is ramped up towards a maximum at which the entire device is fully switched to the low-resistance state. Afterwards the current is ramped down back to 0 mA to reset the device. To probe the amount and variation of the thermal background noise, a scan with zero bias current is always performed prior to the first biased SThM scan and after the last. To be noted, the thermal signal measured from SThM cannot be directly related to the surface temperature without certain calibration steps, 