Millimeter-sized Ce2Rh 3+δ Sb4 (δ ≈ 1/8) single crystals were synthesized by a Bi-flux method and their physical properties were studied by a combination of electrical transport, magnetic and thermodynamic measurements. The resistivity anisotropy ρ a,b /ρc ∼ 2, manifesting a quasi-onedimensional electronic character. Magnetic susceptibility measurements confirm ab as the magnetic easy plane. A long-range antiferromagnetic transition occurs at TN = 1.4 K, while clear shortrange ordering can be detected well above TN . The low ordering temperature is ascribed to the large Ce-Ce distance as well as the geometric frustration. Kondo scale is estimated to be about 2.4 K, comparable to the strength of magnetic exchange. Ce2Rh 3+δ Sb4, therefore, represents a rare example of dense Kondo lattice whose Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida exchange and Kondo coupling are both weak but competing. Heavy-fermion compounds are prototypical strongly correlated systems whose electrons can behave rather unconventionally. Examples of the latter include the ubiquitous strange-metal and/or non-Fermi-liquid behavior observed in the vicinity of quantum critical points (QCPs) characterized by sub-quadratic temperature dependent resistivity (ρ ∝ T n , where n substantially less than 2), divergent electronic specific-heat coefficient (e.g. C/T ∝ -log T ), etc Recently, we reported the growth of a new ternary superconducting rhodium-antimonide La 2 Rh 3+δ Sb 4 (T c ∼ 0.8 K) In this paper, we report the synthesis and physical properties of Ce 2 Rh 3+δ Sb 4 (δ ≈ 1/8) single crystals. Our work manifests that Ce 2 Rh 3+δ Sb 4 is an easy-plane anti- ferromagnet with Néel temperature T N = 1.4 K. Shortrange magnetic correlation can be observed well above T N . Kondo scale is estimated, T K ∼ 2.4 K, comparable to the strength of magnetic exchange. We also discuss the reason for the low ordering temperature, and the possibility of QCP under pressure. Single crystalline Ce 2 Rh 3+δ Sb 4 was grown by a Bi-flux method as described in our earlier work The chemical composition of the obtained single crystals was verified by energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) affiliated to a field emission scanning electron microscope (FEI Model SIRION), which gives the atomic ratio Ce : Rh : Sb = 23.21 : 32.56 : 44.24. Single crystalline x-ray diffraction (XRD) data were recorded at room temperature on a Rigaku XtaLAB mini II with Mo radiation (λ Kα = 0.71073 Å). Electrical resistivity was measured by the standard four-probe method in a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS-9, Quantum Design) which was also used for the specific heat measurements. In order to measure the in-plane resistivity, we employed focused-ion-beam (FIB) technique to make the microstructured device, as shown in the inset to Fig. The crystalline structure of Ce 2 Rh 3+δ Sb 4 determined from single-crystal XRD analysis is shown in Fig Temperature dependent resistivity of Ce 2 Rh 3+δ Sb 4 for electrical current parallel to different principal axes are shown in Fig. Figure In Fig. [cf inset to Fig. The low-temperature AFM transition is now clearly seen in C 4f /T as shown in the main frame of Fig. We then investigate the magnetic entropy S m (per molar cerium) by integrating C 4f /T over T , as shown in the inset to Fig. We also notice a salient feature that C 4f /T remains as large as ∼ 1.2 J/K 2 •mol-f.u. even at the ultra-low temperature 0.05 K. Such a large residual specific heat coefficient is rather unusual for a long-range ordered antiferromagnet. In addition, a slope change is seen near 0.6 K in C 4f /T [Fig. In fact, the two inequivalent Ce sublattices can be also reflected in specific heat under magnetic field (H ⊥ c), as shown in Fig. Finally, several additional remarks are in order: (1) The origin of the low T N . There could be multiple reasons for the low T N in Ce 2 Rh 3+δ Sb 4 . First, within a single Ce sub-lattice, the Ce-Ce distances are 4.56 Å and 5.95 Å [Fig. , where x = 2k F r ij and k F is Fermi wavevector (2) The two inequivalent Ce sites. Although Ce1-and Ce2-sublattices build up the same distorted triangular networks [cf Fig. To summarize, by a Bi-flux method, we successfully synthesized single crystalline Ce 2 Rh 3+δ Sb 4 , a new dense Kondo lattice material. The compound contains quasi-1D Ce chains along c which is also the magnetic hard axis. Quasi-1D electronic and magnetic features are unveiled by resistivity and magnetic susceptibility measurements. A long-range antiferromagnetic transition occurs at T N = 1.4 K, while clear short-range ordering can be detected well above T N . We attribute the low ordering temperature to the large Ce-Ce distance as well as the geometric frustration. Kondo scale is estimated to be about 2.4 K, comparable to the strength of magnetic exchange. Our work provides a rare paradigm of dense Kondo lattice whose RKKY exchange and Kondo coupling are both weak but competing. * These authors contribute equally to this work.