Quantum sensors provide unprecedented magnetic field detection sensitivities, enabling these to extend the common magnetometry range of applications and environments of operation. In this framework, many applications also require high spatial resolution magnetic measurements for biomedical research, environmental monitoring and industrial production. In this regard, Optically Pumped Magnetometers (OPMs) are considered as prominent candidates, but are impaired in size with micrometer scale magnetic particles, e.g. magnetic droplets. In order to address this limitation, here we study the effects of adding a micrometer-to-millimeter magnetic guide to a miniature OPM. This device is applied to detect Fe3O4 magnetic droplets flowing at rates up to 25 drop./s in a microfluidic channel. The computed spatial resolution is 300 μm and the measured SNR is larger than 15 dB for the different sizes of considered magnetic droplets. Recent advances in science and technology are producing a wide range of bioparticle interaction and sensing possibilities, eventually even leading to communication with organisms, that will drastically change the way we link to them. The fusion of fields like nano, bio, and microfluidics technologies is one pertinent example. These technological combinations have culminated in various brands and concepts that are currently used in a variety of research fields, such as Lab-on-a-chip (LoC) When trying to approach the contact-less environment for basic particle interaction, and in particular for droplets containing magnetic particles, mimicking magnetic signals from bioparticles (e.g., action potentials from cells) In this direction, quantum technologies, jointly with nanotechnologies, have led to a new field of physics and engineering aimed at translating the effects of quantum physics into practical applications. Using solid-state quantum systems, atoms, ions, molecules, and photonic circuitry, one can design macroscopic but intrinsically quantum devices used for receiving dim signals Moreover, materials with high magnetic permeability tend to collect magnetic flux lines. This property can lead to a local magnetic field amplification and enhanced spatial resolution in the gap between two high permeability structures or flux concentrators. These have previously been combined with a wide variety of magnetic sensor technologies Nevertheless, limitations with the detection of magnetic droplets in microfluidic channels are still present. On the one hand, there is a dimension mismatch when interfacing between magnetic droplets and atomic magnetometers, because the latter is relatively large compared to micro-sized droplets. This unpairing of dimensions causes the lack of spatial resolution to individually interrogate droplets. On the other hand, magnetic detection systems suffer from loss of signal sensitivity and integrity due to intricate coupling structures and stray fields, the latter from the measuring system as well as from the environment. Therefore, in this work it is proposed a magnetic guide on an OPM to allow high spatial resolution, while maintaining the sensitivity, for detecting magnetic droplets in a microfluidic channel. The magnetic guide is based on a magnetic hose structure that allows efficiently transferring the magnetic signal at a distance Correspondingly, the objectives of this work are to: 1) derive an OPM with high spatial resolution magnetic guide framework for detecting magnetic droplets in a microfluidic channel; 2) provide calculations and experimental demonstration of the capabilities achieved in combination with a test system; and 3) discuss the results at detection rates up to 25 droplets/s (drop./s). In this regard, this article is organized as follows. First, Section 2 describes the constructed system and its principle of operation. Then, an analysis of the performance in terms of spatial resolution and sensitivity is provided in Sections 3 and 4, respectively. Experimental demonstrations of the system and discussion of the results are provided in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the work and provides conclusions. The device uses an OPM with an attached cone-shaped magnetic guide (OPM-MG) for detecting magnetic droplets in a microfluidic channel, as shown in Fig. The OPM-MG is assembled inside a Zero Gauss chamber and it is further composed of a microfluidic handling platform for generating magnetic droplets, and operation/reading electronics controlled by a computer. Figure The magnetic guide (MG) is based on transformation optics operating in the subwavelength regime which efficiently routes magnetic fields Optically Pump Magnetometers (OPMs) rely on the manipulation of a quantum property know as spin (a property that underlies a particle's magnetic moment and therefore its response to a magnetic field), first described in the 1920s and 1930s The OPM device used is a cm-size zero-field QuSpin OPM with 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3 Rb vapor cell operating in Spin-Exchange Relaxation Free (SERF) regime In particular, the OPM is an absolute zero field magnetometer and operates best (< 1% non-linearity) when the background field is <1 nT. The OPM has three compensation coil pairs that surround the vapor cell like a cube (∼5 x5 mm surface with 5 turns in each coil). The coils do not create a completely homogeneous magnetic field, so they can not be operated to produce very large fields (they ought to operate at <200 nT to not create strong gradients causing sensitivity losses). In addition, when calibrating, a known magnetic field is momentarily applied with the internal coils to calibrate the magnetometer response. The calibration process yields a calibration number which is multiplied with the raw output in a way that scales the analog output to be 2.7 V/nT (in default mode, 1x) and the digital output to be represented in pT. In particular, the calibration number algorithm is proprietary of the manufacturer and it is capped at 15.9. If the magnetometer is left uncalibrated, the calibration factor is set at one. For this work, the quality of calibration achieved was 0.76 in the z-axis, hence the magnetometer is relatively healthy (< 1). To remove the ambient magnetic DC field and noise, to < 10's of nT, the OPM-MG is located inside a three-layer closed mu-metal cylindrical Zero Gauss chamber (ZG-206 W/Degauss, Magnetic Shield Corp.) with inside diameter (inside depth) of 152 mm (381 mm) and with a degauss coil installed and operated with a degaussing (DG) unit (digital unit, Twinleaf). The DG unit is used to automate the process of degaussing the magnetic shield and the magnetic components inside the chamber, by applying an oscillating magnetic field that drives the material into saturation and then slowly ramping the oscillation amplitude down to zero. The DG unit is operated with 5 sequences of 100 mA 50 Hz degaussing pulses of 5 s to demagnetize the ferrite elements. Eventually, if the demagnetization is not sufficient, the internal lock-in process used by the OPM, both in order to detect the magnetic field levels and to auto compensate less than nT fields, generates a message in order for the operator to further reduce residual magnetic fields or magnetic field gradient inhomogeneities, as discussed in detail in Fig. The maximum background magnetic field amplitude that the OPM can operate in is ∼50 nT due to the internal coils. The first limitation of the residual field is set by the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the digital-to-analog converters (DACs) that control the compensation field. The second limitation is the field inhomogeneity created by the internal coils, which broadens the zero-field resonance and consequently lowers the sensor performance. A polymer polylactic acid (PLA) 3D printed mechanical holder, with 0.1 mm resolution, was constructed for the OPM-MG. The holder allows positioning the OPM-MG in the center of the Zero Gauss chamber, placing the microfluidic tubes away from the OPM module (with tube separators). The different cables and tubes are directed towards the in/out opening of the can, as shown in Fig. Finally, the Zero Gauss chamber is mounted on a breadboard with absorbing feet to reduce noise due to mechanical vibrations of the surrounding with an isolation of more than 20 dB. The magnetic droplets are composed of tiny (1 -20 μm) iron oxides, i.e. magnetite (Fe3O4), at 10 5 particles/mL solute in water. For the latter magnetite particle sizes and concentration in the microchannel, the 0.01 -0.2 blockage ratio is low, more than an order of magnitude difference in particle sizes is present and the sample is diluted enough for particles to occupy homogeneously the overall cross section of the microchannel. Whilst the droplets are generated with an ON/OFF actively operated microfluidic valve directly modulated at rates of 5 -25 drop./s In addition, the microfluidic platform is operated with two voltage-controlled vacuum pumps connected in series (output of pump 1 to the vacuum input of pump 2) and the output is reconnected into the sample holder for continuous resuspension of the magnetite particles, to avoid deposition (since the particle density is higher than that of water). At a system level, the microfluidic elements are interconnected using ID 125 μm PEEK tubing and electrically wired as shown in Fig. In this way, the magnetic droplets circulate at a flow rate of 4.5 μL/min through a 100 x100 μm square cross-section 56 mm-long microfluidic channel. In consequence, the flow is laminar with a low Reynolds number (R e = 0.46). Also, the microfluidic channel selected for the measurements corresponds to a commercially produced microchip with optical-grade-quality polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA). Accordingly, with this microchip the distance from the tip of the MG to the center of the microchannel is 225 μm, corresponding to the tip being in contact with the top face of the microfluidic chip, a 175 μm cover lid thickness and a 50 μm half-height of the microchannel. The MG concentrates and transfers the magnetic field into the OPM. Therefore, the effective magnetic flux density sensed by the OPM is significantly larger than with respect not having the MG. Considering a magnetic droplet as a point source, which is equivalent to a magnetic dipole, its magnetic field decays very rapidly with distance as d 3 . Instead, placing the point source at the tip (or top) of a cylindrical MG and the OPM module at its base (or bottom), the magnetic field in the z-axis instead follows B z = μ 0 μ ′ r m 2πr 2 (ls+La) , where r is the radius of the FM core, μ 0 the vacuum permeability, μ r ′ the real relative permeability, l s (l a ) the length of the source (air) gap, and m the magnetic moment Therefore, in this section we describe the analysis of the interplay of four different parameters relevant to design the cone-shaped MG. The analysis is supported with numerical computations of magnetostatic fields With the above considerations, the calculation allows optimizing the MG in terms of gain and spatial resolution. First, the gain is related to the capacity of the MG to concentrate and transfer the magnetic field along the MG. In this sense, the gain is computed as the signal at the OPM with MG compared to the signal when placing the OPM vapor cell right next to the magnetic point source without MG. Secondly, the spatial resolution is extracted from the resulting magnetic fields, when scanning the position of the point source, as the Full-Width at Half-Maximum (FWHM) for the depth (in the z direction; computed as the distance away from the tip of the MG) and width (in the x direction; considering the distance from one side to the other side and parallel to the tip of the MG). Then, in one hand, it is shown in Fig. Furthermore, as proposed in this work, the MG is cone-shaped in order to concentrate the magnetic field of the point source into the OPM, resulting that the smaller the top diameter T D, the more gain as shown in Fig. Finally, ferrite materials have losses, and in particular losses at frequencies <1 MHz Accordingly, with the analysis of the trends, of the gain and spatial resolution, for the different parameters of the MG, and also due to the mechanical capabilities to assemble the MG, the experimentally used parameters are BD = 3 mm, HL = 5 mm and T D = 0.2 mm (described in Section 2.1), whilst μ ′′ r,f is considered to be 26 The experimental characterization of the spatial resolution of the OPM-MG system was done during the alignment of the OPM-MG to the microchannel. Accordingly, it was monitored the detected signal level of the magnetic droplets, at a rate 5 drops./s, passing by the tip of the MG while scanning the vertical (y-axis) position with the M6 nylon screws (shown in Fig. Consequently, a high spatial resolution is achieved with the proposed MG, instead of having a poor spatial resolution similar to the size of the OPM vapor cell, which allows detecting single magnetic droplets, as detailed in Section 5. For SERF OPMs, optimized for sensitivity and when a magnetic field B changes very slowly, the steady-state solution of the Bloch equation can be used where S is the spin vector, t is time, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, B is the magnetic field vector, R is the optical pumping rate, S 0 is the equilibrium electron spin polarization, x is the direction of optical pumping and T 2 is the transverse spin relaxation time. In this regime, it is more sensitive to use the low frequency modulation signal method, compared to the DC bias method, to optimize the signal response A magnetic field gradient within magnetometers increases the magnetic linewidth of the OPM, leading to a reduction in sensitivity. In particular, when gradients, i.e. inhomogeneities, are present the transversal relaxation decreases as 1/T 2 = 1/T ′ 2 + 1/T AB , where T ′ 2 is the original transverse relaxation without magnetic field inhomogeneity and T AB is the relaxation caused by the inhomogeneity of the magnetic field Then, assuming a T ′ 2 of 5 ms, a vapor cell temperature of 150 °C and a low pressure with a density of atoms of 1.5 amg (amagat), the transversal relaxation time due to magnetic field inhomogeneity is where D is the diffusion coefficient, r vc is the equivalent radius of the vapor cell and is the sum of the squared magnitudes of the gradients for each of the three magnetic field components. Hence, considering the field gradients generated by the magnetic droplets of interest, as discussed in Section 3, T AB remains much larger than T ′ 2 and χ is very small, and the sensitivity is not significantly degraded. In particular, computing the response of the OPM considering the slightly decreased T 2 Hence, relatively small χ (< 1%) is produced by the sensed weak magnetic fields of the magnetic droplets and is not relevant to affect the sensitivity of the OPM. Furthermore, we note that the inhomogeneity ratio scales rapidly with the magnetic polarization to be sensed (determined by the droplet magnetic moment). Instead, the inhomogeneity does not vary significantly for the range of dimensions of parameters of the MG considered, as shown in Fig. The high permeability magnetic material (ferrite) of the MG generates magnetic field noise, which eventually can limit the sensitivity of the OPM for large dimensions of the MG. Considering the dimensions of the MG described in Section 2.1, the level of noise added is computed (supported with numerical computation) to be approximately 265 fT/ √ Hz Even though the compensation coils integrated in the OPM partially compensate for the extra low frequency magnetic field noise in terms of adjusting the operation to have an optimal signal response, the effect on the sensitivity is not avoided. In this direction, the magnetic noise generated by the material of the MG can be accounted as a low frequency baseline level increase, as shown in the Section 5. Also, the noise further increases proportionally to the effective time-of-flight of magnetic droplets. Nevertheless, due to the little time-of-flight of the magnetic droplets and the reduced bandwidth of the OPM used in this work, the loss in sensitivity due to the generated magnetic noise is negligible for detecting the magnetic droplets. The presented system was adjusted in terms of (i) OPM-MG alignment to the microchannel, (ii) residual magnetic compensation for the OPM and (iii) microfluidics to generate magnetic droplets. Firstly, the proper operation of the system was verified by measuring the frequency domain signal of magnetic droplets at 25 drop./s, as shown in Fig. Then, the spectra with the MG in place was measured, showing a similar trend in the baseline level as the one without MG, but accordingly an extra peak appeared around 25 Hz, matching with the rate of the droplets. Notice that the frequency peak for the droplets stands above the baseline. Furthermore, some extra noise is present in the lower frequencies (below 10 Hz) due to the low frequency equivalent magnetic noise added by the MG, as discussed in Section 4.2. Secondly, in order to characterize different parameters of the detected pulses, time domain measurements were performed for the different rates of droplets, as shown in Fig. Then, for the different rates of droplets measured with the OPM-MG system in the spectral and time domain, it was computed the characteristics of the peaks in terms of level, time-of-flight width, noise floor and Signal-to-Noise ratio (SNR), as detailed in Table Therefore, the noise floor for the different rates of droplets was quantified in the spectral domain measurements. In particular, for each droplets' frequency rate, the noise floor level was determined as the value at the corresponding frequency, but removing with a Gaussian filter the specific present peak. The obtained values range from 0.35 pT/ √ Hz to the minimum noise value of 0.09 pT/ √ Hz, following the trend with the baseline of Fig. In this regard, notice that the similarities between magnetic droplets and magnetic signals from cells (e.g., action potentials) can be partially accommodated in size. In particular, for this work, the smaller magnetic droplets are around 100 μm in size, whilst some cells (e.g., large human, Protozoa and Yeast cells) are in the 50 μm diameter range The use of OPM-MG systems are expected to provide new opportunities, especially with regard to high sensitivity and spatial resolution, in applied sensing physics and other areas of science. In particular, firstly in this work is described and experimentally demonstrated the possibility of closing the gap between micrometer scale targets and the millimeter dimensions of common OPM by magnetically connecting them with a conical MG. Accordingly, the relevant magnetometry physics was presented in this article, with an emphasis on the spatial resolution and sensitivity of an OPM-MG for detecting magnetic droplets in a microfluidic platform. In this sense, the different quantities measured and computed were discussed, and the role of the MG was highlighted. Furthermore, it was demonstrated and discussed the capability of the OPM-MG to detect single magnetic droplets in a microchannel with sufficient spatial resolution and SNR. Moreover, given the high potential of quantum technologies for sensing, we find it crucial to improve the design of magnetic analyzers based on OPMs. In the coming years, the use of quantum developments in micrometer scale sensing will steadily increase in the form of novel, efficient detecting schemes and also new target sensing, analyzing, and imaging devices.