Active metasurfaces provide unique advantages for on-demand light manipulation at a subwavelength scale for emerging applications of 3D displays, augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) glasses, holographic projectors and light detection and ranging (LiDAR). These applications put stringent requirements on switching speed, cycling duration, controllability over intermediate states, modulation contrast, optical efficiency and operation voltages. However, previous demonstrations focus only on particular subsets of these key performance requirements for device implementation, while the other performance metrics have remained too low for any practical use. Here, we demonstrate an active Huygens' metasurface based on in-situ grown conductive polymer with holistic switching performance, including switching speed of 60 frames per second (fps), switching duration of more than 2000 switching cycles without noticeable degradation, hysteresisfree controllability over intermediate states, modulation contrast of over 1400%, optical efficiency of 28% and operation voltage range within 1 V. Our active metasurface design meets all foundational requirements for display applications and can be readily incorporated into other metasurface concepts to deliver high-reliability electrical control over its optical response, paving the way for compact and robust electro-optic metadevices. Active metasurfaces, often alternatively termed as tunable or reconfigurable metasurfaces, are rapidly emerging as a major frontier in photonic research and have launched tremendous breakthroughs in modern optics To this end, a number of active metasurfaces have been implemented by using different electroactive materials, such as chalcogenide phase-change materials (PCMs) In this work, we introduce an electrically active Huygens' metasurface based on the in-situ grown conductive polymer, polyaniline (PANI), and experimentally demonstrate its holistic active switching performance. We combine the superior electro-optical response of PANI with the accurate and continuous phase modulation of the Huygens' nanoantennas, and achieve an unprecedented switching performance covering all key requirements for display applications. Our active Huygens' metasurface exhibits a high modulation contrast of 1400% and a diffraction efficiency up to 28%, which is 25 times higher than the previous polymer-based metasurface Our active Huygens' metasurface is composed of dielectric silicon nanodisks surrounded by a layer of PANI, resting on an indium-tin-oxide (ITO) substrate that acts as an electrical contact (Fig. The core concept of our design is the spectral tuning of the electric dipole (ED) and magnetic dipole (MD) of the nanoantenna by electrical modulation of the surrounding polymer. Fig. The metasurface design is based on an eight-element gradient phase geometry using the calculated nanoantenna phase profiles for an incident wavelength of 785 nm (Supplementary Fig. In-situ polymer growth and electrical beam steering performance. To experimentally validate our electrical beam steering metasurfaces, electrochemical growth of PANI was implemented on the fabricated metasurface in-situ in the optical measurement setup, where a high-speed monochromatic camera was used to monitor the diffraction pattern during the polymer growth (Fig. The diffraction images were monitored throughout the entire polymer growth process. Figure Further increasing the PANI thickness allows for the optical absorption of PANI to become more influential, as evidenced by the decreased diffractive intensity and switching contrast in the +1 order. The overcoated PANI also leads to a phase mismatch in the nanoantennas, where the switching of the +1 and 0 diffraction orders becomes synchronous and solely dependent on variation of optical absorption of PANI. Quantitative evaluation of the electrical beam steering performance is accomplished by a figureof-merit (FOM) generally used for beam deflectors, which is based on the switching contrasts between the +1 and 0 diffraction orders at two states where C is the switching contrast between two diffraction orders, I0 and I1 represent the intensities of the 0 and +1 diffraction orders, respectively, and the superscripts of ox and red denote the oxidized and reduced states, respectively. The value of FOM, which falls between 0 and 1, describes the capability of a beam deflector to route energy into certain angles, where FOM = 1 represents the ideal case. The calculated FOM for different coating cycles indicates that the beam steering performance is optimized when the FOM reaches 0.6 with a polymer coating cycle number of 56 (Fig. In addition, intermediate PANI states, which possess gradually changing refractive indices due to the partially delocalized π-electrons, can be accessed via voltage tuning, thus allowing for a continuous tuning of the phase of the Huygens' nanoantennas. By operating the voltage between the oxidized and reduced states, we can modify on-demand the diffraction intensity and the intensity ratio between the +1 and 0 diffraction orders, as demonstrated in the diffraction images (Fig. V, the electrical switching is fully reversible with a remarkable stability on our active metasurface, as shown in the Supplementary Video 1 which includes the diffraction images, diffraction intensities and the cyclic voltammograms for a total of 9 switching cycles in real-time. We further analyzed the hysteresis behavior of the electrical switching (Supplementary Fig. V) states, as presented in Figure However, remarkably, when Dt approaches the switching time τrise and τfall, the accessible range of the optical response approaches the 10% to 90% switching window at Dt = 15 ms, equivalent to 66 fps, as shown in Figure In this study, we have introduced and experimentally realized an active Huygens' metasurface based on the in-situ grown PANI with holistic switching performance for display applications. We have achieved electrical switching on the beam steering metasurface with large modulation contrast of over 1400%, hysteresis-free controllability, high diffraction efficiency of 28%, fast switching speed of over 60 fps and superior switching duration over 2000 switching cycles, under an operation voltage range only from -0.2 V to +0.6 V. We have demonstrated that the active Huygens' nanoantenna design not only greatly boosts the optical efficiency, but also offers the possibility to continuously tune the phase of the nanoantenna through intermediate states. In addition, we have shown that PANI is an excellent candidate of electro-active materials for active metasurfaces, owing to its large tuning range of refractive index, fast switching speed, outstanding electro-optical properties and superior physical and chemical stability. The in-situ growth of conductive polymer on metasurface is straightforward and more reliable, which can be processed in a low-cost, large-area and scalable manner. Overall, the concept of our electrically active Huygens' nanoantenna design can be broadly extended to a variety of active metasurfaces that are capable of programmable and dynamic wavefront manipulation. From an industrial standpoint, the For the numerical simulation of the active Huygens' nanoantenna, we employed a finite-difference time-domain solver (Ansys Lumerical) using periodic boundary conditions in the x and y directions. The silicon material data took from Palik The dielectric metasurfaces were fabricated by a nanofabrication procedure that comprises EBL patterning, mask deposition and RIE. In detail, a 140-nm thick Si film were deposited on a transparent conductive 50-nm thick ITO-coated fused silica glass substrate using a plasmonenhanced chemical vapor deposition. For the lithography, a double layered poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) positive photoresist (495k A4 and 950k A2) was spin-coated onto the Si film with a soft-baking for 90 s at 170 °C, followed by spin-coating of a conducting layer (ESpace 300Z) on the photoresist to avoid electron charge and pattern distortion. The array of Si nanodisks was patterned on the photoresist using EBL (Raith eLine Plus), followed by a development process by immersing the sample into a 3:1 Isopropanol:Methylisobutylketone solution for 50 s. A 30-nm thick chromium layer was deposited using an e-beam evaporation as a hard mask. Lift-off process was carried out in a remover solution (Microposit Remover 1165). The designed pattern was finally etched into the Si film by a RIE process (Oxford Instrument) for 2 min. As the last step, the chromium hard mask was chemically removed by wet etching using a chromium-selective etchant solution (Sigma-Aldrich). The electrochemical polymer growth and electrical were carried out in a specially custom-built electrochemical cell. The electrochemical cell is designed for housing a threeelectrode system into a thin layer of aqueous electrolyte with an optical thickness of 1 mm on the top of the sample substrate, where a thin transparent glass was used to seal the electrolyte on the top, allowing for an optical transmission measurement through the metasurface. The sample substrate (ITO-coated fused silica) was used as the bottom sealing glass of the cell. The cell also features on the side the in-let and out-let for electrolyte to enable flow-in and flow-out for electrolyte replacement, which is driven by an electrical injector. The sample substrate was connected as the working electrode through a striped metal plate as the electrode contact, whereas a Pt wire and a Ag/AgCl reference were inserted from the side of the cell and connected as the counter electrode and the reference electrode, respectively. A potentiostat (CHI-760e) is used to apply voltage over the time to perform electrochemical polymer growth and switching. In-situ PANI growth was carried out by an electrochemical coating method, as reported previously For the electrical switching, the electrolyte in the electrochemical cell was replaced by an anilinefree aqueous electrolyte containing only 1 M H2SO4. To switch the PANI to the oxidized state and reduced state, constant voltages of +0.6 V and -0.2 V, respectively, were applied on the substrate. For electrical switching cycling, a cycling voltage in the range between -0.2 V and +0.6 V at a scanning speed of 25 mV/s was used. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the metasurface was performed on the Raith eLine Plus system in a SEM mode under a working voltage of 5 kV. The height of the deposited Si film and the thickness of the grown PANI layer at the optimized coating cycle were measured with a profilometer (Bruker Dektak XT) using a stylus with a radius of 2 μm. The refractive index of PANI was obtained from an ellipsometry measurement on an ellipsometer with dual-rotating compensators and a spectrometer (J.A. Woollam, M2000XI-210). A 100-nm thick PANI film electrochemically prepared on an ITO-coated glass substrate was measured with angle-variable spectroscopic ellipsometry at incident angles of 65°, 70° and 75°, using a bare ITOcoated glass as a blank reference. The measured refractive index was extracted from an experimentally fitted oscillator model based on a previous study Transmission spectra were taken using a commercial white light transmission microscopy setup (Witec Alpha series 300). The homogeneous metasurface sample was illuminated by a normal incident collimated white light with a linear polarization. The transmitted light was collected using a 20x objective with NA = 0.4 and direct to a grating-based spectrometer. Diffraction patterns of the transmitted light was collected on a home-built optical setup as shown in Supplementary Figure 