Simulations and theory are presented for the power spectral density functions (PSDs) of particles in time dependent and anharmonic potentials including the effects of a thermal environment leading to damping and fluctuating forces. We investigate three one dimensional perturbations to the harmonic oscillator of which two are time dependent changes in the natural frequency of the oscillator, while the other is a time independent extension of the quadratic potential to include a quartic term. We investigate the effect of these perturbations on two PSDs of the motion that are used in experiments on trapped nano-oscillators. We also derive and numerically test the PSDs for the motion of a spherical nanoparticle in a Paul trap. We found that the simple harmonic Langevin oscillator's PSDs are good approximations for the x-and y-coordinates' PSDs for small values of the parameter q of the Mathieu equation, but the difference can be more than a factor of two as 'q' increases. We also numerically showed that the presence of a permanent electric dipole on the nanosphere can significantly affect the PSDs in the x-and y-coordinates. Nanomechanical oscillators have evolved into a wide arena with various applications in many fields. They are used as ultrasensitive sensors for charge We examine the case of drifting frequency as well as an oscillating frequency in time. We use numerical simulations to show that the Quadrature PSD (QPSD) of the motion, which is the PSD of the motion after removing the fast oscillations A particle in a radio frequency(RF) Paul trap has the z-direction in a simple harmonic motion while the x,ydirections are described by the Mathieu equations We also examine cases when the electric dipole on the nanoparticle affects the equations of motion. Our simulations showed that in such cases the power spectral densities of the z-component are less sensitive to the dipole moment than for the x, y-components. For the case we investigated there was almost no change for the zcomponent's PSDs from those of a SHLO for small values of the parameter q of the Mathieu equation. In contrast, the PSD and QPSD for the x,y-components were substantially changed when the nanoparticle had reasonable electric dipole moments. The system under consideration is an oscillating classical particle in contact with a thermal environment which causes the particle to experience both damping as well as random thermal kicks. We model this system as a Langevin oscillator. The object's motion follows ẍ = F x /m -Γ ẋ + F th /m A. The potential inside the trap V (x, y, z) is given by where V end is the potential on the end caps in the z-axis, k is a dimensionless constant, z 0 and r 0 are constants of length dimension, and V RF is the potential on the rods oscillating with frequency Ω RF /2π. The effects of higher order nonlinear instabilities where the index i runs over the three components {x,y, z}, with and q z = 0. The notation for {a x , a y , a z } is the standard notation for the parameters of the Mathieu equation and are not to be confused with the acceleration. The equation of motion in the z-component is a pure harmonic oscillator equation with natural frequency , while that in x,ycomponents follow a Mathieu equation. The solutions of the Mathieu equation are well known. Since for stable solutions, b |n| >> b |n|+1 for all integer n with β given by a continued fraction This equation was used as an iterative equation to obtain a numerical approximation for ω 0 . We started with β = 1 2 a x + q 2 x /2 1/2 as a first approximation In this section, we give the equations of motion with a nonzero permanent electric dipole p = {p x , p y , p z } on the nanoparticle. This will introduce an additional force on the nano-particle which has the form -∇(-p • E) with E(x, y, z) = -∇V (x, y, z) the electric field at the nanoparticle. This changes Eq. (3) by replacing x i (t) on the right hand side with x i (t) + p i (t)/Q for the three components {x,y, z}. Since the nanoparticle is spinning, the direction of the electric dipole moment vector changes over time following the differential equation where I is the moment of inertial of a sphere: 2 5 mR 2 . The damping and fluctuating terms are discussed in the next section. Lastly, since the fourth order method that was implemented to solve the differential equation is not a symplectic method To solve for the motion, we used the fourth order Runge-Kutta method where the second term δv is a random number that follows a Gaussian distribution. This δv represents the effect of the random forces from the environment. These thermal kicks should lead to a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution in the velocity at long times when the other forces are time independent. The thermal kick δv is different each time step. In order to obtain the equipartition theorem, this δv needs to follow a Gaussian distribution of the form: with where m is the particle's mass, k b is the Maxwell Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, Γ is the damping constant and dt is the time step. This technique is similar to the ones in Ref. We implemented a similar effect for the angular frequencies. Where the three components of the frequency {η x , η y , η z } were adjusted after each time step with with δη i also picked from a Gaussian distribution and where Γ η is the damping constant for the angular rotation. A wrapping technique in time was applied to make the data as periodic as possible over the limits of the interval 0 < t < 100/Γ before calculating the fast Fourier transformation used to obtain the PSDs. We used this technique in all the numerical simulations except for the linearly drifting frequency, because the oscillation frequency doesn't return to its initial value at the end of each run in that case. Also, the Fourier transformation points for the Paul trap simulations were taken at intervals dt F F T < (1/4) × 2π/(Ω RF ) in order to avoid aliasing the RF oscillations. For a harmonic Langevin oscillator, F x /m = -w 2 0 x with w 0 being the natural frequency of the oscillator. The Langevin oscillators have been studied in the literature This PSD has a maximum value of (2k b T ) / πmΓw 2 0 at w = ±w 0 . In some applications it is convenient to compute the PSD relative to its average value at w = w 0 This QPSD has a maximum value of 8 πΓ k b T /mw 2 0 2 at w = 0. The QPSD was utilized in This is the case for which the force F x is given by F x /m = -ω 2 (t)x where ω(t) is given by In this system, the frequency of the oscillator drifts from ω 0 (1 -δ) to w 0 (1 + δ) over the period from t = 0 to t = τ and δ ≪ 1. We derived the PSD for this case in Appendix B 1 and it approximately is given by ) For this case, the QPSD didn't change from that of the simple harmonic oscillator Eq. ( This is the case for which the force F x is given by F x /m = -ω 2 (t)x where ω(t) is given by The parameters ∆ω and Ω control the amplitude and the frequency of the oscillating part in ω(t) respectively. For this case the particle develops side bands and oscillates at multiple frequencies ω n . These frequencies are at steps of Ω from the unperturbed motion frequency ω 0 , where ω n = ω 0 + nΩ for all integer n. The PSD for this case is derived in App.B 2 and it takes the form: (20) where J 2 n is the n-th order Bessel function squared. The QPSD developed minor side bands at frequencies ±Ω as shown numerically in Section III A 2. This is the case in which the oscillator's force leads to the Mathieu equation, Eq. ( where c2 and s2 are the averages of the squares of the Floquet expansion coefficients of the Mathieu equation solution, Eq. (C17). In this section, the numerical and analytical results for the PSD and QPSD are presented for multiple 1D cases at a temperature of 300 K. Motivated by possible experimental configurations The frequencies are of order 100 Hz while the friction coefficient Γ ≤ 1 s -1 . The numerical results presented here are the average of tens of thousands of runs, each providing data for the Fourier transformation for a time interval of 100/Γ. The numerical results were tested for the SHLO and provided an exact match with the analytic PSD and QPSD in Eqs. ( In this section, we investigate the case when the oscillation frequency drifts linearly in time, Eq. ( Instead of having a Lorentzian peak at w = w 0 , the regular PSD spreads almost uniformly over the range of frequencies from 99 Hz to 101 Hz as shown in Fig. The QPSD is advantageous in this case because it doesn't exhibit any major variations from the ideal formula as shown in Fig. The QPSD for the linear ω(t) Eq. ( In this section we consider the situation where the frequency oscillates in time, Eq. where φ is a phase factor that is chosen from a flat random distribution which is different for each run. As shown in Figs. For the QPSD, the only change from the analytic expression in Eq. ( In this section, the case of having an extra nonharmonic term in the potential is considered. This would result if the harmonic potential was only the first order expansion of an even potential near its minimum with α being a dimensionless parameter giving the strength of the perturbation in units of the natural length scale of the thermal oscillator. If α = 0 we get the simple harmonic case, and as α increases the potential deviates more strongly from the harmonic case. As seen in Fig. 2 ) It is possible to fit the obtained QPSD to an equation of the same form as Eq. ( In this section, the three dimensional case of a spherical nanoparticle in a Paul trap, both with and without an electric dipole, is considered. The charge on the nanoparticle was taken to be 300 times the elementary charge and the mass was taken to be 9.6 × 10 -17 kg. We used z 0 = 3.5 × 10 -3 m, k = 0.086, r 0 = 1.1 × 10 -3 m, Ω RF = 5000 × 2π rad/sec., V end = 100 V and V RF = 200 V. These parameters were chosen to be similar to the ones in experiments on levitated nanoparticles in a Paul trap like Refs. In this section, the motion of a particle in a Paul trap is simulated using the equation of motion Eq. (3). Since the motion of the z-component follows a SHLO equation of motion, the numerical results for the PSDs matched perfectly the analytic expressions in Eqs. The PSD and the QPSD for the x-motion are given in Eqs. (C16) and (C21). Here we compare those expressions and the ones for the simple harmonic Langevin oscillator(SHLO) in Eqs. ( For the trap parameters above, the a x ∼ 0.0014 and q x ∼ 0.14. These values lead to an x-component PSD peak value that is approximately 1.5% higher than that of a SHLO's PSD and a QPSD peak value that is 3% higher than that for the SHLO's QPSD, as shown for the case of Γ = 1.0 s -1 in Figs 8 and 9 respectively. That percentage difference was independent of the coefficient of friction Γ, in the range 0.1 < Γ < 1 s -1 . The numerical PSD and the QPSD were in agreement with the analytic expressions derived in Eqs. (C16) and (C21) respectively as shown by the dotted black curves in Figs In fact, by examining the expressions for the PSD and the QPSD for the SHLO Eqs. ( The only Γ dependence of the peak value of the SHLO QPSD Eq. ( For the temperature dependence, because both the SHLO and the Mathieu equation's PSD depend linearly on the temperature at their peak values, the temperature dependence cancels out in the relative difference between Eq. ( While the Paul trap parameters for Figs. ( In this section, the effect of a permanent electric dipole on the sphere is included in the equations of motion. If the Coulomb interaction is neglected, the N charges are distributed randomly on the surface of the sphere giving a dipole roughly √ N × eR, where R is the radius of the sphere and e is the charge of a proton. If the distribution is weighted by the partition function e -p. E k b T at the temperature T, then the probability of the configurations with larger dipole moments is reduced by a factor of ∼ 2 for the parameters in our simulation. For the parameters in this section, N = 300 leading to a rough size of 9eR. We considered the effect of electric dipoles with values ranging from 4eR to 16eR. The values for the other parameters were taken to be the same as in the previous section, Figs. For the z-component, the PSD and the QPSD don't deviate much from the analytic formula in Eqs. ( the numerical answer for both the QPSD and the PSD still match the analytic formulas as shown in Fig. For the x-component, the behaviour of the QPSD is different from that of the regular PSD as we increase the electric dipole on the spherical nanoparticle. The PSD differed from Eq. ( As the value of the parameter q of the Mathieu equation is increased, the simulations PSDs deviate from the Paul trap's PSDs Eqs. ( The numerical as well as the analytic expression for the PSD and QPSD of oscillators in several time depen- dent or anharmonic potentials were analyzed including the effects of a thermal environment leading to damping and fluctuating forces. We show here analytically and numerically that for some perturbative cases the quadrature power spectral density (QPSD) varied less than the regular power spectral density (PSD) and that it often could be approximated by the Langevin oscillator's QPSD. We examined three possible perturbations to the harmonic oscillator potential and investigated how the PSD and the QPSD are affected by them. Two of the three cases were in the form of a slow time dependence in the oscillation frequency with the third being a time independent quartic perturbation to the potential. For a linear drift in the frequency of few percent over a time interval of 100/Γ, where Γ is the damping coefficient, we found the QPSD to be unaffected We also explored the case of a spherical particle in a Paul trap. Two situations were considered, the first one is when the electric dipole moment is neglected and the charges are assumed to be uniformly distributed on the sphere. In this case the equations of motions in the 3 coordinates decoupled and that for the z-component was a simple harmonic Langevin oscillator, while those for the x-and the y-components were in the form of a damped Mathieu equation with an extra Langevin-like thermalization force. For the x-and y-components, the agreement with the Langevin oscillator's PSD and QPSD changed with the value of the parameter q of the Mathieu equation. For smaller q of about q ∼ 0.14 the numerical simulation PSD and QPSD approximately matched those of a simple harmonic Langevin oscillator with only a few percent difference. However, the SHLO PSD and QPSD no longer are good approximations to the Paul trap PSD and QPSD for larger q values. We derived analytic formulas for the PSD and QPSD using a Floquet expansion of the Mathieu equation solution Appendix C. We also investigated the case when there is a permanent electric dipole on the trapped nanoparticle. We considered dipoles up to 2 √ N eR where N is the number of charges on the nanosphere and R is its radius. We found that the z-component remained in good agreement with the Langevin oscillator's PSD Eq. ( where x τ (ω) is the finite Fourier transform of x(t) over the time interval 0 < t < τ and is given by The QPSD is the PSD relative to its average value at w = w 0 . This involves doing the calculation in a frame rotating with the frequency w 0 where ω is the peak oscillation frequency of the oscillator, ω 0 , or close to it. Next, filter out the oscillations at large ω by first taking the Fourier transform of the two quadratures x c and x s then multiplying the Fourier transforms by a filter. The filter is chosen to ensure that the amplitude of the oscillations near w = 0 is left unaffected while the amplitude of the oscillations at w ∼ 2w 0 goes to zero. Then the filtered quadratures are recovered by taking the backward Fourier transform obtaining x c (t) and x s (t). Finally, the two quadratures are combined to get the total filtered motion as The PSD of the quadrature R 2 (t) is approximately the autocorrelation function Langevin oscillator with time dependent ω(t) Here a solution to the Langevin equation with a slowly varying ω(t) is presented. We first go through the general procedure then consider the two cases of interest, namely an oscillating and linearly varying ω(t). The equation of motion without the fluctuating force from the environment is: Substituting with an ansatz for x(t) = A(t) e iφ(t) in Eq. (B1) and setting both the imaginary and the real parts on the left hand side of the equation to zero separately yields: The first equation gives: where c is a constant of integration that is to be determined using the initial conditions. For the second equation, we apply the approximation that the higher order derivatives of φ are small compared to its first derivative φ. This WKB-type approximation is valid because we are considering cases where ω(t) is slowly varying in time. Thus, terms with φ are dropped compared to ω 2 . Then using A from Eq. (B4) one gets: Therefore, the solution under the WKB approximation is: For the cases we consider, ω(t) is approximately a 1000× larger than Γ, therefore the Γ 2 term will be dropped in the denominator and in the phase integral. Incorporating the velocity kick at time t l from the fluctuating force leads to initial conditions such that the position and the velocity are zero before t = t l and at t = t l the velocity receives a kick of δv = δv l . Thus the solution from the WKB approximation x W KB (t) becomes: δv l e -Γ(t-t l )/2 (ω (t l ) ω(t)) 1/2 sin [φ(t) -φ (t l )] (B7) where Θ(t) is the Heaviside step function and Since the system receives multiple thermal kicks, each at different t l , the full time dependent motion is the sum of solutions each starting at a different time t . Thus the trajectory takes the form: (B9) In the next two subsections we will use this solution to obtain the approximate PSD for the cases of a slowly oscillating ω(t) and a linearly varying ω(t). 1. PSD for a linearly drifting ω(t) This is the case for which ω(t) is taken to be where the frequency drifts from ω 0 (1 -δ) to w 0 (1 + δ) over the period from t = 0 to t = τ and δ < < 1. The exponentially decaying term in Eq. (B9) guaranties that for each term in the sum, (t -t l ) is of order 1 Γ ≪ τ . Thus, the ω(t) in the denominator can be approximated to ω(t l ). In the difference Since we are considering a perturbative case with ω(t l ) × (t -t l ) ≪ ω(t l ), the first term will be the dominant one in the expansion. So we can substitute ω(t l )(t -t l ) for φ(t) -φ(t l ) in Eq. (B9). Thus, x(t) becomes (B12) For which the Fourier transform is The statistical average for δv l δv l ′ = δ ll ′ 2ΓkB T m δt l is used to obtain the PSD This expression gives an approximately Γ independent flat PSD between ω 0 (1 -δ) and ω 0 (1 + δ) shown in Fig. For this we have where ξ l = Ωt l and was intruduced to simplify the expression for φ(t) -φ(t l ) in Eq. ( with η = ∆ω/Ω and β = Ωt. This shows that the motion x(t) will have several oscillation frequencies at intervals of Ω from the initial frequency ω 0 , in agreement with our numerical result in Sec.III A 2, such that: where xn (t) are given by: δv l e -Γ(t-t l )/2 w(t)w(t l ) × sin wn (t -t l ) + nξ l -∆ω Ω sin(ξ l ) + n π 2 (B19) with a n = (-1) n/2 for even n and a n = (-1) (n-1)/2 for odd n. xn (t) is the part of the motion that is oscillating at frequency ± wn . It is also approximately the same as that of a perfect Langevin oscillator with a constant natural frequency of wn instead of w 0 and an extra phase. An approximate expression for the PSD of x(t) can be found by approximating both ω(t) and w(t l ) in the denominator in Eq. (B19) to w 0 . This approximation is valid because the maximum change in ω(t) is of order ∆ω and we consider perturbative cases where ∆ω ω0 ≪ 1. The Fourier transform of x(t) can be evaluating by summing the Fourier transforms of xn (t), which is given by: (B20) Assuming that the upper limit is such that Γ (τ -t l ) ≫ 1, this integral evaluates to: e -i ∆ω Ω sin ξ l e i nπ 2 e inξ l ω + ωn + iΓ/2 -e i ∆ω Ω sin ξ l e -i nπ 2 e -inξ l ω -ωn + iΓ/2 (B21) The summation over l is evaluated by applying the statistical averaging of the thermal kicks δv l where δt l is the time interval between the thermal kick δv l and the kick before it and is related to ξ l through δξ l = Ωδt l . We numerically tested that a good approximation for the PSD can be obtained by ignoring the interference terms between the oscillations at different ω n . Thus, the PSD becomes a sum of Lorentzians of the form: (B23) This is the analytic form that was used in Figs. Since the overall coefficients c l and s l were pulled outside the sum, we can choose α 0 = 1 without loss of generality. Also because the {α n } series is a decreasing series, it is traditionally truncated at some ±n max . For our numerical calculations we took n max = 10. And the α's are calculated iteratively by substituting in the recurrence relation Eq. (C11). The constants {s l , c l } were obtained by substituting in Eqs.(C7) and (C8) for the initial conditions giving (C13) Finally, a particle in a Paul trap receives multiple thermal kicks over the course of its trajectory. Thus, the full trajectory will be a sum of multiple solutions of the form Eq. (C10), each starting at a different initial time t l . Therefore, the full trajectory x(t) of a particle in a Paul trap will be x(t) = l Θ (t -t l ) e -Γ(t-t l )/2 × s l n∈Z α n sin (ω 0 + nΩ)(t -t l ) + nφ l +c l n∈Z α n cos (ω 0 + nΩ)(t -t l ) + nφ l (C14) where t l takes all values from zero to the final time of the run τ in steps of δt. In the next two subsections, we will derive the PSD and the QPSD for this solution. It is straightforward to get the PSD for Eq. (C14). We just substitute with its Fourier transform in Eq. (A1). However, since the interest is in the peaks near ω 0 , we only include the terms oscillating at such frequency when taking the Fourier transform. e iωt e -Γ 2 t s l sin(ω 0 t) The method used to evaluate this expression is to substitute by the phase average and statistical average values for c l and s l inside the sum. The statistical average of c l and s l is obtained through their linear dependence on δv l , which has a statistical average given by Eq. (B22). The phase average of c l and s l was evaluate by numerically integrating over φ l from 0 to 2π then dividing the result by 2π. After taking the statistical average and the phase average, the terms inside the sum become independent of l. Thus, we obtain a sum over δt which gives τ that cancels the τ in the denominator. We will use s2 , c2 and cs for the average values of s l s l ′ , c l c l ′ and c l s l ′ divided by δt respectively. And thus the PSD is: with σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 and σ 4 given by Eq. (C13). For the QPSD we will follow the same steps discussed in Sec.II C 1. First, x c (t) and x s (t) are calculated from the term in x(t) that is oscillating at a frequency w 0 . This gives: x c (t) = l s l sin(ψ l (t)) + c l cos(ψ l (t)) e -Γ(t-t l )/2 Θ (t -t l ) x s (t) = l s l cos(ψ l (t)) -c l sin(ψ l (t)) e -Γ(t-t l )/2 Θ (t -t l ) (C18) where ψ l (t) = (ω 0 -ω)(t -t l ) -ωt l . From which one obtains R 2 (t) to be: R 2 (t) = e -Γt l,l ′ (s l s l ′ + c l c l ′ ) cos (w 0 (t l -t l ′ )) -(s l c l ′ -c l s l ′ ) sin (ω 0 (t l -t l ′ )) e Γ(t l +t l ′ )/2 Θ t -t (C19) where t is the larger between {t l , t l ′ }. The power spectral density of R 2 (t) is found by substituting in Eq. (A1) 1 πτ 1 ω 2 + Γ 2 l,l ′ ,l ′′ ,l ′′′ e -Γ/2(|t l -t l ′ |+|t l ′′ -t l ′′′ |) e iω(t l +t l ′ -t l ′′ -t l ′′′ )/2 e iω(|t l -t l ′ |-|t l ′′ -t l ′′′ |)/2 [(s l s l ′ + c l c l ′ ) cos l,l ′ + (s l c l ′ -c l s l ′ ) sin l ′ ,l ] × [(s l ′′ s l ′′′ + c l ′′ c l ′′′ ) cos l ′′ ,l ′′′ + (s l ′′ c l ′′′ -c l ′′ s l ′′′ ) sin l ′′′ ,l ′′ ] (C20) Where cos l,l ′ was used for cos [ω 0 (t l -t l ′ )] to simplify the expression. Using the statistical averaging process, this 4-sum would give 4 possible contraction over the summation indices. The non zero ones are when l = l ′′ and l ′ = l ′′′ or when l = l ′′′ and l ′ = l ′′ . After simplification we obtain: with s2 and c2 the same as defined in the previous section.