Recently a relationship between the Debye temperature ΘD and the superconducting transition temperature Tc of conventional superconductors has been proposed [npj Quantum Materials 3, 59 (2018)]. The relationship indicates that Tc ≤ AΘD for phonon-mediated BCS superconductors, with A being a pre-factor of order ∼ 0.1. In order to verify this bound, we train machine learning (ML) models with 10,330 samples in the Materials Project database to predict ΘD. By applying our ML models to 9,860 known superconductors in the NIMS SuperCon database, we find that the conventional superconductors in the database indeed follow the proposed bound. We also perform first-principles phonon calculations for H3S and LaH10 at 200 GPa. The calculation results indicate that these high-pressure hydrides essentially saturate the bound of Tc versus ΘD. The Eliashberg theory 1-3 describes frequencydependent phonon-mediated attractive interaction between electron Cooper pairs, by taking into account phonon dynamics and retardation effects. A key quantity in the theory is the Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω), which is related to the electronic density of states (DOS) near the Fermi level, the phonon spectra, and the electron-phonon (el-ph) coupling matrix elements. The Eliashberg function enables the determination of the total (isotropic) el-ph coupling parameter λ, which together with the effective Coulomb pseudopotential μ * (typically chosen to be between ∼ 0.1 -0.15) can be utilized to estimate the T c of conventional superconductors, via analytical expressions such as the McMillan 4 , Allen-Dynes The Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory Based on the DQMC results and the relationship between T c and the Debye temperature Θ D for a few tens of selected compounds, Esterlis et al. have proposed that T c ≤ AΘ D for phonon-mediated superconductors In this study, we employ data-driven approaches to achieve the above task. Specifically, we develop machine learning (ML) models to predict Θ D , and then compare the resulting Θ D to the experimental T c in the SuperCon database Data Acquisition. The open Materials Project (MP) database The superconductor dataset under study is sourced from the Japanese National Institute of Material Science (NIMS) SuperCon database Feature Generation. The ML training features are generated by using the MatMiner package Model Training, Validation, and Application. Our regression models for the density and Debye temperature are based on gradient-boosted trees, which is an ensemble algorithm that builds decision trees sequentially and aims at reducing the error of the previous tree at each iteration. In particular, we utilize the XGBoost package To train the ML models, we use grid search (with over 4000 permutations) to tune the hyperparameters, including the maximum tree depth, minimum samples per node, ridge and lasso regularization coefficients, and lossbased post-tree pruning. The tuning process is conducted with a 10-fold cross-validation on a 85% training set randomly split from the total dataset (with the remaining 15% being the test set). To prevent overfitting, we also limit the minimum amount of samples per tree node to 30 and the maximum tree depth to 6, which leads to models that generalize better to new data. The Python code needed to create the model features and implement our models is available at github.com/condmatr/Debye-ML. As discussed in the Results section, we impose manual selection criteria based on the elemental composition to separate BCS superconductors from the unconventional ones. To check that our criteria are sufficient to separate different classes of superconductors, we further develop a classification model based on Scikit-learn's implementation of linear discriminant analysis (LDA) First-principles calculations are based on density functional theory (DFT) using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) There are various ways to determine the Debye temperature Θ D , which is in general related to a material's phonon and mechanical properties. For the purpose of training machine learning (ML) models with sufficient target samples, we choose to compute Θ D from the mean sound velocity v m using the method by Anderson et al. where q is the number of atoms in the unit cell, and V 0 is the unit-cell volume. v m can be further expressed in terms of the longitudinal and transverse sound velocities, v l and v t , respectively: v l and v t in turn are related to the mechanical properties: Here, G and B are respectively the shear and bulk moduli; ρ is the density of the crystal. We note that Θ D computed by the above method is consistent with those determined from phonon calculations and experiments (see Figures To further test our ML models, we apply them to 340 materials that exist in both the Materials Project and the SuperCon databases. We note that these 340 superconducting compounds were first removed on purpose from our target datasets prior to training the regression models for an unbiased evaluation. As shown in Fig. The superconductors under study are sourced from the SuperCon database To further test our manual classification scheme, we employ the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) technique Here, m i is the number of samples in the i-th class, and M (= n i=1 m i ) is the total number of samples. tp (true positive), fp (false positive), and fn (false negative) are evaluated using the subset of samples in each class i. The F 1 -score ranges between 0 (meaning no correction classification) to 1 (meaning a perfect classifier). Our LDA ML model achieves high class-weighted F 1 scores of 0.973 for the training set [Fig. We next apply the ML models to predict the density and Debye temperature for our selected superconductors. While the majority of the lanthanide and actinide superconductors fall below this bound, they also have some exceptions with T c ≫ 0.1Θ D . Overall, there is no clear trend between T c and Θ D in the three superconductor families discussed above. In Fig. High-Pressure Hydrides Finally, we discuss the relationship between T c and Θ D in the recently discovered high-pressure hydride (BCS) superconductors. In particular, we focus on H 3 S and LaH 10 under an external pressure of 200 GPa, which have experimentally reported T c ∼ 203 K 57 and T c ∼ 250-260 K Figures In systems where the phonon DOS show an apparent frequency gap or exhibit multiple branches, one can determine Θ D by fitting the computed c v (specific heat at constant volume) from the phonon DOS directly to that in the Debye model: Here, N is the number of atoms in the unit cell multiplied by the Avogadro's number, and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Figure We have developed machine learning models to predict the Debye temperature Θ D for 9,860 superconductors and compared the values to their experimental superconducting transition temperature T c . In our dataset, all the conventional phonon-mediated superconductors (nearly 2,000 compounds) were found to satisfy the relationship T c ≤ AΘ D , with A ∼ 0.1 Currently, our machine learning model takes only compositional features and crystal system symmetry as input. The model has not been trained using other structural information such as lattice parameters or atomic positions, which will change with pressure. A more sophisticated model architecture like the Crystal Graph Convolutional Neural Network (CGCNN) Our study also suggests a few possibilities to enhance T c of phonon-mediated superconductors. For example, one may push T c towards the bound by an enhanced electron density of states or electron-phonon couplings, due to interaction or non-local screening effects in correlated (BCS) superconductors, such as Ba x K 1-x BiO 3 . For existing materials with a high Θ D , their T c is in general far away from the bound, so there should be opportunity for enhancing T c by engineering the electron-phonon or other properties, via doping, alloying, strain, or pressure. Finally, achieving room-temperature BCS superconductors requires a corresponding high Debye temperature, which can occur under high pressure, or in materials with a high lattice thermal conductivity (high phonon frequency) or superior mechanical properties (large elastic constants). Machine learning discovery of these materials such as superhard metals 