The coupling of electrons to phonons (electron-phonon coupling) is crucial for the existence of various phases of matter, in particular superconductivity and density waves. Here, we devise a theory that incorporates the quantum geometry of the electron bands into the electron-phonon coupling, demonstrating the crucial contributions of the Fubini-Study metric or its orbital selective version to the dimensionless electron-phonon coupling constant. We apply the theory to two materials, graphene and MgB2 where the geometric contributions account for approximately 50% and 90% of the total electron-phonon coupling constant, respectively. The quantum geometric contributions in the two systems are further bounded from below by topological contributions. Our results suggest that the nontrivial electron band geometry/topology might favor superconductivity with relatively high critical temperature. Topology has been at the forefront of condensed matter physics for the past two decades, influencing our understanding of quantum materials and phenomena. More recently, it has however become clear and appreciated that a more general concept, that of quantum geometry, manifests itself in a series of quantum phenomena involving flat electronic bands. Nontrivial quantum geometry -expressing change in wavefunctions under infinitesimal change in the Hamiltonian parameters such as momentum (Fig. All the previous works on quantum geometry either do not include the realistic interaction or treat the interaction strength as a tuning parameter. Up to now, it is unknown how quantum geometry (characterized by, e.g., the FSM) affects the strength of realistic interactions. One main and important interaction in solids is the electron-phonon coupling (EPC), which is crucial for superconductivity In this work, we compute the contribution of electron band geometry and topology to the bulk EPC constant λ. First, we introduce a simple (but in many cases remarkably accurate) model -dubbed the Gaussian approximation (GA) -for the EPC to show its deep link to the electronic band Hamiltonian. In this approximation, the quantum geometric contribution to λ emerges naturally and can be differentiated from the energy dispersion contribution. In particular, we find that the either the FSM or the orbital-selective Fubini-Study metric (OFSM) directly enter the expression of EPC. We show that when the electron states on or near the Fermi surfaces exhibit topology -such as winding numbers of the wavefunctions -the geometric contribution (arising from O/FSM) is bounded from below by the topological contribution (arising from topological invariants). The topological contribution serving as a lower bound of the geometric contribution is in the same spirit as the band topology serving as a lower bound of the band geometry. To test our theory, we apply it to the EPC of two famous materials: graphene and MgB 2 , where we find that our approximation becomes (almost) exact; we then identify the quantum geometric contributions to the bulk EPC constant λ, as well as the topological contributions that bound the geometric ones from below, in the two systems. We further perform the ab initio calculation, with two different methods The bulk EPC constant ω is obtained from the Eliashberg function over the Fermi surfaces. k 1 and k 2 are the Bloch momenta of electrons, τ is the sub-lattice vector, m τ is the mass of the ion at τ , i labels the spatial directions of the possible ion motions, and crucially P n (k) = U n (k)U † n (k) is the projection matrix to the nth electron band with U n (k) the eigenvector. F τ i (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. ( For time-reversal (TR) invariant systems with negligible Coulomb interaction, we show in supplementary information E that the mean-field superconducting k B T c ≥ 1.13ε c e -1 λ is bounded from below by λ regardless of the pairing function, as long as (i) the cutoff ε c is much larger than the temperature and (ii) the bands cut by the Fermi energy are dispersive with a large Fermi velocity. (We note that the bound relies on the Migdal-Elishberg theory which usually holds in the weak-coupling regime. The Migdal-Elishberg theory is not necessarily reliable in the strong-coupling regime where χ τ is a diagonal projection matrix with elements being 1 only for the electron degrees of freedom (like orbitals) at τ . f i (k) is a matrix for the case with more than one bands, and is the quantity we want to determine (supplementary information C), whose deep physical origin is missing in the literature. We now show that f i (k) is intimately related to the electronic Hamiltonian. To show this general relation, we introduce the GA. As a concrete simple illustration, we consider a 3D system with only one kind of atom and one spinless s orbital per atom. (See generalization in supplementary information F and supplementary information H.) We allow multiple atoms per unit cell so that more than one electron bands can exist. Under the two-center approximation, the non-interacting electron Hamiltonian and EPC Hamiltonian are directly given by the smooth hopping function t(r), which specifies the hopping between two s orbitals separated by r. Explicitly, the electron matrix Hamiltonian reads [h(k)] τ τ ′ = R t(R + ττ ′ )e -ik•(R+τ -τ ′ ) with R labelling the lattice vectors, and the EPC f i (k) in Eq. ( Crucially, the GA enables us to uncover a relation between the EPC f i (k) and the electron Hamiltonian h(k). As ∂ ri t(r) = γr i t(r), we Fourier transform to find a simple relation between EPC and the electron Hamiltonian With the spectral decomposition h(k) = n E n (k)P n (k) where E n (k) is the nth electron band with projection operator P n (k), we can split the EPC f i (k) into the energetic and geometric parts where is the energetic part of the EPC since it vanishes if electron bands are exactly flat. f geo i (k) is the geometric part of the EPC since f geo i (k) relies on the momentum dependence of P n (k); it vanishes for trivial bands with no k dependence in their eigenstates, or for one-band systems. The separation Eq. ( In particular, f geo i (k) is responsible for leading to the FSM/OFSM in λ geo = λ geo,1 + λ geo,2 , where both parts depends on geometric quantities, as discussed in supplementary information A. In this work, we will mainly focus on λ geo,1 , since λ geo,2 is restricted to zero by symmetries for graphene, and is either restricted to zero or can be converted to the same geometric expressions as λ geo,1 for MgB 2 , as discussed in the next section. Explicitly, in the two-band case, λ geo,1 reads where m is the mass of the ion, Ω is the volume of the unit cell, dσ k is the measure on the Fermi surface, ∆E(k) is the difference between two energy bands, F S n is the Fermi surface given by E n (k) = μ, and a τ = is the orbital-selective Fubini-Study metric (OFSM). More general definitions of OFSM can be found in supplementary information G, and similar OFSM generalizations were proposed in Ref. We have not developed a completely general version of GA that is applicable to all systems. In general, it is unlikely to cover the full ab initio results just by allowing other powers of the distance between orbitals in the exponential or in the perfector of the exponential. Allowing other powers of the distance can cover the radial part of the EPC, i.e., the EPC matrix elements that correspond to the atomic motions in parallel with the hopping direction; however it cannot always cover the angular part of the EPC, i.e., the EPC matrix elements from the atomic motions in perpendicular to the hopping direction, which might be considerable when the orbitals have strong angular dependence such as p, d, f orbitals. As discussed in the next section, graphene is special since p z orbitals are effectively s orbitals in 2D, and we only need to consider the in-plane motions to the leading order, which therefore involve no angular dependence; MgB 2 is also special since the angular part of the EPC has the same expression as the radial part of the EPC to the leading order, which would allow us to use the GA with additional powers in the perfector to cover the whole EPC to the leading order. Nevertheless, this is not always true in general. Therefore, when studying the geometric contribution to EPC in other systems, one might need certain modification of Eq. ( We now apply the GA to the specific cases of graphene and MgB 2 . With the nearest-neighboring-hopping model of graphene where m C is the mass of carbon atom, E n F (k) is the band that gives the Fermi surface, and ∆E(k) is the absolute difference of two energy bands. Remarkably, we find that, as advertised, the FSM of the electron Bloch states-[g n (k)] ij = Tr[∂ ki P n (k)∂ kj P n (k)]/2 (equal to the expression in Fig. A ′ 1 (K) (derived for μ → 0) with only 9% error, where ω E2g (Γ) and ω A ′ 1 (K) are the frequencies of the E 2g phonons at Γ and the A ′ 1 phonons at K, respectively (supplementary information F). This underscores the excellent agreement of our analytic calculation with realistic ab initio. Although the direct application of GA is not straightforward for moiré system (which we leave for future work), we indeed find that the mean-field critical temperature of twisted bilayer graphene derived from the EPC can be estimated by a geometric expression similar to Eq. While graphene is a relatively "simple" compound, and one could discount our excellent agreement and the findings that follow as "accidental," MgB 2 (Fig. The bands near the Fermi level originate from the σ bonding among B p x /p y orbitals and the π bonding among B p z orbitals The derivation for λ π is similar to graphene, since the π-bonding states originate from the p z orbitals of B atoms arranged as AA-stacking graphite (Fig. We now discuss λ σ for the σ-bonding states. By adopting the GA in the x/y directions and the NN-hopping approximation along z, we obtain the energetic and geometric parts of EPC, which are equal to Eq. ( Owing to the k -first-order approximation of the electron Hamiltonian, we find λ σ,E-geo = 0, and thus obtain λ σ = λ σ,E + λ σ,geo , which read where m B is the mass of the B atom, ∆E ef f (k ) is the absolute difference between two doubly degenerate bands of the effective model, D σ (μ) is the density of the σ-bonding states, and F S ef f,1 is the Fermi surface given by E ef f,1 (k) = μ. where ξ α is a normalized vector that represents the electronic orbitals linear combination picked by the relevant phonons for EPC λ (Fig. We find that the quantum geometric contribution is about 92% of the total λ, with most originating from the σ bonding. On the other hand, we find the energetic contribution from the σ bonding (λ σ,E ) to be negligible, consistent with our analytical argument. Therefore, the quantum geometry of the σ bonding states supports the large EPC constant in MgB 2 . The values in Tab. I are calculated with the ab initio value of ω 2 (ħ ⟨ω 2 ⟩ = 68meV), which can be approximated by the frequency of the E 2g phonons at Γ (ħω E2g (Γ) = 75.3meV) with about 10% error. The quantum geometric contributions in graphene and MgB 2 can be bounded from below by the topological invariants of the states on or near the Fermi surfaces in these materials, showing a deep connection between EPC and topology. The graphene λ geo in Eq. ( where the chemical potential is moderate (e.g., within 1eV from 0). We derive Eq. ( for moderate chemical potential. λ topo is topological because W K = 1 and W K ′ = -1 are the integer winding numbers Besides the nodal lines, we find an obstructed atomic set of bands on the k z = 0 plane of MgB 2 , which contains the σ-bonding states around the Fermi level. The Bloch Hamiltonian has the mirror symmetry m z (that flips the z direction) on the k z = 0 plane. In the m z -even subspace, we find that the isolated set of three bands cut by the Fermi energy is the elementary band representation (EBR) A 1g @3f, which is obstructed atomic since the atoms are not at 3f and which have nonzero PT -protected second Stiefel-Whitney class w 2 = 1. (Fig. where d(k ) = vk a couples the states with different parities in the σ-bonding effective model, and a and c are the lattice constant along x/y and z, respectively. Other parameters in Eq. We note that the topological contribution just tells us that the geometric contribution may be stronger in the topologically nontrivial system. In principle, there can be trivial bands in real material that have strong geometric properties and have a large geometric contribution. Our work shows that quantum geometric properties, now at the forefront of flat band research, are also fundamental -and can in fact be dominant -in a deep understanding of the different contributions to the EPC in systems with dispersive bands. One future direction is the development of a general framework that specifies the geometric and topological contributions to the bulk EPC constant λ for all 2D and 3D systems with any types of topological invariants of states on or near Fermi surface. Our current results imply that given two systems with similar band dispersion, the system with stronger geometric properties would tend to have stronger EPC, which serves as a guidance for future material search (e.g., one can look for Weyl semimetals that have Fermi surfaces enclosing Weyl points with large net chiralities.) The study of the geometric and topological contributions to the bulk EPC constant λ in more phononmediated superconducting materials is essential for checking the relation between electron band topology/geometry and the superconducting T c . Further work will focus on a ab initio high-throughput of the quantum geometry effects in the EPC of many other multi-band superconductors. We find that the the energetic contribution λ E in graphene can be directly measured from the zero-temperature phonon linewidth of the E 2g phonons at Γ, together with the frequencies of the E 2g phonons at Γ and the A ′ 1 phonon at K. (supplementary information J.) Experimentally, the frequency and linewidth of the E 2g phonons at Γ can be measured in the Raman spectroscopy ) may be experimentally testable, where A(ω) is the optical absorption coefficient for photons with frequency ω in the unit system where 1/(4πε 0 ) = 1 Under the tight-binding approximation and Frohlich two-center approximation With the hopping function, the electron Hamiltonian (without the Coulomb interaction) that takes into account the atom motions reads where R labels the lattice point, τ labels the positions of the sublattices in the R = 0 unit cell, c † R+τ creates an electron in the spinless s orbital at R + τ , and u R+τ is the motion of the atom at R + τ . Since the hopping function normally exponentially decays as |r| becomes large, t(R The zeroth-order term gives the non-interacting electron Hamiltonian under the tight-binding approximation: and the first-order term is the leading order term for EPC that reads The higher-order terms are usually neglected. The GA is to assume that the hopping function has the Gaussian form: where r = |r|, and γ < 0 is determined by the standard deviation of the Gaussian function. As a result, we have Eq. (A5) converts the spatial derivative to the position in the EPC Hamiltonian (Eq. ( from which we know For the electron Hamiltonian, where Under the tight-binding approximation, the so-called quantum geometry (band geometry) generally refers to the momentum dependence of One specific quantity that measures the quantum geometry is the Fubini-Study metric (FSM), which reads We note that the general definition of the FSM is given by the periodic part of the Bloch state |u n,k ⟩ instead of the eigenvector U n (k), and the general definition will reduce to Eq. (A12) under the tight-binding approximation for the Fourier transformation in Eq. (A6). (See detailed discussion in supplementary information B.) For EPC in the momentum space, we have where is the projection matrix onto the τ sublattice, and i = x, y, z labels the spatial direction. Clearly, we can see that the form of the EPC Hamiltonian in Eq. (A13) is determined by f i (k), which we focus on below. Owing to Eq. (A5), the EPC f i (k) is related to the electron matrix Hamiltonian h(k) as meaning that We call Eq. (A17) the Gaussian form of the EPC. The Gaussian form of the EPC allows us to define the energetic and geometric parts of the EPC. Note that the electron matrix Hamiltonian contains the information of both the bands and the projection matrix, i.e., where the projection matrix P n (k) is defined in Eq. (A11). Then, where is the energetic part of the EPC as it vanishes for systems with all electron bands exactly flat, and is the geometric part of the EPC as f geo i (k) relies on the geometric properties of the Bloch eigenvector U n (k) (i.e., the momentum dependence of P n (k)). If we consider the one-band case (i.e., only one atom in the unit cell), f geo i (k) must be vanishing since P n (k) = 1 is independent of momentum (n can only take one value in the one-band case), while f E i (k) can be nonvanishing since the energy band can still disperse. The key quantity that we study is the dimensionless EPC constant λ, which, according to supplementary information B 4, reads where μ is the chemical potential, D(μ) is the electron density of states at the chemical potential μ, ω 2 is the mean-squared phonon frequency defined in Ref. m is the mass of the atom, and As discussed in supplementary information B 4, we will focus on ⟨Γ⟩ and will treat ω 2 as a parameter determined by the first-principle calculation, mainly because ω 2 can be well approximated by the frequency of specific phonon modes in graphene and MgB 2 (supplementary information F and supplementary information H). By combining Eq. (A23) with Eq. (A19), we can define where By defining we arrive at where is the energetic contribution to λ since it relies on is the geometric contribution to λ since it relies on f geo i not on f E i , and is the cross contribution to λ since it relies on both f geo i and f E i . Now we discuss more about the expressions of ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo and λ geo . We can split ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo into two parts: where Similarly, λ geo can be split into two parts: where For convenience of illustrating the explicit geometric dependence in supplementary information A 1, we re-write ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo,1/2 . ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo,1 can be re-written as where and ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo,2 can be re-written as The explicit geometric dependence is transparent in the two-band case (i.e., the system has only two electron bands). For ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo,1 , we have resulting in where and a τ is in Eq. (A38). As discussed in supplementary information G, g n,τ (k) is an OFSM, since it is defined by inserting the projection matrix χ τ into the original definition of FSM. Therefore, in the two-band case, λ geo,1 directly relies on the linear combination of the OFSM. In particular, if we have P T symmetry that flips the sublattice index (i.e., the inversion P changes one sublattice to the other one), we would have P T c † k (P T ) -1 = c † k τ x with τ x the x Pauli matrix in the sublattice subspace, and then [P n (k)] τ τ = 1 2 , leading to a τ = 1/2 and Therefore, the extra P T symmetry that flips the sublattice index would make λ geo,1 directly depend on the FSM. This is the case for graphene (supplementary information F) and for the π-bonding states of MgB 2 (supplementary information H 3). To simplify ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo,2 in Eq. (A36), we first note that f geo i (k)P n (k) is simplified to where we have choose E 1 (k) ≤ E 2 (k) without loss of generality. Then, ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo,2 becomes where is an orbital-selective complex vector field. Explicitly, (A47) and Then, Therefore, the explicit geometric dependence is λ geo,2 in the orbital-selective complex vector field. Symmetry may restrict λ geo,2 to zero. For example, if the system has C 3z and m z symmetries that do not change sublattice index, then we have which means λ geo,2 = 0. This is the case for graphene (supplementary information F) and for the π-bonding states of MgB 2 (supplementary information H 3). For the σ-bonding states of MgB2, we do not have two-band model anymore, but λ geo is still split into two parts: one part relies on the OFSM and the other part relies on a orbital-selective complex vector field. Nevertheless, the second part (that relies on orbital-selective complex vector field) has the same final expression as the first part (that relies on OFSM) under the linear-momentum approximation that we use for the electron Hamiltonian, which allows us to merge the two parts and have a simple expression with only OFSM. (supplementary information H 4) Therefore, in the examples studied in this work, the orbital-selective complex vector field is not explicitly necessary. Nevertheless, in general, it can be important (for example, if we go beyond the linear-momentum approximation that we use for the electron Hamiltonian of σ-bonding states.) In general, λ E-geo also has dependence on the band geometry. In the two-band case, we explicitly derive the geometric dependence of λ E-geo . Explicitly for Γ E-geo nn ′ (k, k ′ ), we have and thus ⟨Γ⟩ E-geo should read where a τ is defined in Eq. (A38), A τ ,n,i (k) is the orbital-selective complex vector field in Eq. (A46), and As a result, we have Therefore, we can see the explicit geometric quantity in the λ E-geo is again the orbital-selective complex vector field similar to λ geo,2 . Although λ E-geo is irrelevant in the graphene and MgB 2 , it is possible that λ E-geo can be relevant in other cases. Although we only discuss the GA for a 3D system with only one kind of atom and one spinless s orbital per atom, the GA can also be defined and used for more complicated cases as discussed in supplementary information F and supplementary information H. In particular, GA becomes (almost) exact for graphene and MgB 2 as discussed in supplementary information F and supplementary information H, respectively. For graphene and MgB 2 , the geometric contribution λ geo will be simplified and we can clearly see that specific band-geometric quantities (FSM or its orbital selective version) appear in λ geo . Furthermore, λ geo will be bounded from below by a topological contribution for graphene and MgB 2 . Before talking about graphene and MgB 2 , we will first present some general discussions on EPC in supplementary information B, supplementary information C and supplementary information D, as a preparation. We start with the general discussions on the electron-phonon-coupled model. The electron-phonon-coupled model that we consider is defined on a lattice. We use R to label the lattice point and use τ to label the positions of the sublattices in the R = 0 unit cell. The spatial dimension of the model is defined by the number of primitive basis lattice vectors-if the model has d primitive basis lattice vectors, we say the model is in dD. Throughout this work, we consider d ≤ 3. Regardless of the value of d, R and τ are always embedded in 3D-R and τ always have three components; for example, in 2D, we always write R = (R x , R y , 0) T . At each position R + τ , we have the fermionic creation operator for electrons as c † R+τ , and the bosonic Hermitian operators P R+τ ,i and u R+τ ,i that eventually give rise to phonons. Here α τ labels onsite degrees of freedom for electrons such as orbitals and spins, and i labels the orthogonal spatial directions. Moreover, P R+τ ,i and u R+τ ,i satisfy The commutation relation in Eq. (B1) suggests that u R+τ ,i and u R ′ +τ ′ ,i ′ are defined in different Hilbert spaces for R + τ ̸ = R ′ + τ ′ . In other words, it means that we treat P R+τ ,i and u R+τ ,i as "internal" degrees of freedom at R + τ . We are allowed to do so for the description of phonons, because (i) u R+τ ,i classically is the displacement of the ion at R + τ due to phonons, and (ii) the ion displacement is typically small compared to the unit cell. Owing to the lattice structure of system, the basis of the Hamiltonian always furnishes a representation (rep) of a crystalline symmetry group G. For any g ∈ G, we have g = {R|d}, where R is the point group operation a rotation or rotoinversion and d is a translation of the position (not necessarily a lattice translation). For example, g acts on a generic position x as gx = Rx + d. Under g, the atom position R + τ becomes another atom position R τ ,g + τ g = R(R + τ ) + d. Here τ g is the unique sublattice vector that differs from Rτ + d by a lattice vector. In other words, τ g is the unique sublattice vector that satisfies with ∆R τ ,g a lattice vector. Moreover, R τ ,g = RR+∆R τ ,g is a lattice vector. Formally, given g, there is a one-to-one correspondence between τ g and τ . Given g and τ , there is a one-to-one correspondence between R τ ,g and R. The existence of the one-to-one correspondences is because g is an element of the Euclidean group. The reps of g furnished by the fermion and boson basis operators are where c † R+τ is a row vector of creation operations with components labelled by α τ , i.e., c † R+τ = (..., c † R+τ ,ατ , ...) with "..." ranging over the values of α τ . (B4) Moreover, for the time-reversal (TR) symmetry T , the reps are In Eq. (B5), we have assumed that the fermion basis furnishes a rep of TR symmetry, which can always be guaranteed if we include enough orbitals and spins. Throughout this work, we assume that the Hamiltonian must at least preserve the lattice translations in G. Now we introduce the Hamiltonian of a generic electron-phonon-coupled model. The electron part of the electronphonon-coupled model is free, and described by the tight-binding model as where we have incorporated the lattice translations. Moreover, Hermiticity is equivalent to Under the Harmonic approximation, the phonon part of the electron-phonon-coupled model is described by where we have incorporated the lattice translations. without loss of generality, since the anti-symmetric part does not contribute to the Hamiltonian. Then combined with H † ph = H ph , we obtain Owing to Eq. (B9) and Eq. (B5), the bare phonon Hamiltonian H ph always preserves TR symmetry as shown in the following: To the leading order, the EPC in the electron-phonon-coupled model is captured by Hermiticity is equivalent to and the invariance under lattice translations is equivalent to Based on locality, we assume that F ,R+τ decays at least exponentially as With the above discussion, we can provide a specific definition of the electron-phonon model. Clearly, the charge U(1) symmetry is automatically preserved in any electron-phonon-coupled model. Given a generic electron-phonon-coupled model, we can perform Fourier transformations to the electron and phononrelated operators as from which we find and Then, ∀ g = {R|d} ∈ G, the symmetry reps become where c † k is a row vector of creation operations with components labelled by τ and α τ , i.e., c † k = (..., c † k,τ ,ατ , ...)with "..." ranging over the values of τ and α τ (B18) and For TR symmetry, the symmetry reps become where For the electron Hamiltonian, where Eq. (B23) shows that for any generic reciprocal lattice vector G, where V G is the embedding matrix We always choose U n (k) such that the eigen-operators satisfy γ † k+G,n = γ † k,n for all reciprocal lattice vectors G. For the phonon part, where i, i ′ range over x, y, z for spatial directions, D(q)v l (q) = ω 2 l (q)v l (q), P † q,l = P † q v l (q), and u † q,l = u † q v l (q). As shown in Eq. (B27), the definitions of P † q,l and u † q,l are used to rewrite the phonon Hamiltonian as independent Harmonic oscillators. We always choose v l (q) such that P † q+G,l = P † q,l and u † q+G,l = u † q,l for all G reciprocal lattice vectors. Owing to we have Owing to D * (q) = D(-q) derived from the fact that the bare phonon Hamiltonian always has TR symmetry (Eq. (B10)), we can always choose the following convention for v l : for all q and all l. As a result, we have ω l (q) = ω l (-q) , u q,l = v † l (q) u q = v T l (-q)[ u † -q ] T = u † -q v l (-q) = u † -q,l and P † q,l = P -q,l . for ω l (q) ̸ = 0 , (B34) Eq. (B27) can be written as where the last equality assumes that ω l (q) = 0 only happens at measure-zero region of q in which there is no Dirac-delta-type contribution, and Since the phonon Hamiltonian always has TR symmetry, we have A useful expression for the latter discussion is For the EPC, we have which leads to where we used Eq. (B13) and we also used According to Eq. (B12), Hermiticity requires and leads to and for any generic reciprocal lattice vectors G 1 and G 2 , where V G is defined in Eq. (B26). Owing to the local property of F . Furthermore, we have where and the last equality assumes that ω l (q) = 0 only happens at measure-zero region of q in which there is no Diracdelta-type contribution. Based on the above expressions, the convention that we choose for the phonon eigenvectors (Eq. (B32) derived from TR symmetry of the bare phonon Hamiltonian) and Hermiticity of H el-ph lead to For the convenience of later discussion, we note that F τ i (k, k ′ ) can be expressed in terms of G nml (k, k ′ ) as In general, G nml (k, k ′ ) are gauge dependent, where "gauge" means that the unitary transformations that mix the electron or phonon eigenvectors, e.g., the random phase factors in front of the eigenvectors. In general, given an isolated set of electron bands (labelled by S el , isolated in a subregion of 1BZ), the gauge transformation for the corresponding basis takes the form of where R el (k) is unitary and R el (k + ∀G) = R el (k). Here an isolated set of bands means that the set of bands are gapped from other bands in the subregion of 1BZ of interest. Similarly, given an isolated set of phonon bands (labelled by S ph , isolated in a subregion of 1BZ), the gauge transformation for the corresponding basis takes the form of ... v l (q) ... → ... v l (q) ... R ph (q) , (B51) where R ph (q) is unitary and R ph (k + ∀G) = R ph (k). Note that the basis may not be the eigen-basis after the gauge transformation, but the transformation keeps the projectors on to the set of bands untouched. The behaviors of G nml (k, k ′ ) under the gauge transformations can be derived from the fact that is gauge invariant, where we make sure k is in the subregion of 1BZ where S el,1 is isolated, k ′ is in the subregion of 1BZ where S el,2 is isolated, and k ′ -k is in the subregion of 1BZ where S ph is isolated. In other words, is gauge invariant. Then, we know the following expression is gauge invariant: which is useful later. Furthermore, Eq. (B53) (and thus Eq. (B54)) are smooth at (k, k ′ ) as long as we make sure k is in the subregion of 1BZ where S el,1 is isolated, k ′ is in the subregion of 1BZ where S el,2 is isolated, and k ′ -k is in the subregion of 1BZ where S ph is isolated. To see this, we rewrite Eq. (B53) as where we used Eq. (B45) and Eq. (B46). We know the projector n∈S el U n (k)U † n (k) is smooth in the subregion of 1BZ where S el is isolated, and l∈S ph v l (q)U † l (q) is smooth in the subregion of 1BZ where S ph is isolated. Combined with the fact that F τ ,i (k, k ′ ) is smooth, we know Eq. (B53) is smooth in the subregion of 1BZ in which S el,1 , S el,2 and S ph are all isolated, and thus so is Eq. (B54). Besides the gauge freedom, there is another freedom which is the choice of basis of the Hamiltonian in the momentum space, e.g., choices of Fourier transformation rule. Eq. (B14) is just one way to fix the basis. In general, we have the freedom of choosing basis as where R k and R ′ q are unitary and smooth. Note that although the electron eigenvector U n (k) is not invariant under Eq. (B56), the creation operator γ † k,n is invariant under Eq. (B56); it is because if we perform , the periodic part of the Bloch state reads where r is the electron position operator in the continuous space, i.e., r = d d rr ρ(r) with ρ(r) the electron density operator. |u k,n ⟩ is independent of the basis choice, and any final physical/geometric/topological expressions that we eventually use must be invariant under Eq. (B56). Nevertheless, the specific basis choice specified in the Fourier transformation Eq. (B14) is convenient if we use the tight-binding approximation. Explicitly, under the tight-binding approximation, c † R+τ ,ατ is so localized at R + τ that we are allowed to use rc † R+τ ,ατ |0⟩ = (R + τ )c † R+τ ,ατ |0⟩. Then, with Eq. (B14) and the tight-binding approximation, we have Therefore, when using Eq. (B14) and the tight-binding approximation, the momentum dependence of |u k,n ⟩ is all in U n (k). This will allows us to evaluate the FSM with the vectors U n (k). Explicitly, the general definition of the FSM reads where Owing to the simplification in Eq. (B58) brought by the tight-binding approximation and the Fourier transformation (or the choice of basis) in Eq. (B14), we have Since we always use the tight-binding approximation and the Fourier transformation (or the choice of basis) in Eq. (B14) unless specified otherwise, we will directly use Eq. (B61) in this work unless specified otherwise. In this part, we discuss the Hermiticity, crystalline symmetry, and TR symmetry of the electron Hamiltonian and EPC. Hermiticity requires and where t τ τ ′ (R + τ -R ′ -τ ′ ) is a matrix defined by ) is defined in Eq. (B6), h(k) is defined in Eq. (B23), F i R1+τ 1,R2+τ 2,R+τ is a matrix defined as ,R+τ is defined in Eq. (B11), and is defined in Eq. (B41). Suppose the Hamiltonian has a crystalline symmetry g = {R|d}, where R is the point group part of g and d labels the translational part of g. According to Eq. (B3) and Eq. (B17), the matrix Hamiltonians of electrons (i.e., t τ τ ′ (R + τ -R ′ -τ ′ ) in Eq. (B65) and h(k) in Eq. (B22)) satisfy where U g is defined in Eq. (B19), and U Suppose the Hamiltonian has TR symmetry T . According to Eq. (B5) and Eq. (B20), the matrix Hamiltonians of electrons (i.e., t τ ατ ,τ ′ α ′ τ ′ (R + τ -R ′ -τ ′ ) in Eq. (B65) and h(k) in Eq. (B22)) satisfy (B69) R1+τ 1 ,R2+τ 2 ,R+τ in Eq. (B11) and F τ i (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. (B40) satisfy (B70) The EPC strengh is commonly characterized by the dimensionless EPC constant λ where n, m sum over all the electron bands, l sums over all the phonon bands, is the electronic density of states at μ. For the convenience of the later discussion, we note that given any function F (k) such that F (k + ∀G) = F (k), we have in the thermodynamic limit where V is the volume of the system, and F S n is the Fermi surface given by E n (k) = μ. This will be useful for the calculation of the energetic/geometric contributions to λ. Another commonly used expression of λ reads where is the Eliashberg function. Interestingly, Ref. With Eq. (B76), we can rewrite λ as where and is the electron projection matrix (U n is defined in Eq. (B24)). Eq. (B79) is invariant under the change of the basis (Eq. (B56)) since the first expression is in the eigenbasis. As shown in Eq. (B76), ω 2 formally depends on the EPC, the phonon frequencies/eigenvectors, and the electron bands/eigenvectors. For graphene and MgB 2 , specific phonon modes dominate EPC, and thus ω 2 can be well approximated by the frequency of those dominant phonon modes (as discussed in supplementary information F and supplementary information H, respectively). Therefore, in this work, we will treat ω 2 as a parameter and focus on the remaining part of λ in Eq. (B77). In the expression of λ (Eq. (B77)), all information on the phonon frequencies or phonon eigenvectors is contained in ω 2 . Since we only want to study the effect of the electron band geometry or topology on the EPC, it is also for our simplicity to treat ω 2 as a parameter determined in the ab initio calculation and to focus on the rest. The idea of two-center approximation was discussed in Ref. Assumption 1 (Two-center Approximation of EPC) Given any two electron (spinful) orbitals, the EPC for them is determined by the relative motions of two ions at which the two electron orbitals are localized. Asm. 1 is a generalized version of the two-center approximation used in Ref. In terms of equations, Asm. 1 is equivalent to assuming where R1+τ 1 ,R2+τ 2 ,R+τ in Eq. (B11) by Eq. (B66). For convenience, we can define which gives Then, under the two-center approximation, we have where c † R+τ is defined in Eq. (B4). Eq. (C4) clearly shows that the EPC for c † R1+τ 1 and c R2+τ 2 only involves the relative motion u R1+τ 1,i -u R2+τ 2 ,i , and shows that which is consistent with Asm. 1. According to Eq. (B12) and Eq. (B13), the lattice translation requires and the Hermiticity requires For convenience of the latter discussion, we define a matrix which satisfies according to Eq. (C5). Then, Eq. (C4) can be rewritten as where Eq. (C6) has been used. When we use smooth hopping functions t (r) to describe the hopping among electrons in Eq. (B6), (C11) The discussion in supplementary information C 1 is in real space; now we convert Eq. (C10) and Eq. (C8) to momentum space. To do so, we first Fourier transform Eq. (C8) into momentum space and obtain and we define Eq. (C13) defines f i (k) to be a matrix; Furthermore, we Fourier transform c † R+τ in Eq. (B4) to momentum space and obtain which means that with "..." ranging over the orbitals or spins (labeled by α τ ) at the position τ in the unit cell, where c † k,τ ,ατ is define in Eq. (B14). With Eq. (C14) and Eq. (C12), we can finally transform Eq. (C10) to momentum space and obtain resulting in where Eq. (C17) can be alternatively derived from Eq. (B40) by substituting Eq. (C1), Eq. (C6), Eq. (C8) and Eq. (C13) into Eq. (B41), which leads to the following expression of F τ i (k 1 , k 2 ): where As discussed in supplementary information B 4, the key quantity that we will study is ⟨Γ⟩ in Eq. (B78). Then, it is useful to see how Eq. (B78) looks under the two-center approximation (or more precisely under Eq. (C19)). To do so, first we substitute Eq. (C19) into Eq. (B79) and obtain the following expression of Γ nm (k 1 , k 2 ): where P n (k) is the electron projection matrix defined in Eq. (B80). Then, ⟨Γ⟩ in Eq. (B77) becomes For graphene, the second line of the expression gives the geometric and topological lower bounds, as discussed in supplementary information F. For MgB 2 , all terms are important, as discussed in supplementary information H. As shown by Eq. (C23), ⟨Γ⟩ is determined by f i (k), in addition to the electron bands E n (k), the electron projection matrix P n (k), the chemical potential and the atomic masses. E n (k) and P n (k) can be derived from the electron Hamiltonian Eq. (B22). In the following, we discuss the symmetry properties of f i (k) (and in Eq. (C8)), which will be crucial for the discussion in supplementary information D. In this part, we will discuss the symmetry properties of f τ 1τ 2 ,i (R 1 + τ 1 -R 2 -τ 2 ) in Eq. (C8) and f i (k) in Eq. (C13), which will be crucial for the discussion in supplementary information D. Owing to Eq. (C7) and Eq. (C13), Hermiticity requires and leads to where i = x, y, z regardless of the spacial dimension d ≤ 3. Specifically for f i (k), we have where we used Eq. (C8) and Eq. (C7). Suppose the system has a crystalline symmetry g = {R|d}, where R is the point group part of g and d labels the translational part of g. According to Eq. (B68) and Eq. (C2), we have which, combined with Eq. (C8) and Eq. (C6), leads to where R τ ,g and τ g are defined in Eq. (B2), and owing to Eq. (B2). Then, combining Eq. (C27) with Eq. (C12) and Eq. (B19), we obtain where τ 1,g -τ 2,g = R(τ 1 -τ 2 ) -(∆R τ 1,g -∆R τ 2 ,g ) according to Eq. (B2), and we used τ ′ 1 and τ ′ 2 because we include the case where τ ′ 1 ̸ = τ 1,g and τ ′ 2 ̸ = τ 2,g , for which the equation trivially holds as both sides are zero. Suppose the system has TR symmetry T . According to Eq. (B70) and Eq. (C2), we have which, combined with the lattice translations (Eq. (C6)) and the definition of Then, combining Eq. (C32) with Eq. (C12) and Eq. (B21), we obtain resulting in The symmetry properties of where U τ g τ g is defined in Eq. (B3), U τ τ T is defined in Eq. (B5), R τ ,g and τ g are defined in Eq. (B2), and owing to Eq. (B2). The symmetry properties of f i (k) are summarized in where U g is defined in Eq. (B19) and U T is defined in Eq. (B21). Finally, from Eq. (C13), we can clearly see that for any generic reciprocal lattice vector G, where V G is the embedding matrix defined in Eq. (B26). This means that f i (k) has the same transformation rule as the matrix Hamiltonian h(k) of the electrons in Eq. (B23) under the shifts of the reciprocal lattice vectors. We emphasize that the appearance of only two embedding matrices of Eq. (C38) relies on the two-center approximation of the EPC Hamiltonian (Eq. (C10)). Appendix D: Symmetry-Rep Method: Geometric Contribution to the EPC Constant λ In supplementary information A, we have shown that under the GA, we can identify the geometric contribution to λ. In this section, we will discuss an alternative way of defining the geometric contribution to λ, which we call the symmetry-rep method. We emphasize that unlike the GA, the symmetry-rep method is just a formal way of defining the geometric contribution. The symmetry-rep method repeatedly uses the fact that two functions of the same symmetry properties can be expressed in terms of the same combinations of irreps. As a result, the symmetry-rep method would need the explicit function form of the electron Hamiltonian in terms of not only the momentum but also the hopping parameters as discussed in supplementary information D 3. In practice, when we use the symmetry-rep method, we always need to combine it with the short-range nature of the hoppings, since the symmetry-rep method does not involve any information of locality; when combined with short-range nature of the hoppings, the number of basis functions would be dramatically reduced, allowing us to obtain explicit results. Then, in graphene and MgB 2 , we find that the symmetry-rep method combined with the short-range hoppings give exactly the same results as the GA, as discussed in supplementary information F and supplementary information H. Before going into details, let us discuss more generally what the geometric contribution to λ means. First, the geometric part of EPC means the part of f i (k) in Eq. (C17) that relies on the geometric properties of the electron Bloch states. Here the geometric properties of the electron Bloch states refer to the momentum dependence of the projection operator Pn (k) = |u n,k ⟩⟨u n,k | on the periodic part of the Bloch state |u n,k ⟩ (which is defined in Eq. (B57)). More explicitly, the momentum derivatives of Pn (k) characterize the momentum dependence of Pn (k). Owing to the tight-binding approximation that we use, Eq. (B58) suggests that the momentum dependence of Pn (k) is all in the projection matrix P n (k) defined in Eq. (B80) for the convention Eq. (B14). Therefore, in this work, the geometric part of EPC specifically means the part of f i (k) in Eq. (C17) that relies on the momentum derivatives of the projection matrix P n (k) defined in Eq. (B80) for the convention Eq. (B14). Furthermore, we can also define the energetic part of f i (k) in Eq. (C17), which is just the part of f i (k) in Eq. (C17) that relies on the momentum derivatives of the electron bands E n (k) Eq. (B24) but not on the momentum derivatives of P n (k). The energetic (geometric) contribution to λ is the part of λ that solely depends on the energetic (geometric) part of f i (k). In the following, we will present more details on the symmetry-rep method. We will only discuss certain 2D systems. It is nontrivial to define the geometric part of EPC in generic dimensions based on the symmetry-rep method, which we leave to the future. Yet, the physical relation between EPC and the quantum geometry has been revealed by the GA. As discussed in the above introductory part of this section, the final expressions of the geometric contribution to λ should contain momentum derivatives of P n (k). In the GA discussed in supplementary information A, the momentum derivatives naturally appear because of the Gaussian form of the hopping function. In this part, we will show where the momentum derivatives originate from in the symmetry-rep method. We note that unlike the GA discussed in supplementary information A, the discussion in this part is just a re-formulation of f i (k) in Eq. (C17). First, we should start from real space by using Eq. (C12). Owing to Eq. (C9), Eq. (C12) becomes Eq. (C9) shows that the terms for ∆R + τ 1 -τ 2 = 0 vanish and thus can be safely omitted. For simplicity, we only consider the 2D systems that do not have two atoms with the same in-plane coordinates, i.e., Equivalently, we have since R 1 and R 2 only have the in-plane components. To proceed, we will use the following expression where r = (r x , r y , r z ) T , and e z is the unit vector in the z direction. Combined with Eq. (D2), we can rewrite f τ 1τ 2,i (k) with i = x, y as where we use Eq. (D2) for the second equality, we define for the third equality, and we define for the last equality. By further defining we eventually have where So we have rewritten the form of f i (k) (Eq. (C17)) to make momentum derivatives explicit in it, since the quantities that capture quantum geometry rely on the momentum derivatives as shown, e.g., in Eq. (A12). To reveal the geometric part of the EPC, the symmetry properties of f τ 1τ 2,β (∆R + τ 1 -τ 2 ) in Eq. (D5) and f β (k) in Eq. (D9) are particularly important, since the method described in this section relies on the symmetry reps. Here β = , ⊥. f τ 1τ 2 , (∆R + τ 1 -τ 2 ) and f τ 1 τ 2,⊥ (∆R + τ 1 -τ 2 ) in Eq. (D5) can be rewritten into one expression: where First, let us discuss the Hermiticity. Eq. (C35) gives . Then, we have Combined with Eq. (D7), we further have the Hermiticity of f β (k), which reads resulting in The Hermiticity requirement of f β can be summarized as Based on Eq. (D10), if the Hamiltonian preserves a crystalline symmetry g = {R|d}, we have where we have used the fact that R is a real orthogonal matrix. Since we are considering 2D systems, R xz = R yz = 0 for any crystalline symmetry g preserved by the system, i.e., Therefore, we have where g = {R|d}, and R 2D is in Eq. (D18). Then, with Eq. (D18) and Eq. (D19), Eq. (D17) becomes On the other hand, we have Hence, if we require the Hamiltonian to have the symmetry g, f where z R,β is defined in Eq. (D20). For f β (k), we use Eq. (D7) and Eq. (B19) to convert Eq. (D23) to momentum space and obtain which, combined with Eq. (D9), leads to Based on Eq. (D10), if the Hamiltonian preserves TR symmetry, we have where we have used the fact that R is a real orthogonal matrix. In addition, we have Eventually, we have the symmetry requirement of For f β (k), we use Eq. (D7) and Eq. (B21) to convert Eq. (D28) to momentum space and obtain which, combined with Eq. (D9), leads to In sum, the symmetry properties of f β are where g = {R|d} is a crystalline symmetry, z R, is defined in Eq. (D20), U τ g τ g is defined in Eq. (B3), U τ τ T is defined in Eq. (B5), R τ ,g and τ g are defined in Eq. (B2), U g is defined in (B19), U T is defined in (B21), and we have assumed that the system preserves T and g. With the preparation in supplementary information D 1 and supplementary information D 2, we now introduce the symmetry-rep method to define the geometric part of f i (k) (in Eq. (C17)). In this part, we will just present the symmetry-rep method in an abstract way. Applications of the symmetry-rep method to explicit examples (i.e., graphene and MgB 2 ) are in supplementary information F and supplementary information H, where, we find that the symmetry-rep method combined with the short-range hoppings give exactly the same results as the GA. Our strategy is to replace terms in f β (k) (Eq. (D9)) by terms that involve the electron Hamiltonian h(k), which will become the terms that involve ∂ kx h(k) or ∂ ky h(k) in f i (k), based on the symmetry properties. Then, ∂ i h(k) contains ∂ ki P n (k) which corresponds to the geometric property of the Bloch wavefunction, where P n (k) is the electron projection matrix defined in Eq. (B80). As mentioned at the beginning of supplementary information D, the part of f i (k) that involves ∂ ki P n (k) is just the geometric part, while the part of f i (k) that involves ∂ ki E n (k) is the energetic part, where E n (k) is the electron band defined in Eq. (B24). Let us be more specific in the following. By comparing Eq. (D31) to Eq. (B63), Eq. ( where t a labels all the independent free parameters, and ĥa (k) is non-vanishing and has no tuning parameters in it. Then, we know the most general symmetry-allowed form of f (k) under the same approximations reads Comparing Eq. (D33) to Eq. (D32), it is straightforward to see that where Moreover, the linear operator L in Eq. (D35) does not depend on the choice of ĥa (k). Specifically, if we change the choice of ĥa (k) to ĥ′ a (k), then ĥ′ a (k) must be related to ĥa (k) by where X is a invertible matrix since ĥa (k) and ĥ′ a (k) are nonvanishing in 1BZ. As a result, according to we have leading to Therefore, we can choose any ĥa (k) to use Eq. (D34), as long as the choice of ĥa (k) is the same for both Eq. (D32) and Eq. (D33). Now, we move on to f ⊥ (k). Due to the factor z R,⊥ (defined in Eq. (D20)) of the symmetry requirement of f ⊥ (k) in Eq. (D31), we should study f ⊥ (k) in two cases: (i) all spatial symmetries have det(R 2D ) = 1 for Eq. (D20) (e.g., rotations along z), and (ii) there are spatial symmetries that have det(R 2D ) = -1 for Eq. (D20). In case (i), f ⊥ (k) has the same form as Eq. (D32): which means that where Similar to Eq. (D35), L ⊥ in Eq. (D42) is independent of the choice of ĥa (k). In case (ii), we cannot use L ⊥ in Eq. (D42), because none of the terms in Eq. (D32) can appear in f ⊥ (k) due to the different transformation properties for symmetries with det(R 2D ) = -1. Nevertheless, we can still try to express f ⊥ (k) in the following form: where and is zero in case (i). Unfortunately, we currently cannot give a universal expression for the L ⊥ in case (ii), which we leave as the future work. Let us only focus on L ⊥ for graphene and MgB 2 , both of which belong to the case (ii). As will be discussed in supplementary information F and supplementary information H, both graphene and MgB 2 can be viewed as special cases of the TR-invariant systems that satisfy where Q l are TR-invariant constant matrices that satisfy and ĥa (k) satisfies Eq. (D32). We can see ( since they have the same symmetry properties. Then, we have where γ⊥,l,a = 0 is required if As a result, Eq. (D46) infers and t a satisfies Eq. (D32). In sum, for f ⊥ (k), we have Eq. (D43) with L ⊥ having the expression of Eq. (D42) in case (i) or Eq. (D47) for the special TR-invariant systems considered in the case (ii). Once Eq. (D34) and Eq. (D43) are achieved, we can re-write f i (k) and obtain where ) L is in Eq. (D35), L ⊥ defined in Eq. (D42) or Eq. (D47) (or in other ways depending on the system), and we have used the fact that vanishes for systems with all electron bands exactly flat. We call f geo i (k) the geometric part of f i (k). Eventually, we arrive at where λ E , λ geo and λ E-geo are defined in Eq. (A29), Eq. (A30), and Eq. (A31), respectively, and ∆λ is the additional term given by a nonvanishing ∆f i (k) in Eq. (D49). Eq. (D50) is just a formal way of defining the energetic and geometric parts of the EPC based on the symmetry properties of EPC and the Hamiltonian. Based on Eq. (D35) and Eq. (D42) (or Eq. (D47)), we can clearly see that Eq. (D50) needs explicit information on the t-dependence of the Hamiltonian, not just the momentum dependence. In other words, without further approximations, knowing the Hamiltonian at the fixed values of the hopping parameters (t a in Eq. (D32)) is not enough for using Eq. (D50), because Eq. (D50) does not involve any information of the locality. Therefore, in practice, Eq. (D50) needs to be used together with other local approximations (like short-range approximation for the hopping). In graphene and MgB 2 , we find that the symmetry-rep method combined with the short-range hoppings give exactly the same results as the GA, as discussed in supplementary information F and supplementary information H. with S having the following expression where u † k1-k,l and P † k1-k,l are defined right below Eq. (B27), G nml (k, k 1 -k) is defined in Eq. (B46), γ † k,n is the creation operator for the electron Bloch states, E n (k) is the electron bands, ω l (k 1 -k) is the phonon band, and excluded from the sum since they usually occur in zero-measure regions and do not give Dirac-delta-type contributions. Since S † = -S, e S is a unitary operator. Then, imposing the unitary transformation e S on the Hamiltonian H gives where and "..." does not contain the terms in the form H el-ph and only contains higher-order terms. Eq. (E3) suggests that the induced interaction must be attractive when both E n (k) and E m (k 1 ) are equal to the Fermi energy. With the effective interaction among electrons in Eq. (E3), we now discuss the mean-field superconducting critical temperature T c . The mean-field T c is determined by solving the linearized gap equation T c > T ZT M c happens if the system enters a pairing-density-wave phase when T goes right below T c . According to Eq. (E4), the lower bound of T ZT M c is the lower bound of T c . In the following, we focus on the T ZT M c , which is for the zero-total-momentum Cooper pairings. Since we only focus on the zero-total-momentum Cooper pairings, we only consider the channel of the attractive interaction in Eq. (E3) that accounts for such pairings, resulting in the following total Hamiltonian where and we have neglect the Coulomb interaction. Hermiticity gives that Generally, neglecting the Coulomb interaction is only valid in the low energies after the renormalization, which means that Eq. (E5) is only valid within certain energy cutoff ε c . From the interacting Hamiltonian Eq. (E5), the mean-field Hamiltonian reads ) where the order parameter ∆ n1n2 (k) satisfies the following self-consistent equation Tr [e -βH ZT M,M F ] , (E9) is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. As the superconductivity transition in 3D is normally a second-order phase transition near which ∆ n1n2 (k) is infinitesimally small, we can expand the right-hand side of the self-consistent equation (Eq. (E9)) in series of ∆ n1n2 (k) and only keep terms to first order in ∆ n1n2 (k), resulting in the linearized gap equation where ω ∈ (2Z + 1) π β is the fermionic Matsubara frequency, and which is derived from The mean-field superconducting critical temperature T ZT M c is determined by the linearized gap equation (Eq. (E10)). Explicitly, we solve the linearized gap equation for the temperature T and the nonvanishing pairing gap function, and the highest T given by the solutions is for a > b, and Therefore, the linearized gap equation in Eq. (E10) is equivalent to The form of the linearized gap equation in Eq. (E14) is useful for our discussion. Inspired by Eq. (E14), let us define a vector X and a matrix M to be With Eq. (E15), Eq. (E14) becomes Hermiticity of U in Eq. (E7) gives that With the reformulated linearized gap equation Eq. (E15) and the fact that M is Hermitian, we now have a direct equation for the critical temperature: which is solved for the temperature T . More explicitly, M has real eigenvalues, labelled as m 0 ≥ m 1 ≥ m 2 .... Each eigenvalue of M should be a continuous function of T , since M continuously depends on the temperature (Eq. (E15)). When a certain eigenvalue of M intersects with 1, the corresponding temperature at the intersection point is a solution to Eq. (E18). The largest T that satisfies Eq. (E18) is is the largest T that satisfies m 0 = 1, where m 0 is the largest eigenvalue of M . To see this, first note that ζ(a, b) in Eq. (E11) limits to zero as T → ∞, and thus M limits to zero as T → ∞ according to Eq. (E15). So all eigenvalues of M limit to zero as T → ∞. Suppose T ′ is a generic solution to det(M -1) = 0, then there exists an eigenvalue m l of M such that T ′ satisfies m l = 1. Since m l ≤ m 0 , we have m 0 ≥ 1 at T ′ . Combined with the fact that lim T →∞ m 0 = 0 and m 0 is a continuous function of T ′ , m 0 = 1 will happen in [T ′ , ∞), which means that T ′ is no larger than the largest T that satisfies m 0 = 1. Therefore, the largest T that satisfies m 0 = 1 is the largest T that satisfies det(M -1) = 0, which is equal to T ZT M c . With this preparation, now we show how T ZT M c is bounded from below by λ in Eq. (B71) for TR-invariant systems. As a good approximation for many mean-field superconductors, we assume that the cutoff ε c of the model is much larger than the temperature of interest ε c ≫ k B T , and the electron bands are dispersive with a large Fermi velocity. (With this approximation, our results cannot be applied to flat-band superconductors.) The TR symmetry acts on γ n,k as and then the EPC G nml (k, k 1 ) satisfies owing to the phonon TR transformation that we choose in Eq. (B37). Next we will use the fact that for any nonvanishing Y , we always have the variational principle where recall that m 0 is the largest eigenvalue of M . To relate to λ, let us choose a special Y = X ′ , where Note that we have E n (k) = E n (-k) for TR-invariant system, and we have The TR-invariant points are just measure zero subset of 1BZ, and thus can be ruled out from the summation of k. Then, we obtain where γ Euler = 0.5772... is the Euler constant, and we have used the assumption that the electron bands are dispersive with a large Fermi velocity for the first "≈", and used ε c ≫ k B T for the second "≈". Moreover, where we again have used the approximation that the electron bands are dispersive with a large Fermi velocity for the first "≈" and used ε c ≫ k B T . Combined with Eq. (E20) and Eq. (B71), we arrive at Therefore, we have we arrive at We note that in the lower bound Eq. (E29), T c can be given by any kind of pairing form, even if it is not a uniform s-wave pairing (like pairing density waves). It is because we never assume any pairing form for T c , although we choose a special Y = X ′ in the variational principle (Eq. (E21)) to derive the lower bound Eq. (E29). The discussion in supplementary information B, supplementary information C and supplementary information D holds for both spinful and spinless fermions. However, in reality, we cannot have spinless fermions due to spin statistics When the system has spin SU(2) symmetry, we can neglect the spin when evaluating λ in Eq. (B71) and ω 2 in Eq. (B76). Based on the general form of the EPC Hamiltonian Eq. (B44), spin SU(2) symmetry means that the spinful band index n spinful can be split to the spinless band index n spinless and the spin index s, i.e., n spinful = (n spinless , s). Then, the spinful EPC matrix reduces as Combined with the spin-double degeneracy of the electron bands, we obtain For graphene and MgB 2 discussed in supplementary information F and supplementary information H, the spin-orbit coupling is always negligible, and we will always use spinless models. Appendix F: Geometric and Topological Contributions to EPC Constant in Graphene In this section, we discuss the EPC in graphene. We neglect the spin-orbit coupling in graphene and assume spin SU(2) symmetry. Therefore, we will use a spinless model throughout this section. As a result, all the symmetry operations that we consider are spinless. In this part, we review the electron Hamiltonian of graphene and electron band topology in it following Ref. Besides the charge U(1) symmetry and 2D lattice translations, the relevant symmetry group of the spinless model for graphene is generated by the six-fold rotation C 6 , the mirror m y that flips the y direction, the mirror m z with mirror plane lying in the plane of graphene, and TR symmetry T , where the spatial symmetries form the space group P6/mmm. The model of graphene is constructed from C 6 , m y , m z and T . Graphene has two atoms per unit cell, and at low energies, we only need to consider one p z -like orbital at each atom. p z -like means that the orbital behaves the same as a p z orbital under the symmetry operations of interest. Specifically, according to the convention defined in supplementary information B 1, we have τ ∈ {τ A , τ B } for the sublattice and the orbital index α τ can be omitted since it only takes one value-p z , where and a is the lattice constant of graphene. Then, the creation operators for electrons are labelled as c † R+τ , where The symmetry reps furnished by c † R+τ are where According to the convention in Eq. (B3), we know where τ 0 is the identity matrix in the sublattice space, and τ x , τ y and τ z are the Pauli matrices in the sublattice space. By using Eq. (B14), we have the electron basis in momentum space as and the symmetry reps read According to Eq. (B6), the electron Hamiltonian of graphene in general reads In this work, we only consider the electron hopping up to the nearest neighbors for graphene, i.e., where is defined in Eq. (B6). Then, the terms that are allowed to be zero are t τ τ (0) (the onsite energy), t τ A τ B (δ j ) and t τ B τ A (-δ j ), where and C 3 = C 2 6 . Deriving the forms of t τ τ (0), t τ A τ B (δ j ) and t τ B τ A (-δ j ) based on symmetries has been well-described in the literature (e.g., Ref. Then, based on the Eq. (B22), H el for graphene in momentum space becomes where and δ j is defined in Eq. (F10). where d 0 (k), d x (k) and d y (k) are smooth in D. Then, for any closed 1D loop L in D such that d x (k) 2 + d y (k) 2 ̸ = 0 ∀k ∈ L, a winding number can be defined as In general, only Nevertheless, if we have two loops L 1 and L 2 , the relative signs between W L1 and W L2 are also well-defined. Eq. (F18) is the P T protected winding number proposed in Ref. Going back to Eq. (F15) explicitly for graphene, P T is equivalent to C 2 T symmetry for 2D spinless system (if we neglect the z direction). For graphene, C 2 T is represented as Owing to the C 2 T , h(k) in Eq. (F14) always have the form of is the electron gap, and In addition, because of C 2 T symmetry, we also have the following useful relations where n = 1, 2. Explicitly for graphene, we have Clearly, we have two bands that are isolated over the entire 1BZ, which means D = 1BZ. In particular, there are two gapless points at ±K, where If the loop L only encloses K or -K once, the winding in Eq. (F18) has the value |W L | = 1. We label W K = W L for any loop L that encloses K once, and label W -K = W L for any loop L that encloses -K once, meaning that Specifically, since D = 1BZ, the relative sign between W K and W -K is well-defined, and we have W K = -W -K , featuring the opposite chiralities. In sum, we know graphene is a topological semimetal according to the definition in Ref. The EPC Hamiltonian of graphene has been derived in Ref. According to Eq. ( Therefore, Eq. (D8) for graphene becomes meaning that we only need to consider f β (k). Similar to the electron hopping, we again assume that which means According to Eq. (D31), resulting in In addition, according to Eq. (D31), the symmetry constraints of , which, combined with C 6 , means f N N,⊥ = 0. Therefore, we have In addition, according to the convention that we choose in Eq. (D6), we have 0) = 0. By substituting Eq. (F30) and Eq. (F32) with Eq. (D7), we obtain By using Eq. (B40), Eq. (C19) and Eq. (F34), H el-ph for graphene in momentum space becomes where and f (k) is in Eq. (F33). Now we identify the energetic and geometric parts of f i (k) in Eq. (F34). First, for L ⊥ in Eq. (D43), we try to find the constant matrices Q l (labelled by l) that (i) are TR-invariant constant, (ii) satisfy for any crystalline symmetry g = {R|d} of graphene, and (iii) given rise to Eq. (D44). Based on the expressions of U g in Eq. (F5), we find that the only Q l that satisfies the condition is Q l = 0 with l only taking one value. Therefore, we have L ⊥ = 0 for Eq. (D43). Combined with f ⊥ (k) = 0 as shown in Eq. (F33), we also have ∆ f ⊥ = 0 in Eq. (D43). Since we also show f z (k) = 0 in Eq. (F25), we have ∆f i (k) = 0 in Eq. (D49). Thus, we only need to care about f (k). According to Eq. (D34), we try to re-write f (k) in Eq. (F34) as where h(k) is the electron Hamiltonian in Eq. (F15). By comparing Eq. (F33) to Eq. (F15), γ0 in f (k) is zero, and then we obtain For all k with ∆E(k) ̸ = 0 (∆E(k) is the difference between two electron bands of the system defined in Eq. (F22)), Eq. (F22) and Eq. (F23) show that both is proportional to t since d x (k) and d y (k) are proportional to t as shown by Eq. (F23), and is proportional to t since d x (k) and d y (k) are proportional to t as shown by Eq. (F23). Then, we can directly replace ∂ t by 1/t in f E i and f geo i in Eq. (D50), resulting in where we define As a result, we obtain where We emphasize that we have used the fact that the hopping in graphene is nearest-neighboring (NN). In supplementary information F 10, we will show that the symmetry-rep method can still separate the EPC f i into f E i + f geo i with the hopping derivatives replaced by coefficients even if we include the next-nearest-neighboring (NNN) hopping, but will fail if we have 3rd NN hopping. In supplementary information F 3, we have derived the energetic and geometric parts of EPC Hamiltonian of graphene using the symmetry-rep method. In this part, we will show that Eq. (F44) can also be derived from the GA introduced in supplementary information A. As shown in Eq. (F25), it is clear that the out-of-plane motions of ions cannot couple to electrons, and thus we only need to consider the in-plane motions of ions. This means that we can safely treat p z orbitals as s-like orbitals for graphene, since p z behaves the same as s orbital in the 2D x -y plane. Combined with the fact that we only have one kind of atoms for graphene, the hopping function t(r) has no sublattice or orbital indices. As a result, under the tight-binding and the Frohlich two-center approximation, the EPC Hamiltonian is the same as Eq. (A3). Then, with the GA t(r) = t 0 exp[γ x 2 +y 2 2 ], Eq. (A17) shows that f i (k) in Eq. (F34) should read where h(k) is the electron matrix Hamiltonian for graphene, and (δ ix + δ iy ) comes from the fact that all atoms of the graphene lie in the x -y plane. As a result, Eq. (A20) and Eq. (A21) suggest that the GA gives the same expression for the energetic and geometric parts of EPC as those in Eq. (F44). Now We show that even if we use generic hopping function t(r) instead of GA, we would give the same expression as Eq. (F46). To see this, we use the idea of linear combinations of atomic orbitals proposed in Ref. As a result, we have where r = x 2 + y 2 . As we know, the decay of the hopping is very strong in graphene, and thus we only keep the nearest-neighboring term, i.e., x 2 + y 2 = a √ 3 . Then, we eventually have where Therefore, we obtain the same form of ∂ i t(r) as Eq. (A5) derived from Gaussian approximation, and eventually leads to the ∂ ki h(k) form of f i (k) in Eq. (F46), as well as the energetic and geometric parts of EPC as those in Eq. (F44). With Eq. (F44), we are now ready to analytically derive the geometric contribution to EPC constant λ in graphene, as well as the topological lower bound of the geometric contribution. For this purpose, we choose μ ̸ = ε 0 , meaning that two energy bands do not touch (i.e., ∆E(k) ̸ = 0) on the Fermi surface, i.e., the Fermi surface does not include the Dirac points. (Recall that ε 0 is the onsite energy of the electron as shown in Eq. (F15).) Before deriving the bounds, let us first simplify ⟨Γ⟩ in Eq. (C23) for graphene. First, Eq. (F5), we have which means for all k such that ∆E(k) ̸ = 0 (i.e., k not at ±K), according to Eq. (F22). Furthermore, based on the second line of Eq. (C37), we have where is the 2D part of the rotation matrix of C 3 . Then, combined with the fact that we choose μ not at the Dirac point (meaning that ∆E(k) ̸ = 0 on the Fermi surface), we obtain χ τ is the projection matrix to the τ sublattice defined in Eq. (C18). In addition, owing to Eq. (F22), we have for all k such that ∆E(k) ̸ = 0, which comes from the fact that the electron Hamiltonian (besides the identity term) has the sublattice chiral symmetry. By substituting Eq. (F25), Eq. (F55) and Eq. (F56) into Eq. (C23), we arrive at where m C is the mass of the carbon atom, and we used Eq. (B72) for the third equality. Now we substitute Eq. (F44) into Eq. (F57) and obtain where Let us first analyze ⟨Γ⟩ E-geo , which reads For Tr [P n (k)∂ ki P n2 (k)], we have Eq. (F62) means that the geometric part of EPC does not couple with the energetic part of EPC in λ. The underlying reasons of Eq. (F62) are the C 3 symmetry (Eq. (F53)) and the sublattice chiral symmetry (Eq. (F56)). Eq. (F58) is simplified to Now we turn to ⟨Γ⟩ E-E . where E n F (k) is the electron band that is cut by the chemical potential, n F = 1 for μ < ε 0 and n F = 2 for μ > ε 0 according to Eq. (F22), dσ k is the measure on the Fermi surface, A is the area of the sample, and we have used Eq. (B73). For ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo , we first note that f geo i (k) can be simplified by Eq. (F22): for any n. By substituting Eq. (F66) in to ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo in Eq. (F58), we obtain resulting in where is the FSM according to Eq. (B61). By substituting Eq. (F65) , Eq. (F62) and Eq. (F68) into Eq. (F58), we obtain Now we go back to λ in Eq. (B77). Recall that according to Eq. (D51), λ in general has four contributions: the energetic contribution λ E in Eq. (A29), the geometric contribution λ geo in Eq. (A30), the cross contribution λ E-geo in Eq. (A31), and the other contribution ∆λ. Based on Eq. (F58) and∆ f ⊥ = 0 shown by Eq. (F33), we have λ E-geo = ∆λ = 0, and we arrive at with where Ω is the area of the unit cell, and ∆E(k) = |2(μ -ε 0 )| for k on the Fermi surface. Based on the discussion of the GA (supplementary information A), we can see the direct appearance of the FSM in the geometric contribution to λ can be understood as (derived from the C 2 T symmetry Eq. (F22) and a τ is defined in Eq. (A38)), and λ geo,2 = 0 from the C 3 symmetry. Now we show that the geometric part λ geo in Eq. (F71) is bounded by band topology from below. First, Eq. (F22) yields where θ is defined in Eq. (F21). Then, Eq. (F75) leads to where L ranges over the connected loop that form the Fermi surface, W L is the winding number defined in Eq. (F18), and the first inequality is derived from the Hölder's inequality which reads By further defining we have and where the later is the geometric and topological lower bounds of λ. 7. Analytical Geometric and Topological Contributions to EPC constant in Graphene: To estimate the ratio among λ, λ E , λ geo , and λ topo , let us consider |μ -ε 0 | → 0 limit. In this limit, we can perform the linear approximation for the electron Hamiltonian: where 2 at. From the linear approximation for the electron Hamiltonian, we have the dispersion as and have the Fermi surface as F S = F S + ∪ F S -with which means that and where p = |p|(cos(φ), sin(φ)). Based on Eq. ( Now we look at λ E , λ geo , and λ topo . By substituting Eq. (F86) and Eq. (F84) into Eq. (F71), we obtain where n F = 1 for μ < ε 0 and n F = 2 for μ > ε 0 according to Eq. (F22). By substituting Eq. (F83), Eq. (F88) and Eq. (F84) into Eq. (F71), we obtain By substituting Eq. (F85), Eq. (F86) and Eq. (F84) into Eq. (F78), we obtain In this part, we test our model against ab initio calculations in order to check whether our approximations, i.e., tight-binding approximation, two-center approximation (Asm. 1), and nearest-neighbor approximations (Eq. (F9) and (F27)), are reasonable. In total, we have four key independent parameters: ε 0 and t in the electron Hamiltonian Eq. (F14), γ in the EPC Hamiltonian Eq. (F34) (or equivalently γ = γ/t in Eq. (F43)), and ω 2 in Eq. (B76). Without loss of generality, we can always choose As well discussed in the literature (e.g., Ref. For ω 2 in Eq. (B76), the ab initio calculation shows a ħ ⟨ω 2 ⟩ = 0.1615eV that is almost independent of μ as shown in Fig. For the remaining γ in EPC Hamiltonian, we can directly determine its value from the EPC Hamiltonian in the real space from the ab initio calculation (detailed procedure in supplementary information I). Basically, p z orbitals are also Wannier functions of graphene, and we can project the EPC Hamiltonian onto those Wannier functions to get the matrix elements in the real space. As a result, we get γ = 20.11eV/a 2 , (F95) which, combined with the value of t in Eq. (F94), leads to We note that the value of γ determined in this way depends on the Wannier function obtained during the Wannierization, and thus different Wannier functions might give slightly different values of γ, but the error should be small. All relevant parameter values of the models are summarized in Tab. II. To check the value of γ or γ, we look at F τ i (K, K) and F τ i (K, -K), since the approximations that we make should be the best for the low-energy electrons at ±K, where F τ i (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. (F36) and K is defined in Eq. (F24). The 46 Å 0 -2.751eV -7.308a -2 12 amu 0.1615eV 0.1935eV 0.1622eV TABLE II. The values of the parameters for graphene. a is the lattice constant. ε0 and t are in Eq. (F14), and γ is in Eq. (F43). mC is the mass of the Carbon atom, and amu = 1.67377 × 10 -27 kg. concise expression of F τ i (K, ±K) within our approximation is in Eq. (F108). Specifically, we have where (-) x = -(-) y = -1, leading to where based on Eq. (F95). On the other hand, by using Eq. (B49), the ab initio calculation gives where and the procedure of the calculation is explained in supplementary information I. By comparing Eq. (F100) to Eq. (F98), our approximations require β 1 = β 2 and β 3 = 0. Therefore, only the mean value of is within the our approximations, which gives γalternative By comparing the value of γalternative 2 in Eq. (F99), the relative error is smaller than 6%, which should come from the larger-range terms that are still within the two-center approximation. We note that β1-β2 , since it is small compared to β1+β2 2 . β 3 is beyond the twocenter approximation, because the symmetries would require F τ i (K, -K) = -iβ 2 χ τ (-) i τ i -τ i χ τ (δ ix + δ iy ) as long as we adopt the tight-binding and two-center approximations (Eq. (C1)), no matter whether we assume the hopping only appears between nearest neighbors. In terms of the EPC strengthes, |β 3 | ≈ 0.35|γ away from Γ or K with parameter values in Tab. II. For the dominant matrix elements (i.e., those that have maximum absolute values about 18eV/a), the model matches the ab initio calculation very well, although the mismatch occurs for the subdominant matrix elements (i.e., those that have maximum absolute values about 6eV/a). Therefore, even if we go away from q = Γ, K, the EPC matrix elements beyond the our model are roughly 1/3 of the EPC matrix elements within our model. Yet, we don't see a 1/3 mismatch in the plot of λ in Fig. 2 | 2 /10, since β 3 couples to different matrices than γ; this is consistent with the numerical results in Fig. should be small for both large negative μ (due to the small | ⟨Γ⟩-⟨Γ⟩ ab initio |) and small negative μ (due to small electron density of states D(μ)/N ). Indeed, as shown in Fig. In Fig. ω 2 Approximated by ωE 2g (Γ) and ω A ′ 1 (K) In supplementary information F 8, we directly use the value of ω 2 from the ab initio calculation. In this part, we will show that ω 2 can be well approximated by the combinations of the frequencies of the E 2g phonons at Γ (i.e., ω E2g (Γ)) and the A ′ 1 phonon at K (i.e., ω A ′ 1 (K)). To show this, we derive an analytical expression for ω 2 in the (μ -ε 0 ) → 0 limit. We note that we only consider small but nonzero |μ-ε 0 |, which means that only one electron band is cut by the chemical potential. In the (μ-ε 0 ) → 0 limit, the expression of α 2 F (ω) in Eq. (B75) is simplified to where F S ±K is the Fermi surface around ±K, the 4th equality comes from TR symmetry, p F = |μ -ε 0 |/|v|, n θ = (cos(θ), sin(θ), 0), and we use p F → 0 for ω l (αK -K + p F n θ -p F n θ ′ ). To proceed, let us simplify |G n F n F l (K + FIG. According to the expression of G nml (k, k ′ ) in Eq. (B47) (as well as Eq. (B45) and Eq. (B46)), we have where according to Eq. (B45), v l (q) is the phonon eigenvector for the lth phonon band, FIG. for the linear Hamiltonian Eq. (F82), and we have used p F → 0 for the last equality. The expression of F l (αK, K) in Eq. (F113) are derived from F τ i (K, ±K) and the phonon eigenvectors. From Eq. (F36) and Eq. (F33), we can derive the expression of F τ i (K, ±K), which reads where (- For F τ i (K, K), we care about the phonon modes at q = K -K = 0, which have eigenvectors where the basis is (τ A , x), (τ A , y), (τ A , z), (τ B , x), (τ B , y), (τ B , z) , (F110) and v 1 (Γ) and v 2 (Γ) are two acoustic modes with ω 1 (Γ) = ω 2 (Γ) = 0. v 3 (Γ) and v 4 (Γ) are two optical modes that form the E 2g irrep of the point group D 6h , and they have the same frequency ω 3 (Γ) = ω 4 (Γ) = ω E2g (Γ). For F τ i (K, -K), we care about the phonon modes at q = -K -K = -2K (note that -2K and K are related by a reciprocal lattice vector), which have eigenvectors where 2 and E ′ are irreps of D 3h point group that leaves K invariant up to reciprocal lattice vectors. Here we only consider the phonon modes with in-plane ion motions, since (i) the EPC is zero for the out-of-plane modes (Eq. (F25)), and (ii) the out-of-plane modes are decoupled from the in-plane modes in the phonon Hamiltonian owing to m z symmetry. By substituting Eq. (F108), Eq. (F109) and Eq. (F111) into Eq. (F106), we arrive at Eq. (F112) clearly shows that only the optical phonon at Γ and the A ′ 1 phonon at K have nonzero contribution to Then, we have As a result, we arrive at the following approximated expression of ω 2 for graphene in the (μ -ε 0 ) → 0 limit: which is independent of the EPC. The expression is approximated because we neglect the acoustic phonons in the denominator, which is justified by the fact that acoustic phonons only contribute about 17% of the total EPC constant for μ = -0.02eV suggested by the ab initio numerical calculations. The ab initio calculation shows that ħω E2g (Γ) = 0.1935eV and ħω A ′ 1 (K) = 0.1622eV. Then, according to the expression of ω 2 (Eq. (F115)) derived from our model for μ → 0, we have an approximate value ħ ⟨ω 2 ⟩ = 0.1758eV, which only has about 9% error for μ ∈ [-1eV, -0.1eV], according to the ab initio value of ω 2 show in Fig. In supplementary information F 3, we have discussed how the symmetry-rep method can separate the EPC Hamiltonian into a energetic and geometric parts, if we only include terms up to the nearest neighbors. In this part, we will show that the separation will work (with the hopping derivatives replaced by coefficients) if we include the NNN hoppings, but will fail if we include 3rd NN hoppings. We first include the NNN terms in the electron Hamiltonian and the EPC Hamiltonian. The NNN hoppings have the form as t τ τ (C l 6 a 1 ) with a 1 the primitive lattice vector in Eq. (F2) and l = 0, 1, ..., 5. By using the symmetry properties of the hoppings Eq. (B67), Eq. (B69) and the symmetry rep Eq. (F5), we obtain ) for l=0,1,...,5 m z : no constraints T : t τ τ (C l 6 a 1 ) ∈ R for τ = τ A , τ B and l = 0, 1, ..., 5 h.c. : t τ τ (C l 6 a 1 ) = t * τ τ (-C l 6 a 1 ) for τ = τ A , τ B and l = 0, 1, ..., 5 , (F116) resulting in for τ = τ A , τ B and n = 0, 1, ..., 5. Then, the matrix h(k) in H el for graphene in momentum space (Eq. (F14)) becomes where δ j is defined in Eq. (F10). The bands and projection matrices still have the form in Eq. (F22) with which has a different d 0 (k) compared to Eq. (F23). Now we include the NNN terms in the EPC Hamiltonian. As shown in Eq. (D4), the EPC . The NNN terms in the EPC Hamiltonian are given by f τ τ ,β= /⊥ (C l 6 a 1 ) with l = 1, ..., 5. According to Eq. (D31), f τ τ , (C l 6 a 1 ) should have the same symmetry properties as t τ τ (C l 6 a 1 ) in Eq. (F116), resulting in On the other hand, Eq. (D31) also shows that the symmetry constraints of f τ τ ,⊥ (C l 6 a 1 ) differ by a minus sign for m y from those of t τ τ (C l 6 a 1 ) in Eq. (F116), leading to According to Eq. (F121), Hermiticity, T and C 6 together give f τ τ ,⊥ (C l 6 a 1 ) = γ′ for all τ and l. Combined with m y , we know γ′ = 0. Therefore, we know By substituting Eq. (F120) and Eq. (F122) into Eq. (D7), we obtain and thus f i (k) still has the form in Eq. (F34) but with the expression of f (k) in Eq. (F123). Now we identify the energetic and geometric parts of f i (k) in Eq. (F34). Same as supplementary information F 3, L ⊥ = 0 still holds. Since f ⊥ (k) = 0 still holds as shown in Eq. (F123), we still have ∆ f ⊥ = 0 in Eq. (D43). ∆f i (k) = 0 still holds in Eq. (D49) owing to f z (k) = 0 in Eq. (F25). Therefore, we still only need to care about f (k). According to Eq. (D34), we try to re-write f (k) in Eq. (F123) as where h(k) is the electron Hamiltonian in Eq. (F118). By comparing Eq. (F123) to Eq. (F118), γ0 in f (k) should still be zero, and then we obtain resulting in where according to Eq. (D50). To address the hopping derivatives, note that is proportional to t since d x (k) and d y (k) are proportional to t as shown by Eq. (F119), is proportional to t 1 according to Eq. (F119), and is proportional to t since d x (k) and d y (k) are proportional to t as shown by Eq. (F23). Then, we have where γ is defined in Eq. (F43), and As a result, we obtain where Thus, even with NNN terms, we can still split with the hopping derivatives replaced by coefficients in f E i (k) and f geo i (k). If we have 3rd NN hopping in addition to onsite and NN terms, then electron matrix Hamiltonian h(k) would become ) cannot be proportional to just t or t ′ . As a result, we cannot replace ∂ t by 1/t in Eq. (F41) and Eq. (F42), and we cannot derive Eq. (F45). In this part, we will briefly discuss the case of the magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG), and we will estimate the mean-field superconducting critical temperature of MATBG based on EPC and quantum geometry. For convenience, we will choose the unit system (unless specified otherwise) as where k θ = 4π 3a 2 sin( θ 2 ), ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, a is the lattice constant of graphene, v 0 is the Fermi velocity of the monolayer graphene, and θ is the twist angle. We will focus on the Bistritzer-MacDonald (BM) model where ψ † +,r,l = (ψ † +,r,l,A,↑ , ψ † +,r,l,A,↓ , ψ † +,r,l,B,↑ , ψ † +,r,l,B,↓ ) with l = t, b labelling the layer. Since we are considering the first chiral limit, there is only one term in the interlayer coupling T (r), which reads T (r) = j=1,2,3 T j e ir•q j , with q 1 = (0, 1) T , q 2 = (- 2 ) T , and σ x,y,z and s 0,x,y,z are Pauli matrices for sublattice and spin, respectively. The model in the -valley can be obtained by the TR symmetry. In the first chiral limit, the model has two exactly flat bands per spin per valley, and two flat bands in one valley and one spin has well-defined but different Chern numbers e Y = ±1. Therefore, we can use γ † k,e Y ,η,s to label the creation operators for the flat bands, where η = ± and s =↑, ↓ label the valley and spin, respectively. The expression of γ † k,e Y ,η,s is most straightforward to express in the topological heavy-fermion basis where the basis is and Γ 1 , Γ 2 and Γ 3 are irreps of D 3 group to indicate the symmetry properties of the c modes, and s 0,x,y,z are identity and Pauli matrices for spin. Here γ is the coupling between f and c, and v * is the velocity of the c modes. As a result, the expression of γ † k,e Y ,η,s in the η = + valley reads where b = γ/v ⋆ . The flat-band wavefunction in Eq. (F142) has FSM and the gap between the flat band and the remote bands are ∆E k = |k| 2 v 2 ⋆ + γ 2 . We only consider the inter-valley EPC, which is experimentally shown to be strong where N M is the number of moiré unit cells, k, k ′ are sumed over the Moiré BZ, Q l,η = {G M + η(-1) l q 1 }, (- Z are the moiré reciprocal lattice vectors with b M,1 = q 3 -q 1 and b M,2 = q 3 -q 2 , l = t, b for l = b, t, and the phonon creation operators correspond to Ref. where with N 0 the number of atoms in one moiré unit cell and ω A ′ 1 is the frequency of the A ′ 1 phonon at K/K ′ . To estimate the critical temperature, let us consider the inter-Chern pairing, for which the corresponding leading-order term of the interaction reads [88] where with N 0 is the number of the graphene unit cell in the moiré unit cell and γ in Eq. (F95). For 1.1 • twist angle, we estimate (Ref. where is the pairing order parameter, and i S labels the spin channel (one spin-singlet components or three spin-triplet components). Reducing to the inter-Chern channel, the linearized gap equation becomes To derive a lower bound for T c , we consider and then since T c corresponds to the largest eigenvalue of the matrix. As a result, we have For γ ≈ 100meV in the first chiral limit and v ⋆ ≈ v 0 , T gives an estimate of which is close to the experimental T c around 1 ∼ 2K Appendix G: Orbital-Selective FSM Before discussing MgB 2 , we first discuss the Orbital-selective FSM (OFSM), which will be useful for the discussion of MgB 2 . Recall that the conventional FSM has the following two equal expressions: where P n (k) is the projection matrix on the nth band of an generic electron matrix Hamiltonian h(k) in the basis Eq. (B14). If the nth electron band is degenerate in a region of the 1BZ, P n (k) would have rank more than 1 in that region. According to the definition, g n (k) must be a real symmetric positive semi-definite matrix. Often in realistic materials, g n (k) does not have zero eigenvalues, and thus is positive definite. That's why g n (k) is called a metric. The two ways of writing the FSM in Eq. (G1) inspire us to define the OFSM in two ways. For the first version of the OFSM, we are inspired by the first line of Eq. (G1), i.e., by OFSM is given by inserting matrix in the trace operation in Eq. (G2). The most general way of inserting matrix is the following where A, B are two matrices. In general, Since we care about metric in this work, let us consider the symmetric part of Q n (k, A, B), which reads Tr A∂ ki P n (k)B∂ kj P n (k) + (i ↔ j) . For generic matrices A and B, the symmetric g n (k, A, B) is not guaranteed to be real and positive semidefinite, and thus is not necessarily a metric. However, g n (k, A, B) can always be expressed as the linear combination of metrics, which will be the OFSM. To see this, we note that A = A 1 + iA 2 and B = B 1 + iB 2 , where A 1 , A 2 , B 1 and B 2 are Hermitian matrices. Then, [ We now use the spectral decomposition of Hermitian matrices, i.e., where ξ α X is the eigenvector of X with the eigenvalue a α X , and α X labels all the orthonormal eigenvectors of X. ξ α X corresponds to a linear combination of electron degrees of freedom in one unit cell including orbitals and spins. With Eq. (G6), g n (k, A, B) becomes (G7) Now we define where ξ α is a normalized vector that represents certain linear combination of the electronic degrees of freedom in one unit cell. Finally, we arrive at Therefore, we can see the general expression g n (k, A, B) can always be expressed as linear combinations of a set of g n,αα ′ (k). Now we show g n,αα ′ (k) in Eq. (G8) with fixed values of α, α ′ is real symmetric and positive semidefinite. According to Eq. (G8), it is obvious that g n,αα ′ (k) is symmetric. g n,αα ′ (k) is a positive semidefinite matrix since i,j Therefore, it is highly possible that g n,αα ′ (k) becomes real symmetric positive definite in realistic cases, and thus g n,αα ′ (k) can be called a metric. We call g n,αα ′ (k) the OFSM. If we sum OFSM over a complete set of all orthonormal combinations of the orbitals, we obtain the normal FSM in Eq. (B59): where α, α ′ are summed over complete sets of all orthonormal combinations of the electron degrees of freedom in one unit cell. The OFSM proposed in Ref. For the second version of the OFSM, we are inspired by the second line of Eq. (G1), i.e., by More directly, we are inspired by the term in the two-band λ geo shown in Eq. (A41), which contains a matrix insertion as where M is a generic matrix. Similar to the discussion on the version 1, we define M = M 1 + iM 2 with M 1 , M 2 Hermitian, and use the spectral decomposition to get where ξ α X is the eigenvector of X with the eigenvalue a α X for X = M 1 , M 2 . We can then define resulting in It means that Eq. (G14) (contained in Eq. (A41) in two-band λ geo ) must be linear combination of g n,α (k) defined in Eq. (G16). As g n,α (k) can be derived by replacing ξ α ′ ξ † α ′ in Eq. (G8) by P n (k), g n,α (k) must a real symmetric positivesemidefinite matrix for any fixed values of n and α. Since ξ α in Eq. (G16) again represents a certain combination of the electron degrees of freedom in one unit cell, we also call g n,α (k) a OFSM. Again, summing OFSM over a complete set of α restores the original FSM: Owing to the close relation between g n,α (k) in Eq. (G16) and λ geo shown in Eq. (A41), we will use Eq. (G16) in the following. MgB 2 has two B atoms at the 2c Wykoff position and one Mg at the 1b position per unit cell where a is the lattice constant in the x-y plane, and c is the lattice constant along z. According to the orbital projection in Ref. , 0) T a 3 = c(0, 0, 1) T . According to Eq. (B3) and Eq. (B5), the symmetry reps furnished by c † R+τ are determined by τ g , R τ ,g , U τ g τ g and U τ τ T , where g = C 6 , m y , m z . Specifically, we have and where the basis for U g and U T is In this work, we choose the following approximations for the electron hopping. MgB 2 can be viewed as stacking B layers and Mg layers alternatively along the z direction. Between two atoms of the same kind, the hopping occurs (i) only if the two atoms are in the same layer (B layer or Mg layer) and are nearest neighbors or (ii) only if the two atoms are in different layers and are separated by ±a 3 . (See Fig. meaning that we only consider t τ τ (0), t τ τ (±a 3 ), t τ B1τ B2 (δ j ), t τ B2τ B1 (-δ j ), t τ Mgτ Mg (C n 6 a 1 ) with n = 0, 1, 2, ..., 5, t τ B1 τ Mg (-δ j ± a 3 /2), t τ B2τ Mg (δ j ± a 3 /2), t τ Mgτ B1 (δ j ± a 3 /2), and t τ Mg τ B2 (-δ j ± a 3 /2), where δ j with j = 0, 1, 2 is defined in Eq. (F10) and a 1,2,3 are defined in Eq. (H3). In the following, we derive the form of those terms. By using Eq. (B67), Eq. (B69) and Eq. (H5), we obtain the symmetry properties of the onsite terms for B atoms: for t τ B1 τ B1 (0) and t τ B2τ B2 (0), which gives we obtain the symmetry properties of the onsite terms and NN hopping along z for Mg atoms: for t τ Mg τ Mg (0), which gives we obtain the symmetry properties of the NN hopping terms along z for B atoms: for t τ B1 τ B1 (±a 3 ) and t τ B2 τ B2 (±a 3 ), which gives we obtain the symmetry properties of the NN hopping terms in x -y plane for B atoms: for t τ B1τ B2 (δ j ) and t τ B2τ B1 (-δ j ), which gives we obtain the symmetry properties of the NN hopping terms in the x -y plane for Mg atoms: for t τ Mg τ Mg (C n 6 a 1 ), which gives we obtain the symmetry properties of the NN hopping terms from a Mg atom to a B atom: for t τ B1 τ Mg (-δ j ± a 3 /2), t τ B2 τ Mg (δ j ± a 3 /2), t τ Mg τ B1 (δ j ± a 3 /2), and t τ Mg τ B2 (-δ j ± a 3 /2), which gives In sum, we have 17 real parameters for the electron Hamiltonian: By substituting Eq. (H9), Eq. (H11), Eq. (H13), Eq. (H15), Eq. (H17) and Eq. (H19) into Eq. (B22), we arrive at H el for MgB 2 in momentum space: where and δ j is defined in Eq. (F10). Second, the form of H B,pz el in Eq. (H21) reads where and We note that Eq. (H25) was used in Ref. where where and a 1,2,3 are defined in Eq. (H3). Fifth, the form of H Mg-B el in Eq. (H21) reads δ j is defined in Eq. (F10), and a 1,2,3 are defined in Eq. (H3). We plot the band structure of Eq. (H21) as the blue line in Fig. Furthermore, according to the orbital projection in Ref. and plot the band structure in Fig. We will always use the simplified model in Eq. (H35) instead of the full model in Eq. (H21). Since H B,pz el is nothing but the graphene model Eq. (F15) with an extra dispersion along k z , the nodal lines are just the graphene Dirac cones dispersing along k z . Specifically, by expanding Eq. (H25) around ±K, the effective Hamiltonian around the nodal lines reads Therefore, the nodal lines they have P T -protected winding number W L = 1 if the small loop L is enclosing line K or line -K once, where W L is defined in Eq. (F18). We define W K = W L if the small loop L is enclosing line K once, and define disconnected close loops that enclose line K or line -K when k z is close to the values where the nodal lines intersect the Fermi level. More concretely, E pz,0 + 2t pz,z cos(k z c) = 0 in Eq. (H38) happens at k z c = ±π/2 based on the parameter values in Eq. (H34). So the Fermi surface around the K -H and its TR partner should be like Dirac cones at k z c = ±π/2, as shown in Fig. Besides line ±K from the p z orbitals (Eq. (H38)), we now discuss topological properties of the electron wavefunctions (different from the nodal lines) of the sp x p y orbitals. Let us consider the k z = 0 plane, on which momenta are invariant under m z . Then, we can split the states with k z = 0 into two subspaces: m z -even and m z -odd; in our model, the two subspaces contain different numbers of bands. For the tight-binding model without Mg (Eq. (H35)), the m z -even subspace at k z = 0 is governed by H B,spxpy el , while the m z -odd subspace at k z = 0 is governed by H B,pz el In the following, we focus on the m z -even subspace at k z = 0, and thus we will use H B,spxpy el . Nevertheless, our topological discussion will be valid even if we include the Mg atoms, since (i) the m z -even subspace at k z = 0 is well-defined after including Mg and (ii) including Mg atoms does not affect the band gap (in Fig. As shown in Fig. . The symmetry reps of the isolated set of three bands are where the symmetry reps are labelled according to the Bilbao Crystallographic Server means its states are even under m z . By comparing to the symmetry reps of the elementary band representations (EBR) of P 6/mmm in Bilbao Crystallographic Server, we can see Iso-3 m + z kz=0 has the same symmetry irreps as k z = 0 part of the EBR A 1g @3f. We use Wannier90 which indicates its nontrivial topology. Since Iso-3 m + z kz=0 is an atomic limit, the nontrivial topology of Sub-2 m + z kz=0 is fragile (H41) We note that the states in A 1g @1a or Sub-2 m + z kz=0 may not be energy eigenstates, as the bands of Iso-3 m + z kz=0 are connected. As an illustration, we show the the overlap between Sub-2 m + z kz=0 with the energy eigenstates in Fig. The nontrivial topology of the rank-2 set of bands can also be seen from the Wilson loop. In Fig. The band inversion can also be captured by an effective model under the basis of (A 1g ⊕E 1u )@1a and (B 1u ⊕E 2g )@1a, which is not the atomic basis in Eq. (B14). Explicitly, we use a 6 × 6 unitary matrix R(k ) to label the Bloch vectors (B 1u ⊕ E 2g )@1a and (A 1g ⊕ E 1u )@1a, where the first three columns of R(k ) correspond to (B 1u ⊕ E 2g )@1a and the last three columns of R(k ) correspond to (A 1g ⊕ E 1u )@1a. Since (B 1u ⊕ E 2g )@1a and (A 1g ⊕ E 1u )@1a are equivalent to EBRs, R(k) is smooth. Then, we get a new basis c † k ,B,spxpy by transforming the basis c † k,B,spxpy at k z = 0 of H B,spxpy el in Eq. (H22): and the symmetry representation of furnished by c † k reads We can then transforms the matrix Hamiltonian at . Therefore, the band inversion can be seen by expanding h(k ) to the second order in k and project out c † k ,1 and c † k ,4 via second-order perturbation theory, leading to a 4 × 4 effective matrix Hamiltonian that reads The discussion on the effective Euler number relies on the transformed basis c † k which is not the atomic basis in Eq. (B14) (or the linear combination of them with k-independent coefficients). However, the discussion on EPC uses the atomic basis, and thus it is better to connect the effective Euler number to the quantities in the atomic basis (or the linear combination of them with k-independent coefficients). To do so, we first note that the effective Euler number must equal to the difference between the Euler numbers of Sub-2 m + z kz=0 and the E 1u @1a, since (i) the two states only differ from each other around Γ point according to Fig. where N -N E1u@1a is calculated in the atomic basis. N -N E1u@1a can be understood from an effective model with the basis being the linear combination of the atomic basis with k-independent coefficients. Explicitly, we construct an effective model around Γ-A for only the p x /p y orbitals on B atoms, since the states near Fermi level around Γ are mainly from the p x /p y orbitals on B atoms according to Ref. The symmetry reps in the basis Eq. (H46) read where we replace m z by the inversion symmetry P = C 3 6 m z . We project the sp x p y Hamiltonian Eq. (H35) to c † k,ef f , and expand the resultant projected model to the first order in k , resulting in the following effective matrix Hamiltonian: where The eigenvalues of Eq. ( where |d(k , and E ef f,n (k) is doubly degenerate. The projection matrices for E ef f,n (k) read With the parameter values in Eq. ( Clearly, the eigenvectors for E ef f,1 (k) around Γ-A (U 1,1 (k ) and U 1,2 (k )) do not depend on the momentum along k z to first order in k . With all of these preparation, we now discuss how to understand |N -N E1u@1a | in Eq. (H45) from the effective model h ef f (k) in Eq. (H48). According to the form of d (Eq. (H49)) in h ef f (k), d(k ) must have nonzero winding number along any loop L around Γ unless fine tuned, i.e., where The nonzero winding number of d(k ) in Eq. (H49) must equal to the difference between the Euler numbers of Sub-2 m + z kz=0 and E 1u @1a, as discussed in the following. According to Eq. (H36), we have m < 0. We first show that if the mass m in Eq. (H48) hypothetically changes sign, the Euler number of Sub-2 kz=0 by an odd number where we used Eq. (H55). Combined with the fact that the hypothetical sign flipping of m would turn Sub-2 m + z kz=0 in the space of the lowest three bands of H B,spxpy el into E 1u @1a, we arrive at We emphasize that the validity of Eq. (H58) relies on the existence of band inversion. If the band is not inverted (i.e., is just E 1u @1a, and we have ∆N = |N -N E1u@1a | = 0, while W d = 1. In this case, we would have W d > ∆N = |N -N E1u@1a |. Therefore, for both m > 0 and m < 0, we always have In the study of EPC, we will use the effective model h ef f (k) in Eq. (H48). Since we care about the winding number of d(k ), we will always keep the label d(k ) instead of directly using its explicit form Eq. (H49) in order to keep track of the winding number of d(k ), unless specified otherwise. Specifically, unless specified otherwise, we keep d(k ) and only use two properties of d(k ): (i) d(k ) is linear in k and (ii) d(k ) has winding number being 1 as shown in Eq. (H54). We will use Eq. (H57) to derive the topological contribution to the EPC constant in supplementary information H 6. From Eq. (H50) for the effective model in Eq. (H48), we can see the momentum dependence of the Hamiltonian near Γ-A for p x p y only comes from two hopping terms: t 3 and t B,pxpy,z in Eq. (H35). In particular, only t 3 accounts for the geometric properties of the Bloch states in Eq. (H48) to first order in |k a|. To understand this, we recall that as shown in Eq. (H24), there are only four parameters that are completely in the p x p y subspace: namely the onsite E B,pxpy,0 , the a 3 hopping t B,pxpy,z , and two hoppings t 2 and t 3 among p x p y orbitals on NN hopping. In the Bloch Hamiltonian, any hopping term is the symmetry-invariant combination of the momentum functions and the matrices; nevertheless, the momentum functions of a hopping term can form a high-dimensional irrep of the symmetry group. The momentum functions for E B,pxpy,0 , t B,pxpy,z and t B,pxpy,z and t 2 are all C 3 -invariant, and they cannot have any O(|k a|) term. Specifically, the momentum function for the on-site term E B,pxpy,0 is constant, and the momentum function for t B,pxpy,z only depends on k z . Moreover, since t 2 is equal hopping for p x and p y , its matrix is invariant under C 3 , and thus its momentum function is C 3 -invariant. Therefore, only t 3 , which is the difference between the hopping for p x and p y along y, can appear in the off-diagonal part of Eq. (H48) at first order in |k a|. This fact is very important for the discussion of the EPC in supplementary information H 6. In this part, we discuss the form of the EPC Hamiltonian. As mentioned in Eq. (H35), neglecting Mg atoms has little effect on the electron states near the Fermi level. For the EPC Hamiltonian, we adopt the same approximation-we neglect the Mg components in the electron basis for the EPC Hamiltonian (Eq. (C10)). Under this approximation, the two-center approximation Eq. (C1) shows that the motions of Mg atoms do not affect the electron states, i.e., τ 1 , τ 2 in f τ 1τ 2,i (R 1 + τ 1 -R 2 -τ 2 ) only ranges over the two B atoms in one unit cell. The approximation is supported by the experimental observation that the isotope effect of Mg atoms is much smaller than that of the B atoms Besides neglecting Mg atoms, since the dominant phonons for EPC are around Γ-A (mainly E 2 phonons along Γ-A), those dominant phonons have small in-plane momenta. (We note that the K-phonons which are specially important in graphene are not special here anymore since the Fermi surfaces of p z are not always close to ±K.) However, the p z Fermi surfaces (around K-H and its TR-partner) have large in-plane momentum difference from the p x p y Fermi surface (around Γ-A), as shown in Fig. As discussed in supplementary information H 1 a, we only consider the NN terms for the in-plane (in x -y plane) hopping and the terms along ±a 3 for the out-of-plane (along z) hopping. We adopt the same approximation for the EPC Hamiltonian, i.e., f τ 1τ 2 ,i (∆r) is allowed to be nonzero only if (i) (∆r , where δ j is defined in Eq. (F10). For the in-plane ion motions, we only need to consider their effect on the in-plane hoppings, as discussed in the following. First, the a 3 -hopping among p x /p y orbitals is very small due to the small dispersion along Γ-A near the Fermi level in Fig. We further include the effect of the out-of-plane motions on the a 3 -hopping, since the out-of-plane motions can change the considerable a 3 -hopping among the p z orbital. Such consideration is just for completeness, since the out-of-plane motions only have sub-leading contributions to the EPC strength. We will not consider the effect of the out-of-plane motions on the in-plane hopping term, since we have already considered the effect of the in-plane motions on the in-plane hopping term, which is the major effect. As a result, we have the following approximation leaving only f τ 1τ 2 ,x (±δ j ), f τ 1τ 2,y (±δ j ) and f τ τ ,z (±a 3 ) allowed to be nonzero. In the following, we will transform the EPC f i to the momentum space. Let us consider effectively 2D, and thus we can use the methodology in supplementary information D to rewrite the form of the f τ 1τ 2,i=x,y (R 1 + τ 1 -R 2 -τ 2 ). Specifically, we can replace ∆R in Eq. (D4) by ∆R ∈ a 1 Z + a 2 Z, and obtain ∀i = x, y, where we have used Eq. (C9), k = (k x , k y , 0), and By further defining we eventually have where For the convenience of later discussion, we choose the basis for the matrix f β (k) to be with c † k,B,spxpy right below Eq. (H22) and c † k,B,pz defined right below Eq. (H25); then To further derive the expression of f τ 1 τ 2,β (k), we note that P 6/mmm of MgB 2 is compatible with 2D systems, and thus f τ 1τ 2,β (∆R + τ 1 -τ 2 ) should have the symmetry constraints specified in Eq. (D31). Then, f τ B1 τ B2 , (δ j ) and f τ B2 τ B1 , (-δ j ) should have the same expressions as t τ B1 τ B2 (δ j ) and t τ B2 τ B1 (-δ j ) in Eq. (H15), respectively, leading to with γ1 , γ2 , γ3 , γ4 and γ5 being real parameters. On the other hand, based on the z R,⊥ defined in Eq. (D20), we know z C6,⊥ = -z my,⊥ = z mz,⊥ = 1, and thus f τ B1 τ B2 ,⊥ (δ j ) and f τ B2 τ B1 ,⊥ (-δ j ) satisfies leading to with γ6 and γ7 being real parameters. Now we move to f τ τ ,z (±a 3 ). According to Eq. (C13), we have where and To derive the form of f ′ τ τ , (k z ), let us first specify the symmetry properties of f ′ τ τ , (wa 3 ) according to Eq. (C35). which means that f ′ τ τ , (wa 3 ) has the same symmetry constraints as t τ τ (wa 3 ) in Eq. (H12), resulting in for basis (s, p x , p y , p z ), where γ8 , γ9 , γ10 and γ11 are real parameters. As shown in Eq. (H34), the hopping between s and p z can be neglected along ±a 3 without changing the physics near the Fermi level much (Fig. where the basis is chosen to be with c † k,B,spxpy defined right below Eq. (H22) and c † k,B,pz defined right below Eq. (H25), In sum, f i (k) in Eq. (C19) has the following form where f (k ) is given in Eq. (H67), f ⊥ (k ) is given in Eq. (H70), and f ′ (k ) is given in Eq. (H76). According to Eq. (H67), Eq. (H70) and Eq. (H76), f i (k) is block-diagonal: where the basis is again with c † k,B,spxpy defined right below Eq. (H22) and c † k,B,pz defined right below Eq. (H25), and in the basis c † k,B,X for X ∈ {sp x p y , p z }, f ,X (k ) is given in Eq. (H67), f ⊥,X (k ) is given in Eq. (H70), and f ′ ,X (k z ) is given in Eq. (H76). The block-diagonal f i (k) mainly comes from three approximations: (i) we only keep the short-range terms for the EPC Hamiltonian, (ii) we only choose in-plane/out-of-plane motions to affect only in-plane/out-of-plane hoppings, and (iii) we choose s -p z coupling to be zero along z. Then, Eq. (C19) shows that F τ ,i (k 1 , k 2 ) is also block-dagonal in the basis: where and As the electron Hamiltonian in Eq. ( and define where are the electron density of states at the Fermi level for the p z and sp x p y blocks, respectively. Here π stands for the π bonding among the p z orbital since the π bonding mainly accounts for the p z electron states near the Fermi energy, and σ stands for the σ bonding among the p x p y orbitals since the σ-bonding mainly accounts for the p x p y electron states near the Fermi energy. With Eq. (H89), we split the total ⟨Γ⟩ in Eq. (B77) into two terms according to the two blocks: where D(μ) is the total electron density of states at the Fermi level. Eventually, we can define and have Clearly, under our approximations, λ does not have the cross contribution that involve both sp x p y and p z , consistent with Ref. In this part, we derive the analytical geometric and topological lower bounds of λ π in Eq. (H92). The derivation has a lot of similarity compared to that on graphene in supplementary information F. According to the discussion in supplementary information B 4, the key quantity that we will bound is ⟨Γ⟩ pz in Eq. (H92), where Γ pz np z mp z (k 1 , k 2 ) is defined in Eq. (H89) together with Eq. (H85) and Eq. (H83). To derive the geometric and topological lower bounds of ⟨Γ⟩ pz , we should first find the energetic and geometric parts of the EPC. In this part, we use the symmetry-rep method, while the GA will be used in the next part. To do so, let us first recall the electron matrix Hamiltonian of p z orbitals of B atoms, which reads as shown in Eq. (H25) with δ j defined in Eq. (F10). Compared to Eq. (F14), Eq. (H94) is nothing but the Hamiltonian of graphene with an extra k z dispersion. Then, similar to graphene, h pz (k) has the form where ε pz,0 (k z ) = t pz,z 2 cos(k z c), and As a result, the bands E pz,n (k) of h pz (k) and the corresponding projection matrices P pz,n (k) have the forms where τ z P pz,n (k )τ z = 1 -P pz,n (k ) can be chosen to hold even if ∆E pz (k ) = 0. We note that E 2D pz,n (k ), ∆E pz (k ) and P pz,n (k ) have the same forms as E n (k), ∆E(k ) and P n (k ) in Eq. (F22) for graphene, respectively. Now we are ready to specify the energetic and geometric parts of the EPC. Following the same spirit of supplementary information D, we have used the momentum derivative to carry the i index in f i (k) in terms of the momentum derivatives as shown in Eq. (H83), and we just need to reexpress f ,pz (k ), f ⊥,pz (k ) and f ′ ,pz (k z ). By comparing Eq. (H94) to Eq. (H67), Eq. (H70) and Eq. (H79), we have resulting in where we used Eq. (H97). As discussed in supplementary information D 3, the derivatives with respect to hopping parameters in Eq. (H98) is in general very hard to deal with. However, owing to the short-range nature of the electron Hamiltonian (Eq. (H94)), the momentum dependence of the electron Hamiltonian only comes from two hopping parameters, t pz,z and t pz , and they have different matrix forms. As a result, the derivatives with respect to hopping parameters in Eq. (H98) can eventually be converted to 1/t pz or 1/t pz,z . Explicitly, after incorporating the form of the electron Hamiltonian in Eq. (H94), the energetic and geometric parts of f i,pz (k) read where ∆E pz (k ) and ε pz,0 (k z ) are defined in Eq. (H97), and we heavily used Eq. (H97) and Eq. (H96). We note that and f E i=x,y,pz (k ) and f geo i=x,y,pz (k ) have the same forms as f E i=x,y (k ) and f geo i=x,y (k ) in Eq. (F44) for graphene, respectively, after replacing γ π, by γ. In this part, we will show that the energetic and geometric parts of the EPC in Eq. (H100) have exactly the same forms as those derived from the GA with extra constraints in Eq. (H97). Since we are now considering p z orbitals in a 3D system, they differ from s-like orbitals. We need to first study the form of the hopping function t(r) between any two p z orbitals separated by r in 3D. To do so, we use the idea of linear combinations of atomic orbitals proposed in Ref. where C θ labels the continuous rotation symmetry along the z axis. As a result, where r = (x, y, z). Then, since the dominant phonon modes are in-plane ion motions, we choose the GA for the in-plane directions: which leads to where Nevertheless, as shown in Eq. (H94), we only consider the ±a 3 hopping for B atoms in different layers. Thus, as a good approximation, we can replace γ(z 2 ) in Eq. (H108) by leading to Here c is the lattice constant along z. By following the derivation in supplementary information A, we know the electron Hamiltonian reads where With Eq. (H111), the EPC Hamiltonian reads where and i = x, y, z labels the spatial direction. As a result, we have where Eq. (H117) are the forms of the energetic and geometric parts of EPC derived from the GA Eq. (H107). Now we include the extra constraints of the electron bands and electron projection matrices in Eq. (H97). As a result, we have and which are the same as the energetic and geometric parts of the EPC in Eq. (H100). c. General Symmetry-Allowed Hopping Form: Consistent with Gaussian Approximation We now show that similar to the discussion on graphene in supplementary information F 4, even if we use generic symmetry-allowed hopping function t(r) instead of GA, we would give the same expression as the energetic and geometric parts of the EPC in Eq. (H100). Without GA, we should use the generic symmetry-allowed hopping form (instead of the last expression in Eq. (H107)), which reads where r = x 2 + y 2 . Then, ∇ r t(r) becomes where As shown in Eq. (H94), we only consider the NN hopping for B atoms in the same layer and the ±a 3 hopping for B atoms in different layers. Thus, as a good approximation, we can approximate Eq. (H121) as where Therefore, we have obtained exactly the same form of ∇ r t(r) in Eq. (H111) which is for GA, and by following the rest of the derivation for the GA, we would obtain the same expression as the energetic and geometric parts of the EPC in Eq. (H100). d. Geometric and Topological Lower Bounds of λπ Now we are ready to move to ⟨Γ⟩ pz . By substituting Eq. (H88) and Eq. (H85) into Eq. (C23), we obtain the following expression for ⟨Γ⟩ pz : where m B is the mass of the B atom. To further simplify Eq. (H125), we note that owing to the symmetry representation in Eq. (H5), we have where c † k,B,pz is defined in Eq. (H25). Then, combined with Eq. (C37), we have leading to Eq. (H129) for i = x, y is the same as Eq. (F55) for graphene. In addition, owing to the PT symmetry, the matrix Hamiltonian for p z in Eq. (H94) only has two Pauli matrices besides the identity part; as a result, we have another simplification similar to Eq. (F56), which reads Substitute Eq. (H129) and Eq. (H130) into Eq. (H125), we arrive at Based on Eq. (H100), we can split ⟨Γ⟩ pz into three terms where Tr Similar to Eq. (F62) for graphene, we have k ) has the same form as Tr f E i, (k)P n (k)f geo i (k) in Eq. (F58) for graphene and for i = x, y. For E -E part, we have i=x,y and where V is the volume of the system, and F S pz,n is the FS surface given by the nth band. Compared to the expression of ⟨Γ⟩ E-E in graphene (supplementary information F 6), the major difference in ⟨Γ⟩ pz,E-E is the appearance of the k z -derivative of the energy dispersion. For geo -geo part, we have where ∆E 2 pz (k ) is the absolute difference between two p z bands defined in Eq. (H97), and Compared to the expression of ⟨Γ⟩ geo-geo in graphene (supplementary information F 6), the major difference in ⟨Γ⟩ pz,geo-geo is again the appearance of the k z -derivative of the energy dispersion in Eventually, by substituting Eq. (H134), Eq. (H137), Eq. (H138) into Eq. (H92), we arrive at where is the energetic contribution, and is the geometric contribution. Compared to the expression of λ E and λ geo in graphene (Eq. (F71)), the major change in λ π,E is the appearance of the γ π,z term that involves the k z -derivative of the energy dispersion, while the form of λ π,geo does not change much. Similar to Eq. (F75), we have where with d pz,x (k ) -id pz,y (k ) defined in Eq. (H96). Then, where F S 2D,kz pz,n is the intersection between F S pz,n and the fixed-k z plane, and the first inequality is derived in a similar way to Eq. (F76) by using the Hölder's inequality in Eq. (F77). According to Eq. (F18) and Eq. (H94), if F S 2D,kz pz,n consists of two disconnected TR-related loops with each loop enclosing one nodal line in Eq. (H37), where W ±K are the winding numbers of the nodal lines Eq. (H37). Suppose F S 2D,kz pz,n consists of two disconnected TR-related loops with each loop enclosing one nodal line in Eq. (H37) if and only if k z ∈ S n . We can then label the length of S n by |S n |, and have Eventually, we can can define which satisfies Numerical calculations of λ π,E , λ π,geo and λ π,topo are in supplementary information H 7. 4. pxpy-Gaussian Approximation: Analytical Geometric and Topological Contributions to λσ In this part, we derive the energetic and geometric contributions to λ σ from the GA. We will only consider p x and p y orbitals, since we know the electron states near the Fermi level around Γ-A mainly originates from the p x and p y orbitals. Therefore, we consider a 2 × 2 hopping matrix function t(r), whose basis are (p x , p y ) of B atoms. Specifically, t α1α2 (r) labels the hopping from the α 1 orbital at r 1 to the α 2 orbital at r 1 + r, where α 1 , α 2 takes values of p x and p y orbitals. From the hopping function, the electron matrix Hamiltonian reads where the basis is With only p x and p y orbitals, the EPC F τ i,pxpy (general definition is in Eq. (B40)) reads where and Now we introduce the GA. Similar to supplementary information H 3 b, we use the idea of the linear combinations of atomic orbitals to derive the form of the hopping function t(r). Since p x and p y orbitals do not form a rep of O(3), we again consider O(2) and m z symmetries for t(r). Then, O(2) and m z symmetries gives where Combined with the Hermitian condition that t † (r) = t(-r), we arrive at where where pp 1 and pp 2 have the meaning of (ppπ + ppσ)/2 and (ppπ -ppσ)/2 bonding, respectively, t(0, -x 2 + y 2 , |z|) is along y since two B atoms in our chosen unit cell are on the y axis, ppπ and ppσ are respectively the π bonding and σ bonding among p orbitals defined in Ref. Based on Eq. (H159), we use the Gaussian function for the hopping decay in the x -y plane owing to the fact that the dominant phonons originate from the in-plane ion motions, and introduce the following expression for the hopping function: where the prefactor x 2 + y 2 in pp 2 ( x 2 + y 2 , |z|) are included to makes sure t(r) is smooth, and F (z 2 ) is the decay function along z. We note that we cannot choose F (z 2 ) to be Gaussian, because t 2 = pp 1 (a/ √ 3, 0) and t B,pxpy,z = pp 1 (0, c) have different sign according to Eq. (H36). Next we derive ∇ r t(r). To do so, first we note that where Combined with the fact that we arrive at From Eq. (H165), now we can derive f i,pxpy (k), which reads where In Eq. (H166), the ∂ ki h pxpy (k) term comes from the Gaussian factor of the hopping in Eq. (H159), while f z,pxpy (k) and ∆f i,pxpy (k) do not. As the final step of the in-plane GA, we need to neglect ∆f i,pxpy (k). Next we will show that (i) under the short-ranged hopping approximation, f z,pxpy (k) will have the ∂ kz h pxpy (k) form, and (ii) if we further adopt small |k | approximation, ∆f i,pxpy (k) is negligible. As discussed in supplementary information H 1 a, the short-ranged hopping approximation works well for electron states near the Fermi energy in MgB 2 . Explicitly, we only need to consider hopping among B atoms along in-plane ±δ j in Eq. (F10) and out-of-plane ±a 3 (Fig. Let us discuss f z,pxpy (k) first. From the expression of f z,pxpy (k) in Eq. (H168), f z,pxpy (k) cannot have contribution from ±δ j , since ±δ j have zero z components. So f z,pxpy (k) only has contribution from ±a 3 = ±(0, 0, c). As a result, we can safely replace γ(z 2 ) in Eq. (H168) by γ(c 2 ), and obtain where Now we discuss ∆f i,pxpy (k) first. According to the form of the hopping function in Eq. (H157) and Eq. (H159), [t(r), σ y ] and t(r) -σ y t(r)σ y approach zero as x 2 + y 2 , when x 2 + y 2 limits to zero. Then, we have lim meaning that ∆f i,pxpy (k) cannot have contribution from ±a 3 . So the only contribution to Eq. (H169) comes from the in-plane ±δ j hopping terms. Since ±δ j all give x 2 + y 2 = a 2 /3, we can safely replace the 1 x 2 +y 2 factor in Eq. (H169) by 3/a 2 , resulting in where h pxpy (k) is defined in Eq. (H150), and h pxpy (k) τ 1τ 2 is the τ 1 τ 2 block (2 × 2) of h pxpy (k). In the matrix form, we have where τ 0 is the identity matrix in the sublattice subspace. Now we adopt the small |k | approximation. As discussed in supplementary information H 1 a, the Fermi surfaces of the σ-binding electron states are around Γ-A, which have small |k |. Then, we consider h pxpy (k) to first order in k , which is related to the effective Hamiltonian h ef f (k) in Eq. (H48) by a basis transformation R ef f . (The reason for us to use different basis for h pxpy (k) and h ef f (k) is that the atomic basis (Eq. (H151)) for h pxpy (k) is convenient for the study of EPC since EPC cares about atomic motions, while the parity-eigenbasis (Eq. (H46)) for h ef f (k) is convenient for band topology and band geometry since the parity-eigenbasis are energy eigenstates for k = 0.) Explicitly, under the first-order |k | perturbation, we have where h ef f (k) is in Eq. (H48), and c † pxpy,k R ef f = c † ef f,k with c † pxpy,k in Eq. (H151) and c † ef f,k in Eq. (H46). Then, ∆f i,pxpy (k) in Eq. (H174) becomes Therefore, under the short-range hopping and small |k | approximation, ∆f i,pxpy (k) in Eq. (H166) can be neglected owing to the form of the GA that we choose (Eq. (H160)). Combined with Eq. (H170), we arrive at where γ i=x,y is in Eq. (H167), γ σ,z is in Eq. (H171), R ef f is in Eq. (H176), and h ef f (k) is in Eq. (H48). We now show that the GA in Eq. (H160) reproduces exactly the electron and EPC Hamiltonian under the shortranged hopping and small-|k | approximations. Specifically, the parameters in the electron and EPC Hamiltonian should be related to the parameters in the GA Eq. (H160), and the question is whether Eq. (H160) imposes any extra constraints on the hopping after adopting the short-ranged-hopping and small-|k | approximations. In Eq. (H48), there are three independent parameters besides the global energy shift: t B,pxpy,z , m, v. They are related to the parameters in Eq. (H160) by On the other hand, for EPC, the GA gives By projecting the EPC f i,spxpy (k) in Eq. (H83) to the basis Eq. (H46) and by only considering the zeroth order of k , we obtain Since γ σ, , γ σ,z , F (c 2 ), F (0), t ′ 0 are independent parameters, the GA Eq. (H160) does not impose any extra constraints on the Hamiltonian and EPC after adopting the short-ranged-hopping and small-|k | approximations. Therefore, the GA Eq. (H160) is exact after adopting the short-ranged-hopping and small-|k | approximations, meaning that the electron Hamiltonian and EPC can always be precisely reproduced by GA after adopting the short-ranged-hopping and small-|k | approximations. From Eq. (H182), we have the following relations: and Based on the form of f i,ef f (k) in Eq. (H178), we can define the energetic and geometric parts of f i,ef f (k), which read where E ef f,n (k) are the doubly degenerate bands in Eq. (H51), and P ef f,n (k) are the projection matrices in Eq. (H52). To define the energetic and geometric contributions to λ, let us first look at the expression of ⟨Γ⟩ spxpy in Eq. (H89) under the Gaussian, short-ranged-hopping and small-|k | approximation with basis of h ef f (k) in Eq. (H46). Specifically, under the Gaussian, short-ranged-hopping and small-|k | approximation, we have where with the factor 2 comes from the double degeneracy, and Then, we have resulting in where label = E -E, E -geo, geo -geo. Finally, we arrive at where and Dσ(μ) D(μ) represents the portion of the electron DOS at the Fermi level for sp x p y orbitals. As shown in Eq. (H180), the EPC coupling f i,ef f (k) does not depend on k . On the other hand, f E i,ef f (k) and f geo i,ef f (k) defined in Eq. (H185) have k dependence, since the expression of the energy bands (Eq. (H51)) and the projection matrix (Eq. (H52)) involves infinite order of k . Nevertheless, the |k |-independent f i,ef f (k) means that f E/geo i,ef f (k) as well as Γ ef f,E-E/E-geo/geo-geo 11 (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. (H191) are only reliable to zeroth order in k , since the high-order-k correction of f i,ef f (k) would change the higher-order-k terms in f In the following, we may use the full expression of f E i,ef f (k) and f geo i,ef f (k) in Eq. (H185) to derive Γ ef f,E-E/E-geo/geo-geo 11 (k 1 , k 2 ) as intermediate steps. But eventually, we will only keep the energetic and geometric contributions to λ σ from the zeroth-order-|k | part of Γ ef f,E-E/E-geo/geo-geo 11 To address Γ ef f,E-E 11 , we first note that according to the expression of χ ef f in Eq. (H190) and P ef f,n (k ) in Eq. (H52). The simple reason for Eq. (H195) is that χ ef f anti-commutes with the matrix part of h ef f (k) in Eq. (H48). Then, we have Combined with from Eq. (H195) and we further obtain where as shown in Eq. (H51) is independent of k . As a result, by only keeping the zerothorder-|k where we used for the second equality, which is derived from both C 3 and m z symmetries. Eventually, we have and For Γ ef f,E-geo , we have Combined with we arrive at The results stay the same if we only keep the zeroth-order-|k | term. Now we discuss λ σ,geo . Since f geo i,ef f in Eq. (H185) is nonzero only for i = x, y, the contribution to λ σ,geo comes from the in-plane motions of B atoms. In fact, to the zeroth-order of k , the in-plane motions of B atoms only contribute to is zero as shown in Eq. (H205). In Γ ef f,geo-geo 11 in Eq. (H191), χ ef f + and χ ef f correspond to the same and opposite motions of two NN B atoms, respectively, according to Eq. (H190) and the meaning of χ τ shown in Eq. (C17). Then, let us split Γ ef f,geo-geo 11 into two parts: where corresponds to the contribution from the same motions of two NN B atoms, and corresponds to the contribution from the opposite motions of two NN B atoms. Recall that the dominant phonons to the EPC constant λ are the E 2 phonons along Γ-A (enhanced to E 2g at Γ and A), which originate from the opposite in-plane motions of NN B atoms. Therefore, for small |k |, we should expect that Γ ef f,geo-geo (k 1 , k 2 ) must be small while Γ ef f,geo-geo 11,-(k 1 , k 2 ) is large. Indeed, we will show that to zeroth order in |k |, Γ ef f,geo-geo (H211) So we can neglect Γ ef f,geo-geo (k 1 , k 2 ). Now we discuss Γ ef f,geo-geo 11,-. From Eq. (H210), we have where We separate Γ ef f,geo-geo 11,- ) is always non-negative and provides an upper bound of Y (k 1 , k 2 ). Specifically, non-negative Z(k 1 , k 2 ) is given by where k) in Eq. (H53), and we have used given by Eq. (H185). Then, we have where we have used Eq. (H215) for the last equality. Therefore, we arrive at where Z(k 1 , k 2 ) is defined in Eq. (H285). Now we show that to zeroth order in |k |, the upper bound in Eq. (H217) would saturate. First, note that where Then, combined with Eq. (H195), we know χ ef f would anti-commute with f geo i,ef f (k): As a result, we know Z(k 1 , k 2 ) -Y (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. (H216) is zero to zeroth order in |k |: Combined with Eq. (H212), we know that the upper bound in Eq. (H217) is saturated to zeroth order in |k |, leading to . From Eq. (H218) and Eq. (H213), we have meaning that Since owing to m < 0 according to Eq. (H50) and Eq. (H36), P ef f,2 (0) is the projection matrix to the parity-odd combination of p x /p y orbitals according to the basis in Eq. (H46). Then, we have σ, i=x,y α∈{(px,-),(py,-)} where is the OFSM according to the definition in Eq. (G16), α ∈ {(p x , -), (p y , -)}, and σ, i=x,y α∈{(px,-),(py,-)} and where γ σ, is defined in Eq. (H184). As shown in supplementary information H 7, Eq. (H231) is nonzero, meaning that the upper bound 2Z(k 1 , k 2 )| |k 1, |=|k 2, |=0 is non-vanishing. In the derivation of Eq. (H231), we have used Z(k 1 , k 2 ) to approximate Y (k 1 , k 2 ) since they are the same zero momenta (Eq. (H221)), where Z(k 1 , k 2 ) and Y (k 1 , k 2 ) are defined in Eq. (H213). Eventually, the OFSM comes from the Z(k 1 , k 2 ) as shown in Eq. (H226). If we do not use Z(k 1 , k 2 ) to approximate Y (k 1 , k 2 ), then we would have a different geometric quantity that comes from Y (k 1 , k 2 ). Explicitly, Y (k 1 , k 2 ) can be simplified as where and Thus, resulting in and λ σ,geo = λ σ,geo,-,1 + λ σ,geo,-,2 , (H237) where and (H239) λ σ,geo,-,1 and λ σ,geo,-,2 have the same meaning as λ geo,1 and λ geo,2 in supplementary information A except that we now go beyond two bands and λ σ,geo,-,1 and λ σ,geo,-,2 are only in the χ ef f,-channel. Eq. (H237) would be the expression of λ σ,geo if we do not use Z(k 1 , k 2 ) to approximate Y (k 1 , k 2 ). Nevertheless, Eq. (H221) shows that i=x,y α∈{(px,-),(py,-)} which allows us to merge them in Eq. (H237) and restore Eq. (H231). In other words, λ σ,geo,-,1 and λ σ,geo,-,2 can be merged to 2λ σ,geo,-,1 , and thus we do not explicit use the complex vector field in Eq. (H233). Before moving onto the topological contribution, we note that by replacing χ ef f to χ ef f + in the derivation of Eq. (H217), we can also define the upper bound for Γ ef f,geo-geo where (k 1 , k 2 ) also saturates to its upper bound in Eq. (H241), but its upper bound vanishes. At last, we consider the topological term. First, we evaluate i=x,y α∈{(px,-),(py,-)} ∆E 2 ef f (0) [g ef f,1,α (0)] ii from the expression of g ef f,1,α (k ) in Eq. (H227) and the expression of ∆E 2 ef f (k ) in Eq. (H219). Specifically, i=x,y α∈{(px,-),(py,-)} Note that where d(k ) = |d(k )|(cos(θ k ), sin(θ k )). Then, combined with the expression of ⟨Γ⟩ spxpy,geo-geo in Eq. (H230), we arrive at where we have used the Hölder inequality (Eq. (F77)) for the last inequality. The Fermi surface of E ef f,1 (k) can be expressed as F S ef f,1 = ∪ kzc∈(-π,π] F S ef f,1,kz with F S ef f,1,kz is the intersection between F S ef f,1 and the fixed k z plane. Then, where we have used the fact that F S ef f,1,kz=0 is a closed loop of k that encloses Γ once, W d is the winding number in Eq. (H54), and the relation between W d and the effective Euler number ∆N is in Eq. (H58). As a result, we have and derived from Eq. (H194). By defining we eventually have We note that i=x,y α∈{(px,-),(py,-)} g ef f,1,α (0) itself in this case is not bounded from below, because i=x,y α∈{(px,-),(py,-)} relies on the ratio between v 2 and m 2 owing to the nonzero gap at Γ (which is |2m|) for the σ-bonding states, where we have used the explicit expression of d(k ) in Eq. (H49). For example, if the gap limits to infinity, we should not have any geometric effect of U ef f,1 (k). Nevertheless, the following quantity is bounded from below: where the expression of W d in Eq. (H54) is used. 5. pxpy General Symmetry-Allowed Hopping Form: Consistent with Gaussian Approximation In this part, we show that even if we use the general symmetry-allowed hopping form for p x p y orbitals, we would get the same energetic and geometric contributions to λ σ from the GA, under the same NN and small k approximation. We still consider a 2 × 2 hopping matrix function t(r), whose basis are (p x , p y ) of B atoms, and will still use O(2) and m z symmetries for t(r). The part of the derivations in supplementary information H 4 are valid here, and we will not repeat them. We will focus on the difference brought by the general symmetry-allowed t(r). The first difference brought by the general symmetry-allowed t(r) is that Eq. (H160) cannot be used, since Eq. (H160) introduces the GA. Instead, we should use with F 2 ( x 2 + y 2 , |z|) a smooth function. Then ∂ ri t(0, -r , |z|) (with r = x 2 + y 2 ) in Eq. (H165) becomes where and l = 1, 2. Then, ∂ ri t(r) becomes Since we only care about the NN hopping among the B atoms in one plane and the ±a 3 hopping among B atoms in different layers, we can approximate resulting in the following form of f i,pxpy (k) where ∆f i,pxpy (k) is in Eq. (H169). Now we adopt the linear k approximation for the electron Hamiltonian. Combined with the short-range hopping, Eq. (H177) show that ∆f i,pxpy (k) becomes zero. Moreover, we note that where the expression of the 4 × 4 matrix R ef f is in Eq. (H176). Combined with the fact that R ef f commutes with τ 0 σ y , we have It means that we can safely tune γ ,1 and γ z,2 in Eq. (H258) without changing f i,pxpy (k) under our approximation. Moreover, such tuning does not change f E i,pxpy (k) and f geo i,pxpy (k) to the leading order either, as f E i,pxpy (k) and f geo i,pxpy (k) come from i = z and i = x, y, respectively, to the leading order, because the dispersion is quadratic along x-y and the eigenstates of h pxpy (k) is independent of k z . Then, we choose γ ,1 = γ ,2 = γ and γ z,1 = γ z,2 = γ z in Eq. (H258), and get the same form of f i,pxpy (k) as Eq. (H178) derived from GA. As a result, the all the later energetic and geometric contributions to λ are the same as those derived from GA. In supplementary information H 4, we derive the analytical geometric and topological contributions to λ σ based on the GA with a 4-band p x p y model. In this part, we derive the analytical geometric and topological lower contributions to λ σ in Eq. (H92) from the 6-band sp x p y model with the symmetry-rep method, in order to check our results. We will show that the two methods give the same results. The key first step is again to specify the energetic and geometric parts of the EPC. Although MgB 2 is not strictly a 2D material, we can follow the same spirit of supplementary information D to identify the energetic and geometric parts of the EPC. It is mainly because (i) the symmetry group of MgB 2 is effectively 2D, (ii) f ,spxpy (k ) and f ⊥,spxpy (k ) only relies on the momentum components in the 2D plane (i.e., xy plane), and (iii) Eq. (H67) is generalizable to f ′ ,spxpy (k z ). Now we move on to the details. Since we have used the momentum derivative to the carry i index in f i,spxpy (k) in terms of the momentum derivatives as shown in Eq. (H83), and we just need to reexpress f ,spxpy (k ), f ⊥,spxpy (k ) and f ′ ,spxpy (k z ) by using the symmetryrep method. To do so, we need to first express h spxpy (k) in terms of ĥa (k) according to Eq. (D32): where h spxpy (k) and t 1,2,3,4 are in Eq. (H22), and We can explicitly verify that Then, by comparing h spxpy (k) in Eq. (H22) to Eq. (H67), we obtain where we have generalized Eq. (H67) to f ′ ,spxpy (k z ). On the other hand, f ⊥,spxpy (k ) is nonvanishing for MgB 2 , there are symmetries such as m y that has z my,⊥ = -1 according to Eq. (D20), and MgB 2 is TR invariant. Then, we should try to find Q l that satisfy Eq. (D44). According to Eq. (H5), the symmetry reps for the basis c † k,B,spxpy right below Eq. (H22) are with 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -i 0 0 0 0 i 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -i 0 0 0 0 i 0 Eq. (D44) is satisfied. Then, we have which leads to based on Eq. (H267) and Eq. (H262). It means that ∆ f (k) = 0 in Eq. (D43). The appearance of L y is consistent with the appearance of τ 0 σ y in Eq. (H174) derived from the GA. By combining Eq. (H265) and Eq. (H270), we arrive at where the basis is c † k,B,spxpy right below Eq. (H22), with χ spxpy τ defined in Eq. (H86). As a result, we have where and E spxpy,n (k) and P spxpy,n (k) are energies and projection matrices of h spxpy (k) satisfying h spxpy (k)P spxpy,n (k) = E spxpy,n (k)P spxpy,n (k). We note that we do not simply include f spxpy,z (k) (Eq. (H83)) in ∆f i (k) in Eq. (D49), since we have the momentum derivative along z now and thus can obtain the energetic and geometric parts of f spxpy,z (k) as shown in Eq. (H273). In this part, we will show different contributions to ⟨Γ⟩ spxpy in Eq. (H89) and λ σ in Eq. (H92). Let us first discuss Γ spxpy nm (k 1 , k 2 ) defined in Eq. (H88). First, Γ spxpy nm (k 1 , k 2 ) has the following expression according to Eq. (H88), Eq. (H85) and Eq. (H273): where Γ ) . The different contributions to λ σ are defined in Eq. (H193). Before moving on to deriving the expressions of λ σ,E , λ σ,E-geo and λ σ,geo , we rewrite ⟨Γ⟩ spxpy,geo-geo for the convenience of later discussion. Similar to the discussion in supplementary information H 4 d, we can split Γ spxpy,geo-geo nm (k 1 , k 2 ) into two parts: where Γ spxpy,geo-geo nm,δ where where Z nm,-(k 1 , k 2 ) is defined in Eq. (H285). Similar upper bound has been derived in Eq. (H217) for the four-band effective Hamiltonian Eq. (H48), but Eq. (H286) holds to all orders. We will discuss in supplementary information H 6 c that under the small k approximation, the upper bound in Eq. (H286) is nonzero and saturated and Γ To derive analytic expressions for λ σ,E , λ σ,E-geo and λ σ,geo , we should derive analytic expressions for f E i,spxpy (k) in Eq. (H274) and for f geo i,spxpy (k) in Eq. (H275). Since the Fermi surface of H B,spxpy el in Eq. (H22) is around Γ-A, k a should be small on the Fermi surface. Therefore, we will only explicitly derive the expressions for f E i,spxpy (k) and f geo i,spxpy (k) to zeroth order in |k a|. To do so, we only need the explicit forms of the energy bands E spxpy,n (k) and the projection matrices P spxpy,n (k) to first order in |k a| in f E i,spxpy (k) (Eq. (H274)) and in f geo i,spxpy (k) (Eq. (H275)). We emphasize that we will only use the first-order-|k a| approximation for the energy bands and projection matrices Γ spxpy,E-E nm (k 1 , k 2 ), Γ spxpy,geo-geo nm (k 1 , k 2 ) and Γ spxpy,E-geo nm (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. (H276), which contain f E i,spxpy (k) (Eq. (H274)), f geo i,spxpy (k) (Eq. (H275)). We do not need to (and will not) use the first-order-|k a| approximation for the energy bands and projection matrices in the other parts of λ σ (Eq. (H193)), unless specified otherwise. To derive the expressions of E spxpy,n (k) and P spxpy,n (k) to first order in |k a|, we can expand h spxpy (k) in Eq. (H22) to first order in |k |, resulting in where O(|k a| 2 ) include second-order and higher-order terms, the columns of U spxpy are eigenvectors of h spxpy (k = 0), and The meaning of d(k ) in Eq. (H289) is the same as that in Eq. (H48); the explicit expression of d(k ) is in Eq. (H49). As discussed in supplementary information H 1 c, we will keep d(k ) instead of directly writing out its explicit form in order to keep track of its winding number. The relation between the parameters in Eq. (H36) and those in the tight-binding model (Eq. (H287)) is Based on Eq. (H287), the energy dispersion reads As a result of Eq. (H291), we have which means that for Eq. (H273). We note that we always use E spxpy,n (k) to label the energy bands of the tight-binding model (Eq. (H22)), and this is why we include O(|k a| 2 ) in Eq. (H291 For projection matrices, from Eq. (H287) we obtain where The expressions of the projection matrices can be obtained from P spxpy,n (k) = U spxpy,n (k)U † spxpy,n (k). Again, we note that we always use U spxpy,n (k) and P spxpy,n (k) to respectively label the eigenvectors and projection matrices of the tight-binding model (Eq. (H22)), and this is why we include O(|k a| 2 ) in Eq. (H295). From the Eq. (H295), we obtain the following relations for the projection matrices, which read where 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 -1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 for Eq. (H273). With Eq. (H294), Eq. (H305) and Eq. (H297), we can write f E i,spxpy (k) and f geo i,spxpy (k) in Eq. (H273) as the following: where the expression of γ σ,z is in Eq. (H183). For f E i,spxpy (k) in Eq. (H306), we have converted ∂ t B,s,z to 1 t B,s,z and converted ∂ t B,px py ,z to 1 t B,px py ,z , which is enabled by the short-ranged nature of the electron Hamiltonian Eq. (H22) and the small-k approximation. Specifically, owing to the two approximations, the k z dependence of E s,δ (k z ) and E pxpy,δ (k z ) only relies on t B,s,z and t B,pxpy,z , respectively, and E s,δ (k z ) and E pxpy,δ (k z ) couple to different matrices, which enables the conversion. On the other hand, the derivatives with respect to hopping parameters still appear in f geo i,spxpy (k) (Eq. (H307)). To address this issue, recall that the states of Eq. (H22) near the Fermi level around Γ-A mainly originate from the p x p y orbitals of B atoms where U pxpy,± (k) are in Eq. (H296). Then, we consider U † pxpy f geo i,spxpy (k)U pxpy , which reads where we have used L y U pxpy = U pxpy U † pxpy L y U pxpy and U † pxpy L y = U † pxpy L y U pxpy U † pxpy for the first equality, the second equality comes from U † pxpy P s,δ (k)U pxpy = 0 and The third equality in Eq. (H309) is derived from and d(k ) only depends on t 3 according to Eq. (H49). So by projecting f geo i,spxpy (k) to the p x p y subspace, we have converted the derivatives with respect to hopping parameters to a scalar factor. The conversion relies on the fact that within the p x p y subspace, only one hopping parameter t 3 is responsible for the geometric properties of the wavefunction to first order in |k a|, as discussed in supplementary information H 1 c. To further simplify Eq. (H309), we note that owing to the explicit expression of d(k ) in Eq. (H49), Eq. (H311) leads to which holds because of the O(|k |) approximation that we made for the electron Hamiltonian. Then, we simplify Eq. (H309) into With the expression of γ σ, in Eq. (H184), we arrive at In principle, one can use the expression in the last line of Eq. (H309) for U † pxpy f geo i,spxpy (k)U pxpy instead of Eq. (H314), which might change the eventual expression of λ σ,geo ; but it cannot change the value of λ σ,geo due to Eq. (H312) under our approximations. Therefore, we will use Eq. (H314). In the following, we will discuss λ σ,E-geo , λ σ,E and λ σ,geo in Eq. (H193), one by one. As shown in Eq. (H306) and Eq. (H307), f E i,spxpy (k) only has i = z component and f geo i,spxpy (k) only has i = x, y components to zeroth order in |k a|. As a result, Γ spxpy,E-geo nm (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. (H278) would be of order O(|k 1, a|, |k 2, a|), meaning that where k F, is the largest value of |k | on the Fermi surfaces of the sp x p y orbitals. Eq. (H315) matches Eq. (H207) derived from the GA. e. λσ,E Now we discuss λ σ,E . Recall that E spxpy,n=2,3 (k) are cut by the Fermi energy μ = 0. Then, for Γ spxpy,E-E nm (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. (H277), we only need to consider n, m ∈ {2, 3}. Since we only care about Γ spxpy,E-E nm (k 1 , k 2 ) to zeroth order in k 1, and k 2, , we will need the following expressions where Now we try to simplify Eq. (H277). To do so, first note that according to Eq. (H306) and Eq. (H296). Combined with Eq. (H316), we are ready to deal with ⟨Γ⟩ spxpy,E-E in Eq. (H192) based on Eq. (H277): We note that we only expand Γ For the integration on the Fermi surfaces, we have (H321) for any F such that F (C 3 k) = F (k) and F (k + G) = F (k) with reciprocal lattice vector G, where F S spxpy,n is the C 3 -invariant Fermi surface given by E spxpy,n (k) = μ. We need F (k + G) = F (k) because we need to extend the domain of k to R 3 and then reduce back to 1BZ for the first equality in Eq. (H321), since the Fermi surface in 1BZ might be disconnected. Then, we obtained we can further simplify Eq. (H277): Eventually, combined with Eq. (H291) and Eq. (H193), we arrive at where the expression of γ σ,z is in Eq. (H183). Eq. (H326) matches Eq. (H203) derived from the GA, if we neglect the O(|k F, | 1 ) part and take E spxpy,2 (k) = E spxpy,3 (k) = E ef f,1 (k). Now we move onto ⟨Γ⟩ spxpy,geo-geo in Eq. (H282) and λ σ,geo in Eq. (H193). As shown in Eq. (H280), Γ where we have used the fact that f i=x/y,spxpy (k) is off-diagonal in the sub-lattice basis as shown in Eq. (H83) with Eq. (H67) and Eq. (H70). Then, we obtain Γ where we used Eq. (H314) for U † pxpy f geo i,spxpy (k 1 )U pxpy . With Eq. (H332), we now discuss ⟨Γ⟩ spxpy,geo-geo in Eq. (H192), which reads Tr χ spxpy - where U pxpy,+ (0) is in Eq. (H317), we have used Eq. (H316) for the third equality, and used Eq. (H321) for the fourth equality. Note that again, we only expand Γ derived from on Eq. (H272), Eq. (H301) and and Eq. (H317). Eq. (H334) matches Eq. (H231) derived from the GA if we neglect the O(k F, ) term and take E spxpy,2 (k) = E spxpy,3 (k) = E ef f,1 (k), since P pxpy,+/-(k) corresponds to P ef f,1/2 (k ) if projecting P pxpy,± (k) to the basis in Eq. (H46) according to Eq. (H301), Eq. (H300) and Eq. (H52). where we used the form of the projection matrix in Eq. (H316) and the expression of P ± in Eq. (H318). According to Eq. (H300) with Eq. (H302) and Eq. (H303), we have (Γ, Γ + (0, 0, kz)) in Eq. (H354) with parameter values in Eq. (H356). The horizontal axis is Γ + (0, 0, kz), which is the phonon momentum. (b) The black dots are the sum of Γ ab initio nm (K, K + (0, 0, kz)) over the two degenerate bands for the nodal line along K-H. The red line is n,m ħΓ pz nm (K, K + (0, 0, kz)) in Eq. (H353) with parameter values in Eq. (H356). The horizontal axis is K + (0, 0, kz), which is K plus the phonon momentum. (c) The Eliashberg function α 2 F (ω) in Eq. (B76) given by the ab initio calculation. The dashed line is at frequency of the E2g phonon at Γ, i.e., ħωE 2g (Γ) = 75.2meV. In this part, we perform numerical calculations with our model. To do so, we need to determine the values of γ parameters in the EPC Eq. (H80). However, according to the expression of the γ parameters in Eq. (H103), Eq. (H183) and Eq. (H184), we do not need to know the values of all γ. Explicitly, we only need to know the following γ parameters: γ5 , γ10 , γ9 , γ3 -γ7 , where γ5 and γ10 are for the λ π , and γ9 and γ3 -γ7 are for the λ σ . Compared to the calculation for graphene in supplementary information F, the ab initio calculation for MgB 2 is more complicated, and thus we cannot directly give the form of the gauge-dependent EPC F τ i (k 1 , k 2 ) for MgB 2 due to the random gauges in the numerical calculations. Instead, we will use the gauge-invariant Γ pz nm (k 1 , k 2 ) and Γ spxpy nm (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. (H88). Specifically, for the p z part, we sum over all p z bands for Γ pz nm (k 1 , k 2 ), and obtain where we used the form of Γ pz nm (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. (H88). For the sp x p y part, we only consider k 1 = Γ and k 2 along Γ-A, and n, m of Γ spxpy nm (Γ, Γ + (0, 0, k z )) are summed over the two degenerate bands (i.e., n, m ∈ {2, 3} as shown in Fig. n,m∈{2,3} Γ spxpy nm (Γ, Γ + (0, 0, k z )) in Eq. (H350) corresponds to the sum of Γ ab initio nm (Γ, Γ + (0, 0, k z )) over the two degenerate bands along Γ-A near the Fermi level, since they mainly originate from p x p y orbitals. We plot the ab initio data in Fig. where U pxpy,+ (0) is the basis for the parity-even combination of p x p y orbitals at Γ as shown in Eq. (H317). As a result, the more general forms of n,m Γ pz nm (K, K + (0, 0, k z )) and n,m∈{2,3} Γ given by the numerical calculation in Ref. u R+τ B2 = -(cos(φ), sin(φ), 0)εa u R+τ B1 = (cos(φ), sin(φ), 0)εa , (H364) where a is the in plane lattice constant and ε measures the distortion. We note that the distortion does not break the lattice translations. With this distortion (or the frozen phonon), the two-center EPC Hamiltonian becomes TR,i (cos(φ), sin(φ), 0) i 2εa + R,i,j (H369) As we can see, only the ( β 2 + β 3 ) matters for the two-center EPC at k = Γ, and only the ( β ′ 2 + β ′ 3 ) matters for the on-site EPC at k = Γ, under the Γ-E 2g frozen phonon. To specifically compare ( β 2 + β 3 ) to ( β ′ 2 + β ′ 3 ), we choose u R+τ B2 = (0, 1, 0)εa u R+τ B1 = (0, -1, 0)εa , (H370) which means φ = -π/2. Without the distortion, the electron Hamiltonian for p x and p y orbitals at Γ reads h pxpy (0) = E B,pxpy,0 + 2t B,pxpy,z + 3t 2 τ x σ 0 , (H371) according to Eq. (H22). Then, if only the two-center term matters, we have where the values before ":" are eigenvalues and the vectors after ":" are eigenvectors. On the other hand, if only the on-site term matters, we have h pxpy (0) + h on-site (0) = E B,pxpy,0 + 2t B,pxpy,z + 3t 2 τ x σ 0 -3( (H375) From Eq. (H373) and Eq. (H375), both the two-center and the on-site terms can open the gaps at the previously doubly degenerate energy level E B,pxpy,0 + 2t B,pxpy,z + 3t 2 and at the previously doubly degenerate energy level E B,pxpy,0 + 2t B,pxpy,z -3t 2 . Nevertheless, they open the gaps in different ways. Note that (1, 0, 1, 0)/ √ 2 and (1, 0, -1, 0)/ √ 2 are respectively the bonding and anti-bonding state of p x orbitals, and (0, 1, 0, 1)/ √ 2 and (0, 1, 0, -1)/ √ 2 are respectively the anti-bonding state and bonding state of p y orbitals. Then, Eq. (H373) suggests that the bonding and anti-bonding states of the same orbital would have opposite energy shifts for the two-center term, while Eq. (H375) suggests that the bonding and anti-bonding states of the same orbital would have same energy shifts for the on-site term. According to Fig. To more precisely compare the amplitude, we include the both distortions into the Hamiltonian at Γ and get h pxpy (0) + h two-center (0) + h on-site (0) = E B,pxpy,0 + 2t B,pxpy,z + τ x (3t 2 σ 0 -3( which gives Therefore, the effect of the on-site EPC term under the bond-stretching motion in Eq. (H370) contribution is negligible compared to the two-center EPC term, serving as a numerical evidence for the irrelevance of the on-site EPC term. By comparing Eq. (H360) to Eq. (H67) and Eq. (H69), we find that γ3 = -β 2 given by Eq. (H357), showing the consistency in the numerical results. ⟨ω 2 ⟩ Approximated by ωE 2g (Γ) In supplementary information H 7, we directly use the ab initio value of ω 2 for the calculation. In this part, we will show that ⟨ω 2 ⟩ can be well approximated by the frequency of the E 2g phonons at Γ, labelled by ω E2g (Γ). On the right-hand side of Eq. (I3), the first term denotes the interaction between the electron and the ions in the system. This interaction is commonly described using pseudopotentials The potential v(r) in Eq. ( Here ρ(r) is the electron density and e is the electric charge of an electron. The final term of Eq. (I3) is the exchangecorrelation potential. In general it is challenging to formalize this quantum mechanical electron-electron interaction, and there have been significant research efforts devoted to finding expressions for this interaction. The specific approximations that we make for the exchange-correlation potential will be specified in supplementary information I 4 and supplementary information I 5. Given the Kohn-Sham equation for a single electron in Eq. (I1), and the ingredients for the electronic potential generally defined in Eq. (I3), one can solve for the single particle states |ψ nk ⟩ in a self-consistent manner. The motion of atoms in solids is often, to a good approximation, describable within the Harmonic approximation. In this approximation, phonons can emerge as normal modes of vibration for the system. Analogous to electrons, these phonons can be labelled by their mode index l and wavevector q. Eigenvectors for phonons modes are given by diagonalizing the dynamical matrix D(q), which is defined in Eq. (B29) for the analytical study. For DFT calculation, it is more conventional to define the dynamical matrix D(q) as: where Φ is the interatomic force constant matrix that reads and recall that u R+τ ,i is the motion of the atom with equilibrium position R + τ along the direction i. The variable F i,R+τ represents the force felt by the atom with equilibrium position R + τ along the direction i. In general the interatomic force constant matrix can depend on two unit cells, R and R ′ , but in practice only the difference R -R ′ matters for our purposes, and we therefore take one of them zero. In examining Eq. (I6), the main ingredients involve either the total energy or the forces on each atom. DFT has been widely used to theoretically study phonons in materials, in part because both of these quantities are readily available. There have been two popular approaches for describing phonons in materials, both of which we employ in our work. The conceptually simpler approach is known as the "frozen-phonon" method, which relies on finite displacements to evaluate the elements of the interatomic force constant matrix given by Eq. (I6). Specifically, we can write the force derivative as a discrete derivative: In this approach, one can generate an interatomic force constant matrix Φ by perturbing each of the atoms of the unit cell in different directions and measuring the changes in the forces on the atoms of the system. Using Eq. (I5), one can also generate the dynamical matrix which can then be used to capture the phonon eigenvector and phonon frequencies for the system. Note that this approach requires a summation over unit cells R in Eq. (I5). Thus it is often important to include many unit cells such that all relevant interatomic interactions are captured and also so that the dynamical matrix can be described at different q-points. The "frozen-phonon" method is used by method I with Wannier interpolation for graphene as discussed in supplementary information I 4. An alternative approach to describing the phonons of the system is known as density functional perturbation theory (DFPT). A comprehensive review of this method can be found in Ref. where G nml (k 1 , k 2 ) is defined in Eq. (B46). Since G nml (k, k) = 0 for the acoustic phonons and the ion motions along z, we can sum l in Eq. (J2) over all phonons without changing γ EP C Γ,E2g , leading to where expression of Γ nm (k 1 , k 2 ) is in Eq. (B79). Since we choose a NN hopping electron model and we choose the energy of Dirac point to be zero, the electron part has chiral symmetry. Then, according to the convention in supplementary information F, E 2 (k) = -E 1 (k) ≥ 0, and thus δ E m (k) -E n (k)ħω E2g (Γ) is nonzero only for m = 2 and n = 1, leading to Let us consider the case where μ ∈ (- , ħω E 2g (Γ) 2 ), and focus on zero temperature. Then, the linewidth becomes The relation between γ EP C Γ,E2g and λ E is hidden in Γ 12 (k, k): Owing to the Hellmann-Feynman theorem, we know and thus As a result, the average linewidth of each E 2g phonons finally becomes where the integral is along the line for E 1 (k) = - . By comparing to λ E in Eq. (F71), we arrive at which, combined with the approximated analytical expression of ω 2 in Eq. (F115), results in Therefore, if we can measure the low-temperature average phonon linewidth of the E 2g phonons at Γ that is caused by EPC for μ ∈ - , , it, combined with the measured phonon frequencies, gives a direct measurement of the energetic contribution λ E at μ = -ħω E 2g (Γ) 2 . The low-temperature average phonon linewidth of the E 2g phonons at Γ that is caused by EPC is measurable in graphene. In graphene, the low-temperature average phonon linewidth of the E 2g phonons at Γ does not solely comes from EPC-the EPC contribution is about 85% according to Ref. where γ Γ,E2g is the total low-temperature average phonon linewidth of one of the E 2g phonons at Γ, and γ an Γ,E2g is the part that comes from anharmonicities. Now the question becomes how to separate γ EP C Γ,E2g from the total linewidth γ Γ,E2g . As shown in Eq. (J4), the zero-T γ EP C Γ,E2g has strong chemical potential dependence, i.e., γ EP C,T =0 Γ,E2g With this method, the Ramen measurement in Ref. where h is the Planck constant, c is the speed of light, and the error is considerable-about ±3cm -1 . Experimentally, ħω E2g (Γ) = 0.196eV (i.e., 1582cm -1 ) according to the measurement in graphene where is the optical absorption coefficient for photons with frequency ω in the unit system where 1/(4πε 0 ) = 1 Here we have used the expressions of λ geo and λ E below Eq. (F71). Known experiments observe A(ω) ≈ 2.3% for ħω > 0.5eV, which gives hc 2π 2 e 2 A(ω = 2|μ|/ħ) ≈ 1.0, which is consistent with Eq. (F92). We note that such test is for |μ| > ħω/2 > 0.25eV, while our proposal of measuring λ E is for μ ≈ -0.1eV. Ff one can measure A(ω) down to ħω = 0.1eV while measureing λ E and λ geo based on our proposals, these measurements would serve as a good test our theory, and relate the λgeo λ E in scattering experiments to the absorption coefficient A(ω) in the optical response. Besides graphene, it is possible to verify the relation between quantum geometry and the EPC strength in other systems. On the surface of the topological insulator Bi 2 Se 3 , the geometric properties of the Bloch states should vary along the Fermi surface, due to the hexagonal distortion 2 : λ π a. Symmetry-Rep Method: Energetic and Geometric parts of the EPC b. Gaussian Approximation: Energetic and Geometric parts of the EPC c. General Symmetry-Allowed Hopping Form: Consistent with Gaussian Approximation d. Geometric and Topological Lower Bounds of λ π 4. p x p y -Gaussian Approximation: Analytical Geometric and Topological Contributions to λ σ a. Short-range Hopping and Small |k | Approximation b. λ σ,E c. λ σ,E-geo d. λ σ,geo e. λ σ,topo 5. p x p y General Symmetry-Allowed Hopping Form: Consistent with Gaussian Approximation 6. Symmetry-Rep Method: Analytical Geometric and Topological Contributions to λ σ a. Symmetry-Rep Method: Energetic and Geometric parts of the EPC b. Contributions to λ σ c. Symmetry-Rep Method: Zeroth-Order |k a| Approximation For f i,spxpy (k) d. λ σ,E-geo e. λ σ,E f. λ σ,geo g. λ σ,topo 7. Numerical Calculations of Contributions to λ a. Numerical Evidence for the Irrelevance of On-Site EPC Terms for the σ-bond-stretching Appendix A: Gaussian Approximation: Geometric Contribution to the EPC Constant λ t Mg-B,1 = 0 , t Mg-B,2 = 0.5 , t Mg-B,3 = 0.9 , (H34) (k 1 , k 2 ). spxpy,geo-geo nm (k 1 , k 2 ) is split into two parts-Γ spxpy,geo-geo nm,± (k 1 , k 2 ) in Eq. (H281). In the following, we will show that Γ P spxpy,m (k 2 ) + (k 1 ↔ k 2 ) + O(|k 1, a|, |k 2, a|) m B i=x,y (E pxpy,+ (k 1,z ) -E pxpy,-(k 1,z )) 2 Symmetry properties of f τ 1 τ 2 ,β (∆R + τ 1 -τ 2) and f β (k) √ 3a 2 |. In Fig.5and Fig.6, we compare the EPC matrix elements from the ab initio calculation and from our model Eq. (F36) for phonon momentum = O(|k 1, |, |k 2, |) . (H221)