The newly discovered Ruddlesden-Popper bilayer La3Ni2O7 reaches an remarkable superconducting transition temperature Tc = 80 K under a pressure of above 14 GPa. Here we propose a minimal bilayer two-orbital model of the high-pressure phase of La3Ni2O7. Our model is constructed with the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 , 3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals by using Wannier downfolding of the density functional theory calculations, which captures the key ingredients of the material, such as band structure and Fermi surface topology. There are two electron pockets α, β and one hole pocket γ on the Fermi surface, in which the α, β pockets show mixing of two orbitals, while the γ-pocket is associated with Ni-d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital. The random phase approximation spin susceptibility reveals a magnetic enhancement associating to the d 3z 2 -r 2 state. A higher energy model with O-p orbitals is also provided for further study. shows a remarkable high superconducting transition temperature of T c = 80 K with an applied pressure of over 14 GPa In this paper, we propose a bilayer two-orbital model for the high-pressure phase of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . Our models is constructed based on Wannier downfolding of the DFT band structure, which capture key feature of electronic structure at E F and could serve as a starting for further strongly correlated calculations and investigation on the unconventional pairing symmetry. Electronic model.-To elucidate the electronic structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under the high-pressure phase (29.5 Gpa), a primitive unit cell with two-Ni atoms is adopted. We fix the experimentally refined lattice parameters With the Wannier downfolding Here H 0 is the tight-binding Hamiltonian determined out of our Wannier downfolding, and H U is the Coulomb interaction term T , with the field operator d sσ denotes annihilation of an s = Ax, Az, Bx, Bz electron with spin σ. As shown in Fig. with Here T x/z k represents intra-layer intra-orbital hopping, and the Hamiltonian acquires a block-diagonal form In this representation, the two d 3z 2 -r 2 states at E F are manifested as the component T z k ±t z ⊥ which define a splitting energy 2t z ⊥ . With the value of tight-binding parameters listed in Tabel I, we show in Fig. The basis is Ψ = (d Ax , d Az , d Bx , d Bz , p Ax , p Ay , p Bx , p By , p z , p ′ z , p ′′ z ) T , with four more in-plane p Ax , p Ay , p Bx , p By and three apical p z , p ′ z , p ′′ z as shown in Fig. Spin susceptibility.-To determine the magnetic response of the material, we investigate the the spin susceptibility of our model, which is defined as Here s, t = Ax, Az, Bx, Bz label orbitals, and the spin operator is defined as S qs = 1 2 kαβ d † ksα σ αβ d k+qsβ with σ the Pauli matrix. By using wick theorem, we expand Eq. 4 to obtain the bare (non-interacting) susceptibility Under the random phase approximation, the spin susceptibility is calculated by with interaction vertex defined as In Fig. Discussion.-The discovery of the high transition temperature superconductor La 3 Ni 2 O 7 represents a major breakthrough in the field of nickletate superconductivity. Our DFT calculations demonstrate that there are two electron pockets α, β and one hole pocket γ on the Fermi surface, in which the α, β-pockets exhibit mixing of orbitals, while the γ-pocket features a dominated d 3z 2 -r 2 content. In comparison to the bulk Conclusion.-In conclusion, we have introduced a minimal bilayer two-orbital model for the Ruddlesden-Popper bilayer La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under pressure. The tightbinding parameters are obtained by Wannier downfolding of the DFT calculations, which reproduce the band structure and Fermi surface well. The spin susceptibility is studied using the RPA method, which shows that the magnetic signal majorly comes from d 3z 2 -r 2 . This model provides important means to the study of electronic, magnetic, orbital, and superconducting properties of the material under pressure.