Two-particle lattice states are important for physics of magnetism, superconducting oxides, and cold quantum gases. The quantum-mechanical lattice problem is exactly solvable for finite-range interaction potentials. A twobody Schrödinder equation can be reduced to a system of linear equations whose numbers scale with the number of interacting sites. For the simplest cases such as on-site or nearest-neighbor attractions, many pair properties can be derived analytically, although final expressions can be quite complicated. In this work, we systematically investigate bound pairs in one-, two-, and three-dimensional lattices. We derive pairing conditions, plot phase diagrams, and compute energies, effective masses and radii. Along the way, we analyze nontrivial physical effects such as light pairs and the dependence of binding thresholds on pair momenta. At the end, we discuss the preformed-pair mechanism of superconductivity and stability of many-pair systems against phase separation. The paper is a combination of original work and pedagogical tutorial. In 1986, Daniel Mattis published a review on few-body lattice problems Physics of real-space pairs is tightly linked with the pairing mechanism. In superconducting oxides, main candidates are: strong electron-phonon interaction An added benefit of this approach is that the two-particle lattice problem is exactly solvable for a wide class of non-retarded interaction potentials, which provides a welcome rigor and often an analytical formula. The binding threshold, pair energy, dispersion, effective mass m * p , effective radius r * p , and wave function: all can be determined without approximations. These properties provide important physical insights. For example, mass anisotropy of pairs differs from the bare anisotropy of the member particles, see, e.g., Sections 3.6 and 9.3. This relationship may be helpful in understanding the anisotropy of transport and electromagnetic properties of HTSC. Additionally, pair wave function is directly proportional to a macroscopic superconducting order parameter A striking application of two-particle properties to unconventional superconductivity comes from analyzing the BEC temperature of pairs: Here, C is a numerical coefficient and n p is the pair number density assumed to be known from chemical composition. m * p is the pair mass provided by an exact solution. Consider system's evolution with n p shown in Fig. (C) Upon further increase of density, the pairs overlap much more, with the average distance smaller than the pair size. The constituent fermions begin to form a Fermi sea Early developments of short-range attractive models of superconductivity Even nearest-neighbor attraction is an approximation to inter-electron or inter-hole attractions of real materials. The latter results from mediation by an intermediary subsystem such as phonons, and typically extend beyond nearest neighbors Intersite attraction also appear within another popular theory of unconventional superconductivity based on the t-J model In the last two decades, optical lattices and cold atoms emerged as another physical realization of models with short-range attraction Basic properties of two-body states in U V models were discussed by Micnas, Ranninger, and Robaszkiewicz The purpose of this work is twofold. First, we collect results obtained for different lattices The paper is organized as follows. After formulating the general theory (Section 2), we analyze bound states in the attractive Hubbard model in different dimensions (Section 3), and then the U V model in 1D (Section 4), 2D (Sections 5, 6, and 7), and 3D (Sections 8 and 9). The next two sections are devoted to two special topics: light pairs (Section 10), and the stability of pairs against phase separation (Section 11). Section 12.1 summarizes the most important common physical properties of lattice bound states. Sections 9.3 and 12.2 discuss relevance to HTSC. Extensive Appendixes contain additional information intended for subject matter expects. Appendix A.1 briefly summarizes two-particle problems not covered in this work in detail. Appendix A.2 explains how the present formalism can be extended to multi-orbital models We begin with formulating an underlying model. We restrict consideration to Bravais lattices only. (Two-body problems in more complex lattices can also be solved Here nm = σ nmσ = c † m↑ c m↑ + c † m↓ c m↓ is the fermion number operator on site m. b and b are hopping and interaction neighbor vectors, respectively. The first term in Eq. ( In first quantization, two-body wave function Ψ(m 1 , m 2 ) must satisfy the Schrödinger equation: ) where E is the total energy. Equation ( where N is the total number of lattice unit cells. A transformed equation reads Here, is the one-particle dispersion of the model. The right-hand-side of Eq. ( where is the total lattice momentum of the two fermions. It is critically important for the existence of an exact solution that Φ 0 and Φ b are functions of only one argument P rather than two separate arguments k 1 and k 2 . Utilizing the definitions, Eqs. ( Substitution of Eq. ( where Notice how in the process of substitution, k 1 is replaced by q, and k 2 by Pq. But the argument of Φ remains unchanged: P = k 1 + k 2 → q + Pq = P. As a result, Φ(P) can be moved outside the q sums, and the equations reduce from integral to algebraic. Thus the entire method is predicated on conservation of total momentum. Quantities M bb ′ in Eqs. ( The consistency condition of Eqs. ( determines system's energy E as a function of total momentum P and, consequently, the pair's energy, dispersion, and effective mass. If n b is the number of vectors b with nonzero V b , then in Eq. ( where each column is multiplied by its respective V b ′ . The eigenvector of Eqs. ( The size and complexity of the main system, Eq. ( In order to restrict the wave function symmetry, we use the following transformation instead of Eq. ( Next, we multiply the Schrödinger equation, Eq. ( The V term contains two groups of q integrals: one that contains exp (iqb) and another exp (-iqb). One now observes that the two groups transform into each other when b → -b. To make use of this symmetry, we arrange all vectors b into pairs (b, -b), then select only one vector from each pair and collect them in new group b + . Thus, the full group splits in two subgroups: For example, in the square lattice with nearest-neighbor interaction, {b} = {+x, +y, -x, -y} can be split in two pairs, {(+x, -x), (+y, -y)}. Then one can choose {b + } out of four equivalent possibilities: {b + } = {+x, +y}, {b + } = {+x, -y}, {b + } = {-x, +y}, and {b + } = {-x, -y}. The b sum in the V term in Eq. ( 4N q e ik1b+ + e ik2b+ e -iqb+ + e -ik1b+ + e -ik2b+ e iqb+ φ + q,k1+k2-q 4N q e -ik1b+ + e -ik2b+ e iqb+ + e ik1b+ + e ik2b+ e -iqb+ φ + q,k1+k2-q The last equality is true because we consider only symmetric potentials, V b+ = V -b+ . In the next crucial step, we apply a variable change q ′ = k 1 + k 2q to the first half of Eq. Equation ( The wave function is expressed from Eq. ( Substituting φ + back in the definitions of Φ + , one obtains: where For nonzero P, it may be more convenient to use an equivalent but a more symmetric formulation. Let us perform a variable change in Eqs. ( That leads to the appearance of factors like exp (±iPb + /2) in front of the q sums. They can be absorbed into a new definition of Φ + : Φ+ 0 (P) ≡ Φ + 0 (P) , Φ+ b+ (P) ≡ e -i P 2 b+ Φ + b+ (P) . In terms of the new amplitudes, Eqs. ( where and the condition ε -q = ε q has been used. There are several advantages of Eqs. ( The consistency condition of the linear system, Eqs. ( In this section, we repeat the derivation of Section 2.3 for anti-symmetric wave functions that describe spin-triplet pairs. The corresponding Fourier transformation reads We multiply the Schrödinger equation, Eq. ( Of note here is the absence of a U term that cancels out due to antisymmetry. Next, we split the sum over b in two partial sums: over b + and over -b + , and then change variables To convert this to linear equations, we introduce 1 2 n b auxiliary functions Using these definitions, the pair wave function follows from Eq. ( Substituting φ - k1k2 back in Eq. ( Applying the variable change defined in Eq. ( the system is cast in an alternative form: The size of the triplet system is one less that of the singlet system because of the lack of the Hubbard term. Therefore, triplet pairs are usually easier to deal with than singlets. In this section, we derive a general recipe of calculating pair's effective radius r * p . We consider only spin-singlet pairs with P = 0. Other situations can be analyzed similarly. Radius components are defined as follows The k 1 + k 2 = 0 wave function follows from Eq. ( Substitution in the denominator of Eq. ( Upon substitution in J j , one notices that m j can be expresses as a k j derivative of e ikm . Taking into account the permutation symmetry of φ + k,-k , one obtains Both expressions in parentheses can be transformed utilizing the Green's theorem for periodic functions, see for example Ref. The wave function is expressible via amplitudes Φ + using Eq. ( From here, one derives Thus, calculation of pair size comprises the following steps. (i) For given U , V b+ , and ε k , one solves the eigenvalue problem, Eqs. ( Before getting to more complex U V models, it is instructive to consider the simpler case of zero-range interaction, that is the negative Hubbard model. Several characteristic features of lattice bound states show up already at this level. Additionally, due to the model's relative simplicity, analytical calculations can be carried out to the fullest extent. The model is defined by the potential One expects only one singlet bound state, so either unsymmetrized solution, Eq. ( which defines pair energy E(P). The pair wave function is up to a normalization constant. Since total momentum P is fixed, ψ is a function of only one argument: The real-space wave function follows from Eq. ( The first factor describes center-of-mass motion while the integral over q describes internal structure of the pair. Analysis will continue for different lattices separately. The 1D attractive Hubbard model provides the simplest example of a lattice bound state. Many pair properties can be derived analytically. The basic integral, M 00 in Eq. ( Substitution in Eq. ( This is a rare case when pair energy is known as an explicit formula. Based on it, a number of interesting properties can be established. (i) The minimum energy of two free particles with total momentum P is E 11 = -4t cos (P/2). Comparing that with Eq. ( The pair binding energy is quadratic in coupling near the threshold: The first term here is the minimum energy of two free particles with total momentum P . (v) Expansion of Eq. ( The pair mass is not constant but increases with the binding energy. This is a common property of bound states Transitioning to the wave function, the integral in Eq. ( . (65) where α ≡ 4t cos(P/2) has been set for brevity. Thus, the un-normalized wave function can be written as where and The same expressions can be derived directly from a real-space Schrödinger equation by means of two-particle Bethe ansatz. Using the explicit form of Ψ, it is straightforward to compute potential energy, kinetic energy, and effective radius of a moving pair: Interestingly, r * p (P → π) → 0, which means the pair shrinks to a point. The same conclusion can also be derived directly from Eq. For the square lattice, the basic integral M 00 in Eq. ( This result applies not only to the isotropic square model at arbitrary P, but also to the rectangular model with t x = t y . Inserting Eq. ( Using the asymptote K(1 -z) ∼ 1 2 ln 8 z , at z → +0, one obtains In the ground state, α = β = 4t, and the binding energy is one obtains from Eq. ( where E(κ) is complete elliptic integral of the second kind. Equation (77) has correct limits: The factor K 8t |E0| in Eq. ( where ξ P,q ≡ ε P 2 +q + ε P 2 -q . Both sums in Eq. ( Using explicit expressions, Eqs. (B.29) and (B.32), one derives, after transformations, a final formula The pair shrinks to a point in the strong coupling limit, E → -∞, and at P = ±π for any |U |. The radius diverges at the threshold, E → -8t cos P 2 , as expected on physical reasoning. In the ground state, P = 0, the asymptotes are The energy, mass, and radius of the 2D Hubbard pair are plotted in Fig. In this section, we consider the two-dimensional triangular lattice with nearest-neighbor isotropic hopping, t b = t. Single particle dispersion, Eq. ( The double integral M tr 00 , Eq. ( The lowest energy of two free particles on the triangular lattice is E 11 = -12t. When E → E 11 -0 from below, the argument of K approaches 1 and M tr 00 diverges logarithmically. Utilizing Eq. ( Let us derive asymptotic behavior of E at small couplings. Setting |E 0 | = 12t + ∆, ∆ ≪ t in Eq. ( from where the binding energy is The attractive Hubbard model in three dimensions possesses a new qualitative feature: nonzero threshold of pair formation. In 3D, kinetic energy alone is strong enough to counteract weak attraction. Mathematically, the triple integral in M 00 converges when E → E 11 for any P, rendering the critical potential depth |U cr | finite. Calculation of |U cr | requires evaluation of the celebrated Watson integrals The minimum energy of two free particles is E 11 = -3α at which the classic result of Watson's reads The binding threshold then follows from Eq. ( The P = 0 value of 7.914 . . . obtained by numerical integration was reported in Ref. The binding threshold can also be computed on BZ planes that pass through four BZ corners, for example on the plane P x = P y . This is possible thanks to the extension of Watson's result to the anisotropic case by Montroll where The threshold value is an inverse of Eq. ( The ground state energy, E 0 = E(P = 0), is discussed next. A close-form expression for M sc 00 in the isotropic simple cubic model was found by Joyce Using these formulas, Eq. ( Once E 0 is found from Eq. ( where we have used M sc 00 = 1/|U |. Thus, the effective mass can also be computed by numerical differentiation of M sc 00 . m * p (U ) is shown in Fig. r * px (U ) is shown in Fig. The tetragonal lattice is of interest because of its relevance to high-T c superconductors. We explore several effects of hopping anisotropy in this section. Equations Of physical interest is pair mass anisotropy m * px /m * pz . Expanding |U |M tg 00 = 1 for small P one obtains The mass ratio is shown in Fig. Pairing enhances mass anisotropy which approaches (t z /t) 2 in the strong coupling limit. For intermediate |U |, the mass anisotropy lies between (t z /t) and (t z /t) 2 . Another interesting property is the ratio of effective radii. It follows from Eq. ( The pair size anisotropy is shown in Fig. In a BCC lattice with nearest-neighbor hopping, ε k = -8t cos kx 2 cos ky 2 cos kz 2 . (In this and the following sections, we set the cube length, a = 1.) First, we consider the ground state, P = 0. In calculating M bcc 00 , integration over the BCC Brillouin zone can be replaced with one fourth of the integral over a cube with side length 4π. Changing momentum variables yields The integral here is one of the generalized Watson integrals first evaluated by Maradudin The binding threshold is found by setting E 0 = -16t, which results in Expanding Eq. ( The numerical coefficient at the quadratic term is = 0.290501 . . .. Formula ( which is consistent with strong-coupling perturbation theory. Nonzero pair momenta are discussed next. Cases with one nonzero component, for example P = (P x , 0, 0), can be reduced to the ground state case. The energy denominator in M bcc 00 contains After shifting the integration variable q x , M bcc 00 is reduced to the ground state expression, Eq. ( |U bcc cr (P x , 0, 0)| = (11.484320 . . .) t cos (P x /4) . This expression should be compared with the simple cubic value, Eq. (87). Similar to the FCC case, integration over the FCC Brillouin zone can be replaced by integration over the cube with side length (4π). In the ground state, ε q = ε P-q , and M fcc 00 reduces to This triple integral was first evaluated by Iwata Pair formation occurs at E 0 = -24 t or w = 1. The binding threshold reads Table We now transition to U V models with on-site repulsion U and nearest-neighbor attraction V b ≡ -|V |. A general feature of these models is the existence of multiple bound states, whose number increases with lattice dimensionality. Because of the complexity of general energy equation, Eq. ( The symmetrized set of neighbor vectors consists of two elements: }. Symmetrized Schrödinger equation, Eq. ( Here ε k = -2t cos k, and subscript in E s indicates "spin-singlet". We introduce two auxiliary functions: so that Substituting Eq. ( Next, a change of variables q ′ = q -P 2 under the integrals results in a (2 × 2) matrix equation where and α ≡ 4t cos (P/2). Note that As a result, everything can be expressed via the basic integral M 0 . The bound state's energy is determined by the consistency condition of Eqs. ( This form will be useful later in comparing with similar equations in higher dimensions. Substitution of the explicit form of M 0 yields the final expression: This is a cubic equation for E s (P ), which does not have a simple-form analytical solution. Only at BZ boundary the equation simplifies to which is consistent with second-order perturbation theory. In order to obtain binding threshold, set E s equal to the lowest energy of two free carriers, E 11 = -4t cos (P/2), in Eq. This formula possesses several interesting properties. First of all, |V s cr | is nonzero despite the model being onedimensional. Here, the attraction competes not only with kinetic energy but also with repulsion U which leads to a nonzero threshold. At weak repulsion, U < t, one has |V s cr | ≈ U/2 which can be understood from the Born approximation: there are two attractive sites for one repulsive site, hence half as strong V is needed to overcome U . In the opposite limit of strong repulsion, |V s cr | approaches a finite limit. At large U , the on-site wave function amplitude, Ψ(m, m) → 0, which becomes a boundary condition for the rest of Ψ. Once attraction is strong enough to produce a bound state in the presence of this zero, further increase of U has no effect. Finally, |V s cr | is a strong function of pair momentum. Like in 3D Hubbard models, the pair becomes more stable at large P . At BZ boundary, the pair is always stable for any U however large, and any |V | however small. A typical pair dispersion for |V | < |V s cr | is shown in Fig. At threshold, E s = -4t, and the last formula yields m * ps /m 0 = 2, as expected. At strong attraction, the mass generally grows linearly with coupling, m * ps /m 0 ∝ |V |/t, with the slope depending on U and the U/V ratio. As an example, Fig. In this section, we introduce the topic of light bound pairs that will be discussed later in several places of this paper. We use this term to describe a situation when pairs are strongly bound, E → -∞, but at the same time remain mobile with an effective mass of order m 0 . It occurs when a pair can move through the lattice without changing its energy, i.e., without breaking the most attractive bond. There are two primary reasons why it can happen. First, because of geometry. In some lattices such as triangular and FCC, one member of a pair can hop to another site while still remaining a nearest neighbor to the second member, which keeps the configuration energy unchanged at -|V |. This is followed by a similar hop by the second member. The two particles hop in turns in a "crab-like" fashion, which results in overall movement of the pair through the system. The second origin of light pairs is a flat segment in the attractive part of the inter-particle potential. In this case, the particles can also move in alternating order without changing their energy. In this section, we use the relative simplicity of the 1D U V model to illustrate the second mechanism. To this end, we set U = -|V | in the formulas of Section 4.1. Additionally, the strong-coupling limit, U = V → -∞, can be treated analytically. Consider Fig. Hamiltonian action within this basis is The Schrödinger equation in momentum space is where Ẽ is pair energy counted from -|V | and a is the lattice constant. Band dispersion is which corresponds to an effective mass Thus, pair mass remains of the order of free-particle mass m 0 even in the limit of infinitely strong attraction. Figure (Since the particles cannot really exchange, there is no need to consider spin degrees of freedom. Singlet and triplet pairs will have the same mass.) The Schrödinger equation reads which yields Ẽ1,2 (P ) = ±2t cos P a 2 and Thus, the bound pair is no heavier than just four free particle masses. Note that this conclusion does not depend on the separation distance at which the flat section of the potential occurs. The antisymmetrized set of vectors consists of just one element {b -} = {(1)} and there is one basis function Φ - 1 (P ). An antisymmetrized Schrödinger equation, Eq. ( In terms of the auxiliary function the pair wave function is expressed as Substituting Eq. ( Changing variables q ′ = q -P 2 in the last equation yields Note that it is independent of U , as expected for a triplet pair. Direct calculation results in for the triplet energy, and in for the triplet effective mass, where m 0 = 2 /(2ta 2 ). The triplet pair is stable when Notice that in the U → ∞ limit, |V s cr | = |V t cr | and E s = E t . The phase diagram of the 1D U V model at P = 0 is shown in Fig. Two-dimensional lattice models at low carrier density have been popular in the studies of HTSC because most high-T c superconductors including the copper oxides are highly anisotropic. According to one point of view, superconductivity in cuprates is essentially two-dimensional. The (repulsive) 2D Hubbard model The symmetrized set of neighbor vectors consists of three elements: {b + } = {(0, 0), (1, 0), (0, 1)}. In writing down the (3 × 3) system, Eqs. ( x = e -i(Px/2) Φ + 10 , and Φ+ y = e -i(Py/2) Φ + 01 . In terms of the new set, the consistency condition reads where α = 4t cos (P x /2), and β = 4t cos (P y /2). M 00 was given in Eq. ( The d-sector equation is obtained by subtracting the last two lines of Eq. We begin analysis with the s-symmetrical ground state described by Eq. ( where Equation ( Let us determine the pairing threshold for a positive U . To this end, set E s = -8t -0 in Eq. ( This line separates the regions of "no pairs" and "s-pairs" in the 2D U V phase diagram, see Fig. one obtains the binding energy near the threshold: Note that the exponent is four times less than in the corresponding expression in the attractive Hubbard model, Eq. ( In this form, the binding energy was given in Ref. Turning now to the d-symmetric state, Eq. ( It is independent of U , as expected for a d-symmetric wave function. General expressions for M 00 , M 11 , and M 20 at arbitrary E are given in Appendix B.3. Using those, Eq. ( Separation of the singlet dispersion relation, Eq. ( Like in the 1D U V model, see Eq. ( In order to determine the binding threshold at an arbitrary P, energy E must be set equal to the minimal energy of two free particles E 11 = -α -β. Upon substitution E = E 11 , all M nm in Eq. ( Note that all L nm converge to finite values in the E = E 11 limit. Explicit analytical expressions are given in Appendix B.7. Insertion of Eq. ( where and the specific form of B is unimportant. In the limit E → E 11 , both A and B remain finite whereas M 00 diverges. Thus, the binding condition becomes Equations ( The existence of such lines poses an interesting question about pair formation at a finite but low particle density. Figure Clearly, the central question is whether this empty-lattice picture retains its qualitative features at small but finite densities. That requires a reliable many-body method that can handle large systems such as Quantum Monte Carlo Next, we discuss full pair dispersion E(P) for all P. Due to complexity of the main dispersion relation, Eq. ( where β = 4t cos (P y /2). The second factor can be brought to the following form This equation does not have a simple-form analytical solution. An example of numerical solution of Eq. ( There are two antisymmetrized vectors {b -} = {(1, 0), (0, 1)} and two functions Φ -. Upon constructing the system, Eq. ( Note that such a decomposition takes place over the entire BZ. Since M 20 = M 02 , p x and p y energies are different, as shown Fig. Let us derive the binding condition along BZ diagonals. In the limit E → E 11 , the difference M 00 -M 20 converges. Making use of Eq. (B.40), one obtains: The two-particle phase diagram of the square U V model for P = 0 is shown in Fig. Consider now triplet energy at arbitrary P. Again, certain simplification takes place at BZ edges. At P x = ±π, M 20 = 0, and the energy of p x pair is given by Eq. ( where Eqs. (B.29) and (B.32) have been utilized. Equation ( The square U V model is the rare case when the two-body problem was solved for interactions beyond the nearest neighbors In order to form a bound pair, attraction must exceed a threshold to overcome the strong repulsive core. For nearest-neighbor attraction, the threshold is about 2t, see Eq. ) This is what was confirmed by exact calculations One can add to this argument the light pairs mechanism already discussed in Section 4.2. In shallow long-range attractive potentials, two or more neighbors will have equal or close attractive strengths with high probability. That will enable resonant movement of pairs without breaking attractive bonds. As a result, pair effective mass will remain of order m 0 even in the strong coupling limit. We illustrate this mechanism for an attractive potential extended to the second nearest neighbors with V 2 = V 1 . We introduce the strong-coupling singlet dimer basis with b 1 = (1, 0), b 2 = (1, 1), b 3 = (0, 1), and b 4 = (-1, 1). Hamiltonian action within this space is given by Converting the corresponding Schrödinger equation to momentum space and expanding the determinant, one obtains dimer dispersion: Ẽ1,2 (P) = ±(2t) 2 + cos (P x a) + cos (P y a) , Ẽ3,4 (P) = 0 , where Ẽ is referenced from -|V |. At small P, Ẽ1 ≈ -4t + (ta 2 P 2 )/4, from where the pair mass is where m 0 = 2 /(2ta 2 ). Thus, in this model the mass enhancement is limited by the same factor of 4 as in the 1D model with long-range attraction, cf. Eq. ( Next, we rigorously solve the U V model with attraction extended to second nearest neighbors. In deviation from The first equation is equivalent to Eq. ( It is smaller than the d x 2 -y 2 threshold, Eq. ( Returning to the general system, Eqs. ( (179) The binding threshold is derived by equating the determinant to zero and setting E = -8t. Because all M mn logarithmically diverge, one needs to apply the subtractive procedure, Eq. ( For V 2 = 0, it reduces to Eq. that was reported in Ref. V cr (2) should be compared with the U → ∞ limit of Eq. ( Note that Eq. ( In the rectangular U V model, both hopping and interaction along x and y axes are different, as illustrated in Fig. The dispersion relation is given by Eq. ( Matrix elements M nm are still defined by Eq. ( Equation ( Let us analyze particular cases of Eq. (185). First, we investigate isotropic hopping, t y = t x = t. Utilizing Eqs. (B.69)-(B.73), the binding condition becomes For isotropic attraction, V x = V y = -|V |, Eq. ( Next, we consider the case of anisotropic attraction, V x = 0, V y < 0, and arbitrary hopping anisotropy. Equation (186) reduces to According to Appendix B.7, Several particular cases are of interest. (i) t x = 0. In this case, the system splits into individual y chains, each of which hosts a 1D U V model. L 02 -4L 01 = (2t y ) -1 and |V y,cr | = 2U t y /(U + 4t y ), which coincides with the earlier result, Eq. ( (ii) t x = t y = t. This is the case of isotropic hopping. L 02 -4L 01 = (πt) -1 and This expression should be compared with its isotropic attraction counterpart, Eq. ( (iii) t y = 0. In this case, the system splits into individual x chains. The two particles reside on adjacent chains and feel an attraction V y when their x coordinates coincide. The model is isomorphic to the 1D attractive Hubbard model. In the t y → 0 limit, L 02 -4L 01 diverges as ≃ 4(3π) -1 (t x t y ) -1/ Dispersions of p x and p y pairs are given by Eqs. ( Consider the p y pair. In the t x = 0 limit, |V y,cr | = 2t y , which is the correct threshold for the 1D U V model, see Eq. ( The triangular U V model possesses another qualitative feature: light pairs are formed due to lattice topology rather than degeneracy of the attractive potential. Consider Fig. The light pair effect has implications for the formation of phonon bipolarons. It is by now well understood The U V model on triangular lattice was solved by Bak In the singlet sector, there are four symmetrized vectors: 2 ), (- 2 )} ≡ {0, 1, 2, 3}. Changing momentum variable, q ′ = q -P 2 , and redefining amplitudes as Φ+ b = e -i(P/2)b Φ + b , the master equations, Eqs. ( Here and α, β, and γ are defined in Eqs. (C.3)-(C.5). Integration over BZ can be replaced with integration over the rectangle 0 ≤ q x ≤ 2π, 0 ≤ q y ≤ (4π)/ √ 3. The expressions for M + are given in Appendix C.2. The following relations hold for any P: Additional relations hold along BZ symmetry lines. In the triplet sector, there are three anti-symmetrized vectors: {b -} = {1, 2, 3}. Performing the same variable change, q ′ = q -P 2 , and amplitude redefinition Φb-= e -i(P/2)b-Φ - b-, the master equations yield where The expressions for M -are also given in Appendix C.2, Eqs. (C.38)-(C.46). One has: Thus, the triplet dispersion is described by a symmetric matrix for all P. A typical pair dispersion is shown in Fig. Determination of pairing thresholds from the general dispersion relations, Eqs. ( For the singlet states, we combine Φ 0 , which is unchanged, with symmetrized combinations of basis functions given by Eqs. (C.60) and (C.63) into a new basis: In terms of the new basis, dispersion equation, Eq. ( (205) The top-left 2 × 2 block describes an s-symmetric ground state. To find the binding condition, set E → -12 t, at which all M + diverge logarithmically. To obtain a finite result, introduce the differences: Next, express M + via L + and M + 00 and expand the 2 × 2 determinant. The (M + 00 ) 2 term vanishes identically while the coefficient at M + 00 must be zero. This leads to a binding condition Analytical expressions for L + are given in Appendix C.3. The final result reads The other two 1×1 blocks in Eq. ( A transformed dispersion equation reads The first two blocks describe a p-symmetric doublet, whereas the lower-right block describes one f -symmetric state. Note that both M - 11 and M - 12 converge at threshold, and no subtraction procedure is necessary. Starting with Eqs. (C.38) and (C.39), setting α = 4t, β = 8t, γ = 0, E = -12t, elementary integration yields Consequently, the pairing thresholds are One qualitatively new feature of 3D models is a larger role of kinetic energy. A finite attraction is needed to form a pair even at U = 0. The U V model on the simple cubic lattice was solved in Ref. The symmetrized set of vectors consists of four elements: {b + } = {(0, 0, 0), (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 0, 1)}. Similar to the square lattice, Eqs. ( x = e -i(Px/2) Φ + 100 , and so on. The resulting 4 × 4 linear system reads where α = 4t cos (P x /2), β = 4t cos (P y /2), and γ = 4t cos (P z /2). Pair dispersion is obtained by equating the 4 × 4 determinant to zero. The quantities M nmk are generalized Watson integrals. For arbitrary P, they can be computed numerically. On BZ diagonals, including the Γ point, α = β = γ. In this case, all M nmk in Eq. ( in terms of which the energy equation becomes block-diagonal: The upper-left corner describes an s-symmetric ground state. Remarkably, all the matrix elements can be expressed via the basic integral M 000 : Expanding the 2 × 2 determinant, the s-pair dispersion equation becomes where M 000 is given in Eq. ( From Eq. ( where U 0 ≡ (7.913552 . . .)t is the pairing threshold in the attractive Hubbard model at P = 0, see Eq. Next, consider the d-symmetric doublet described by the low-right corner of Eq. (221). To determine the binding threshold, use Eqs. (D.11) and (D.13) to find from where The full phase diagram of the simple cubic U V model is shown in Fig. The anti-symmetrized set of vectors consists of three elements: {b -} = {(1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 0, 1)}. The dispersion equation splits into three independent equations describing three p-symmetric pairs: This critical value is plotted in Fig. In the tetragonal U V model, attractive potential V z and hopping integral t z along z axis differ from their xy counterparts, see Fig. In this section, the general case of nonzero V z is considered. Due to the model's complexity, very few results can be derived analytically. Bulk of the results presented below are obtained by solving pair dispersion equations numerically. Derivation of pair dispersion proceeds along the same lines as the simple cubic case of Section 8. The result We begin with analysis of the binding conditions at the Γ point where M 100 = M 010 , M 200 = M 020 , and M 101 = M 011 . Instead of doing a full point symmetry analysis, it is easier to proceed by observing that taking a sum and a difference of the second and third equations in Eq. (218) splits off one d-symmetric state. The difference can be written in terms of Φ + x -Φ + y : This equation describes a d x 2 -y 2 -symmetric solution with a threshold that smoothly interpolates from the isotropic cubic case, Eq. ( This system describes a mixture of one s-symmetric and one d-symmetric states. Upon setting E = E 11 = -8t-4t z , the consistency condition of Eq. ( In the 2D limit, t z → 0, all M nmk logarithmically diverge, but utilizing a subtractive procedure M nmk = M 000 + L nmk , one can show that Eq. ( (C) V xy = 0. Out-of-plane attraction only. Set V xy = 0 and expand the remaining 2 × 2 determinant in Eq. ( Both Eqs. ( There are three spin-triplet pairs, all with p-type orbital symmetries. Their dispersion relations are given by Eqs. ( x and Φ - y equations but V z in the Φ - z equation. Like in the simple cubic case, decomposition into three independent dispersion relations takes place over the entire BZ of pair momenta. In this section, we only investigate binding conditions at the Γ point. To that end, we set α = β = 4t, γ = 4t z and E = -8t -4t z . Analysis of the p x and p y thresholds, which are equal, is straightforward. They smoothly interpolate between the pure 2D limit, Eq. ( The situation with the p z state is more interesting. Although Eq. ( This formula is plotted in Fig. The tetragonal U V model is a convenient system to discuss Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) of real-space pairs. BEC lies at the core of the preformed-pairs mechanism of high-temperature superconductivity It was argued in Section 9.1 that if t z > 0.002 t, then pairs are already three-dimensional yet highly anisotropic. The above condition is satisfied in most crystalline solids. Hence, the pairs' collective behavior should be described in terms of anisotropic 3D BEC A convenient starting point is the anisotropic version of the continuous-space BEC formula: Here, ñp and m * p are the density and effective mass of bosons (fermion pairs) in physical units. Transitioning to relative units one obtains . (239) Here, n is the number of pairs per unit cell, and the pair masses are expressed in units of m 0 = 2 /(2ta 2 ). We also assume m * px = m * py . As was argued in the Introduction, a maximum critical temperature is reached at "closepacking" when the pair density is approximately equal to the inverse pair volume, n cp = Ω -1 p . The close-packing temperature is: . This formula contains only single pair properties supplied by the exact solution. The continuum approximation can be superseded by a more rigorous lattice treatment. The pair density is computed as a full Bose integral and then equated to an inverse pair volume. Instead of Eq. ( E P is the full pair dispersion also provided by the exact solution. This equation Here, we apply the simplified formula, Eq. ( For the pair volume, we adopt the following formula which also defines the pair sizes r * px , r * py , and r * pz . This form of Ω p respects the exclusion principle and ensures the pair volume is not less than 1 even in the strong coupling limit. The mean-squared distances are defined via the full coordinate wave function, Eq. In taking the momentum sum in Eq. ( We have already discussed various aspects of light bound pairs in the 1D chain (Section 4.2), in the 2D square lattice (Section 5.4), and in the 2D triangular lattice (Section 7). In this section, we study several other systems that host mobile pairs in the strong-coupling limit. Consider a lattice consisting of two square lattices shifted out-of-plane and staggered in the (xy) plane relative to each other, see Fig. where Ẽ is pair energy counted from -|V |. Expansion of the determinant yields four dispersion bands Near P x = P y = 0, the ground state energy is Expanding at small momentum, one finds the effective mass where m 0 = 2 /(2ta 2 ) is the free particle mass. 10.2. Square U V model with resonant attraction, U = V The simple square U V model with only nearest-neighbor attraction does not support light pairs. However, light pairs become possible for resonant attraction U < 0, U = V . In this case, the energy of on-site dimer and nearest-neighbor dimer are equal, and the pair can move in the first order in t. Figure The Hamiltonian action is Notice the special role of dimer A: it is coupled to both B and C while the latter two are not coupled directly but only through A. That will allow for generalization to other lattices to be discussed in Section 10.3. The dispersion relation reads which yields three bands: Ẽ2 = 0, and Expanding the lowest branch at small P yields the mass where m 0 = 2 /(2ta 2 ) is the free particle mass. This simple form enables analytical expressions for several other lattices. For example, in the 3D simple cubic lattice, b + = x, y, and z. The lowest energy band is The effective mass is Comparison between Eqs. ( In the body-centered cubic lattice, there are four vectors: b + = 1 2 (x ± y ± z). Dimer dispersion has five energy bands with Ẽ2,3,4 = 0 and Ẽ1,5 = ±(4 t) 1 + cos The effective mass of the lowest band is It is noteworthy that Eqs. ( where z is the number of nearest neighbors in respective lattices. The properties of one bound pair, which this review summarizes, make physical sense only if the pairs keep their identity in a macroscopic system with finite particle density. For most of the results to remain valid, the pairs should not aggregate in trions, quads, and larger clusters. In other words, the effective interaction between pairs should be either repulsive or weakly attractive when such a weak attraction is unable to bind pairs into larger complexes (in 3D). The situation is clear in attractive Hubbard models. Two fermions forming an on-site real-space pair have two opposite spin projections and prevent other fermions from occupying the same site at the same time. Thus, clusters of three or more fermions are prohibited by the exclusion principle. The attractive Fermi-Hubbard model is stable against phase separation The situation is more subtle in U V models, t-J models, and other models where the attractive interaction is of finite range. The exclusion principle does not directly prohibit pairs from sticking to each other side-by-side and forming a macroscopic cluster. Thus, any such system will phase-separate in the large V limit. However, the exclusion principle still plays an important role at intermediate V . In the context of large bipolarons, Emin argued Rigorous determination of clustering thresholds and phase boundaries requires solving a few-body or a full many-body problem on an infinite lattice with sufficient accuracy, and is therefore difficult. Berciu reported In 2D, Emery, Kivelson, and Lin reported Multi-magnon bound states in a 2D square frustrated magnetic were analyzed in We are unaware of any numerical investigation of clustering in 3D lattices except our own work We now summarize our own results on pair liquid stability in U V models A high-level conclusion from this analysis is the existence of finite domains of pair stability in various forms of the U V model in all lattice dimensionalities. It is within such domains is where the results derived in the bulk of this paper are valid. The fundamental reason for pair stability is the Fermi statistics and associated nodes in the many-fermion wave functions In this paper, U V models (extended attractive Hubbard models) of increasing complexity have been analyzed in detail. Taken together, the results point to several common properties of lattice bound states. They are summarized in this section. The most important property of two-particle lattice problems is their exact solvability. This is a big advantage as all the results can be easily verified and cross-checked, both analytically and numerically. When it comes to physical applications, typical arguments are centered around justifications of a starting Hamiltonian or relevancy to a particular real system. But once the model is agreed upon, the conclusions that follow are not usually questioned. At the same time, the complexity of a solution increases rapidly with interaction range and lattice dimensionality. As shown in Section 2.2, the size of a matrix that defines pair dispersion, Eq. ( The exact dispersion equation defines pair energy over the entire BZ of pair momenta. It provides singlettriplet splitting, energy gaps between various sub-bands of the same parity, and a total bandwidth. The dispersion possesses degeneracies at high-symmetry points, which can be cross-checked with group theory classifications. By setting the pair energy equal to the lowest energy of two free particles with the same total momentum a binding threshold is determined. At this special energy, matrix elements M simplify considerably. In many cases, and especially at the Γ point and along BZ diagonals, the thresholds can be calculated analytically. Many explicit examples have been derived in this paper. The exact solution also provides pair effective mass and radius. The mass is rigorously defined via a second derivative of the total energy near the band minimum and as such it can be extracted from the dispersion relation. In some cases, one can utilize the fact that the dispersion relation simplifies along BZ diagonals and derive analytical expressions. See, for example, Es. This is purely a lattice effect that is absent in continuous space An important consequence is the existence of a binding surface in momentum space which separates unbound and bound pairs. As shown in Section 5.2, the binding surface does not in general match the Fermi surface of free electrons. The mismatch leads to segmentation of the Fermi surface into areas that are more or less prone to pairing and potential appearance of Fermi arcs. We note that such a pair would have formed with a nonzero total momentum. This is opposite to conventional Cooper pairs that are formed with zero total momentum. The described effect may also have links to the FFLO phase. A key question is how the binding surface is modified by a finite fermion density. This is a many-body problem that goes beyond the scope of this work. Effective mass is an important characteristic of a bound pair. Broadly, it defines pair mobility and response to external perturbations. In the context of superfluidity, the mass determines a BEC temperature in a system of many pairs, as argued in the Introduction. It is important to know what makes pairs either light or heavy. Near threshold, the mass is always close to two free-particle masses. In the opposite, strong coupling limit, the mass generally scales as m * p /m 0 ∝ |V |/t, i.e., increases linearly with the binding energy. This is because the pair moves in the second order in hopping t and breaks an attractive bond in the intermediate state, see Fig. The first situation arises for purely geometric reasons. One pair member can hop to a neighbor site without breaking an attractive bond. In other words, both the starting site and the ending site are nearest neighbors to the second pair member. Then the second member moves in the same way and the process repeats. The constituent particles hop in turns and the entire pair moves through the lattice in a "crab-like" fashion without ever breaking a bond. A good example is provided by the triangular lattice investigated in Section 7.1 (see also Refs. The second situation leading to light pairs arises when two or more lattice sites have equal attractive potentials. One such model was considered in Section 4.2. If the on-site interaction is attractive rather than repulsive and U = V , then a first-order resonant motion is possible as illustrated in Fig. An overall conclusion of this analysis is that in many circumstances, binding does not lead to significant increase of pair mass. Pair mass is not an impediment for a high mobility or a high BEC temperature. The role played by lattice anisotropy is important in the context of cuprate superconductivity. All cuprate superconductors have a layered structure which has led to a popular point of view that the superconductivity is essentially two-dimensional. A number of pure 2D theoretical models have been proposed and extensively studied. In the preformed pair mechanism, however, superconductivity is still considered three-dimensional albeit highly anisotropic. Investigations conducted in the present work support this picture. We analyzed two 3D anisotropic models: tetragonal attractive Hubbard model in Section 3.6 and tetragonal U V model in Section 9. We found in that in both cases the pair formation line splits in two regions, see Figs. 5(a) and 21. At extremely high anisotropy, t z < 0.002 t, pair formation is indeed dominated by logarithmic divergencies of 2D integrals. By that measure, the pairs may indeed be regarded as pure two-dimensional. However, when t z > 0.002 t the divergencies are no longer dominant and the threshold is on the order of its value in an isotropic 3D lattice. For that reason, real-space pairs in this regime are already three-dimensional. Thus, two-body solutions may help to clarify the nature of superconductivity depending on the level of anisotropy observed in a system. Phase separation is a ubiquitous feature of all models with finite-range attraction such as U V or t-J models. Physical reasoning suggests that any system with a strong enough attraction will form clusters and eventually phase-separate. It raises the question about stability of real-space pairs in many-body systems. A positive answer is provided by the Fermi statistics The derived conclusion is very general and applicable to a wide class of inter-particle potentials including threedimensional and long-range ones. It has been confirmed by exact numerical calculations for t-J models x = 1 -n |V|/t t t 0 t h 0 1 pairing threshold optimal doping close packing Figure Real-space pairs are known to adequately describe many aspects of high-T c phenomenology. This topic is not discussed here and the reader is referred to available reviews In this section, we discuss insights into cuprate superconductivity provided by two-body problems. The first one concerns the role of anisotropy. It was shown in Sec. 9.3 and Ref. The above argument applies equally to quasi-1D superconductivity where the crystal is composed of weakly bound 1D chains. In this respect, the recent claim of a T c = 90 K superconductivity in a quasi-1D copper oxide is particularly noteworthy Similar to anisotropy, there is an optimal strength of attraction. A weak attraction cannot form pairs but a strong attraction leads to clustering and phase separation. Aggregating available results on the tetragonal U V model Further insights can be gained by examining Fig. Finally, we discuss the role played by strong electron correlations represented by Hubbard repulsion U . Consider the square lattice with bare electron hopping t 0 . Near half-filling, the effective hopping of holes is reduced by strong correlations by a factor of ∼ 4 -10 Consider evolution of the system with hole doping starting at half-filling illustrated in Fig. Several additional two-body problems seem to be of interest. One of them is the body-centered tetragonal (BCT) U V model with out-of-plane attraction. The BCT lattice supports in-plane light pairs (but not out-of-plane ones), which should boost T * BEC . The negative effects of U on pairing can be minimized by a small t z . Compared with the simple tetragonal lattice, BCT has four times as many attractive bonds, which should reduce the threshold values by about a factor of four. Finally, BCT is close to the crystal structure of some cuprate superconductors. It would also be interesting to analyze two-body problems with effective single-particle dispersions arising from strong correlations. For example, holes in nearly half-filled t-J models acquire the tendency to hop diagonally to second nearest neighbors Also of interest are multi-orbital models describing CuO 2 planes and even full CuO 6 octahedra. Only one such investigation has been published so far Finally, we mention the need to investigate a four-fermion problem in the tetragonal U V model to complete the picture of phase separation in 3D. The author declares to not have known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. which can be verified by direct substitution. For n = m = 0 and α = β, all four terms in the left-hand-side are equal by symmetry, which leads to Calculation of the next basic integral, M sq 20 , is more involved. Since the following derivation will also be needed in the anisotropic case, α = β, we present here its general version. After integration over q y , which is elementary, The second term here is M sq 00 . It will be moved, temporarily, to the left side of the equation. After the substitution cos where z 1 = (|E|+ β)/α and z 2 = (|E|-β)/α. Next we use substitution z = z 1 + 1 u to convert the quartic polynomial under the square root into a cubic polynomial. The result is According to the general theory of elliptic integrals As the next step, we use the substitution to transform J m 's into Legendre normal forms, Eq. (B.2). The results are Note that the first argument in Π is negative. At this point, we return to the isotropic case, α = β. Using a, b, c from Eq. (B.12), one obtains Notice that the expression for J -1 (α, α) involves Π with their two arguments being equal by absolute value. In this special case, Π can be reduced to K. According to which is valid for any 0 ≤ κ < 1. We can prove Eq. (B.23) by the following procedure. Go back to M sq 10 (E; α, β) and transform it in the same manner as M sq 20 starting with Eq. (B.9). Instead of Eq. (B.15), we have The isotropic version reads Thus, M sq 10 also contains a special case of Π(-κ, κ). However, we previously derived an expression for M sq 10 that includes K(κ) only. Several comments are in order. (i) M sq nm (E; α, α) describe not only bound U V pairs in the Γ point but on the Brillouin zone diagonal as well. This follows from the definitions of α and β. (ii) All integrals have the analytical structure of αM sq nm = Q 1 (κ -1 )K(κ) + Q 2 (κ -1 )E(κ) + Q 3 (κ -1 ), where Q 1,2,3 are polynomials and κ = 2α |E| . The smallest power in all Q i is ≥ -1 while the highest power grows with n and m. The overall complexity of the analytical expressions increases with n and m. All M sq nm include a nonzero term ∝ K(κ) that logarithmically diverges when E → -2α -0, as expected from the definition, Eq. (B.1). However, coefficients by K(κ) approach a universal limit 1 πα that is the same for all n and m. As a result, all differences M sq nm -M sq n ′ m ′ are finite at E = -2α. They are discussed in the next section. Appendix B.4. M sq nm -M sq 00 at threshold. Square case, α = β As discussed in the main body of this paper, to determine a pairing threshold, energy E must be sent to the lowest energy of two free particles from below. For the isotropic square U V model, it means E → -2α -0. As shown in Appendix B.4, all M sq nm logarithmically diverge in that limit and direct determination of the threshold is impossible. The procedure can be regularized by subtracting from all M sq nm a common term that has the same logarithmic divergence. The subtrahend can be any one of M sq nm or any other function that has the same logarithmic divergence. The most obvious choice is M sq 00 . Accordingly, we introduce the following new functions that are finite for all n, m and α. It can be deduced from the definitions, Eq. (B.1) and Eq. (B.38), that all L sq nm < 0. There are two principle ways of calculating L sq nm . For those {nm} for which full expression M sq nm is known, L sq nm is given by its non-singular part, utilizing E(1) = 1. But in general, L sq nm can be calculated directly from the definition, Eq. (B.1), because in this special case the second integration is also elementary. Below, we list L sq nm for |n| + |m| ≤ 5. where In order to derive M rt 10 and M rt 20 , we apply the transformation sequence, Eqs. (B.9)-(B. With that, the results are M rt 01 and M rt 02 are obtained by permuting α ↔ β: Note that n 10 n 01 = κ 2 0 . Next, we compose a sum rule that is an anisotropic version of Eq. (B.7): These expressions are needed in deriving the pairing threshold in the square U V model at nonzero pair momenta Integration over q y in Eq. (C.2) was done by utilizing the residue theorem. The next step depends on whether the expression under the square root can be factorized into a product of two real factors. If β2 > 4 αγ, it is possible, and α cos 2 q x + β cos q x + γ = α (z 1 -cos φ)(z 2 -cos φ) , (C.9) Then the problem is reduced to Eq. (B.3), and the same transformations, Eqs. (B.4) and (B.5), result in In the ground state, P x = P y = 0, α = 4t, β = 8t, γ = 0, and Substitution in Eq. (C.11) yields If β2 < 4 αγ, factorization is not possible. Reduction to Legendre standard form is achieved by consecutive application of Eq. (B.4) and The final result is Appendix C.2. Numerical evaluation of M ± nm for the triangular lattice In this section, the following integrals are utilized: where a, b, c > 0, and a 2 > b 2 + c 2 is assumed. We also define 2 . Integration over q y yields 2e iqx cos qx 2 + q y |E| -α cos q x -β cos qx 2 cos q y -γ sin qx 2 sin q y = M + 21 , (C.31) +qy) cos qx 2 + q y |E| -α cos q x -β cos qx 2 cos q y -γ sin qx 2 sin q y = M + 23 , (C.36) These expressions can be used for efficient numerical evaluation of M + nm . The spin-triplet matrix elements M - nm are defined in Eq. ( 2 . Integration over q y yields e i( qx 2 +qy) sin q x |E| -α cos q x -β cos qx 2 cos q y -γ sin qx 2 sin q y = M - 12 , (C.40) dq x dq y (2π) 2 e iqx sin -qx 2 + q y |E| -α cos q x -β cos qx 2 cos q y -γ sin qx 2 sin q y = π 0 dq x π (γ -β) sin 2 q x β 2 cos 2 qx 2 + γ 2 sin 2 qx e i(-qx 2 +qy) sin q x |E| -α cos q x -β cos qx 2 cos q y -γ sin qx 2 sin q y = M - 13 , (C.42) dq x dq y (2π) 2 e i( qx 2 +qy ) sin qx 2 + q y |E| -α cos q x -β cos qx 2 cos q y -γ sin qx 2 sin q y e i( qx 2 +qy) sin -qx 2 + q y |E| -α cos q x -β cos qx 2 cos q y -γ sin e i(-qx 2 +qy ) sin qx 2 + q y |E| -α cos q x -β cos qx 2 cos q y -γ sin qx 2 sin q y = M - 23 , (C.45) dq x dq y (2π) 2 e i(-qx 2 +qy) sin -qx 2 + q y |E| -α cos q x -β cos qx 2 cos q y -γ sin At the Γ-point (P = 0), the following relations among singlet matrix elements hold: The starting point is the three basis functions Φ + 1-3 in the singlet case (Φ 0 will be added later) and Φ - 1-3 in the triplet case. By acting on both bases by the symmetry operations of C 6v , see and so on. The characters of D ± are given in Table (C.64) This completes the analysis of symmetry at the Γ point. Equations (C.61) and (C.64) are combined to form a new basis, Eq. ( , (C.65) . (C.68) The matrices of E 1 are: , (C.70) (D.10) Joyce At threshold, |E| = 3α, all M sc nmk can be expressed via M sc 000 using the remarkable identities derived by Glasser and Boersma As far as we are aware, only the basic integral M tg 000 has been evaluated analytically for arbitrary |E|, α, and γ by Delves, Joyce and Zucker Compared with the original papers, we have applied the identity cos nq x cos mq y cos kq z |E| -α cos q x -β cos q y -γ cos q z , (D.18) apply to the simple cubic U V model at arbitrary P, tetragonal U V model (t x = t y = t z ) at arbitrary P, and orthorhombic U V model (t x = t y = t z , not studied in this paper) also at arbitrary P. They cannot be evaluated analytically. However, two out of three integrations can be carried out analytically. Thus, only one integration remains to be done numerically which leads to an efficient numerical scheme. The first integration in Eq. (D.18) is elementary while the second produces complete elliptic integrals. First, we introduce three elliptic moduli: From here, one potential can be expressed via the other two. Appendix D.5. Derivation of Eq. ( For convenience, we introduce an anisotropy parameter, σ ≡ t z /t. Starting with Eq. (231), we wish to evaluate dq x dq y dq z (2π) 3 1 -cos 2q z 8t + 4t z -4t cos q x -4t cos q y -4t z cos q z , (D. At σ → 0, K logarithmically diverges. In the main nonvanishing order, one can neglect the σ term in the denominator outside of K[. . .]. Using the asymptote, K(z → 1) = Lattice z |U cr |/t |U cr |/(zt) Simple cubic 6 7.913552 . . . 1.318925 . . . Body-centered cubic 8 11.484320 . . . 1.435540 . . . Face-centered cubic 12 17.848362 . . . 1.487363 . . . √t x t y → 0. The p y pair forms with a zero threshold.