Hyperuniformity is a property of certain heteroneous media in which density fluctuations in the long wavelength range decay to zero. In reciprocal space this behavior translates into a decay of Fourier intensities in the range near small wavenumbers. In this paper quasiperiodic tilings constructed by word concatenation are under study. The lattice is generated from a parameter given by its continued fraction so that quasiperiodicity emerges for infinite when irrational generators are into consideration. Numerical simulations show a quite regular quadratic decay of Fourier intensities, regardless of the number considered for the generator parameter, which leads us to formulate the hypothesis that this type of media is strongly hyperuniform of order 3. Theoretical derivations show that the density fluctuations scale in the same proportion as the wavenumbers. Furthermore, it is rigorously proved that the structure factor decays around the origin according to the pattern S(k) ∼ k 4 . This result is validated with several numerical examples with different generating continued fractions. Hyperuniformity is a property of a spatial distribution in which there are fewer density fluctuations at long length scales compared to a random distribution with the same number of points. In other words, hyperuniform systems have a more ordered structure than a typical random system, while still being statistically homogeneous. Quasicrystals (as Crystals) are hyperuniform A consistent approach to standard cases characterized by smooth S(k) and quasicrystals with dense but discontinuous S(k) in 1D can be achieved by defining γ based on the integrated Fourier intensity The integral is multiplied by 2 to be consistent with the definition for higher dimensions, where κ is viewed as a radial coordinate. For quasiperiodic lattices, Z(k) is monotonically increasing and for k sufficiently small it can be plotted as bounded between to power-law curves verifying that for some constant coefficients d 1 and d 2 and for some γ. In such case γ is said to be order of hyperuniformity and the cumulative intensity function obeys a power law of order 1 + γ, which is symbolized as Another measure of hyperuniformity is given by the local number variance of particles within a window of radius R (an interval of length 2R in the 1D case), denoted by σ 2 (R) (order metric context). If its growth is more slowly than the window volume (proportional to R in 1D) in the large-R limit, the system is hyperuniform. For any 1D system the scaling of σ 2 (R) for large R is determined by γ as follows: (class I, γ > 1) strongly hyperuniform, (class II, γ = 1) logarithmic hyperuniform and (class III, 0 < γ < 1) weakly hyperuniform. Finally, for γ < 0 we have the anti-hyperuniform class In recent years, there has been significant research interest in hyperuniformity in quasiperiodic tilings, which are complex arrangements of tiles with long-range order but no translational symmetry. Studies have shown that certain types of quasiperiodic tilings exhibit hyperuniformity In this paper we present a comprehensive analysis of the hyperuniformity of quasi-periodic lattices based on word concatenation and generated by continuous fractions. By making use of the recursive nature of these systems, iterative expressions for both Fourier intensities and density fluctuations can be obtained analytically. Both are a function of the different coefficients that form the continued fraction. Analytical expressions for the decreasing pattern of Fourier intensities with wavenumbers for quasiperiodic tilings generated by the so-called Metallic means and by periodic continued fractions are derived in detail, showing good agreement with the numerical examples. Furthermore, it is also proved that the global hyperuniform behavior of the structure factor is S(k) ∼ k 4 . Let us consider two segments (tiles) of lengths A and B and a real number α ∈ R defined in the range 0 < α ≤ 1. Let the sequence [0; a 1 , . . . , a n ] be the continuous fraction of α, namely we can write where a j > 0, for j ≥ 1, are positive integer numbers. ii Using the terms of this sequence, a word can be formed from the alphabet {A, B} by concatenation. The recursive formula is defined as where both the exponent and the product must be understood as concatenations, for instance A 3 (B 2 A) = AAABBA. The parameter α plays the role of generation parameter of the quasiperiodic tiling. From the definition given above, if α is a rational number the word W n corresponds to the last iteration. The infinite word emerges as the periodic concatenation of W n . Otherwise, if α is irrational, then it is known that the sequence {a n } becomes infinite and the associated word has a purely quasiperiodic pattern given by the limit lim n→∞ W n . We will refer to the algorithm given by Eq. ( Both u j and v j are numerator and denominator of the jth convergent α j = u j /v j Moreover, for two consecutive steps the following identity holds which leads to the known distance between two consecutive convergents iii For the tiling associated to the word W j , both the total number of points and tiling length are then N j = u j + v j and L j = u j A + v j B respectively, which can also be determined recursively as Therefore, the total number of points N = N n and the final length of the tiling L = L n are The pattern of points generated by the Sturmian word can be considered as a distribution of local heterogeneities. Thus, the density of the medium generated after n iterations of Eq. ( and its corresponding Fourier series representation leads to where the Fourier coefficients are The sequence {k m } represent the reciprocal space positions and according to Eq. ( In general, evaluation of Eq. (15) requires in first place the concatenation of the complete word W n , and secondly the determination the N real space coordinates x j , 1 ≤ j ≤ N . Taking advantage of the recursive formation of the words, we propose a new iterative approach to find the expression of Eq. (15), avoiding the computation of the N coordinates x j . This procedure is suitable for quasiperiodic 1D lattices generated by concatenation and it can result useful, especially when handling large systems, which is necessary to simulate aperiodic media. Consider any word U formed by U symbols taken from the alphabet {A,B}, and real space positions of points given by {x j , 1 ≤ j ≤ U }. Let us define As long as there is no room for confusion, we will henceforth refer as Fourier coefficients to those obtained by the above expression (16). We are interested in evaluating Eq. ( Then the word UV obtained by concatenation has a length l u + l v and U + V particles whose coordinates respect to the origin of the concatenated word are The Fourier coefficients of the new tiling is Given any integer number m and using the induction principle from this result it is straightforward that where stands for the Fourier intensities of a periodic tiling of m particles with separation l, that is with coordinates {0, l, 2l, • • • , (m -1)l}. Making use of the properties given by Eqs. ( As this new recursive scheme shows, the Fourier coefficients can be obtained just iterating n times the Eq. ( The Fourier coefficients define the properties of the medium in reciprocal space. Media studied in this paper have a discrete distribution of reciprocal space positions k given by k = 2πm/L, with m = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . If A/B is rational, any system obtained by a finite number of interactions n will be periodic having a bounded band of information in the reciprocal space. That is, the distribution of Fourier amplitudes will be periodic. Given a medium of N particles within a length L, let us see the period of this distribution. Indeed, the final expression of Fourier coefficients is exp{ikx j }. Assuming A/B = θ A /θ B is the irreducible fraction of the tiles lengths ratio, then there exist a value of k for which the Fourier coefficients is periodic. That period corresponds to If A/B is irrational, numerator and denominator of the rational approximation θ A /θ B approaches to infinite making also aperiodic the spectrum in the reciprocal space. It results of interest the fact the period derived in Eq. ( Consider the tiling generated by α = [0; a 1 , . . . , a n ] = u n /v n , with length L = L n = Au n + Bv n . For each j with 0 ≤ j ≤ n we can define the parameter σ j obtained as the remaining continued fraction after truncation of α up to position j, i.e. with σ 0 = α and σ n = 0. The number σ j plays a key role in the subsequent developments, specially in the computation of the so-called density fluctuations of the tiling. So, it is interesting to derive two different ways of expressing its value, additionally to the continued fraction given by Eq. ( and solving for σ j Secondly, let us express σ j in form of irreducible fraction. For that, we invoke the following decreasing sequence with general term Taking into account Eqs (26) (28), the sequence {ξ j } presents alternating sign and approaches to zero around the limit value α. Moreover, in general Since the initial values are ξ -1 = -v n , ξ 0 = u n , then ξ j will be negative for odd indexes and positive for even ones. Based on this, the sequence c j = (-1) j-1 ξ j-1 for 0 ≤ j ≤ n + 1, is formed by positive integer numbers and decreasing order from c 0 = v n up to c n = 1 and c n+1 = 0. The recursive relationship between sequences {c j } and {σ j } is then straightforward and given by vii Such set of numbers {c j } so formed will be used as basis to build a sequence of wavenumbers associated to the tiling α n . This sequence will be of special importance in the forthcoming developments and it is defined as Additionally, the term associated to ν = -1 as k -1 = 2πN n /L n will be added at the beginning of the sequence. It should be pointed out that this is a sequence of positive and decreasing numbers, since according to Eq. ( As observed, the number of terms of this sequence increases as the corresponding convergent α n does. The Fourier intensities at these locations reveal strong periodic patterns in direct space, closely related to the formation of the tiling. Taking a closer look at these wavenumbers for the three systems shown (n = 4, n = 6 and n = 8), it results clear that their positions fit quite accurately as higher convergents are considered. Each column of Table In general we can denote by k 0 (α n ) = 2π/(B + α n A) to the wavenumber for ν = 0 calculated for the tiling After a quick inspection of the numerical values shown in the second row of Table Indeed, from of Eqs. ( where the dependence on the associated convergent α n has been highlighted using notation k ν (•) and σ ν (•). This detail in notation is important at this stage since the quotient of Eq.( The values of each of the fractions σ j (α n-1 )/σ j (α n ) for 0 ≤ j ≤ ν -1 are approximately the unity since it is assumed that n ≫ ν ≥ 1. Moreover, for ν = -1 and ν = 0, it yields too These Bragg peaks in reciprocal space have consequences on the behavior of the medium in the long wavelength range. The recursive expression of the Fourier intensities will help to show why this sequence of wavenumbers have dominant magnitudes. Indeed, using Eq. ( where the last step P [a n , L n-1 ; k ν (α n-1 )] = a n holds because P(m, l; k) = m when kl/2π is a integer number. Following the recursive scheme and, as long as j is sufficiently far from ν, we can approximate i.e. they take their maximum values. The Fourier intensities H n (k) at wavenumbers k = k ν , with n ≫ ν, result maximized with respect to other wavenumbers in their neighborhood. This explains why their intensities are several orders of magnitude larger than the rest. Furthermore, in Fig. The approximation of Eqs.(36) and (37) gets worse as the value of k ν (α n-1 ) differs from k ν (α n ), which becomes evident as ν gets closer to n. However, recall we can make n as large as we want for a pure quasiperiodic tiling generated by an infinite continued fraction. Thus, the Fourier intensities at these Bragg peaks at the sequence {k ν } decays towards k → 0 following a pattern stronger than the linear one. In fact, we will see in the next section that, under certain assumptions tested in previous works we can predict analytically the Fourier intensities in this sequence of wavenumbers, which will be called sequence of dominant wavenumbers. ix It is well known that the order of hyperuniformity of a medium in reciprocal space is closely related to the limiting values of density fluctuations in the physical space. In the particular case of quasiperiodic media generated by substitution, it has been observed that the hyperuniformity and the limit density fluctuations are close related Denoting by ρ = N/L = (1+α)/(B+αA) to the limit density of tile vertices, then we can writhe ρ j = ρ+δρ j , where δρ j stands for the deviations respect to ρ and they are given by This relationship exhibits the decreasing amplitudes of density fluctuations for large scales, characteristic of hyperuniform structures. From Eq. ( This expression reveals the close relationship between the ratio of density fluctuations and the parameter σ j introduced in the previous section. Furthermore, using Eq. ( where the new parameter τ j = L j-1 /L j denotes the relationship between tiling lengths at two consecutive iterations. As shown in Eq. ( Eq. ( x (i) According to Eq. (39), the Fourier intensities are maximized at the dominant wavenumber sequence k ν+1 = σ ν k ν (ii) Ratio of two consecutive density fluctuations is proportional to the ratio between two consecutive dominant wavenumbers, i.e. δρν δρν-1 = -σ ν τ ν For the purposes of this section, we can ignore the subscript n since other convergents will not be of interest. Thus, for convenience in notation, let us denote as H(k) = |H n (k)| to the magnitude of the Fourier intensity of tiling generated by α = [0, a 1 , . . . , a n ] at wavenumber k. Assuming the hypothesis that Fourier intensities scales as the density fluctuations, we can establish the following relationship for each pair of consecutive wavenumbers within the sequence Assuming a power law for the Fourier magnitudes, we find that where both σ ν and τ ν can be written as the continued fractions Therefore, the structure factor decays with wavenumbers according the law As Eqs. ( Let us consider for that the tiling generated by α = [0; 1, 8, 1, 8, 1, 8, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, . . .] ≈ 0.8989789 . . . The Fourier intensities can be determined using the recursive procedure proposed in Eq. ( It follows that k 0 and k 1 are quite close to each other, but k 1 and k 2 are far apart. These distances between the wavenumbers are the reflection in the reciprocal space of the jumps between the values 1 and 8 in the sequence. On the other hand, when we evaluate the wavenumbers from k 7 onwards we find k 7 = 0.4142 k 6 , k 8 = 0.4143k 7 , k 9 = 0.4128 k 8 , k 10 = 0.4167 k 9 , . . . i.e., from ν ≥ 7, the wavenumbers are equidistant (in logarithmic scale), reflecting the constant behavior of the sequence as a 7 = a 8 = • • • = 2. The behavior described here can be clearly seen in the red-colored coordinates of the dominant wavenumbers in Fig. xii However, if we look at the overall order of decay of the Fourier intensities as k → 0 in Fig. This case collects the behavior of generalized Fibonacci-type quasiperiodic media that could also be simulated using the substitution rule A → B, B → B a A. The order of hyperuniformity has been studied in refs. Therefore, the Fourier intensities at the wavenumbers k = k ν can be simulated according to the quadratic law It is straightforward that this behavior towards k → 0 (long wavelength range) is governed by the latest values of sequence {a j } (those with highest values of the index j) which, from the definition of the xiii sequence {k ν }, are associated to the lowest values of the wavenumbers. Therefore, it is clear that the Fourier intensities will also decay quadratically for tilings generated by continued fractions of the form α = [0; d 1 , . . . , d m , a, a, a, . . .], such as the one shown in Fig. Since S(k) is formed by a set of singular peaks, it should not be induced that the order of the cumulative intensity function is of one order higher. On the contrary, in these cases it turns out that both S(k) and Z(k) share the same exponent Considering n ≫ ν ≫ p, we can introduce the following values Since the assumed model is multiplicative for both the Fourier intensities and the sequence {k ν }, the value σ = k ν+p+1 /k ν+1 represents the global jump between the two wavenumbers k ν+1 and k ν+p+1 , separated p steps from each other. Due to the periodicity of the continued fraction, the value of σ is independent of the value of ν considered. With a sufficiently high value of ν fixed, from k ν+1 onwards, the relationship between the Fourier intensities over p steps is Since the relationship between the wavenumbers is we can write that Let us now see that the two values σ and τ are approximately equal provided that n ≫ ν ≫ 1, where n represents the total size of the sequence {a j }. In fact, in order to achieve this, we will determine both σ and τ separately, finding for them more compact expressions. From Eq. (29), it is Now, since σ does not depend on ν, we can choose any index ν to obtain its value. In particular, it is of interest to take ν = 0, for which Eq. ( where as known α = u n /v n and u p /v p = [0; a 1 , . . . , a p ] denotes the pth convergent. Additionally, ξ 0 = u n , so that the value of σ can be expressed finally as On the other hand, it turns out that the expression for τ given in Eq. (55) can also be meaningfully abbreviated. Each τ j , ν + 1 ≤ j ≤ ν + p is defined as the ratio between two consecutive tiling lengths, that xv is τ j = L j-1 /L j = [0; a j , a j-1 , . . . , a 1 + θ A /θ B ], hence they all are finite continued fractions. However, since it is assumed that ν ≫ p, then for ν + 1 ≤ j ≤ ν + p, τ j can be approximated as τ j = [0; a j , a j-1 , . . . , a 1 , a p , . . . , a 1 , . . . , a p , . . . , a 1 + θ A /θ B ] ≈ [0; a j , a j-1 , . . . , a 1 , a p , . . . , a 1 ] (61) where the last expression is an infinite continued fraction. Therefore, the above assumption allow us to write each τ j as function of the parameter β = [0; a p , a p-1 , . . . , a 1 ] obtained from α by reversing the period. Indeed, The above expression shows that τ is constant and independent of ν when considering values ν ≫ p something that will be used later. Using the definition given by τ j = L j-1 /L j , see Eq. ( The tilings lengths obey the characteristic recursive sequence L j = a j L j-1 + L j-2 as shown in Eq. ( where u p /v p = [0; a 1 , . . . , a p ] is the p-th convergent of α. Dividing by L ν we obtain finally Using again that we are considering ν = mp as multiple p with ν ≫ p, then we can approximate Plugging Eq. (66) into Eq. ( In order to prove that σ ≈ τ , the ratio σ/τ will be calculated using the derived forms above, (60) y (67). xvi This expression can be simplified even more making use of a known result concerning periodic continued fractions. Indeed, it can be proved has X 1 = β y X 2 = -1/α as roots. Thus, using the relationships between roots and polynomial coefficients, we have Plugging this result into Eq. ( where the identity of Eq.( which demonstrates the quadratic decay of the Fourier intensities considering the full period of p steps and thus S(k) ∼ k 4 . As above, the fact that the spectrum is formed by a singular set of Bragg peaks makes the cumulative intensities to behave under the same power-law, that is, enveloped as Z(k) ∼ k 4 . Fig. In the two previous sections the cases of periodic irrational numbers have been considered. The general case of a tiling generated by any continued fraction is studied in the next section, showing that the global asymptotic exponent of the decreasing Fourier intensities towards k → 0 is demonstrated to be quadratic. After studying the specific cases seen in the previous two points, it is worth asking whether the detected behavior can be generalized to any quasiperiodic medium generated by a continued fraction α = [0; a 1 , . . . , a n ], exhibiting hyperuniform behavior and a structure factor that tends to zero according to a quartic law, i.e., S(k) ∼ k 4 as k → 0. It has been shown that, locally, differences in the values of the sequence {a j } are reflected in perturbations of the Fourier intensities, as observed in the numerical examples in Figs. Without loss of generality, we will name again xvii So that Using the expressions (29) and ( Thus, we can then calculate the value of χ as The above expression tends to 2 because the sequence v n of natural numbers increases indefinitely, while τ n in general remains as less than unity. Several numerical examples have been carried out to verify this property, all of them showing a quadratic exponent in the trend toward the long-wavelength range. Three of them are illustrated in Fig. In this paper the hyperuniformity of one-dimensional quasiperiodic lattices generated by continued fractions has been studied. Given any real number in the interval [0,1] as a continued fraction, we can construct a word or sequence from a binary alphabet, giving rise to quasiperiodic tilings. The studied media are constructed by word concatenation as one-dimensional quasiperiodical distributions of points. The Fourier intensities in the reciprocal space are recursively determined thus exploiting the quasiperiodic nature of the tiling. Among the entire spectrum of Bragg peaks, a sequence of wavenumbers, called dominant sequence of wavenumbers, has been identified, showing special properties related to the density fluctuations of the tiling. It has been proved that the pattern of decay of Fourier intensities at this sequence is quadratic regardless the continued fraction, meaning these media are strongly hyperuniform with exponent 3. The theoretical results have been validated and illustrated by means of several numerical examples.