Materials synthesis in a microfluidic environment enables the flexible and controllable production of various types of nanostructures which are of great potential in the fields of chemistry, environmental science, bioengineering, and medicine. Here, we demonstrate onchip simultaneous continuous-flow synthesis and in-situ spectrum diagnosis of zinc oxide (ZnO) nanomaterials using a femtosecond-fabricated three-dimensional microchannel reactor integrated with an array of optical fiber probes. The microchannel reactor including 3D concentration gradient generators followed by 3D micromixing units provides highefficiency manipulation of reactants with different concentrations as well as parallel reaction dynamics in an autonomous manner. The integrated optical fiber probe array allows precise and parallel spectropic detection in different microchannels with high spatial and temporal resolutions for screening the synthetic conditions. The synthesized ZnO nanostructures can be tailored in size, shape, and morphology by tuning the flow rates and reactant concentrations based on the spectroscopic signals detected with the fiber probe array. Continuous flow synthesis based on microchannel reactors has been recognized as an enabling technology for the rapid production of fine chemicals and advanced materials owing to their advantages such as high reaction efficiency, intrinsic safety, and feasibility in scaling-up production with the ability to perform parallel reactions. The concentration gradient module is designed to generate flows with variable concentrations for fast-screening optimized concentrations of reactants. The on-line monitoring module is designed for obtaining spectra with high spatialtemporal resolution. Five microcells are fabricated at the outlet microchannels from the reactors to make sure each reactor can be monitored independently with high spatial resolution. Each microcell contains two round-shaped windows with a diameter of 2.55 mm, matching with the coupled optical fibers. The windows are horizontally arranged with a distance of 1 mm, allowing transmission of light through the microcell. The local flow velocity in the microcells is reduced to minimize influence of the flow velocity on the collected spectra. Considering the characteristic spectra of materials/chemicals are in a wide wavelength range, we select multimode optical fiber (185 nm to 1,100 nm) to couple with the microcells. Due to the same reason, a fiber-coupled xenon lamp (220~2,200 nm LBTEK, LBHPX2000) is utilized as the light source. The wide wavelength range of the optical fiber and xenon lamp indicate that this on-line monitoring module can be applicable to variety of materials/chemicals. The incident light enters the microcell from the bottom window of the microcell. The transmission light from the top window is sent to a fiber-coupled photospectrometer (Idea optics, NOVA 2S) with a wide spectrum range (200~1,100 nm). The photospectrometer is capable of collecting averaged spectra over a short integration time within 10 ms, which strongly guarantee high resolution and precision of the spectra. We should note that shorter integration time leads to higher precision of real-time monitoring, however the final spectral characterization is the average of five individual tests for one sample point to reduce the effect of flow fluctuation and ensure the stability of detection. We validated the functions of the integrated microfluidic flow synthesizer before carrying out reactions. Numerical simulation demonstrated that concentration gradient was established among the outlets with an interval of approximately 25% (Fig. After numerical simulation study, we use on-line monitoring module to collect experimental data to verify the gradient concentration in the reactors and check whether the on-line monitoring module can work properly. Here zinc nitrate solution of a concentration of 300 mM was loaded into the channel via inlets A and B, and deionized (DI) water was loaded via other two inlets with a flow rates of 12.5 mL min -1 . Fig. The 3D microfluidic synthesizer was used to synthesize ZnO nanostructures. The process is schematically illustrated in Fig. Concentration gradient is expected to be generated in the five reactors. The theoretical concentrations of the Zn(NO3)2 and NaOH solutions which are perfused into the five reactors are shown in Fig. In general, the stronger the absorption, the higher the yield of ZnO. We note that the yield linearly correspond to the concentration of Zn(NO3)2 and NaOH, indicating that the more the reactants, the larger the yield. This trend was kept when the reaction was performed under other flow rates. Fig. This synthesizer offers us a great chance to fast screen a variety of synthetic parameters including the concentration of the reactants and the temperature. The synthetic parameters are changed by tuning flow rates, the concentration gradient of the NaOH solution, Zn(NO3)2 solution and the temperature of the reactor. Fig. All the chemicals for on-chip continuous-flow synthesis were used without further purification. Hydrofluoric acid, potassium hydroxide, zinc nitrate, and sodium hydroxide were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (China). Fabrication of the microfluidic chip was performed by a femtosecond laser micromachining system, Two layers of concentration gradient generator was designed and fabricated integrated with 3D mixers presented in our previous work. The on-chip synthesis of ZnO micro-and nano-materials was achieved by introducing Zn(NO3)2 and NaOH into separate inlets on two layers. The two inlet flows were perfused into microchannels by plunger pumps (custom-made, Sanotac). Concentration gradient was established both for Zn(NO3)2 and for NaOH. The as-synthesized products were collected at the outlet, and then washed for several times with water, finally got dried at 80 °C. The establishment of the concentration gradient was demonstrated by numerical simulation. Here, Reynolds number (Re) was calculated to determine whether the fluids are in laminar flow regimes: Re = ρUL/μ, where the density (ρ ~1000 kg/ m 3 ) and dynamic viscosity (μ ~0.001 Pa• s) of water are used for approximations, L is the characteristic length scale of the system, and U is the average flow velocity, which could be obtained by: U = flow rate/wh. In our case with the 3D microchannels, w = 1 mm, h = 1 mm, the flow rate, velocity Re was shown in Table The outlet is set to be fixed pressure with p=0 and the diffusion coefficient used is D = 1× 10 -9 m 2 /s. The morphology of synthesized products collected from the outlets was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi, S-4800). The crystal structure was examined by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL JEM-1400) and X-ray diffraction (XRD Rigaku, Ultima IV, Cu Kα radiation). The on-line spectra were obtained by the fiber-coupled photo spectrometer (Idea optics, NOVA 2S) with a fibercoupled light source xenon lamp (220 nm-2200 nm LBTEK, LBHPX2000) through optical fiber (185 nm to1100 nm) array coupled with the five microcells. In summary, we fabricated a glass microfluidic chip with 3D CGGs and 3D mixers by femtosecond laser-assisted etching. This fabricated microfluidic chip was further integrated with an array of optical fiber probes for on-chip real-time spectroscopic monitoring of the synthesis process with high spatial and temporal resolutions. We demonstrated that ZnO nanostructures could be synthesized with tailored size and shape by tuning the flow rates and reactant concentrations assisted by the feedback spectroscopic signals detected with the fiber probe array. This real-time spectroscopic monitored continuous synthesis can be applied to other molecules and materials to accelerate scientific research and industrial production. The developed femtosecond laser microfabrication technique will pave the way for advanced prototyping of 3D novel glass-based autonomous continuous-flow "factory-on-achip" microsystems with intelligent feedback control. dynamic viscosity of the fluid, and P represents the constant temperature pressure. The simulated fluid is set to water, with a viscosity of 1×10 -3 N * s/m 2 , and a density of 1000 kg/m 3 . Fluid mixing in microfluidic chip channels is mainly controlled by the law of conservation of matter, which is given by the convection and diffusion equation, whose equation can be described as: Species convection and diffusion equation: c represents the solute concentration; D represents the species diffusion coefficient. The setting of boundary conditions: at the entrance, the model assumes a fully developed laminar flow, and the velocity of the two entrances is the same as ν. To quantitatively evaluate the mixing efficiency of microfluidic chips I, the formula for calculating the mixing efficiency at any cross-section in the mixing channel is defined as: where N is the total number of a cross-section grid cell, ci is each grid cell mass concentration, with c̅ is ci for cross-section calculation of average, σ max 2 is the maximum variance of mixture concentration along each cross-section of the channel (that is, the variance of concentration when there is no mixing at the entrance). σ max 2 is calculated by the following formula: The value of mixing efficiency I varies from 0 (no mixing) to 100% (full mixing). In microfluidic flow synthesis, the flow rate is an important synthetic parameter that can determine the molar ratio of matter and may influence the reaction kinetics. Therefore, we use numerical simulation to consider the influence of the flow rate on the concentration gradient, the velocity difference, and the pressure difference at the two entrances of each reactor. Fig. 