Despite the rapid rise in the performance of a variety of perovskite optoelectronic devices with vertical charge transport, the effects of ion migration remain a common and longstanding Achilles' heel limiting the long-term operational stability of lead halide perovskite devices. However, there is still limited understanding of the impact of tin (Sn) substitution on the ion dynamics of lead (Pb) halide perovskites. Here, we employ scan-rate-dependent current-voltage measurements on Pb and mixed Pb-Sn perovskite solar cells to show that short circuit current losses at lower scan rates, which can be traced to the presence of mobile ions, are present in both kinds of perovskites. To understand the kinetics of ion migration, we carry out scan-ratedependent hysteresis analyses and temperature-dependent impedance spectroscopy measurements, which demonstrate suppressed ion migration in Pb-Sn devices compared to their Pb-only analogues. By linking these experimental observations to first-principles calculations on mixed Pb-Sn perovskites, we reveal the key role played by Sn vacancies in increasing the iodide ion migration barrier due to local structural distortions. These results highlight the beneficial effect of Sn substitution in mitigating undesirable ion migration in halide perovskites, with potential implications for future device development. Lead halide perovskites have shown a remarkable run in photovoltaic applications, with single junction solar cell efficiencies reaching close to 26% and tandem efficiencies (with Si) eclipsing 33%. The manifestation of ion migration in lead (Pb) perovskite devices was first observed in the appearance of apparent large low-frequency dielectric constant and pronounced current-voltage hysteresis in perovskite solar cells. seems to suggest negligible (or complete absence of) ion migration in pure-Sn perovskites, The perovskite films and devices used in this study are based on solution-processed methylammonium (MA)-free compositions, viz. FA0.15Cs0.15PbI3 (henceforth referred to as 'Pb perovskite') and FA0.85Cs0.15Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 (henceforth referred to as 'Pb-Sn perovskite'), where FA refers to the formamidinium cation. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements performed on the films (Figure We then fabricated Pb and Pb-Sn perovskite solar cells with p-i-n configuration with the architecture: ITO / [2-(9H-Carbazol-9-yl)ethyl] phosphonic Acid (2PACz) / perovskite / fullerene (C60) / bathocuproine (BCP) / Cu. For Pb perovskites, JV scans (reverse and forward) of a characteristic device is displayed in Figure Having optimized material and device fabrication, we investigated the nature and extent of the role of ion transport in solar cells comprised of Pb and Pb-Sn perovskites. We performed J-V measurements over a range of scan rates from 5 mV/s to 1 V/s to capture any time-dependent performance changes in the devices. We did not lower the scan rate below 5 mV/s due to long measurement times (tens of minutes) and thus potential degradation of the devices due to bias stress, especially in dark conditions. circuit, leading to a lowering of Jsc. Next, we calculated the variation of hysteresis index (HI) as a function of scan rates . To further understand the extent and impact of ionic diffusion, we employ impedance spectroscopy, which is a powerful technique to disentangle the ionic and electronic response in perovskite device stacks due to the characteristically different time scales of the two phenomena. The 'hf' response has a characteristic lifetime of 5.8 μs, corresponding to a Rrecomb of 340 Ω and a Cgeo of 17 nF, which are similar to those obtained for the Pb cells. Moreover, even after increasing the cell temperature to 40 o C, it was still not possible to resolve any 'lf' response for the Pb-Sn device, even down to frequencies close to 1 mHz (Figure To complement the experimental work with atomic-scale insights into ion migration mechanisms, we also performed systematic density functional theory (DFT) calculations (see details of the computational methodology in Methods). Previous studies by us and other groups have demonstrated that halide ions are the dominant migrating species via a vacancy mechanism in lead-halide perovskites. To examine the impact of Sn substitution, we first focused on a FAPbI3 perovskite structure, which allowed us to probe trends in ion migration energies in a systematic manner. Due to the tetragonal distortion in the lattice, there are two inequivalent iodide sites in FAPbI3 and, consequently, we find that the two most probable pathways for iodide vacancy migration are equatorial-equatorial and axial-equatorial mechanisms, for which the calculated migration barriers are 0.34 eV and 0.45 eV, respectively (Figure We then explore iodide migration and associated energy barriers in the mixed-metal system FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3. Due to such B-metal alloying, there are two inequivalent pathways for axial-equatorial migration involving Pb-centred and Sn-centred iodide diffusion (see Figure It is known that there is a significant population of Sn vacancy defects in Sn-containing perovskites due to their low formation energies. Therefore, these Sn vacancies can be easily ionized, thereby resulting often in the unintentional hole doping in Sn-containing perovskites. The impact of substituting Pb with Sn on the ion migration properties of halide perovskite optoelectronic devices has been investigated using a combination of 