On-chip integration of two-dimensional (2D) materials offers great potential for the realization of novel optoelectronic devices in different photonic platforms. In particular, indium selenide (InSe) is a very promising 2D material due to its ultra-high carrier mobility and outstanding photo-responsivity. Here, we report a high-speed photodetector based on a multilayer 90 nm thick InSe integrated on a silicon nitride (SiN) waveguide. The device exhibits a low dark current of ~10 nA at 1V bias, a remarkable photoresponsivity of 0.38 A/W, and high external quantum efficiency of ∼ 48.4% measured at 5 V bias. This performance is tested at near-infrared (NIR) 976 nm wavelength under ambient conditions. Furthermore, using numerical and experimental investigations, the estimated absorption coefficient per unit length is 0.11dB/μm. To determine the dynamic response of the photodetector, its small and large signal frequency response are also evaluated. A 3-dB radiofrequency (RF) bandwidth of 85 MHz is measured with an open-eye diagram observed at 1 Gbit•s -1 data transmission. Given these outstanding optoelectronic merits, active photonic devices based on integrated multilayer InSe can be realized for a variety of applications including short-reach optical interconnects, LiDAR imaging, and biosensing. 1. The development of near-infrared (NIR 750 nm-1064 nm) integrated photodetectors is crucial for a wide range of modern applications spanning lab-on-a-chip devices and environmental sensing to short-range communication in data centers In the past decade, photodetectors based on graphene and several other two-dimensional materials have demonstrated exceptionally high responsivity and quantum efficiency from visible to near-infrared wavelengths Recently, layered Indium Selenide (InSe) has gained renewed interest as an active optical material due to its anisotropic optical, electrical, and mechanical properties. It has been proposed for several applications including memory devices, optical sensors, artificial synapses, and neural network computing Photodetectors based on few-layered InSe sheets exhibit a broadband response from visible to near-infrared wavelengths with high photoresponsivity In this work, we demonstrate integrated InSe photodetectors on the SiN platform operating in the NIR region. The hybrid SiN/InSe waveguide photodetectors are fabricated by mechanical exfoliation of InSe flakes on top of SiN waveguides. The device operates under bias and exhibits a low dark current of a few nano-amps. Furthermore, a remarkable photoresponsivity of 0.38 A•W -1 and low noise-equivalent power (NEP) of 4.7 nW•Hz 1/2 are achieved at 976 nm wavelength. The devices exhibit a 3-dB radiofrequency (RF) bandwidth of 85 MHz and open-eye diagrams are demonstrated for on-off modulated signals from 50 Mbit•s -1 to 1 Gbit•s -1 . The achieved excellent merits offer a new avenue for building and designing active photonic components on the SiN platform using InSe. Figure A deterministic dry transfer procedure is used to transfer the mechanically exfoliated multilayered InSe on top of the SiN waveguide, laid directly on top of the metal electrodes. It is worth noting that a recent study has reported an anisotropic nature of InSe where the optical absorption is highly affected by the crystal orientation. Given our method for transfer, the fabricated devices are not perfectly aligned with the crystal orientation that maximizes the optical absorption The material characteristics of bulk and transferred InSe are confirmed by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), Raman spectroscopy, x-ray diffraction spectroscopy (XRD), and ellipsometry. To confirm its stoichiometry, EDS of the grown single crystal InSe is performed on the selected area depicted by the highlighted pink color box shown in the SEM image in Fig. The evanescent field coupling in the hybrid structure over a propagation length is simulated using FDTD as shown in Fig. The current-voltage characteristics of the integrated photodetector are tested in the dark state and under monochromatic laser excitation of 976 nm. As previously stated in section 2.2, the refractive index contrast between InSe and SiN induces high optical confinement within the active InSe layer (see Fig. The generated photocurrents (Iph = Ilight-Idark) under different powers as a function of the applied voltage are depicted in Fig. Furthermore, the photodetector's noise equivalent power is calculated to assess its minimal detectable power (noise equivalent power NEP). The latter is defined as in/R, where in is the noise current and R is the responsivity. Therefore, the NEP indicates the excitation power needed to produce a photocurrent equal to the noise current. There are typically three noise sources present: 1/f noise, shot noise, and Johnson noise, where f is the frequency. However, for high-frequency signals f > 1 kHz, the total noise current is determined by the Johnson noise (inJ = (4k B T∆f)/R 0 , where k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, R0 is the channel resistance) and shot noise (ins = 2e(I d + I ph )∆f, where q is the electric charge, ID is the dark current, Δf is the device bandwidth) To test the dynamic performance of the photodetector, its frequency response (RF) is measured. A continuous wave laser at 976 nm is modulated by a commercial optical high-speed modulator. A DC source is used to bias the photodetector using a bias tee. The RF signal is then fed into the network spectrum analyzer (ESA). The schematic of the experimental setup is shown in supplementary Fig. Additionally, an open eye diagram is recorded at a bit rate of 0.5 and partially open one at 1 Gbit.s -1 . The performance of the SiN/InSe photodetector is compared to other waveguide-integrated photodetectors in Fig. 6 In summary, we demonstrated an InSe/SiN waveguide integrated photodetector operating in the near-infrared (976 nm) regime. The fabrication process is simple compared to other integrated photodetectors. The asassembled devices exhibited an extrinsic responsivity of 0.38 A/W (EQE of ~ 44%), a low dark current of 1 nA at 1V, and a fairly low NEP of 4.7 nW/Hz 1/2 . Additionally, a high-index contrast of InSe compared to SiN waveguide, (Δn) of ~ 0.4, it results in improved optical absorption. The measured absorption coefficient for a 90 nm thick flake is 0.11 dB/μm. Additionally, the device showed a 3dB cutoff frequency of 85 MHz at 10 V and open eye diagrams at a bit rate of 0.5 up to 1 Gbit.s -1 . This InSe-based photodetector exhibits high bandwidth and outperforming similar reported devices by more than five to six orders of magnitude. We believe that the bandwidth can be further improved by increasing the carrier mobility, enhancing the waveguide-InSe interface, and reducing the circuit capacitance. This study provides a realization of highperformance photodetectors using a simple architecture with potential applications in a wide range of functions including lab-on-a-chip devices, LiDAR system imaging, and short-reach interconnects for data centers. The InSe single crystals are produced using a 99.999% pure molar combination of In (52.4% weight percentage) and Se (47.6%) compounds that are purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Conical quartz ampoules evacuated to 10 -4 Pa are used to produce single-crystalline InSe flakes. A horizontal furnace is used to homogenize the batches and create the InSe flakes for 48 hours at 550 • C. The Bridgman vertical method is used to grow the mixed crystals. The melt-filled ampoules are heated at 850 • C for 24 hours before pulling; once the melt had filled the ampoule's tip, the ampoules are lowered via a 1 • C temperature gradient at a rate of 0.1mm/h. The InSe crystals that are formed have dimensions of 3 cm and 1.2 cm. The passive SiN photonic devices are fabricated with standard 220-nm-SOI processes in Applied nano tools inc., Metal pads in the devices are patterned by electron-beam lithography followed by the deposition of metal pads (Ti/Au, 10/100 nm) by electron-beam evaporation and a standard lift-off process. After depositing the metal pads, InSe is transferred with the help of a PDMS film. A few layers InSe flakes are exfoliated using scotch tape and transferred onto the PDMS substrate. By using the controllable dry transfer method, the selected InSe flakes are transferred onto the SiN waveguides. The electric field profile in the silicon nitride waveguide and the beam propagation are calculated using the MODE Solutions eigenmode solver and FDTD simulation in Lumerical. The optical parameters used for InSe are those extracted from ellipsometry. The optical parameters of multilayer InSe are determined by Accurion's Imaging Ellipsometry (https://accurion.com/company). This system combines optical microscopy and ellipsometry for spatially resolved layer-thickness and refractive index measurements. The tool is highly sensitive to ultrathin singleand multi-layer films, ranging from mono-atomic or monomolecular layers (sub-nm regime) up to thicknesses of several microns. Additionally, Imaging Ellipsometers can perform layer thickness measurements with a spatial resolution down to 1 μm. The ellipsometric parameters (Psi (ψ) and Delta (∆) are fitted using EP4 model software. A (FEI) Quanta 450 field emission scanning electron microscope with an electron energy of 10 KV is used to image the photonic chips while they are placed on an SEM stub using carbon tape. The tapping mode of the WITec Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) module is used to determine the thickness of the transferred InSe flake. The cantilever tip (Scanasyst-air) had a radius of 7 nm, a force constant of 0.2 N/m, and a resonance frequency of 14 kHz. The optical transmission is performed using edge coupling the light into the photonic chips through lensed fiber and a tunable laser operating at 976 nm. The output response from the devices is collected by an output lensed fiber and detected by a power meter. The output optical power intensities are calibrated before testing the device using a standard photodiode power sensor. The steady-state performance of the InSe photodetectors is tested by measuring their dark current and responsivity. A transverse electric-polarized (TE) of 976 nm light is edge coupled via lensed optical fiber to the devices. A curve tracer/power device analyzer / (Agilent B1505A) is used to control the biases and measure the I-V characteristics in the dark and upon light coupling via a pair of standard DC electrical probes.