The world is full of fluids that flow. The fluid nature of flowing skyrmionic quasiparticles is of fundamental physical interest and plays an essential role in the transport of many skyrmions. Here, we report the laminar and transiently disordered dynamic behaviors of many magnetic skyrmions flowing in a pipe channel. The skyrmion flow driven by a uniform current may show a lattice structural transition. The skyrmion flow driven by a non-uniform current shows a dynamically varying lattice structure. A large uniform current could result in the compression of skyrmions toward the channel edge, leading to the transition of the skyrmion pipe flow into an open-channel flow with a free surface. Namely, the width of the skyrmion flow could be adjusted by the driving current. Skyrmions on the free surface may form a single shear layer adjacent to the main skyrmion flow. In addition, although we focus on the skyrmion flow dynamics in a clean pipe channel without any pinning or defect effect, we also show that a variation of magnetic anisotropy in the pipe channel could lead to more complicated skyrmion flow dynamics and pathlines. Our results reveal the fluid nature of skyrmionic quasiparticles that may motivate future research on the complex flow physics of magnetic textures. The advance of hardware and software technologies will benefit future information-driven society It is therefore important to explore the complex dynamics of skyrmions in nanoscale device geometries in order to realize skyrmion-based functional devices. The single and collective skyrmion dynamics are fundamental for the manipulation of skyrmionic bits in magnetic substrates An important problem of the flow dynamics of fluid particles in pipes is whether it is described by the laminar, turbulent, or transitional dynamics We simulate the current-driven dynamics of many compact Néel-type skyrmions in a 2D ferromagnetic pipe channel with the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction where m is the reduced magnetization, t is the time, γ 0 is the absolute gyromagnetic ratio, α is the Gilbert damping parameter, h eff = -1 μ0MS • δε δm is the effective field. μ 0 , M S , and ε denote the vacuum permeability constant, saturation magnetization, and average energy density, respectively. The system energy terms include the exchange energy, DM interaction energy, PMA energy, and demagnetization energy, as expressed in the average energy density below where A, D, and K are the ferromagnetic exchange, DM interaction, and PMA constants, respectively. B d is the demagnetization field. n is the unit surface normal vector. micromagnetic simulator We focus on the skyrmion dynamics with an initially zero skyrmion Hall angle (i.e., the overdamped case To determine θ for θ SkHE = 0 • , we analyze θ SkHE of a compact skyrmion using the Thiele equation where v = (v x , v y ) is the steady skyrmion velocity, and j e = (j x , j y ) = (-j e sin θ, j e cos θ) is the electron current. G = (0, 0, -4πQ) is the gyromagnetic coupling vector associated with the Magnus force, where Q = 1 4π m•( ∂m ∂x × ∂m ∂y )dxdy is the skyrmion number We further computationally find that a relaxed compact To explore the possible dynamic behaviors of the skyrmion pipe flow in our studied system, we first drive the skyrmions in the pipe channel into motion under a systematic variation of the current density. We consider a uniform and a non-uniform current density distribution [Fig. all skyrmions into motion toward the +x direction with an intrinsic skyrmion Hall angle of θ SkHE = 0 • . Namely, we ensure that the skyrmion shows no skyrmion Hall effect (i.e., θ SkHE = 0 • ) and deformation driven by a small current. The initial state includes 180 relaxed compact skyrmions forming a stable triangular lattice in the pipe (Fig. The laminar flow means that the fluid particles flow orderly in smooth and parallel paths without lateral mixing, where each particle only has a constant velocity along the path For the system driven by a uniform current [Figs. 4(a)-4(e)], the skyrmions move toward the +x direction and the skyrmion lattice structure gradually changes to a more stable triangular configuration [Fig. creases when the current is applied and then decreases during the lattice transition; it finally approaches a stable value when a steady skyrmion pipe flow is formed. We also note that the skyrmion size is slightly oscillating during its motion, as indicated by the time-dependent m z [Fig. For the system driven by a non-uniform current [Figs. 4(f)-4(j)], the skyrmions move toward the +x direction and form a laminar pipe flow (see Supplementary , where I = 1 4π ( ∂m ∂x ×m) y dxdy is related to the efficiency of the spin torque over the skyrmion interactions lead to more pronounced oscillations in m z and total energy of the system, however, the total skyrmion number remains constant [Figs. In fluid dynamics, a laminar flow may transform into a transitional flow and further to a turbulent flow as the Reynolds number increases. The speed of the fluid plays an important role on the transition as the Reynolds number increases with the flow speed. To explore similar phenomena in the skyrmion pipe flow, we apply a moderately large current to drive the system as the skyrmion speed increases with j. For the sys-tem driven by a uniform current, we do not find the laminarturbulent transition for a moderate range of j = 10 -50 MA cm -2 , however, we observe a transition of the skyrmion pipe flow into an open-channel flow due to the skyrmion deformation-induced skyrmion Hall effect (see Supplementary Video 3 [90]). In Fig. In principle, the skyrmions should move with θ SkHE = 0 • as shown in Fig. For the system driven by a moderately large non-uniform current, we do not find a fully developed turbulent flow, however, we find both laminar and transiently disordered dynamic FIG. Here, it is worth mentioning that the oscillation of the skyrmion size driven by a moderately large current (Figs. In this section, we further investigate the laminar dynamics of the skyrmion pipe flow in the presence of certain magnetic anisotropy variation. The model geometry and parameters are the same as that used in Sec. III C, however, a variation of the magnetic anisotropy constant in the pipe channel is applied by considering grain-like regions with slightly varying PMA constants using the Voronoi tessellation As shown in Fig. In Fig. It should be noted that the effect of the anisotropy variation on the skyrmion pipe flow driven by a small non-uniform current (Figs. In conclusion, we have studied the flow dynamics of skyrmions in a 2D pipe driven by small and moderately large currents. A lattice structural transition may happen due to the skyrmion-edge and skyrmion-skyrmion interactions. A small non-uniform current could create a laminar skyrmion flow, while a large non-uniform current may create a transitional skyrmion flow. A uniform current may also lead to a transition of the skyrmion pipe flow to an open-channel flow. Namely, the width of the skyrmion flow could be controlled by the current density of the applied uniform current. A chain of skyrmions on the free surface of the open-channel skyrmion flow could move faster than the main skyrmion flow. Our results reveal the rich dynamics of fluid-like topological spin textures. Our results may also motivate future research toward the understanding of the complex flow and transport phenomena in magnets.