This work highlights the potential of earth-abundant mixed-metal oxide catalysts for the acid-based oxygen evolution reaction. These catalysts offer numerous combinations of metalcentre compositions, which can enhance catalytic activity and stability compared to preciousmetal-based catalysts commonly used today. Despite substantial research in this field, there is a need for new methods and approaches to accelerate the exploration of these materials. In this study, we present a comprehensive approach to designing, developing, and implementing a self-driving laboratory to optimize the electrodeposition synthesis of amorphous mixed-metal oxide catalysts for the acidic oxygen evolution reaction. We particularly emphasize the development of methodologies to address experimental variability. We investigate crucial parameters and considerations when transitioning from manual bench-top synthesis and evaluation to automation and machine learning guided optimization. We address both experimental and optimization algorithm considerations in the presence of experimental variability. To illustrate our approach, we demonstrate the optimization of CoFeMnPbOx electrodeposited catalyst materials through multiple campaigns. Our results highlight considerations for optimizing overpotential and stability based on the outcomes of our experiments. As the world faces the pressing challenge of climate change, the development of clean and sustainable energy sources is more important than ever. One promising avenue is the use of renewable energy technologies, such as water splitting, to generate hydrogen as a fuel. This process requires a highly efficient and stable catalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), which is often expensive and relies on precious metals such as platinum or iridium for acceptable performance in acidic OER environments in terms of catalytic activity and stability. Extensive research has been conducted to assess and discover catalyst materials with promising properties. However, there is still a vast array of potential candidates in this field that we have only begun to comprehend and exploit. The sheer number of material combinations, parameters, and synthesis conditions adds to the extensive data space, necessitating thoughtful deliberation to expedite the production and evaluation of these materials. To perform this optimization, we developed and deployed a self-driving laboratory, in collaboration with North Robotics. Self-driving laboratories offer an alternative approach to high-throughput experimentation, utilizing probabilistic optimization algorithms, such as Bayesian optimization and genetic algorithms This study focuses on amorphous transition mixed metal oxides and optimizes a set of experimental conditions to identify optimal regions of potential CoFeMnPbOx catalysts as it relates to both activity (minimize overpotential) and stability utilizing a self-driving laboratory. This study serves as a guide towards developing a self-driving laboratory for electrocatalysis applications and presents our critical evaluation, findings, considerations, and suggestions when looking to deploy a self-driving laboratory for electrodeposition and electrocatalysis evaluation. In particular, we explore various approaches to the design of the self-driving laboratory, the importance of reproducibility and validity in the data, proxy experimentation, experimental noise and variance on the metric of optimization, and finally culminate this into the optimization of a mixed-metal oxide catalyst for the OER reaction. We set out to design a self-driving laboratory for the electrochemical synthesis and characterization of the mixed-metal oxide catalyst material, with the goal of a) optimizing the synthesis conditions of the mixed-metal oxide electrodeposition to achieve a material with the lowest OER overpotential within the defined experimental space, and b) elucidate stability information from these catalysts through the utilization of proxy experimentation. We focus our efforts on OER active earth-abundant elements (Co, Fe) coupled with a structural element (Mn, Pb) synthesized via electrodeposition. Electrodeposition allows for the fabrication of uniform thin films with good adhesion and electrical contact with the substrate (in this case, fluorinated tin oxide FTO), along with the ability to directly probe the catalyst activity without influence from any geometric and/or size distribution influences that may arise when working with non-thin film morphologies (eg. power materials). For this particular challenge, previous research has demonstrated the effectiveness of anodic electrodeposition to combine catalytically active transition metal species, such as Co, Fe, and Ni, with those of more acidic stable, albeit low-activity species such as Pb or Bi. An outline of the workflow for the designed self-driving laboratory is shown in The physical platform is shown in Figure Both the electrodeposition and electrochemical performance evaluation occur in our custom-made automated 3-electrode electrochemical cells (Figure Critical to this work is the workflow development to properly evaluate the catalyst performance. In particular, our goal is to develop an automated experimental protocol that can be used to optimize the catalyst overpotential, while also gathering information on the material composition relationship to acid stability during OER. As will be discussed in subsequent sections, experimental variability, in particular those related to the desired metric to be optimized, must be understood and sources of error and variance in the experimental protocol must be minimized for a successful optimization process. Furthermore, it is desirable to minimize the total reaction time and increase the throughput of experiments, without losing experimental data fidelity. Typically, to evaluate the performance of an electrocatalyst, techniques such as linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) are used to obtain a metric of overpotential versus a set current rate. Historically, 10 mA/cm 2 has been a benchmark target for OER performance. To evaluate electrochemical performance, we performed 30-minute chronopotentiometry with intermittent electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Scheme 1 summarizes our performance measurement protocol. As part of this development, we relied on the concept of 'proxy' figures of merit. Proxy metrics involve measurements that elucidate specific performance metrics of a material that may lack fundamental considerations and/or be influenced by external factors limiting the use of these metrics outside of the housed experimental campaign, but is acceptable within the confines of an experimental campaign when utilized to compare one sample to another for optimization purposes. With this reasoning, we chose to evaluate overpotential via constant current hold for 30 minutes. Such a measurement allows for the catalyst to reach a 'steady state' within the electrochemical environment, as would be expected of a mixed-metal oxide in an acidic environment undergoing surface reconstruction upon initial electrification. To properly evaluate catalyst stability, the most appropriate measurements involve the direct measurement of the catalyst material dissolution from the material into the electrolyte, via methods such as quartz crystal microbalance or inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry. To summarize, we determined that for our samples of interest, there is a near-linear decay in the effective capacitance of the sample versus time under constant current, which can be used to linearly extrapolate and predict the catalyst end of life after operating for only 20 minutes. We understand that a much more comprehensive study is necessary to gather a larger data set to gain more accuracy and test the thresholds of our predictive model, which are the focus of future studies. Furthermore, it is worth exploring and developing other methods of accelerated stress testing of OER catalysts, which can be used as strong predictors of catalyst lifetime when coupled with ML to elucidate performance-prediction models. However, for our purposes in determining an adequate OER performance characterization protocol within the confines of our system (electrodeposited non-noble metal OER thin film catalysts), the presented measurements serve as an adequate proxy indicator of catalyst lifetime to compare those catalyst synthesized from the self-driving laboratory. A standard electrodeposition protocol is required to establish an acceptable level of sampleto-sample reproducibility. We used a modified version of Chatti et. al. To confirm these conclusions, two control experiments were performed to confirm the identity of the observed DRT peaks. The resulting DRT fit-EIS spectra for replicate 3-minute electrodeposited catalyst materials were subjected to a) OER in a different supporting electrolyte (0.1 M HNO3) (Figure Of critical importance when attempting to optimize an experimental parameter via an active learning algorithm is the need to understand the experimental variability. Electrocatalysis OER measurements are prone to variability given the nature of the dynamic environment in which the experiment takes place. The sample-to-sample performance of these repeated experiments is relatively consistent, which is to be expected, albeit the measurement of the exact overpotential metric increases in variances as the current increases, as there is a more vigorous generation of bubbles. The overpotential mean and standard deviation of each current is 1 mA/cm 2 : μ = 1.79 V, σ = 2.9 mV; 5 mA/cm 2 : μ = 1.87 V, σ = 4.3 mV; and 10 mA/cm 2 : μ = 2.09 V, σ = 14.9 mV. Based on the overpotential variability inherent in the OER performance measurements, we were determined to quantify how this variability impacts the performance of the machine-learning optimizer, in-order to influence our choice of optimizer for deployment in the self-driving laboratory. An extensive amount of optimizers have been developed and demonstrated successfully within self-driving laboratories. Acquisition functions play a crucial role in optimizing algorithms and data queries in noisy observation environments. A detailed explanation of the optimization process and the role of the acquisition function has been covered in previous studies. These were implemented utilizing BoTorch model libraries of SingleTaskGP and FixedNoiseGP, which are single-output GP models. For hyperparameters of GP models, we choose Matérn52 kernel covariance function (with a high smoothness value, 2.5) and Automatic Relevance Determination (ARD) To explore the effectiveness of the models in the design spaces with a limited number of samples (mimicking an SDL), we initiated the BO algorithms with one randomly selected sample and one query sample is picked from the pool in each iteration. The total pool of undiscovered data points can be expressed as ( x ⃗ ; y) ∈ D, whose input features x ⃗ are all discrete data points and are made available for evaluation by the acquisition functions. Discrete material design spaces are chosen due to the resolution of the experimental set-up and overpotential measurements. The BO algorithms and the acquisition functions to be compared are evaluated in 20 campaigns of cycles with 20 independent random seeds. The aggregated performances of the BO algorithms were derived from 20 averaged runs with reporting mean and standard deviation of the results. We reduced the chances of landing on more informative samples by randomly selecting the first sample and running the algorithms in campaigns and comparing the mean and variance of the models. The Top% metric is a percentage of the top 30 catalysts that were selected from the entire parameter space. Discovered top candidates [0,30] Number of top candidates to achieve (30) Enhancement Factor (EF) indicates how well the algorithm performs in finding the top candidates compared to the random baseline in each learning cycle (i) and is shown as: The Acceleration Factor (AF) indicates how fast an algorithm can reach a defined number of top candidates. This parameter is an especially important metric for the comparison of expensive experiments, where it is ideal to accelerate the pace of exploration in as few experiments as possible. The challenge associated with working with experimental data is they exhibit either homoscedastic or heteroscedastic behaviour. With this dataset, we added homoscedastic (NEI) or synthetic heteroscedastic experimental noise (SEN) to the overpotential outputs and evaluate the previously discussed algorithms, hyperparameters, and acquisition functions to gain an understanding of the strengths and limitations of such algorithms as they attempt to accommodate noisy observation environments. Homoscedastic noise is when the variance of the noise is constant across the entire dataset. The assumption of constant variance may lead to biased parameter estimates and emphasize the regions with low variance and underemphasize the regions with high variance. The summarized results of this benchmarking study are shown in Figure From the evaluation of the Top(%) benchmarking metric alone, it is difficult to determine a statistically significant superior optimizer. Evaluating the EF (Figure , respectively. This benchmarking study was applied to experimental data from [8], as detailed in the body. Under this same framework, we evaluated the addition of variance to the overpotential, with the results shown in Figure We performed two separate optimization campaigns using the self-driving laboratory outlined in this work, with the design considerations mentioned in prior sections. For each campaign, the electrodeposition target elements were Co, Fe, Mn, and Pb, using discrete concentrations of between 0 M and 1 M, with an increment step size of 0.1 M, generating an experimental landscape of 256 possible different deposition solution compositions. The measured overpotential after 30 minutes of applied constant current (5 mA/cm 2 ) for each catalyst run is shown in Figure From a scientific standpoint, the experimental results obtained with this self-driving laboratory are corroborated with those results in scientific literature. In particular, previous studies have demonstrated that a 1:1 combination of Co 2+ :Pb 2+ with the addition of a small amount of Mn In conclusion, this study has demonstrated the effectiveness of a self-driving laboratory in optimizing mixed-metal oxide electrocatalysts for acid-stable OER. The incorporation of an experimental optimizer enabled us to quickly identify an optimal electrodeposition procedure with Pb to Co ratio, and small dopings of either Fe or Mn for improved overpotential performance, with this finding corroborated by the literature. Additionally, we explored the use of proxy experimentation as a valuable tool for designing experimental workflows when expensive characterization equipment is not available, and have shown an initial view of generated correlations between elemental composition and pseudo-acid stability through electrochemical measurements alone. While the concepts of proxy experimentation presented in this work by no means can replace rigorous material characterization methods, they offer an opportunity to utilize versatility and carefully designed experimental protocols in unconventional ways to gather some scientific intuition and/or information that would otherwise not be possible. This is a concept we plan to further develop and report on in future work. We emphasize the importance of reproducibility and validity in measurements and have presented our approach to improving this methodology as it relates to this work. Moving forward, we plan to expand our capabilities with onboard characterization to incorporate other metrics and improve our scientific understanding of property-performance relationships. Furthermore, we aim to explore other electrodeposition parameters as they relate to other electrochemical systems. We encourage other researchers to critically consider the use of self-driving laboratories and proxy experimentation to optimize their experiments and elucidate performance information. The electrodeposition and electrochemical performance evaluation are discussed within the body of this work. Anodic electrodeposition conditions employed previous literature procedures, and utilized hydrate forms of nitrate salts in total concentrations between 0 -1 M in 0.1 M nitric acid (HNO3, 70% ACS reagent diluted with 18 MΩ Millipore H2O). Electrodeposited samples were of the oxy-hydroxide form (CoFePbMnOx) and were synthesized using cobalt(II) nitrate hexahydrate (Co(NO3)2•6H2O, 99.999% trace metals basis, Sigma Aldrich), lead(II) nitrate (Pb(NO3)2, 99.999% trace metals basis, Sigma Aldrich), manganese(II) chloride tetrahydrate (MnCl2•4H2O, 99.99% trace metals basis, Sigma Aldrich), and iron(III) nitrate nonahydrate (Fe(NO3)3•9H2O, 99.999% trace metals basis, Sigma Aldrich) from a 1 M stock solution, added and diluted to 10 mL of the optimizer-specified concentration. An automated dispensing unit with an accuracy of 0.05 mL was used to prepare the electrodeposition samples, with a mass balance used to confirm the final solution concentration to +/-1% targetted molarity. All electrodeposition procedures were performed in a 3-electrode cell with pre-cleaned fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) glass slide used as the working electrode and deposition substrate (MSE supplies, 2.2 mm thick, 7-8 Ohm/Sq TEC 7, 25 x 25 mm), an Ag/AgCl reference electrode (3M KCl, 6 mm, BaSi), and a cleaned graphite rod as the counter electrode. The electrochemical OER performance evaluation utilized a similar electrochemical set-up in a duplicate electrochemical cell to avoid cross-contamination, except used a Pt coil as the counter electrode as opposed to a graphite rod. The OER performance electrolyte was 0.01 M H2SO4 (99.999%, Sigma Aldrich). After each experiment, all cell contents were washed with 18 MΩ millipore water 10 times to remove trace metal concentrations (See The true evaluation of catalyst stability requires operating the catalyst in a representative environment until the catalyst is either fully deactivated or dissolved. We wanted to investigate if we could reduce the time required to obtain a relevant descriptor of catalyst stability and utilize this approach to obtain a proxy method for comparing catalysts within the same campaign as a means to reduce the experimental time required for the performance evaluation. Figure For each electrochemical curve, the voltage slope was extracted at times of 10, 20, and the full lifetime of the catalyst material. The full lifetime of the catalyst was taken at the inflexion point to higher voltages, which was visually confirmed as this inflexion point corresponded to when the thin catalyst layer was completely removed from the FTO substrate during OER. Figure Subsequently, current hold EIS measurements were taken every 3 minutes during the entirety of the constant-current OER measurement until catalyst dissolution. A single Randles circuit with a constant phase element (CPE) was fit to each EIS spectra to extract circuit element values for Rs, Rct, CCPE and α. Given the nature of these experiments (low current and thin-film catalyst materials), a single Randle circuit was found adequate to represent the obtained data. The interfacial capacitance of mixed-metal oxide surfaces, in particular those under dynamic OER conditions is difficult to truly evaluate and equate to the true electrochemical active surface area, as the true specific capacitance of our materials is impossible to accurately determine given the dynamic nature of the amorphous mixed-metal oxide material during OER. Hence we focus on establishing a capacitance term that is dependent on the contributions from the solution and polarization resistances. During anodic electrodeposition, bubbles are generated at the electrode surface which blocks the substrate sites from further deposition. These bubbles can occlude the catalyst surface, creating a templated, visibly non-uniform coated electrode surface. We standardized the electrodeposition procedure to include intermittent pulsing during the electrodeposition step to occur every minute to remove the bubbles from the surface. The result of this pulsed templating method is a visually smooth catalyst surface that is void of bubble templating, as shown in Figure 