We discuss the methodology of quantum Monte Carlo calculations of the effective mass based on the static self energy, Σ(k, 0). We then use variational Monte Carlo calculations of Σ(k, 0) of the homogeneous electron gas at various densities to obtain results very close to perturbative G0W0 calculations for values of the density parameter 1 ≤ rs ≤ 10. The obtained values for the effective mass are close to diagrammatic Monte Carlo results and disagree with previous quantum Monte Carlo calculations based on a heuristic mapping of excitation energies to those of an ideal gas. Landau's Fermi liquid theory Recently, variational diagrammatic Monte Carlo calculations (VDiagMC) In this paper, we revisit the methodology of zero temperature QMC calculations of the effective mass, in order to resolve the discrepancy between QMC and perturbative/VDiagMC results, show how such calculations can be done and provide new results for 3D Jellium. In principle, the effective mass can also be calculated from the temperature dependence of thermodynamic quantities Landau energy functional. Landau pσ,p σ f (pσ, p σ )δn pσ δn p σ (1) Here, μ is the chemical potential, ε p = (p -p F )p F /m * is the quasiparticle energy which determines the effective mass for momenta in the vicinity of the Fermi momentum, p F , and f (pσ, p σ ) is the quasi-particle interaction, independent of volume, V , to leading order. Here, and in the following, we assume a homogeneous system with isotropic Fermi surface. The success of Landau's Fermi liquid theory started with its application to strongly interacting quantum liquids Fermi liquid behavior results from the assumption of certain analytical properties of fundamental correlation functions Both quantities, Z and m * , can thus be operationally defined from the single particle Greens function, conve-niently expressed in Fourier space, where |E N n denotes the n th eigenstate with energy E N n of the N -particle system. The self energy Σ defined as captures all effects of interactions where m is the bare mass. The Fermi surface is then determined from . Its analytic structure close to the singularity determines Fermi liquid behavior. Under quite general assumptions the self-energy of the infinite system allows an expansion (5) up to corrections of order k 2 and z 2 log z. The singularity dominating the Green's function close to the Fermi surface is then with giving rise to a well defined quasi-particle behavior of strength Z and energy (k -k F )k F /m * . Since G(k, 0) changes sign at k = k F , the singularity of the Green's function close to the Fermi surface is entirely contained in either G + (k, z) or G -(k, z). The real-time spectral function is obtained by approaching the real axis using Landau's energy functional may then be identified with the quasi-particle energies of the single particle propagator Both, Z and m * , can be obtained from static observables at zero temperature. The value of the renormalization constant Z can be read off from the jump in the momentum distribution Landau's Fermi liquid theory successfully describes thermal equilibrium or hydrodynamic transport observables The microscopic theory maps them to the single particle quasi-particle spectrum, characterized by the emerging pole in the exact interacting propagator, Eq. ( Considering the generalized Hamiltonian H = N (H N -μN ), an external perturbation ξ(a k + a † k ) couples the ground state of the N particle systems to excitations containing N ± 1 particles. From time-independent perturbation theory, restricting to states |E + within the subspace of N and N + 1 particles, the perturbed ground state up to linear order in ξ can be written as yielding the energy to second order in ξ: Similarly E - k is the ground state of the perturbed Hamiltonian restricted to the N and N -1 subspaces. The Green's functions are determined by comparing with the Lehmann representation, Eq. (2), Upper bounds to the ground state energies E ± k can be obtained with a variational ansatz for |E ± k and minimizing the expectation value of the perturbed Hamiltonian with respected to variational parameters. Although technically a little bit more involved, calculations of the static Green's function is thereby reduced to a static response function, analogous to calculations of the density response Quantum Monte Carlo calculations. Let us now turn to the calculation of the static single-particle Green's function via quantum Monte Carlo methods, focusing on G + (k, 0). For that, we minimize the energy E + T (ξ) of the generalized Hamiltonian H using a trial wave function, |Ψ T (ξ) , in the Fock space of N and N + 1 particle wave functions providing an upper bound for E + k (ξ). Assuming that ξ is sufficiently small, the trial wave function can be expanded as Minimizing with respect to α 1 , α 2 in the limit of ξ → 0, we obtain a variational approximation for the Green's function in the particle excitation sector where we have assumed normalized wave functions, e.g. , with overall phases such that all matrix elements are real. An analogous calculation in the hole sector yields G - μ (k, 0) from a variational calculation based on superposition of the lowest energy state for a hole excitation and a k |Ψ N 0 . Thus, the static Green's function So far, the chemical potential, μ, entering as a parameter in G ± μ , has not been specified yet. Since single particle excitation are gapless in the Fermi liquid, the chemical potential can be fixed by the implicit equation lim k→k F G -1 μ (k, 0) = 0. Finite size effects. Our Quantum Monte Carlo calculations are done for finite number of electrons N confined in a periodic cube of side L and volume V = L 3 . Calculations must be extrapolated to the thermodynamic limit. Shell effects in the single particle energy spectrum and the Coulombic interaction represent the main source of finite size effects Shell effects can be addressed by twisted boundary conditions Although GC-TABC allows us to obtain G ± μ (k, 0) for arbitrary k, size effects due to intrinsic two-body effects remain. In charged systems, these are dominated by the long-range Coulomb interaction where v q = 4πe 2 /q 2 is the Coulomb interaction, ε 0 k = 2 k 2 /2m, and the integral is restricted to a cube with |q α | < π/L for any spatial component (α = x, y, z). Due to this restriction, we can use the expression (q, ω) 1 -ω 2 p /ω for the dielectric function, where ω p is the plasma frequency. Since, the dominant contribution to the integral stems from the finite values of ω = iν, substituting this limiting form for the dielectric function captures the exact behavior in the limit of small q. The resulting integration then gives with C 1.22 e 2 /L. One can show that Eq. ( Results and discussion. We have performed VMC calculations for the 3D homogeneous electron gas based on analytical Slater-Jastrow (SJ) and Slater-Jastrow backflow (BF) wave functions In Figure In Figure In contrast to Z, perturbative calculations of ∂ k Σ(k F , 0) seem to be much less sensitive to the underlying approximation scheme, e.g. self-consistency and vertex corrections In order to deduce the effective mass, we have fitted our QMC results for Σ(k, 0) around k F to obtain ∂ k Σ(k F , 0). In table I we summarize our results based on size corrected GC-TABC calculations for N = 66 SJ and N = 54 BF wave functions. We see that the decrease of Z competes with the increase of ∂ k Σ(k F , 0), resulting in values of m * /m very close to one. However, since mk -1 F ∂ k Σ(k F , 0) remains smaller than one even at r s = 10, the lowering of Z with increasing r s eventually dominates the effective mass and m * clearly increases for r s 4. Similarly to Z, the change from the SJ trial function to more accurate BF trial functions reduces ∂ k Σ(k F , 0) by a small amount, slightly larger than our statistical resolution. This provides a rough estimate of the bias due to the trial wave function. Since our approach is variational, we expect that the our results provide upper bounds to ∂ k Σ. In addition, more correlated wave functions tend to lower the values of Z Our results are in rather good agreement with perturbative G 0 W 0 calculations The quantitative agreement between two methodologically and numerically different methods, real space QMC and VDiagMC, is highly encouraging. Comparisons with high precision measurements, as already done in solid sodium The authors acknowledge support from the Fondation Nanosciences de Grenoble. DMC is supported by the U.S. Dept. of Energy, CMS program DE-SC0020177. M.H. thanks Saverio Moroni for many valuable discussions. Computations were done using the GRICAD infrastructure which is supported by Grenoble research communities, and HPC resources from GENCI-IDRIS A0140914158. In this Supplementary Material we provide details of the VMC calculations, how the self-energy is extracted, and how errors are estimated. Then we present data for different sizes of the simulation cell in table S.2. Finally we compute an effective band mass of excitation energies and compare with a recent calculation. We have performed variational quantum Monte Carlo simulations using both Γ point and grand-canonical twist-averaged boundary conditions (GC-TABC) conditions for systems containing between N = 38 and N = 162 electrons. In these calculations we used Slater-Jastrow (SJ) and Slater-Jastrow-Backflow (BF) trial wave functions with analytical expressions for the Jastrow and backflow potentials as detailed in Ref. A SJ/BF wave function for the ground state is with where q contains N wave vectors of lowest |q| (here and in the following we do not explicitly consider the spinstructure of our paramagnetic system where the determinant can be further reduced to the product of two determinants, one for each spin), and U N denotes the symmetric pair correlation factor In the case of SJ wave functions, the arguments of the orbitals φ q (•) are the bare electron coordinates, whereas in backflow wave functions they are shifted by a manybody correlation factor Our perturbed wave functions, Eq. ( In the following, we describe both wave functions in detail. Let us first discuss Ψ N ±1 1 which is chosen in order to represent a good trial wave function for an N ± 1 particle energy state with momentum ±k compared to the ground state. For Ψ N ±1 1 , we used the simplest extension of the ground state state wave function to a correlated excited state which approximately describes an exact eigenstate of momentum ±k in the N ± 1 particle sector In the case of particle excitations (Ψ N +1 1 ), the orbitals of the Slater determinant D N +1 now contain also k in addition to all wave vectors occupied in the ground state, whereas for hole excitations (Ψ N -1 which is built from the same Jastrow potential u(•) used in the ground state, and the summation is over all N (N ± 1)/2 pairs of particles. In contrast to Ψ N ±1 , where we have used a straightforward candidate for minimizing the total energy, 2 is chosen to maximize the overlap with the perturbation acting on the ground state, in the case of particle excitations, and In the coordinate representation, the unnormalized hole state Ψ N -1 2 can be written as with R N = (r 1 , . . . , r N ). In practice, we perform a VMC calculation of weight and matrix elements/ expectation values containing Ψ N 0 (R N ) and Ψ N -1 2 (R N -1 ) can be accessed via introducing additional integrals over r N and reweighting. In the particle excitation sector, Ψ N +1 2 , for SJ wave functions, we can explicitly write down where and we can write for the orbital k, we can write the wave function in form of a determinant times a symmetric correlation function with φ q (r) = φ q (r) for q = k. Derivatives of the determinant needed for the local energy can be calculated similarly as backflow In the case of BF, we have used Eq. (S.30) where the bare coordinates are replaced by the backflow coordinates constructed exactly as in the N + 1 particle case. Although this wave function is not exactly proportional to a † k |Ψ N 0 , we don't expect any significant differences, e.g. we have checked that In the GC-TABC procedure Notice that all our trial wave functions have the properties that by space inversion they equal their complex conjugate, hence the overlap integrals and matrix elements are real. For our study of the static self-energy, Σ(k, 0), for any given k and twist angle, the observables and matrix elements ε ij , z k , and n k , given by Eq.( For GC-TABC, any k vector can be reached by imposing the corresponding twist angle. Spherical averaging over all k vectors of given magnitude then corresponds to averaging twist over all twist angles yielding the same modulus of k. In our GC-TABC calculations, we have used 32 equally weighted points that exactly integrates all polynomials on the sphere up to order eight Given the value of the chemical potential, μ, the Greens functions G ± μ can be expressed in terms of QMC observables, e.g. Eq. Since all matrix elements needed for the Greens function/ self-energy are calculated within the same QMC simulations, the errors are not independent. Therefore, we have estimated the final uncertainty of our self-energy, by determining its spread over several independent calculations and different twist angles in GC-TABC. The systematic errors for all quantities given in the tables are estimated by looking at how the χ 2 value varies with respect to the fitted value. Fits of GC-TABC curves usually yield values of χ 2 close to one per degree of freedom. The χ 2 value of the fits for canonical simulations at the Γ point are typically larger, in particular for the N = 38 and N = 66 systems, because of the irregular filling of the shells of states, and the fewer k values close to k F . In the table of the main text, we have reported SJ and BF values from size extrapolated GC-TABC using systems with N = 66, and N = 54, respectively. Due to the systematic uncertainty of results with different sizes, we did not attempt further numerical extrapolation. Table In Fig. S.3 we further illustrate the changes due to size corrections for the self-energy at r s = 1. Comparison with Reference slope at the Fermi surface where we denote m eff the thus obtained "effective mass" to avoid confusion with m * characterizing quasi-particle excitation energies. In Figs. S.4 and S.5, we show the SJ band dispersion for r s = 1 and r s = 10. In agreement with the results of Ref. Our QMC results with backflow (BF) and Slater-Jastrow (SJ) trial functions as compared to those of G0W0 (RPA) and variational diagrammatic Monte Carlo (VDi-agMC)