Physics of high-T c superconducting cuprates is obscured by the effect of strong electronic correlations. One way to overcome the problem is to seek for an exact solution at least within the small cluster and expand it to the whole crystal. Such an approach is in the heart of the cluster perturbation theory (CPT). Here we develop CPT for the dynamic spin and charge susceptibilities (spin-CPT and charge-CPT), within which the correlation effects are explicitly taken into account by the exact diagonalization. We apply spin-CPT and charge-CPT to the effective two-band Hubbard model for the cuprates obtained from the three-band Emery model and calculate one-and two-particle correlation functions, namely, spectral function and spin and charge susceptibilities. Doping dependence of the spin susceptibility was studied within spin-CPT and CPT-RPA that is the CPT generalization of the random phase approximation (RPA). Both methods produce the low energy response at four incommensurate wave vectors in qualitative agreement to the results of the inelastic neutron scattering on overdoped cuprates. Electronic and magnetic subsystems of a correlated material are strongly coupled. Classic example is the cuprate high-T c superconductors, whose phase diagram contains antiferromagnetic (AFM), metallic, charge-density wave, and pseudogap states. Undoped cuprates corresponding to the half-filled system is the AFM insulator. In this case the spin dynamics corresponds to the excitations of magnons and could be described by the linear spin-wave theory. The physics, however, becomes more complicated once the holes are doped into the system. Holes are delocalized and the AFM long-range order quickly disappears opening the way for the new cooperative phases to arise. Recent resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) reveal magnon-like excitations in cuprates over a wide doping range from underdoped to heavily overdoped systems Cluster perturbation theory (CPT) is a straightforward way of calculating the one-particle correlation function, i.e. the spectral function Cuprates have a quasi-two-dimensional structure and the conductivity is provided by the electrons in the copper-oxygen plane. This was the reason for intensive studies of twodimensional models and, in particular, effective low-energy Hubbard model as a simple one yet retaining essential physics. However, a detailed study of the electronic and magnetic properties of cuprates requires a more realistic model such as the three-band Emery model that includes both Cu-d x 2 -y 2 and O-p x,y orbitals Here we develop the CPT for the dynamical spin susceptibility, the approach we call spin-CPT. It is based on an explicit calculation of correlation functions by the exact diagonalization with a subsequent extraction of the lattice two-particle spectral function in the CPT-like manner similar to Refs. This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss the model and approximations used for the study. In Section 3 the main results are presented. In Section 4 the results are discussed. In Section 5 the concluding remarks are given. The Hamiltonian of the Emery model where i denotes copper sites, j denotes oxygen sites, n i(j)σ is the number operator of holes on a site i(j) with spin σ, n i(j) = n i(j)↑ + n i(j)↓ , P ij and P jj are phase factors, and d iσ (p jσ ) destroys a hole with spin σ on a d x 2 -y 2 (p x(y) ) orbital and site i (j). The Coulomb interaction normalization constant λ is introduced for convenience to be able to vary the interaction strength. The following hopping parameters are used (here and below all energies are in eV): t pd = 1.36, t pp = 0.86. These are the hopping integrals of multiband pd model calculated for La 2 CuO 4 Since CPT has a cluster at it's heart, choice of it is important. In a CuO plane, one can naturally distinguish a single element consisting of a copper ion surrounded by four oxygens. Oxygen, however, belongs to the two neighboring cells. To overcome this difficulty, we use the canonical fermions of Shastry where f indexes a cell position (site), ε α is a one-electron energy for an orbital index α, which takes values {a, b, d}, where d is the copper orbital and a and b are the cell oxygen orbitals with the energies ε a = ε p + 2t pp ν 00 and ε b = ε p -2t pp ν 00 . The operator d f σ annihilates a hole with spin σ on a copper orbital on a site f , operators a f σ (b f σ ) annihilate a hole with spin σ on an oxygen orbital a (b) on a site f , n α f σ are the number operators, The Wannier coefficients μ, ν and χ and other constants relating parameters of Equations ( int includes all non-local interaction terms including three-site and four-site ones, which do not have a significant influence on the results obtained using Equation (2), and it is omitted hereafter. Such a cell representation is especially useful when one is interested in the low-energy properties. Since only b orbitals are directly connected by the hopping processes with d orbitals, they should have a negligible effect on the low-energy part of the electronic structure. On the other hand, at high doping a orbitals might become important The central object we are going to calculate is the transverse part of the dynamical spin susceptibility χ αβ,γδ (q, Ω). It can be defined as an analytical continuation of the Matsubara two-particle spin-spin correlation function where S + αα and S - β β are the spin raising and lowering operators, q is the wave vector, ω n is the Matsubara frequency, α, β, α , β are the orbital indices, T τ is the ordering operator over Matsubara (imaginary) time τ, and T is the temperature in the energy units. Averaging is done with the fully interacting Hamiltonian. By using the Wick's theorem, one can obtain the zeroth order approximation for the spin susceptibility in terms of the one-particle Green's function G αβσ (p, iω m ) for an electron with the spin σ, Analytical continuation iω n → Ω + iη includes positive infinitesimal parameter η that can be used to introduce a Lorentzian broadening in the course of the numerical calculations. Since we consider the paramagnetic phase, the spin index will be omitted. The physical spin susceptibility is calculated on real frequencies Ω as the sum over all orbital indices coinciding at vertices, Analogously to the spin correlation function (3), the charge correlation function is defined as where ρ αα is the particle density operator. The physical charge susceptibility on real frequencies Ω is calculated as 2.2.1. CPT Electronic structure of the two-band model is studied within CPT that is discussed in details in Refs. For the Hamiltonian (2), we calculate the electronic spectral function where G αβ (k, ω) is the electronic Green's function on the real frequencies ω, k is a wave vector, α and β are the orbital indices, and η → 0 + . Trace of (8) gives the total (physical) spectral function A(k, ω) = ∑ α A αα (q, ω). CPT allows to calculate A(k, ω) within a small cluster and an arbitrary momentum resolution; it is also characterized by a fast convergence of results with increasing cluster size The main CPT equation is where all square matrices have dimension L × N c , L is the number of orbitals that's in our case equal to two, N c is the number of sites within the cluster, k is a wave vector defined within the cluster Brillouin zone, ω is a frequency, Ĝc (ω) is the exact local (intracluster) propagator, and T( k) is a Fourier transform of the hopping matrix. The translational invariance is restored in CPT as where i(j) is an intracluster site index, r i(j) is a corresponding radius-vector. CPT can be used to improve calculation of the dynamical spin susceptibility χ(k, Ω) within RPA by replacing the bare electron-hole bubble, χ (0) (k, Ω), by the one calculated using CPT Green's functions. It allows to include self-energy corrections over the vertex renormalization of RPA. The methodology is discussed in details in Refs. where f (ω) is the Fermi function, and η is the positive infinitesimal. The transverse dynamical susceptibility within CPT-RPA is calculated as A vertex Ū including another renormalization constant λ that will be discussed below is defined as Ū = λ U, where the nonzero components of the RPA vertex U are U αα αα = U α and U αβ αβ = V αβ , where α = β Dynamical charge susceptibility Π(q, Ω) is obtained within the CPT-RPA by replacing the vertex U in the RPA equation 2.2.3. Explicit calculation of the two-particle correlation function (spin-CPT and charge-CPT) Alternative to the RPA-like approach is to calculate the two-particle correlation function directly without intermediate steps of finding the one-particle Green's function and building a spin or charge correlation function out of it. Here we calculate the right side of Equation ( where S -and S + are the spin ladder operators, |0 and |μ are the ground and excited states, which are obtained in the Lanczos approximations. Then the translational invariance for the whole lattice is restored analogously to Equation (10): Dynamical charge susceptibility Π(q, Ω) can be also calculated in a similar manner on a cluster as where n α,i is the number of particle operator. Since such an approach allows to calculate the charge correlation function directly, we refer to it as charge-CPT. To see the changes of the low-energy electronic structure with doping and interactions, we start with the calculation of the Fermi surface for the CuO model Figure The doping dependence of the spin susceptibility within another approach, spin-CPT, where correlation effects are treated explicitly by ED is shown in Figure Note that some typical artifacts of the cluster calculations such as size effects are present in the results. Those effects should not be taken as physical results. For example, the repeating pattern barely seen in Figure Now we turn to the qualitative comparison of the obtained results to the experimental spectra from the inelastic neutron scattering (INS) on cuprates. At half filling, cuprates are antiferromagnetic insulators due to a strong Coulomb interaction and their spin spectrum has a spin-wave character Addition of charge carriers into the CuO 2 planes leads to the formation of a more complicated spectrum, which nature is still under debate In the overdoped regime, both our methods produce the response at lowest energies around the four incommensurate wave vectors located at qualitatively similar positions as in the INS data for overdoped La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 RIXS experiments have been successful in studying the high-energy magnetic excitations although with some restrictions on the probed area of wave vectors q. Via RIXS, magnon-like excitations in cuprates were detected dispersing upward to the energies as high as ∼ 400 meV in the wide doping range from underdoped to heavily overdoped samples We have formulated a cluster perturbation theory for the two-particle correlation functions. In particular, spin-CPT and charge-CPT for spin and charge dynamical susceptibilities, respectively. Both quantities were calculated by spin(charge)-CPT and CPT-RPA in a wide doping range for the effective two-orbital Hubbard model obtained from the Emery pd model. In the underdoped case, magnetic response shows signatures of the upper branch of the hourglass dispersion and no presence of the low-energy incommensurate spin excitations. In the overdoped case, both spin-CPT and CPT-RPA produce the low-energy spin excitations located near the four incommensurate wave vectors. These results agree with the spectra for doped cuprates obtained in INS and RIXS. Calculated momentum-dependent charge excitations are in general agreement with RIXS. One may expect that CPT-RPA overestimates the contribution of the itinerant electrons to a two-particle quantity like the spin susceptibility. But it is important that it bears an effect of the electronic structure that is expected to be obtained quite accurately in CPT. And the electronic structure affects the spin susceptibility through the particle-hole bubble enhanced by the RPA vertex. Spin-CPT, on the other hand, converges to the exact result with the increase of the system size but underestimates the long-range correlations. In general, CPT-based approaches are a simple and economic methods to calculate the momentum-and energy-resolved oneand two-particle correlation functions and allow to take into account short-range correlations exactly. The latter plays a key role in doped high-T c cuprates.