The interplay between superconductivity (SC) and spin/charge density wave (DW) in organic metals shows many similarities to high-T c superconductors. It also contains many puzzles, for example, the anisotropic SC onset observed and the severalfold increase of the upper critical field H c2 in the coexistence region, as well as the microscopic origin of SC/DW phase separation there. In this paper, by the direct calculation of the Landau expansion for DW free energy, we argue that the phase transition between DW and metallic/SC phase in organic superconductors goes by first order at low enough temperature, which explains the spatial segregation of DW and SC at large length scale, consistent with experimental observations. This first-order phase transition is not directly related to SC and happens even above the SC transition temperature. The properties of metals with a charge-density-wave (CDW) or spin-density-wave (SDW) ground state attract great attention since the fifties (see, e.g., The OS are interesting for studying the interplay between CDW/SDW and SC because their phase diagram, layered crystal structure and many other features resemble those in cuprate and iron-based high-T c superconductors, but they are simpler and more convenient for investigation. By changing the chemical composition one can control the electronic dispersion in OS in a wide interval. One can grow rather large and pure monocrystals of organic metals, so that their electronic structure can be experimentally studied by high-magnetic-field tools The microscopic structure of SC and DW coexistence is important for understanding the DW influence on SC properties and T cSC . The DW and SC phase separation may happen in the momentum or coordinate space. The first scenario assumes a spatially uniform structure, when the Fermi surface (FS) is partially gapped by DW and the ungapped parts give SC The puzzling feature of SDW/SC coexistence in (TMTSF) 2 PF 6 , long unexplained in any scenario, is the anisotropic SC onset In this paper we argue that the phase transition between DW and metallic/SC phase in OS goes by first order at low enough temperature, which explains the spatial segregation of DW and SC at large length scale, consistent with experimental observations. This first-order phase transition is not directly related to SC and happens even at T > T cSC because of the suppression of DW by the deterioration of FS nesting, which is controlled by pressure in (TMTSF) 2 PF 6 and in α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 KHg(SCN) 4 , or by cooling rate affecting the anion ordering in (TMTSF) 2 ClO 4 . In Sec. II we describe the driving parameter of DW-metal phase transition in various quasi-1D organic metals. In Sec. III formulate the mean-field approach for the free energy in the DW state and write down its Landau expansion. In Sec. IV we perform the explicit calculation of the DW free-energy expansion for the model described in Sec. II and analyze the DW phase diagram of organic superconductors. In particular, we study the range of temperature and electron-spectrum parameters where the phase transition from DW to metallic state is of first order. In Sec. V discuss our results in connection with the experimental observations in OS. A. Quasi-one-dimensional electron dispersion and pressure as a driving parameter of DW-metal/SC phase transition in organic superconductors In Q1D organic metals where v F and k F are the Fermi velocity and Fermi momentum in the chain x-direction. We consider a quasi-1D metal with dispersion (1) where the function t ⊥ ( k ⊥ ) is given by the tightbinding model: where b and c are the lattice constants in y-and z-directions respectively. The corresponding Fermi surface (FS) of quasi-1D metals consists of two slightly warped sheets separated by 2k F and roughly possesses the nesting property. It leads to the Peierls instability and favors the formation of CDW or SDW at low temperature, which competes with superconductivity. In the metallic phase the corresponding density of electron states at the Fermi level per one spin components per unit length L x of one chain is ν F = 1/(πħv F ). The dispersion along the z-axis is assumed to be much weaker than the dispersion in the y-direction. Therefore we omit the second harmonic ∝ cos(2k z c) in the dispersion relation they do not influence the physics discussed below unless the nesting vector become shifted in the y-z plane. We do not consider such a shift in the present study. Hence, only the "antinesting" parameter t ′ b ∼ t 2 b /(v F k F ) is important for the DW phase diagram. The electron dispersion along the z-axis is ignored below. With the increase of applied pressure P the lattice constants decrease. This enhances the interchain electron tunneling and the transfer integrals. The increase of t ′ b (P) with pressure deteriorates the FS nesting and decreases the DW transition temperature T cDW (P) In (TMTSF) 2 ClO 4 there is an additional degree of freedom and driving parameter. The ClO 4 anions, which lack the inversion symmetry and possess an electric dipole moment, order below the transition temperature T AO = 24 K > T cDW with wave vector Q AO = (0, π/b, 0) The electron dispersion in (TMTSF) 2 ClO 4 in the anionordered phase in the new folded Brilluin zone can also be approximately described by Eq. ( This dispersion results to the antinesting term given by Eq. ( The anion ordering can be controlled by the cooling rate near T AO = 24 K. In rapidly cooled (quenched) samples the anions remain disordered, and the DW is not suppressed, while SC does not appear. The slowly cooled (relaxed) samples have Δ AO ≈ 14 meV An external magnetic field B via the Zeeman splitting energy Δ Z = μ B gB shifts in opposite directions the FS for different spin projections, which damps CDW but not SDW. The magnetic field also affects the orbital electron motion, which leads to the beautiful effect of field-induced spin-density wave This results to the same antinesting term The electron Hamiltonian consist of the free electron part H 0 and the interaction part H int : The coupling function V σ σ ′ ( Q) contains all types of electronelectron (e-e) interaction: Coulomb repulsion, phononmediated attraction, etc. For the usual Coulomb or phononmediated e-e interaction V σ σ ′ (Q) is independent on the indices σ, σ ′ . In the Hubbard model the dependence of e-e interaction on spin indices appears because two electrons with the same spin orientation cannot occupy the same quantum state on the same site due to the Pauli principle, and therefore do no have the strong on-site e-e interaction. The strong Coulomb repulsion is weakened by the metallic screening, therefore the DW order parameter is much smaller than the bandwidth or the Fermi energy in most metals, including organic superconductors. We consider the interactions at the wave vectors Q = ±Q = ±(Q 0 + q) close to the nesting vector Q 0 = (2k F , π/b, π/c) with |q| ≪ k F . If the deviations from ±Q 0 are small, we can approximate the interaction function as Next, in the mean-field approximation we decouple the fouroperator term so We introduce the order parameter In this expression and in Eq. ( Between the CDW and SDW, the system chooses a state with the highest transition temperature, which in our model corresponds to the largest coupling constant U, giving the greatest order parameter Δ and energy gain. Below the transition temperature the CDW and SDW are coupled only in a magnetic field or another spin-dependent external perturbation For CDW definition (10) directly leads to and which is consistent with Ref. and accordingly to Ref. k↓ a k -Q↑ ⟩ for SDW. Both Hamiltonians can be expressed in similar way as where Δ defined in Eq. ( where prime indicates the 1/2 factor due to avoid double counting (or the summation over the reduced Brillouin zone in the case of commensurate DW). Leaving out the spin indices, we cancel the above mentioned factor, so we omit the prime. We also fix gauge of Δ, considering it real, and drop the modulus sign from |U|. The spectrum of the Hamiltonian is then given by the eigenvalues E ± ( k) of the matrix h which are where The operators γ k , μ k in which the Hamiltonian is diagonal are defined by the eigenvectors of h. They are obtained by a unitary transformation such that u 2 + v 2 = 1 and Δ(u 2 -v 2 ) + 2uvε -( k) = 0. Finally the diagonalized Hamiltonian is Now given that the Hamiltonian is diagonal in fermionic operators γ k , μ k and there are only four states |n γ n μ ⟩ = {|00⟩, |01⟩, |10⟩, |11⟩}, the partition function Z = Tr exp{-H MF /T } can be easily calculated: And the free energy F = -T ln Z is We are interested in the Landau-Ginzburg expansion coefficients of the free energy in powers of Δ: By differentiating this expression one obtains This means that the free energy expansion coefficients can be calculated by expanding into the Taylor series not the free energy itself, but the function Next we use the following relation to represent the hyperbolic tangents as a sum over odd Matsubara frequencies ω = πT (2n+ 1): Finally, substituting this equality in As it follows from Eqs. ( and If B > 0, the DW-metal phase transition is of the second order, and only the first two coefficients A and B are sufficient for its description. If B < 0, the phase transition may be of the first order, and next coefficients C and even D if C ≤ 0 are required for its description. The sum over k in Eq. ( The factor 2 appears because of two Fermi-surface sheets at k x ≈ ±k F , and we assumed quarter filling π/a = 4k F Usually, for simplicity the integration limits over k x in Eq. ( and the resulting logarithmic divergence of the coefficient A is regularized by the definition of the transition temperature T c0 (see Appendix B). However, in this case for the dispersion in Eqs. ( In this section we take the quasi-1D electron (1) linearised in the k x direction, and explicitly calculate the first coefficients of the Landau expansion for the DW free energy given by Eqs. ( The integration of Eq. ( The free energy expansion coefficients are obtained by expanding the r.h.s. of this equation over Δ 2 : The coefficient at the linear term is divergent when sum over ω is taken. The divergence is regularized by introducing the critical temperature T c0 at which the DW phase transition occurs when t ′ b = 0, see Appendix B. As a results we obtain where ψ(x) = d/dx ln Γ(x) is the digamma function. The type of the phase transition is defined by the coefficient in front of the ∼ Δ 3 term in the expansion. This coefficient is The self-consistency equation (SCE) for the order parameter Δ is obtained from the condition F ′ = 0 for the minimum of free energy. This SCE for the DW state, even in the presence of both spin and charge coupling constants and in a magnetic field, was derived previously From Eqs. ( This antinesting term also describes (TMTSF) 2 PF 6 as a limiting case Δ AO = 0. In the case of band-splitted electron dispersion, as in Eqs. (4) for AO or The DW-metal transition line T c ( Δ AO , t ′ b ), given by equation A ∞ = 0 and shown in Fig. Substituting Eq. ( In the limit t ′ b = 0 we obtain Δ AO /T c0 = 2πe ψ (1/2) ≈ 0.88 (the intersection of the blue line with the t ′ b -axis in Fig. In contrast to Δ * AO (t ′ b ), within our model t ′ * b is independent of Δ AO as long as Δ AO < Δ * AO (t ′ b ). This is illustrated in Fig. In contrast to this, the increase of t ′ b on the interval 0 < t ′ b < t ′ * b at fixed Δ AO < Δ o AO does not leads to the sign change of B ∞ , given by Eqs. ( Let us now take Δ AO = 0 and consider finite limits of integration k x ∈ [-K, K]. Then equation The additional factor f ( Δ) is We expand the r.h.s of ( The coefficient at the linear term is Due to finiteness of the limits of integration it is not divergent any more. The coefficient at the qubic term is Numerically calculating the sum and the integral in Eq. ( The electron spectrum given by Eq. ( This additional term reduces the coefficient B and leads to dependence B(t in Fig. We now discard the linear approximation of the spectrum in the k x direction, i.e. replace the spectrum In this case the analytical integration with respect to k x of ( Our calculations show that a DW-metal transition, driven by an external parameter which deteriorates the FS nesting, typically goes by first order at low enough temperature. When such a driving parameter splits the energy spectrum and the Fermi surfaces, as in the case of anion ordering in (TMTSF) 2 ClO 4 or of magnetic field acting via Zeeman splitting on a CDW, as described in Sec. IIB, the temperature interval of the firstorder phase transition is rather wide, ∼ T c0 /2 (see Fig. The model electron dispersions used in our calculations and given by Eqs. ( The obtained first order of DW-metal phase transition explains the spatial segregation of SDW and SC/metal phases observed in (TMTSF) 2 PF 6 and (TMTSF) 2 ClO 4 , or of CDW and SC/metal phases in α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 KHg(SCN) 4 , resulting to DW coexistence with superconductivity. The parameters and properties of phase nucleation during the first-order phase transition was extensively studied in various systems The phase segregation during the first-order DW-metal phase transition happens on a rather large length scale ≳ 1 μm, which explains the observation of angular magnetoresistance oscillations (AMRO) in (TMTSF) 2 PF 6 Above we have substantiated the first-order DW-metal phase transition by a direct calculation of the Landau expansion of the DW free energy for a generic quasi-1D electron dispersion, relevant to various organic superconductors. A different model of a multiband quasi-2D metal with several FS nested parts and also with additional reservoir states may also give a first-order phase transition and, hence, a spatial phase segregation In organic metals the DW phase transition temperature T cDW is usually much higher than the SC transition temperature T cSC . This is a general situation, which happens in many other compounds where CDW or SDW coexists with superconductivity To summarize, we investigated the density wave (DW) phase diagram and the type of DW-metal phase transition in layered organic superconductors. Even at zero temperature the DW is destroyed by an external parameter which violates the Fermi surface nesting and reduces the electronic susceptibility at the DW wave vector. This parameter may be the antinesting term in the electron dispersion, which can be controlled by external pressure as in (TMTSF) 2 PF 6 or in α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 KHg(SCN) 4 . This antinesting parameter may also be the band splitting, e.g., as in (TMTSF) 2 ClO 4 due to the anion ordering, controlled by the cooling rate. By the direct calculation of the Landau expansion coefficients of the density-wave free energy of quasi-1D metals with this antinesting parameter we have shown that the DW-metal phase transition at low temperature T ≪ T c0 is, usually, of the first order. This gives a microscopic substantiation of the DW/SC spatial phase segregation on a large length scale ≳ 1 μm, indicated by the angular magnetoresistance oscillations or by field-induced SDW, observed in (TMTSF) 2 PF 6 which is equal to -1/5 at x = 0 and monotonically asymptotically approaches zero as ∝ 1/x 2 . This justifies our use of Eq. ( The strength of anion potential V AO and of the corresponding band splitting energy Δ AO in (TMTSF) 2 ClO 4 is still debated. The early calculation in an extended Hückel-band model give the site-energy difference between two independent TMTSF molecules about V AO ≈ 100 meV Appendix B: Regularization of the divergence in coefficient A ∞ The coefficient A ∞ , which is given by Eq. ( Suppose that for t ′ b = 0 the phase transition occurs at temperature T c0 , where Δ = 0. Then from the condition A ∞ = 0 it follows that The divergent sum can be regularized by imposing a cutoff at ω ∼ E F which gives the equation for T c0 : as in Ref. ′ b ) similar to B K (t ′ b ) (presented by solid line FIG