Abstract:In order to improve low-frequency characteristics of micro-perforated panel absorbers, sound absorption structures composed of micro-perforated panels and expansion chambers are design, and an optimization design method is constructed based on the transfer function model and the simulated annealing algorithm. First, a single-chamber structure composed of a micro-perforated panel and an expansion chamber is build, and the sound absorption curve is simulated by the finite element method. Second, for the sake of enlarging the continuous absorption bandwidth with absorption coefficients not less than 0.8, a three-chamber structure is designed, which has a sound absorption bandwidth of 1277Hz (27-1304Hz) covering 5.6 octave bands. Then, the transfer function model of the structure is established, and a series of theoretical formulae are derived to calculate the absorption coefficients. Subsequently, the sound absorption bandwidths calculated by the theoretical formulae and the finite element method are compared, and the relative error is 3.68%. Finally, an optimization design method is constructed by combining the transfer function model and the simulated annealing algorithm, where the optimization objective is to maximize the absorption bandwidth and the optimization variables are structural parameters of the three-chamber structure. The results show, after optimization, the three-chamber structure exhibits an excellent sound absorption performance, with a continuous bandwidth of 1591Hz (4-1595Hz), realizing 8.6 octave bands. Noise is known as the invisible killer of environmental pollution Micro-perforated panel (MPP) absorber was proposed by Finite element method and transfer matrix method have been widely used to design and analyze sound absorbers. Transfer matrix method is a theoretical method based on mathematical models and is suitable for low-frequency performance analysis. Compared with finite element method, transfer matrix method is more efficient, especially while repeatedly analyzing a complicated sound structure. Zaw et al. constructed a sound absorber through combining an expansion chamber and a Helmholtz resonator, and adopted transfer matrix method to analyze the effect of the parameters of the Helmholtz resonator on transmission losses For the sake of improving low-frequency characteristics of MPP absorbers, this paper designs a kind of sound structure composed of expansion chambers and MPPs, and adopts transfer matrix method and finite element method to analyze the sound absorption performances. Meanwhile, an optimization design method is constructed through combining transfer matrix method and simulated annealing algorithm to extend effective sound absorption bandwidth, and a sound absorption structure with 8.6 octave bands is obtained. Fig. In Fig. In order to extend the effective absorption bandwidth in the low frequency range, a three-chamber structure COMSOL is used to simulate the sound absorption performance of the threechamber structure, and the results are shown in Fig. The three-chamber structure shows amazing sound absorption performance covering big octave bands. In order to verify COMSOL results and to further optimize the structure so as to realize bigger octave bands, transfer matrix method is used to establish the theoretical model of the three-chamber structure. Under the assumption of the plane wave, neglecting the variation of sound wave with time, the lumped parameters of a sound structure satisfy 11 12 where, z P and z U stand for the total sound pressure and total volume velocity at the input end; t P and t U denote the total sound pressure and total volume velocity at the output end; A is the transfer matrix of the sound structure, describing the relationship between the input and output sound waves. For a sound structure comprising n sound elements connected in series, its transfer matrix can be expressed as The three-chamber structure in Fig. where, ( ) ( ) The three-chamber structure can be divided into sixteen basic sound elements, as shown in Fig. The sound propagation in the sound structure is shown in Fig. Based on the transfer function model, the MATLAB program is developed to predict the absorption coefficient curve of the three-chamber structure, as shown in Fig. Based on the established theoretical model, the simulated annealing algorithm is adopted to construct the optimization design method to further broaden the effective sound absorption band of the three-chamber structure. The simulated annealing algorithm was first proposed by Metropolis The optimization objective is to maximize the effective sound absorption bandwidth, where l f and h f denote the low and high cutoff frequencies, respectively. The constraint is the effective sound absorption coefficients 0.8   . The optimization variables are the structural parameters of the three-chamber structure, as shown in Fig. An iterative design is implemented through making use of the optimization method ( Based on the MPP theory, through combining the transfer function model of the sound absorption structure and simulated annealing algorithm, an optimization design method is constructed, and the sound absorption structure composed of three MPPs and three expansion chambers is designed and optimized. The main conclusions are as follows. (1) The theoretical model established by transfer matrix method can accurately predicts the sound absorption performance of the sound structure. For the sound absorption bandwidth, its relative error between theoretical prediction and COMSOL simulation is 3.68%. (2) The optimization design method can significantly improve the sound absorption performance of the structure. After optimization, the effective sound absorption bandwidth extends from 1324Hz (20-1344Hz) to 1591Hz (4-1595Hz) covering 8.6 octave bands, about 141% of the octave bands before optimization. (3) The multi-chamber structure composed of MPPs and expansion chambers can achieve surprising low-frequency broadband characteristics and the structural size is not large, overcoming the limitation of poor low-frequency absorption performance of MPP absorbers, which is of great significance to promote the engineering application of MPP absorbers.