Multi principal element alloys (MPEAs) comprise a unique class of metal alloys. MPEAs have been demonstrated to possess several exceptional properties, including, as most relevant to the present study a high corrosion resistance. In the context of MPEA design, the vast number of potential alloying elements and the staggering number of elemental combinations favours a computational alloy design approach. In order to computationally assess the prospective corrosion performance of MPEA, an approach was developed in this study. A density functional theory (DFT)based Monte Carlo method was used for the development of MPEA 'structure'; with the AlCrTiV alloy used as a model. High-throughput DFT calculations were performed to create training datasets for surface activity/selectivity towards different adsorbate species: O 2-, Cl -and H + . Machine-learning (ML) with combined representation was then utilised to predict the adsorption and vacancy energies as descriptors for surface activity/selectivity. The capability of the combined computational methods of MC, DFT and ML, as a virtual electrochemical performance simulator for MPEAs was established and may be useful in exploring other MPEAs. 1. In conventional alloy design to date, typically a principal metallic element is explored, accompanied by other elements in relatively minor concentrations. Such alloy designwhilst often empiricalhas also been aided by thermodynamic calculations; the development and use of phase diagrams; and more recently by kinetic assessment to factor in thermally activated solid-state transformations. Whilst such approaches have developed to significant levels of sophistication, the exploration of more complicated alloy systems, of which no prior data exists, can make desktop alloy design complex Integrated approaches permit computational materials discovery approaches for new (objective oriented) alloy design. To date, the calculation of phase diagrams (CALPHAD), which is based on equilibrium thermodynamics to provide information on probable equilibrium phases, is widely used; as is the use of density functional theory (DFT) to provide information on phase stability. Though CALPHAD and DFT approaches are beneficial, such approaches may be time-consuming, computationally costly and limited in what can be explored relative to properties of interest and the breadth of MPEA compositions When a primary property of interest is alloy electrochemistry and/or corrosion behaviour, detailed information regarding surface features is criticalas electrochemical processes occur at the alloy surface (i.e. alloy-environment interface). Without a complete understanding of the composition-dependent surface properties in the context of electrochemistry and/or corrosion, the verification of newly designed alloys will be tedious. For instance, in alloys that develop local sites with different electrochemical activities, this may accelerate corrosion due to micro-galvanic coupling or localised pit formation A state-of-the-art hybrid MC and DFT approach was employed in order to develop MPEA models sampled from equilibrium The phase and composition at equilibrium were obtained using the multi-cell Monte Carlo "(MC) 2 " method. Specifically, the existing MC code, based on a methodology proposed by Ghazisaeidi The bulk structure was generated using an implementation , and represents the atomic concentration of species i in simulation cell j. The primed coordinates indicate post-flipped values, while un-primed are pre-flipped values. The updated phase fractions were obtained by using the Lever rule to enforce mass conservation. DFT calculations were performed using the Projector Augmented Wave (PAW) method as implemented by the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) All surface DFT calculations were performed using the VASP code Vacancy calculations were performed by removing one atom in the topmost layer on each slab. Whereas, for surface adsorption calculations, the adsorbates studied are *H, *O and *Cl, in their dissociated forms where E ads-slab is the energy of adsorbate/slab complexes, E slab is the energy of a pure slab and E adsorbate is the energy of the adsorbate. Here is E adsorbate of H, O and Cl are defined as 1⁄2 E(H2), E(H2O) -E(H2) and E(HCl) -1⁄2 E(H2), respectively. The influence of applied potential (U vs. SHE) and pH on ΔG can be considered implicitly When comparing the vacancy energies of different elements, the E VE plays a crucial role. In the present work, we have compared three differently defined approached to E VE , namely: (1) the energy per atom of different elements in their pure crystal structure at room temperature; (2) the energy obtained by fitting the function ∑ n i E i i∈{Ti,V,Al,Cr} = E total for all vacancy and pure slabs in this study; and (3) the energy per atom in the high entropy alloy primary crystal, which serves as a universal correction value. Figure In this study, we employed Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) where x i and x j represent the representations of the i th and j th samples, γ is a length scale parameter. The prediction form of KRR is as follow: where w is a weight matrix, K is the kernel matrix. The loss function of KRR is a quadratic function given by the following formula: where y true is the labels of the training set, α is a L2 regularization term. A closed form solution of the loss function can be derived, as follow: To find the optimal hyperparameters γ and α, a grid search technique was employed. We searched for the optimal values using a base-2 logarithmic grid from 0.25 to 4096 for the kernel width and a base-10 logarithmic grid from 10e -7 to 10e -7 for the L2 regularisation term. In this studyas already ascertained from the Approach section -exploration of the AlCrTiV MPEA was carried out, owing to the alloy being known to exhibit the formation of only a single (bcc) phase at room temperature; along with a reported record regarding the contribution of each element to electrochemical reactions. The results of our attempt at the prediction of dissolution characteristics for AlCrTiV, using the workflow proposed herein; follows below, including correlation with experimental data. The (MC) 2 methodology accurately predicted the formation of a single bcc phase for AlCrTiV with an equi-atomic configuration and a lattice constant of 3.05 Å, with two supercells made are shown in Figures Using the bulk AlCrTiV alloy structure predicted by (MC) 2 , surface slabs were generated and used to build a surface reactivity map based upon the chemical interactions between different species (i.e., H + , Cl -, and O 2-) and the alloy surface. On the basis of empirical data being available for the electrochemical activity of AlCrTiV (which is from a bulk polycrystal), we selected the (001) surface for the adsorption modelas it provided 32 possible adsorption sites (i.e., atop, bridge-x, bridge-y, and hollow), along with eight vacancy sites. Furthermore, we also employed an extended supercell in order to minimise the lateral interaction between adsorbed species. Despite the species being charged in the electrolyte, we have only considered the adsorption of neutral species on the surface in our DFT calculations (*H, *Cl and *O); noting that the accounting for charge/electrons may be approached using the standard hydrogen electrode method The selection of adsorbates explored was based on their critical role during surface electrochemistry (namely, alloy corrosion), such as participating in the hydrogen evolution reaction, oxide formation and thickening, surface dissolution, and pitting. From calculated surface maps, a different reactivity between may distinguish between cathodic and anodic sites on the surface. While previous studies on conventional (non MPEA) alloys have only highlighted the competitive adsorption of such species on the alloy surface as the coverage function The adsorption energy difference on different slabs may be used as the preference indicator for each slab tendency as being more or less anodic/cathodic, as by the adsorption of *O and *Cl or *H, respectively. The inspection of Figure The future objective development of new MPEAs with controlled electrochemical activity will require the theoretical analysis of many samples, which can also become an obstacle even in theoretical-based studies. Instead, we are more interested in the ongoing generation of datasets for training ML models to predict the electronic energy of certain surface structures. This approach will be beneficial for the generation and analysis of large surface datasets, to better understand the contribution of individual elements on surface electrochemistrywhich is particularly important for MPEAs. From the experimental work to date studying AlCrTiV, it is understood that 'dynamicpassivity' is a critical factor contributing to corrosion resistance of AlCrTiV; including the surface film composition, thickness and electronic properties. Various analysis tools have confirmed that AlCrTiV exhibits excellent electrochemical stability, which is attributed to the ability to form passive layer comprising of mixed metallic oxides: Al2O3, TiO2, V2O3 and Cr2O3. The experimental techniques used to study the passive film characteristics and electrochemical activity, include high resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and atomic emission spectroelectrochemistry. Using AESEC, Choudhary et al. In the workflow outlined for this study, the utilisation of ML was then adopted for predicting adsorption and vacancy energies. In a previous study, Batchelor et al. employed a coordinationbased representation and linear regression to predict adsorption energies of O and OH on high entropy alloys The present study enhances the combined representation by incorporating an additional representation for the adsorption site, enabling "cross-site" prediction. The improved representation is comprised of EP to represent the single-atom adsorbate (*O, *H, or *Cl in this study), SOAP to represent the high entropy alloy slabs We have shown the capability of ML to replace the use of high-throughput DFT for providing data on the reactivity of the surface models of an alloy. Such results demonstrate the effectiveness of ML modes in accurately predicting adsorption of different species and vacancy energies on MPEA. The key findings from the work herein include: (i) the application of the (MC) 2 approach was capable of providing a platform for subsequent DFT and ML approachesthat are relevant to the determination of electrochemical propertieswhere the prediction of electrochemical properties has notionally been historically challenging to model, (ii) the workflow herein provides a visual, spatial map of electrochemical properties from calculations entirely in-silico, (iii) all elements in AlCrTiV exhibit unique properties due to different charge distributions in MPEA compared to their pristine crystal structure, in which Al exhibits spontaneous formation of vacancy in AlCrTiV alloy that is well validated by independent empirical data Whilst we believe the above findings, and the pathway to obtaining such computational results regarding surface electrochemistry are significant, it is also prudent to identify some of the physical limitations, and required future work, in order to gain the most benefit from such approaches when applied to rationalising MPEA behaviour. Some points that remain open and will be the focus of future studies include: • As also noted in this study, the corrosion performance of MPEAs is closely linked to the nature of the surface films. The modelling approach herein is in part, a proxy to studying surface films on the basis that the modelling approach deals with a 'snapshot' in time for an alloy surface (whereas surface films develop dynamically). The model is indeed a major simplification of the MPEA-electrolyte interface, as it presently standshowever this is typical for any early model that may evolve in complexity. • The numbers of sample for MPEA's surface, AlCrTiV, studied here using DFT are small. Large datasets are necessary to make any conclusive statement regarding elemental's role on the electrochemical reactions in-silico. • Additional features, such as different surface orientations, explicit modelling of electrolyte system including cations and anions The approach outlined in the study herein, whilst applied to only a single empirical benchmark, has provided a computation workflow that may be utilised as a virtual electrochemical characterisation tool. Such a tool has the capacity to predict and therefore estimate the electrochemical properties of MPEAs in-silico, by considering composition, crystallographic orientation, and number of samplings. As a result, the computation workflow herein introduces a cheaper and faster approach to garner an insight into electrochemical properties of new MPEAs with tuned composition and phase, designed entirely from simulations; with MPEAs revealing promising electrochemical performance laboratory verified accordingly. Herein, a methodology has been presented for generating realistic MPEA structures for AlCrTiV, using implementation of the (MC) 2 algorithm for the investigation of electrochemical activity and development of activity/selectivity maps. Furthermore, the work herein reports on the development and utilisation of an ML method which capable of predicting surface electrochemical activity via adsorption and vacancy energies. Independent detailed experiments were used to correlate and verify the electrochemical properties of the AlCrTiV MPEA, derived from the simulations herein -in which Ti has the most important contribution on the formation of protective oxide species such as TiO2. The combined (MC) Ele (n Ti + n V + n Al + n Cr ) ⁄ for Ele in {Ti, V, Al, Cr} (Eqn.11) where n Ti ,