Kagome materials have emerged as a setting for emergent electronic phenomena that encompass different aspects of symmetry and topology. It is debated whether the XV 6 Sn 6 kagome family (where X is a rare earth element), a recently discovered family of bilayer kagome metals, hosts a topologically non-trivial ground state resulting from the opening of spin-orbit coupling gaps. These states would carry a finite spin-Berry curvature, and topological surface states. Here, we investigate the spin and electronic structure of the XV 6 Sn 6 kagome family. We obtain evidence for a finite spin-Berry curvature contribution at the center of the Brillouin zone, where the nearly flat band detaches from the dispersing Dirac band because of spin-orbit coupling. In addition, the spin-Berry curvature is further investigated in the charge density wave regime of ScV 6 Sn 6 , and it is found to be robust against the onset of the temperature-driven ordered phase. Utilizing the sensitivity of angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy to the spin and orbital angular momentum, our work unveils the spin-Berry curvature of topological kagome metals, and helps to define its spectroscopic fingerprint. Electrons on a kagome lattice constitute a preeminently suited scenario for exotic quantum phenomena at all coupling scales: Within the Mott limit, it is the established paradigmatic setting for spin liquids and other aspects of frustrated magnets 1 . For symmetric metallic states or itinerant magnets, the diversity of dispersing kagome signatures such as Dirac cones, flat bands, and van Hove singularities enable to unlock a plethora of correlated electron phenomena from topological band formation and symmetry breaking The family of XV 6 Sn 6 kagome materials, where X is a rare earth element, belongs to a novel series (hereafter dubbed the "166" family) which has been predicted to host electronic states with non-trivial topology. In particular, not only the surface states that appear at natural cleavage planes of the crystals are theoretically conceived to have a non-trivial origin The direct experimental observation of non-trivial topological properties in 166 kagome metals remains an open challenge. While transport is unable to probe correlated flat band states below E F or isolate topological surface states Here, we provide the first spectroscopic evidence of the non-trivial topology in the "166" kagome family. We use spin-ARPES and density functional theory (DFT) calculations to determine the electronic structure of these systems resolved in energy, momentum, and spin. We do not only find a net spin polarization of the surface states in the prototypical compound TbV 6 Sn 6 , but we ultimately demonstrate the non-trivial topology of the gap between the dispersive Dirac band and the nearly flat band arising from the kagome geometry. Such a gap is a common feature of all kagome lattices with non-zero SOC, and its nature is believed to be topological, yet its demonstration has been elusive until now TbV 6 Sn 6 , see Fig. Both the Dirac cones and the flat band around -1 eV are spectroscopically detectable by ARPES owing to their occupied character. As shown in Fig. (2) of Fig. Upon cleavage, two terminations are possible, namely a Sn-terminated and a mixed V/Snterminated surface plane, with the latter being characterized by V atoms arranged into a kagome pattern. To determine the type of termination, we acquired the Sn core levels alongside the ARPES, finding a good agreement with previous works on the sister compound GdV 6 Sn 6 37 . Specifically, as shown in Fig. The kagome termination, on the other hand, shows a significantly different line shape, featuring an asymmetric profile and a shift of about 0.43 eV towards higher binding energy values. These differences are attributed to the different local atomic environment present at the two surfaces The measured Fermi surfaces (Fig. The surface states at the kagome termination have minimal separation from the bulk continuum This makes their spin-resolved measurements challenging, since the bulk contribution is intense and makes the spin-polarised signal too weak to be observed (see also Supplementary Figure The high-resolution electronic structure of the Sn termination is shown in Fig. Close to the Fermi level, our ARPES measurements and DFT calculations permit to investigate the topological nature of the 166 family. We focus on the surface states originating from the multiple gapped Dirac cones described in Fig. According to Hu et al. To experimentally verify this, we first calculated the expected spin-texture of the Sn surface states. The calculated spin-resolved electronic structure is shown in Fig. This important aspect is also compatible with the sample being well above the magnetic transition temperature (the measurements were indeed performed at 77 K). Additionally, the Tb 4f -levels are well separated from the near-Fermi energy region, and do not hybridize significantly with the measured surface states (see also Supplementary Figure The energy distribution curves of Fig. Standard spin-ARPES, on the other hand, cannot be used to prove the topological character of the gap between the correlated kagome flat band and the quadratic minimum, because those bands are spin-degenerate. Theoretically, one can access the topological character of the gap by calculating the spin-Berry curvature of this system. The Chern number C of each band forming such a gap is identically zero owing to the combined action of inversion (which gives Ω n↑ (k) = Ω n↑ (-k) for the Berry curvature) and time-reversal symmetry (which enforces Ω n↑ (k) = Ω n↓ (-k)). Nonetheless, one can expect a finite spin-Berry curvature Ω Sz z (k) due to the action of SOC. At the level of a simple first-nearest-neighbors tight-binding model with hopping amplitude t, SOC opens a gap at the Γ point between the parabolic dispersion from the Dirac band (1) and the flat band (2), as shown in Fig. Schüler et al. Kagome metals are also getting much attention since they represent the perfect playground for several intertwined many-body orders In Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the topological nature of XV 6 Sn 6 kagome metals by exploiting the combination of spin-ARPES and DFT calculations and leveraging sensitivity at the multiple energy scales relevant to kagome systems. Beside unveiling a net spin-polarization of the surface states of TbV 6 Sn 6 , which originates from the non-trivial Z 2 invariant of the SOC-induced bulk gaps close to the Fermi energy, we have crucially shown that the correlated flat band region is characterized by a finite spin-Berry curvature, establishing for the first time its topological character. In addition, we have reported the resilience of the non-trivial topology against the onset of the charge ordered phase in ScV 6 Sn 6 , revealing its ubiquitous nature across the series. This will motivate the investigation of the spin-Berry curvature in other kagome metals as well, such as AV 3 Sb 5 and FeGe, where a non-trivial flat band separation has also been predicted and in which the charge order has a strong effect on the electronic properties. Within a more general perspective, our work constitutes the first evidence of the multidimensional topological nature, i.e. from surface to bulk states, of the "166" kagome family. It ultimately establishes these systems as a new domain for correlated topological metallicity with a nontrivial spin-Berry curvature of the wavefunctions manifold. The former shows the flat band position for k x,y = 0, the latter instead has prominent intensity in correspondence of the quadratic minimum, as also visible in panels b and c. f Zoom-in of the ARPES data in the proximity of the Fermi level showing the most intense Sn-derived surface states (indicated by arrows labelled (1) and ( 1 Balents, L. Spin liquids in frustrated magnets. Nature 464, 199-208 (2010). Experimental details -Single crystals of XV 6 Sn 6 (Tb, Sc, Ho) were grown using a flux-based growth technique as reported in the reference 1 . X (chunk, 99.9%), V (pieces, 99.7%), and Sn (shot, 99.99%) were loaded inside an alumina crucible with the molar ratio of 1:6:20 and then heated at The energy and momentum resolutions were better than 12 meV and 0.02 Å-1 , respectively. The temperature of the measurements was kept constant throughout the data acquisitions (16 K and 77 K), above the magnetic transition of the system (< 5 K). Both linear and circular polarized lights were used to collect the data from the APE undulator of the synchrotron radiation source ELETTRA (Trieste). Theoretical details -We employed first-principles calculations based on the density functional theory as implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) with the spin operator σ z and velocity operator v i = 1 ħ ∂H/∂k i (i = x, y). |nk⟩ is the eigenvector of the Hamiltonian H with the eigenvalue E nk . Eq. 1 is computed by using our in-house post-wan library (see Code availability statement). The grey arrows refer to the energy regions where a finite spin asymmetry for the surface states is measured. Kiesel, M. L., Platt, C. & Thomale, R. Unconventional fermi surface instabilities in the kagome hubbard model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 126405 (2013). Di Sante, D. et al. Turbulent hydrodynamics in strongly correlated kagome metals. Nature Communications 11, 3997 (2020). 7 Ortiz, B. R. et al. CsV 3 Sb 5 : A Z 2 topological kagome metal with a superconducting ground state. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 247002 (2020). Nakai, H. & Hotta, C. Perfect flat band with chirality and charge ordering out of strong spin-orbit interaction. Nature Communications 13, 579 (2022). Yan, Z. & Wan, S. Topological phases, topological flat bands, and topological excitations in a one- Arachchige, H. W. S. et al. Charge density wave in kagome lattice intermetallic ScV 6 Sn 6 . Phys. Rev. Koepernik, K. & Eschrig, H. Full-potential nonorthogonal local-orbital minimum-basis band-structure scheme. Phys. Rev. B 59, 1743 (1999).