This research article presents stress distribution and fracture analysis of a cantilever beam considering both continuum and lumped distribution of gravity force. Airy stress function is used to derive two-dimensional stress distribution using power series and boundary conditions Cantilever beams are widely used in real-life structures such as bridges, dams, balconies, mezzanines, staircases etc. These structures are often subjected to self-weight by default, and may result in sudden failure due to crack propagation. Literature survey shows that analytical expression for stresses due to self-weight is very limited. For instance, analytical solution for stresses is available for a gravitating simply supported beam has not yet been reported in literature. In the present study, we have used a general method to derive the Airy stress function of a cantilever beam under self-weight in view of the method proposed by Fracture analysis of the cantilever beam is also carried out due to its self-weight. It is assumed that a crack is present at the top of the fixed end and that propagates vertically down. In this case too, analytical solution for energy release rate is derived and also matched with numerical simulations. Airy stress function ΦΦ of a cantilever beam in Fig. where mm, nn are non-negative integers. Since gravity gg is a conservative force, the potential function V is generally defined where, ρρ is the density of the elastic beam. Thus, two-dimensional stresses are often expressed to satisfy the stress-equilibrium equations upon substituting Eqs. 1 & 2 in Eq. 3, two-dimensional state of stresses follows: Normal stress in x-direction, Normal stress in y-direction, And shear stress in xy-plane, Fig. Noting that FF xx is normal force in x-direction, MM is bending moment & V is shear force. while the expressions for two-dimensional stresses in view of Eq.3 are (2.2) It is significant to note that the present methodology has also enabled us to find the stress distribution for a gravitating simply supported beam as was first reported by Tanimoto (1957) Motivated by the derivation of stress equations of the cantilever beam in Fig. While the equations of stresses are given by 3) It is important to note that irrespective of GEUDL acts bottom or top of the surface of the cantilever beam (Fig. Crack propagation can be a significant issue in structures subjected to constant loading such as self-weight. High tensile stress at the top corner of the fixed end of cantilever beam (Figs.1&2) could make it particularly susceptible to crack initiation and propagation Further total elastic energy stored in the beam is expressed by the following expression Assuming that cross-section of the cantilever beam to be rectangular (Fig. Using the definition of energy release rate Noting that Eq. 13 is also valid for the lumped load in Fig. Results and discussion Aiming to validate the analytical solutions in Eq. 7, the numerical simulations are carried out for both self-weight (Fig. Assuming that beams are made a typical steel material with elastic modulus E=210 GPa, Poisson's ratio=0.3, density =7800 kg/m 3 and g=9.81 m/sec. Results in Fig. We have also investigated stress distribution of the cantilever beam in Fig. We have also validated the analytical solution for energy release rate G in Eq.13 with finite element analysis (FEA) with ANSYS APDL software [7]. Plane182 element is used for free quad meshing of the beam and that resulted in 4200 mesh elements. Further, it is also assumed that a sharp crack is present at the top of fixed end of the cantilever beam. Node release method was used for deriving the expression for G [8,9]. Result in Fig. Analytical and numerical stress analysis of the cantilever beam due to self-weight reveal that magnitude of bending stress is much higher than remaining two stresses. However, vertical normal stress does not match between continuum and GEUDL beam systems. Stresses obtained from analytical solutions match closely with the numerical solutions. Further, fracture analysis of the cantilever beam is also carried out to derive the expression for energy release rate analytically. At the end, a correction factor is proposed in the energy release rate to match the numerical solution more accurately.