Superconducting stiffness ρs and coherence length ξ are usually determined by measuring the penetration depth λ of a magnetic field and the upper critical field Hc2 of a superconductor (SC), respectively. However, in magnetic SC, e.g. some of the iron-based, this could lead to erroneous results since the internal field could be very different from the applied one. To overcome this problem in Fe1+ySexTe1-x with x ∼ 0.5 and y ∼ 0 (FST), we measure both quantities with the Stiffnessometer technique. In this technique, one applies a rotor-free vector potential A to a superconducting ring and measures the current density j via the ring's magnetic moment m. ρs and ξ are determined from London's equation j = -ρsA and its range of validity. This method is particularly accurate at temperatures close to the critical temperature Tc. We find weaker ρs and longer ξ than existing literature reports, and critical exponents which agree better with expectations based on the Ginzburg-Landau theory. The highest T c measured in bulk Iron-based superconductors (IBSs), in ambient pressure, is 56 K Bulk DC superconducting properties, such as the stiffness ρ s , were measured in this crystal by transverse field muon spin rotation (μSR) The superconducting stiffness ρ s is defined via the gauge-invariant relation between the current density j, the total vector potential A tot from all sources, and the complex order parameter Ψ(r) = ψ(r)e iφ(r) with ψ(r) > 0, according to where Φ 0 = 2π /e * is the superconducting flux quanta, is the stiffness, e * and m * are the carrier's charge and mass, respectively. For anisotropic stiffness see Ref. This relation holds as long ∇φ does not change. The stiffness, in turn, is related to the penetration depth via However, every superconductor has a critical current density j c determined by the penetration depth λ and coherence length ξ. When A tot exceeds a certain value, it is worthwhile for the SC to change ∇φ so as to keep j below j c everywhere in the SC. According to the Josephson equation, dynamic changes in φ lead to voltage, which, when combined with current, result in power and energy dissipation in the process. When this happens, the relation between j and A tot is no longer linear and the system's rigidity breaks. We used these properties to measure both ρ s and ξ as a function of temperature in FST. The experiment is assembled from a ring-shaped SC cut out of a single crystal, shown in Fig. The gradiometer is composed of two outer loops wound clockwise, and inner two loops wound anticlockwise, see Fig. In principle, A ec does not change as the coil vibrates since there are no EC flux Φ ec variations, and the pickuploop signal is only due to A sc . In practice, the small signal of the EC is reduced from the measurements as background, (see Sec. III A). The ring's vector potential at a pickup-loop radius R pl at z = 0 is related to m in the EC direction ẑ, by where φ is the azimuth direction. We cool the system below T c with I ec = 0. After the temperature has stabilized, we gradually increase I ec while measuring the superconducting ring's magnetic moment. An example of a measurement at T = 12 K is presented in Fig. Typical behavior in our measurements, for low currents, is a linear relation between the ring's moment and I ec , as expected (see Ref. To extract the stiffness, we fit each m(I ec ) to a line in a temperature-dependent range due to the variation in the critical current. Such a fit is demonstrated in the inset of Fig. The red down triangles in Fig. Finally, in Fig. The emerald diamonds in Fig. where D is the demagnetization factor, and χ 0 is the specific susceptibility. For a ring with our geometry, the demagnetization factor equals D = 0.6, and if we consider the inner radius of the ring r in → 0, since in ZFC, it is hard for the field to penetrate the ring hole, D = 0.7 As for the temperature dependence of χ, a sharp transition is observed towards the critical temperature in this measurement T c = 13.82 K, which indicates the quality of the material. Interestingly, in DC magnetization measurements, the knee is not observed. To characterize the magnetic properties of the FST sample, we performed a magnetic hysteresis loop measurement, between 2 T and -2 T, which is depicted in Fig. The response of the superconducting ring to an applied magnetic field at different temperatures below T c is reflected in Fig. The analysis of Stiffnessometer data is described in details in Ref. In the low flux regime (low currents in the EC), the magnitude of the order parameter is constant almost all over the superconducting ring and zero outside since on the ring ∇ × A ec = 0. In the London gauge ∇ × ∇ × A = -∇ 2 A, and the vector potential outside an infinitely long coil is given by With Eq. 4 we arrive at the partial differential equation (PDE) where λ = ∞ outside the SC. Normalizing the spatial variables and vector potential as follows and using cylindrical coordinates where A = A(r, z) φ, we end up with the following PDE We use the finite element-based FreeFem++ software The equation is solved in a box such that z ∈ [-L, L], and r ∈ [0, 8L] with L = R pl = 8.5 mm. Dirichlet boundary conditions are imposed. As shown in Fig. The red line in the inset of Fig. where n and r ec,i are windings per unit length in one layer, and radius of the i th layer, respectively, we obtain the dimensionless vector potential where m is the SC's magnetic moment, and g a geometrical constant on the order of unity. In reality, the coil is not infinite, and, as a result of cutting and drilling, the ring is not perfect, see Fig. (2) We use a literature value of a low-temperature stiffness of similar material to predict A with the PDE solution and compare it to our measured dm/dI at the same temperature to extract a second value for g. For this work, the stiffness was taken from Ref. In the low flux regime Φ ec /Φ 0 r 2 in /λε, and for λ r out -r in and h, where h is the ring's height, deep inside the ring A tot = 0, hence A sc = -A ec . In other words, the applied flux is matched by the flux generated by the ring in the hole. For Φ ec /Φ 0 > r 2 in / √ 8ξλ, the current necessary to produce A sc at r in exceeds the local critical current While the derivation of Eq. 14 is in the limit ξ λ r out -r in h, we believe it is valid for λ r out -r in and λ h separately. For Φ > Φ c , vortices are expected to penetrate from the inner rim towards the outer one so that the SC's moment no longer grows with amplification of I ec . These vortices are manifested in ∇φ variations. Eq. 13 relates the linear slope of the m(I) measurements, shown by blue circles in Fig. with n ρ = 0.91 ± 0.02. This relation describes the data well from the knee temperature 12.4 K all the way to T c . For comparison, the μSR measurements of 1/λ 2 Based on the stiffness and the critical current in the inset of Fig. We found n ξ = 0.41 ± 0.02. The deviation from the linear regression at high temperatures may be a result of analysis failure since the penetration depth is no longer much smaller than the ring's height (λ ̈ h). At low temperatures, we associate the deviation with heating caused by the strong current in the excitation coil, which cannot be accurately accounted for by the temperature calibration. Alternative determination of ξ is from H c2 ξ determined from H c2 is presented on a linear scale with black squares in Fig. To examine reproducibility we investigated more than one ring cut from different crystals of FST. A comparison between different rings from other crystals appears in Fig. Right Y-axis, the penetration depth as a function of the temperature in blue and emerald triangles, for the different calibration methods. The left Y-axis shows the temperature dependence of the coherence length. The red-circles are taken from the critical current measurement in Fig. It could be that the knee originates from the interaction of the superconducting order parameter with the underline ferromagnet. To test this possibility we measure the SC's magnetic moment vs. temperature in the 0 . 0 . 0 . 0 . 0 . I e c > 0 ; H = 0 presence of an applied field (ZFC) in the direction of the EC, with and without current in the coil. The raw data is shown in the inset of Fig. We discuss the two major observations of this work, the knee, and the critical exponents, and examine the relation between measured quantities. A. The Knee Mukasa et al. GL theory assumes, and BCS theory predicts, a linear temperature dependence of ψ 2 . According to Eq. 2 this leads to the prediction that n ρ = 1. Our finding is not exactly as expected, but it is closer to unity than the results of μSR added to Fig. If we relax the linear assumption, the GL theory also predicts n ρ /n ξ = 2. We find n ρ /n ξ = 2.22 ± 0.12 . ( The result obtained from the μSR and H c2 methods gives n μSR ρ /n Hc2 ξ = 0.88±0.08, far from the GL expected value. The first critical field, H c1 , is related to λ and ξ [26] via An attempt to test this equation fails severely regardless of the experimental method used to determine the different quantities. Bendele et al. where We developed a method, ideal for magnetic superconductors close to T c , to measure both the penetration depth λ and coherence length ξ. For FST we find that λ and ξ are longer than previously reported and their temperature dependence agrees better with the GL predictions. A second transition, that looks like a knee, is observed at a temperature below T c in the stiffness measurements. Further experiments are required to determine whether this transition is due to either nematic order, surface superconductivity, multiple Fermi surfaces, or a simple geometrical effect. Due to the heat produced by the current in the EC, a temperature gradient is developed between the ring and the thermometer, s.t., the actual temperature of the sample T , and the temperature recorded by the chamber thermometer T ch are not the same. Our goal is to determine the sample temperature T corresponding to each critical current I c ec based on the chamber temperature T ch . The calibration process is done by measuring the temperature dependence of the magnetic moment in the presence of an applied field of μ 0 H ≈ 1 mT (ZFC), similarly to Sec. III B. However, this time we use a disconnected FST ring and repeat the measurement for different I ec values. The critical current values from Fig. The current in the EC heats the sample but cannot generate a persistent current in the ring due to the disconnection. Nevertheless, there are two additional contributions of the EC current to the signal, and both are consequences of its finite length. A good way to understand them is from the EC signal in Fig. Once these contributions are eliminated, we search for the temperature correction, ∆T , for which m(I ec , T ch + ∆T ) collapses onto the one without the current m(0, T ) at the steepest part of the measurement's slope as seen in Fig. After the temperature correction, for each current, is set, we compare the measurement with the current to the one without. The error in the temperature correction is estimated by the temperature difference between points with the same moment value from both measurements. An example appears in Fig. 