The recent report of near-ambient conditions superconductivity in a nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride has inspired a large number of experimental studies with contradictory results. We model from first principles the physical properties of the possible parent structures of the reported superconductor, LuH2 and LuH3. We show that only the phonon band structure of LuH3 can explain the reported Raman spectra due to the presence of hydrogens at the interstitial octahedral sites. However, this structure is stabilized by anharmonicity only above 6 GPa. We find that the intriguing color change with pressure in the reported superconductor is consistent with the optical properties of LuH2, which are determined by the presence of an undamped interband plasmon. The plasmon blue-shifts with pressure and modifies the color of the sample without requiring any structural phase transition. Our findings suggest that the main component in the experiments is LuH2 with some extra hydrogen atoms at octahedral sites. None of LuH2 and LuH3 superconduct at high temperatures. Introduction. One of the most important problems of modern physics is finding a superconductor with a high critical temperature Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. have recently reported a near-ambient pressure room temperature superconductor in a nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride This finding has inspired a large number of experimental and theoretical works In this study, we give an explanation for these experimental results by combining density functional theory (DFT) Structural properties and phonon dispersion. LuH 2 crystallizes in the cubic F m 3m structure, where Lu atoms form an fcc lattice and hydrogen atoms occupy tetrahedral sites. Experiments report a lattice constant of 5.033 Å We have calculated the bulk modulus for cubic LuH 2 and LuH 3 by fitting the static DFT energy to a thirdorder polynomial. Our results for LuH 2 give a bulk modulus of B = 90.6 GPa, and bulk modulus pressure derivative of K 0 = 4.6, which agree fairly well with the values found in Ref. Cubic LuH 3 is dynamically unstable at 0 GPa Optical properties. The color change of the sample in the experiment in Ref. The reason for the color change in LuH 2 is the existence of an undamped interband plasmon In the study we are not including the effects of electronphonon coupling on optical properties of LuH 2 and LuH 3 . In LuH 2 , electron-phonon interaction will lead to the broadening of the electronic band structure in Fig. Discussion At this moment, we have contradictory findings. While the Raman signal can only be explained by LuH 3 , the color changes induced by pressure only exist in LuH 2 . As we mentioned before, XRD cannot distinguish between these two materials, while the calculated lattice constant is overestimated in DFT/SSCHA for both of the models. The calculated elastic constants are similar enough that we cannot say with certainty which material appears in the experiments. Some previous experiments suggested that the stoichiometry of lutetium hydride is between lutetium dihydride and lutetium trihydride We have also considered the case of LuH 2 with vacancies on the tetrahedral site. Our crystal structure predictions reveal that in this case (Lu4H7), the energy above the convex hull is slightly higher compared to hydrogendoped LuH2 (Lu4H9), specifically by 27 meV as opposed to 12 meV. The Lu 2 H 3 structure is red already at 0 GPa and with increasing pressure changes color to yellow/orange. Additionally, it is not able to explain the 250 cm -1 Raman peak since it does not have phonon modes in the acoustic-optical phonon gap. Finally, we have also calculated the superconducting properties of lutetium dihydride and trihydride using isotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations. In agreement with experiments In conclusion, we have performed a first-principles study of the physical properties of lutetium hydrides in order to recognize the parent structure of the material synthesized in Ref. Stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (SSCHA) The calculation of superconducting properties of LuH 3 was done for the stable structure at 6 GPa and 300 K. We used 8 × 8 × 8 q point grid to sample vibrational properties and 42 × 42 × 42 k point grid to sample electronic states. Double delta averaging of electron-phonon matrix elements over the Fermi surface was done with 0.008 Ry Gaussian smearing. Critical temperature was calculated using isotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations using SSCHA auxiliary phonons, SSCHA hessian phonons and full anharmonic phonon spectral functions In order to calculate the optical properties of lutetium hydrides, we first constructed maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) using the Wannier90 code package Once our Wannier basis is converged, we then computed the linear optical response within the independent-particle approximation (IPA) by means of Eqs. (B1a)-(B1b) of Ref. Finally, from the linear KS optical response, we calculated the optical dielectric function within the random-phase approximation without crystal-local fields, by setting α LRC = 0 through Eq. (33) of Ref. , where n d is the refraction index of diamond anvil cell, which we assume to be 2.33. The electron energy loss (EEL) function is calculated as -Im[ε -1 RPA (ω)]. To construct the convex hull of Lu-H, we consider the F m 3m LuH 2 , F m 3m LuH 3 , and P 3c1 LuH 3 screened from the Materials Project database. The former two have been extensively studied in our main text. In addition, the Lu 2 H 5 which denotes hydrogen doped at the octahedral site of LuH 2 has been included. The other two binary hydrides, Lu 4 H 7 and Lu 4 H 9 , are obtained from high-throughput crystal structure predictions with the CALYPSO code 