Exploring novel materials with enhanced optical nonlinearities at low power levels with ultrafast response and small footprints is of great interests for information processing, communication, sensing and quantum systems. Recent progress on nonlinear metamaterials and metasurfaces suggests promising solutions to overcome the limitations of nonlinear materials in nature. Here we present a design concept for highly enhanced saturable absorption effect based on subwavelengththick (<1/5) hybrid graphene-plasmonic metasurface structures in infrared wavelengths. Our theoretical and experimental results demonstrated that, by exciting nonequilibrium carriers inside nanoscale hotspots, one could not only enhance the saturable absorption in graphene, but also reduce the saturation fluence by over 3 orders of magnitude (from ~ 1 mJ/cm 2 to ~100 nJ/cm 2 ). Our pump-probe measurement results suggested an ultrashort saturable absorption recovery time (<60 fs), which is ultimately determined by the relaxation dynamics of photoexcited carriers in graphene. We also observed pulse narrowing effects in our devices based on the autocorrelation measurement results. Such design concepts can be tailored via structure engineering to operate in broader wavelength ranges up to mid-and far-infrared spectral regions. These ultrafast lowsaturation fluence saturable absorber designs can enable low-threshold, compact, self-starting mode-locked lasers, laser pulse shaping, and high-speed optical information processing. Saturable absorbers (SA) are nonlinear optical components with reduced absorption at high optical intensities. They are widely used for mode-locked lasers, Q-switching devices, pulse shaping, optical signal processing applications, etc. Low saturation fluence and ultrafast recovery time are highly desirable attributes of saturable absorbers as they enable access to the nonlinear behavior with lower power consumption and faster speed. Using SA with low saturation fluence and ultrafast recovery time, one can achieve low-threshold, compact, stable, self-starting high-power mode-locked lasers Various saturable absorbers have been demonstrated in literature utilizing different materials and approaches, such as semiconductor saturable absorber mirror (SESAM) In this paper, we demonstrate an ultra-compact graphene-plasmonic hybrid metasurface saturable absorber (GPMSA) experimentally with ultralow saturation fluence (~100 nJ/cm 2 ) and ultrafast recovery time (<60fs) in the infrared wavelength. The subwavelength-thick GPMSA focuses light in the nanogaps between adjacent Au nanobars and significantly enhances the saturable absorption effects in graphene. More specifically, the highly enhanced field intensity in the nanoscale hot spots strongly boosts photon absorption in the graphene over the nanogap regions, resulting in a large photoexcited carrier population. The high density of photocarriers results in a significant change in graphene optical conductivity around the incident wavelengths. Meanwhile, the highly enhanced light-matter interaction The proposed GPMSA device consists of a plasmonic metasurface, a dielectric spacer layer (Al2O3), a metallic back reflector (Aluminum), and a monolayer graphene over the plasmonic metasurface, as shown in Figure This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 6 (1.035μm) of the GPMSA (bottom right). |E| When an ultrashort laser pulse incident onto the GPMSA device, the plasmonic metasurface focuses most of the optical energy into the "hot spots" in the nanogaps. Close to 40% of the incident photons are absorbed in the graphene located at the hotspots (as shown in Figure These photoexcited non-equilibrium carriers relax into a hot fermi-Dirac distribution within 10 -100 fs due to electron-electron (e-e) and electron-optical phonon (e-ph) scattering This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 Where, I(t) = I0exp(-2.76t 2 /Δ 2 ) is the incident laser intensity, α f is the fine structure coefficient of graphene, D(E) = D(ћω/2) = ћω/(πћ 2 vF 2 ) is the density of states of graphene on the CB or VB at incident photon energy, and Δ is the incident laser pulse width (Full Width Half Maxima-FWHM). These two coupled differential equations explain the absorption, stimulated emission, and the subsequent relaxation of the excited non-equilibrium carriers. For saturable absorption, we are primarily interested in the ultrafast accumulation of non-equilibrium photoexcited carriers from VB to CB and the subsequent relaxation of the carriers from the non-equilibrium states to the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution near the Dirac point. The most contributing relaxation channels in this process are the carrier-carrier (e-e) and carrier-optical phonon (e-ph) scattering, which happens within 10-100 fs. The scattering contributions from other origins such as carrieracoustic phonon and phonon-phonon scattering are not considered here as they have a picosecond or larger time constant For each incident pulse fluence, we obtain the time-dependent photocarrier distribution and graphene surface conductivity from the model and the corresponding reflection spectra of the GPMSA is obtained from FDTD simulations. Figure Figure Furthermore, the maximum reflection modulation of the GPMSA mirror is ~30%, more than one order of magnitude higher than that of the reference device. (structure parameters are the same as in Figure This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 From Figure So, to evaluate the device's operation as a saturable absorber, the self-modulation of reflection, ΔR(%), at the center wavelength of the incident laser and at the peak of the pulse (time = 0fs) for The significant decrease (10%) of reflected pulse width relies on two important features of the GPMSA, i.e., saturated absorption at high intensity and ultrafast recovery time (shorter than half of the pulse width ~55fs), because both are necessary to ensure the peak of the pulse with highest intensity experiences larger reflection than the rising and falling edges of the pulse. If the recovery time is longer than the pulse width, the absorption experienced by the falling edge of the pulse would be close to that at the peak intensity, thus, the pulse width narrowing effect will be much weaker. An essential factor for the GPMSA operation is the carrier relaxation time of graphene, i.e., τ1. This is defined as the time necessary for the photoexcited non-equilibrium carriers to relax from the excited states with the help of e-e and e-ph scattering events (other longer time scale relaxation channels are not considered here, as explained in the previous section and in supplementary information S2 and S3). Reflection modulation, saturation fluence, and recovery time of GPMSA This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 13 are dependent on τ1. Figure The saturation fluence, Fsat, of GPMSA also varies for different relaxation times, τ1, illustrated in Figure Electron Beam Lithography (EBL) was used to pattern the double layer resist. After patterning the sample, cold development (40C temperature) in a solution with 1-part Methyl Isobutyl Ketone (MIBK) and 3-part Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) was done. Then Cr/Au (5nm/35nm) layer was deposited using a thermal evaporator, and lift-off was done using hot acetone for 12 hours. PMMA/MMA bilayer resist was used to form the overhang resist structure after development and facilitate the lift-off of the plasmonic metasurface structure. The fabrication flow is shown in Figure Monolayer graphene was transferred on the device using a wet transfer method (see the methods section). We performed Raman spectroscopy to quantify graphene layer and its quality. The measured spectra are shown in Figure After graphene transfer, the resonance wavelength of the device was blue-shifted by ~76nm, the reflection dip is decreased by 11%, and the reflection at the working wavelength (~1.035μm) is changed by 20%. Furthermore, we can tailor the working wavelengths of the GPMSA design (Figure The optical setup for the saturable absorption measurement (shown in Figure The measured reflection of GPMSA (same device as in Figure Figure does not affect our measurement results as it introduces negligible reflection modulation (~0.1%) unrelated to saturable absorption compared to the large reflection modulation (~5.5%) obtained from the saturable absorption measurement of the device. To extract the device's saturation fluence, we followed the two-level atom model Here, A NS describes the non-saturable absorption, A s is the saturable absorption. F s is the saturation fluence within the single photon absorption limit. After fitting the measured data with equation (3), we obtained the saturation fluence (F s ) of the device. The fitted curve is shown in Figure The saturation fluence is 2-3 orders of magnitude smaller than the graphene SA reported in literature This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 To investigate the transient behavior and obtain the recovery time of GPMSA, we have performed degenerate pump-probe measurements at 1.035μm wavelength with the femtosecond laser (Menlo System GmbH) as mentioned previously. A schematic of the optical setup is shown in Figure (details can be found in the methods section). With the optical delay line (ODL), we varied the delay between the pump and probe pulses and recorded the change in the device reflection with the probe pulse as the device interacted with the pump pulse. Pump-probe measurements show that GPMSA devices provide enhanced absorption and large reflection modulation within femtosecond time scale compared to the substrate and reference device (Figure This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 Pulse narrowing is one of the important functions of saturable absorbers The autocorrelation curve for the GPMSA device is narrower compared to those for the reference device and the substrate back reflector. This, together with experimental results in Figures This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 22 The results again confirm that the GPMSA device has strong saturable absorption with an ultrafast recovery time. This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 In summary, we have demonstrated ultra-fast saturable absorption in subwavelength-thick (~200 nm, < /5) GPMSA devices based on graphene-plasmonic hybrid metasurfaces. Both theoretical and experimental results demonstrated that the GPMSA devices are featured with ultralow saturation fluence (~100 nJ/cm 2 ) and ultrafast recovery time (<60fs) in the infrared wavelengths. The GPMSA devices focus light into the nanoscale hot spots inside the nanogap between adjacent Au nanoantenna and significantly increase light-matter interaction with graphene. Consequently, photon absorption in the graphene is significantly boosted over the nanogap regions and generates a large photoexcited carrier population. Furthermore, the strong light-graphene interaction in the hot spots of the GPMSA magnifies the tuning effects of the reflection spectra due to the ultrafast modulation of graphene optical conductivity. These enhanced effects finally result in the decrease of saturation fluence by over three orders of magnitude compared to free space coupled graphene SAs reported in the literature. Moreover, the proposed scheme does not slow down the ultrafast carrier dynamics in the graphene layer while the saturation fluence of the device is decreased. To the best of our knowledge, the GPMSA devices presented here exhibit the shortest recovery time and lowest saturation fluence among all free space SAs reported in the literature so far. The design concept can be readily applied to longer infrared wavelengths via structure engineering thanks to the broadband absorption of graphene and the design flexibility of plasmonic metasurfaces. The proposed planer hybrid metasurface-based GPMSA design holds the promise to enable high-speed signal processing, pulse shaping, and compact high-power pulsed laser sources in the infrared wavelengths with low power consumption. This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 All numerical simulation is done using MATLAB ® (MathWorks Inc.) with a phenomenological graphene carrier dynamics model All FDTD simulations are done using commercially available Lumerical Inc. FDTD software. The optical surface conductivity of non-pumped graphene is extracted from the numerical model included in the software, and the time-dependent optical surface conductivity of pumped graphene is calculated using the numerical model described above. All other material parameters (Gold, Aluminum, and Aluminum Oxide-Al2O3) are also obtained from the simulation software database. Time-dependent FDTD simulation process details can be found in the supplementary information. On a Silicon substrate, a 150nm Aluminum (Al) layer was deposited using electron beam evaporation (PVD 75, Kurt J. Lesker Company®). On top of the Aluminum layer, a 20nm Aluminum Oxide (Al2O3) layer is deposited using atomic layer deposition (Cambridge Savannah ALD) as a dielectric spacer layer. The dielectric layer was spin-coated with two layers of electron beam resists. One layer of poly (methyl methacrylate) (495K PMMA with 2% Anisole, ~100nm) and on top, another layer of methyl methacrylate (950K MMA with 2% Anisole, ~70nm). On top of the resists, a very thin layer (~5-10nm) of Chromium (Cr) was deposited as a charge dissipation layer. Electron Beam Lithography (EBL, JEOL JBX-6000FS) was used to pattern the double layer resist. After patterning, the sample was developed at a cold temperature (40C) in a solution with 1-This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 part Methyl Isobutyl Ketone (MIBK) and 3-part Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) to remove the exposed resists. Then a thin layer (~5nm) of Cr and 35nm thick Gold (Au) layer was deposited using thermal evaporation (Edwards Auto 306). The lift-off was done by soaking the sample in hot acetone for 12 hours, followed by an acetone and IPA rinse. We used a CVD graphene sample on a Cu foil (covered both sides). We cut a small piece, large enough to cover the whole area of the fabricated device and put it on a glass slide. We used one drop of water on the glass slide to hold the small piece in its place. Then we spin-coated 950K A4 PMMA layer (at 2500 RPM for 1 minute) on top of the graphene piece to protect the graphene layer on that side from the following processing steps. Then we flip the small piece and expose the bare graphene side of the Cu foil. We take another glass slide and use Kapton tape on all four sides of the piece to hold it on the glass slide. Then put it inside oxygen (O2) plasma etcher for 15 minutes to etch the graphene off that side of the Cu foil. After the process is done, we remove the graphene-covered Cu foil (on one side now) and cut off the four edges of the foil as they were protected by the Kapton tape during the plasma etching and still have graphene on both sides. Then we put the graphene-covered Cu foil (Copper, Cu, side down) in a copper etchant (a mixture of CuCl2 and HCl). After the etching is completed, we can see a translucent piece of graphene (covered with PMMA on top) floating on the etchant. We scooped the floating graphene piece from the etchant with a small piece of SiO2/Si wafer and put it inside a Deionized (DI) water bath. We provide three separate DI water baths (each for 5 minutes) to the graphene piece to remove all the Cu etchants. After the last bath, we move the graphene sample to another DI water bath. Then we take our device (where we want to transfer graphene) and scoop the graphene sample out of the DI water with it (transferring graphene on our device). Then we gently blow the sample with This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 an N2 gun (optional as it may tear graphene) to remove any water puddle underneath the graphene and then let it dry on its own for 24 hours. After that, we put the sample in an acetone bath for 5 minutes and then rinsed it with acetone and IPA to remove all the PMMA from the top. Then blowdry with an N2 gun. Raman spectrum of the monolayer graphene is presented in Figure Bruker Vertex 70 FTIR spectrometer connected to a Hyperion 2000 microscope is used to measure the reflection spectra of the fabricated devices. A linear polarizer was used on the optical light path to align the light polarization along the long axis of the nanobar. The reflected light from the sample was collected with a 15x objective (NA=0.4). A liquid Nitrogen cooled Mercury Cadmium Telluride (MCT) photodetector was used to detect the collected reflected light from the sample. A background spectrum of the sample substrate (Al2O3/Al/Si) is taken and subtracted from all the measurements to remove any effect of the substrate. The ultrafast self-modulation is demonstrated by a degenerate (same color) pump-probe measurement. The measurement setup is illustrated in Figure This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 on the pump path and used it as a reference (5f option selected in chopper controller) for a phasesensitive lock-in-amplifier. The photodetector output is connected to the lock-in-amplifier, and the DC output of the lock-in-amplifier is connected with a source meter and ultimately, the source meter reading is stored automatically by a computer using the MATLAB instrument control toolbox. An optical delay line controls the probe pulse delay (ODL 220, Thorlabs Inc.) with respect to the pump pulse. The movement of the ODL and the data recording from the lock-in-amplifier is synchronized and automated with the computer so that first the ODL is moved to change the delay and then a data is recorded. This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. Equation ( This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 We performed FDTD simulation to optimize design parameters and achieve large absorption and high nearfield enhancement in the gap at resonance wavelengths. In Figure From the coupled differential equations mentioned in the main manuscript, equation ( The non-equilibrium photoexcited carrier concentration, N(t, ω), in the conduction band, at the laser wavelength (1.035μm), and subsequent relaxation due to carrier-carrier and carrier-optical phonon scattering is presented in Figure Graphene has a constant absorption of πα f or 2.3% at all wavelengths. As the carriers accumulate in the conduction band from the valence band, the absorption decreases from 2.3%. We can account for the changing absorption, A(t, ω) , by considering the time-dependent occupation probability of electrons in CB (fC (t, ω)) and VB (fV Here, A(t, ω) is the time-dependent absorption of graphene. We can convert this absorption into an absorption coefficient, α(t, ω), by considering a thickness (d) of 0.3nm for the graphene monolayer. Please see discussion in supplementary section S4 for absorption coefficient calculation of monolayer graphene. For these simulations, we take graphene absorption coefficient long before pumping, α(-∞, ω), as the initial or base value and then we try to calculate the changes in the absorption coefficient due to laser pumping, ∆α(t, ω) = α(t, ω) -α(-∞, ω). From the changes in time-dependent absorption coefficient, ∆α(t, ω), the change in complex This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. Here, KK model relates the change in imaginary part (∆k(t, ω)) and the real part (∆n(t, ω)) of graphene's complex refractive index with its time dependent change in absorption coefficient, ∆α(t, ω). To calculate the effective total complex refractive index upon laser excitation, we extract the optical surface conductivity, σ S (-∞, ω), of non-pumped graphene from FDTD numerical model in Lumerical Inc. FDTD simulation software. From σ S (-∞, ω), we can calculate in plane (||) complex permittivity, ε(-∞, ω) = 1 + iσ S (-∞,ω) ε 0 ωd , and then complex refractive index, n T (-∞, ω) = √ε(-∞, ω), of non-pumped graphene. Then we add the time dependent change in complex refractive index, ∆n T (t, ω)= ∆n(t, ω) + i∆k(t, ω), to obtain the total complex refractive index of graphene, n T (t, ω) includes the instantaneous time dependent index change due to laser pumping. The complex permittivity, ε(t, ω) , of the graphene is then calculated from the complex index, ε(t, ω) = n T (t, ω) 2 = (n(t, ω) + ik(t, ω)) Using this instantaneous change in graphene's optical surface conductivity, σ S (t, ω), we can perform simulation of GPMSA using the 2D surface conductivity model in Lumerical FDTD and find the time-dependent reflection spectra, as shown in Figure This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 Simulation results depicting the time evolution of reflection spectra, R, and reflection modulation (ΔR) with changing optical surface conductivity of graphene in GPMSA is presented in Figure Absorption is calculated utilizing FDTD simulation software from Lumerical Inc. We setup an FDTD simulation and to calculate the absorption within a certain region of graphene we follow the below outlined procedure. 1. Setup FDTD simulation with advanced absorption analysis group. 2. Enclose the region of interest and a small part of surrounding region (at least one cell larger) with this advanced absorption analysis group. This analysis group contains an index monitor and electric field monitor. It is evident, from Figure This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 The optical setup for the saturable absorption measurement is shown in Figure The pump beam is focused using a 45 ̊ parabolic mirror with reflected focal length 8". The beam diameter at the focus point is calculated considering gaussian pulse shape. The wavelength of the pump light is 1.035μm and incident beam diameter is 2mm. Considering the gaussian laser beam, the diameter is calculated to be 135μm. But because the beam is falling on the device at 45 ̊, the focus point becomes elliptical and one of the axes become longer and the other axis is around 135μm. We confirmed the beam diameter at the focus point by focusing the beam on reflective Au circles (fabricated on glass substrate) of different diameters 50μm, 100μm, 150μm, 200μm and 250μm (these circles are used to measure beam diameters of other lasers also). For us, we focused the laser beam on the middle of the reflective circle of 200μm and 250μm diameters. Then collected the reflected beam in a power meter. Then scanned the beam on x-and y-axis of the circle with 10μm steps. We start counting the steps just before we see the decrease in signal in the power meter and continue counting the number of steps until we completely lost the signal on the power meter. It takes about 14 to 16 steps in this case. So, we approximate the shape of the focus point of beam to be circular with diameter around 150μm. From Figure shift causes ~0.1% reflection modulation (unrelated to saturable absorption) of the device, which is negligible considering the 6% reflection modulation obtained from the saturable absorption measurement. Furthermore, the saturation absorption for these devices happens ~0.1μJ/cm 2 . In this pump range the femtosecond laser has <3nm blue shift. So, the measurement results obtained from the on-resonance devices are not affected by the wavelength shift of the laser. i2kd (8)