The valley-related multiple topological phase transitions attracted significant attention due to their providing significant opportunities for fundamental research and practical applications. However, unfortunately, to date there is no real material that can realize valley-related multiple topological phase transitions. Here, through first-principles calculations and model analysis, we investigate the structural, magnetic, electronic, and topological properties of VSiXN4 (X = C, Si, Ge, Sn, Pb) monolayers. VSiXN4 monolayers are stable and intrinsically ferrovalley materials. Intriguingly, we found that the built-in electric field and strain can induce valley-related multiple topological phase transitions in the materials from valley semiconductor to valley-half-semimetal, to valley quantum anomalous Hall insulator, to valley-half-semimetal, and to valley semiconductor (or to valley-metal). The nature of topological phase transition is the built-in electric field and strain induce band inversion between the dxy/dx2-y2 and dz2 orbitals at K and K ′ valleys. Our findings not only reveal the mechanism of multiple topological phase transitions, but also provides an ideal platform for the multi-field manipulating the spin, valley, and topological physics. It will open new perspectives for spintronic, valleytronic, and topological nanoelectronic applications based on these materials. Valley degree of freedom and related manipulations have become rising topics in recent years In the 2D hexagonal lattice material, the extreme value of the valence and conduction bands are appeared at the K and K ′ points, forming the valley degrees of freedom. Due to the effect of the inversion symmetry ( P ) breaking together with spin-orbit coupling (SOC), the K and K ′ valleys have opposite spins but degenerate energies, which is called as spin-valley locking. As a result, the charged carriers in the two opposite valleys were selectively stimulated by the photons with left-hand and right-hand circular polarization. In addition, if the system further breaks time-reversal symmetry ( T ), the valley degenerate will disappear at K and K ′ points. It is named as ferrovalley Recently, a new 2D transition metal material MoSi 2 N 4 family has been successfully synthesized in the experiment In this work, we systematically investigate the builtin electric field and strain on the covariation effect of spin, topological, and valley freedom of the VSiXN 4 (X= C, Si, Ge, Sn, Pb) monolayers. It is found that the built-in electric field and strain effects can induce a series of topological phase transitions, such as valley semiconductor (VSC), valley-half-semimetal (VHSM), valley quantum anomalous Hall insulator (VQAHI) and valleymetal (VM). It essentially originated from the built-in electric field and strain-induced band inversion between the d xy /d x2-y2 and d z2 orbitals at K and K ′ valleys. Our findings create pathways for valley-related multiple topological phase transitions and further microelectronic devices with the perfect valley, spin, and topology. To explore the electronic and magnetic structures, we used the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) (3) where C is Chern number, Ω(k) is the Berry curvature in the reciprocal space, v x and v y are operator components along the x and y directions, and f n = 1 for the occupied bands, respectively The crystal structure of the VSiXN 4 monolayer is shown in Fig. , where E tot is the total energy of the VSiXN 4 . The μ V , μ X , and μ N are the chemical potential V, X, and N atoms, respectively. N is the number of atoms in VSiXN 4 . As listed in Table and global band gap Eg (meV) of the 2D material VSiXN4 (X = C, Si, Ge, Sn, Pb). The valence electron configuration of the V atom is 3d 3 4s 2 . After donating four electrons to the neighboring N atoms, one valence electron is retained. According to Hund's rule and the Pauli exclusion principle, the electron configuration of V 4+ split into three groups: a 1 (d z2 orbital), e 1 (d xy , d x2-y2 orbital), and e 2 (d z2 orbital), as shown in Fig. To determine the magnetic ground state of the VSiXN 4 monolayer, three possible magnetic configurations are considered, namely, the ferromagnetic (FM), antiferromagnetic (AFM), and non-magnetic (NM) structures [see Fig. where o and u denote to the occupied and unoccupied states, respectively. The spin indices σ and σ ′ run over ±1, amounting to each of the two orthogonal spin states at the K point. E u,σ , and E o,σ ′ are the band energy of the states. As shown in Fig. where ∆ is the band gap, and The spin orientation is determined by the orbital overlaps of a τ |p τ ′ and a ′ τ |p z . In a purely octahedral crystal environment, the irreducible representations of the p ′ τ and p z of the ligands are E u ⊕E g and A 1g ⊕A 2u , respectively. a τ of V atoms belongs to E g , which indicates that a τ trends to couple with p ′ τ instead of p z from N atoms. Thus, It indicates that the MAE favors a positive value, benefiting the out-of-plane spin orientation. In fact, VSiCN 4 and VSi 2 N 4 have an easy magnetization plane, while the easy axes of VSiGeN 4 , VSiSnN 4 , and VSiPbN 4 are along the out-of-plane direction, as shown in Fig. In addition, we first calculated the band structure of VSiXN 4 with spin polarization but without SOC. As shown in Fig. To understand the underlying mechanism for the ferrovalley effect in VSiXN 2 . Here, we take VSiGeN 4 as an example to perform model analysis. We adopted where Ŝ and L are spin angular and orbital angular operators, respectively. Ĥ0 SOC and Ĥ1 SOC represent the interaction between the same spin states and between opposite spin states, respectively. For the VSiGeN 4 monolayer, the single valley is composed of only one spin channel [see Fig. SOC can be ignored. On the other hand, Ĥ0 SOC can be written in polar angles In the out-of-plane magnetization case, θ = φ = 0, then the Ĥ0 SOC term can be simplified as The energy levels of the valleys for the VBM and CBM can be expressed as , respectively. Then, the valley polarization in the valence and conduction bands can be expressed as where the Lz The analytical result certificates that the valley degeneracy splits for the valence and conduction bands are consistent with our DFT calculations ( = 0.00 meV). To reveal the topological properties of VSiXN 4 monolayers, we have calculated the local density of states of the edge state through the Green's function method In conclusion, we have demonstrated the rich multifield induced physics in VSiXN 4 (X = C, Si, Ge, Sn, Pn) monolayers. The rich topological phase transitions can be realized through the built-in electric field and strain. Taking the VSiGeN 4 monolayer as an instance, when ε < 0% and ε > 0.4%, it is a valley semiconductor. Moreover, the quantum anomalous Hall insulator is obtained with tensile 0.0 ∼ 0.4%. At the two critical cases with ε = 0.0% and 0.4%, the valleys at K and K ′ become a Dirac cone, respectively. It becomes a valley-half-semimetal. We reveal that the nature of topological phase transition is built-in electric field and strain induces band inversion between the d xy /d x2-y2 and d z2 orbitals at K and K ′ val-leys. The abundant topological phase transition makes the VSiXN 4 monolayers a very promising material to develop intriguing spin-valley-topology devices.