In superconducting quantum processors, the predictability of device parameters is of increasing importance as many labs scale up their systems to larger sizes in a 3D-integrated architecture. In particular, the properties of superconducting resonators must be controlled well to ensure high-fidelity multiplexed readout of qubits. Here we present a method, based on conformal mapping techniques, to predict a resonator's parameters directly from its 2D cross-section, without computationally heavy and timeconsuming 3D simulation. We demonstrate the method's validity by comparing the calculated resonator frequency and coupling quality factor with those obtained through 3D finite-element-method simulation and by measurement of 15 resonators in a flip-chip-integrated architecture. We achieve a discrepancy of less than 2% between designed and measured frequencies, for 6-GHz resonators. We also propose a design method that reduces the sensitivity of the resonant frequency to variations in the inter-chip spacing. A S the size of superconducting quantum processors grows beyond a small number of qubits, more advanced circuit-integration technology needs to be developed to accommodate the increasing input/output (I/O) wiring complexity. To this end, flip-chip integration is one choice that allows the routing of individual I/O lines to address qubits in the interior of the processor In this paper, we present a design methodology for superconducting flip-chip-integrated quantum processor components. We apply it to the calculation of resonant frequencies (f r ) of coplanar-waveguide (CPW) resonators and their coupling quality factors to a readout feedline (Q c ). By analyzing only the 2D cross section of the CPW, we calculate these quantities using two methods: conformal mapping analysis and 2D numerical simulation. We compare the results to those obtained by 1000-times more resource demanding 3D simulation, and to experimental measurements of 15 aluminum resonators in a flip-chip quantum processor architecture. With the inclusion of the kinetic inductance contribution, we predict the resonant frequencies with accuracy better than 100 MHz. The inter-chip spacing can be off-target, or may vary across a flip-chip module. For a resonator that faces a ground plane on the opposing chip, we propose a design method with a partial ground-plane cutout of the area directly facing the resonator, reducing the sensitivity of its resonant frequency to the inter-chip spacing. In this section we show the calculation of f r and Q c from a CPW resonator's 2D cross-sections in flip-chip geometry with an inter-chip vacuum gap. Fig. The resonant frequency of a λ/4 resonator is calculated by where l tot is its total length including the effective lengths resulting from CPW discontinuities at both ends. L g l and L k l are the geometric and kinetic inductances per unit length, respectively, and C l is the capacitance per unit length. We can obtain L g l and C l by using either conformal mapping techniques (L g,conf l , C conf l ) To implement the conformal mapping techniques, we assume that the metal thin films of the resonator's central conductor and of the ground planes on both tiers have infinite conductivity, and that the CPW cross-section satisfies the quasi-TEM approximation. In order to simplify the conformal transformation functions, the metal thin films are assumed to have zero thickness (t = 0), and two magnetic walls are placed on the dielectric-vacuum interfaces, i.e. the gaps of the CPW, assuming that the magnetic field is perpendicular to the vacuum-dielectric interfaces The total L g,conf l and C conf l values are therefore calculated as the parallel combination of the two halves. We have where t and b represent the top and bottom halves of the CPW cross-section, respectively. Here μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε r is the relative permittivity of the substrate of both tiers, and K(k) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind with modules A detailed derivation of (2-3) is shown in Appendix A. We then compare L g,conf l and C conf l obtained by conformal mapping techniques with 2D FEM simulation under different inter-chip spacings h s . We use h b = h t = 280 μm, and ε r = 11.45 for our high-resistivity silicon substrate of both tiers at cryogenic temperature As shown in Fig. For comparison between the conformal mapping technique and 2D FEM simulation, we calculate for each h s , as shown in Fig. shown, as ∆L g l /L g,sim2D l and ∆C l /C sim2D l increase rapidly with smaller h s . The cross-section of the CPW resonator in the flip-chip geometry therefore needs to be considered as a whole when h s is very small, rather than being separated into two halves and treated independently. Having determined L g l and C l , we also need to know the kinetic inductance to calculate f r . It is given by where J z is the supercurrent density in the direction of the current flow, and the surface integral is over the crosssection of the thin film only. For a flip-chip geometry, the integral also includes the qubit tier's metal ground plane. Furthermore, λ m is the magnetic penetration depth of the superconductor, and I is the total current injected into the CPW's center conductor. To calculate Simulated kinetic inductance per unit length L k l and its ratio to the simulated geometric inductance per unit length L g,sim2D l under different inter-chip spacings hs. We use a magnetic penetration depth λm = 83 nm for the superconducting thin films during the simulation. The coupling quality factor Q c of the resonator quantifies its coupling rate to the feedline, determining how fast the qubit state can be detected with where f r is the bare resonator frequency without feedline, and we take p = 1 for its fundamental resonance. As shown in Fig. In order to obtain precise values of C rf , C rr , and C f f under different h s , we conduct 2D FEM simulations at the cross-section of the resonator's coupling part to the feedline. Fig. To validate the accuracy of the resonator's f r and Q c obtained from 2D cross-sections, both parameters are compared to 3D FEM simulation To obtain a precise value of l tot in (1), in addition to the resonator's designed length l r = l s + l c + l o , we also need to estimate the effective length of the circular structure at the open end of the resonator. We introduce two empirical coefficients (α 1 , α 2 ) so that l tot = l r + α 1 R 2 + α 2 R. These coefficients are obtained by sweeping R at a fixed h s and fitted with f r from 3D simulations. We obtain α 1 = 0.032 μm -1 and α 2 = 2.9. We disregard the small effective length of the short end of the resonator Fig. We now examine our 2D cross-section techniques by calculating the resonant frequencies and coupling quality factors of fifteen resonators by means of conformal transformation and 2D FEM simulation, f conf+KI r , f sim2D+KI r , and Q cal2D c (including simulated kinetic inductance L k l ), and comparing them with experimentally measured values. The resonators were fabricated and packaged within a multi-qubit flip-chipintegrated quantum processor as reported by Kosen and Li To obtain the value of h s for each of the 15 resonators within one flip-chip-integrated processor, we used the gap values, measured by scanning electron microscopy, at the chip's four corners In Fig. We use conformal mapping techniques to obtain L g,conf l ′ and C conf l ′ of the cross-section when the CPW resonator faces the dielectric substrate of the opposing chip. The resulting equations are -1 To derive the capacitance per unit length, as in Appendix A, we separate the capacitance contribution of the vacuum from that of the qubit tier's substrate at the top half of the crosssection. However, since the CPW metal is closer to the interchip vacuum than the qubit tier's substrate, their capacitance contributions are taken in series rather than in parallel Since in these two scenarios (CPW facing either metal or dielectric, cf. Fig. We define γ as the ratio between the resonator length facing dielectric substrate and the resonator's total length l tot . We can approximate the effective inductance and capacitance per unit length as where L k l ′ is the kinetic inductance per unit length when the CPW faces dielectric. To find the optimal value γ opt of minimal sensitivity to h s variation, we use a cost function F (γ) independent of the total length: where , and γ opt is the value that minimizes F (γ opt ) in the range . We obtain γ conf opt = 0.75 for h s ∈ [6, 10] μm for large enough N . We ignore the kinetic inductance during the calculation, using the fact that at large (Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that analytic and numerical simulation of a 2D cross-section of a coplanar waveguide superconducting resonator in flip-chip geometry can predict the resonant frequency within 2% of 3D-simulated and measured values, after considering the effective length correction due to the resonator ends. We also determined the coupling quality factor within 20% by 2D simulation. The 2D cross-sectional method is considerably more computationally efficient than conventional 3D FEM simulations. The 3 orders of magnitude speed-up will become particularly useful for large-scale quantum processor design containing a large number of qubits and resonators. The conformal mapping analytic equations and 2D simulation steps can be easily integrated into the process design kit workflow of superconducting quantum processor design, e.g., using newly developed tools like Qiskit metal. This method can also be generalized to other components implemented using CPW transmission lines, e.g., couplers and Purcell filters. In addition, we have proposed a resonator design that is insensitive to inter-chip-spacing variations. . In this appendix we will use conformal mapping techniques to derive the geometric inductance and capacitance per unit length of the CPW cross-section in flip-chip geometry when the CPW line faces a metal ground plane on the opposing chip. To simplify our conformal transformation functions such that they are feasible to calculate analytically, we assume zero thickness of the metal thin films on both tiers. We also assume that the chip spacing h s is large enough, such that the magnetic field around the CPW center conductor is perpendicular to the vacuum-dielectric interfaces at gap areas of the CPW. We are then able to cover the vacuumdielectric interfaces with magnetic walls and separate the CPW cross-section into two halves. See Fig. We then apply conformal transformations to the separated two halves independently, resulting in different parallel-plate waveguides with different widths W and separations H. The geometric inductance and capacitance per unit length of each parallel-plate waveguide are therefore calculated using where ε p r is the relative permittivity of the dielectric medium between two plates after the conformal transformation. We use different conformal mapping techniques for each half. The contributions of two halves to the total geometric inductance and capacitance per unit length of the CPW crosssection are calculated as a parallel combination. Now we will show how to do the conformal transformation to each half of the cross-section. We start with the bottom half in Fig. We first calculate the geometric inductance per unit length of the bottom-half cross-section. We replace the substrate with the vacuum since their permeability are the same. We first put the cross-section into a complex z-plane. Because all the metals are in the horizontal direction, we can put the metals along with the Re[z]-axis and directly apply the Christoffel-Schwartz transformation (23) Here A 1 and A 2 are constants that determine the scaling and translation of the transformed geometry, and z i (i = B, C, D, E) are the positions of the end points of the metals on the Re[z]-axis. Choosing the center of the CPW's center conductor as the zero position of the Re[z]-axis, we have The geometry in the z-plane is now conformally mapped to the w-plane. As a result, the CPW center conductor and the ground plane (two infinite points viewed as connected) in the z-plane are transformed into the two plates with equal width and separated in parallel, forming a parallel-plate waveguide with vacuum in-between the plates. The width and the height of this parallel-plate waveguide are calculated as where K(k) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind with modules ). The geometric inductance per unit length of this parallelplate waveguide is obtained as To calculate the capacitance per unit length of the bottomhalf cross-section, we can further view this cross-section as two cross-sections in a parallel combination, in which the first has the vacuum below the metals, whereas the second has a finite-thickness dielectric substrate with relative permittivity ε r -1. We can then calculate the capacitance contributions from the vacuum and the substrate separately. We refer to The capacitance per unit length of the cross-section with vacuum below the metals can be calculated using the same conformal transformation function . For the cross-section having a finite-thickness substrate with relative permittivity ε r -1, we can first do an intermediate transformation such that the substrate becomes infinitely thick to resemble the vacuum case above. We map the crosssection from the z-plane to the t-plane with function From the t-plane, we repeat the same Christoffel-Schwartz transformation but replace the variable notations in Thus we obtain with modules Therefore, the geometric inductance and capacitance per unit length of the bottom half of the CPW cross-section are The top half of the CPW cross-section will be treated differently compared to the bottom half, as the top-half crosssection has a metal ground plane from the qubit tier on top of the CPW line. Since the qubit tier's metal ground plane blocks all the electromagnetic field generated from the CPW line, we can view the qubit tier's substrate as absent and replace it with vacuum. To simplify the calculation, we exploit the symmetry of the top-half cross-section and only calculate the geometric inductance and capacitance per unit length of the crosssection at the z-plane's real positive part (zero position is at the center of CPW's center conductor). The resultant two identical parallel-plate waveguides mapped from the real positive and negative parts are also treated as a parallel combination. We do two consecutive conformal transformations to map the real positive part of the top-half cross-section into a parallel-plate waveguide. We first map the qubit tier's half of the metal ground plane in the z-plane to the Re[t]-axis, and then use the Christoffel-Schwartz transformation to map the geometry to a parallel-plate waveguide in the w-plane Fig. The first transformation function we use is In the z-plane, we define z P = 0, z I = ih s , z D = w r /2 and z E = (w r + 2s r )/2. In the t-plane these points are mapped into t P = 1, t I = 0, t D = cosh 2 [πw r /4h b ] and The second transformation function we use is where F (φ, k s ) is the elliptic integral of the first kind with After the second transformation, the real positive part of the top-half cross-section is now mapped to a parallel-plate waveguide, with the width and the height where we have used the relations After combining the same results from the real negative part of the top-half cross-section, the geometric inductance and capacitance per unit length of the top half of the CPW cross-section are Therefore, the total geometric inductance and capacitance per unit length of the CPW cross-section in flip-chip geometry, when the CPW faces a metal ground plane on the opposing chip, are given in ( To determine the magnetic penetration depth λ m of our superconducting films, we compare 3D-simulated and measured resonator frequencies (this time from single-chip devices, not flip-chip). We use L k l as a fitting parameter to account for the discrepancy between measured and simulated frequencies, since the model uses 2D sheets with perfect-E boundary condition, which does not include kinetic inductance. We measured six resonators on each of seven identical chips, see Fig. where ω = 2πf and f = 6.6 GHz is the frequency of the alternating current. The imaginary term of ε metal is negligible. We obtain λ m = 83 nm for our 150 nm thick aluminum film. This is somewhat larger than the literature value of 50 nm In order to determine the effective length of the circular resonator-qubit coupling pad shown in Fig. Here β = 1/(4 L g l C l ) is a fixed value for given w r , s r , h s , h b , and ε r . Fig. We obtain the fitted parameters α 1 = 0.032 μm -1 and α 2 = 2.9 at l r = 5056 μm. We use these fitted parameters to obtain the effective length at different l r and h s during f r and Q c calculations in the main text. Repeated simulations at different l r show that the change of calculated effective length (α 1 R 2 + α 2 R) at a given R is less than 3%. We also repeat the simulations at different h s , from 1 μm to 60 μm, and find that for our maximum investigated R = 100 μm, the change of the calculated effective length, is less than 113 μm (18%), compared to its value for h s = 8 μm. Smaller R gives a smaller change, and we see that the change is kept at this value when h s → ∞. With l r = 5056.4 μm, the corresponding change of the resonator's frequency is less than 2%. In this appendix we show the comparison of required computational resources between 2D and 3D FEM simulations. We did 3D FEM simulations We conducted 2D FEM simulations In addition, we have also documented the used computational resources in COMSOL when simulating J z over the metal thin films, with h s from 7 to 9 μm with step 0.1 μm. The average solution time was 33 s and the allocated memory was 7.5 GB. In this appendix, we calculate the Q-factor, Q pr , of the resonator's CPW line cross-section in flip-chip architecture, based on the simulated participation ratio of different domains The Q-factor Q pr is calculated using where p i is the simulated participation ratio for each domain i and tan δ i is the domain's loss tangent. Fig. e FIGURE 1. VOLUME -, -