We study femtosecond spin currents through MgO tunneling barriers in CoFeB(2 nm)|MgO(d)|Pt(2 nm) stacks by terahertz emission spectroscopy. To obtain transport information independent of extrinsic experimental factors, we determine the complex-valued spin conductance G ̃d(ω) of the MgO layer (thickness d = 0-6 Å) over a wide frequency range (ω/2π = 0.5-8 THz). In the time (t) domain, G d (t) has an instantaneous and delayed component that point to (i) spin transport through Pt pinholes in MgO, (ii) coherent spin tunneling and (iii) incoherent resonant spin tunneling mediated by defect states in MgO. A remarkable signature of (iii) is its relaxation time that grows monotonically with d to as much as 270 fs at d = 6 Å, in full agreement with an analytical model. Our results indicate that terahertz spin conductance spectroscopy will yield new and relevant insights into ultrafast spin transport for a wide range of materials. Fig. To better understand and optimize THz spin transport, we need tools to adequately characterize it. An important quantity is the spin conductance G = I S /Δμ S , which quantifies how much spin current I S is obtained when a spin-voltage drop Δμ S is applied across a conductor [Fig. In this work, we introduce an approach to measure the spin conductance of a thin film X between a ferromagnetic metal layer F and a heavy-metal layer H [Fig. THz spin-conductance spectroscopy. The general idea of THz spin-conductance spectroscopy is shown in Fig. In the frequency domain, the spin conductance of MgO is given by an Ohm-type law, j̃S(ω) = G ̃d(ω)μ ̃S(ω), where d is the thickness of X. The spin voltage in Pt is neglected owing to the short spin lifetime in Pt In our experiment, we measure electrooptic signals (t) and ref (t) rather than the emitted THz electric field E(t). However, and E are related by an instrument response function that cancels in the frequency domain when the reference measurement is considered In the last step of Eq. ( As spin conductor X, the nonmagnetic insulator MgO is chosen. It is extensively used as a tunnel barrier in magnetic tunnel junctions, which provide large tunneling magnetoresistance for applications in nonvolatile memory devices The samples are sub||TaN(1.5 nm)|CoFeB(2 nm)|MgO(d)|Pt(2 nm)|TaN(1.5 nm) stacks with various MgO thicknesses of 0 ≤ d ≤ 15 Å. The sample with d = 0 is the reference sample. All layers are grown on an MgO substrate (sub) by DC magnetron sputtering in ultrahigh vacuum at a base pressure of 10 -3 mbar, except the MgO layer, which is grown in the same vacuum chamber by radio-frequency sputtering using an off-axis gun tilted 90° from the substrate plane In the THz emission experiments [Fig. Interestingly, with increasing d, the signal amplitude not only drops, but the initially sharp temporal features become smoother [Fig. To gain more intrinsic insight into the spin transport through MgO from the signals of Fig. To obtain the time-domain spin conductance G d (t), we inversely Fourier-transform G ̃d(ω). The resulting normalized G d (t)/g ref is shown in Fig. Note that G d (t) can be considered as the spin current through MgO that is induced by an impulsive spin voltage. Therefore, G d (t) for d = 0 would ideally equal a δ(t)-type signal. However, as the bandwidth of our setup is finite, the extracted G d (t) is the response to a broadened δ-like pulse δ exp (t). To achieve a unipolar δ exp (t), which is as short as possible and free of oscillations, we apply a suitable window function δ ̃exp (ω) to G ̃d(ω)/g ref prior to Fourier transformation For d > 0, the extracted G d (t) traces [Fig. Interpretation. Thin MgO films have been studied extensively in the past. For d < 10 Å, structural imperfections are reported, in particular oxygen vacancies While the PH and CT processes are instantaneous We briefly discuss each mechanism in more detail. Regarding G PH , one expects that, for d < 6 Å, MgO grows in islands where We fit the convolution of G d [Eq. ( The model fits [Fig. Here, Γ -1 quantifies the spin lifetime in a defect state for an infinitely thin MgO layer, and λ is the spin decay length in a MgO barrier. Eq. ( In conclusion, we demonstrate THz conductance spectroscopy for the example of MgO barriers. In the time domain, we find ultrafast signatures of IRT, i.e., an exponentially decaying spin current with a relaxation time that increases with the MgO layer thickness. This behavior arises because the tunneling probability decreases with increasing thickness of the tunneling barrier. We anticipate that our method can be used to measure the spin conductance of a large set of materials, ranging from simple metals 