Structure-property relationships in ordered materials have long been a core principle in materials design. However, the intentional introduction of disorder into materials provides structural flexibility and thus access to material properties that are not attainable in conventional, ordered materials. To understand disorder-property relationships, the disorder -i.e., the local ordering principles -must be quantified. Correlated disorder can be probed experimentally by diffuse scattering. The analysis is notoriously difficult, especially if only powder samples are available. Here, we combine the advantages of three-dimensional electron diffraction -a method that allows single crystal diffraction measurements on sub-micron sized crystals -and three-dimensional difference pair distribution function analysis (3D-∆PDF) to address this problem. 3D-∆PDFs visualise and quantify local deviations from the average structure and enable a straightforward interpretation of the single crystal diffuse scattering data in terms of a three-dimensional local order model. Comparison of the 3D-∆PDF from electron diffraction data with those obtained from neutron and x-ray experiments of yttria-stabilized zirconia (Zr0.82Y0.18O1.91) demonstrates the reliability of the newly proposed approach. Functional materials design uses structure-property relationships which focus on structurally ordered systems, where disorder and defects are generally considered detrimental. However, it is known that certain types of correlated disorder can lead to phenomena that are inaccessible to ordered structures Three-dimensional single crystal diffuse scattering can be a remedy to resolve these ambiguities, as this approach (1) preserves the structural information in 3D space and (2) is performed on single crystals. There are many different approaches to the analysis of single crystal diffuse scattering Historically, single crystal electron diffuse scattering from submicron crystallites has been analysed using oriented zone axis patterns In this article we demonstrate how the 3D-∆PDF technique can be applied to single crystal diffuse scattering data obtained from 3D ED data. The sample material chosen is yttriastabilized zirconia (Zr 0.82 Y 0.18 O 1.91 , YSZ) -a well-known and technologically important material for which large neutron size single crystals are readily available. By comparing the results of the 3D-∆PDF from x-ray and neutron experiments with our analysis of the electron diffraction data, we demonstrate the applicability and reliability of the proposed method. YSZ shows pronounced diffuse scattering for which a consistent local order model has been established in the literature Electron diffraction patterns from an ion-milled single crystal of YSZ were measured with continuous-rotation 3D ED. Selected reciprocal space layers of single crystal diffuse scattering reconstructed from the experimentally obtained diffraction patterns are shown in Fig. To develop a local order model from these data we use the 3D-∆PDF maps as shown in Fig 3 . The first and most striking difference between the electron and other 3D-∆PDFs here is that the signatures in the electron 3D-∆PDF maps are much more localized in the centre of the PDF-space as compared to the x-ray and neutron maps. This is a direct consequence of the experimental broadening of the diffuse scattering in reciprocal space: the sharpness of diffuse scattering is inversely related to the correlation length of the corresponding local correlations in real space. For a material with unknown local order, the goal is to identify the short-range deviations from the average structure and to model the very local interactions. The suppression of higher-order correlations does not hinder this goal. We compare the correlations at the shortest interatomic vectors in our 3D-∆PDF maps with those determined elsewhere using x-ray and neutron 3D-∆PDFs19,34 (see Figure The 1 2 00 interatomic vectors are the shortest interatomic vectors that correspond exclusively to difference vectors between oxygen positions. The signatures we observe in the electron, neutron and x-ray 3D-∆PDFs (see Fig. The 4 interatomic vectors are the shortest interatomic vectors that correspond to difference vectors between oxygen and metal ion positions. In analogy to the The 1 2 1 2 0 interatomic vectors are the shortest interatomic vectors that correspond to difference vectors between metal ion positions, but they also occur as difference vectors in the oxygen substructure. Thus, we observe a superposition of correlations resulting from metal-metal interactions and correlations resulting from oxygen-vacancy interactions To evaluate the quantitative reliability of the 3D-∆PDF, we quantify the shifts of the maxima and minima described qualitatively in the previous section (∆ + OO , ∆ - OO , ∆ + OM ,∆ - OM , and ∆ + MM ). We approximate the intensity distributions at the shortest inter-atomic vectors with three-dimensional Gaussian distributions Of course, we do not expect the refined shift magnitudes to be identical for all three radiation types used, as different probes are sensitive to different structural aspects. In particular, for the The 3D-∆PDF analysis shows that the most pronounced local oxygen-oxygen interaction at the 1 2 00 interatomic vectors can be quantified using the x-ray 3D-∆PDF. The tendency of YSZ to form 6-fold coordinated metals with a pair of double vacancies separated by 1 2 1 2 1 2 vectors cannot be observed as a significant positive correlation in the x-ray 3D-∆PDF but can be clearly observed in the neutron 3D-∆PDF (compare Fig. In an earlier study We have established that electron diffraction can yield sensible 3D-∆PDFs from submicron grains, overcoming the single-crystal limitations of x-ray and neutron techniques. The observed broadening of the diffuse scattering in the electron diffraction does not prevent a quantitative and reliable analysis. This is because the nature of local correlations is encoded in the position and shape of diffuse scattering, whereas the width of diffuse scattering features relates only to correlation length Electrons interact much more strongly with matter than xrays or neutrons. Therefore, the probability that a single electron passing through the sample will scatter more than once is significant. This effect is known as dynamical scattering and, among other things, breaks the inversion symmetry of reciprocal space We show that it is possible to obtain a quantitative and reliable local order model from electron diffraction data using 3D-∆PDF analysis, but we recognise that many challengesmostly experimental aspects -remain before this method can be used routinely. A major challenge that should be mentioned is the limited reciprocal space coverage available in electron diffraction experiments. The generation of the 3D-∆PDF from experimentally collected diffuse scattering data requires the application of a three-dimensional Fourier transform In this case, we suggest combining data from several crystals, which is the typical approach used to increase completeness in 3D ED Another challenge is the stability of the sample with respect to the electron-beam-induced radiation damage and vacuum exposure. Radiation damage may be an issue even in x-ray diffraction experiments A final point to consider is the method of detecting the diffuse scattering. As the diffuse scattering intensities are typically 10 3 to 10 4 times weaker than the Bragg scattering intensity, the dynamic range of the detector is of paramount importance Electron diffraction experiments are routinely performed on submicron crystallites, as these are often synthesis products, whereas large single crystals suitable for x-ray or neutron diffraction experiments often need to be grown by especially adapted synthesis methods Powder PDF is and will remain an important characterization method, but its reduced information content can lead to difficulties and ambiguities of interpretation that are avoided with 3D methods. A key advantage of powder PDF, however, is that it easily allows in-situ, in-operando and variable pressure experiments, which currently can only be implemented to a very limited extent in a 3D ED setup. We envisage that many studies will now benefit from combining both approaches. For example, by establishing a three-dimensional local order model from 3D ED in conditions accessible to electron diffraction can provide a starting point for the adaption of the model that then describes the PDF data measured at the conditions of interest. We consider this combination to be the optimal use of the proposed method and we see great potential in its application to solving complex disorder problems. The zirconia samples have a composition of Zr 0.82 Y 0.18 O 1.91 , grown by the skull melting method, delivered by Djevahirdjan S. A., Monthey, Switzerland. The composition was confirmed by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) X-ray experiments were performed on a Rigaku Synergy S diffractometer equipped with an Eiger 1M detector using Mo radiation, (sin(θ max )/λ =1.28 Å-1 ). To avoid possible fluorescence a threshold of 17.4 keV was used on the detector. Simple ω-scans with 0.5 • step widths and 120 s exposure time were taken. The crystal was kept at ambient conditions. 3D diffuse scattering data was reconstructed on a 501 × 501 × 501 voxel reciprocal space grid (-10 ≤ h, k, l ≤ 10) using the orientation matrix provided by CrysAlis Pro 49 and custom Python scripts using Meerkat Neutron diffraction experiments were carried out at D19 instrument (λ = 0.95 Å, 0.1 • steps, 80 s exposure per frame, sin(θ max )/λ = 0.94 Å-1 ), ILL, Grenoble utilizing a 180°φscan. 3D diffuse scattering data reconstruction utilized the orientation matrix as provided by Int3d 51 and a custom Python script. The data was reconstructed on a 501 × 501 × 501 voxel reciprocal space grid (-10 ≤ h, k, l ≤ 10). Electron diffraction experiments were carried out at a FEI Tecani G2 microscope using 200 keV electrons (λ = 0.02508 Å, sin(θ max )/λ =1.24 Å-1 ) equipped with a hybrid-pixel detector ASI Cheetah (512×512 pixels). The goniometer was tilted from -50 • to +50 • . Diffraction patters were taken with 1.0 s exposure time and the crystal was rotated by 0.25 • between the patterns. PETS2 The reflection conditions for the F -centring were fulfilled in all cases and after careful inspection the data were symmetry-averaged in the m 3m Laue symmetry. The general data processing procedure to obtain 3D-∆PDF from experimental data is described in 