High-pressure structural search was performed on the hydrogen-rich compound LuBeH 8 at pressures up to 200 GPa. We found a F m3m structure that exhibits stability and superconductivity above 100 GPa. Our phonon dispersion, electronic band structure, and superconductivity analyses in the 100-200 GPa pressure range reveal a strong electron-phonon coupling in LuBeH 8 . While T c shows a decreasing trend as the pressure increases, with a superconducting critical temperature T c of 255 K at 200 GPa and a maximum T c of 355 k at 100 GPa. Our research has demonstrated the room-temperature superconductivity in F m3m-LuBeH 8 , thus enriching the family of ternary hydrides. These findings provide valuable guidance for identifying new high-temperature superconducting hydrides. The search for room-temperature superconducting materials is widely regarded as the "holy grail" of condensed matter physics The search for high-temperature superconductors in hydrogen-rich compounds began after the theory of "chemical precompression" was proposed. Initially, researchers focused on natural binary hydrides, such as SiH 4 , AlH 3 , etc. The most prominent high-pressure high-T c compounds are known as "superhydrides". Superhydrides have enveloping cage-shaped hydrogen-based lattices, wrapped in positively charged metal atoms. The most prominent metal atoms are rare earth elements including lanthanum, yttrium, and cerium. However, the lutetium hydride has not received good attention In this letter, we predict a new ternary room-temperature superconductor, LuBeH 8 (spacegroup: F m3m), by searching the stable structures of lutetium-beryllium-hydrogen system. We studied its phonon dispersion, electronic band structure, electron-phonon couplings, and superconducting critical temperatures. Its high symmetry facilitates its good superconductivity. Through our calculations, we found that LuBeH 8 remains stable at 100 GPa, and the superconducting critical temperature is as high as 355 K, which is already far beyond the room temperature. We used in-house developed machine-learning-based crystal structure prediction package CRYSTREE The crystal structure of LuBeH 8 is shown in Figure The phonon properties of F m3m-LuBeH 8 were calculated using DFPT scheme. The calculation determined that the lower pressure limit of LuBeH 8 is 100 GPa, above which no imaginary branches of the phonon spectrum exist. We show the phonon dispersion curve and phonon state density (PHDOS) of LuBeH 8 at 100 GPa in Figure In Figure Figure In order to estimate the superconducting critical temperature of LuBeH 8 under pressure and to find the maximum T c , we performed a linear response calculation for the e-ph coupling (EPC), based on the calculated Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω), the EPC constant λ is obtained by: In addition, the critical temperature is calculated by the Allen-Dynes modified Mc-Millan formula Superconducting phase above room temperature in lutetium-beryllium hydrides at high pressures 6 where λ is the EPC intensity, ω log is the logarithmic mean phonon frequency, and the coulomb pseudopotential parameter μ * is set to 0.1. ω log is defined as The factor f 1 , f 2 depend on λ, μ * ,ω log , and mean square frequency ω 2 , The detailed calculation results are shown in Table The calculation results show that F m3m-LuBeH 8 exhibits metallic behavior while maintaining kinetic stability at 100 GPa, and its superconducting critical temperature is as high as 355 K, which is far beyond the temperature required for room temperature. As the pressure increases, the overall superconducting critical temperature tends to decrease, which may be attributed to the hardening of phonon branches that impede electron-phonon coupling and superconductivity. In conclusion, we discovered the superconducting phase F m3m-LuBeH 8 of the novel superhydride through first-principles calculations and crystal structure prediction. LuBeH 8 remains dynamically stable above 100 GPa while reaching a maximum superconducting critical temperature of 355 K. Excellent superconducting properties result from high structural symmetry and the efficient stacking of beryllium in the lattice, which allows stable mechanical pressure to be applied. T c shows a decreasing tendency with increasing pressure. The increasing pressure will harden the phonon branches and inhibit the electron-phonon coupling of the structure as well as superconductivity. Our study confirms the validity and accuracy of machinelearning-based crystal structure searches and offers a promising approach for discovering other hydride superconductors. Our findings represent a step towards achieving roomtemperature superconductivity.