In this work, we report the realization of a polarization-insensitive grating coupler, single-mode waveguide, and ring resonator in the GaN-on-Sapphire platform. We provide a detailed demonstration of the material characterization, device simulation, and experimental results. We achieve a grating coupler efficiency of -5.2 dB/coupler with a 1dB and 3dB bandwidth of 40 nm and 80 nm, respectively. We measure a single-mode waveguide loss of -6 dB/cm. The losses measured here are the lowest in a GaN-on-Sapphire photonic circuit. This demonstration provides opportunities for the development of on-chip linear and non-linear optical processes using the GaN-on-Sapphire platform. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of an integrated photonic device using a GaN HEMT stack with 2D electron gas. Gallium Nitride (GaN) has increasingly become promising in the field of photonics due to broadband transparency and the ability to grow high optical quality wafer-scale thin films. GaN with a typical bandgap of≈3.4 eV The interesting non-linear properties such as Pockels and Kerr effect can help in fabricating GaN-based efficient optical modulators. The presence of a non-centrosymmetric structure of the GaN crystal enables the material to generate a second-order non-linear-optical response, such as a second harmonic generation from the bulk crystal. The presence of non-linear susceptibility χ(2) of the order of lithium niobate (value approx. 20 pm/V) provides a platform that can be used to realize frequency conversion over the transparency window of GaN Efficient on-chip integrated photonic devices require epitaxially grown GaN films that are substrate specific. However, epitaxial growth of GaN-on-Si (100) faces two major challenges, a large lattice constant mismatch (>17%) and the difference in the coefficient of thermal expansion (≈116%) between GaN and Si. The lattice mismatch leads to defective film, and high thermal mismatch would result in film cracks In this paper, we present GaN-on-Sapphire as a substrate for integrated photonics applications. In particular, we present high electron mobility (HEM) stack that can be used to realize highfrequency electro-optic devices. We demonstrate GaN waveguide, grating fiber-chip coupler, and ring resonator as building block devices for a GaN-based photonic circuit. Furthermore, we present a polarization-independent vertical fiber-chip coupler using one-dimensional grating for the first time. We validate the dual-polarization excitation using the spectral response of a microring resonator. Sapphire is chosen as the substrate to grow GaN of desired thickness. AlN is chosen as the intermediate layer between sapphire and GaN. AlN has a lattice mismatch of about 13.3% The material optimization is followed by waveguide design and simulation to determine the designed dimension for light confinement and propagation. In section 3.1, we discuss the effect of waveguide width and etch depth on the modal characteristics at 1550 nm. Section 3.2 presents a detailed grating light-chip coupler design and analysis. The grating coupler simulation is performed to achieve maximum fiber-chip coupling to the GaN waveguide. As evident from the index profile in Fig. On-chip coupling can be performed in two ways; edge coupling and vertical/grating coupling. The devices need to be diced with optical quality chip-edge for high-efficiency coupling in edge coupling. Since sapphire is a hard material, polishing is a challenge. Furthermore, the alignment tolerance and ease of performing measurement is a challenge. In contrast, a grating coupler is relatively simple to couple light into a waveguide without any additional post-processing. A detailed design procedure is presented in Implementation of Si-overlay grating increases the index contrast to 1.25 (360% improvement from GaN-only grating) at 1550 nm wavelength, which would lead to increased efficiency of light coupling into the GaN waveguide. Si grating coupler parameters such as periodicity (Λ), etch depth(t), duty cycle(D), and the angle of incidence(θ) were optimized using Ansys Lumerical FDTD for both TE and TM polarization. Fig. The results in Fig. Further, we simulate the coupling loss mechanism constituting the reflection, transmission, and substrate leakage of the proposed waveguide-grating coupler design for the optimized grating parameters. Fig. Fig. Fig. The polarization-insensitive behavior of the gratings is further corroborated by simulating the waveguide dispersion, and group index variation of the propagating modes. The measured group index obtained from the two resonant modes is n g =2.57 and 2.54 as shown in Fig. In summary, for the first time, we demonstrated an efficient grating coupler in GaN waveguide. We presented a detailed simulation and fabrication process. We achieved a CE of -5.2 dB/coupler and a waveguide loss of ≈6 dB/cm. A 1dB bandwidth of 40 nm and a 3dB bandwidth of over 80 nm were obtained for the grating coupler. In addition, we employed a microring resonator, with a q-factor of 11,000 and 3,000 for TE and TM polarization, to demonstrate dual-polarisation coupling by the grating coupler demonstrating polarization-independent coupling by a single one-dimensional grating. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first such demonstration. The results presented are promising, with the scope to improve the performance through an optimized device fabrication process. This would open opportunities for using GaN as a waveguide material for linear and non-linear processing. We acknowledge funding from the Ministry of Education, Government of India, for supporting facilities at the Centre for Nanoscience and Engineering (CeNSE), Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. SKS thanks Professor Ramakrishna Rao chair fellowship. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Data underlying the results presented in this paper are not publicly available at this time but may be obtained from the authors upon reasonable request.