The fabrication of bulk delta-phase Zirconium Hydride (δ-ZrH) using Zircaloy-as a precursor is herein reported. Characterization using electron-microscopy methods indicate that the fabricated material is of a single-phase. Sn-rich segregation zones have been observed to form as a direct result of the hydriding process. These findings experimentally validate previous ab initio calculations on the influence H incorporation in Zircaloy-constitutional elements such as Sn, Fe and Cr. The effect of hydriding and Sn segregation on pre-existing Zr(Fe,Cr) 2 Laves phases is also evaluated. Major implications on the development of moderators for use in microreactors within the nuclear industry are discussed. Transition metal hydrides are being studied as moderators for advanced nuclear concepts where reactor size is a critical factor The purpose of this study is to understand the effects of using Zircaloy-as a precursor in the fabrication of δ-ZrH. Zircaloy-is an attractive precursor for bulk ZrH for a few reasons. First and foremost, as ZrH is being studied as a nuclear moderator, the neutron capture cross-section of the alloy precursor must be kept low. Hafnium has a very large thermal neutron capture cross section For this work, nuclear-grade Zircaloy-was purchased from Allegheny Technologies Inc. (Albany, OR, USA) and machined into nominal x mm cylinders. The samples were cleaned with abrasive scouring pads and ethanol before hydriding. Samples were then hydrided according to known pressurecomposition-temperature curves for the Zr-H system [ ]. All samples were hydrided in a single run using an Oxy-Gon model BC furnace (Oxy-gon Industries, USA) with flowing ultra-high purity (UHP) H 2 . The H/Zr ratio ≈ .66 was obtained by measuring the weight change after hydriding, assuming all weight gain was due to solid-state incorporation of H atoms into the Zr matrix via chemisorption [ ]. Uncertainty in the H/Zr ratio was estimated to be around ± . and arises from systematic errors as well as the growth of thin oxide and nitride layers due to trace impurities in the UHP H 2 source-gas. A Bruker D Phaser tabletop x-ray diffractometer was used to confirm the phase purity of the hydrided samples. Subsequently, the δ-ZrH samples were then sectioned into small discs and polished using standard metallographic preparation ending in vibratory polishing using colloidal silica . After polishing, electrontransparent samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were prepared with a Ga focused ion beam (FIB) system coupled into both Thermo Fisher Helios and Thermo Fisher Scios scanning electron microscopes (SEM). The procedure for TEM sample preparation can be found elsewhere After the hydriding process, TEM and XRD were used to assess whether the produced material was single-phase at both nano and macro scales, respectively. Figure Microstructural characterization was performed with electron-microscopy methods such as TEM and STEM, as well as STEM-EDX. Figures A and B show a low-magnification bright-field STEM (BF-STEM) and high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) micrographs, respectively, featuring multiple grains of an electron-transparent FIB lift-out lamella. Arrows in the micrographs point to zones of secondary phase particles (SPPs) present in the material after the hydriding process. Such SPPs were observed to have both rounded and needle-like shapes. Subsequent higher-magnification micrographs in Figures C and D show defects such as typical dislocations lines and loops within the microstructure of a hydride grain. Apart from SPPs and dislocations, no other defective structures were observed in the TEM lamellae. In order to determine the nature of such SPPs, STEM-EDX was performed and the results are shown in Figure It has been found that it is feasible to fabricate bulk δ-ZrH from a Zircaloy-precursor. The predomi- nately single-phase nature of these samples was confirmed through three different techniques spanning different length scalese.g. SAED, EBSD, and XRD. Analysis using TEM/SAED across two different zone axis agreed well with the ICSD databases illustrating phase purity at the nanometer scale. Phase purity at the meso scale was determined through the use EBSD. By indexing the patterns against not just an FCC file (δ-ZrH) but also against the hexagonal metal phase it was possible to see that the samples were > . % δ-ZrH, with any detectable heterogeneity between the center and surface of a pellet. EBSD analysis determined a very weak texture (MRD< ) with clear orthotropic symmetry. Lastly, XRD was performed to determine phase purity across the sample. The purity of these samples, is expressed in the lack of non δ-ZrH peaks. Previously δ-ZrH was fabricated in a bulk for by In this study we primarily report that Sn-rich SPPs form in the bulk δ-ZrH matrix after the hydriding process when fabricated from Zircaloy-. As seen in the STEM-EDX maps in figure , it is worth emphasizing that Sn segregates out of the original Zircaloy-matrix (a Zr-based alloy made with ≈ . Sn and minor additions of Fe and Cr Recent efforts using computational science have been devoted to understanding the role of H atoms within transition metal lattices In this present research, when nanoscale STEM-EDX elemental maps of the single-phase δ-ZrH are performed, we noticed an apparent decrease of the pre-existing Fe,Cr-rich Laves phases in Zircaloy-. This was a parallel observation from the results presented in figure . A STEM-EDX mapping of H-charged Zircaloy-is presented in the supplemental information file for comparison. This finding points to two hypotheses: (i) the hydriding process promote dissolution of such phases, or (ii) these Laves phases are transformed to Sn-rich segregation regions. For the known Zr(Fe,Cr) 2 Laves phase, the dissociation (or melting) temperature has been reported to be approximately K [ ]. On the other hand, the maximum temperature for the synthesis of the δ-ZrH is approximately K. This argument suggests that the first hypothesis is unlikely. The observation of Sn segregation into a single Laves phase precipitate in figure (A) suggests the second hypothesis deserves further investigation. When Sn is rejected from the Zr lattice due to hydriding, it has to enrich sinks within the microstructure. Trans-, intra-and inter-granular precipitates -such as the Laves phase -could act as sinks for Sn segregation. This observation indicates that further studies are needed to understand the thermodynamic effect of Sn into Laves phases in quaternary Fe-Cr-Zr-Sn systems. In the context of H uptake in Zr cladding within nuclear reactors, the localized hydriding of α-Zr also causes Sn segregation. It is shown in Mouton et al. that Sn segregates at the hydride/metal interface as studied via Atom Probe Tomography (APT) [ ]. Sn was found to be enriched at stacking faults found ahead of the hydride/metal interface. Udagawa et al. showed that Sn lowers the stacking fault energy in the Zr metal and proposes that these planar defects facilitate the nucleation of the hydride [ ] and this has also been corroborated by Chakraborty The effect of Sn segregation could have wide ranging impacts on the stability of ZrH, especially within the contexts of irradiation and corrosion resistance, however, reports on Sn-rich SPPs is limited to Zr-based alloys studies and not in bulk hydrides. In the latter case, it has been reported that Sn segregation accelerates nodular corrosion processes through interactions with the metal-oxide interface [ ]. Additionally, Sn segregation has also been reported as a direct effect of irradiation of Zr cladding We have reported on the feasibility to fabricate bulk, high-quality, > . % phase pure δ-ZrH using Zircaloy-as the precursor material. The advantages of using the alloy instead of Zr metal have been outlined. A significant finding, obtained through careful TEM analysis, is that Sn-rich precipitates are present within the delta-phase matrix of the fabricated hydride material. The nature of such Sn-rich SPPs formation and impact on the overall response of the bulk δ-ZrH as a neutron moderator material is pending of further research. The results in this paper also experimentally validate previous ab initio computational results presented by Christensen et al. [ ] on influence of major and minor alloying elements into Zr and ZrH systems. In order to better evaluate the homogeneity, distribution and concentration of H atoms within hydrides, novel spectroscopy techniques within the TEM are currently under development [ ] N. Sano, K. Takeda, Atom probe analysis of Sn in Zr-based alloys, Journal of nuclear materials ( -) 