We study superconductivity in a two-dimensional, disordered marginal Fermi liquid. At the semiclassical level, the transition temperature Tc is strongly suppressed because marginal Fermi liquid effects destroy well-defined quasiparticles. However, we show that interference between quantumcritical collective modes must be included, and these enhance Tc, violating Anderson's theorem. Our results suggest that phase coherence in a disordered, quantum-critical system can survive and manifest in the form of collective excitations, despite the absence of coherent quasiparticles. Strange-metal behavior has been a persistent mystery for over 30 years We extend Ref. In Eq. ( Eq. ( Here Λ is a UV cutoff and ḡ2 ∼ g 2 /γ el (dimensionless), where γ el is the semiclassical elastic impurity scattering rate. In the limit of vanishing fermion-boson coupling ḡ → 0, Eq. ( Anderson's theorem dictates that s-wave superconductivity is immune to non-magnetic disorder as long as the normal state is a good metal Interestingly, recent developments suggest a new twist of this theme: short-ranged (e.g., externally screened Coulomb) interactions and random or structural inhomogeneity can enhance superconductivity near the Anderson metal-insulator transition We note that the superconducting transition temperature is determined by the minimum of the pairing amplitude and the superfluid stiffness Quantum effects like multifractality might be expected to play no role in a strongly correlated non-Fermi liquid lacking long-lived quasiparticles. An intensively studied paradigm for such systems consists of two-dimensional (2D) fermions at finite density coupled to quantumcritical bosons In a dirty quantum-critical system, impurities can dramatically modify the self-energies of the bosons and fermions, due to disorder smearing. At finite temperature T and at the quantum critical point, the (retarded) bosonic propagator acquires a quantum relaxational form Here, ω and k are frequency and momentum, α is a constant, and m 2 b = α m T is the thermal mass. The latter generically arises due to symmetry-allowed quartic bosonic interactions in contrast with its clean counterpart that scales as ∼ |ω| 2/3 . Here, x = max(|ω|, J T ), where J is a slowly varying dimensionless function of α/α m In this paper we calculate the pairing susceptibility at finite temperature to determine the stability of the dirty MFL to superconductivity. Evaluating the usual Cooper ladder diagram The model that we study here without W was found to show a conductivity that diverges at low T The outline of this paper is as follows. In Sec. II we describe the model for a dirty superconducting marginal Fermi liquid, and we present the main results for the pairing susceptibility. In Sec. III, we review the multifractal enhancement of superconductivity near a metalinsulator transition from the perspective of the pairing of exact eigenstates. In Sec. IV, we review the mixing of interaction channels and enhancement or suppression of pairing in dirty normal metals via the sigma model. We precisely define the sigma model employed in this work in Sec. V. Details of the calculations leading to our main results appear in Sec. VI, and we conclude in Sec. VII. We consider a system with N flavors of fermions coupled to SU(N ) matrix bosons tuned to the quantum critical point where + iπν 0 2 x Tr q σ3 (ω -Σ) , We adopted the shorthand notation t,x = dt d 2 x and ω,k = dω d 2 k/(2π) 3 . The matrix field q → qa,b σ,σ ′ ;α,β;i,j;ω,ω ′ (x) incorporates both particle-hole (diffuson) and particle-particle (Cooperon) modes of the fermions, and carries particle-hole {σ, σ ′ }, spin-1/2 {α, β}, SU(N ) flavor {i, j}, and Keldysh {a, b} indices as well as frequency labels {ω, ω ′ }. It obeys the constraints Tr [q] = 0, q2 = 1, and ŝ2 σ1 τ 1 Θ1 qT ŝ2 σ1 τ 1 Θ1 = q. Pauli matrices σ, ŝ, τ , and Θ act respectively in the particle-hole, spin, Keldysh, and frequency spaces The q-matrix action differs from the Fermi-liquid case in the second line of Eq. Technically we consider flavor "triplet" pairing, wherein the pairing field SU(N > 2) does not permit condensation of flavor-singlet fermion pairs. A natural generalization of our work allowing genuine flavor-singlet pairs would incorporate SO(N ) antiferromagnetic bosons, but this requires the further incorporation of (e.g., weakly broken) particle-hole symmetry Our goal is to evaluate the retarded pairing susceptibility χ R by integrating out the q matrix and bosonic φ fields to obtain an effective propagator for the ∆ field. The diagrams contributing to the inverse static pairing susceptibility [χ R ] -1 (Ω = 0, q = 0): Panel (b) is the semiclassical Cooperon ladder contribution, see also Eq. ( We proceed by parameterizing q with coordinates At the semiclassical level, the Cooperon ladder contribution to the pairing susceptibility where t ≡ T /γ el and τ -1 C is the dephasing rate that in principle contains effects from both the MFL and the Cooperon self-energy In the absence of the MFL self-energy (ḡ 2 = 0, black curve), S diverges logarithmically as T decreases, resulting in the standard BCS result T BCS c ∝ e -1/ν0W for 1/T c τ φ ≪ 1, independent of disorder and in accordance with Anderson's theorem. However, as ḡ2 increases (blue to red), the logarithmic divergence is increasingly weakened by A MFL > 1, leading to a much smaller transition temperature T S c in Eq. ( We now consider quantum interference corrections to the pairing susceptibility at the leading order of 1/σ dc . The corresponding Feynman diagrams are shown in Figs. where D R b is given by Eq. ( Plot of the semiclassical Cooperon ladder integral S(T ) in Eq. ( iar with this notation, the analogous diagrams in conventional many-body perturbation theory are shown in Fig. Upon summing up the diagrams, the total inverse pairing susceptibility in the static limit is found to be The quantum correction where t = T /γ el is the reduced temperature and t * ≡ 2π 2 ḡ2 ν 0 /(α m N ). For t ≳ t * , thermal screening dominates and the singularity in t originates from the thermal mass of the quantum-relaxational bosons [Eq. ( For t ≪ t * , the thermal mass and dephasing drop out and the quantum correction diverges in a less singular manner. C(t) is a dimensionless parameter which varies weakly with T and depends on α, α m , ḡ2 and τ -1 φ (see Sec. VI). It encodes the integrals involved in Figs. The second and third terms in Eq. ( Meanwhile, the quantum correction is singular in t owing to the quantum-critical nature of the bosons. Conse-quently, superconductivity is mainly driven by the quantum correction. As T → T c , [χ R tot ] -1 (0, 0) → 0. Solving for T c using Eq. ( The physical origin of the pairing enhancement is twofold. On one hand, the quantum-critical interaction is magnified by the collective modes encoding the diffusive motion of the fermions. Physically, this is because the fermions have a higher probability to interact strongly with each other due to their slow diffusive motion Our work suggests a novel mechanism to boost superconductivity in a disordered quantum-critical system. Importantly, the robust superconductivity predicted by Eq. (1) demonstrates how collective phase coherence can survive in systems without well-defined quasiparticles. Similar conclusions apply to Altshuler-Aronov quantum corrections to the conductivity In this section, we review the key steps leading to the prediction of enhanced superconductivity in an ordinary (not strange) metal due to static quantum-critical spatial fluctuations near an Anderson metal-insulator transition (MIT). Following Refs. We consider an attractive Hubbard model with disor-der in d spatial dimensions, Here c jσ annihilates an electron at site j with spin σ, and t i,j is the single-particle Hamiltonian that encodes hopping and quenched disorder. We assume time-reversal symmetry, so that exact eigenstates of t arise in degenerate pairs. Let ψ α (i) denote such an eigenstate with eigenenergy ξ α . We re-express Eq. ( As in the reduced BCS approximation, we simplify the interaction term, retaining only products of Cooperpair annihilation and creation operators that populate or empty a pair of single-particle states. The mates of the pair are related by time-reversal. In the absence of spin-orbit coupling, we get where the labels ( β, ↓) denote the time-reversed partner of (β, ↑). The eigenstate correlations are encoded in the matrix element Defining a BCS order parameter ∆ α ≡β M αβ c β↓ c β↑ and following the standard steps, we obtain the BCS mean-field equation where T denotes the temperature and For weak pairing near the Fermi energy in a system residing within the diffusive metallic phase or close to the MIT (but still on the metallic side), we can take ∆ α → ∆, independent of α. Then Eq. ( Here ν 0 is the density of states and a is the lattice spacing. The exponent Υ ≡ (d -d 2 )/d measures the second mul-tifractal dimension d 2 of the eigenstates near the Fermi energy. In the metallic phase d 2 = d and Eq. ( The approach in Sec. III cannot be easily generalized to the case of a strange metal, where quasiparticles are ill-defined due to Planckian dissipation. In this paper, we instead employ the sigma model, which allows the incorporation of non-Fermi liquid effects In the sigma-model approach to a diffusive Fermi liquid, renormalization group (RG) beta functions can be derived for dimensionless interaction couplings. For a time-reversal invariant system with strong spin-orbit coupling, the interactions include density-density and BCS pairing coupling strengths γ s and γ c , respectively. Repulsive (attractive) interactions in each channel correspond to γ > 0 (γ < 0). The lowest-order beta functions are where l = ln(L) is the logarithm of the RG lengthscale (e.g. system size L) and λ ∝ 1/σ dc . The second term on the right-hand side (RHS) of Eq. ( Ignoring the nonlinear -2γ 2 c term for the moment, the flow equations in (28) possess a single relevant direction that drives both interactions towards strong coupling. For suitable initial conditions, this results in an instability wherein both γ s,c → -∞. We denote α ≡ -4γ s,c /3 (tuning the irrelevant difference of the interaction coupling strengths to zero), and we then obtain a beta func-tion for the instability where η = λ/2. We solve this equation to determine α = α(L). At a certain length scale L the coupling diverges; we identify this scale with the coherence length ζ coh of the superconducting state, leading to a ground-state gap of the form where α 0 is the bare coupling and Υ = η/d. Here we have used the fact that ∆ ∼ ζ -d coh for superconductivity nucleating from a diffusive Fermi liquid in d spatial dimensions. At an Anderson MIT, Υ becomes a universal scaling exponent, leading to a prediction consistent the results presented in the last section. The flow equations ( The first term on the RHS of this equation corresponds to a perturbative shift of γ c to the repulsive side, which obtains from the diagrams in Figs. where again we have converted T ∼ L -d . Eq. ( We consider s-wave superconductivity with spinsinglet, flavor "triplet" pairing [Eq. x Tr φa τ a Êσ 11 + ŝ2 φaT τ a ŝ2 Êσ 22 MF (ω)q(x) MF (ω) ( ∆q ∆ cl + ∆ q ∆cl ). The Pauli matrices τ , σ, ŝ, and Θ act respectively in the Keldysh, particle-hole, spin-1/2, and frequency spaces. Θ1 is defined via ⟨ω| Θ1 |ω ′ ⟩ = 2π δ(ω + ω ′ ), where ω is frequency. The thermal matrix MF is defined as where F (ω) = tanh(ω/2T ) is the generalized Fermi distribution function and T denotes temperature. The subscript τ means that this is a matrix in the Keldysh space. For brevity, we work with the units where k B is the Boltzmann constant, c is the speed of light, and ħ is the Planck constant. The q matrix q → qa,b σ,σ ′ ;i,j;ω1,ω2;α,β (x) carries indices in {σ, σ ′ } ∈ {1, 2} particle-hole, {α, β} ∈ {↑, ↓} spin-1/2, {i, j} ∈ {1, 2, ..., N } flavor, and {a, b} ∈ {R, A} Keldysh (fermion retarded/advanced In Eq. ( where ν 0 is the density of states per channel, the diffusion constant is D = v 2 F /(4γ el ), and γ el is the elastic impurity scattering rate. The small dimensionless parameter πλ is the inverse conductance per channel. In the above action S, we have Hubbard-Stratonovich (H.S.) decoupled the bare pairing interaction in the spin-singlet, flavor-"triplet" [Eq. ( The last term on the second line of Eq. ( The SU(N ) boson propagator Db at the saddle-point level where α and α m are constants. The α m T term serves as the thermal mass for the quantum-critical bosons and generically arises due to symmetry-allowed quartic φ 4 interactions amongst the bosons The quantum-relaxational boson induces a marginal Fermi liquid (MFL) self-energy for the fermions where x , x = max(|ω|, JT ). (40b) Here J is a constant and ḡ2 = g 2 /4π 2 γ el is the dimensionless squared Yukawa coupling constant. Note that the causality structure of the σ3 Im ΣMFL,ω term in the sigma model is consistent with the iη σ3 τ 3 Keldysh prescription. The S int II term in Eq. ( In the following, we present the parameterization of the FNLsM and the corresponding Feynman rules. Our main goal is to compute the pairing susceptibility and explore the consequences of the interplay between disorder and quantum-critical interactions on the superconducting transition temperature T c . While we focus on a particular microscopic model here, the physics of the conclusion is quite general and expected to be applicable to a wide range of disordered quantum-critical systems. To facilitate the parameterization, we perform a unitary rotation where Êσ 11,22 are defined above Eq. ( The symmetry constraints for q are now q2 = 1, Tr [q] = 0, ŝ2 σ1 Θ1 qT ŝ2 σ1 Θ1 = q. (43) We then employ the "π-σ" parameterization for the q matrix = q(0) + q(1) + q(2) + q(4) + . . . and the Ŵ field satisfies which follows immediately from Eq. ( To satisfy the constraint in Eq. ( We then plug Eqs. ( where the numerical subscripts {1, 2, 3, 4} correspond to frequencies {ω 1 , ω 2 , ω 3 , ω 4 }, = 1,2,3,4,k integrates over all frequencies and momentum, and Tr traces over the flavor and spin-1/2 labels. We also defined where the Dirac delta functions The bare propagators are given by X i,j; where x 1,2 = max(|ω 1,2 |, JT ) and τ -1 MFL = ḡ2 πJ T is the dephasing rate due to the MFL self-energy ΣMFL [Eq. At quartic order, there are five Hikami box terms where Tr traces over the flavor and spin indices, T is the transpose in the flavor ⊗ spin space, and We adopt the same convention for the Feynman rules presented in Refs. The flavor and spin indices are implicit. Along a solid line, the frequency label, spin, and flavor indices remain unchanged. The momentum flowing through the diffuson is labeled by an arrow in the middle of the two black solid lines. The momentum arrow points inwards (outwards) for the fields X, Ŷ ( X † , Ŷ † ). The interaction vertices are diagrammatically depicted in Fig. Fig. A. Semiclassical contribution -The Cooper ladder The retarded inverse pairing susceptibility [χ R semi ] -1 can be obtained by computing the effective propagator of ∆ cl and ∆q . At the semiclassical level (ignoring quantum interference), we only consider the linear coupling between Ŷ , Ŷ † and ∆, ∆. By integrating out the Ŷ fields, we have where τ -1 φ is the effective dephasing rate incorporating τ -1 MFL and the Cooperon self-energies represented by the diagrams in Fig. where the marginal Fermi liquid (MFL) self-energy [Eq. In the absence of the MFL effects, ḡ2 → 0, and the above expression reduces to the FL result implying that [Eq. ( which is much smaller than the BCS result. Physically, the strong suppression of the transition temperature is due to the MFL self-energy that destroys well-defined quasiparticles before they can form Cooper pairs. Despite the absence of well-defined quasiparticles, phase coherence can still manifest through collective modes. In the following, we consider the quantum correction to the pairing susceptibility represented by the diagrams in Figs. Fig. Fig. where ε ± = ε ± ω/2. Due to the Cooperon self-energy, τ -1 MFL in the propagator ∆ Y should be replaced by the total dephasing rate τ -1 φ = τ -1 MFL + τ -1 C . In the above expressions, we omitted terms proportional to the Keldysh component of bosonic propagator; these can be absorbed into the dephasing rate For T ≳ T * , thermal screening is more important than dynamical screening and thus the bosonic propagator can be approximated by the quantum relaxational version D b [Eq. ( where α m = m 2 b /T is the coefficient of the quantum-relaxational boson thermal mass. In the thermal screening regime, by focusing on the static limit ω → 0, k → 0 and performing the q integral, we have where t = T /γ el , and the dimensionless parameter and similarly Note that since the MFL and total dephasing rates, τ -1 MFL and τ -1 φ respectively, are proportional to temperature, C is just a function of ln T and thus only weakly depends on temperature. We plot C(t) versus the dimensionless temperature t = T /γ el in Fig. We now consider the regime T ≪ T * in which dynamical screening dominates over thermal screening. Repeating the above calculation using the dynamically screened bosonic propagator D scr [Eq. ( Φ. The full expression is very complicated, but for small T , where β = 2h 2 g 2 λ/πN . This contribution arises from the regime where q 2 ∼ 2T y 1,2 , where q is the loop momentum in Eqs. ( Since the second term has a weak temperature dependence, it just effectively renormalizes the pairing interaction strength W , Eq. valid up to some logarithmic corrections. Since πλ is the inverse conductance per channel, the full conductivity accounting for 2 spin and N flavor components is With h = πν 0 , T c = t c γ el and γ el ḡ2 = g 2 /4π 2 , we recover Eq. ( For T ≪ T * , dynamical screening becomes important and the inverse pairing susceptibility is instead This is Eq. ( The results of Refs. Our results are applicable to a broad range of quantum-critical materials where disorder is inevitable in practice, although we do not attempt to estimate transition temperatures for particular materials here (which would depend upon details of the critical bosonic mode and disorder). However, we note that a recent experiment reported a significant increment of T c in Y 5 Rh 6 Sn 18 by atomic disorder 