Silicon is a promising anode material for next-generation lithium-ion batteries. However, the volume change and the voltage hysteresis during lithiation and delithiation are two substantial drawbacks to their lifetime and performance. We investigate the reason for the voltage hysteresis in amorphous silicon nanoparticles covered by a solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI). Concentration gradients inside the nanoscale silicon can not produce the massive stresses necessary to cause the reported voltage hysteresis. Our chemo-mechanical model shows that plastic deformation of the stiff, inorganic SEI during lithiation and delithiation reproduces the observed silicon open-circuit voltage hysteresis. Additionally, the viscous behavior of the SEI explains the difference between the voltage hysteresis observed at low currents and after relaxation. We conclude that the visco-elastoplastic behavior of the SEI is the origin of the voltage hysteresis in silicon nanoparticle anodes. Thus, consideration of the SEI mechanics is crucial for further improvements. The improvement of lithium-ion batteries is essential for facing the pressing global challenges. Due to their high theoretical capacity, pure silicon anodes are a promising candidate for the next generation of lithiumion batteries Silicon confronts research with two challenging features on the way to commercial silicon anodes. The first is the significant expansion and constriction with a volume change of up to 300% during lithiation and delithiation, respectively. The deformation leads to the cracking of large silicon particles and the formation of networks with nanometer-sized silicon particles The second major issue is the voltage hysteresis of silicon anodes observed in experiments for various silicon structures, namely thin films Phase transformations can explain a voltage hysteresis for crystalline silicon or the first cycle of amorphous silicon anodes Similarly to other anode materials, the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) naturally covers silicon particles. The SEI protects the anode from the electrolyte As the SEI deforms due to the chemical expansion and shrinkage of the particle, considerable strains and stresses occur inside the SEI. Certain studies even claim that the compressive stress of the SEI acting on the particle might be beneficial to avoid particle cracking In this paper, we consider a visco-elastoplastic SEI model based on non-equilibrium thermodynamics When the silicon anode particle expands and contracts, distinct strains emerge inside the SEI as illustrated in Fig. Our silicon particle model is based on the work of Kolzenberg et al. complemented by plasticity The chemical deformation F ch is described by the concentration of lithium c Li,0 inside the silicon particle in the Lagrangian frame according to where v Li is the molar volume of lithium inside silicon. The lithiation behavior and the mechanical deformations are derived in our model based on non-equilibrium thermodynamics. Our model builds up on the free energy according to the first law of thermodynamics. In section SI in the supporting information, we discuss nonnegativity of the entropy production R ≥ 0 in our model stated in Eq. (S12), which means accordance with the second law. The free energy density ρ 0 φ of the silicon anode consists of a chemical contribution depending on the lithium concentration and a mechanical contribution due to elastic deformation. The free energy of the silicon anode reads with the Faraday constant F and the ideal open-circuit voltage of silicon U 0 . The elastic strain tensor E el in Eq. ( The first and second Lamé constants read , where ν Si is the Poisson ratio of silicon. The elastic deformation F el depends on the Piola-Kirchhoff stress P inside the particle determined by the constitutive equation where C is the right Cauchy-Green tensor C = F T F. The Piola-Kirchhoff stress is related to the Cauchy stress σ as P = JσF -T with J = det F. The Piola-Kirchhoff stress P defined in Eq. ( In addition to the elastic deformation, the particle deforms plastically when reaching the von Mises yield criterion where M dev = M -1/3 tr M is the deviatoric part of the Mandel stress M = F T rev σF -T rev with the reversible part of the deformation F rev = F el F ch . The yield stress σ Y depends on the material and reveals how much stress the particle can withstand with reversible deformations. The plastic flow L pl = Ḟpl F -1 pl is calculated by where the plastic multiplier φ is determined from the consistency condition ḟ = 0. The defining equation for the lithiation and delithiation of a silicon particle reads with the lithium flux ⃗ N Li,0 = -L∇ 0 μ Li and the electrochemo-mechanical potential μ Li . The mobility is determined by L = D Li (∂μ Li /∂c Li,0 ) -1 with D Li the diffusion coefficient of lithium in silicon. At the boundary of the particle r = R, the lithium flux ⃗ N Li,0 (R) is determined by the applied (de)lithiation rate. The lithium concentration and the stress inside the particle influence the electro-chemo-mechanical potential of lithium according to the constitutive equation The chemical potential at the outer border of the anode determines the measurable silicon open-circuit voltage (OCV) by U = -μ Li /F . Thus, the OCV reads We determine the ideal open-circuit voltage U 0 as the mean value of the open-circuit voltages measured via GITT during lithiation and delithiation in Ref. Inside the SEI, there is no chemical deformation, as no lithiation of the SEI is possible. Therefore, the SEI only deforms elastically and plastically In our visco-elastoplastic SEI model, elastoplastic deformations and viscous flow contribute to the total stress. The stress due to elastoplastic deformations is defined similarly to Eq. ( with the strain tensor E SEI,el , the right Cauchy-Green tensor C SEI , and the Lamé constants λ SEI and G SEI defined analog to the particle model. The free energy density of the SEI is defined according to merely the mechanical contribution in Eq. ( leading to the plastic flow The consistency condition ḟSEI = 0 determines again the value of the plastic multiplier φ SEI . We emphasize that plastic flow in the SEI is driven by the deviatoric part of the elastoplastic stress contribution M dev SEI,el . In addition to the elastoplastic model discussed in Ref. with J SEI = det F SEI . We describe the SEI as a power-law shear thinning material. Therefore, the viscosity decreases with increasing strain rate where η SEI,0 is a constant value and n < 1 is the shearthinning exponent. In our model, we consider the viscous behavior in parallel to the elastoplastic model. Thus, the sum of the elastic and viscous contributions describes the total Piola-Kirchhoff stress as Analog to the particle model, the momentum balance determines the stress inside the SEI. Finally, we emphasize that our model describes the SEI mechanics on a continuum level. The visco-elastoplastic behavior is not a single-crystal property but results from subsequent partial SEI fracture and healing At the interface between the anode particle and SEI, we assume a perfect sticking of the SEI on top of the silicon particle. Therefore, the stresses inside the particle and SEI interact at the interface. Precisely, the radial component of the Cauchy stress has to be equal in particle and SEI at the boundary. Due to the radial symmetry, this also implies the equivalence of the radial part of the Piola-Kirchhoff stress at the interface Inside the particle, the chemical contribution dominates the total deformation. In contrast, the SEI deforms only elastically and plastically. Thus, mechanical deformations of the SEI have to afford the large deformation implied by the particle. These deformations result in significant strains and stresses inside the SEI. Consequently, the stress inside the SEI can substantially affect the stress and lithiation behavior of the silicon particle. The literature states values of Young's modulus of the SEI E SEI between only a few hundreds of MPa and values greater than 100 GPa. For a better overview, we divide the reported values into the categories: soft with E SEI < 1 GPa Experiments attempt to determine the viscosity of the SEI but face severe difficulties due to the small length scale of interest. Recently, research has advanced in estimating the viscosity value of the outer, organic SEI layer Measurements for Young's modulus of silicon show a wide range of values If not mentioned explicitly, we use the parameters presented in Table We implement our model in MATLAB using a finite difference approach. We solve the partial differential equations ( Based on our chemo-mechanical model, we evaluate the influence of the mechanics of the silicon particle and its covering interphase on the voltage hysteresis of silicon anodes in this section. Although we term the covering layer SEI throughout this paper, our model also describes a particle covered by a silicon oxide layer. Without the impact of the SEI, we can create three different scenarios presented in the supporting information in sections SII to SIV reasoning the experimental voltage hysteresis. Firstly, literature often considers silicon thinfilm anodes, where the expansion and contraction are restricted to the normal direction of the film as illustrated in Figure Consequently, plastic flow due to slow diffusion or constrained particles can not reproduce the voltage hysteresis observed in GITT measurements with a silicon nanoparticle anode. Thus, we investigate the influence of the SEI on the stress and potential inside the silicon particle. In our model, we consider the SEI as a viscoelastoplastic material. Inside the particle, a substantial amount of the total deformation is the chemical contribution due to the change in lithium concentration. In contrast, the SEI merely shows mechanical deformations. As the deformation of the SEI has to adjust to the deformation of the particle, considerable strains occur naturally inside the SEI. Assuming a high Young's modulus of the SEI, strains inside the SEI cause significant stresses. As discussed, the radial component of the stress inside the SEI at the particle-SEI interface determines the radial stress component inside the particle at the interface. For currents as small as C/20, the radial stress component of the SEI is the main reason for the stress inside the particle. The particle stress distributes uniformly, reasoning vanishing deviatoric stress. Therefore, plastic flow will not occur inside the particle. Nevertheless, the substantial stresses inside the particle can generate a voltage hysteresis. In our simulation, we determine the open-circuit voltage after a relaxation period to reproduce GITT measurements. Figure The maximum stress in the system results from the yield condition, which determines the maximum deviatoric stress independent of the particle size. However, expressing Eq. ( As the stresses inside particle and SEI influence the particle deformations, the stress hysteresis induces a hysteresis phenomenon in the deformation tensor. This leads to a hysteresis behavior in the radius and volume of the particle. In Fig. The literature states a significant difference between the voltage hysteresis of silicon anodes for small currents and the open-circuit voltage hysteresis measured with GITT. As discussed at the beginning of section III, we can not attribute this to concentration gradients inside the particle. Instead, we assign the potential difference to the viscous behavior of the SEI. As the literature provides no value for the viscosity of the inner SEI, we fit the viscosity to the experimental data. To investigate the influence of viscous SEI behavior on the voltage during slow cycling, we simulate the GITT measurement procedure with alternating C/20 current steps and relaxation periods. We show the simulated voltage together with the voltage measured during the GITT experiment In the supporting information, we compare shearthinning viscosity with Newtonian behavior. As illustrated in Fig. Regarding the timescales, Newtonian viscosity and power-law shear-thinning viscosity reveal similar transition times during the GITT pulse depicted in S6(b). Thus, the choice of shear-thinning or Newtonian behavior does not significantly influence the transition profile between the different potential curves. As the exact mechanical parameters of the SEI are ambiguous in experiments, we provide a parameter study to estimate the influence of Young's modulus E SEI . In Fig. In the supporting information, Fig. At the same time, we investigate the influence of Young's modulus of the silicon nanoparticle on the shape and size of the voltage hysteresis in the supporting information. Fig. Therefore, the parameter study shows that high values of Young's modulus of the silicon nanoparticle and the SEI achieve the best agreement between the chemo-mechanical simulation and experimental data. This indicates the importance of nanoscale effects on the silicon voltage hysteresis. To conclude, the slow diffusion process or particle constriction inside electrodes can not cause the voltage hysteresis observed for silicon nanoparticle anodes. However, the expansion of silicon nanoparticles leads to an impact of the SEI or the silicon oxide layer on the stress and potential inside the anode. We propose a visco-elastoplastic silicon-SEI model, which can for the first time explain the open-circuit voltage hysteresis of a silicon nanoparticle anode measured with GITT. The plasticity of the SEI leads to different stresses inside the particle during lithiation and delithiation, inducing the observed voltage hysteresis. In addition, our SEI model qualitatively reproduces the volume hysteresis of silicon anodes. Furthermore, the viscous SEI behavior describes the difference between the voltage hysteresis observed for cycling at low currents and the open-circuit voltage from GITT after a relaxation period. A variation of Young's modulus of the SEI reveals its crucial influence on the shape of the voltage hysteresis. The results indicate a stiff inner SEI layer. Consequently, our work suggests that a soft SEI will mitigate the voltage hysteresis of silicon nanoanodes.