We study two-terminal configurations in junctions between a topological superconducting wire with spinorbit coupling and magnetic field, and an ordinary conductor with an embedded quantum dot. One of the signatures of the Majorana zero modes in the topological phase is a quantization of the zero-bias conductance at G(V = 0) = 2e 2 /h. However, the finite size of the wires and the presence of the quantum dot in the junction generate more complicated features which lead to deviations from this simple picture. Here, we analyze the behavior of the conductance at zero and finite bias, G(V), as a function of a gate voltage applied at the quantum dot in the case of a finite-length wire. We analyze the effect of the angle between the magnetic field and the orientation associated to the spin-orbit coupling. We provide a detailed description of the spectral features of the quantum wire weakly and also strongly coupled to the quantum dot and describe the conditions to have zero-energy states in these two regimes for both the topological and non-topological phases. We also analyze the concomitant behavior of the noise. We identify qualitative features that are useful to distinguish between the topological and non-topological phases. We show that in a strongly coupled quantum dot the simultaneous hybridization with the topological modes and the supragap states of the wire mask the signatures of the Majorana bound states in both the conductance and the Fano factor. The search for topological superconducting phases in lowdimensional hybrid nanostructures is a very active field of research for some years now. This is mainly motivated by the fact that this phase is characterized by the existence of Majorana states localized at the edges. In one-dimensional structures these states are zero modes with non-Abelian exchange statistics and are very appealing to realize topologically protected qubits in these experiments, although several alternative interpretations based on the formation of non-topological Andreev bound states have been also proposed in the literature 1. Sketch of the setup. A finite-length superconducting wire with spin-orbit coupling and magnetic field applied in the directions ⃗ n λ and ⃗ n B , respectively is contacted to a normal lead through a quantum dot. The energy levels of the quantum dot ε d can be tuned by means of a gate voltage. The tunneling contacts between the wire and the quantum dot and the normal lead and the quantum dot are, respectively t cS and t cN . It is important to mention that perfectly localized Majorana modes should exist in ideal infinite-length wires while experiments are carried out in wires of finite size where some degree of hybridization between these modes takes place. This results in a pair of delocalized fermionic particle-hole subgap excitations. The impact of the finite size of the wires in the behavior of the local density of states has been studied in Refs. For these systems we also analyze the two-terminal conductance and identify the features that would allow to distinguish situations where the wire is in the topological phase from those where the wire is a non-topological superconductor. We complement this analysis with the study of the associated current noise. This quantity has been analyzed within the topological phase in previous works without quantum dots We consider a lattice version of the model for topological superconducting wires introduced in Refs. with the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian matrix given by Here, ⃗ σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) and ⃗ τ = (τ x , τ y , τ z ) are the Pauli matrices acting, respectively, in the spin and particle-hole degrees of freedom, while σ 0 , τ 0 are the 2×2 unitary matrices. ξ k = -2t S cos(ka) -μ S is the kinetic dispersion relation relative to the chemical potential μ S being t S the nearest-neighbor hopping parameter in the 1D lattice along the wire. The lattice constant is a, while λ k = 2λ sin(ka) is the amplitude of the SOC oriented in the direction ⃗ n λ . Notice that close to the bottom of the band (for μ S ≃ -2t S ) this Hamiltonian is equivalent to the continuum Hamiltonian of Refs. (2) are the magnetic field oriented along ⃗ n B , which introduces a Zeeman splitting of amplitude B S and the pairing potential ∆. This model has a topological phase for some values of the parameters and for a range of orientations of relative orientations of the SOC and the magnetic field. The evaluation of topological invariants In the present work, we focus on values of μ S < 0. Assuming t S , ∆ > 0, the topological phase corresponds to the range -2t S ≤ μ S ≤ μ c , with and relative angles between ⃗ n B and ⃗ n λ satisfying Eq. ( where the Hamiltonian for the superconducting wire H S is given by Eq. (1) expressed in real space in a system with N w sites and connected to a semi-infinite BCS Hamiltonian with singlet pairing. The Hamiltonian reads We work in the coordinate system where the z-axis is oriented along the wire and the x-axis is oriented along the SOC. We consider ⃗ n B in the (x, z) plane. The Hamiltonian for the normal contact is a 1D tight binding Hamiltonian with hopping t N , where we are using the notation b † j = b † j,↑ , b † j,↓ , b j,↓ , -b j,↑ for the Nambu spinor within the normal lead. The quantum dot is modeled by being the Nambu spinor that describes the corresponding degrees of freedom. ⃗ B d is the magnetic field and ε d is the local energy of the quantum dot, which can be controlled by an external gate voltage. Notice that we are not explicitly considering here the effect of the Coulomb interaction at the quantum dot. This is because we focus on the regime where the Zeeman field introduced by the magnetic field dominates, hence, the main effect of the Coulomb interaction would be to introduce a renormalization of B d and ε d . The last term of Eq. ( where the label l = 1 denotes the sites of the superconducting and normal chains at the boundary with the quantum dot. It is useful to guide the study of the transport properties with an analysis of the spectral properties of the finite-size superconducting wire with SOC and magnetic field connected to the quantum dot. Within the topological phase, the Majorana modes localized at the left/right (l/r) ends of the wire can be generically represented as η ν = γ † ν + γ ν , with ν = l, r, being γ † ν , γ ν creation and anihilation regular fermionic operators. These are related to the fermionic operators defining the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( c † νσ denotes a linear combination of the operators entering Eq. ( being η l,r the Majorana modes defined from Eq. ( The first term is the Hamiltonian of the quantum dot defined in Eq. ( where we write explicitly only the component related to the site j = 1 of the wire since this is the one contacted with the quantum dot and we indicate the remaining components with . . .. The coefficients are α ↑ = w 1r e iδ r cos(θ r /2) ± iw 1l e iδ l cos(θ l /2), α ↓ = w 1r e iδ r e iφ r sin(θ r /2) ± iw 1l e iδ l e iφ l sin(θ l /2), β ↑ = w 1r e -iδ r cos(θ r /2) ± iw 1l e -iδ l cos(θ l /2), β ↓ = w 1r e -iδ r e -iφ r sin(θ r /2) ± iw 1l e -iδ l e -iφ l sin(θ l /2), where w 1r , w 1l are the weights of the states generated by γ † r and γ † l on the site j = 1. Notice that, as the length of the wire becomes much larger than ξ M , the weights behave as w 1l → 0. Here, we see that the projection of c † 1,σ on the low-energy states of the wires is Substituting in Eq. ( A similar Hamiltonian with ∆ ′ σ,n = t ′ σ,n = 0 was presented in Ref. with ↑ =↓, ↓ =↑. The parameters entering the effective Hamiltonian read We shall mainly focus on zero energy features in the structure constituted by the superconducting wire and the quantum dot. These can take place in two conceptually different scenarios: The states resulting from their hybridization with the quantum dot may also cross zero energy for some parameters. Our aim is to analyze the transport features in these two situations in order to identify signatures of the topological phase. We consider an electrical bias eV applied at the normal lead. The generated current reads and it can be written as follows We have expressed the mean values of the operators entering the definition of the current in terms of the Green's function matrix After operating within the Schwinger-Keldysh Green's function formalism where f (ε) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. As usual The conductance at zero temperature T = 0 is calculated as where G 0 = e 2 /h is the conductance quantum per spin channel. The first term of Eq. ( We also analyze the zero-frequency noise associated to this current, . This expression can be also written in the present model as The corresponding the Fano factor reads This quantity has been analyzed within the topological phase in previous works without quantum dots We consider parameters of the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( A. Magnetic field perpendicular to the direction of the SOC We start by analyzing the results for the most studied configuration, which corresponds to θ = π/2. Notice that, because of the combination of the s-wave superconductivity with the SOC and the magnetic field, the effective superconducting pairing has singlet and triplet components when the pairing term of Eq. ( The singlet component acts on particles at the different bands -see Eq. (A2) -while the triplet component acts intra-band. In the topological phase the Fermi energy of the system with ∆ = 0 is in the gap between the two bands. Hence, when ∆ is switched on, the triplet pairing represented by ∆ T k is dominant. The estimate for the localization length of the Majorana zero mode is ξ M = (ħv F )/∆ eff with λ k F a = 2λ sin(k F a), -2t S cos(k F a) ≃ μ and ħv F ≃ -2t S a sin(k F a). Considering ⃗ n B along the z-axis (parallel to the wire) and ⃗ n λ along the x-axis (perpendicular to the wire), the parameters entering Eqs. ( Therefore, the parameters of Eq. ( Along this section, we fix ∆ = 0.2meV and λ = 0.5meV-We also consider B S = 1meV, in which case μ c ≃ -19.02meV. Within the topological phase, we focus on μ S = 1.01μ c . For these parameters ξ M ≃ 104a. We expect that only wires with lengths significantly larger than 2ξ M are free from effects related to the hybridization of the Majorana end modes. In this section we analyze in detail a chain with L = 250a, which corresponds to a length slightly larger than 2ξ M . 1. Topological phase: μ < μ c We consider here a wire with parameters in the topological phase, μ < μ c with a length L = N w a, with N w = 250. In this scenario, the Majorana end modes of the topological phase are not fully decoupled but are weakly hybridized. As a result of their hybridization, the spectrum of the wire contains lowenergy subgap particle and hole states at finite energies ±ε M which can be described by Eq. ( For strong coupling, the supra-gap states also play a role, as we will discuss. The subgap spectrum originated in the hybridization of the topological modes with the polarized quantum dot is analyzed in Figs. Close to these values, we can also identify the lines crossing zero energy. The effect of the hybridization between these two systems can be identified in two features of the spectrum shown in Fig. Hence, taking into account Eq. ( In Ref. In what follows we discuss the correspondence between these features and those expected to be observed in experiments measuring the conductance in these configurations of wires and quantum dots. Here we add to the description the coupling of the quantum dot to the normal lead. In addition, we consider the other end of the wire coupled to an ordinary superconductor [see sites j = N w + 1, . . . in Eq. ( In order to gather more information on the zero-bias response at these points we show in the top panel of Fig. In both cases we see that the conductance is almost completely due to Andreev processes within this range of low V. For the same parameters, we also show the Fano factor F defined in Eq. ( FIG. We extend the analysis of the transport properties to the configuration where the quantum dot is strongly coupled. This corresponds to the parameters of the bottom panel of Fig. 2. Non-topological phase: μ > μ c . We now discuss the behavior of the low-energy spectrum of a superconducting wire with the same values of B, λ, ∆ and FIG. The other parameters are the same as in Fig. N w as in the cases previously analyzed, but with a value of the chemical potential within the non-topological phase. For these parameters, the effective superconducting gap is small but the Fermi energy crosses the two bands of the Hamiltonian of Eq. (A2) and the dominant pairing is ∆ S k F . As the wire has a finite length, the supragap spectrum consists of a sequence of discrete levels, as already mentioned. In this regime the origin of the zero-energy crossings is similar to the ones generated by magnetic impurities in superconductors (Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states). In fact, the spectrum without impurity is gapped while the hybridization of the impurity with the supragap states results in bound states in the gap. For suitable values of the parameters, these bound states cross at zero energy. The low-energy spectrum for μ = 0.9μ c is shown in Fig. Inset: same parameters as in the bottom panel with ε qd = -13meV as a function of B. of the Fig. which has real solutions for B d ≥ t cS √ ν S . In the example shown in the bottom panel of the Fig. with the normal lead. The result is a double-peak feature with a dip at zero bias in the conductance. Such a different behavior between the topological and non-topological cases could be useful to identify them in experiments. Consequently, the behavior of the noise in the present case is clearly different from the response in the topological phase shown in Figs. The orientation of the magnetic field is a natural knob to experimentally explore the transition to the topological phase In each case, we consider moderate and strong couplings between the wire and the quantum dot. In all the cases we observe similar features in these spectra as those discussed for the perpendicular case shown in Fig. In the case of δθ = 0.35π we can observe some crossings in the excited states above the ones closest to zero energy. The corresponding behavior of the conductance as a function of V and ε d is shown in Fig. FIG. We have analyzed the transport properties of a finite-length superconducting wire with spin-orbit coupling and magnetic field inside and outside the topological phase, with focus on the parameters that are relevant for experiments. We have also considered in the device an embedded quantum dot in the N-S junction, as it appears to be the case in many experimental setups We have guided the study with a previous analysis of the spectral properties of the wire contacted to the quantum dot by means of exactly diagonalyzing the Hamiltonian describing this uncoupled system as well as by deriving and solving analytically the effective low-energy Hamiltonians. The underlying picture in the topological phase is that the Majorana end modes combine in the finite-size wire to form low nonzero-energy fermionic excitations. These hybridyze with the quantum-dot levels, generating states that cross zero energy for some parameters. For low hybridization with the quantum dot, the behavior of these states keep track of the spin structure of the topological modes. Under such circumstances, the zero-energy crossings contain very valuable information of the structure of the Majorana modes and their degree of localization. However, for strong hybridization, supragap states contribute, introducing additional features. Within the nontopological phase, with the spin-orbit direction perpendicular to the magnetic field, the quantum dot behaves as a magnetic impurity and the spectrum of the coupled system can be understood as the generation of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov bound states inside the effective gap. For non-perpendicular orientations of these two fields, the spectrum is very similar to that of the topological phase when focusing at low energies when the angle θ is slightly larger than the critical value θ c . The concomitant behavior of the conductance follows closely the features of the spectrum of the combined wire and quantum dot. Importantly, for a quantum dot with a Zeeman splitting as the case we considered here, the behavior of the conductance is clearly different for the two spin orientations of the quantum dot when the wire is in the topological phase. For parameters consistent with this phase, the conductance has an important weight at zero bias -albeit lower than the limit 2G 0 expected in a semi-infinite topological wire-for the spin orientation having a large component with the spin of the particle component of the Majorana zero mode. However it is vanishing small for the other spin orientation. Consequently, in the first case the Fano factor is F ≪ 1 in a neighborhood of V = 0 while in the second case F ∼ 1. These features are very clear for weakly coupled quantum dots. However, when the coupling becomes large, supragap states partially mask the response, hence, the zero-bias peak and the corresponding Fano dip become very narrow. Away from the topological phase in configurations where the SOC and the magnetic field are perpendicular, zero energy crossings are more likely to take place for weakly coupled quantum dots. Unlike the topological phase, the transport features (conductance and Fano factor) are very similar for the two spin orientations of the quantum dot. This approximate symmetry for the two spin orientations provides an important distinction between non-topological and topological states for the case of orthogonal SOC and Zeeman fields. Overall, however, it is difficult to clearly identify features that unambiguously distinguish the topological from the non-topological phase in systems with non-perpendicular orientations of the spin-orbit and magnetic field. Our results highlight the role of the degree of coupling between the quantum dot and the wire. In fact, the response of the topological wire weakly hybridized with the quantum dot can be understood in terms of a simple picture based on the hybridization of the levels of the quantum dot with the end modes of the wire. Instead, as the coupling becomes stronger, the hybridization between the quantum dot and the supragap states play a role. This has impact in the behavior of the transport properties. In particular, the conductance decreases and the noise becomes higher, thus hindering the identification of the topological phase. Altogether, these observations may serve as a guide for the design of future experiments. the superconducting terms reads 