Chalcogenides, which refer to chalcogen anions, have attracted considerable attention in multiple fields of applications, such as optoelectronics, thermoelectrics, transparent contacts, and thin film transistors. In comparison to oxide counterparts, chalcogenides have demonstrated higher mobility and p-type dopability, owing to larger orbital overlaps between metal-X covalent chemical bondings and higher-energy valence bands derived by p-orbitals. Despite the potential of chalcogenides, the number of successfully synthesized compounds remains relatively low compared to oxides, suggesting the presence of numerous unexplored chalcogenides with fascinating physical characteristics. In this study, we implemented a systematic high-throughput screening process combined with first-principles calculations on ternary chalcogenides using 34 crystal structure prototypes. We generated a computational material database containing over 400,000 compounds by exploiting the ion-substitution approach at different atomic sites with elements in the periodic table. The thermodynamic stabilities of the candidates were validated using the chalcogenides included in the Open Quantum Materials Database. Moreover, we trained a model based on Crystal Graph Convolutional Neural Networks to predict the thermodynamic stability of novel materials. Furthermore, we theoretically evaluated the electronic structures of the stable candidates using accurate hybrid functionals. A series of in-depth characteristics, including the carrier effective masses, electronic configuration, and photovoltaic conversion efficiency, was also investigated. Our work provides 1 Optoelectronic materials have attracted significant attention owing to the global energy shortage and environmental concerns suffered from the excessive consumption of fossil fuels. By absorbing solar energy, which acts as a clean and sustainable energy source, the internal electric current can be produced and delivered based on the photoelectric effect. The past several decades have witnessed a phenomenal development of the discovery and the performance modification on a series of optoelectronic materials, e.g., silicon, CdTe for solar photovoltaic modules Over the years, a variety of HTP studies have been carried out for optoelectronic materials and led to the subsequent chemical synthesis, as well as the device fabrication in the family of perovskites, antiperovskites, half-Heuslers, full-Heuslers, etc. In 2017, Zhao et al. designed a series of lead-free double perovskites by exploiting the strategy of cation-transmutation and highlighted 11 optimal novel candidates with promising optoelectronic properties In this work, we chose 34 ternary chalcogenide prototypes as initial entries to explore novel crystalline semiconductors for potential optoelectronic applications. In combination with the strategy of cation substitution, we built a material database containing 400,000 candidates. After a series of screening processes oriented by optoelectronic properties, including thermodynamic stability, band gap, electronic structure, and efficiency, a total number of 52 candidates were identified as promising absorber materials for solar cell devices. Our theoretical study provides a guideline for further experimental research focusing on the synthesis and validation of novel optoelectronic materials. We first collected all the experimentally-known and theoretically-predicted ternary chalcogenide compounds from the MPs database. As shown in Fig. verified successfully by experiments. The detailed information on these 34 structural prototypes is listed in Table The generated 34 prototypes with a general chemical formula of A x B y X z act as initial entries for the HTP material design process. We then selected the elements from Li to Bi for ion-substitution on A and B sites, respectively, except for the diatomic nonmetal, noble gas, and rare-earth elements. And one of S, Se, and Te chalcogen anions kept occupying the X site, as shown in Fig. Considering that stability is critical for the experimental synthesizability, service lifetime, and efficiency of optoelectronic applications Generally, chemical composition and structural symmetry have an in-parallel impact on the thermodynamic behaviors of materials. A typical example is the ideally stable halide perovskite with a chemical formula of ABX 3 , which usually exhibits the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t = (r A + r X )/ √ 2(r B + r X ), where r i is the ionic radii of the atom i) close to 1. This scenario is based on the assumption that the bond lengths of A-X and B-X are the sum of r A , r X , and r B , r X , respectively In addition to the red pixels in the map, metastable ternary sulfides (e.g., green square presents metastable sulfide with a distance to the convex hull below 50 meV, blue square means the metastable sulfide with a distance to the convex hull from 50 to 200 meV), which are able to decompose into competing phases. Although metastable phases are generally difficult to synthesize, there are 20 computed metastable phases with ∆E h < 50 meV that have been experimentally confirmed, as shown in Fig. Except for the S-based system, we also considered the stability maps for Se-based and Te-based systems, as shown in Figs. Similarly, alkaline and alkaline-earth compounds contribute a considerable amount of stable phases in both ternary sulfides, selenides, and tellurides. While the number of stable transition metal/transition metal chalcogenides (TM-TM-X) is less, scattering amongst the center of the maps for three systems. Compared with TM-TM-X, the stability of post-transition metal chalcogenides is more promising, and the size of islands of stability is bigger and more concentrated. Turning now to the metastable candidates for three systems, metastable sulfides and selenides can fill almost all the gaps in the stability maps. However, the current tolerance of distance to the convex hull still left relative gaps in the chemical composition space of tellurides. For instance, it's hard to find stable or metastable compounds in W/Re/B/C-TM-Te. Interestingly, there are 2455, 2815, and 2673 compounds for S-, Se-and Te-based chalcogenides exhibiting metastable behavior ( ∆E h < 50 meV/atom, as shown in Table Furthermore, we summarized the number of S-, Se-and Te-based candidates with ∆E h < 50 meV/atom for each structural prototype, respectively, as shown in Fig. To understand the trend of stability for calculated ternary chalcogenides, we here take the ternary sulfides as an example. The stability tendency with respect to the chemical composition is analyzed based on the Hume-Rothery rules We first extracted the structural information and the E f for all the S-based, Sebased, and Te-based candidates to construct a dataset for the ML training process. As for the training process, we used Material-Agnostic Platform for Informatics and Exploration(magpie) According to the Shockley-Queisser (S-Q) efficiency limit, the band gap (E g ) of an ideal solar absorber in a single-junction cell should be close to 1.34 eV Since we have obtained the band gap of chalcogenides combined with satisfied stability, we can roughly evaluate their performances as photovoltaic materials based on the S-Q limit. For the solar cell material, there is a well-known selection criterion that a promising absorber generally relies on favorable ones with direct bandgap characteristics, which facilitates the strong optical absorption in solar cells with reduced thickness. However, the conventional evaluation of S-Q efficiency is roughly dependent on the band gap value, failing to take into account the condition of the dipole-forbidden rather than a dipole-allowed direct transition in a few direct-gap materials. Therefore, the selection criterion simply based on the S-Q efficiency has been increasingly proven to be insufficient to discover promising photovoltaic materials. Accordingly, we adopted the "Spectroscopic Limited Maximum Efficiency (SLME)" as a target property to evaluate the efficiency of candidates To investigate the photovoltaic performance, we further calculated the electronic structures and the carrier effective masses of candidates with SLME > 32%. For photovoltaic devices, high mobility of photogenerated charge carriers is required for the facilitated transport and efficient collection by electrodes. A key factor determining carrier mobility is the carrier effective mass, which is calculated from the second derivatives of band structure curves near the valence band maximum (VBM, for holes) and conduction band minimum (CBM, for electrons), respectively. After obtaining the band structures at the scPBE0 level and the carrier effective masses of candidates, we finally selected 65 promising materials for photovoltaic applications, as listed in Table To further investigate the physical mechanism of the candidates, we take Sn 3 BaSe 4 as an example to study the orbital contribution near the band edges, as well as chemical bonding characteristics. As shown in Fig. In summary, we have presented a comprehensive high-throughput screening process based on the idea of ion substitution and ab initio calculations to explore promising ternary chalcogenides for optoelectronic applications. By replacing A-and B-site cations in ternary A x B y X z chalcogenides crystallized in 34 structural prototypes, a rich material database containing > 400,000 A x B y X z chalcogenide candidates was constructed. After a series of systematic first-principles calculations, we found 7943 unknown materials exhibiting satisfied phase stability against chemical decomposition. On this basis, the chemical distribution of phase stability in terms of the structural prototype and chemical composition was established, respectively. Furthermore, an effective stacked ensemble model based on machine learning algorithms was generated to predict the phase stability directly. By using the developed self-consistent hybrid functional, a photovoltaic-functionality-oriented material screening process involving > 6000 stable and metastable candidates was performed, providing a final identification of 52 chalcogenides as promising absorbers in single-junction solar cells. These materials exhibited good thermodynamic stabilities (E f < 0 eV and ∆E h < 50 meV/atom), suitable band gaps (1.1-1.5 eV), direct or quasi-direct electronic band structures ( E g < 10 meV), ultra-low carrier effective masses (< m 0 ), and high efficiencies (> 32 %). In particular, a series of materials represented by Sn 3 BaSe 4 show similar optical characteristics as CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 owing to the intrinsic lone-pair ns 2cation-containing electronic configuration, which has been verified as an origin for the high conversion efficiency of the solar cell devices fabricated by Pb-based halide perovskites. Our work provides a promising routine for exploring novel ternary chalcogenide semiconductors with superior performances for optoelectronic applications. And the subsequent experimental efforts aiming at the synthesis and performance characterization are strongly called for. The first-principles calculations were performed using an in-house developed HTP calculation environment 