Heterostructures based on ultrawide-bandgap (UWBG) semiconductors (bandgap 4.0 eV), such as boron nitride (BN) and diamond, hold significant importance for the development of high-power electronics in the next generation. However, achieving in-situ hetero-epitaxy of BN/diamond or vice versa remains exceptionally challenging due to the complex growth kinetics involved. In this study, we have grown BN thin film on (100) single crystal diamonds using pulsed laser deposition and investigated its structural, magnetic, optical, and thermal properties. The structural analyses confirmed the growth of BN films, which exhibited diamagnetic behavior at room temperature. Notably, the film demonstrated anisotropic refractive index characteristics within the visible-tonear-infrared wavelength range. The room temperature cross-plane thermal conductivity of BN is 1.53 (± 0.77) W/mK, while the thermal conductance of the BN/diamond interface is 20 (± 2) MW/m 2 K. These findings have significant implications for a range of device applications based on UWBG BN/diamond heterostructures. Epitaxial integration of ultrawide-bandgap (UWBG) semiconductors (bandgap > 4.0 eV) represent a revolutionary new arena in materials research since they show excellent promises for highperformance electronics. showed the direct conversion of h-BN into nano-ordered c-BN by nanosecond pulsed laser melting. Here, we have grown BN thin film on (100) SCD substrates by PLD and performed structural, magnetic, optical, and thermal characterizations. Structural characterizations confirm the growth of BN. The films show diamagnetic behavior, have an anisotropic refractive index within the visible-to-near-infrared wavelength range, and excellent cross-plane thermal conductivity of 1.53 (± 0.77) W/mK, and interfacial thermal conductance of 20 (± 2) MW/m 2 K at room temperature. These in-situ grown BN films on diamond by PLD with the exhibition of various functionalities might be useful for the optoelectronics and critical thermal management applications. For depositions, we used commercially available normal-grade (100) SCD substrates (SKU 145-500-0549, size: 3 3 mm 2 ), purchased from Element Six (UK). Since the surface of diamond is crucial, BN thin films of thicknesses ~20 nm are grown by using PLD (load-lock assisted high vacuum (~510 -9 Torr) chamber operating with a KrF excimer laser (248 nm wavelength and pulse width 25 ns). The films are grown by using the following conditions: growth temperature ~750 °C, nitrogen partial pressure (PN2) ~100 mTorr, and laser fluency ~2.2 J/cm 2 , target-to-substrate distance ~ 50 mm, and repetition rate of 5 Hz. For the ablation, we used a commercially available one-inch diameter h-BN target (American Element, 99.9%). Before and after each deposition, SCD and BN/SCD is pre and post-annealed at the same growth temperature and pressure for one hour. We performed core-level XPS, which shows the presence of characteristic B-N bonding peaks at ~190.4 eV (B 1s-core) and ~397.9 eV (N 1s-core) [Figs. The magnetic properties of BN are also interesting. Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometer (VASE) (M-2000 Ellipsometer, by J. A. Woollam Company) was used to measure the RI of pristine SCD (as a reference), followed by the RI of BN. The process involves illuminating the samples with light at four equally spaced incident angles (Φ) ranging from 55° to 70° and collecting the reflected light to get the reflection coefficients for both s-polarized and p-polarized lights of the samples, and fitted to obtain the RI. For fitting, we constructed two-layer model to represent the BN/SCD heterostructure, with an anisotropic uniaxial Cauchy model applied to the top layer. To summarize, BN thin films were successfully grown on (100) diamond single crystals using PLD. Detailed structural analyses have confirmed the growth of these thin films. We investigated several properties through measurements of optical refractive index, magnetization, and thermal conductivity. While these properties are appealing, further endeavors are required to grow BN/diamond heterostructures with high-quality electronic interfaces in the future. Nonetheless, given the pressing demand for in-situ integrations with clean interfaces in high-power UWBG semiconductor electronics, our demonstration holds potential for fabricating BN/diamond devices suitable for diverse applications.