Fiber-based confocal endomicroscopy has shown great promise for minimallyinvasive deep-tissue imaging. Despite its advantages, confocal fiber-bundle endoscopy inherently suffers from undersampling due to the spacing between fiber cores, and low collection efficiency when the target is not in proximity to the distal fiber facet. Here, we demonstrate an adaptation of image-scanning microscopy (ISM) to lensless fiber bundle endoscopy, doubling the spatial sampling frequency and significantly improving collection efficiency. Our approach only requires replacing the confocal detector with a camera. It improves the spatial resolution for targets placed at a distance from the fiber tip, and addresses the fundamental challenge of aliasing/pixelization artifacts. Flexible fiber-based micro-endoscopes are an effective tool for minimally-invasive deep-tissue imaging. They offer micron-scale resolution with miniature probes having diameters of a few hundred microns, making them suitable for in-vivo imaging of neurons and cells A common approach to improve the resolution and optical cross-sectioning of fiber-bundle endoscopes is through confocal imaging Over the years, many techniques have been suggested and demonstrated to improve lensless fluorescence fiber-bundle endomicroscopy. These methods include structured-illumination Here, we demonstrate that both the collection efficiency and spatial sampling frequency can be significantly improved for targets placed at a distance from a lensless fiber bundle by adapting the principles of image scanning microscopy (ISM) ISM has emerged as a microscopy technique that improves the signal-to-noise and resolution of confocal microscopes. ISM utilizes the same raster-scanned illumination as in confocal microscopy but replaces the small detection pinhole with a larger pixelated detector array, allowing the use of all signal photons without loss of resolution. In ISM, the resolution is maintained or improved compared to confocal microscopy by reassigning the detected light from each detector (pixel) to the midpoint between the detected and illumination positions. The final ISM image is the sum of the reassigned signals. Mathematically, the pixel-reassignment process is equivalent to spatially scaling by half (shrinking) each raw image from the detector array (Fig. Here, we combine the raster-scanned illumination of conventional confocal endoscopy The principle of the image-scanning fiber endoscopy is schematically shown in Fig. The proximal facet is imaged on a camera through a dichroic beam-splitter (DM) and a band-pass filter (F). At each scan position, the camera captures the fluorescence intensity distribution over the proximal facet (Fig. Quantitatively, the point spread function (PSF) of confocal imaging, h con f (r), is the product of the illumination and the detection PSFs Where r is the transverse spatial coordinate, h illum is the illumination PSF, and h det is the detection PSF. When both illumination and detection have similar Gaussian profiles, confocal imaging results in a sqrt (2) times narrower effective Gaussian PSF than each of these PSFs. In the case of ISM, the effective PSF, h IS M is the convolution of the illumination and detection PSFs, scaled by a factor of half To study the expected improvement in the normalized OTF due to the increase in spatial sampling frequency of ISM fiber-bundle endoscopy, we numerically simulated the resulting images of a point target placed at distances of 60μm and 150μm for ISM and confocal fiber bundle endoscopy, and compared to the ideal confocal image sampled at a spatial frequency ∼ 6-times that of the fiber bundle (i.e., without relevant aliasing). The OTF for each case was calculated by Fourier transforming the simulated image. The results of this study are presented in Fig. As expected, the 1-D cross-sections of the OTFs in all cases show that aliased spatial frequencies, which result from undersampling, are present in the confocal images at frequencies higher than f s /2 (blue curves and arrows). In contrast, in the ISM images, the aliased frequencies are only present at frequencies above f s (red curves). The doubling of the spatial sampling frequency is important at close distances (Fig. Our experimental setup is schematically depicted in Fig. The ISM endoscopic image is formed in an identical fashion to conventional ISM image formation Z obj =150μm To demonstrate the spatial resolution and SNR improvements of ISM over confocal microendoscopy, we image the target at different distances from the fiber distal facet to the target. First, we image the sample at a contact distance (z ob j = 0μm) to establish the ground truth for the experimental measurements (Fig. All displayed ISM, and confocal images are Fourier-interpolated using a Hann filter to eliminate the cores pixelization. Since the ISM image has a ×2 denser grid of 'virtual' cores (Fig. In this work, we demonstrated a lensless micro-endoscopy approach that adapts the principles of image-scanning microscopy (ISM) to fiber-bundle endomicroscopy. Our proposed configuration utilizes off-the-shelf components and is based on a conventional confocal fiber-bundle endoscope with a camera replacing the confocal detector. By implementing ISM-endoscopy, we demonstrate an improved collection efficiency of up to a factor of approximately 18 at an object distance of 150μm, and an enhanced spatial resolution compared to confocal endoscopy. While the improvement of spatial resolution and collection efficiency in ISM has been extensively studied ISM endoscopy can be applied to any fiber bundle endoscope, and the collection and resolution enhancements may vary according to the MCF parameters and object distances. This is primarily due to different fiber bundles having different numerical apertures (NA), which affect the distances in which the resolution improvement due to doubling the sampling frequency and improvement in collection efficiency are obtained. Importantly, the optimal number of reassigned neighboring cores depends on the object distance and fiber NA, where a larger number of cores collect a useful signal at a larger object distance, and higher NA A drawback of employing a camera rather than a single detector in the imaging system is a potentially slower image acquisition speed. At larger object distances, it may be interesting to study sparse and/or compressive measurements. Lastly, we note that our ISM-based endoscope may enable label-free reflection endomicroscopy, which is challenging to perform in confocal detection. This is because, in reflection endomicroscopy, the illumination and detection wavelengths are identical. Detecting the weak reflected target signals in the presence of relatively-strong background reflections from the MCF facets is a great challenge Figure As mentioned in the main text, the apparent resolution improvement at large target distances (Fig. 