Advances in additive manufacturing have enabled the realisation of inexpensive, scalable, diffractive acoustic lenses that can be used to generate complex acoustic fields via phase and/or amplitude modulation. However, the design of these holograms relies on a thin-element approximation adapted from optics which can severely limit the fidelity of the realised acoustic field. Here, we introduce physics-based acoustic holograms with a complex internal structure. The structures are designed using a differentiable acoustic model with manufacturing constraints via optimisation of the acoustic property distribution within the hologram. The holograms can be fabricated simply and inexpensively using contemporary 3D printers. Experimental measurements demonstrate a significant improvement compared to conventional thin-element holograms. Acoustic holograms are a low-cost technically simple alternative to phased arrays for the generation of high-fidelity, three-dimensional, distributions of acoustic pressure and phase To date, acoustic holograms have been direct analogues to thin optical holograms, and their application in acoustics has employed the same underlying thin-element approximation for their design. In other words, a phase and amplitude modulating thin sheet is designed that in practice is fabricated as a hologram of finite thickness comprising independent pixels (columns) of varying thickness Here, we introduce physics-based acoustic holograms that are designed using a differentiable acoustic model that incorporates the complex 3D wavefield within the hologram, along with manufacturing constraints, during the design process. This enables the experimental realization of holograms that can render complex acoustic fields with highfidelity. The lenses are designed using gradient-based optimisation, which is solved in a computationally efficient way using a differentiable acoustic simulator. This allows the convenient use of automatic differentiation with respect to the lens material properties without the need to manually derive the adjoint. We consider here a transducer emitting a single frequency wave propagating through a heterogeneous hologram in an otherwise homogeneous medium. The hologram is designed to control the spatially varying acoustic field outside of the lens, for example, the pattern of acoustic pressure at a target depth d. The internal material structure of the hologram is represented by the vector θ = (c, ρ, α) which captures the heterogeneous distribution of sound speed The field is then extracted in a plane located next to the lens, opposite to the source, and propagated to the target plane using the angular-spectrum method. The wavefield at the target plane is then compared to the one of interest, and the gradients of the loss function used to iteratively update the material parameters of the lens. c, density ρ, and absorption α. For a given transducer, the resulting 3D acoustic wavefield P is determined by the hologram material properties θ, written here as P (θ). The wavefield at any position can be found by solving the heterogeneous Helmholtz equation where S r as an operator that extracts field values in a plane at distance r from the lens. If the lens axis aligns with a domain axis, this operator, in discrete form, is equivalent to taking a slice of the 3D array representing P at a specific index along a specific dimension. Here, the acoustic fields are solved using the j-Wave package To design the lens, a real-valued loss function l(Q, Q 0 ) is minimised, where Q 0 is the target field. If this function is differentiable with respect to its argument (e.g., mean squared error or normalized cross-correlation operator), gradientbased optimization methods can be used to adjust the values of θ. As the numerical implementation of Eq. (1) using j-Wave is written in a differentiable language The optimization of the holograms is carried out with gradient descent. The loss function used depends on the required hologram. For example, for focused lenses, the acoustic power at the target location could be maximized. Here, we maximize the correlation between the amplitude of the acoustic field at the target depth q = |Q| to a target amplitude q 0 = |Q 0 |, regularized with an intensity term l(q 0 , q) = -q * 0 q q 0 q -λ q . (2 Here λ is the weighting for the intensity term, which is chosen experimentally, and • represents the l 2 norm. The regularization term helps to increase the diffraction efficiency of the designed lens by penalizing over-use of absorption and backward scattering. To demonstrate the potential of physics-based acoustic holograms, holograms were designed for fabrication using a Stratasys J835 (Stratasys, Edina, MN, US). This allows for simultaneous printing of multiple materials with differing mechanical properties in a single component with a spatial resolution of <200 μm. These properties can vary The distribution gets increasingly pushed to the constraints provided by the fabrication method resulting in a highly binarised lens that can be directly fabricated. This binarisation process maximises the scattering strength of the lens. from rubber-like Agilus30 to rigid or Poly(methyl methacrylate)-like (PMMA) veroClear The constraints of the chosen fabrication method were incorporated into the lens design by parameterizing the material distribution using a mixture model. The values for absorption, sound speed and density were defined as where γ is a real scalar field tuned by the optimization, σ(x) = e x /(1 + e x ) is the sigmoid function and (c i , ρ i , α i ) are the acoustic parameters of the i-th material, which correspond to the two materials used for printing which have been previously characterised We illustrate the performance of the proposed method experimentally. For the target field a pattern that has been previously realised was chosen: the dove of peace The gradient descent rapidly converged to a highly binarised distribution (Fig. The hologram used for experimental comparison was taken from iteration 50 of the gradient descent. The impact of iteration choice on experimental performance is discussed in Supp. Sec. I. For comparison with the physics-based hologram, a hologram was also designed using the thin-element approximation as outlined in The output field was characterised for both holograms in a custom-built test tank with a three-axis computer controlled positioning system using a 0.2 mm needle hydrophone (Precision Acoustics, Dorchester). The hologram was attached directly to the front surface of the transducer which was excited using a high-voltage impulse (JSR DPR300, Imaginant, NY, USA). The field was recorded over a 54 × 54 mm area with a step size of 0.3 mm. This scan was centered on the middle of the hologram, at a distance of approximately 1.2 cm from the output surface. Signals were recorded with a M4i.4421-x8 digitiser (Spectrum, Germany) using 100 averages. The acoustic field at 2 MHz was extracted at each measurement position and the planar-data was projected using AS to reconstruct the 3D acoustic field. The target depth was then identified in each dataset by maximizing the correlation with the target field. The acoustic field generated at the target depth by both the thin-element and physics-based holograms are shown in Fig. We have introduced physics-based acoustic holograms designed using a differentiable acoustic model that more accurately accounts for the complex 3D wavefield within the hologram. This approach significantly improves the fidelity of the generated acoustic fields compared to traditional thin-element approximation methods. The gradient-based optimization technique employed is computationally efficient and adaptable for various applications. This includes existing applications for acoustic holograms such as transcranial ultrasound stimulation (TUS), ultrasound therapy, and acoustic assembly, where, in addition to the enhanced fidelity that can be achieved, additional aspects of the physics can also be incorporated. For TUS, reverberations between the skull and hologram can be factored into the design (see Fig. This approach is an application of inverse-design or topological optimisation which has seen broad application. In nano-photonics for example, it has been applied to the design of metasurfaces In future, this method has the potential to be extended to use non-linear acoustic materials, potentially allowing the construction of acoustic systems that perform non-linear computations. This approach has been applied, for example, to generate optical neural networks Gradient descent iteration and over-fitting The gradient descent for the example shown in Fig. To test which iteration performed best experimentally, 5 holograms were fabricated taken from iterations 30, 50, 110, 190, and 450. Each was measured experimentally with the set-up described in Sec. III with the field of each hologram shown in Fig. To investigate this discrepancy, time-domain simulations were performed through holograms from different iterations of the gradient descent using the k-Wave toolbox As the gradient descent iteration increases, the field more slowly converges to steady state. This suggests that the model is employing higher degrees of multiple scattering in the hologram profile. Such structures are more sensitive to numerical-experimental mismatch arising from fabrication errors hence worse experimental performance. This can be avoided by picking an early iteration for which the binarisation error on the hologram is small, as was done here. In the future, the gradient descent could be regularised to eliminate this behaviour, for example, by optimising in the time-domain and windowing the propagated field. Physics-Based Acoustic Holograms A numerical experiment was carried out to investigate the potential of physics-based holograms for transcranial focusing as shown in Fig. 