Thermally-induced transitions between bistable magnetic states of magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJ) are of interest for generating random bitstreams and for applications in stochastic computing. An applied field transverse to the easy axis of a perpendicularly magnetized MTJ (pMTJ) can lower the energy barrier (E b ) to these transitions leading to faster fluctuations. In this study, we present analytical and numerical calculations of E b considering both coherent (macrospin) reversal and non-uniform wall-mediated magnetization reversal for a selection of nanodisk diameters and applied fields. Non-uniform reversal processes dominate for larger diameters, and our numerical calculations of E b using the String method show that the transition state has a sigmoidal magnetization profile. The latter can be described with an analytical expression that depends on only one spatial dimension, parallel to the applied field, which is also the preferred direction of profile motion during reversal. Our results provide nanodisk energy barriers as a function of the transverse field, nanodisk diameter, and material characteristics, which are useful for designing stochastic bitstreams. There has been a recent surge in interest in innovative computational approaches that mimic the flexibility of neural systems Kramers' theory for thermally activated escape over a potential barrier Previous research on randomly fluctuating magnetic tunneling junctions (MTJs) has primarily focused on easy-plane systems, which have been considered the faster alternative We investigated perpendicularly magnetized nanodisks, that correspond to the so-called free layer of a perpendicular magnetic tunnel junction (pMTJ) memory element. Our starting point is a macrospin model developed by Garanin in Ref. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the structure we model and simulate. In Section III, we present the macrospin model and the micromagnetic simulation results used to test it. Section IV covers the non-uniform reversal model and the String method technique used to assess the model. The results of the String method simulation are presented and discussed in detail in Section V. The paper ends with a summary in Section VI. A schematic of a pMTJ free layer is shown in Fig. x x parallel to the applied magnetic field and ẑ z z perpendicular to the film plane. The magnetocrystalline anisotropy axis k is parallel to ẑ. To describe the magnetization, we use spherical coordinates in which Θ is the angle of the magnetization from the ẑ z z axis. Because of the orientation of the field, the magnetization lies in the xz plane. We use SI units and dimensionless expressions are used to simplify the algebra and provide generalizations. Dimen-FIG. For magnetization reversal in very small samples coherent rotation of the magnetization (macrospin reversal) can be favored, while in samples larger than the exchange length there may be spatial variations of the magnetization (non-uniform reversal). Thus, we start here with the macrospin model applied to uniformly magnetized thin ferromagnetic disks with radius R, thickness t, and volume V . The magnetic energy density, E = E/V , is obtained from the sum of dipolar (E d ), anisotropy (E k ), and Zeeman (E Z ) energy densities: The individual terms depend on m as follows: where M s is the saturation magnetization, K is the magnetic anisotropy, K d = μ 0 M 2 s /2 is the demagnetization field energy coefficient, and H = H x x is the applied in-plane magnetic field. The coefficient ζ is obtained from the disk magnetostatic tensor using ζ = (3N zz -1)/2. Both are purely geometric factors that depend only on the disk aspect ratio and are close to unity if (t/R) ≪ 1 (see Refs. After expressing the magnetization unit vector in polar coordinates m = (cos Φ sin Θ, sin Φ sin Θ, cos Θ) and energy densities in terms of E 0 = K d (Qζ ) we obtain a rescaled energy density, Ẽ = E /E 0 : Ẽ =cos 2 Θ -2h sin Θ cos Φ. (5) Because the calculation of energy barriers is the main goal of this work, we emphasize our conventions at this point. The total energy is obtained after integrating over the volume of the disk and will be denoted by the unscripted letter E. The problem characteristic energy, E 0 , will be introduced in Section IV. Energy barriers, E b , will be expressed in units of k B T (with T = 300 K). Energy density terms are denoted with script character E and are of the order of 1 MJ/m 3 . Dimensionless energy densities are denoted with tilde Ẽ after normalization by E 0 . A summary of the conversion relations is provided in Table The transition and metastable states of the energy are magnetization directions where the effective field, δ E δ m , vanishes: From Eq. 7 we conclude that Φ = 0. There are four uniform solutions of Eq. 6. The first two are the polar angles of the energy maximum and saddle. There are also two mutually supplementary angles that share the same energy and correspond to energy minima. In Garanin's macrospin reversal model For the reader's convenience, we write E b explicitly in dimension-full units. Our model slightly refines Garanin's prediction by explicitly considering shape anisotropy effects caused by the magnetostatic interaction which are captured here in the sizedependent factor (Qζ ). To exemplify the predictions of the macrospin we perform pairs of overdamped micromagnetic simulations (damping factor α = 1) using m ≈ x as the initial configuration. For these simulations, the initial magnetization was set Energy density terms, in order: total, dipolar, anisotropy, Zeeman, exchange. x, ỹ In plane dimensionless coordinates. (a) Two overdamped micromagnetic simulations of a 60 nm device at a field of 0.6 T that relax to different minima. The energy barrier is measured directly from the difference between the initial and final states (b). The slow initial evolution confirms that the macrospin saddle is a critical point of the energy landscape. The two minima are symmetric and follow identical curves. (c) The non-uniformity as defined in the text remain low and overlapping for the two simulations. marginally out of the x-y plane and in opposite directions so that the magnetization relaxes to different metastable states. The parameters for these simulations were set to match those of our previous experimental studies A typical result from the overdamped simulations is shown in Fig. We use the spatial average of each magnetization component to quantify the non-uniformity of the configuration, As can be seen in Fig. From a systematic repetition of this procedure, we determine the energy barrier versus applied transverse field for six distinct diameters in the range 5 < D < 100 nm. The energy barrier and field are scaled as indicated in Eq. 11. In consequence, all data appear on a single curve Fig. For comparison, Fig. The decrease in the energy barrier occurs even under the assumption of uniform magnetization and the curves seem to reach convergence at D ≈ 100 nm. Nonetheless, this limiting energy barrier is much larger than a barrier obtained from domain wall mediated reversal, as will be introduced in the next section. While the macrospin model is a useful approximation for device sizes smaller than the exchange length, it is natural to expect that it fails once the system is large enough to accommodate variations of the magnetization. To consider this scenario, we rewrite the energy as a surface integral with four spatially varying contributions: The energy now includes the exchange energy where A is the Heisenberg exchange constant. Equation To obtain non-dimensional expressions we rescale the inplane spatial coordinates (r = l ex r) by an exchange length, and the energies with a characteristic value, E 0 = At; The energy density rescaling factor can now be written as E 0 = E 0 /(l 2 ex t) and the dimensionless energy density ( Ẽ = E /E 0 ) becomes: Notice that, as a consequence of our local approximation for the magnetostatic energy, the exchange length (Eq. 14) depends on the disk radius. The implicit definition is not a problem for computation because ζ (R) is monotonic, and therefore, l ex (ζ (R)) is single-valued. The shape-induced effects of the local approximation into the effective anisotropy are incorporated in this definition to smooth the transition between the macrospin and the wall-mediated models. We will assume that Φ is constant (Φ = 0) and the profile Θ only depends on x. Here, we maintain a two-dimensional measure of integration to account for the circular shape of our device, even though the y coordinate is ignored when performing variational calculus. This is the key approximation in our model. We solve for the transversal profile of an infinite stripe and assume that it is still valid for a circle. The configurations Θ(x) that correspond to energy minima or saddle points are extremes of this function which can be found from the corresponding Euler-Lagrange equation and its accompanying boundary condition (see App. C). A non-uniform solution that satisfies Eq. 17 exists and corresponds to a reversal driven by a domain wall that moves across the disk (detailed derivation in Appendix D). The key observation is that the saddle state occurs when the domain wall is at the center of the disk, and the magnetization profile described by: In the equation, sn(•|m) is the Jacobi Elliptic function with parameter m chosen to satisfy the boundary conditions (not to be confused with the magnetization magnitude |m|=1). Appendix B explains how to obtain the parameters used in the description of these profiles, i.e., A , B, and m. Numerically integrating the energy density (Eq. 15) over the surface of the disk, gives the energy of the non-uniform saddle state. The energy barrier is therefore: The String method We have used our OOMMF-based implementation of this method to find the transition states of the nanodisk at different applied fields. An example of this calculation is shown in Fig. As we can see in Fig. After the relaxation of the string, the transition between the two domains became smoother with a profile that closely approximates our theoretical predictions (Eq. 18), Fig. The re-scaled field h varies between 0 and 1 in our model, and as such determines a critical field, B c (R) = μ 0 M s (Q-ζ ), at which the system becomes saturated in-plane and the bistability is lost. As the magnet's aspect ratio changes from a high needle-like cylinder (ζ → -1/2) to an extended film ζ → 1, the field decreases from B c = 1.7 T to 0.61 T. Since film devices have small aspect ratios, the fields of interest are all below 0.7 T. FIG. Since the energy barrier height greatly influences the rate of fluctuation and this barrier can be changed by applying a transverse field to the device, the following section examines the effect of the field on the energy barrier for several disk diameters. In Fig. Overall, there is a good agreement between predictions from the DW-mediated model and the String method results although the latter yields slightly lower energy barriers. This is expected since our model only considers a onedimensional dependence of the magnetization, and the String method calculation allows for other relaxation paths. As a rule, chain-of-states algorithms reach transition paths that are lower in energy than their analytical counterparts since they have larger degrees of freedom and are able to access a wider configurational space. This explains why most of our analytical values are above their corresponding simulation results in Fig. Another result is a non-monotonicity of the energy barrier with respect to nanodisk size, Fig. An expected effect of the application of a transverse field to an MTJ is a decrease in tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR). To predict the TMR vs applied field behavior, we have assumed a fixed reference layer (blue layer in the inset of Fig. The tunneling conductance is assumed to depend on θ as FIG. In the inset, for the reader's convenience, parallel and antiparallel states schematic in a pMTJ. follows (e.g., and the tunneling magnetoresistance is the fraction: In our case, from Eq. 9, the angle is defined as A nice way to see the reduction in TMR is to relate T (h) to T , the TMR as a function of the transverse field to the zero field value (i.e., that given by Eq. 22). Then the maximum device TMR is given by: Figure In our investigation, a new intermediate state appears for large devices (D ≥ 60 nm), Fig. The inset of Fig. Next, we consider the area closer to the disk center. The penalty for out-of-plane magnetization orientations is stronger in the interior of the disk than at the edges. In the presence of a strong field along x direction, this magnetization direction becomes favorable. By enlarging the area with close to uniform magnetization, the exchange energy penalty is reduced. Putting together all these observations, we now provide an explanation for the stability of the newly found configuration. The field is strong, so both metastable directions are slightly out of plane. The perpendicular anisotropy is stronger at the disk edges than in the interior. As a result, the magnetization aligns with the field for most points except within a narrow rim near the disk edge where the contribution to the exchange energy is concentrated. In summary, we have compared two possible transition pathways for thermally activated switching, in perpendicularly magnetized nanodisks. One pathway is a coherent rotation of the magnetization (macrospin) and another transition is domain wall-mediated switching with spatially nonuniform magnetization states. These transition paths were tested using overdamped micromagnetic and String method simulations respectively. Specifically, we have compared energy barriers and the spatial profiles of analytical models to those obtained numerically resulting in minimal discrepancies, and only in extreme cases. Moreover, a new metastable state in the energy barrier behavior was found in large devices (D ≥ 60 nm) for very high fields. From an application perspective, the aim of this work was to prove the possibility of using a transverse field to lower the energy barrier of pMTJ devices with different nanodisk diameters. Both the models and the simulations, show that the energy barrier of a perpendicularly magnetized nanodisk can be tuned with the applied field. A quick estimate of the switching rate can be done assuming Γ 0 = 1 GHz as a characteristic frequency of magnetic excitations. In this case, a barrier E b = 4.6 k B T results in switching times in the order of 100 ns. For a device with a zero field barrier of E b = 20 k B T (i.e. a 12 nm diameter device, with a saturation field of B sat = 0.98 T) an applied field of 0.51 T (h = 0.52) would produce this fluctuation rate. Similarly, a 40 k B T device (18 nm diameter, B sat =0.9 T) achieves the above rate with a field of 0.60 T (h = 0.67). Thus, as we have illustrated in Fig. The findings confirm that pMTJ devices, whose fluctuation rates are determined by a transverse magnetic field, can produce rapid and measurable fluctuations, presenting exciting possibilities for their application in generating genuine random numbers. What still remains to be explored are the optimal device dimension, the testing of our theory, and simulations against experimental device measurements. Moreover, an accurate estimation of the prefactor in the attempt rate expression would be needed, to fully assess the stochasticity of the device. cos 2 Θ -2h sin Θ d xd ỹ. (C1) To simplify our work, in the text we solve the equation at y = 0 and assume the same profile is valid for the rest of the disk. In reality, this is the solution for a square of side 2R. We assume the discrepancy with the solution for a disk will be small 2 Using integration by parts in the first term we obtain: An extremal satisfies δ E = 0 for arbitrary δ Θ; therefore, the first of these integrals provides the differential equation to be solved; the second integral, the boundary conditions to be satisfied ∂ Θ Appendix D: Derivation of the non-constant saddle profile. We postulate that, in addition to the Neumann boundary conditions in Eq.17, the profiles should also satisfy the following symmetry: Which is motivated on physical grounds. It is reasonable to expect that the non-uniform extremal is made of two energetically equivalent orientations separated by a transition region in between. We expect that for large disks the magnetization fully rotates between Θ ↑ and Θ ↓ , i.e. lim R→∞ Θ R = Θ ↑ . Multiplying the differential equation in 17 by dΘ/d x and integrating in x results in the equivalent equation: We solve for the first constant of integration, C 1 , after substitution of the boundary conditions. We use m x = sin(Θ) to rewrite Eq.D2 as an elliptical integral: After integrating we obtain an expression involving, F( x|m), the Elliptic Integral of the first kind: x +C 2 = A • F sin -1 (B cot (β )) |m (D5) Solving Eq.(D5) for Θ, we get an expression involving a Jacobi elliptic function, sn(x|m): Since we expect Θ(x = 0) = π/2, we can find C 2 that satisfies: Since the first pole of sn(x|m) is located at iK(1m), we find C 2 = iA K(1m). This allows us to use a change of variables and other identities of Jacobi elliptic functions and simplify this to Eq. 18 In the large disk limit (m=1), the above parameters can be simplified: and, when R → ∞, In this form, the solution provides for a quick intuitive in-terpretation of this result. Since tanh(x) changes sigmoidally from -1 to 1 as x grows from -∞ to +∞, the angle Θ acquires the same sigmoidal dependence but varies between Θ ↑ and Θ ↓ .