Inspired by recent graded metamaterials designs, we create phononic arrays of micro-resonators for frequency signal amplification and wave filtering. Leveraging suspended waveguides on a thick silicon substrate, we hybridize surface Rayleigh and Lamb flexural waves to effectively achieve phononic signal control along predefined channels. The guided waves are then spatially controlled using a suitable grading of the micro-resonators, which provide high signal-to-noise ratio and simultaneously create phononic delay-lines. The proposed device can be used for sensing, wave filtering or energy harvesting. Over the past few decades the use of MEMS resonators has become increasingly important in the creation of new designs for timing references, RF filters, mass and motion sensors In this paper we implement, at the microscale, a graded metamaterial configuration that is able to control elastic wave Manuscript received June, 2023 Corresponding author: A. Corigliano (email: alberto.corigliano@polimi.it) Fig. propagation via the so-called rainbow effect The paper is organised as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the device in terms of geometry and operating frequency range. In Sec. III, we provide a description of the fabrication methods and the experimental setup. In Sec. IV we compare numerical and experimental results, analysing the peculiar features of the device, i.e. the capability of slowing down waves, wave filtering and amplification. Finally, in Sec. V, we draw together some concluding remarks. The phononic graded meta-MEMS consists of an elastic waveguide having a graded array of resonators of different lengths (see Figure In this work, we consider low frequency resonators (less than 100 MHz) -commonly used in low-precision consumer electronics -given the constraints on the prototype dimensions dictated by the manufacturing process and the experimental setup. Due to the intrinsic limitations of the micro-fabrication and the problem in generating the input elastic waves at high frequencies, we opt for a device working in the frequency range between 200 kHz and 1.2 MHz. It is worth noting that the proof-of-concept, obtained at the scale of the prototype, can be usefully exploited for the application at smaller scales, provided that a suitable production process is adopted. A detailed description of the device size and features is reported in Tab. I. The samples are fabricated starting from a Silicon On Insulator (SOI) wafer having 5 μm of n-doped silicon on top of 1 μm of silicon oxide (Figure The litography is performed with a maskless aligner, model MLA100 from Heidelber instrument. After the litography, the MEMS structures are defined using a DRIE Bosch-like process The measurement setup is depicted in Figure The system can detect the out-of-plane displacements in the picometer range with an in-plane position accuracy of the laser beam limited by the beam spot size (≈ 0.9 μm for the 50X magnification); the frequency range of detection of the instrument is 20 MHz. The system can acquire a grid of points defined by the user and reconstruct a vibration map of the device. The mechanical input is provided by means of a piezoelectric probe of type Ultran, series KC12-1, which is kept in direct contact with the device under test by a rigid arm. The probe size was chosen as small as possible in order to fit on a relatively small silicon substrate and the frequency range of excitation delivered by the probe set the frequency boundaries of our experiment i.e. from 200 kHz to 1.2 MHz. The probe is driven by a power amplifier in sync to the MSA500 or to an external arbitrary wave-form generator. Two types of measurements are performed. First a wide bandwidth sweep signal with a total amplitude of 3 V is generated to excite all the frequencies ranging from 300 kHz to 1300 kHz. The steady-state response of the vibrational map is acquired, providing the frequency spectrum of the displacement for each point of the grid. This analysis is done to obtain the frequency response function (FRF) of the fabricated device, to verify the agreement between numerical predictions and experimental results. Numerical calculations are performed through ABAQUS ® finite element software, for one suspended graded meta-MEMS on an infinite medium modeled using Absorbing Boundary Conditions The device controls the propagating wave in the following ways: (i) it slows down the wave, lowering both the phase and the group velocity, (ii) it filters specific frequency components of the input and (iii) it amplifies the displacement and velocity fields of the lateral resonators induced by the incoming wave at their target resonant frequencies. From an application point of view, these features translate respectively into: (i) delay-lines, (ii) frequency filters and (iii) frequency selective amplifiers for surface waves. (a) The wavefield in space and time is measured using a Polytec MSA500 laser doppler vibrometer (I), eventually complemented with an oscilloscope (II), while the input is created using a signal generator (III). The chip is placed on the thick chuck of the vibrometer and is forced in the center through a probe. In order to assure such phenomena, we orient the graded meta-MEMS so that the incoming wave, generated at the center, propagates from the shortest (first) to the longest (last) resonator. In this way, the wave propagation is accompanied by a slow wavenumber transformation due to a decrease in the resonant frequencies along space. The first result of the characterisation is reported in Figure The numerical prediction of the resonance obtained from the dispersion curve and the experimental data, extracted from the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) performed by the vibrometer over the entire structure, are in excellent agreement with a ∼ 0.9% relative error in the resonant frequency prediction. This preliminary analysis shows that the micro-fabrication process is accurate and the tested structures are comparable to the initial design. Furthermore, to characterise the dynamic motion of the resonator and to assess the real damping, the experimental quality factor of the considered resonator is Q := ω r /∆ω r = 936, being ω r the angular resonant frequency and ∆ω r the angular half-power bandwidth, both values being retrieved from the experimental data. After having verified that the obtained frequencies agree with the design target, further analyses are performed to characterise the propagating elastic wave on the chip and to assess the ability of the graded meta-MEMS to control, filter and confine the elastic signal that traverses the system. The first necessary step is to define the input signal generated by the piezoelectric probe. In general, a source excitation on a thick medium generates propagating surface and bulk shear/pressure waves To observe the rainbow metamaterial capability of slowing down the traversing wave and to confine it, we perform a time domain analysis with a relatively narrow-band signal at 536 kHz. This frequency is slightly below the resonant frequency of the third last resonator, such that the wave is not stopped but strongly slowed down. We consider, as a reference, a resonator located at the end of the waveguide to fully show the resonators' ability of shortening the wavelength and simultaneously slowing down the wave. This effect happens more efficiently with frequency in the lower range of the array. Figure The final characterisation aims to show the effectiveness of the graded meta-MEMS in acting as frequency filters and amplifiers. To verify this point, a large bandwidth signal is generated at the input. Figure These two effects, i.e. filtering and amplification are strongly related; the wave attenuation along the waveguide is caused by the transfer of energy to the resonators, thus experiencing amplification effects. In this paper we have shown the rainbow effect at the microscale by means of flexural resonators. We have experimentally demonstrated the potential advantages of using phononic graded meta-MEMS for frequency signal amplification and filtering. Leveraging a peculiar control of the waveguide dispersion properties using graded resonators we confine and amplify different frequency components along space. The implementation of locally changing dispersion curves integrates a slowdown effect both in terms of energy and information carried by the wave. This effect also allows for broadband signal attenuation given the generation of multiple partially overlapping band gaps. The proposed device can be suitably employed for applications involving sensing, wave filtering or delay-lines in MEMS. Moreover, it paves the way to the development of efficient energy harvesters, that may benefit from the enhanced interaction of the incoming wave with the target resonator.