semiconductors have attracted considerable interest for their unique physical properties. Here, we report the intrinsic cryogenic electronic transport properties in few-layer MoSe2 field-effect transistors (FETs) that are simultaneously van der Waals contacted with gold electrodes and are fully encapsulated in ultraclean hexagonal boron nitride dielectrics. The FETs exhibit electronically favorable channel/dielectric interfaces with low densities of interfacial traps (< 10 10 cm -2 ), which lead to outstanding device characteristics at room temperature, including a near-Boltzmann-limit subthreshold swings (65 mV/dec), a high carrier mobility (68 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ), and a negligible scanning hysteresis (< 15 mV). The dependence of various contact-related quantities on temperature and carrier density are also systematically characterized to understand the van der Waals contacts between gold and MoSe2. The results provide insightful information on the device physics in van der Waals contacted and encapsulated 2D FETs. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals materials have been widely investigated for their unique atomic structure that enables emerging physical phenomena and nanoelectronics. On the one hand, the isolation and on-demand reassembly of various 2D materials together have led to the observation of intriguing phenomena, including indirect-direct bandgap transition, The most prototypical van der Waals semiconductors can be attributed to the six transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) that share a general chemical formula MX2 (M= Mo and W; X= S, Se, and Te). Among them, MoSe2 remains rarely explored for its relatively low carrier mobility due to its high effective mass ~0.8 m0, In order to achieve ultraclean interfaces and van der Waals contacts for the MoSe2 channels, we adopted a dry-pickup-transfer technique to stack the channel and top dielectric layers. For clarify, Figures The high interface quality is also corroborated by the steep subthreshold swings (SS), which approach the Boltzmann limit. where kT/q is the thermal voltage and Cd is the depletion capacitance that is negligible for 2D channels. Hence, SS in 2D FETs is mainly determined by the ratio between Ctrap and Cox. Only in devices with ultrathin high-k gate dielectric (i.e., large Cox) ( Using the SS value, we extract a low effective Dit of 4.8×10 10 cm -2 eV -1 , far below those reported at the interfaces of SiO2 The simultaneously high interface and contact qualities allow us to assess the intrinsic electronic transport of the few-layer MoSe2. By employing the 4-probe method, Apart from the above two types of primary scattering mechanisms, lattice phonons represent another type, but is activated mainly at high T regimes. A power law μ ∝ T -γ is often employed to analyze the trend of μ around room T to clarify the weights of extrinsic scattering mechanisms, Next, we turn to the electronic characteristics of the van der Waals Au/MoSe2 contacts by analyzing the interfacial Schottky barrier (ΦB). According to the theory of thermionic emission, ΦB can be extracted from the subthreshold current through the 2D thermionic emission equation where A 2D * is the 2D Richardson constant, A is the junction area, n is the ideality factor accounting for barrier lowering by image charges. Because the application of Vds or Vtg can result in the variation of the effective barrier height (ΦE), it is necessary to extract the intrinsic ΦB by extrapolating ΦE to zero Vds under the flat-band condition. By setting Φ E = (Φ B -V ds /n), at a fixed Vds one can extract the values of ΦE at different Vtg from the slopes in the Arrhenius plots of ln(I ds /T 3/2 ) versus 1000/T (Figure To further shed light into the physics of the van der Waals contacts, we analyze the dependence of three crucial contact quantities (i.e., RC, ρC, and RS) on carrier density (n2D) and T. Since the threshold voltage (VT) of FETs is prone to shift with T, it is more reliable to estimate n2D by using n2D = Ctg•(Vtg-VT) to rule out the effect of VT shift. The three contact quantities closely correlate with one another following the injection equation R C = √ρ C R S coth (L C /√ρ C /R S ), In contrast to n2D, the dependence of the three contact quantities on T is more complicated. From Figures In our devices with a large LC over 3 μm, the limiting factor in the injection equation coth (L C /√ρ C /R S )~1, which results in a relative concise relation between the three contact quantities: R C ~√ρ C R S . In this case, the trend of RC with different device parameters (e.g., n2D and T) can thus be readily understood in terms of the trends of ρC and RS. At 300 K, the best RC value is as low as 4.5 kΩ•μm (n2D = 8.2×10 12 cm -2 ), which is 2-3 orders lower in magnitude than those extracted from conventional contacts, Electron beam lithography (EBL) and Metallization. A bilayer of electron resists comprising methyl methacrylate (MMA, EL9) and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA, A4) was adopted in EBL to facilitate the subsequent procedures of patterning and lift-off of the contact electrodes on the bottom BN flakes. After electron exposure, the resist patterns were developed, rinsed, and blow dried with N2. Then, the contact electrodes (3 nm Ni/12 nm Au) were defined with a combination of thermal evaporation deposition and standard lift-off. Finally, the bottom BN flakes with defined electrodes were thermally annealed at 250 °C for 2 h in Ar/H2 atmosphere to remove the possible resist residues. Van der Waals assembly. To fabricate the BN-encapsulated FETs, individual flakes of BN and MoSe2 were initially mechanically exfoliated onto SiO2/Si substrates. A relatively thick BN flake was selected as a top encapsulator and picked up with a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) slab coated with poly(propylene carbonate) (PPC) polymer at 40 °C in a nitrogen glovebox. Afterward, the BN/PPC/PDMS trilayer stack was used to pick up MoSe2 flakes and transfer them to the bottom BN encapsulator with predefined contact electrodes to form a more complex hexa-layer stack. Then, the hexa-layer stack was heated at a softening temperature of 120 °C for the PPC layer above to release the encapsulated BN/MoSe2/contacts/BN structure from PDMS. Next, the BN/MoSe2/contacts/BN stack was cleaned with acetone and was thermally annealed at 350 °C for 2 h in Ar/H2 atmosphere to remove the bubbles and strain introduced during transfer. Finally, a metallic top gate and wiring pads (5 nm Ni/50 nm Au) were defined together by standard EBL and metallization. Ref. [15] , [16] , [42] , [40] , [41] Published at Chinese Physics Letters, 40, 068501 (2023) DOI: 10.1088/0256-307X/40/6/068501