The wide bandgap and strong covalent bonds of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) had long been thought to be chemically inert. Due to its inertness with saturated robust covalent bonds, the pristine 2D monolayer hBN cannot be functionalized for applications of energy conversion. Therefore, it is necessary to make the 2D hBN chemically reactive for potential applications. Here, we have computationally designed a single nitrogen (N) and boron (B) divacancy of the 2D monolayer hBN, noted by VBN defective-BN (d-BN), to activate the chemical reactivity, which is an effective strategy to use the d-BN for potential applications especially in electrochemistry. Single Pt atom adsorbed on the defective area of the VBN d-BN acts as a single-atom catalyst (SAC) which exhibits distinctive performances for O2 reduction reaction (ORR). First-principles based dispersion-corrected periodic hybrid Density Functional Theory (DFT-D) method has been employed to investigate the equilibrium structure and properties of the Pt-adsorbed 2D monolayer defective boron nitride (Pt-d-BN). The present study shows the semiconducting character of Pt-d-BN with an electronic bandgap of 1.30 eV, which is an essential aspect of the ORR. The ORR mechanism on the surface of 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN follows a 4e -reduction route because of the low barriers to OOH formation and dissociation, H2O2 instability, and water production on the Pt-d-BN surface. Here, both the dissociative and associative ORR mechanisms have been investigated, and it is found that the associative mechanism with the ORR pathway is more thermodynamically favorable. Therefore, it can be mentioned here that the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN exhibits a high selectivity for the four-electron reduction pathway. According to the calculations of the relative adsorption energy of each step in ORR, the Pt-d-BN is anticipated to exhibit substantial catalytic activity. These findings are significant because they provide an additional understanding of the ORR process on the metal atom-adsorbed d-BN and a new method for producing inexpensive materials with strong electrocatalytic activity for various applications of fuel cells. Now-a-days, researchers have an emphasis on working for clean and renewable energy sources to replace traditional ones, and most of the energy sources in our society are conventional energy sources such as coal, petroleum, and compressed natural gas (CNG). One of the drawbacks of using these conventional energy sources is the emission of greenhouse gases. New methods of producing clean and green energy, high-capacity energy devices, and effective manufacturing are needed to address problems like global climate change and energy requirements of the future. Fuel cells and metal-air batteries, which are used in solar cells, electric vehicles, and other applications, are promising technologies to meet future energy requirements. Additionally, it is demonstrated that the conducting edge states and vacancy defects in the hBN give rise to semiconducting characteristics. Hence, the hBN sheet supported by conducting materials could function as an ORR-active electrocatalyst. The hBN nanosheet, a structural counterpart of graphene, has also drawn great interest because of its special characteristics and vital applications. A microscopic understanding of the role of a catalyst in the form of 2D monolayer slab structure, molecular and atomic regimes is now possible because of the developments in the field of computational materials science. Recent developments in Gaussian basis sets, Gaussian-types of orbitals (GTOs), pseudopotential, and supercomputers have facilitated simulations for probing the surface phenomena of diverse catalysts, analyzing various catalytic activities, and examining the chemical reaction pathways. The periodic hybrid dispersion-corrected density functional theory (DFT-D) method B3LYP-D3 (based on first principles) implemented in CRYSTAL17 suite code was used to determine the equilibrium structures and properties of the 2D monolayer pristine hBN, VBN defective-BN, and Pt-d-BN materials studied here. Nørskov and coworkers developed a method for the analysis of several elementary stages, including various protonation states to characterize the O2 reduction reaction pathway and they proposed the possible reaction pathway. where * represents an active site of the catalysts, and these active sites adsorb the reaction intermediate species throughout the reactions. In the above two equations, the adsorption of protons (H + ) and electrons (e -) has been ignored. During the ORR process, these 4e -and 2e - transfer pathways result in the formation of H2O and H2O2 as the final product, respectively. We have focused here on both the dissociative and associative mechanisms because it has been found that both the mechanisms are thermodynamically and energetically favorable for the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material. For the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN, we have calculated the catalytic performance by evaluating the adsorption energy of the adsorbate at the catalytic surface at each reaction step during the ORR process. Also, the binding energy of protons (H + ) and electrons (e -) has been included in this calculation. The following equation has been used to calculate the adsorption energy (Eads) of the species that are present during the ORR process on the adsorption system (Pt-d-BN). Where Etotal, Eadsorbent, and Eadsorbate are the total energies of the adsorbed system, adsorbent (isolated Pt-d-BN sheet), and adsorbate species, respectively, in the gas phase. A negative value of Eads suggests that the process is exothermic, and it is occurring because the adsorbed oxygenated intermediates are attached to the thermodynamically stable surface of the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN. This material has been considered in the present study to explore all the reaction steps of ORR with respect to computational hydrogen electrode model (CHE) or standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). At first, we studied the equilibrium structure and electronic properties of the pristine 2D monolayer structure of the hBN sheet or slab. The 2D equilibrium structure of the hBN is depicted in Figures The results of DFT computation are accurate for gas species and solid surface reactions, and it is simple to compute the electrolytic processes at the gas-solid interface. Here, we have used a small segment of this Pt-d-BN material with one oxygen molecule adsorbed as a model for the ORR pathways to explain the reaction mechanism. After calculating the electronic properties and confirming the electronic semiconductivity of the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN, we were interested in learning more about the ORR activity of the given material as an electrode, more specifically, a cathode of a fuel cell. This may show excellent performance for launching the sluggish ORR in fuel cells. We have studied each of the reaction intermediates following the ORR mechanism depicted in Figure The 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN also shows high selectivity for the 4e -reduction pathway. By keeping the basal plane active, each of the reaction steps takes place at the Pt-site of the 2D monolayer of the Pt-d-BN material which indicates that Pt atom acts as a single-atom catalyst in the system. Table Equilibrium structural parameters, lattice constants, and electronic band gap (Eg) parameters of various systems of the ORR steps taken place on the surface of the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material. In the present study, we have investigated the electron spin densities of these various intermediate states formed during the ORR process, as shown in Figure The lowest energy level of the conduction band was obtained at -5.12 eV, whereas the highest energy level of the valence band was calculated at -7.22 eV, both at the K point, confirming that this reaction intermediate O2 * _Pt-d-BN has a direct band gap (Eg) and the value of Eg is about 2.09 eV, as illustrated in Figure Step In summary, we have computationally explored both the structural and electronic structural and lattice parameters (in Å) of the pristine hBN, VBN d-BN and Pt-d-BN materials obtained by the DFT-D method are summarized here.