Very recently, a report on possible room-temperature superconductivity in N-doped lutetium hydrides near 1 GPa pressure has drawn lots of attentions. To date, the superconductivity is not confirmed under relatively low pressure in subsequent studies. Based on the density functional theory first-principles calculations, we extensively investigate the influence of charge doping on the stability and superconductivity of LuH 3 at ambient pressure. Although electron doping can not stabilize LuH 3 , we find that the room-pressure stability of LuH 3 can be achieved by doping holes with concentrations in between 0.15-0.30 holes/cell. Moreover, our calculations reveal a positive dependence of superconducting transition temperature on the number of doped holes, with the highest value close to 54 K. These findings suggest that realizing superconductivity in hole-doped LuH 3 at ambient pressure is not impossible, although the transition temperature is still far away from the room temperature. Finding a superconductor that works at ambient conditions is the ultimate goal of superconductivity research. Guiding by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory Very recently, Dias et al. claimed the discovery of superconductivity in N-doped lutetium hydrides at 1 GPa, with T c being 294 K. The main phase that accounts for superconductivity was attributed to Fm 3m LuH 3-δ N ǫ , in which a color change from blue to pink and red occurs below 4 GPa It is known that Fm 3m LuH 3 is unstable at ambient pressure. To date, near-room-pressure stability of N-doped LuH The plane-wave method, QUANTUM-ESPRESSO The maximally localized Wannier functions were constructed on a 6×6×6 grid of the Brillouin zone. Three s orbitals of H atoms were used as an initial guess. The convergent EPC constant λ was extensively carried out through fine electron (72×72×72) and phonon (24×24×24) grids with Electron-Phonon Wannier (EPW) code Likewise, the number of doped holes is ranging from 0.05 holes/cell to 0.50 holes/cell. By examining the phonon spectrum, we find that the imaginary modes disappear with doping level in between 0.15 holes/cell and 0.30 holes/cell [Fig. FIG. To figure out the physical reasons that account for the en-hanced λ, we further calculate the Fermi surface nesting function ξ(q), EPC matrix element weighted nesting function γ(q), and q-resolved EPC constant λ(q). ξ(q), γ(q), and λ(q) read ξ(q) = 1 and respectively. ω qν is the vibrational frequency of phonon qν. m and n stand for the indices of energy bands. g nm k,qν denotes the EPC matrix element. ǫ n k and ǫ m k+q are the eigenvalues of the electronic states. N k represents the total number of k points in the fine mesh. For these two doping limits, the peak values of nesting function are almost unchanged, but the peak positions are shifted due to enlarged Fermi surfaces, as indicated by black arrows [Fig. Both the enlarged EPC matrix elements of Lu phonons and the softening of Oct-H phonons can give rise to the red shift of the spectral weight of α 2 F(ω). Simultaneously, the logarithmic average frequencies ω log are reduced from 36.90 to 36.44, 34.56, and 30.70 meV, accompanied by the increase of doping concentration. By solving the isotropic Eliashberg equations, we can determine the T c of hole-doped LuH 3 [Fig. In summary, we have performed first-principles density functional calculations to investigate the influence of doping on dynamical stability of LuH 3 at ambient pressure. We manipulate the total charge to simulate electron/hole doping. As uncovered by our calculations, doping holes is critical to realize ambient-pressure stability. Utilizing Wannier interpolation method, the EPC and phonon-mediated superconductivity in hole-doped LuH 3 are computed. The phonons of Lu and H atoms at the octahedral center provide glue to pair electrons. Specifically, the strongest EPC can be achieved under 0.30 holes/cell doping, leading to superconductivity with T c being 53.7 K. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first theoretical report about ambient-pressure superconductivity in doped LuH 3 .