With shrinking dimensions in integrated circuits, sensors, and functional devices, there is a pressing need to develop nanofabrication techniques with simultaneous control of morphology, microstructure, and material composition over wafer length scales. Current techniques are largely unable to meet all these conditions, suffering from poor control of morphology and defect structure or requiring extensive optimization or post-processing to achieve desired nanostructures. Recently, thermomechanical nanomolding (TMNM) has been shown to yield single-crystalline, high aspect ratio nanowires of metals, alloys, and intermetallics over wafer-scale distances. Here, we extend TMNM for wafer-scale fabrication of 2D nanostructures. Using Cu, we successfully nanomold Cu nanoribbons with widths < 50 nm, depths ~ 0.5-1 μm and lengths ~ 7 mm into Si trenches at conditions compatible with back end of line processing. Through SEM cross-section imaging and 4D-STEM grain orientation maps, we show that the grain size of the bulk feedstock is transferred to the nanomolded structures up to and including single crystal Cu. Based on the retained microstructures of molded 2D Cu, we discuss the deformation mechanism during molding for 2D TMNM. The ability to fabricate increasingly complex nanostructures is the backbone of numerous advances in wide ranging fields including catalysis Recently, thermomechanical nanomolding (TMNM), a technique whereby a bulk feedstock of a desired material is pressed through a nanoporous mold at elevated temperatures and pressures, has been shown to yield high aspect ratio single crystal nanowires over wafer-scale distances Here, we use TMNM to form 2D Cu nanostructures inside Si3N4/Si trenches. Using Cu feedstocks with varying grain sizes, we observe successful TMNM over millimeter length scales of 2D nanostructures with high aspect ratios up to 50. Importantly, the molded 2D Cu nanostructures retain the same grain size of the Cu feedstock, from nanoscale grains to single crystal. The conditions used for TMNM are back end of line (BEOL) compatible and scalable, enabling future integration with semiconductor processing. TMNM in 2D requires a bulk feedstock of the material of interest along with a mold (Figure The different microstructures observed in nanomolded Cu enable us to identify the potential growth mechanisms for TMNM in 2D. As with 1D, 2D TMNM is both time and temperature dependent with increased temperature promoting more complete molding. There is a slight pressure increase necessary to mold nc-Cu (30 MPa), μc-Cu (60 MPa), and sc-Cu (70 MPa). The lack of any consistent grain orientation in nc-Cu, the presence of grains in partially molded samples, and comparable grain size in molded Cu with grain size in the bulk feedstock indicate that the microstructure of the feedstock is conserved during molding. Finally, sc-Cu was only successfully nanomolded when {111} planes were aligned with the walls of the trench, matching what is expected from 1D TMNM. Here, we discuss differences between 1D and 2D TMNM. TMNM in 1D is driven by crystal reorientation at the base of the nanowire to minimize surface energy followed by interfacial diffusion along the mold wall The lack of grain rotation in the case of 2D TMNM in contrast to 1D TMNM can partially be attributed to different boundary conditions during molding. In 1D TMNM, there is a high probability for a random grain to have a set of {111} planes oriented on the mold walls as the mold wall surrounds the grain. In 1D TMNM, once the grain has the <110>-direction aligned with the molding direction, there will always be {111} planes aligned with the mold walls. In 2D nanomolding, the grain must be oriented such that the <110>-direction is in the molding direction and {111} planes align with the trench wall. Thus, 2D TMNM requires more grain rotation for proper alignment, which could become a large energetic barrier. Experimentally, this was observed for the single crystal Cu molding where misaligned crystals did not mold even at high pressures of ~100 MPa. We instead attribute the resulting microstructure observed in 2D TMNM to grain boundary diffusion and subsequent grain boundary sliding resulting from diffusion. The predicted length of the molded nanowire in 1D TMNM, L, is shown in Equation 1 where L0 is related to the entry effect during molding, p is the pressure, D is the diffusion constant, Ω is the atomic volume, t is the molding time, kb is Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, S is the cross-section area of the diffusion path, and A is the cross-section area of the mold. In 1D TMNM, interfacial diffusion of Cu on the mold surface drives formation of nanowires. For 2D TMNM, we include the contribution of grain boundary diffusion where DI is the interfacial diffusivity, δI is the interfacial diffusion thickness layer (~ 1 nm) Any appreciable grain boundary diffusion in polycrystal samples must occur simultaneously with grain boundary sliding to conserve volume, prevent void formation, and prevent grain overlap In conclusion, we successfully show 2D TMNM over large length scales making it a viable technique for wafer-scale fabrication of 2D nanostructures at BEOL compatible conditions. Since TMNM is a material-agnostic technique, the same approach can be used to fabricate 2D of a wide variety of compounds including other metals, alloys, intermetallics, and metallic glasses. The simultaneous control of both morphology and grain size during 2D TMNM can be useful for a wide array of applications where current nanofabrication techniques are the bottleneck for further advancements. In the context of interconnects, fabrication of high aspect ratio single crystal Cu nanostructures can greatly reduce resistivity by mitigating grain boundary scattering The following steps were taken to fabricate an 8-inch Si wafer with a 20 ~ 40 nm gap trenches with a 1 μm pitch: thermal oxidation for hardmask formation with a 200 nm gap (1 μm pitch), followed by a photolithography process with a KrF scanner (ASML, PAS 5500/700D), hardmask etching (Lam Research, EXELAN-HPT), photoresist stripping (PSK, DAS-2000), post cleaning, silicon trench etching (Lam Research, TCP-9400DFM), another round of post cleaning, and hard mask removal through hydrofluoric acid. Finally, low-pressure nitride deposition (Centrotherm, E1200) for gap shrinkage to the target gap of 20 ~ 40 nm. The etching conditions were as follows: a mixture of CF4, Ar, and O2 for the Bottom Anti-Reflective Coating (BARC) etching, C4F8, Ar, and O2 for the oxide etching, and He, SF6, and O2 gases for silicon trench etching. After dicing into 7 mm x 7 mm sections, the diced wafers are cleaned in piranha solution before being transferred into the argon glovebox for TMNM. Thermomechanical Nanomolding Nanocrystalline 9 μm thick Cu foil (99.8% purity) was purchased from MTI. Microcrystalline 25 μm thick Cu foil (99.8% purity) was purchased from ThermoScientific. No additional annealing or polishing was done on the foils. Before TMNM, the Cu foil is cleaned in acetic acid for 30 seconds followed by blow-drying to remove the native oxide layer For the single crystal sample, a pre-polished <110>-oriented Cu substrate was purchased from MTI. A Laue diffraction pattern was collected to determine the orientation of the (111) planes. From there the Cu substrate was rotated manually to orient (111) planes to be parallel to the trench walls before nanomolding. After TMNM, the Si was etched away using 15% KOH at 60°C followed by etching of the Si3N4 barrier layer using 5% HF. SEM cross-section imaging and EBSD SEM images were acquired using a Thermo Fisher Helios G4 UX Focused Ion Beam. EBSD maps were acquired using a Bruker eFlash HR EBSD in a Tescan Mira3 FESEM. The Cu foils were polished using a vibratory polisher with 70 nm colloidal silica for 3 hours for EBSD. Liftouts of Cu-filled trenches were made using a Thermo Fisher Helios G4 UX Focused Ion Beam with a final mill at 5 kV. STEM images were collected on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Spectra 300 S/TEM at 300 kV. The liftouts were initially tilted to align the Si on the <100>-axis, which is also the nanomolding direction. All 4D-STEM maps were collected on an Electron Microscope Pixel Array Detector (EMPAD). Grain mapping was done using Py4DSTEM 