We developed a resistance measurement using radio frequency reflection to investigate the electrical transport characteristics under destructive pulsed magnetic fields above 100 T. A homemade flexible printed circuit for a sample stage reduced the noise caused by the induced voltage from the pulsed magnetic fields, improving the accuracy of the measurements of the reflected waves. From the obtained reflectance data, the absolute value of the magnetoresistance was successfully determined by using a phase analysis with admittance charts. These developments enable more accurate and comprehensive measurements of electrical resistance in pulsed magnetic fields. In the study of metals and their transport properties, the measurement of electrical resistivity in high magnetic fields plays a crucial role. Conventional approaches for measuring magnetoresistance have relied on standard alternating current (AC) techniques, typically conducted at magnetic fields below 100 T, generated by non-destructive pulsed magnets. However, performing magnetoresistance measurements in higher magnetic fields exceeding 100 T has been a significant challenge, requiring the use of destructive pulse magnets such as a single-turn coil (STC). The STC, while capable of generating high magnetic fields up to ∼200 T, In previous attempts to measure the electrical resistivity of metallic samples in strong magnetic fields generated by the STC, several approaches were taken, including the four-terminal, In recent years, an alternative approach has been developed, Among the previous approaches, the RF impedance measurement, In this paper, we will introduce a setup for the RF impedance measurement utilizing a circulator instead of a directional coupler for the RF wave separation and an FPC for noise reduction. Furthermore, we present a novel analytical method for obtaining magnetoresistance data, where the reflection coefficient is treated as a complex number, incorporating the use of an admittance chart. In the following sections, we will explain the measurement setup, theoretical foundations, and practical data analysis using the result obtained with a non-destructive pulse magnet. We will also present the results obtained with an STC. Comparative studies with conventional methods will be included to highlight the advantages and limitations of our novel approach. The reflected waves from the sample were separated by the circulator or the directional coupler and recorded by the oscilloscope after passing through a bandpass filter. To prevent unwanted RF reflections at the input of the oscilloscope and to protect the oscilloscope from the spike noise induced by the field generation, external 50 Ω terminators were connected prior to the oscilloscope, and input impedances of the oscilloscope were set to 1 MΩ. The reflected waves and the reference waves were numerically treated with the lock-in technique, and the reflectance Γ = A 2 /A 1 and the phase shift θ = θ 2θ 1 were obtained, where A 1 and A 2 are the amplitudes of the ref-erence and reflected waves and θ 1 and θ 2 are the phases of the reference and reflected waves, respectively (See Fig. Measurements at low temperatures and under pulsed magnetic fields were conducted in a plastic or metal cryostat using a measurement probe consisting of a 10-cm-long FPC, a 90cm-long semi-rigid coaxial cable, and a fiber-reinforced plastic rod. The FPC fabricated by Taiyo Industrial consisted of a three-line microstrip array One of the test samples used for this work was kish graphite, which was micro-processed using focused ion beam (FIB) technology. The sample dimensions after processing were approximately 100 μm x 25 μm x 10 μm. The graphite sample was mounted on the FPC using gold wires and silver epoxy. Measurements in the non-destructive pulse magnetic fields were conducted at 4.2 K using liquid helium. The other test sample was YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 (YBCO) thin film grown on MgO substrate which was purchased from CERACO Ltd. The YBCO film has a slight excess of copper and shows the superconducting transition at ∼86 K. The YBCO film had a thickness of 500 nm and was cut into the dimensions of 1500 μm x 100 μm. Two different film samples were prepared from the same batch of YBCO film and used for the experiments at the STC (sample 1) and non-destructive magnet (sample 2). The measurements were conducted between 77.4-87.5 K using liquid nitrogen. In addition to the above test samples, small chip resistors ranging from 30 to 100 Ω were also mounted on the FPC, and the performance of the probe was checked under zero magnetic field at 77.4 K. To check the validity of our technique, standard 2-terminal resistance measurements were also performed using the same probe at low frequency (50 kHz) with a non-destructive pulsed magnet. The circulator or the directional coupler was removed and a shunt resistor was connected in series with the sample. The voltage between each end of the sample (V ) and the shunt resistor (V shunt ) was measured. The 2-terminal resistance of the sample was calculated by R = R shunt V /V shunt , where R and R shunt are the resistance of the sample and shunt resistor, respectively. The actual reflectance Γ S at the sample, which is the ratio between the amplitudes of the incident and reflected wave, and the phase shift θ can be transformed into polar coordinates to define the complex reflection coefficient where u and v are the real and imaginary parts of the complex coefficient, respectively. In this analysis, the sample connected to the FPC with wires was treated as a parallel circuit consisting of a real resistance R and a parasitic capacitance C 17 (See Fig. Complex numbers y = g + ib and ρ = u + iv are substituted into this equation, where g and b are the normalized conductance and susceptance, respectively. By comparing the real and imaginary parts of Eq. ( The relationship obtained from Eqs. ( A. Measurements with non-destructive magnet Figure Figure Figure In Fig. Therefore, the observed Γ vs R curves can be fitted by using where A is a parameter that relates to several factors such as the attenuation in the transmission line and coupling constant between the ports of the splitter/circulator/directional coupler. Table In Fig. Figure (3) and (4), they are converted into normalized conductance and susceptance. The resistance is obtained by R = Z 0 /g, and the susceptance B is calculated by B = b/Z 0 . The calculated resistance curves exhibit good agreements with the 2-terminal magnetoresistance measured at the low frequency of 50 kHz. By ignoring the imaginary part of ρ and substituting it in Eq. ( RF impedance measurements at 140 MHz were performed in STC, and standard 2-terminal resistance measurements at 50 kHz were conducted in the non-destructive magnet. The YBCO sample was immersed in liquid nitrogen. In the nondestructive magnet, magnetic fields up to 57 T were generated, and the magnetoresistance was measured in helium gas cooled by liquid nitrogen. In Fig. Figure We applied the RF impedance technique to perform magnetoresistance measurements in ultrahigh magnetic fields above 100 T. The use of a circulator instead of a directional coupler enhanced the separation of reflected waves. Replacing twisted pairs of copper wires with FPC and semi-rigid coaxial cables reduced the voltage induced by the pulsed field and improved the S/N ratio. Additionally, by treating the reflection coefficient as a complex number and utilizing an admittance chart, we achieved the separation of the magnetoresistance and the magnetosusceptance. These advancements provide more precise and comprehensive insights into the electrical properties of materials under magnetic fields. 