A physics-based computer model has been developed to support the development of volatile extraction from regolith of the Moon and asteroids. The model is based upon empirical data sets for extraterrestrial soils and simulants, including thermal conductivity of regolith and mixed composition ice, heat capacity of soil and mixed composition ice, hydrated mineral volatile release patterns, and sublimation of ice. A new thermal conductivity relationship is derived that generalizes cases of regolith with varying temperature, soil porosity, and pore vapor pressure. Ice composition is based upon measurements of icy ejecta from the Lunar CRater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) impact and it is shown that thermal conductivity and heat capacity equations for water ice provide adequate accuracy at the present level of development. The heat diffusion equations are integrated with gas diffusion equations using multiple adaptive timesteps. The entire model is placed into a Crank-Nicholson framework where the finite difference formalism was extended to two dimensions in axisymmetry. The one-dimensional version of the model successfully predicts heat transfer that matches lunar and asteroid data sets. The axisymmetric model has been used to study heat dissipation around lunar drills and water extraction in asteroid coring devices. There is growing interest in extracting water from the Moon Extraction of water on the Moon or Mars can be accomplished through strip mining with subsequent processing of the mined material or through in situ thermal techniques: injecting heat into the subsurface, providing a means for vapor or liquid to reach the surface, and collecting it in tanks. Methods on asteroids could be similar or could involve bagging the entire asteroid and heating or spallation of the rocky material with concentrated sunlight It is difficult to test extraterrestrial water extraction technologies on Earth because of the high preparation costs for realistic test environments: large-scale beds of frozen regolith in vacuum or Mars atmosphere chambers The application that led to the present effort is the World Is Not Enough (WINE) spacecraft concept, which is being developed by Honeybee Robotics under NASA contract The authors were team members for another application of this modeling: NASA's Resource Prospector mission (which was cancelled while in development). It was planned to prospect for water in the Moon's polar regions by drilling into the regolith, bringing up cuttings for physical and chemical analysis. One objective of the mission was to determine the temperature of the subsurface regolith around the drill sites. Unfortunately, drilling creates a lot of heat and experiments showed that it takes hours or even days for the soil to cool back to the original temperature. The mission's timeline cannot afford for the rover to sit so long in one location waiting to take a measurement. Modeling may be able to help solve this problem, too. The cooling rate around the drill bit should depend on the boundary conditions, which in cylindrical coordinates centered on the drill is the ice temperature asymptotically far from the drill. If the natural subsurface temperatures are relatively constant over distances comparable to the radius that was heated by drilling, then the asymptotic temperature will equal the original temperature at the drilling location. Therefore, measuring only the cooling rate at one or several depths down the drill bit should be adequate for modeling to determine the original temperature of the subsurface. The model will need to be populated with information obtained from the drill cuttings, including density of the soil and ice content as a function of depth, including possibly chemistry of the ice as measured by the rover's instruments. The measured drill torque may contribute to calculating the original density of the regolith with depth. If the model has accurate constitutive equations, then with these measurements as inputs the model can be run repeatedly using different boundary conditions until it correctly reproduces the measured cooling rates around the drill bit. This concept needs to be developed through modeling, which requires improving the model's constitutive equations, followed by comparison to ground testing before the mission. Mitchel and dePater (1994) developed a one-dimensional model of heat transfer for Mercury and the Moon. It included solar insolation at the surface, geophysical heat flux from the subsurface, and constitutive equations for heat capacity and thermal conductivity of the regolith. The model used a finite difference framework with the Crank-Nicolson algorithm. Here, the model methodology is extended in three ways. This extends the progress first reported by The 1D thermal model described above has been reproduced and extended to 2D axisymmetric form. The 2D heat flux equation in Cartesian coordinates is, where T is temperature, k is thermal conductivity of the material, ρ is density of the material, C is heat capacity of the material, and t is time. The equation is discretized for use in a finite difference model. The left-hand size of the discretized equation calculates the change in T from before to after one time step. The right-hand side could therefore be evaluated either before or after that time step. The Crank-Nicolson method is simply to average these two approaches where the radial and vertical directions are r and z, respectively, and the discretized radial distance is r j = jΔr = jΔz. Collecting terms with α = kΔt/[2(Δz) 2 ρC], (1 + α ) T i,j+1 (6) so the equation becomes where the indices for α were "linearized" for solvability by keeping them at n instead of n+1. The fourth order cross-derivatives are assumed to be very small and change slowly in time relative to Δt, which should be valid in realistic cases since the heat equation is diffusive and dissipative Subtracting the left-hand size of Eq. ( T ij * is defined apart from the constants of integration by the relationship, which is substituted into the right-hand side of (9), The derivatives commute, (1 + δ r 2 )T ij n+1 and (1 -δ z 2 )T ij * must therefore be equal with the correct choice of constants of integration for T ij * , Each term in this system of equations, can be represented as a tridiagonal matrix, so the tridiagonal matrix algorithm can be used to solve it efficiently. Since this is cylindrical coordinates, the centerline j=0 is a special case that can be handled using the method of discretization by The model is parameterized for thermal properties of the material below. It also incorporates radiative heat transfer at its surface using albedo, emissivity, and insolation parameters following Mitchel and dePater (1994) and Parameterizing the model's soil properties relies upon published measurements in the literature, cited below. Those measurements show that thermal conductivity is a function of temperature, porosity (equivalently, bulk density) of the granular material, and interstitial gas pressure. Appendix A summarizes the data sets that are used in this effort. Bulk density ρ of the regolith varies on the Moon with location and depth beneath the surface, but it is not well known for asteroids. Lunar values are chosen consistent with Apollo core tubes and other Apollo measurements. Asteroid bulk densities are typically determined by fitting the results of thermal modeling to the observed thermal inertias of the asteroids. Measurements by Rosetta during flyby of 21 Lutetia indicates the thermal inertia increases below the top few centimeters "in a manner very similar to that of Earth's Moon" An important question is whether thermal conductivity also varies with particle size distribution. Thermal conductivity for actual lunar soil has been found to follow the form, where K is in kelvins (temperature units), and where χ, A, and B are model parameters. For example, Apollo 12 soil sample number 12001,19 was measured by The heat flux field may be decomposed into two contributions. The first is the flux that would exist if radiative heat transfer could be switched off. A hypothesis is that parameter A in Eq. 15 should scale as a power law of the solid fraction of the material, where ν is soil porosity so (1 -ν) is the solid fraction, and A 0 and a are model parameters obtained by fitting the data. The second heat flux contribution is the additional flux field if radiation were switched back on. That additive flux includes both the radiative field in pore spaces and the additional flux in the solid material that provides continuity to the pore flux. A hypothesis is that this passage through both the solid and radiative regions produces the product of a power law of the solid fraction and a power law of the pore fraction, so the parameter B from Eq. 14 scales as, where B 0 and b are model parameters obtained by fitting data, and a is the same value as in Eq. 16. Thus, defining χ 0 = B 0 A 0 , the parameter χ from Eq. 14 scales as, The A i and χ i fitting parameters for the six fitted curves (i = 1,2, ... ,6) in Fig. with R 2 = 0.9948 and R 2 = 0.9901, respectively. Choosing integer values a = 2 and b = 1 also produces excellent fits to the data with R 2 = 0.9946 and R 2 = 0.9881, respectively, so the integers were chosen for elegance. The best fits with these exponents are shown in The first form of the generalized function for thermal conductivity is therefore, where A 0 = 6.12 × 10 -3 W/m-K and χ 0 = 1.82 for the basalt measured by To test Eq. ( More experimental work is needed to explain why some subsets of the data do not fit as well as others (e.g., 790 kg/m 3 data, or the middle temperatures of the 1500 kg/m 3 data). The equation is theoretically elegant but it is possibly too simple, or the experiment data might have errors due to sample handling or other deficiencies. The second functional form follows Chen found excellent fit using a ̂= 7.5, b ̂= 0.61, ĉ= 0.0022, and ε = 0.78. Lunar and asteroid regolith in vacuum are incompatible with liquid moisture content, so S r =0, which simplifies the equation to an exponential decay, Note this lacks a separate temperature-dependent term as in Eqs. ( This fits the Fountain and West data as shown in Fig. Alternatively, the fact that PC does not fit the form of Eq. ( The consistent curve shape for FW and Chen provides confidence that Eq. ( For asteroids, the volatile molecules are bound in the crystalline structure of the hydrated minerals and not generally in the form of physical ice. For the Moon, the volatiles include adsorbed molecules on the surfaces of the grains as well as solid ice mixed in the regolith. The contribution of ice to thermophysical properties of regolith is determined by its chemistry and its physical state: amorphous or crystalline, "snow" mixed in the pore spaces, solid ice cobbles like hail, etc. The thermophysical properties of amorphous ice can vary by orders of magnitude depending on density and microstructure The composition of lunar ice was calculated by Tony The saturation curves of these volatiles (NIST, 2017) shown in Fig. where d i and k i are the thickness and thermal conductivity of each layer. To firstorder approximation, which is the limit of accuracy considering the other unknowns, a mixture of dry regolith with ice grains would scale as water ice, then k bulk ~0.0013, not measurably changed. The mixed chemistry of ice cobbles can safely be ignored for modeling thermal conductivity. As volatiles are released, the increasing pore pressure will increase thermal conductivity by orders of magnitude as shown in Fig. where k PC (ν, P) represent the PC data and k(ν, 300K) is Eq. 26 based on FW data evaluated at T=300K (the temperature chosen to match the temperature of the PC data). k PC is evaluated at P = 0.5 Pa in the denominator, which is apparently below the "floor" where pore gas does not contribute significantly to thermal conduction in the soil as discussed below. Appended on the right side of each set of points is one data point Ratio = k Chen (ν)-k(ν,300K) k Chen (ν,0.5 Pa)-k(ν,300K) The general fitting function for this family of curves is, where P ̂= Max(P, P 0 ), and P 0 is the pressure below which is the "floor" of minimum conductivity. At constant pressure this reduces to the form of a single exponential, whereas Eq. ( The second term is the coefficient for the radiation term in T 3 . Radiation ought to be independent of gas pressure to good approximation in the rarefied conditions considered here so the additive form of Eq. ( was developed from data measured at T = 300K. Therefore, the T 3 in Eq. ( P ̂= Max(P, P 0 ) (36) P 0 = 13.68508622330367 pascals k 1 = 3.419683995668 k 2 = 1.3409114952195769 k 3 = 0.680957757428219 k 4 = 2.8543969429430347 k 5 = 0.000000037037037037 k 6 = 0.799089591748905 k 7 = 2.637142687697802 k 8 = 0.024344154876476995 k 9 = 0.04793741867125248 The decimal places are not all significant, but they are the exact values coded into the model. Quantifying significant digits of model parameters is left to future work when better empirical datasets are available, and when the knowledge gaps in the physics have been reduced. For specific heat this model uses a mass-weighted mixing model of ice and regolith. The contribution of the dry regolith is informed by the measurements previously made for Apollo soil samples and analogue materials. Fig. and by The specific heat of pure water ice was measured by The specific heats of the major volatiles in lunar ice are shown in Fig. Above the sublimation temperature of each component, the weighting is renormalized for the reduced mass. The heat capacity for the composite ice and for pure water are compared in Fig. Thermal conductivity of water ice, lunar soil, and 8.9 %wt water ice in lunar soil. The sublimation of water ice on the Moon at temperatures below the triple point is treated by in kg/m 2 /s, where M W is the molecular weight of water and R is the universal gas constant. Kossiacki and Jacek (2014) modified this by subtracting the partial pressure of the vapor P from the saturation pressure, When partial pressure reaches saturation pressure, then sublimation should cease. Here, the model will use the vapor pressure relationship provided by How it is modeled depends on which physical state is assumed. One simple way to model the exposed surface area of the ice Δs (in a cell toroidal of radius r about the model's axis because this is an axisymmetric model) is Δs = 2πrΔz σ where σ is a parameter based on expected physical state of the ice informed by the geological model. The net sublimed mass during the n th timestep in cell location (i, j) is therefore The mass of water in the regolith's pore spaces in the toroidal cell could be modeled as, Where φ ij is the fraction of the pore space filled by ice and ρ I is the density of the ice. A relationship is needed between σ ij and φ ij to represent the physical state of the ice. For now, the model uses the simplification σ ij = φ ij . Heat capacity is a simple scaling between ice and regolith heat capacities by the amount of each mass within a cell. Temperature in a cell may continue to rise even as ice sublimes until it reaches the triple point, because sublimation is a slow process at these temperatures and the system remains in non-equilibrium. In practical cases that have been modeled, the temperature never rose as high as the triple point. As sublimation occurs, the heat of fusion is subtracted from the internal energy of the cell and the temperature is lowered accordingly before time-stepping the model to calculate conduction of heat again. The gas and the solid components in each cell are assumed to have the same temperature. Hydrated minerals in asteroid regolith will release their volatiles as a function of temperature. For testing an asteroid mining prototype, it was economically beneficial to use lower temperature materials for early tests so a lower temperature simulant was developed using primarily epsomite, because it will release most of its water of hydration below 300 oC. Curves were obtained through Thermo-Gravimetric Analysis (TGA) to determine mass of released volatiles at each temperature increment. Examples of these curves are shown in Fig. where w is the weight percent (of a cell's material) that has sublimed, and T is in kelvins. The model does not modify the thermal conductivity of the solid fraction of the soil as mass is converted to vapor, although it should reduce that term because (especially with epsomite) a large fraction of the solid mass is lost, reducing the solid conduction contact network. That effect is offset by the increase in conductivity due to rising pore pressure as shown in Figure Only limited testing of the model has been performed. The following four cases demonstrate aspects of the thermal algorithms and the overall code structure with increasing complexity. The first case is one dimensional (1D) simulations of the lunar regolith heating and cooling in sunlight at various latitudes in comparison with Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) Diviner data per Fig. The lunar surface albedo as a function of angle and other parameters choices by Vasavada et al. were intertwined with choices of thermal conductivity to make their model match lunar data sets. where the "H parameter" is the single remaining model parameter. Values of H can be iterated until the model makes predictions that match observations of lunar surface temperature rising and falling as the Moon rotates in the sunlight. The value of H is thus a proxy to characterize how rapidly the soil compactifies with depth at each location on the Moon in some averaged sense. Following the choices of Vasavada et al., the thermal conductivity form in Eq. ( Ice content is set to zero. The specific heat is represented by Eq. ( to match lunar measurements. This should produce improved characterization of H. The second case is for equatorial conditions on asteroid 101955 rotating in sunlight. Fine tuning of the model has not been performed for the asteroid because adequate data sets from asteroids do not exist, but better data are expected soon from spacecraft missions currently in progress. Parameterization is therefore speculative. Many cases were modeled, and they produced similar results with differences that can be tested when the mission data become available. This particular case shown in Fig. Cooling curve displays subsurface information Sunset Temperature (K) Lunar "hours" after dawn of all three layers were assumed to follow Eq. ( The third case adds complexity by using the 2D axisymmetric version of the Crank Nicolson formulation while retaining the lunar soil property equations of the 1D model (following In these simulations, four different boundary temperatures Albedo and emission at the surface follow The fourth case integrated the fully set of new constitutive equations given by Eqs. coring device The simulations were performed both for terrestrial test conditions with a 1 bar background pressure in the regolith and for space applications with the pores initially in vacuum. The soil begins at 272 K temperature and the soil container's boundaries are kept at 272 K throughout the simulation. In each timestep, 200 W thermal energy is delivered to the inside walls of the corer uniformly along its heated surface, then it diffuses from the tube through the soil. Videos were created from the simulation data showing the resulting temperature and pressure fields in the regolith. Fig. Thermal volatile extraction modeling has been successfully developed for the 1D and axisymmetric 2D cases for asteroid and lunar regolith. The modeling includes parameterization for regolith thermal conductivity and heat capacity based on measurements of lunar soil samples, simulants, and terrestrial soil and ices. This is apparently the first time a soil constitutive model has successfully reconciled datasets for temperature, porosity, and gas pore pressure variables into a single equation. The model has been only partially tested. It produced excellent agreement with LRO Diviner data of the Moon and estimates of asteroid Bennu heating and cooling as they rotate in the sun. The 2D axisymmetric features have been demonstrated by simulating the Resource Prospector drill cooling after insertion into lunar soil. The model can also simulate the effects of ices upon the thermal conductivity and heat capacity of the lunar regolith. (For the asteroid case, ice is not expected as the volatiles are in the form of hydrated minerals.) The model is based on the assumption that lunar ice is crystalline rather than amorphous, which is supported by some data although the presence of amorphous phases cannot be ruled out. More work is needed to adapt the model to include the effects of amorphous ice. The model also successfully integrated equations for volatile release and gas diffusion along with the thermal diffusion equations, employing multiple, adaptive time steps to handle the different characteristic times of each part of the physics. The fully integrated model has been demonstrated for the case of a corer heating and extracting volatiles from asteroid regolith. Some or all data, models, or code generated or used during the study are available from the corresponding author by request: Mathematica notebook containing data from figures Figure 16. Specific heat of water ice and composite lunar ice. soil models Lunar data