Mid-infrared semiconductor lasers in photonic integrated circuits are of considerable interest for a variety of industrial, environmental and medical applications. However, photonic integration technologies in the mid-infrared lag far behind the near-infrared range. Here we present the monolithic integration of mid-infrared quantum cascade lasers with low-loss passive waveguides via butt-coupling. The passive waveguide losses are experimentally evaluated to be only 1.2±0.3 dB/cm with negligible butt-coupling losses. We demonstrate continuous-wave lasing at room temperature of these activeto-passive waveguide coupled devices. Moreover, we report frequency comb operation paving the way towards on-chip mid-infrared dual-comb sensors. The development of photonic integrated circuits (PICs) in the last decades has enabled high-speed optical transceivers and chip-scale photonic sensors. On InP-based monolithic integration platforms, on the other hand, both limitations can be overcome. Initially developed for optical communication applications, it now enables sophisticated PICs with more than 1000 components on a chip, including laser sources, photodetectors, modulators and various passive components. In order to achieve continuous-wave lasing of monolithically integrated QCLs, efficient optical coupling between active and passive waveguide sections and low passive waveguide losses are required. In this paper, we demonstrate such a system where light from an active QCL waveguide is coupled into a passive waveguide through a clean and smooth butt-joint. The waveguide core material is un-doped InGaAs with free-carrier absorption losses lower than 1 dB/cm. Since the active material and passive waveguide are grown in different steps, our approach offers high flexibility in epitaxial layer and waveguide structure. In particular, it can be applied to InP-based QCLs operating at any mid-infrared wavelength. In this work, we exemplify the approach based on QCLs lasing around 8 μm wavelength. The weak cavity dispersion observed in our devices enables frequency comb formation over a broad (∼60cm -1 ) optical spectrum. We experimentally verify comb operation by directly measuring the intermode coherence. A schematic of our monolithically integrated QCL design is shown in Figure Straight stripes of active material with a width of 35 μm and a spacing of 400 μm are then defined by contact photolithography using a 400 nm thick SiO x layer as etching mask. Wet etching is performed using 1:1:3 H 3 PO 4 :H 2 O 2 :H 2 O solution, which has a high selectivity of the QCL active region to InP. The anisotropic wet etching creates a 3.5 μm wide undercut below the SiO x hard mask layer. Next, passive material (i.e. undoped InGaAs) of 2.3 μm thickness is grown on the wafer by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE). The SiO x hard mask protects the active stripes from the epitaxial regrowth of InGaAs. A 50 nm thick InAlAs layer and 400 nm InP:Fe layer are then grown on the InGaAs layer to avoid currents flowing through the passive waveguide. After passive material regrowth, the hard mask layer is removed in hydrofluoric acid solution and a 500 nm thick n-doped InP cap layer (n= 5•10 16 cm -3 ) is regrown on the wafer. The homogeneously integrated QCLs are then processed using a standard buried heterostructure technique. A lateral layer of insulating InP:Fe is then selectively grown on the sides of the active and passive waveguides by MOVPE. The hard mask is removed and a 3 μm thick InP cladding layer is grown on the wafer again using MOVPE. In order to fully isolate the passive waveguide section from the electrical contact, a 200 nm thick SiN x layer is deposited. Afterwards, an ohmic contact on the top cladding layer is formed by Ti/Pt/Au deposition. The substrate is thinned down to 200 μm and Ni/Ge/Au is deposited as the backside contact on the InP substrate. In the end, the QCL wafer is cleaved into ridges with different passiveto-active ratios to form Fabry-Pérot (FP) lasers. Figure The light-current-voltage (LIV) characteristics of a 3 mm active, 2 mm passive device in pulsed operation (100 ns pulse width, 100 kHz repetition rate) is shown in Figure (∼ 300 nm) in the 8 μm wavelength range. The measured mode spacing between adjacent spectral lines is evaluated to be ∼0.3 cm -1 (8.7 GHz), which matches the free spectral range of the combined active-passive FP cavity of 5 mm length. In the following, we determine the waveguide losses of our monolithically integrated QCLs by analyzing the slope efficiency of devices with different passive waveguide lengths. The overall waveguide loss can be divided into four separate terms: mirror losses α M , passive waveguide losses α P , active waveguide losses α A and butt-coupling losses α B , which account for losses occurring at the active-passive interface. where e is the electron charge, η i the internal quantum efficiency, N p the number of periods in the QCL active region and ħω the emitted photon energy. By considering pulsed light-current measurements of three integrated QCLs with different active and passive waveguide lengths, both before and after HR coating, Equation 1 can be used to determine the individual loss terms. The measured slope efficiencies of six devices before and after HR coating are reported in Table Before HR coating, mirror losses are given by α M = -ln R 2 /2L, where R ≈ 27% is the reflectivity at one facet as obtained from the calculated modal index of 3.2. Here, L denotes the laser cavity length. After coating, the reflectivity of one facet approaches unity resulting in α M ≈ -ln R/2L. From these results and the observation that α P and α B vanish for the 2.5 mm only active device, α A can be directly calculated. Applying Equation 1 to the rest devices leads to α P = 1.2 ± 0.3 dB/cm and α B = 0.05 ± 0.02 dB, respectively. Details about the calculation can be found in Supplementary Materials. Numerical simulations predict a free-carrier absorption loss in the InGaAs passive waveguide of 0.7 dB/cm at 8 μm wavelength. This result indicates that the passive waveguide loss mainly originates from free-carrier absorption, with only minor contributions from scattering losses due to surface and sidewall roughness. It is worth noting that the QCL wafer used in this work was grown on an n-doped InP substrate (Si doped, n = 10 17 cm -3 ). Further reduction in free-carrier loss could therefore be achieved by using a substrate with lower doping concentration. Compared with previous results in Ref. 31, the lower index contrast between the waveguide core (InGaAs, n ≈ 3.4) and cladding layer (InP, n ≈ 3.1) in the buried heterostructure configuration leads to the lower passive waveguide loss. Monolithic integration of mid-infrared frequency combs with passive waveguides offers the potential to realize fully integrated dual comb sensors. Besides, it provides new possibili-ties to design and control mid-infrared frequency combs. In the following, we evaluate our monolithically integrated QCL sources in terms of comb performance, with the example of a 3 mm active, 0.5 mm passive device. A prerequisite for comb formation is a low group velocity dispersion (GVD) over the full spectral bandwidth. Another indication for comb formation is a narrow (≲ 1 kHz) intermode beat, 1 as it can be observed via the bias line of the device. In Figure In order to rigorously assess the coherence within the indicated region, we performed coherent beatnote interferometry, also often referred to as SWIFTS. In conclusion, we have presented the monolithic integration of mid-infrared QCLs with lowloss passive waveguides. The passive waveguide is fabricated by wet etching and a selective area growth technique. A clean and smooth butt-joint between the active and passive section This material is available free of charge via the internet at http://pubs.acs.org. LIV characteristics for devices with long passive sections (2.5 mm active and 4 mm passive, 1.5 mm active and 4.5 mm passive); calculation of the waveguide loss; measured GVD of monolithically integrated a QCL device with a 3 mm long active section and 2 mm long passive section.