Driven-dissipative physics lie at the core of quantum optics. However, the full interplay between a driven quantum many-body system and its environment remains relatively unexplored in the solid state realm. In this Letter, we inspect this interplay beyond the commonly employed stroboscopic Hamiltonian picture based on the specific example of a driven superconductor. Using the Shirley-Floquet and Keldysh formalisms as well as a generalization of the notion of superconducting fitness to the driven case, we show how a drive which anti-commutes with the superconducting gap operator generically induces an unusual particle-hole structure in the spectral functions from the perspective of the thermal bath. Concomitant with a driving frequency which is near resonant with the intrinsic cutoff frequency of the underlying interaction, this spectral structure can be harnessed to enhance the superconducting transition temperature. Our work paves the way for further studies for drivendissipative engineering of exotic phases of matter in solid-state systems. In the past decade, controllable light-matter coupling and Floquet engineering have emerged as powerful tools to tailor a plethora of phenomena in quantum manybody systems. This has permitted the exploration of novel out-of-equilibrium physics in the realm of quantum simulation as well as solid-state platforms. In the context of superconductivity, these tools have been shown to enhance Meanwhile, dissipative environments are ubiquitous, and help mitigate the problem of heating endemic to most interacting driven systems. Dissipation has also been developed as a resource to engineer correlated steady states especially for quantum computation applications In contrast, the intrinsic energy scales of solid-state systems (∼ 100 GHz) are comparable to the terahertz driving frequencies in state-of-the-art experiments, mak- In the anti-commuting case, the roles of particles and holes are exchanged in every alternating temporal Brillouin zone. This ensures the excitations unfavorable to superconductivity lie outside of the cutoff frequency ΩC , and consequently, the system is less susceptible to temperature change of the bath. (b,c) The time-averaged gap ∆0 as a function of temperature T for (b) ζ = +1 (H1 = a 2 τ0σy) and (c) ζ = -1 (H1 = a 2 sgn(kx)τzσy). In panel (c), ∆0 is also plotted in logarithmic scale in the inset. Here, Eq. ( ing the Lindbladian approach insufficient. A more general description of the complex interplay between the drive and the thermal bath requires a combination of the Floquet In this Letter, we explore how this interplay affects long-range order. Focusing on the example of drivendissipative superconductors, we address whether periodic driving enhances or reduces superconducting order. For static superconductors, the fitness criterion based on the commutator of the normal state Hamiltonian Ĥ0,k and the gap matrix ∆k quantifies the potential stability of superconducting states where Ĥ±1,k are the lowest order Fourier components of the drive Hamiltonian and ζ = +1 (ζ = -1) denotes the commutator (anti-commutator). Surprisingly, anticommuting drives re-order the particle-hole structure of the Floquet spectral functions, as depicted in Fig. Commuting drives, on the other hand, are generically detrimental to superconductivity. Our proposal is rather general and goes beyond standard mechanisms like dynamic squeezing of phonons We consider a time-periodic single-particle Hamiltonian coupled to a static bath where c k,s (b q,r ) are the fermionic annihilation operators of the system (bath) with momenta k (q) and internal degrees of freedom s (r), and Ψ k = (c k,s1 , c k,s2 , . . . ) T ; W k,q describes the weak system-bath coupling, while ξ q,r is the bath dispersion. We use the Floquet-Keldysh formalism in this Letter. The Shirley-Floquet formalism captures the time periodicity of the Hamiltonian by expressing it in the Floquet representation as where (F l ) m,n = δ m,n-l and N m,n = mδ m,n are matrices in Floquet space, see Supplemental Material (SM) This structure also applies to other quantities as Green's functions G and thermal distributions ρ. In the Keldysh formalism, the bath is the source of two effects Particularly, in the lab frame where the bath is static, ρ has a simple form in the Wigner representation as The drive induces an intrinsic relative rotation between the system and the bath, which cannot be eliminated in any rotating frame. A usual strategy to solve the driven system is to diagonalize the system Hamiltonian in Floquet space, H → H ′ = P † HP = H ′ 0 F 0 -ΩN, where H ′ 0 is the effective stroboscopic Hamiltonian, and the transformation operator P is a function of F l For example, for systems effectively described by a Lindbladian, we obtain a frequency-detuned thermal distribution ρ ′ (ω) = ρ(ω + Ω), which suggests the inadequacy of the effective stroboscopic Hamiltonian to comprehensively capture the full dissipative physics. More generally, a Floquet Fermi liquid is obtained From now on, we focus on the specific example of superconductors in the Nambu spinor basis Ψ k = (c k↑ , c k↓ , c † -k↑ , c † -k↓ ) T . The single-particle Hamiltonian of the superconductor Ĥl,k entering Eq. ( induces superconductivity in a specific symmetry channel characterized in the mean-field treatment by the spinsinglet gap matrix ∆k = d k τ y σ y . To evaluate the impact of drive and dissipation on the superconducting order, we treat the interaction in the mean-field limit using a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation generalized to the Floquet-Keldysh space where the trace is normalized tr 1 = 1, and the Keldysh Green's function is defined by Eq. ( Notably, using [P, F l ] = 0 and the invariance of trace under similarity transformations, the gap equation can be shown to be invariant under a general change of reference frame, see SM To investigate the effects of the intrinsic system-bath rotation, we consider a weak, sinusoidal drive with momentum-dependent amplitude a k implemented upon a superconductor with electronic dispersion with μ ∈ {0, z} and |a k | ≪ Ω . The driving frequency is at least comparable to the electronic energy scale Ω ≳ ε k . The weak drive motivates us to assume a priori that the gap is dominated by its time-averaged value ∆ 0 ≫ |∆ |l|≥1 |, where we have chosen the gauge ∆ 0 ≥ 0. This approximation captures the dominant features of the driven-dissipative superconductor by allowing us to write a Dyson equation for the Green's function as Here, ˆ G R k ≡ ĜR k (a k = 0) describes the non-driven system and can be solved as where By substituting the ansatz Eq. ( (a-c) The electron-hole spectral functions, (d-f) the anomalous spectral functions, and (g-i) the anomalous response functions [Eq. ( which validates Eq. ( The dominance of the static component of the order parameter indicates that the superconducting excitations can be characterized by the electron-hole spectral function A eh , the anomalous spectral function A an , and the anomalous response function R an of the l = 0 Wigner Green's functions, Notably, the spectral functions capture the driving effects on the superconductor, while the response function captures the thermal effects induced by the bath. The gap equation Eq. ( where Eq. ( The driving induces a specific Floquet structure in the spectral functions. For the non-driven system, ˆ G R k l=0 has two equivalent poles at ω + = ±E k reflecting the particle-hole symmetry imposed by the Nambu basis. The corresponding spectral functions are [Fig. where , which recovers a Dirac delta distribution L Σ→0 + (ω) = δ(ω) in the weakly dissipative limit. In contrast, the Green's function for the driven system ĜR k l=0 acquires infinitely many shifted poles at ω + = ±E k + nΩ, n ∈ Z. In the high-frequency limit Ω ≫ ε k for clarity, we find the lowest-order contributions to the spectral functions in the (n + 1)-th temporal Brillouin zone ω/Ω ∈ (n -1/2, n + 1/2] behave as [Fig. The following discussion is valid for large Ω up to Ω ≈ 2E k , in which case the drive induces a parametric resonance between the particle and hole excitations We now elucidate the role of the commutator, Eq. ( Ω , with J l the Bessel functions of the first kind, see SM In this case, the intrinsic system-bath rotation is detrimental to superconductivity, cf. Eq. ( In contrast, the anti-commuting case, ζ = -1, has more intriguing features. This can be realized by μ = z, ν = y, associated to a Rashba-like spin-orbit coupling. In the anomalous spectral function A an [Fig. We now discuss the effects of an anti-commuting drive on the gap equation, Eq. ( . Particularly, at large driving frequency Ω ≫ E k , these excitations are distant from the Fermi surface, and their contribution is much less sensitive to temperature. Consequently, the combined contribution from all four excitations is expected to be greater than the non-driven counterpart [Fig. We show how our scheme works for the simple scenario of a flat-band system with s-wave superconductivity and a drive associated with a Rashba-like spin-orbit coupling, i.e., To the order of O(a 2 /Ω 2 ), the anomalous spectral function can be approximated by where excitations lying beyond the cutoff frequency |ω| > Ω C are omitted. The corresponding gap equation for ∆ 0 in the weakly dissipative limit Σ → 0 + now reads where N is the total density of states. Dissipation with characteristic energies comparable to the gap ∆ 0 will suppress superconductivity The enhancement of superconductivity can be confirmed by a finite order parameter beyond the critical temperature of the non-driven superconductor T c0 = gN/2. At high temperatures T ≫ Ω, the gap of the driven superconductor exhibits an asymptotic behavior of ∆ 0 ∼ 1/T , with a first-order jump from finite to vanishing values at the temperature This result implies the existence of superconductivity at arbitrarily high temperatures for a resonantly tuned driving frequency δΩ → 0. We confirm our analysis by numerically solving Eq. ( In summary, the Floquet-Keldysh formalism, in conjunction with a generalization of the fitness criterion to driven superconductors, provides a framework to engineer specific drives to enhance the superconducting transition temperature We clarify the distinctions between our scheme with others in literature. Schemes for the enhancement of superconducting order based on phonon driving and squeezing Moreover, Ref. Our results indicate that the enhancement of the superconducting transition temperature is most pronounced for flat-band systems In addition, recent experimental developments have shown that it is possible to generate Floquet bands in van der Waals materials To conclude, inspired by the interplay between drive and dissipation in quantum optical systems, we have illustrated the capability of driven-dissipative engineering, specifically in tailoring superconducting order. This stimulates exploration and generalization of the technique to other ordered states of matter in solid state platforms. R.L. and R.C. acknowledge funding from the ETH Grant, and A.R. acknowledges financial support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) through an Ambizione Grant No. 186043. Rui Lin, 1 Aline Ramires, 2 and R. Chitra It maps the operator H -i∂ t to a tight-binding model along the synthetic Floquet dimension as . Specifically, F l and N are infinite-dimensional matrices in Floquet space. These matrices can be written down explicitly as and obey the following useful identities, This formalism makes the time dependence of the problem implicit by providing an effective Hamiltonian H, which can be solved using standard diagonalization techniques. The transformation operator P is composed of solely the matrices F l in Floquet space, with an ansatz [3] where S l are matrices in the space of H l . Upon the diagonalization in Floquet space, we obtain the effective stroboscopic Hamiltonian. The Green's function in the Shirley-Floquet formalism The components of the Shirley-Floquet Green's function are related to the Green's function G(t 1 , t 2 ) in the Schrödinger representation as where t ≡ (t 1 + t 2 )/2 is the time average and ω denotes the frequency associated to the time difference δt ≡ t 2t 1 . Notably, the Shirley-Floquet formalism duplicates the time-dependent system into physically equivalent replicas. Due to this redundancy of the formalism, the physical quantities in the Shirley-Floquet formalism can all be written succinctly in the Wigner representation, see Eq. ( We conclude this section by proving a crucial statement in the main text, P † ρ(ω)P ̸ = ρ(ω). For this purpose, we rewrite the transformation operator in the basis of F l as P = l∈Z P l F l , see Eq. (S5), where P l are matrices in the same space as H l . In this basis, we can observe a relation, ρ(ω)F l = F l ρ(ω + lΩ), between the thermal distribution ρ(ω) and the basis matrices F l . This relation allows us to write down where we have further used the fact that [P l , ρ] = 0 because they are in different spaces. When P indeed describes a time-periodic frame transformation, there exists n ̸ = 0 such that P n ̸ = 0. In this case, it can be seen that P † ρ(ω)P ̸ = ρ(ω). For example, in the simplest case where P n = δ n,1 , we obtain P † ρ(ω)P = ρ(ω + Ω). This indicates that in any time-dependent rotating reference frame, the thermal bath no longer provides an equilibrium thermal distribution. We use the Shirley-Floquet formalism developed above to calculate the Green's function corresponding to the Hamiltonian where we have suppressed the spin space for the current discussion, because it does not affect the commutation relation. We provide an analytically tractable example for many of the driven-dissipative effects discussed in the main text, particularly for the results related to a commuting drive, ζ = 1. Note that, because the drive is in the normal state, i.e. τ 0 or τ z Nambu sector, it commute with the dispersion τ z by construction. Therefore, our discussions below are valid for all drives which commute with the gap operator. In the Shirley-Floquet representation, the Hamiltonian of the driven system can be rewritten as The commutativity between the drive and the rest of the Hamiltonian allows us to diagonalize the Hamiltonian using as where J n are the Bessel functions of the first kind. Particularly, we have used the identities in Eq. (S4) and the Taylor expansion It can be subsequently recognized that the Hamiltonian in the rotating frame is exactly the same as the Hamiltonian of the non-driven system H ′ = H ≡ H(a = 0). Since H ′ is diagonal in Floquet space, its Green's function can be solved by inverting the individual static replicas as [cf. Eq. ( with E = ε 2 + ∆ 2 0 . The Green's function of the driven system in the lab frame can finally be solved as This is equivalent to the expression shown in the main text, and is also consistent with the approximations Eq. ( In the absence of the coupling to a thermal bath, the different Shirley-Floquet Hamiltonians describing the same system in different frames, i.e., H and H ′ , should be physically equivalent. This is because they are related by a transformation operator P. This can indeed be reflected in the retarded/advanced Green's functions and thus the spectral functions, when all excitations are taken into account and integrated over, where we have used the identity ∞ n=-∞ J n (x)J n+l (x) = δ 0,l . Specifically for the commuting case with ζ = 1, because H ′ = H(a = 0), the drive has no physical effect and can be rotated out completely in the absence of the thermal bath, as soon as the system reaches equilibrium. Nevertheless, when the coupling to the thermal bath is considered explicitly, we need to refer to the Keldysh Green's function and the response function. These quantities are indeed sensitive to the drive, where we have used the concavity of tanh(x), ∀x > 0. This indicates that a commuting drive generally suppresses the excitaitons and effectively heats up the system. We discuss the behaviors of the oscillating components of the order parameter ∆ l̸ =0 . For clarity of the discussion, we can rewrite the gap equation [Eq. ( Notably, the Floquet space has a repeating structure as expressed by the Wigner representation, cf. Eq. (S8), particularly upon integration over ω. Therefore, the trace in Floquet space tr F A essentially extracts the entry A (0,0) of the Floquet matrix. We start by proving the frame invariance of this gap equation, with a general change of time-dependent reference frame expressed by its operator P in Floquet space. Upon the transformation, all the normal state, the superconducting gap, and the bath are subject to the mapping, FIG. However, because generally P can be expanded in the basis of F l [cf. Eq. (S5)] and thus [P, F l ] = 0, we immediately observe upon the change of reference frame. Particularly, we have used the invariance of trace upon similarity transformation in Floquet space. We now proceed to prove that time-constant component of the gap ∆ 0 is indeed dominating over the oscillating components ∆ l̸ =0 . For this purpose, we further rewrite the gap equations Eq. (S19) in the specific choice of the lab frame and ∆k = d k τ y σ y , where Specifically, we have also taken explicitly into account the generalized fluctuation-dissipation theorem [Eq. ( where μ ∈ {0, z} and ν ∈ {0, x, y, z}. We also focus our discussion at low temperatures T ≪ Ω, and with the drive at near resonant to the cutoff frequency Ω C ≈ Ω. The behaviors of T l are depicted in Fig. We first consider ∆ ±1 , which are related to the Green's functions in the first Wigner families (G R k ) l=±1 . To the order of O(a 2 /Ω 2 ), these Green's functions are approximated by [cf. Eq. ). Interestingly, ∆ ±1 vanishes unless the drive is in τ 0 σ 0 sector or the same sector as the dispersion, i.e. τ z σ 0 . Otherwise, tr τ σ [(G R k ) l τ y σ y ] = 0 as the drive rotates the order parameter into a sector orthogonal to the interaction channel. This argument in fact also applies to all odd Fourier components of the gap, ∆ l , l ∈ 2Z + 1. As a result of the vanishing ∆ ±1 , a frequency doubling in the order parameter is predicted. We then consider ∆ ±2 related to (G R k ) l=±2 . As a result of the cutoff Ω C , the dominant excitations of the Green's function are the ones located at ω = ±(Ω -E k ). A similar argument as above shows that ∆ ±2 generally do not vanish, but rather scale as a 2 /Ω 2 . Considering the thermal distribution which behaves as At very low temperature T ≪ E k , ∆ ±2 are thus suppressed exponentially in a similar way as all other oscillating components, regardless of the driving amplitude a/Ω, and our a priori assumption that the constant component ∆ 0 dominates is thus valid. On the other hand, when the temperature is comparable to the energy scale of the system T ∼ E k ≪ Ω, ∆ ±2 ∼ a 2 /Ω 2 become sizable, and its omission might be inappropriate. This is confirmed in our numerical solution of the gap equation for the driven-dissipative flat-band superconductors. See Fig. We have thus shown the insignificant contributions of the higher harmonics. This also indicates the robustness of our scheme with respect to the existence of higher harmonics in the driving. Even though these higher harmonics are unavoidable in realistic experimental implementations, they only induce shifted poles beyond the third temporal Brillouin zones, which are suppressed by the cutoff frequency. We complement our results for flat-band superconductors in the main text by more general calculations for dispersive superconductors. More specifically, we consider the weak coupling limit where the summation over momentum can be replaced by an integral over energy as k → N (ε F ) Ω C -Ω C dε, where N (ε F ) is the density of states near the Fermi surface. Similar to Eq. ( The diverging parametric resonance seen in the low-order Dyson equation becomes smoothened when all orders are taken into account. We show the numerically evaluated weight of the shifted excitation at R an ε (ε -Ω) as a function of the dispersion ε in Fig. Therefore, we can proceed to investigate the superconducting transition temperature and the validity of its enhancement for dispersive systems For this purpose, we write down the self-consistency gap equation corresponding to the response function, The transition temperature of the driven superconductor can be estimated by imposing ∆ 0 = 0, which yields the equation for T c as where γ ≈ 0.577 is Euler's constant. The transition temperature T c for the driven superconductor is thus approximately related to the non-driven critical temperature T c0 = T c (a = 0) as We have thereby shown that the driven-dissipative enhancement is qualitatively recovered for the dispersive superconductor. This is again confirmed by a numerical solution of the gap equation, as shown in Fig. 