Innovative new materials are consistently emerging as electrode candidates from lithium-ion battery research, promising high energy densities and high-rate capabilities. Understanding potential structural changes, morphology evolution, degradation mechanisms and side reactions during lithiation is important for designing, optimising and assessing aspiring electrode materials. In-situ and operando analysis techniques provide a means to investigate these material properties under realistic operating conditions. Here, we demonstrate an operando spectroscopic method using photonic crystal-structured electrodes that uses the optical transmission spectrum to monitor changes to the state of charge or discharge during lithiation and the change to electrode structure, in real-time. Photonic crystals possess a signature optical response, with a photonic bandgap (or stopband) presenting as a structural colour reflection from the material. We leverage the presence of this photonic stopband, alongside its intricate relationship to the electrode structure and material phase, to correlate electrode lithiation with changes to the optical spectrum during operation. In this work, we explore the optical and electrochemical behaviour of a TiO2 anode in a lithium-ion battery, structured as an inverse opal photonic crystal. In principle, the operando technique demonstrated here is versatile and applicable to a wide range of electrochemical electrode material candidates when structured with ordered porosity akin to a photonic crystal structure. The growing popularity of smartphones, electric vehicles and wearable electronic devices, alongside their associated high energy demands, has driven the research for lithium-ion battery (LIB) materials towards achieving higher energy densities, higher cycling stability, longer lifespans, safer battery cells, lighter and more flexible designs Mainstream commercial uptake of these alternative electrode materials or designs requires detailed information on side reactions, degradation mechanisms, particle cracking, morphology evolution, material phase changes and state of charge heterogeneity in order to assess the health and long term stability of these potential electrodes in functioning cells Development and progress related to in-situ and operando techniques in the literature has taken many forms, cleverly utilising a variety of different analytical techniques to probe aspects of LIB behaviour. In-situ x-ray diffraction (XRD) has been used to track structural changes and reversibility in anatase TiO2 electrodes Critically, each of these techniques offers an insight into LIB operation which cannot be obtained through conventional ex-situ methods. Recently, operando and in-situ optical characterisation techniques have begun to emerge. Optical scattering intensity from electrode materials and particles has been used to track phase transitions and state of charge in specific materials Adopting optical probes provide many opportunities to evaluate mechanical/volumetric changes, interfacial species changes, electrolyte composition and absorption characteristics related to electronic processes with materials, to name a few possibilities. While invasive probes prove useful to evaluation cell-level state of health in batteries, there are challenges in assessing how active material interconnection and changes can be tracked in real-time, a problem that lies between spectroscopic identification of surface species or changes and electrode-level response. Here, we take an approach to develop an operando electrode characterisation technique that exploits the unique characteristics of photonic crystals (PhCs), where the periodicity in material refractive index creates a pseudo photonic band gap, somewhat analogous to the electronic band gap in semiconducting materials, to disallow propagation of certain frequencies of light. More specifically, we leverage the presence of the photonic stopband in inverse opal (IO) structured TiO2 anodes to monitor the behaviour of the electrode non-destructively during reversible lithitation-induced changes to the interconnected active material. Electrodes incorporating an IO PhC design have been explored to a large degree in the literature, and serve as model electrodes for investigating porosity and the influence of interconnection between active materials without binders or additives While ordered and interconnected porous materials such as inverse opals have show very good stable response in LIBs using a range of cathode and anode materials, there remain some opens questions on how such electrodes vary during cycling since it has been assumed that porosity (acknowledging the gravimetric and volumetric energy density penalty) is believe to facilitate the typical volumetric change, while the interconnected nature maintains electrical conductivity The optical probe is based on an angle-resolved transmission measurement arrangement (Figure A common method, of which there are a few, used to calculate the n eff is based on a volume averaging of the IO refractive index n IO , with volume fraction φ IO (typically, φ IO = 0.26) , and the background filling material refractive index n bg , with volume fraction φ bg (typically, φ bg = 0.74), as: Our previous work Measurements with TiO2 IOs show that a reduced interplanar spacing is present in TiO2 IOs prepared this way Since the approach is sensitive to changes in both material refractive index and periodicity or dimension, the fundamental electrochemical response was defined at the outset. Figures The operando monitoring of the TiO2 IO electrode immediately revealed some significant effects on the appearance of the transmission spectra, compared to the initial spectra prior to cycling. One such effect is visible in Figures Intercalation-mode Li-ion battery material involve reversible lithium insertion and removal during each cycle. This often results in volumetric swelling, sometimes causing cracking in cyclic swelling/contraction cycles, among other effects. Determining the relative contributions of composition (thus refractive index) changes and physical (dimension) changes is difficult and they are often measured separately. Our approach couples both parameters and we find that real-time monitoring of these processes exhibits cyclic behaviour coincident with the charging and discharging cycles. Here, this effect is shown for a typical CV cycle (0.2 mV/s) but we observe this cyclic process in every cycle during voltammetric measurements and also during galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles. The transmission intensity constantly, and reversibly, responds to the operating voltage and thus, the level of lithiation of the electrode i.e. the mole fraction of Li in LiχTiO2. This identifies an effective refractive index change and not a change to the dimensions of the TiO2 electrode during lithium uptake or removal. Several of the operando spectra in Figures V. Likewise, during charging the most pronounced recovery in the transmission intensity is found in the operando spectra recorded between 2.1 -2.3 V. Considering that for TiO2, the lithium insertion reaction in the discharge occurs at ~ 1.63 V and the lithium removal reaction occurs at ~ 2.20 V, as per the CV data, there appears to be a strong correlation between the expected mole fraction of lithium content in the electrode and the transmission intensity. Greater lithium mole fractions in the electrode clearly cause a suppression of total optical transmission. The drops in transmission intensity are consistent across multiple cycles. Cyclic opacity in the electrode is thus linked to the state of charge or depth of discharge. For example, during the lithiation of the electrode in the discharge process, voltages between 1.7 -1.5 V are the onset of more optically opaque electrodes and this voltage window in a typical galvanostatic discharge process coincides with an increase in the lithium mole fraction in LiχTiO2 from χ ~0.1 to χ ~0.25. Beyond the overall optical transmission intensity changes during cycling, which track the reversible lithiated state of the electrode, spectral features near the photonic band-gap of the ordered macroporous electrode can reveal much finer changes in the optical profile and so the dimensions and changes to the TiO2 IO. As per eqns. ( By that this red-shift is closely linked to the properties of the photonic stopband and of the reversibly lithiated electrode as a whole and, critically, not an isolated or abnormal change to the transmission/absorption properties of the material in a specific region of the spectrum. Referring back to eqn. (1), there are two possible explanations for the red-shift in the photonic stopband: an increase in d 111 (the out-of-plane interplanar spacing of the photonic crystal) or an increase in n eff (the effective refractive index). Considering the small magnitude of the red-shift to the photonic stopband, changes to either of these parameters would also be minor. In this study, some of the larger shifts in stopband position were on the scale of ~10 nm. In galvanostatic charge/discharge tests a 10 nm stopband red-shift was recorded after 70 cycles compared to just 7 cycles and in CV tests at 0.1 mV/s a stopband red-shift of 11 nm was recorded between cycle 1 and 5. The corresponding changes to the electrode parameters correspond ∆d 111 = 3 nm or ∆n eff = 0.025, assuming the optical shift can be attributed solely to each parameter and not some combination of both, overall constituting very small changes to the system properties. These miniscule modifications to the electrode system are difficult to detect accurately by experimental means, e.g. in situ or operando microscopy measurements require sensitivity to track the slight changes to d 111 which are of the order of ~1% of the overall interplanar spacing of the macroporous electrode, and photoelectron or energy loss spectroscopy analysis of the surface/interface rely on specific cell designs to confidently probe the region of interest. Tomographic or CT-methods could visualise structural changes, but the sensitivity of the spectral shifts used in this work provide high fidelity tracking of very small, but systematic, changes to the overall electrode during each cycle, and over the full cycle life, both together. Consequently, for the TiO2 IO electrode system examined here, it is currently difficult to uncouple the minor shift in photonic stopband position and attribute its origin to either a change in d 111 or n eff , or, some combination of both parameters. The PhC electrodes examined in this work consisted of 8 -10 layers of IO material (see Supplementary Operando optical transmission spectra in conjunction with electrodes adopting an IO design have been shown to be capable of providing an optical assessment of the degree of lithiation and electrode cycling behaviour. Through close monitoring of the transmission spectra during operation, the operando optical spectra reveal an intricate relationship between the magnitude of the transmission intensity and the nominal lithium content in the electrode at various operating voltages. Drops in the overall transmission intensity correlate to higher uptake of lithium content in the electrode; a remarkable reversibility is seen in the inverse process as the intensity recovers at the onset of voltages corresponding to lithium extraction from the electrode. Cyclic variability in the optical transmission intensity is shown to relate directly to the state of charge of the electrode, linking the electrode optics to the electrochemical performance. Another optical effect which shows great promise is the structural colour inherent to the IO PhC, exhibiting a direct response to repeated cycling. A gradual red-shift of the photonic stopband is incurred over the course of multiple cycles, establishing a visual colour indicator of the electrode behaviour and history. From the data sets reported here, it would appear that this shift in stopband position is linear with cycle number and, more importantly, predictable. An observable structural colour for an electrode linked to the cycle number has the potential to chronicle the electrochemical performance, provided the optical behaviour of the IO material is reasonably well-understood or characterised. Taking the broad applicability of this technique into consideration, with it being feasible for a wide range of electrode materials which can adopt an IO structure or be made to mimic one, the operando optical analysis explored here is versatile enough to inform on electrode phase and structural evolution while relating this information back to expected levels of lithiation during the cycle. This method shows great promise in assessing and diagnosing material performance, furthering our understanding of potential electrode candidates by closely monitoring their fundamental material properties alongside their electrochemical evolution. Polystyrene spheres in an aqueous suspension were used to form the sacrificial artificial opal templates for the IO structure. Monodisperse sphere suspensions, with a concentration of 2.5 wt% polystyrene, were purchased from Polysciences Inc. and used, as received, for forming the opal templates via dip-coating. In this work, spheres were purchased with diameters in the ranges of approximately 370 -380 nm and 490 -500 nm, depending on the application. A sulfate ester used in the preparation process of the polystyrene spheres bestowed a slight negative charge to the spheres. Opal templates were prepared on glass substrates which had been pre-cut into 2 × 1 cm 2 pieces. The glass substrates were first cleaned via successive ultrasonication (at a frequency of 40 kHz) in acetone (reagent grade 99.5%; Sigma-Aldrich), isopropyl alcohol (reagent grade 99.5%; Sigma-Aldrich) and deionised water, for 5 minutes each, in order to remove any dust or dirt particles by physical agitation. Following the cleaning process, a 1 × 1 cm 2 surface on the glass substrate was exposed to UV-Ozone treatment using a Novascan PSD Pro Series cleaner for a period of 1 hour, in order to promote surface hydrophilicity, immediately prior to immersion in the aqueous sphere suspension. Treated substrates were dip-coated into pre-heated vials of sphere suspension at a rate of 1 mm min -1 which was maintained at a temperature of approximately 50 °C. An MTI PTL-MM01 dip-coater was used for all dip-coating processes. Glass substrates were immersed at a slight incline angle (~ 10 -20°) to the vertical in order to improve the adhesion of the polystyrene spheres to the surface. Upon immersion into the suspension, the substrate was held still for 5 minutes to the allow the surface of the suspension to settle and allow a stable meniscus to form with the substrate. Finally, the substrate was withdrawn from the suspension at a rate of 1 mm min -1 with the polystyrene spheres arranging themselves into an ordered colloidal crystal template during extraction. TiO2 inverse opals were prepared using the sol-gel synthesis technique to infiltrate the voids in a prepared sacrificial opal template. In this technique, a liquid (sol) precursor is introduced into the air voids of an opal template. Ambient moisture or applied heat to the infiltrated template allows the sol to hydrolyse, condense or crosslink to form a solid material (gel) which resides in the interstitial voids of the opal template. Annealing the samples at high temperatures is often performed to create crystalline materials. For the TiO2 IOs prepared in this work, a 0.1 M TiCl4 solution in isopropyl alcohol was utilised as the sol-gel precursor. A titanium (IV) chloride tetrahydrofuran complex (TiCl4•2THF 97%; Sigma-Aldrich) was used as the source of TiCl4; the precursor solution was magnetically stirred for 24 h before use, at which point the solution was clear in colour. For the sol-gel infiltration process, the TiCl4 solution was drop-cast using a syringe onto opal templates. One or two drops of the precursor was applied, just enough to adequately wet the entire surface of the photonic crystal. Special care was taken to not flood the sample with excess precursor, which can create solid layers of material which may sit atop any potential IO structure. The sacrificial opal template was subsequently removed via calcination in air at 450 °C for 1 hr with a heating ramping rate of 5 °C min -1 . The high temperature allowed for both the removal of the opal template and for the crystallisation of the TiO2 material to anatase phase TiO2. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out using a Zeiss Supra 40 high resolution SEM at typical accelerating voltages of 15-20 kV. The instrument was used to analyse the morphology of the opals and IO PhCs, and the metal film morphology or thickness. Dimensional analysis for feature size distributions from SEM images were measured using IMAGEJ software. Microscopy analysis was performed on selected samples before and after electrochemical cycling. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis was also performed on the same SEM instrument using an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. EDX line scan measurements were obtained in several directions across the surface. EDX analysis was particularly useful for detecting the presence of residual electrolyte salt in post-cycling images, often presenting as enlarged IO walls. EDX analysis could screen for elements present in the electrolyte salt and ensure that post-cycling images were free from any salt contamination, please see Supplementary Materials Figs. S11 and S12 for further details. Raman scattering analysis was used to characterise the prepared TiO2 IO films. The analysis was useful for identifying the material phase of TiO2, with modes corresponding to anatase phase TiO2 detected here (see and ensuring it remained upright during analysis. Two protruding holes from the top of the cap were used to allow for electrical wire connections to the electrodes. A stereolithography (SLA) vat polymerisation 3D printer was used for constructing 3D models. Here, a Formlabs Form 2 3D printer, featuring a 250 mW laser operating at 405 nm, was used. High temperature resistant resin from Formlabs was used, on merit of its strong structural composition and high deflection temperature >210C, in order to resist possible degradation from electrolyte vapour during operation. A hot glue gun and Kapton tape (Bemis Company, Incorporated) were used to seal openings in the cell and keep it hermetically sealed. All cells were assembled in an inert atmosphere, in this case inside a glovebox in an argon environment. Optical transmission spectra were recorded using an Ocean Optics Inc. USB2000 + VIS-NIR-ES UV-visible spectrometer which features an operational wavelength range of 350 -1000 nm. An unpolarised tungstenhalogen lamp with an operational wavelength range of 400 -2200 nm purchased from Thorlabs Inc. was used as the broadband light source for recording spectra. For spectra recorded in air, 100% transmittance was normalised to the transmission spectrum of a clean blank piece of glass, allowing the spectra of TiO2 IOs on glass to be recorded relative to the spectrum of glass. Similarly, for the spectra recorded in 0.1 M LiPF6 electrolyte, 100% transmittance was normalised to the transmission spectrum of a clean blank piece of glass suspended upright in the electrolyte. For all spectra recorded in this work, the angle of incidence between the normal from the photonic crystal surface and the incident light was fixed at 0° incidence. For recording measurements over long periods of time (e.g. operando spectra recorded over many different electrochemical cycles), transparent battery cells were clamped in place to prevent any movement of the sample. This is an important consideration as there is some spectral variance experienced between different sample spots on the same IO electrode; clamping the cell in place ensured that the spectra were consistent and, importantly, recorded from the exact same sample spot. Electrochemical testing was carried out using a Biologic VSP potentiostat/galvanostat instrument. TiO2 IO electrodes were tested in a half-cell arrangement, as the working electrode, with lithium metal acting as the counter and reference electrode. The mass loadings for the TiO2 IO electrodes were within the range 0.1 -0.2 mg. Figure In the main text, we described how a custom electrode needed to be designed to circumvent issues with substrate transparency for conductive oxide glasses. The final electrode design uses a non-conductive glass substrate to support the active material (a TiO2 inverse opal) with 20 nm of Ni metal deposited over the entire surface to act as a current collector layer. The thin layer of metal acting as the current collector layer is not ideal in terms of conductivity, yet thicker layers could not be used due to the need for optical transparency. Ideally, the conductive layer would be highly transparent to optical wavelengths. For this reason, glass substrates with fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) layers were first tested as potential conductive substrates for TiO2 IOs. Figure The optical transmission spectra for a TiO2 IO, prepared on an FTO substrate, in an air and electrolyte background is shown in Fig. An important consideration, for tracking the photonic stopband of the TiO2 IO electrodes, is that the structural order of the IO is maintained during cycling. The photonic stopband is sensitive to the repeating lattice structure and the refractive index of the IO material. Hence, it is important to establish that the long range order and periodicity of the IO is retained after electrochemical cycling. Figure In the main text, a large drop in transmission intensity, occurring over the first electrochemical cycle only, was attributed to the formation of NiO from the Ni metal deposited over the surface to act as a conductive layer. Using a potential window of 3.0 -1.0 V for testing the TiO2 active material, the reconversion of NiO to Ni metal does not occur as this reaction potential is reported as occurring below 1.0 V 1 . This restricts the conversion reaction of Ni to NiO to the first discharge only, linking this reaction to the drop in overall transmission intensity after the first cycle. This effect was discussed in some detail in the main text. However, an optical effect which was only briefly mentioned was the effect of this supposed conversion of Ni metal to NiO on the position of the photonic stopband. Referring to eqns. ( Figures Many works with TiO2 IO electrodes, prepared on stainless steel substrates and using traditional coincell set-ups, feature much higher coulombic efficiencies with values close to 100% The TiO2 IOs used to investigate the operando optical effects in the main text were prepared using polystyrene sphere templates with diameters in the 370 -380 nm range. In terms of the optical effects observed from the operando transmission spectra, a cyclic fluctuation of the electrode transmittance and a gradual red-shift of the photonic stopband position with cycling are observed for all TiO2 IO electrodes tested. For the red-shifting of the photonic stopband position, it is important to establish that any changes to the appearance of the photonic stopband are linked to structural or refractive index changes in the ordered material and not occurring as a result of a change in the optics of the background electrolyte over time. Understanding how the structure or composition of the electrode evolves over time is the more salient effect which can occur here; monitoring changes in the photonic stopband of the electrode has the potential to establish a system which can use the optical signature of the electrode to diagnose and assess the performance of and the changes to the electrode, non-destructively and in-operando. One way in which to determine whether the stopband red-shifting effect is tied to background optical effects or changes to the structural/optical properties of the IO, is to move the initial position of the photonic stopband and observe if the same optical red-shifting of the stopband occurs in different wavelength ranges. It is unlikely that changes to optics of the background electrolyte would homogenously span over large wavelength ranges, effectively eliminating this possibility if photonic stopband red-shifting effects were still observed. For this reason, larger TiO2 IOs were prepared using polystyrene sphere templates with diameters in the 490 -500 nm range. These larger TiO2 IOs were prepared and used as electrodes in an identical fashion to the smaller IOs used throughout the main text. Figures One final observation on the optical behaviour of these larger TiO2 IOs is illustrated in Fig. The requirement to use a custom electrode is explained above in the text accompanying Fig. There are several different crystal phases of TiO2 which can form when crystallising the material; all of these different phases of TiO2 have distinctly different electrochemical and optical properties. Consequently, it is important to identify which phase of TiO2 is produced when conducting analysis of the material. Voltage plateaus in galvanostatic cycling and reaction peaks in CV cycling are dependent on the type of TiO2 being used. The reaction peaks observed in the CV cycles in the main text suggested the presence of anatase phase TiO2 7 (and possibly bronze phase TiO2 8 ) when compared to literature sources working with these materials. The reported refractive indices of different TiO2 phases are significantly different, thus affecting the expected position of the photonic stopband of any potential TiO2 IOs. For instance, rutile phase TiO2 IO is reported as having a refractive index of 2.62 at 633 nm To prevent the obscuring of the IO surface with residual electrolyte when imaging the surface, it is essential to establish that the cleaning of the electrode removes the majority of material not related to the IO material. This is an important consideration to ensure that SEM images captured of the electrode post-cycling are not complicated with other material and just show the appearance of the IO material. For the TiO2 IO electrodes used in this work, allowing the electrode to sit in a vial of de-ionised water for 3 -4 hours was found to be sufficient to remove the majority of residual electrolyte from the surface of the electrode. Figure analysis to include the stopband red-shift data for additional CV cycles, shows the trend is maintained, as depicted in Figure