The electrical transport properties of Pbx(TiO2)1-x (x being the Pb volume fraction and ranging from ∼0.45 to ∼0.69) granular films are investigated experimentally. The charging energy of the Pb granules is reduced to less than the superconducting gap of Pb granules for the low temperature insulating films by using high-k dielectric TiO2 as the insulating matrix. For the insulating films in the vicinity of the superconductor-insulator transition, Cooper-pair hopping governs the lowtemperature hopping transport. For these films, the low-temperature magnetoresistance is positive at low field and the resistivity vs temperature for Cooper-pair hopping obeys an Efros-Shklovsii-type variable-range-hopping law. A crossover from Cooper-pair-dominated hopping to single-electrondominated hopping is observed with decreasing x. The emergence of single-electron-dominated hopping in the more insulating films is due to the causation that the intergrain Josephson coupling becomes too weak for Cooper pairs to hop between adjacent superconducting Pb granules. Disordered superconductors have attracted great attention over the past few decades since a range of novel phenomena, such as superconductor-insulator transition in two-dimensional superconducting films Theoretically, it has been proposed that the current through a superconducting grain is sensitive to the rela-tion between the superconducting gap ∆ and the charging energy E c . For E c > ∆, the transport is governed by single-electron hopping, while the hopping transport is mediated by Cooper pairs in the opposite case E c < ∆ To satisfy the condition for Cooper-pair hopping, E c < ∆, one needs to choose a suitable superconductorinsulator granular system with relative small E c and large ∆. For a superconductor-insulator granular composite, the charging energy of a grain can be estimated via E c ≃ e 2 /(4πǫ 0 κa) In the present paper, we successfully realized the Cooper-pair hopping transport and observed the EStype-VRH conductivity The Pb x (TiO 2 ) 1-x films with x ranging from ∼0.45 to ∼0.69 were deposited on glass substrates at room temperature by co-sputtering Pb and TiO 2 targets in Ar atmosphere. The details of the deposition procedures are similar to those described in Ref. Figure Figure Before presenting the hopping transport results for those x 0.52 films, we first briefly discuss the lowtemperature transport properties of the films with global superconductivity (x 0.59). Figure Figure Along with increasing field, the charging energy of some Pb granules with small size will be larger than the energy gap ∆(H). (The evolution of ∆ with field can be estimated via ∆ This opens the channels for single-electron hopping, and will slow down the increasing rate (dρ/dH) of the resistivity. At H P (T ), the decreasing rate of the conductivity [53] caused by the reduction in the concentration of Cooper pairs (RCCP) for hopping is equal to the increasing rate of the conductivity resulted from the growth in the concentration of single-electron (GCSE) for hopping, ρ(H) reaches its maximum. Above H P (T ), the decreasing rate of the conductivity by RCCP is less than the increasing rate of the conductivity by GCSE, the resistivity will decreases with further increasing field. When the reduction of the conductivity by RCCP is as large as the increment of the conductivity by GCSE, the magnetoresistance will be zero [ρ(H) = ρ(0)]. Since ∆(H) increases with decreasing temperature, the magnetoresistance peak, as well as the field for ρ(H) = ρ(0), will shift to a higher field with decreasing temperature, which is what we see in Fig. We evaluate the average charging energies of the insulating Pb x (TiO 2 ) 1-x films using E c = e 2 /(4πǫ 0 κa). The effective dielectric constant can be estimated via κ = ǫ r (a + s)/s with s being the intergrain spacing between neighboring grains Figure with where ρ 01 is a prefactor, b is a numerical factor of the order of unity, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and ξ CPH = a/ ln(8 Ē/πḡ ∆) is the Cooper-pair localization length for the ES hopping. In the expression of the localization length, ḡ and Ē ∼ E c are the typical values of the conductance and Coulomb correlation energy between neighboring grains, respectively. The theoretical predictions of Eq. ( where ρ 02 is a prefactor. We compare the experimental ρ(T ) data with Eq. ( For the x ≃ 0.47 (0.45) Pb x (TiO 2 ) 1-x film, the fitted value of ∆ is 1.55 (1.62) meV, which is close to the zerotemperature superconducting gap ∆ 0 (1.37 meV) of Pb obtained via single-electron tunneling spectra measurements. Thus, the fact that the low-temperature ρ-T data can be well described by Eq. ( In summary, we successfully realized Cooper-pair hopping in insulating Pb x (TiO 2 ) 1-x (x ≃ 0.50, 0.52, and 0.55) granular films by using the high-k dielectric TiO 2 as the insulating matrix. For these films, the lowtemperature magnetoresistances are positive under low field, and the temperature dependent behavior of resistivity obeys the ES-type VRH law in low-temperature region. As x is reduced from ∼0.50 to ∼0.47, a crossover from Cooper-pair-dominated hopping to single-electrondominated hopping is observed. These x 0.47 films possess negative magnetoresistance at low temperatures and the resistivity vs temperature obeys a law of thermalactivation form. For the x 0.47 Pb x (TiO 2 ) 1-x films, the intergrain Josephson coupling is too weak for Cooper pairs to hop between the adjacent superconducting Pb granules, and the low-temperature transport can only be mediated by single-electron hopping.