On-chip photonic quantum circuits with integrated quantum memories have the potential to radically progress hardware for quantum information processing. In particular, negatively charged group-IV color centers in diamond are promising candidates for quantum memories, as they combine long storage times with excellent optical emission properties and an optically-addressable spin state. However, as a material, diamond lacks many functionalities needed to realize scalable quantum systems. Thin-film lithium niobate (TFLN), in contrast, offers a number of useful photonic nonlinearities, including the electro-optic effect, piezoelectricity, and capabilities for periodically-poled quasi-phase matching. Here, we present highly efficient heterogeneous integration of diamond nanobeams containing negatively charged silicon-vacancy (SiV) centers with TFLN waveguides. We observe greater than 90% transmission efficiency between the diamond nanobeam and TFLN waveguide on average across multiple measurements. By comparing saturation signal levels between confocal and integrated collection, we determine a 10-fold increase in photon counts channeled into TFLN waveguides versus that into out-of-plane collection channels. Our results constitute a key step for creating scalable integrated quantum photonic circuits that leverage the advantages of both diamond and TFLN materials. Optically addressable solid-state spin qubits are promising building blocks for scalable quantum networking applications Negatively charged group-IV color centers benefit from structural inversion-symmetry, which, to first-order, shields the local spin structure from nearby electric field noise introduced during nanofabrication However, scalable, monolithic fabrication of diamond photonic integrated circuits (PICs) remains challenging, and complex diamond PICs are precluded by the absence of second- order nonlinearities. To overcome these challenges, heterogeneous integration with mature nanophotonic material platforms is a promising approach Here, we demonstrate efficient heterogeneous integration of a diamond nanobeam featuring incorporated SiV color centers with a TFLN platform using a mechanical pick-and-place approach diamond spin qubits into a scalable nonlinear photonics platform. Our device consists of a diamond double-tapered nanobeam with incorporated SiV centers bridging a gapped, undercut TFLN waveguide, imaged in Fig. The TFLN waveguides are fabricated following the techniques demonstrated in Following fabrication, the diamond nanobeam is transferred via pick-and-place to the TFLN socket. The mechanical transfer process is carried out using a home-built micro-manipulation setup equipped with confocal imaging capabilities and dual tungsten "cat-whisker" needles, each with a ∼ 70 nm tip radius. To assist with the mechanical break-off process, the holding tethers are partially cut via focused ion beam (FIB) etching. During transfer, precise orientation of the nanobeam can be controlled with the dual needles, while the LN chip is mounted on a combination of translation and rotation stages. After careful positioning, strong adhesion between the diamond nanobeam and the TFLN via Van der Waals forces allows us to remove the attached needle by pulling it down into the etched trench between the TFLN waveguides. Ultimately, the diamond nanobeam tapers are positioned inversely to the LN "socket" tapers, enabling high-efficiency adiabatic transfer of light between the TFLN waveguide and the diamond nanobeam, as shown in Fig. We characterize our device in a closed-cycle Montana cryostat at a temperature of ∼5 K utilizing a home-built confocal microscopy setup consisting of two distinct access arms. We refer to these collection arms as the confocal and transmission paths. The transmission path can be removed from the apparatus by withdrawing the dichroic just before the cryostat. The full measurement apparatus is schematically depicted in Fig. As a first step, we measure transmission through our device, using the TFLN grating couplers to characterize the single-taper transmission efficiency between the diamond and LN. Using the transmission measurement path, we send a narrow-band laser source through one grating coupler and measure the output power through the other. The input laser power is calibrated via a fiber beamsplitter and photodiode at the input. The output transmitted light is coupled into a single mode fiber and routed to a second photodiode. We sweep the Ti:Sapphire laser excitation from 700 nm to 780 nm in intervals of 5 nm, with a separate measurement performed at 737 nm, specifically, as demonstrated in Fig. We next perform photoluminescence (PL) measurements on SiV color centers embedded in the diamond waveguide. There are two measurement configurations: one with the excitation and collection co-localized via the confocal path (C/C), and one with confocal excitation but collection through the grating couplers and transmission path (C/CP). Using a homebuilt confocal scanning microscope, we excite color centers off-resonantly at 710 nm and collect the ZPL emission at 737 nm. The resulting PL maps and spectra are presented in Fig. From the PL spectra, we observe a small ensemble of emitters arising from the homogeneous distribution of SiVs throughout the diamond nanobeam. Therefore, for our specific device, we are unable to isolate a single emitter through off-resonant confocal excitation. To quantify photon extraction efficiencies, we thus perform saturation measurements first with the C/CP configuration, then with the C/C configuration, and integrate within 6× the FWHM of identified Lorentzian peaks. As further post filtering, we selectively integrate and fit to the saturation model a representative transition for an SiV center, demarcated by gray in Fig. The difference in signal between the two CP configurations can be attributed to preferential emission of the SiV in one direction of the nanobeam due to either angular dipole orientation or positioning in the nanobeam (see supplemental section S6). Most notably, we observe a nearly 2.5-times increase in color center photon extraction through the diamond nanobeam and TFLN waveguide grating couplers compared to the confocal channel for collection through CP, indicating extremely high-efficiency diamond-TFLN coupling. Correcting for the grating coupler efficiency < 25%, we infer that channeling of SiV photons into the TFLN waveguide is improved by more than 10-fold when compared to out-of-plane confocal collection through a high-NA objective. As further evidence of emitter co-localization, we measure g (2) (τ) auto-correlation of its emission in the C/C configuration using a 50 : 50 fiber beamsplitter. We isolate a single emission line with a series of filters, and observe anti-bunching of g (2) (0) = 0.629 ± 0.006, indicating emission from an ensemble of emitters within our filtered wavelength region, as shown in Fig. Lastly, we consider the robustness of the integration to environmental factors. It should be noted that this particular device survived multiple partial and complete thermal cycles. Furthermore, during one such event, the nanobeam fully detached from the TFLN waveguide socket and the pick-and-place apparatus was used to re-position the nanobeam. In all cases, we observed similarly high transmission efficiency. Additional controlled thermal cycling and targeted testing will be necessary to formally characterize this robustness, but repeated transmission measurements suggest a lack of deterioration in device performance. Overall, we have demonstrated the photonic integration of diamond color centers with thin-film lithium niobate. Our integration yields very high coupling efficiency of 91.9 ± 11% per-facet between the diamond and the TFLN. This translates into a nearly 2.5-times increase in off-chip photon collection through integrated channels, and a 10-fold enhancement in photon channeling into the LN waveguides versus out-of-plane. These metrics enable us to combine the promise of diamond spin qubits with the advantageous optical nonlinearities native to lithium niobate. Furthermore, the emission count rate is potentially limited by random placement and non-ideal angular orientation of the SiV inside the nanobeam. The homogeneous distribution of color centers within the nanobeam also complicates the probing of single emitter properties in our device. These challenges can be overcome by delta doping and targeted implantation techniques, such as masked or focused ion beam implantation A major advantage of selective integration is the possibility for large-scale pre-characterization of diamond nanobeams and emitters, enabling a more deterministic device yield Our device paves the way for high-efficiency emitter collection on TFLN, enabling single-photon experiments that leverage TFLN's unique properties. We aim to utilize optical nonlinearities in LN for modulating color center emission, thereby demonstrate multi-emitter interference and multiplexing on chip The sample was maintained at 5 K in a Montana Instruments Cryostation s50. We position the sample using a three-axis stage consisting of an Attocube piezo stack (X101/Z100). We use a heated cryo-objective inside the Cryostation to address the sample. For grating coupler transmission measurements in Fig. We filter extraneous fiber fluorescence on the excitation path with a 711/25 nm (Semrock Brightline 711/25) bandpass filter and on all collection paths with 740/13 nm (Semrock Brightline 740/13) bandpass filters. Our confocal excitation/collection path consists of a 4f lens setup containing a fast steering mirror (Newport, FSM-300-01) and two f=300 mm achromatic doublets (Thorlabs, AC254-300-A). The confocal and coupler transmission paths are mixed via 720 nm shortpas dichroic beamsplitters (Semrock, FF720-SDi01-25x36). To compensate for polarization misalignment between the two dichroics, we use a 400-800 nm half-wave plate (Thorlabs, AHWP10M-600) to optimize power delivery. Final polarization control before the Montana window is achieved by a 690-1200 nm half-wave plate (Thorlabs, AQWP05M-980). All mirrors in the optical setup are broadband silver mirrors (Thorlabs, PF10-03-P01). Color center emitter signal is either routed to avalanche photodiode single photon counting modules (Excelitas, SPCM-AQRH-24) or a hybrid spectrometer with Acton, SpectraPro 2750 gratings and an Andor, iDus416 CCD. Power measurements are performed with photodiode sensors (Thorlabs, S120C) moved between parts of the optical path. For g (2) autocorrelation measurements collected via the confocal channel, the signal is routed to a 50:50 fiber beamsplitter. Each arm is subsequently routed to a separate SPCM unit. For coupler-collected autocorrelation measurements, the output from each LN grating coupler is directly routed to separate SPCM, utilizing the TFLN waveguide intrinsically as a beamsplitter. SPCM outputs are then routed to a Picoharp 300 timetagging system. For spectrometer measurements, we route the optical signal through a 750/10 nm bandpass (Thorlabs FBH750-10) and a 750 nm shortpass (Thorlabs FES0750) in series, thereby filtering out the specific SiV-optical transitions we would like to measure. We tilt both filters to tune the filtering range and effectively isolate a single transition for PL detection. From manufacturer-provided specifications of the cryostat, cryo-objective, and mirrors, we assume a 95% transmission of the cryostat window, 90% through the cryo-objective, and 98% reflection for each silver mirror. Lenses are assumed to have a transmission of 99.75% each. SPCMs are assumed to have 65% efficiency at operating wavelengths. We begin sample preparation with a 2 by 2 mm 2 electronic grade diamond from Element 6. The sample is cleaned with a refluxing triacid mixture, followed by soaking in acetone and isopropanol (IPA). We remove 500 nm of the strained diamond surface with an anisotropic, oxygen plasma etch. We incorporate SiV centers by growing back 200 nm of diamond, while placing a silicon substrate alongside the diamond in the CVD chamber. A hardmask consisting of 200 nm of Si x N y is then deposited via low pressure CVD. The nanobeam pattern is defined in ZEP 520A positive ebeam resist with a 100keV ebeam writer (JEOL 6300) and developed in a three step process (ortho-xylene, MIBK:IPA 1:3, and IPA). We use an anisotropic etch with SF 6 , CH 4 , and N 2 to transfer the pattern from the resist to the hardmask, which is subsequently transferred into diamond with a 500 nm anisotropic oxygen plasma etch. Approximately 25 nm of Al 2 O 3 is then deposited with atomic layer deposition (ALD) to protect the device sidewalls. A breakthrough etch of the alumina is performed with an ICP metal etcher tool (Plasma Therm Versaline LL ICP Metal Etcher). An additional 200 nm anisotropic diamond etch then exposes material, enabling continuation of a quasi-isotropic etch. The quasi-isotropic etch process is performed at an elevated temperature of 300 C using high density oxygen plasma in an ICP dielectric etch tool (Plasma Therm Versaline LL ICP Dielectric Etcher). We periodically remove the sample from the etcher and image with an SEM in order to monitor the progress of the undercut. Upon completion, we strip the masking layers with an HF soak. We then rinse the sample in water followed by IPA and allow it to dry by letting the solvent evaporate gradually. In Fig. One needle is a piezo-controlled (Thorlabs PCS-6300CL) tungsten "cat whisker" needles with ∼ 70 nm tip radius (Ted Pella 99-15864) for initial break-off picking. To assist with the mechanical break-off process, some waveguides are detached from their diamond holding structures on the diamond substrate through a fixed ion beam (FIB) cut. In addition to a fine-controlled needle, a secondary cat whisker needle is mounted on a micrometercontrolled stage to provide an extra point of contact that enables mid-transfer control and adjustment of the diamond waveguide. Orientation prior to attachment of the diamond waveguide is optimized with the two needles and a rotation stage. The waveguide is transferred to the fine-controlled needle and lowered to the LN substrate. After making contact with the LN gratings, the diamond attaches electrostatically more strongly to the LN than to the needle, and the needle is further pulled down into an etched trench between the LN gratings as it detaches from the diamond. Further fine position and alignment adjustment can be done with the needle while taking care not to apply force sufficient to break the diamond from LN. We indicate the taper facet transfer efficiency to be η taper , the grating coupler efficiency to be η coupler , and all other optical losses lumped together to be η losses . Therefore, our measured transmissions (T) can be expressed as: We then make the reasonable assumption: We lump the grating coupler input and output efficiencies into a single term (see supplemental section 12 for a discussion of the expected in-and out-coupling efficiencies): Which simplifies our transmission to: We now make the approximation that the grating coupler efficiencies are roughly constant across the chip and therefore, η coupler,integrated ≃ η coupler,control . Additionally, as the two measurements were using identical optical paths, both are affected by the same η losses . Given that the control device consists of a continuous TFLN waveguide, η taper,control = 1. Therefore, by comparing transmissions: η taper,integrated ≃ √︃ T integrated /T control (6) We fabricated four control devices for calibrating grating coupler efficiency on the TFLN sample. Two of these consist of TFLN tapered waveguides connected at the tips and two are constant-width waveguides. Transmission statistics were taken multiple times over 2 months for all four control devices as well as the heterogeneously integrated device. Transmission values are relatively consistent across multiple measurements, with any variance attributed to alignment or thermal fluctation, as well as gradual condensation in the cryosystem. Because the TFLN tapered waveguides introduce uncharacterized scattering, we only use the fully-connected constant-width waveguides for "control device" measurements. For measurements performed in the main text, we use connected device "2" as the control device. Connected device "4" was damaged during measurements and could not be used to calibrate transmission measurements. By measuring both devices, "2" and "4", we can estimate the total grating coupler in-to-out-coupling transmission at 737 nm to range between 2.69% and 4.92%, and averaging to 3.55 ± 0.44% (we assume negligible loss in the Fig. waveguide). This is pictured in Fig. From these transmission measurements, we determine the taper efficiency of a second fully-integrated device (different from that presented in the main text) to be 84.1 ± 1.6% per taper facet at 737 nm, demonstrating the repeatability of our pick and place transfer procedure. These measurements are illustrated in Fig. To verify the validity of our confocal versus coupler collection channel count rates, we use Lumerical FDTD to perform simulated sweeps of dipole emitter orientation and position while monitoring transmission through the different collection channels. We simulate a nanobeam with 300 nm width and 200 nm thickness, modeling the single mode region of our tapered diamond devices. We place a monitor at the end of each Fig. To investigate the effects of dipole orientation, we sweep the polar angle, θ, of the dipole from 50°to 60°to account for slight crystalline misalignment out of plane. We sweep the azimuthal angle, φ, between 0°and 180°, accounting for misalignment stemming from both the cut of the bulk crystal and lithography. For ⟨100⟩ cut diamond with devices perfectly aligned to the cubic axes, we expect both θ and φ to be ∼ 55°, given diamond's tetrahedral structure. Taking slices at both θ ≈ 55°and φ ≈ 55°and summing the transmitted power at both ends of the nanobeam, we see that in-nanobeam transmission (coupler channels) is greater than out-of-plane confocal collection, as shown in Fig. For sweeps of dipole position in the nanobeam cross-section, we maintain φ = 55°. We vary θ between 0°and 90°only, given these two angles correspond to maximum and minimum contrast between confocal and integrated transmission. Again, we observe that integrated collection channels consistently perform equally to or outperform the out-of-plane collection consistently across all emitter positions by nearly 5-fold Fig. objective, we see instead an increased 10-fold improvement in experimental device demonstration. In Fig. Each autocorrelation measurement presented in the main text is extracted from a series of power-dependent g 2 measurements. The full series of measurements are provided here, demonstrating how for both collection schemes, g 2 (0) does not fall below 0.5, the single emitter threshold, but still demonstrates predominantly single emitter behavior of the interrogated spot. Fig. We compare the integrated device's emission into a confocal collection channel to emission into the TFLN waveguide channel by varying the confocal excitation and collection foci and recording the resulting photoluminescence (PL) spectra measured via each collection channel. For the confocal excitation and collection scheme (C/C configuration), we step the foci in tandem, while localized to the same coordinate and plot the results in Fig. We repeat this measurement for the confocal excitation with the C/CP configuration. In this configuration, only the confocal excitation plane is stepped, while the collection plane is fixed on the TFLN grating couplers. We plot the results in Fig. We also collect full PL maps in the X-Y plane at each interrogated focal plane. For each collection configuration, we overlay this data, with the z axis corresponding to focal plane shifts, thereby generating a 3D map of suspected emitter locations. The results, shown in Fig. 