We argue that there is a special doping point in the phase diagram of cuprates, such that the condensation of holes into a charge-ordered and into a superconducting phase are degenerate in energy but with an energy barrier in between. We present Monte Carlo simulations of this problem without and with quenched disorder in two-dimensions. While in the clean case, charge order and superconductivity are separated by a first-order line which is nearly independent of temperature, in the presence of quenched disorder, charge order is fragmented into domains separated by superconducting filaments reminiscent of the supersolid behaviour in 4 He. Assuming weak interlayer couplings, the resulting three-dimensional phase diagram is in good agreement with the experiments. Figure There is an overwhelming experimental evidence CO that is reached once SC is suppressed by a sufficiently strong magnetic field. One fact that points to an approximate O(3) symmetry between the two orders is that the critical temperature for the field-induced CO (and therefore the putative charge-ordering temperature) obeys T 3D CO ≈ T c near a hole doping content, hereafter "the O(3) point", p O(3) ≈ 0.12. As schematically shown in Fig. It is useful to visualize this phase diagram with an extra control-parameter axis, such as the magnetic field, perpendicular to the T vs. doping plane. Fig. In all the phase diagrams of Fig. A striking characteristic of the phase diagrams in Fig. Applying a magnetic field is not the only way to tune the balance between CO and SC. An alternative path is the structural enhancement of CO introduced by Tranquada and collaborators Notice that in panels (a) and (b) of Fig. stabilizes the solid phase, which indeed has a larger critical temperature slope. Summarizing, the cuprate phase diagrams are in many respects similar to the 4 He phase diagram shown in Fig. For 4 He, the control parameter is the pressure P . At low temperatures, and at a critical pressure nearly independent of the temperature, the superfluid phase transforms into the solid phase. The analogy between a continuum system like 4 He and lattice systems as cuprates is not new. Indeed, at least from a theoretical point of view, there is a long tradition The vertical transition line T SF↔S (P ) in (c) between the superfluid (subscript SF) and the solid phase (subscript S), more often drawn as horizontal with exchanged axes, was one of the first arguments put forward by London to advocate for some form of condensation in the early days of research on superfluids. Indeed, according to the Clausius-Clapeyron equation, relating the changes in entropy ∆S and in volume ∆V at a first-order phase transition, the divergent derivative dT SF↔S /dP = ∆V /∆S implies that ∆S = 0, thus identifying the superfluid as a practically zero-entropy state, like a solid phase A minimal model to investigate the instability that can occur in the particle-hole or particle-particle channel, i.e., pre-formed electron pairs that are paired in real space (precursors of CO) or in momentum space (Cooper pairs, precursors of SC) is the twodimensional attractive Hubbard model The attractive Hubbard model can be mapped onto the repulsive Hubbard model More insight into the competition between CO and SC can be gained considering the limit of a large Hubbard coupling, where the model can be mapped onto a Heisenberg model While the above scenario is very appealing to formulating a statistical mechanical description of the competition between CO and SC, a full O(3) symmetry is clearly a drawback of the model. Indeed, for the repulsive Hubbard model, this is a consequence of rotational invariance, but there is no such fundamental symmetry in a generic attractive model. One expects that CO and SC can be tuned to an approximate O(3) symmetry point by a non-ordering field (e.g.p for cuprates), but there is no reason why the barrier between these states should vanish at the O(3) point. In other words, the O(3) symmetry is only approximate, in the sense that the charge-ordered and superconducting phases are still degenerate but are separated by barriers. Based on these considerations, we study an effective classical spin model on a square lattice, with nearest neighbour exchange interaction and three relevant parameters: an exchange anisotropy, to tilt the balance between easy-axis (charge) and easy-plane (superconducting) order; a potential barrier, to remove the unphysical high degeneracy of the O(3) symmetric point; a random field to mimic disorder. In the clean system (without disorder), we find that the presence of the barrier allows for a finite-temperature phase transition, otherwise forbidden at the O(3) point. Once disorder is taken into account, CO is fragmented into different domains, resulting in a polycrystalline charge-ordered phase, and FSC sets in as a parasitic phase at the domain boundaries Our analysis is carried out by means of Monte Carlo (MC) calculations, which allow us to study not only the ground state, as in Ref. The scheme of this work is the following. In Sec. 2, we discuss the model and methods of investigation. In Sec. 3, we discuss the properties of the model in the absence of disorder, highlighting the role of the potential barrier and using the result of the model in the absence of a barrier Above the Josephson scale, we can model our system with a classical order parameter. Therefore, as in Ref. The competition between CO and SC is captured by the classical anisotropic Heisenberg model (XXZ model) with an effective barrier potential term and a random field mimicking disorder, where the symbol ⟨R, R ′ ⟩ specifies that the sum runs over nearest-neighbouring sites. We fix the interaction strength J = 1 unless otherwise specified. Furthermore, we use the anisotropy parameter α ≥ 0 to tune the ground state from being superconducting to charge-ordered. This corresponds to keep constant the ground-state energy of the SC and tune the one of the CO i.e. a CO-driven transition. As we shall see, a simple rescaling of the energy units allows describing a SC-driven transition. The second term in Eq 1 is the barrier potential, whose height is adjusted by the parameter B. Its role, as anticipated in Sec. 1, is to eliminate the unphysical degeneracy of the charge-ordered and superconducting state with all possible intermediate supersolid phases for α = 1. In the following, we will still call the α = 1 case "the O(3)" or "isotropic" point, keeping in mind that such terminology refers only to the first term of the Hamiltonian in Eq. 1. The last term in Eq. ( In the case where B = W = 0, Eq. ( The presence of a finite energy barrier separating the three equivalent ground states φ R = 0, π/2, π (i.e., S z R = -1, 0, 1) makes the model no longer invariant with respect to O(3) rotations of the order parameter, and the Mermin-Wagner theorem does not apply. Indeed, we find that, for B > 0, the ordering temperature remains finite for all α. Furthermore, since the effect of the barrier persists at finite temperatures, metastability regions appear in the resulting T vs α phase diagram. In order to study the physical quantities related to the effective Hamiltonian, Eq. ( taken τ MC Metropolis steps apart from one another, τ MC being of the order or larger than the autocorrelation time (for the clean system, typically we take τ MC = 30 -100 Metropolis steps). To account for the thermalization time, we finally discard the initial N out (at least 10 5 ) Metropolis steps. In the presence of the random field, we also average over N dis realizations of the disorder (henceforth, this average is marked by an overline). To analyse the tendency to order, we compute the mean-square magnetization, where R is the magnetization per unit surface area calculated at each MC step. Note that the mean-square magnetization is directly related to the charge (ν = z) and superconducting ν = x, y susceptibilities In the absence of long-range order ⟨m ν ⟩ = 0, therefore, for a BKT system in the thermodynamic limit, χ ν = N χ ν /T . Of course, in numerical calculations, the system is always finite and never reaches the real thermodynamic limit, preventing the vanishing of ⟨m x,y ⟩. In the following, we will use the quantity χ xy ≡ 1 2 ( χ x + χ y ), to monitor the superconducting correlations. While χ xy can be seen as a proxy of the superconducting susceptibility, in the charge-ordered phase, instead, the order parameter is nonzero, so that χ z and χ z are not simply proportional. In this case, to monitor the response of the CO correlations, we use both the susceptibility χ z , which is the true response of the system to an external field, and χ z . In order to assess a global BKT superconducting transition, we compute the in-plane superfluid stiffness J s , associated with the superconducting phase rigidity and defined as the second derivative of the free energy with respect to a twist of the SC phase angle δθ, e.g., along the x direction: where Z is the partition function and x is the unit vector in the x direction. To perform the extrapolation to the thermodynamic limit of the BKT critical point we use the BKT scaling of the superfluid stiffness where T BKT is the BKT critical temperature and we take L 0 as a fitting parameter. Whenever needed, we complement our analysis of the superconducting state, with a closer inspection into the occurrence of vortices in the pattern of the local superconducting order parameter (the in-plane magnetization). A vortex (anti-vortex) is identified whenever a variation of 2π (-2π) of the superconducting phase θ R is found in a closed path around a single plaquette with side equal to the lattice spacing. Defining the superconducting phase difference at site R in the direction of the ν unit vector -π meaning that we take the value modulus 2π so that Θ ν (R) ∈ (-π, π], the circulation of the superconducting phase around a plaquette whose center is located where n R = ±1 is the integer vorticity in the phase angle θ R going around the plaquette Concerning the charge-ordered state, we define T CO using the crossing point (as a function of temperature) of the kurtosis of the pseudospin distribution function, i.e., the Binder cumulant ( Its value at the critical temperature is indeed less sensitive to finite-size effects, as compared to the CO order parameter ⟨m z ⟩, and unbiased by fitting functions and a priori scaling hypotheses. In the thermodynamic limit N → ∞, one expects U N → 0 in the hightemperature limit, while U N → 2/3 in the ordered phase for T → 0 3 Clean system Let us start discussing the MC numerical results starting from the clean case in the presence of a finite energy barrier, i.e. B > 0. As can be expected, one prominent effect of the barrier is to introduce metastability in the system. Already at zero temperature, there exists a range of values of α * CO (B) < α < α * SC (B) where both phases are local minima of the energy At zero temperature, the spinodal points α * CO,SC (B) can be calculated analytically as a function of the barrier height B. Indeed, increasing α at T = 0, we can assume that a) b) Figure all pseudospins are parallel, i.e., φ R = φ and θ Rθ R ′ = 0. Up to constant terms in the angle φ, the total energy per site from Eq. ( The resulting energy landscapes for B = 0.2 and B = 2, with varying α, are given in Figs. By substituting φ = π/2 and φ = 0, π in the second derivative of Eq. ( For B = 0 the model becomes fully symmetric and the zero-temperature spinodal points merge into the zero-temperature transition point. The study of metastable states at finite temperatures is particularly challenging, both in real experiments and in numerical simulations. If the system is prepared in a metastable state, there is a finite probability that a bubble of the more stable phase nucleates in a finite time and then grows. Therefore, sooner or later the system will transit to the more stable phase. As a consequence, spinodal lines, marking the limit of stability of the metastable phase, require time-domain considerations to be defined. A metastable phase is well-defined only if it persists at least for its equilibration time, otherwise, it can not be considered a thermodynamic phase. The line where the equilibration and the nucleation times become equal defines the dynamical spinodal line By definition, the free energy of the system is F (m z ) = -T ln[P eff (m z )/ mz P eff (m z )]. Notice that by doing the histogram in m z one automatically takes into account the correct measure for the probability distribution. It is easy to check that, for B = 0, the probability distribution is flat at α = 1, P (m) = 1 2 , consistent with a flat free energy. The numerical identification of the spinodal lines and the equilibrium coexistence line of SC and CO can be obtained by studying the form of F (m z ) as a function of the parameters. For a fixed value of α, the first-order transition temperature T SC↔CO , is defined as the temperature at which the absolute minimum of the free energy changes from m z = ±1 to m z = 0. A spinodal temperature T sp is defined by the local minimum of a metastable phase becoming an inflection point. Thus, once we extracted all the effective free energies F (m z ) at each temperature, we can infer the full phase diagram. Since the flip of the whole phase is a very rare event, we need to take a very small system in order to have enough flips to consider the system at equilibrium within a reasonable simulation time. As a proof of principle and in order to have an approximate map of the spinodal lines, we take L = 4 and construct P eff (m z ) using histograms of m z measured at each MC step. The system is evolved for N MC = 5 × 10 5 after N out = 5 × 10 5 , with τ MC = 50. Of course, it must be borne in mind that the condition m z = 0 cannot distinguish a superconducting state from a charge-disordered state. To construct the phase diagram one has to complement the previous study with the computation of the superfluid stiffness. The search for metastable states and first-order lines within the above protocol becomes harder and harder with increasing B. Thus, the investigation of the metastable states must be adapted to the cases of a small (B ≪ 1) and a large (B ≫ 1) barrier. Henceforth, we shall refer to the paradigmatic cases B = 0.2 and B = 2 to discuss the two different regimes. In the case of large B, we follow a different protocol to numerically estimate the spinodal points. For α < α B (α > α B ) the superfluid stiffness (Binder cumulant) are computed starting from a charge-ordered (superconducting) configuration and heating up the system, using the simulated annealing algorithm. We define a spinodal point using the temperature at which J s or ⟨m 2 z ⟩ jump to their finite value, checking that this temperature is not strongly dependent on the system size L. The absence of a significant size dependence can also be viewed as a confirmation of the spinodal points extracted with the free energy protocol. In Sec. 3.2 we characterize bicriticality within our model, whereas in Secs. 3.3 and 3.4 we discuss in detail two paradigmatic examples of phase diagrams, for a small and large value of the barrier height, respectively. According to the Mermin-Wagner theorem To gain a first insight into this phenomenon, we compare in Fig. In this section, we discuss the case B = 0.2. In Fig. The superconducting mean-square magnetization χ xy grows monotonously by lowering the temperature for values of the anisotropy parameter as large as α = 1.04, i.e. above the isotropic Heisenberg limit. For the same range of anisotropy, χ z shows a maximum and then drops nearly to zero at lower temperatures. Clearly, thus, in this region the superconducting phase prevails at low temperature, so that, at some temperature T BKT , the system transitions from a high-temperature disordered state to a superconducting state. For α > 1.04, the situation gets reversed with the charge correlations growing monotonically and the superconducting ones getting suppressed. This behaviour is coherent with the results found in the anisotropic Heisenberg model without a barrier (B = 0), where χ z decreases with T for α ≪ 1 while for α ≲ 1 it displays a peak at T ≃ T BKT Observing the yellow curve corresponding to α = 1.04, in Fig. The resulting phase diagram is reported in Fig. As anticipated, the presence of the barrier with B = 0.2 shifts the superconducting transition line to higher temperatures, up to a value α B = 1.04 of the anisotropy control parameter. For slightly larger values, we recover the CO (Ising) transition line, which is shifted downwards with respect to the case B = 0. The bicritical point is shifted to The first-order transition line (T SC↔CO , marked by the yellow squares) and the spinodal lines (T sp red diamonds) in the phase diagram are obtained by constructing the effective distribution function P eff (m z ), as discussed in Sec. 3. We report in Fig. In panels b-e of Fig. Let us consider now a barrier parameter B = 2. The phase diagram in Fig. In Fig. The case α = 1.35 highlights again the possibility of having a superconducting state stabilized by entropic effects. Indeed, upon cooling, the superconducting mean-square order parameter, light blue curve in Fig. To fully describe the properties of the anomalous transition found at α = 1.35, we looked at the evolution in temperature of the total density of vortices, given in Eq. ( Finally, let us discuss in more detail the metastable states for B = 2. As an example, we report in Fig. We now discuss the role of disorder. The localizing effect of impurities is not expected to significantly alter the BKT transition found at α < 1 To probe the BKT transition, we monitor the superfluid stiffness J s and its scaling according to Eq. 3. However, this will not be sufficient in our discussion because of the gradual broadening of the BKT jump of J s , along with the gradual violation of the BKT scaling relation, Eq. ( Note that the average over many disorder realizations (indicated by the overline) restores spatial isotropy at large distances. Indeed, as it is well known, one of the hallmarks of the BKT topological phase transition is encoded in the peculiar behaviour of the correlation function: , T ≤ T BKT , ξ xy → ∞, in the thermodynamic limit, where J is the stiffness at T = 0 and a is the characteristic size of a vortex core The average in-plane component provides instead a good estimate of the short-range SC still present in the system. It is worth noting that this quantity again does not contain the information about the coherence of the condensate, which is encoded in the θ variable. We checked, however, that for all values of α we investigated, at least at low temperatures, the spins belonging to the same superconducting cluster are indeed coherent. Moreover, the charge-ordered state loses now its long-range order so that the resulting magnetization and the corresponding Binder cumulant in Eq. ( which is expected to decay exponentially as ∼ e -|r|/ξ z , to characterize the behaviour of the charge-ordered state, using ξ z as a fitting parameter. The random-field Ising model in two dimensions has no finite critical temperature We estimate T CO assuming the CO correlation length to behave as ξ z (T ) ∼ (T -T CO ) -1 , for T approaching T CO from above (without getting too close to it), with the index ν = 1 of the clean Ising model The phase diagram T vs α is reported in Fig. For α < 1, the superconducting state is not much affected by disorder, except for a small suppression of the superfluid stiffness (see Appendix A). Indeed, according to the Harris criterion Instead, non-trivial features are expected for values α ≳ 1 where spatially correlated disorder emerges from the interplay between the competition and the presence of impurities. Our two striking results are indeed found on the α ≥ 1 side of the phase diagram: i) the observation of FSC for α ≳ 1; and ii) the formation of a polycrystalline charge-ordered phase when α ≫ 1. In Fig. It is not surprising that for α = 1 (panel a) we still observe a pretty clear jump of the stiffness, although the clustering of small charge-ordered regions in the system can already be observed (see the corresponding snapshot in Fig. Going towards α = 1.05 (panel b) we can still observe a well-defined crossing of J s with the critical line, whereas in the clean system this value corresponded already to a charge-ordered global minimum of the free energy. Finally, for α = 1.1, we still find a finite superfluid stiffness, and yet the usual BKT scaling relation, Eq. ( It is very interesting that in this regime the stiffness decreases with temperature. This can be seen as a remnant of the entropy-induced superconductivity observed in the clean system, which disfavours superconductivity at low temperatures. Such an anomaly may be measured in samples close to the p O(3) point and is another prediction from this work. Note that the downward curvature in the low-temperature limit is not the consequence of finite-size effects, since a 256 × 256 lattice with periodic boundary conditions provides already a reasonable size to observe reliable thermodynamic quantities. Let us discuss the CO correlation lengths ξ z , used to define the polycrystalline chargeordered phase for α ≥ 1.15 (see purple dots in Fig. We conclude this section by observing that the curves in Fig. We discuss now the survival of a filamentary superconducting cluster and the presence of short-range SC in the polycrystalline charge-ordered side of the phase diagram. Whereas in the case α = 1.1 it was still possible to define a BKT transition, albeit with a certain degree of uncertainty, when the anisotropy parameter is increased up to α ≥ 1.15 no T BKT can be defined from the crossing point. In particular, at α = 1.15 one can see from Fig. In order to get a more quantitative idea of short-range SC, in Fig. For 1 < α < 1.15, at high T we observe first a slow decrease of ⟨sin φ⟩ with increasing the temperature followed by an inflection point at T infl ≳ T BKT . This range of the control parameter α lies inside the region of the phase diagram that we labelled with FSC in Fig. The curve for α = 1.15 (dark green) highlights again an interesting crossover scenario, which presents a filamentary pattern, clearly visible in the snapshots, but no long-range stiffness [see Fig. In order to investigate the role of superconducting phase fluctuations in this crossover filamentary state, we analyze the correlation length ξ xy . In Fig. Starting from our detailed analysis of the two-dimensional model, we can make a comparison between the theoretical phase diagram Fig. As it is known from studies of the layered Heisenberg model, the transition temperature can be estimated from the superconducting and CO correlation length meaning that the interlayer energy associated with a correlated region of area (ξ xy,z ) 2 is of the order of the critical temperature. Figure The superconducting and charge-ordered interlayer couplings, J xy ⊥ and J z ⊥ respectively, are not known. In view of the quasi 2D nature of cuprates we take J z ⊥ = 0.1 and J xy ⊥ = 0.01. The much smaller value of the superconducting coupling with respect to the charge-ordered one is justified by the fact that CO is coupled by the long-range Coulomb interaction while SC is coupled by Josephson tunnelling through the insulating layers, and one expects a large difference between these two scales. For the rest, these parameters are rather arbitrary, but the qualitative form of the phase diagram is not expected to be sensitive to the precise value of the couplings. Fig. We see that indeed the three-dimensional phase diagram bears a strong resemblance with the experimental phase diagrams for the SC-driven case (Fig. We used Monte-Carlo simulations to solve a statistical mechanics model of a two-dimensional system presenting competition between SC and CO, both in the absence and in the presence of quenched disorder. We computed thermodynamic quantities, correlation functions, and thermodynamic phase diagrams. In a clean system, the competition mechanism generates metastability regions in the phase diagram, bounded by two spinodal lines and encompassing the first-order phase transition line. As the temperature increases, the region of metastability shrinks to a single point, which coincides (within numerical accuracy) with the bicritical point, where the charge-ordered, superconducting and disordered phases meet. The first-order line separating the charge-ordered phase and the superconducting phase is rather steep for low values of the barrier height (B = 0.2), indicating that the two phases have similar entropy, as one can check using the Clausius-Clapeyron relation. We can thus make a comparison with the case of 4 He A closer inspection shows that the first-order line is not exactly vertical, and a reentrance appears, thus showing that near α ≳ 1 one can make a transition from the charge-ordered phase to the superconducting phase by increasing the temperature. This means that the superconducting phase has actually slightly higher entropy than the chargeordered phase. A posteriori, this result is reasonable as the charge-ordered state has two gapped transverse modes while the superconducting state has one gapped mode and one Goldstone mode. Thus, just considering low-laying excitations near T = 0, it is reasonable that the superconductor can have larger thermal fluctuations and entropy. Interestingly, the re-entrant behaviour of the superconducting phase is also reminiscent of the phase diagram of 4 He, in which a range of pressures is found where the solid 4 He, if heated, transits to its superfluid state before becoming a simple liquid. In 4 He, however, this happens in the high-temperature part of the phase diagram, while here we observe it at low temperatures. In fact, in the low-temperature region, the slope of our phase diagram and the one of 4 He have opposite sign. We speculate that this qualitative difference is due to the fact that in our case the charge-ordered state has no Goldstone modes while in the case of 4 He the crystal has sound (Goldstone) modes. The metastability regions and the first-order transition line disappear when quenched disorder is considered, giving rise instead to a phase-separated region where FSC appears. Indeed, moving from the SC to the CO regime we find the gradual disappearance of the two-dimensional superconducting phase towards a polycrystalline charge-ordered phase with the tuning of the anisotropy parameter α. As the BKT signatures disappear, onedimensional-like superconducting patterns still survive inside the charge-ordered phase. In Refs. The filamentary superconductivity foot we find in the two-dimensional phase diagram (Fig. Very near the O(3) point in the dirty case, we find that the superfluid stiffness has a non-monotonous behaviour as a function of T with a maximum at intermediate temperatures (Fig. In our model, up and down pseudospins encode only two possible realizations of CO corresponding to a checkerboard pattern in a bipartite lattice. This is a simplification of cuprates where, for example, non-magnetic charge stripes with periodicity four have four CO variants for each orientation, yielding 16 possible "colours" of CO patterns. Still, our simplified "two-colour" model captures many subtleties of the phase diagram. The presence of some one-dimensional-like superconducting patterns persisting on the CO side of the phase diagram can indeed have striking effect on the macroscopic observable, such as specific heat 