A recent theory of the disorder-dependent slope of the upper critical field, Hc2, at the superconducting transition temperature, Tc, is extended to multiband superconductors aiming at iron-based superconductors, considering two constant gaps of different magnitude and, potentially, different signs. The result shows that there is only a narrow domain inside the s± pairing state where the slope increases with the increase of transport (non-magnetic) scattering rate, P . In most phase space, the slope should decrease in an s± state and increase in the s++ pairing state. The experiment shows that in an archetypal iron-based superconductor, Ba1-xKxFe2As2 (BaK122), non-magnetic disorder induced by electron irradiation increases the slope S across the superconducting "dome," at different x. This implies that Ba1-xKxFe2As2 is likely an s++ superconductor with two (or more) gaps of different magnitudes. This work reopens a decade-long discussion of the nature of the superconducting order parameter in iron pnictides. Soon after discovering iron-based superconductors (IBS), it became obvious that although practically all these materials are fully gapped, measured thermodynamic quantities did not follow the clean single isotropic gap predictions. Instead, it was found that natural and deliberately introduced non-magnetic disorder is pairbreaking Further intense research showed that the results of transport and thermodynamic measurements could be explained with both anisotropic s ± or s ++ pairing due to spin and orbital fluctuations, respectively In most IBS, including the subject of this study, Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 , T c (x) shows a dome-like variation. However, the slope of the upper critical field, S ≡ ∂H c2 /∂T estimated at T c in pristine samples, appears to be a simple linear function of T c as expected from the BCS theory in the clean limit Even a brief literature survey finds numerous reports of the upper critical field slope at T c as a function of disorder introduced by various means in various materials. The overall experimental picture is quite clear -superconductors with line nodes show decreasing slope, whereas those without nodes show increasing dH c2 /dT . The original two-gap s ++ superconductor, MgB 2 , shows an increase of the slope S with increasing residual resistivity In IBS, the transition temperature decreases with the non-magnetic disorder. For example, in electron-doped Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 where disorder was introduced by ball-milling In this work, we extend the single band theory of Ref. Let us assume often used separation of variables in the order parameter where t c = T c /T c0 and P is the dimensionless transport (non-magnetic) scattering parameter (rate). Obviously, the Anderson theorem is readily recovered for isotropic s-wave superconductors, where Ω = 1. According to (son and father) Pokrovsky where, ψ are digamma functions, v a are in-plane Fermi velocity and all coefficients h μ,ν (x) are evaluated at x = P/2t c . These coefficients are: Since we are dealing here with multiband superconductors, we need at least a two-band model. The full-blown two-band theory contains many microscopic details, effects of which on a macroscopic features like the slopes of H c2 are not easy to track. Hence, we employ the simplest "minimum 2-band model" within which we can calculate the slopes. Such two-band Ω-model was first introduced for MgB 2 to explain the temperature-dependent anisotropy of London penetration depth Let us consider two order parameters, Ω 1 and Ω 2 re- siding on two bands with the partial densities of states (DOS) at the Fermi level, n 1,2 = N 1,2 /N , where N = N 1 + N 2 is the total density of states so that n 1 + n 2 = 1. The normalization equation reads Simplifying Eq. 4 even further, consider Ω i to be constants (that can have different signs, though!) and introduce the ratio, r = Ω 2 /Ω 1 and the ratio of the partial densities of states, n = n 2 /n 1 , we obtain, ( Therefore, the average, needed for Eq. ( and Eq. ( We proceed in a similar way expressing various averages in Eq.2 for the slope of H c2 at T c . Introducing the ratio, v = v a2 /v a1 and assuming a simple cylindrical Fermi surface where v a1 = v F 1 cos φ, v F 1 is the Fermi velocity on band one, we have: FIG. 2. The slope of Hc2 at tc, denoted here as S ≡ ∂Hc2/∂T |T =Tc ≡ ∂T Hc2|T c , plotted as a function of the ratio of the partial densities of states n = n2/n1 and of the ratio of the angular parts of the order parameter r = Ω2/Ω1. The region of r ≥ 0 corresponds to s++, whereas region r < 0 to the s± pairing. Clearly, the slope S behaves very differently in these two domains. where 1/2 comes from cos 2 φ = 1/2 since we consider constant Ω i and only the cos 2 φ needs to be averaged. These equations are substituted into the general Eq.2 along with the coefficients, Eq.3, and the slope can be numerically evaluated for any values of n, r, and v, characterizing the two-band superconductor, and for any nonmagnetic scattering rate P . One needs to watch for the meaningful range of the scattering parameter by ensuring that the transition temperature, Eq.1, remains finite. For example, in a pure s ± situation, n = 1, v = 1, r = -1, T c is suppressed to zero at P = 0.2808, the same as in the d-wave order parameter, because in both cases, ⟨Ω⟩ = 0. Let us now examine some numerical solutions to the above equations. Figure ingly, the result is non-trivial, showing different trends depending on n and r. A 2D density plot in Fig. Considering our experimental results, it is, however, more interesting to explore possible slope increase on the negative, s ± , side of r values. Then, the only region of interest is at small n. Figure More explicitly, the expectations for a pure s ± state are completely equivalent to a line nodal d-wave su- perconductor Let us examine in more detail the region of s ± side where the slope can increase, as discussed above, at n < 0.2. Figure As a specific system to probe our theoretical conclusions, we selected a well-studied (Ba 1-x K x )Fe 2 As 2 family of iron-based superconductors (abbreviated as BaK122). Considering the significant dependence of the results on n, it was important to probe several different compositions. An example of the data collected in overdoped BaK122, x = 0.56, is shown in Fig. Four different compositions were measured, x = 0.2 (under doped), x = 0.34 (optimally doped), and two moderately overdoped, x = 0.47 and x = 0.56, but before the Lifshitz transition, which alters the electronic band structure and the gap structure considerably The lower panel of 8 shows measured H c2 before and after irradiating the indicated compounds. The slope was evaluated as a linear derivative of each curve. The summary of the results is presented in Fig. In another experiment on a single crystal of (Ba 0.75 K 0.25 )Fe 2 As 2 (T c0 ≈ 30.3 K), the 2.5 MeV electron irradiation was pushed to a very large dose of 8.93 C/cm 2 = 5.6 × 10 19 electrons/cm 2 . To put this in perspective, a usual overnight irradiation run yields around 0.8 C/cm 2 , so 8.93 C/cm would be achieved in about five days of continuous irradiation, which is impossible to do in one go. It took about two weeks of active irradiation spread over several sessions that lasted a few years. In BaFe 2 As 2 , thresholds energies of ion knockout upon head-on collisions, E d , were calculated using VASP-MD simulation that yielded E d =33 eV (Ba), 22 eV (Fe), and 50 eV (As) (defects per atom) per 1 C/cm 2 . For our largest dose of 8.93 C/cm 2 we estimate 4.5 × 10 -3 dpa or 0.045 defects per a conventional unit cell (Z = 2). This means that we produce one defect per 22.2 conventional unit cells at this dose. Therefore, with the unit cell volume of 0.20457 nm 3 , the average distance between the defects is 1.66 nm. This should be compared to the coherence length, ξ, and Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) coherence length, ξ 0 = ħv F /π∆ 0 The results of the theoretical part are straightforward. Unless a superconductor has very imbalanced partial densities of states of the order of 10% or less, it will show a reduction of the slope of H c2 at T c with transport (nonmagnetic) disorder if it has nodes or any other state in which the order parameter has different signs, such as s ± multiband superconductivity. An increasing slope, including an anisotropic multiband case, is predicted for any s ++ state. Note, however, that the initial change in the slope becomes negative at a very large difference between gap amplitudes and small n; see the upper left corner of the right panel in Fig. Our data in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 show that the slope S increases with P across the T c (x) dome of superconductivity for underdoped, optimally doped and overdoped compositions. This is a strong argument in favor of a multiband s ++ superconductivity with a significant difference between different gaps. Reviewing the literature and our work of the past two decades, there are no experimental facts, at least for Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 , that could not be explained from the anisotropic s ++ point of view. This includes the suppression of T c , non-exponential London penetration depth, specific heat, thermal conductivity, and other transport and thermodynamic quantities. Angle-resolved photo-emission is not sensitive to the sign of the order parameter but produced important information regarding the gaps anisotropy on separate sheets of the Fermi surface Of course, the question of the pairing type is complicated and requires considering multiple independent experiments and theories. For example, tunneling spectroscopy and neutron resonance studies Single crystals of Ba 0.2 K 0.8 Fe 2 As 2 were grown by using an inverted temperate gradient method with the starting materials, Ba and K lumps, and Fe and As powders. Details of the growth are published elsewhere The 2.5 MeV electron irradiation was performed at the SIRIUS Pelletron-type linear accelerator operating in the Laboratoire des Solides Irradiés at the École Poly-technique in Palaiseau, France. The acquired irradiation dose is conveniently measured in C/cm 2 , where 1 C/cm 2 = 6.24 × 10 18 electrons/cm 2 . A Faraday cup placed behind the sample chamber enabled accurate measurement of the acquired dose during irradiation. The electron irradiation was performed in liquid hydrogen at 20 K to prevent Frenkel pairs recombination and defects clustering. The typical concentration of the induced defects is one defect per thousand of unit cells. Here, our highest dose of 8.93 C/cm 2 corresponds to about one defect per 22 conventional unit cells (Z=2 for BaFe 2 As 2 ). Details of the irradiation experiments are available elsewhere 