Dirac points in two-dimensional massless Dirac fermions are topologically protected. Although single Dirac point cannot disappear solely, a pair of two Dirac points annihilates after merging at a time-reversal invariant momentum (TRIM). This process triggers a topological phase transition. In this paper, we numerically calculate the electronic specific heat (C) of the systems with a honeycomb lattice and α-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 in the case that two Dirac points are moving and merging by changing the ratio of the magnitude between the transfer integrals, which can be controlled by uniaxial pressure for example. When two Dirac points are close to but not at TRIM, the temperature dependence exhibits a crossover from C ∝ T 2.0 (expected for separated Dirac points) at low temperatures (T ≤ Tco) to C ∝ T 1.5 (expected in the case of the merged Dirac points) at high temperatures (T ≥ Tco). Here, Tco denotes the crossover temperature, which is determined by the potential barrier magnitude between two Dirac points. Our findings demonstrate that the precursor of the topological phase transition is observed through the temperature-dependence of the electronic specific heat. Graphene is a well-known two-dimensional system consisting of massless Dirac fermions In the realm of quasi-two-dimensional organic conductors From recent theoretical proposals In this study, we neglect the quasi-two-dimensionality in α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 when studying electronic specific heat. In fact, a power law behavior, T 1.8 , has been observed, particularly below 4 K The energy dispersion at the semi-Dirac point is linear in two directions (e.g., ±k x -directions) and quadratic in other two directions (±k y -directions) In this paper, we present numerical calculations demonstrating the occurrence of this crossover in C when two Dirac points approach each other. We emphasize that this crossover serves as a signature of the topological phase transition. The internal energy per site (U ) at temperature, T , can be calculated using the following equation: where for the honeycomb lattice and m = 4 for α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 ], N k is the number of k points taken in the first Brillouin zone, and k B is the Boltzmann constant. For simplicity, we neglect the effect of electron spin. The electronic specific heat, C, at the constant volume is obtained by differentiating the internal energy: We numerically calculate C by performing numerical differentiation. Using the density of states, D(ε), Eq. ( where μ is the chemical potential. When the Tdependence of μ is very small, it is known that C ∝ T for free electrons For the purposes of this study, we do not consider electron-electron interactions. Although Coulomb interactions in graphene We consider the honeycomb lattice with only nearest neighbor transfer integrals (t a , t b , and t c ) and half-filling. The energy dispersion relations are given by where ± signs in ε(±, k) correspond to upper and lower bands, respectively, and a represents the lattice constant. We assume t b = t c = t and t a ≥ t in Eq. ( The position of two Dirac points is close each other at t a /t = 1.99, as shown in Fig. For Dirac fermions (t a /t = 1.00), the energies near ε F can be described as where = h/2π, h is the Planck constant, and v F = √ 3at/(2 ). The density of states, D(ε), for Eq. ( For semi-Dirac fermions (t a /t = 2.00), the energies near ε F can be written as where α = a/(4 √ 3). The dispersion is linear in ±k xdirections and quadratic in ±k y -directions. The density of states is given by We numerically calculate D(ε) using Eq. ( In the honeycomb lattice, the electronic specific heat, C, can be calculated for both Dirac fermions and semi-Dirac fermions. For Dirac fermions, using the density of states D(ε) given in Eq. ( where T = k B T /t is the dimensionless temperature. For example, in the case of graphene, t can be estimated to be around 2.97 eV from first-principles calculations For semi-Dirac fermions, using D(ε) given in Eq. ( We compare these analytical expressions for C with numerically calculated C, as shown in Fig. Next, we consider the cases when two Dirac points exist close each other. We perform numerical calculations of C at 1.970 ≤ t a /t ≤ 1.998, as shown in Fig. The crossover temperature, T co , the difference in wave vectors ∆k, and the energy difference ε F -ε 1,s are shown as functions of t a /t in Fig. which is depicted by the green line. As t a increases, T co , ε F -ε 1,s , and ∆k decrease. The magnitude of T co is on the order of the potential barrier between the two Dirac points. When the barrier is zero (i.e., in the case of semi-Dirac fermions), T co becomes zero. In the study of the energy band of α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 under uniaxial pressure, we consider a tight-binding model with a rectangular lattice for the highest occupied molecular orbits of the BEDT-TTF molecule. The electron filling (ν) of this material is 3/4. We neglect the interlayer hopping, t ⊥ , because of its small magnitude. In two-dimensional conductive plane, we incorporate the transfer integrals between neighboring sites (t a1 , t a2 , t a3 , t b1 , t b2 , t b3 , and t b4 ). The Hamiltonian matrix has been explained in Appendix C in ref 31. The effect of the uniaxial pressure (P ) along the y-axis is taken into account by modifying the values of the transfer integrals using interpolation In this model, two Dirac cones are overtilted (type-II Dirac or Weyl semimetal) at 0 ≤ P < 2.3 For semi-Dirac fermions (P = P merge ) and Dirac fermions (P =20.0, i.e., P/P merge = 0.511), the densities of states follows D(ε) ∝ |ε -ε F | and D(ε) ∝ |ε -ε F |, respectively, as shown in Fig. By utilizing ν = 3/4, we can determine μ through Fig. In the regime where the merging of two Dirac points is imminent (0.894 ≤ P/P merge ≤ 0.996), the T -dependence of C exhibits a crossover: C ∝ T 2.0 at low temperatures and C ∝ T FIG. This crossover is confirmed by the nearly constant behavior observed at low temperatures in the T -dependencies of C/(k B T 2.0 ) and the nearly 1/ √ T dependence at high temperatures, as shown in Figs. 11. Similar to Section IV, we define the crossover temperature, T co , using a maximum in C/(k B T 2.0 ). The P -dependences of T co , ε 4,s -ε F , ε F -ε 3,s , and ∆k in Fig. We ignore the interlayer hopping, t ⊥ , of α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 . By introducing t ⊥ , the quasi-twodimensionality of the system becomes a crucial factor for the electronic specific heats at very low temperatures, because the density of states near the Fermi energy is changed. Consequently, the determination of the crossover becomes ambiguous at extremely low temperatures. Moreover, recent proposals have suggested the existence of a three-dimensional Dirac fermion at very low temperatures In this study, we performed comprehensive numerical calculations to explore the intriguing behavior of the elec- tronic specific heat, C, in two-dimensional systems employing simplified models for the honeycomb lattice and α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 . Our findings shed light on the behavior of C when two Dirac points approach each other. Specifically, we observed a transition from C ∝ T 2.0 at low temperatures to C ∝ T 1.5 above the crossover temperature, T co , which we defined based on the maximum in C/T 2.0 . Notably, we demonstrated that T co decreases as the spacing between the two Dirac points decreases, eventually reaching zero when the points merge. This merging process is associated with a topological phase transition. Thus, measuring T co provides a promising method to investigate the motion and merging of two Dirac points in two-dimensional Dirac fermion systems. The occurrence of the crossover serves as a significant indicator of the topological phase transition. Additionally, in the T -C/T 2.0 plot, we anticipate observing a maximum attributed to the presence of the saddle point. For the honeycomb lattice with only the nearest neighbor transfer integrals (t a , t b , and t c ), the semi-Dirac point emerges at t a /t = 2.00 Regarding α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 , the crossover is expected to occur near the uniaxial strain of 39.155 kbar when the interpolation formula line). At ta/t = 1.00 (Dirac fermions), D(ε) ∝ |ε| and at ta/t = 2.00 (semi-Dirac fermions), D(ε) ∝ |ε|, respectively. At ta/t = 2.01 (a normal insulator), D(ε) near εF becomes zero due to the energy gap. T FIG.