In this essay, several iterative techniques are investigated for synthesizing of the array factor of the antenna array. These iterative techniques include Richardson method, Jacobi method, Gauss-Seidel method, Successive-over relaxation (SOR) method. It is shown that these iterative techniques can be successfully applied to synthesize of the array factor of any arbitrary linear, planar, or even ring arrays. Traditionally, least square method (LSM) is used for this purpose. However, LSM cannot be directly applied for any practical arrays. In other words, LSM is not a general approach, and it should be mixed with other techniques to find the magnitude and phase of the excitation coefficients of each element of the under-studying arrays. Obtained results show that the proposed method, offers considerable improvements for this target. Ingle antenna is used for several targets in engineering fields The pattern of a linear or planar array is formed by selecting the proper values of the magnetic and phase of the excitation coefficients of array elements. Hence, the array factor synthesis is an important challenge in antenna engineering. So far, various analytical, iterative, and algorithm-based approaches are introduced for this purpose. Even, some of them can reduce the number of array elements In In other words, thie polynomial is considered as a global basis function for the phases of each elements. By this way, the number of optimization variables is extensively decreased in comparison to the number of array components. In Nowadays, the time-modulated arrays (TMA) are widely regarded in communication systems. Time-modulated array can improve the flexibility of the array. To this end, time switches are employed. But, it should be noted that this type of arrays are more sensitive with respect to the unplanned errors due to the using of several time switches. In In this essay, first, the problem is converted into a system of linear equations. Then, the classical least square method is defined for the problem. In the following, it is shown that several iterative techniques, including Richardson, Jacobi, Gauss-Seidel, Successive-over relaxation (SOR) method can be effectively used to solved the obtained system of equations to achieve the accuracy of the final solution. To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, several examination are considered. The obtained results confirm that these iterative techniques provide a good accuracy for the under-studying problem. As shown in figure where, Atefe Akbari-Bardaskan Department of Electrical Engineering, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran S Fig. In the above equations k is the wave number, θ is the elevation angle in spherical coordinate, β is the phase difference, and In's; n=1, 2, ..., N, are the array weights. By sampling the array factor in uniform step, a linear system of equations is defined as follows. where,       The system is linear, because each variable is in the first power only. According to Nyquist theorem, the value of M is determined as follows where λ is the wavelength. Target is minimizing the norm vector as.  e ZI F Then, solution is determined by setting the derivative of this objective function with respect to Z to zero. The above equations leads to the following one In equation ( To this end, first, the real and imaginary parts of the problem is separated as follows. As a result, the new system of linear equations is acquired.  GI C  G QR Also, L, and U are the negative of the strictly lower and upper triangular part of Z, respectively. The final solution of the problem using the Jacobi, Richardson, Gauss-Seidel, and Successive-over relaxation (SOR) technique are as follows. where ω, T are the coefficient factor and total number of iterations, respectively. The proposed technique is straightforwardly expanded to an equally-spaced, planar array. It is assumed that the number of elements and distance between two elements in x and y direction are N and M, and dx and dy, respectively. The array factor of a planar array, placed in x-y plane, is as follows. where φ shows the azimuth angle in spherical coordinate. The studies show that the accuracy of all iterative methods are the same. So, only one of them are reported in the next section. Now, different and practical arrays are examined to verify the effectiveness of the method. For each example, a MATLAB program is written for implementing of the method. An equi-ripple array factor with N=20, SLL=-25dB and d=λ/2 is regarded as the first case. The acquired results, including the array factor, synthesized array factor, and array weights are shown in Figures ( A linear array with N=21, d=λ/2, SLLmin=-40dB, and SLLmax=-16dB is considered as the third case. It is desired to synthesize of array factor with two different SLLs (two deep nulls). Target and synthesized array factors are reported and compared in Figure As mentioned in the previous section, the proposed method can be expanded to a planar array. So, the previous case is developed to a planar array with 21×21 elements and elements spacing λ/2× λ/2. The 3-dimensional array factor and 2dimensional array weights are depicted in Figures 