We report a study on the growth of NiBi 3 nanowires and nanorods during the preparation of superconducting NiBi 3 films by co-evaporation of Ni and Bi. We find that NiBi 3 films grown via co-evaporation of Ni and Bi metals achieve higher transition temperatures (4.4 K) compared even to the single crystal NiBi 3 . However, in certain parameter space, the film surfaces were spattered with nanoscale features, such as nanowires and nanorods. Ambient temperature deposition resulted in polycrystalline NiBi 3 nanorods which were controllable with the evaporation rate of Bi. Deposition at elevated temperatures promoted the emergence of long single crystalline NiBi 3 nanorods. High resolution transmission electron microscopy measurements confirmed the crystalline behaviour of the nanorods. We believe that NiBi 3 nanowires form in a process analogous to the well known vapor-liquid-solid process, as we observe an amorphous Bi cap on the nanorods. From glancing angle X-ray diffraction measurements we identify that the presence of trigonal Bi with hexagonal primitive cell in 1 Numerous intermetallic compounds have been discovered possessing outstanding properties usually not found in common metals and alloys. Transport measurements on polycrystalline NiBi 3 samples by Piñeiro et al. Several techniques have been employed for the preparation of this bimetallic superconducting NiBi 3 compound in order to explore its diverse properties. For example, Sakurai et al. A similar method of high temperature melting of Bi and Ni was used by Fujimori et al. In the thin film form, it has been found that NiBi 3 compound forms at the interface of Ni and Bi prepared at room temperature. Bismuth ingots (99.99% pure) and Nickel wires (99.999% pure) were simultaneously evaporated from thermal and e-beam ports respectively in a deposition chamber maintained at a base pressure of 1×10 -7 mbar. A series of thin films were prepared by varying parameters such as Bi deposition rate and substrate temperature in order to understand the effect of these parameters on the microstructure of NiBi 3 . For the first batch of samples, the Ni deposition rate was fixed at 0.1 Å/s while the Bi deposition rate was 0.2 Å/s (named Sample A), 0.4 Å/s (named Sample B), and 0.8 Å/s (named Sample C). Another batch of co-evaporated samples was prepared by varying the substrate temperature as 150 • C (named Sample D) and 250 • C (named sample E) for a fixed deposition rate of Bismuth as 0.4 Å/s. A field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) was used to examine the surface morphology. The influence of evaporation rate of Bi and the effect of elevated substrate temperature on the phase of NiBi 3 was studied using a grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) approach using a Cu Kα source with a Rigaku automated X-ray diffractometer at a grazing angle of 1.0 degree with a step size of 0.02deg. An energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDXS) attached to the FESEM column was used to perform elemental mapping on single nanorods. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) Jeol F200, operating at 200 keV was used to verify the crystalline structure of single NiBi 3 nanorods. Low temperature resistance meausrement was performed on a single NiBi 3 nanowire using cryogenic physical property measurement system (PPMS) with a minimum achievable temperature of 1.8 K. For samples A, B, and C, after attaining base vacuum in the deposition system, the evaporation rate of Ni was fixed at 0.1 Å/s in presence of a mechanical shutter in front of the substrates. Subsequently, the evaporation rate of Bi was set, prior to opening the shutter. With the increasing rate of Bi evaporation, the Ni to Bi ratio in the vapor flux decreases, leading to excess Bi in the films. Figures The nanorod like vertical outgrowth may be reminiscent of the well known vapor-liquidsolid mechanism of nanowire growth in chemical vapour deposition. The GIXRD plot for all three samples is shown in Fig. We note that the orthorhombic NiBi 3 has lattice parameters a=8.884 Å, b=4.15882 Å, c=11.485 Å(JCPDS file no:65-0088). Fig. In order to further ascertain the correlation between the Bi-phase and the nanowire/nanorod growth, we have prepared another set of co-evaporated samples by varying substrate temperature to 150 • C (sample-D), 250 • C (sample-E). Fig. In addition, there is an enhancement of NiBi 3 peaks with hkl planes (3 0 2), (3 1 1), and (0 2 0) corresponding to 2-theta values 34.036 • , 38.269 • , and 44.131 • (close to the 2-theta value of Ni) which again confirms the re-crystallization process. We have performed EDAX and HRTEM on the two types of nanowires after scratching them onto a carbon-coated Cu grid to confirm the elemental distribution and crystalline nature. Fig. Secondly, the temperature dependence (in Fig 2) shows that elevated temperature promotes crystalline nanorods. The average length of the crystalline nanorods was observed to be much higher than the polycrystalline rods obtained at lower temperatures. Therefore, substrate temperature strongly accelerates the anisotropic growth of rods. Since 250 From the analysis of SEM and HRTEM data, we find that the NiBi 3 nanowires obtained at a substrate temperature of 250 • C are exceptionally long and single crystalline in nature. In this section, we verify the superconducting transition temperature of a single NiBi 3 nanowire produced during the growth of the NiBi 3 film at high temperature. For this purpose, we scratched the nanowires from the film surface onto a Si wafer coated with a 300 nm thick thermal oxide layer. Gold contact pads of 100 nm thickness were lithographically patterned at the two ends of a suitably placed NiBi 3 nanowire (width ∼ 350 nm, length=12 μm). A schematic diagram of the arrangement is shown in the inset of Fig- In this article, we have discusses the growth of NiBi 3 nanorods and nanowires during the co-evaporation of NiBi 3 thin films. We find that the rate of evaporation of Bi and the substrate temperature, both significantly affect the growth of NiBi 3 nanorods and nanowires. A relatively higher rate of evaporation of Bi and a relatively higher substrate temperature seemed favorable for the formation of the nanorods. From the glancing angle X-ray diffraction measurements, we found that the presence of the hexagonal-Bi is crucial for the nucleation of the nanorods. Although nanorods were also obtained at ambient substrate temperatures at a high rate of Bi evaporation, the nanowires obtained at a substrate temperature of 250 o C, were single crystalline in nature. From HRTEM images we observed that the tip of the nanowires obtained at high substrate temperature was covered with a cap of amorphous Bi. This indicates that the formation of the nanowires is analogous to the well-known vaporliquid-solid growth mechanism of nanowires in the CVD process. In this case, although there is no liquid state as such, the high mobility of the low melting point material Bi effectively plays the role of liquid and helps nucleate the long NiBi 3 nanorods. It was found that the formation of nanowire occurs at random sites of the thin film with highly populated molten Bismuth relative to other spots, as seen in the cross-sectional FESEM image of the thin film. The superconducting transition of a single NiBi 3 nanowire, measured by four probe method, was found to be 4.3 K, matching the transition temperature of single crystal NiBi 3 . In this work, we have identified the exact parameter window for the physical route fabrication of long, single crystal NiBi 3 nanowires, which will open an opportunity for quantum transport measurements in nanowires of this interesting quantum system which is a superconductor based on a strong ferromagnetic material.