Stochastic p-Bit devices play a pivotal role in solving NP-hard problems, neural network computing, and hardware accelerators for algorithms such as the simulated annealing. In this work, we focus on Stochastic p-Bits based on high-barrier magnetic tunnel junctions (HB-MTJs) with identical stack structure and cell geometry, but employing different spin-orbit torque (SOT) switching schemes. We conducted a comparative study of their switching probability as a function of pulse amplitude and width of the applied voltage. Through experimental and theoretical investigations, we have observed that the Y-type SOT-MTJs exhibit the gentlest dependence of the switching probability on the external voltage. This characteristic indicates superior tunability in randomness and enhanced robustness against external disturbances when Y-type SOT-MTJs are employed as stochastic p-Bits. Furthermore, the random numbers generated by these Y-type SOT-MTJs, following XOR pretreatment, have successfully passed the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) SP800-22 test. This comprehensive study demonstrates the high performance and immense potential of Y-type SOT-MTJs for the implementation of stochastic p-Bits. With the culmination of Moore's Law and the advent of the big data era, traditional deterministic computing is facing challenges, particularly in terms of memory wall. Stochastic p-bits have emerged as powerful tools for addressing Non-deterministic-Polynomial-hard (NPhard) problems, reversible reasoning, and neural network computing, and are poised to become the next generation of intelligent computing devices Among various technical approaches, spintronic stochastic p-Bits based on thermal fluctuations offer advantages and show promise in terms of long endurance, low power consumption, compatibility, and scalability with advanced CMOS technologies. These devices can be seamlessly integrated into processors Despite occupying a larger cell size due to their threeterminal geometry, SOT-MTJs can, in principle, provide higher endurance, lower power consumption, and faster operation speed compared to their STT counterparts In this letter, our MTJ stack structure is W(3)/Co 20 Fe 60 B 20 (1.6)/MgO(1.8)/Co 20 Fe 60 B 20 (1.8) /Co(1)/Ru(0.8)/Co(3)/IrMn(10)/Ru(4 nm), which was deposited by a magnetron sputtering system (ULVAC) with a base pressure of 1 × 10 -6 Pa. The numbers in brackets are thickness in nanometers. Due to an in-plane (IP) magnetic field of 180 Oe in the sputtering system, we can induce an easy axis during deposition. After a high temperature annealing process with a base vacuum of 1 × 10 -4 Pa, we measured the hysteresis loops of the stack by a vibrating sample magnetometer (VMS, EZ-9 from MicroSense) to check its in-plane easy and hard axes. The following is the detailed fabrication process of MTJs: (1) Use electron-beam lithography (EBL) to transfer the writing line pattern to films and the writing line is etched by ion beam etching (IBE) for the first time. (2) Use EBL to transfer the MTJ pattern to the writing line and IBE carves the junction. (3) SiO 2 is grown to prevent side wall oxidation. (4) Ultraviolet lithography is used to pattern big electrode pads and Pt/Au films are deposited for external connections. Transport measurement is carried out on a three-dimensional probe platform with Keithley 2400, 2182A and Agilent 81104A. More details of the device fabrication and measurement have been reported elsewhere The structure of the MTJ device was confirmed by the high resolutional high-angle angular dark field (HAADF) image of the cross-section of a Y-type SOT-MTJ as shown in top of Fig. We can see in Fig. In order to understand our experimental results in various types of SOT-MTJs, we utilized a macrospin model based on the generalized LLGS equation to simulate spin dynamics and switching probability. The classic Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation is enriched by the Slonczewskilike spin-transfer torque term or the so-called dampinglike torque term as shown in Equation where ⃗ m is the unit vector of magnetization, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, α is Gilbert damping constant, ⃗ σ is the vector of an applied spin torque, H ef f is an effective field including an in-plane anisotropy field introduced by the induced shape anisotropy and an out-of-plane anisotropic field due to demagnetization in the present case and H T is the random thermal field. Worth noting, we only consider the Y-type and XY-mixed type SOT modes in the simulation because these two modes support field-free operations. As mentioned before, H T at a fixed temperature is assumed constant in its amplitude but fully random in its direction. Note that the duration of H T is set the same as the time interval for the spin dynamic evolution process. We have also simulated the influence of the field-like torque in the supporting material and the result indicates that the effect of the field-like torque is not the main factor affecting the switching interval compared with the effect of various SOT schemes. For the Y-type SOT-MTJ, when H T is switched off, the spin dynamics solved by Equation ( In Equation (1), because of much smaller k B T than the energy barrier for the HB-MTJs, the random field H T can be deemed as a perturbation to H ef f and the mildness of the voltage-dependence of switching probability for the Y-type SOT-MTJs should be evidenced by the spin dynamics with H T =0. To account for the gentler voltage-dependence of the switching probability in the Y-type SOT-MTJ than the XY-mixed type, we thus traced a parameter m max y , the maximized magnetization component in the y axis (the easy axis) during the dynamic process activated by a specified spin torque σ . Since for a HB-MTJ stochastic p-Bit device with energy barriers ≫ k B T , only the events with m max y approaching zero (the ridge in the energy profile to determine the switching or not as marked by the red area in Fig. The experimental Q factor ∼17% is about 3 times as large as the calculated one because in reality such magnetic parameters as the anisotropic fields and damping constant may have some spatial distributions among different places of an MTJ unit and this uncertainty can surely broaden the ∆V c and enlarge the Q. But even such a simple toy model can grasp the huge contrast in Q (from ∼5% to below 1%, higher than 5 times) as changing the SOT-MTJ type from the Y-type mode to the XY-mixed type. These experimental and simulation results both clearly manifest the importance of selecting suitable SOT modes for targeting various aims of SOT-devices. While a small interval ∆V c may be benefit for memory applications, the Y-type SOT-MTJs discovered with a higher Q factor here is no doubt more favorable for the stochastic p-Bit uses. Our experiment shows that the switching probability can be accurately adjusted by the switching voltage, which is a critical factor for stochastic p-Bit applications. Then, we systematically studied the switching interval ∆V c of the Y-type and XY-mixed type and X-type SOT switching modes in details. The switching features of various SOT modes can be grasped by a simple macrospin model taking a thermal field into account. The Y-type mode is found both in experiments and simulations to have the largest switching interval and low critical current density and thus the highest Q factor, which eases circuitry design correspondingly and favorably supports its stochastic p-Bit applications.