Direct estimation of the hydrodynamic response of an offshore structure in a random spreading sea can lead to large computational costs. In this paper the actual spreading sea is replaced by an idealised diffuse wave field and the diffuse field reciprocity (DFR) relationship is derived analytically and verified against diffraction analysis for offshore application. The DFR approach provides an analytical expression for the estimation of the wave loading spectrum in a spreading sea. It is very efficient because only the added damping coefficients are required. Furthermore, if normalised to the peak amplitude of a spreading sea, an upper bound response can be obtained using the reciprocal approach. And this is demonstrated using a spar type floating wind turbine. Given that the hydrodynamic coefficients are routine outputs for offshore structural design, engineers would obtain the upper bound response without additional computational cost using this new approach. Realistic sea states contain waves that are dependent on frequency as well as direction. The response of an offshore structure can be sensitive to both the frequency and the heading of an incident ocean wave, and the most realistic way of ensuring that this effect is captured in a numerical simulation is to model the wave environment as a random spreading sea. For example, large floating offshore structures subject to multi-directional random waves have been studied in In room acoustics, a diffuse sound filed is an ideal probabilistic model describing a sound field consisting of a very large set of statistically uncorrelated elemental plane waves. The propagation direction of the waves are random with a uniform probability distribution An efficient approach to tackle this vibroacoustic problem has been achieved by using the diffuse field reciprocity (DFR) principle It is shown in this paper that the hydrodynamic response of an offshore structure can be successfully recovered through the reciprocal DFR principle in an idealised diffuse sea environment. In this way, instead of solving a full diffraction problem, only the radiation potential in still water needs to be computed. In addition, it is possible to estimate an upper bound response in a spreading sea assuming the worst sea state is coming from all directions. Compared to the commonly used unidirectional sea assumption, the DFR approach provides a new reciprocal approach that is as efficient, considers all degree of freedoms and provides a higher safety factor. This approach is weakly analogous to the Haskind relation In what follows, the formulation of the diffuse field reciprocity (DFR) principle is introduced in Section 2. The analytical verification of the proposed reciprocal approach is given in Section 3, in terms of the hydrodynamic response of a simple articulated buoy, by demonstrating the equivalence between the reciprocal DFR approach and the direct approach via a full diffraction analysis. In Section 4, an upper bound is introduced together with discussions of how the upper bound can be estimated efficiently using the DFR approach. Following the discussions, a demonstration case study using a spar type floating wind turbine is presented in Section 5. Concluding remarks are given in Section 6. 2 Hydrodynamic response in a spreading sea For a linear system subject to a random wave excitation, the covariance matrix of the structure response at degrees of freedom ζ can be found as where G(ω, θ) ∈ C μ is the transfer function, with G j relates the structural response at the degree-of-freedom ζ j to a surface wave of unit elevation. S ηη (ω, θ) is the directional spectrum of the surface wave elevation at frequency ω with wave direction θ. The notation [•] * T indicates complex conjugate transpose. A blocked force is the force experienced by the structure when it is subject to incoming waves but held stationary where f b is the blocked force due to a wave of unit elevation. Note that the blocked force is dependent both on frequency and the incoming wave direction. H ∈ C μ×μ is the structural transfer function matrix, which for a linear system can be found as the inverse of the dynamic stiffness matrix: where M, C and K are the inertia, damping and stiffness matrices. For offshore engineering, it is a common practice to consider a frequency independent spreading function D(θ). The directional spectrum of the wave elevation can then be written as where S ηη (ω) is the unidirectional wave spectrum, and the following condition must be satisfied for the spreading function: Therefore, Eq 1 can be expanded as: Eq 6 indicates that a two dimensional integration over wave heading as well as frequency are required for the estimation of the hydrodynamic response in a spreading sea. As a large number of wave headings is normally required (e.g., as much as 12 headings are recommended in The key insight here is that the spreading function D(θ) in Eq 5 can be seen as a measure for the fraction of sea states, out of a large number of ensemble, that are coming from direction θ. In other words, the wave direction θ is regarded as a random variable, with its probability distribution described by the density function D(θ). With this view, the expression inside the square brackets in Eq 6 is the expected cross spectrum of the blocked force by ensemble average. The covariance matrix of the hydrodynamic response can then be more compactly expressed as: where the expectation is taken over the incident wave headings θ over 0 to 2π. At first sight, it might appear that we haven't gained any computational saving by converting the expression from Eq 6 to Eq 7 by taking the ensemble average point of view, because large computational efforts are still required to compute the expected cross spectrum for the wave forces. However, if the spreading sea is replaced by an idealised diffuse wave field, the technique from the vibro-acoustics literature known as "diffuse field reciprocity (DFR)" From where E[•] is the mathematical expectation or ensemble average and f b represents the vector of blocked forces. On the right hand side of Eq 8, E(ω) and n(ω) are the spatially averaged system energy and modal density respectively The diffuse field reciprocity (DFR) from Eq 8 relates the cross spectrum of the blocked force to the resistive part of the direct field dynamic stiffness D dir . This corresponds to the wave energy radiated into the far field. For a body moving on or near a free water surface, energy got carried away from the moving structure by travelling waves. This results an energy loss and this is called added damping or potential damping C pot . In addition to the travelling waves, there are also evanescent waves near the structure. They do not dissipate energy and are related to the reactive part of direct field dynamic stiffness matrix D dir . Therefore, the radiated force due to the structure oscillation in still water can be obtained as: where f rad is the force vector due to structure movement and M a is the added mass matrix. Therefore, the imaginary part of D dir , which is required for the reciprocal relationship in Eq 8, is directly related to the potential damping matrix, i.e., Im(D dir ) = ωC pot . It can be seen from Eq 8 that the direct integration over the wave headings is reduced to a simple algebraic expression, by taking the ensemble average in a diffuse sea. This allows an efficient estimate for the hydrodynamic response in a spreading sea environment. The diffuse field reciprocity (DFR) relation were originally developed in vibro-acoustic field and as a result the parameters in Eq 8 in offshore context are yet to be defined. In Appendix A, the modal density and spatial averaged energy are formulated in an offshore context. Putting all the components together, the DFR relationship in offshore application can be found as: where k is the wavenumber, d is the water depth. Note that the above expression is applicable for water of finite depth. For deep water, kd is large, and tanh(kd) ≈ 1, sech(kd) ≈ 0. Therefore, the DFR relationship in Eq 10 become much simplified. The reciprocal DFR relationship in Eq 10 might look unfamiliar to researchers and practitioners in offshore or marine engineering. Nevertheless, relating the exciting forces and moments in terms of the far-field behaviour of the radiation potential is not new and is known as Haskind relation in diffraction theory The cross spectrum of the blocked force of an offshore structure in a diffuse sea can then be obtained analytically once the potential damping matrix is known. In Section 3, for the purpose of analytical verification, the potential damping coefficients are obtained by computing the radiation force with a diffraction analysis. However, as to be discussed in Section 4.1, the hydrodynamic coefficients, such as added mass and potential damping, are well documented for typical offshore structures. For new designs, a hydrodynamic model for the hydrodynamic coefficients is usually developed as part of the design procedure To verify the applicability of the diffuse field reciprocity (DFR) on offshore structures in a diffuse sea environment, we compare the blocked force spectrum calculated from two different approaches: a direct approach, where a diffraction analysis is conducted, and the reciprocal approach using DFR from Eq 10. As stated in the introduction, the hydrodynamic coefficients required for the DFR are mostly well documented or ready to be extracted from standard numerical methods The buoy of length d, as shown in Figure Using Bernoulli's equation where a is the radius of the buoy and φ is the velocity potential. Integrating the pressure along the buoy surface, the overall moment acting on the structure can be obtained as: where θ is the circumferential coordinate and n is the directional normal vector, which is equal to a cos θ. We call f rad the radiation moment and it is calculated with respect to the bottom joint of the buoy. Assuming time harmonic dependence, and use the velocity potential φ for the simple articulated buoy as given in Appendix B, the radiation moment can be found as: where q is the Hankel function of first kind and qth order. k p is the wave number and can be found from the dispersion relation, k tanh(kd) = ω 2 /g, via numerical iterative routines such as Newton Raphson's method. There are two real roots and infinite number of imaginary roots for wave number k at each frequency ω. The two real roots represent waves propagating in opposite directions, while the imaginary values denote the evanescent waves. For the ease of notation, from this point on, we will use k to represent the wavenumber and drop the summation sign. Given a unit displacement input (ζ = 1), the radiation moment can be found and the potential damping matrix C pot can then be obtained as the imaginary part of f rad from Eq 9 : (kd sinh(kd) + 1 -cosh(kd)) 2 (tanh(kd) + kd sech 2 (kd)) cosh 2 (kd) where J and Y are the Bessel function of first and second kind respectively. The 2 × 2 matrix corresponds to the two degrees of freedom of the buoy. As the two rotation motions, ζ 1 and ζ 2 as seen in Figure Using the DFR relation in Eq kd sinh(kd) + 1 -cosh(kd) cosh(kd) Therefore, Eq 15 is the result obtained via the reciprocal approach by using the potential damping matrix and the DFR relationship from Eq 9. In comparison, the cross spectrum of blocked moments is to be estimated explicitly in the next section via the direct approach using diffraction analysis. The diffuse field reciprocity (DFR) approach, as described in Eq 10 for offshore applications, relates the expected cross spectrum of the blocked forces to the wave energy radiation into far field in a reciprocal manner. To verify the DFR results, using the articulated buoy subject as an example, the cross spectrum of the blocked force is also derived directly via analytical diffraction analysis. For a buoy subject to a single incident wave at angle θ, as shown in Figure where H is wave height. C m is the effective inertia coefficient and δ is the phase angle: In the present case for the simple buoy with two degrees of freedom, the blocked moment vector can be expressed simply as: For excitation due to a random wave, the wave height is then related to the random wave spectrum, i.e., H = 2 2S ηη (ω)dω. The cross spectrum of the blocked moment can then be obtained as: kd sinh(kd) + 1 -cosh(kd) cosh(kd) Eq 18 gives the blocked moment cross spectrum matrix for a single incident wave at angle θ. It follows that the expected cross spectrum of the blocked moment in a directional sea is: where we recall from the introduction that the directional spreading function D(θ), subject to Eq 5, is viewed as equivalent to a probability density function. In a diffuse sea, waves from different directions all have the same amplitudes (in an ensemble sense) and as a result D(θ) = 1/2π. Therefore, in a diffuse sea, the cross spectrum of the blocked moment from Eq (16) can be found as: kd sinh(kd) + 1 -cosh(kd) cosh(kd) It can be seen that the results from the direct approach, where Eq 20 gives the cross spectrum of the blocked moments by solving the diffraction problem directly, and the reciprocal approach, where Eq 15 gives the cross spectrum of the block moment via DFR approach, are exactly the same, thus verifying the validity of the DFR relationship for offshore applications. A full diffraction analysis normally requires computations for wave incidence from all directions. In this section, with an application to a simple articulated buoy, we have demonstrated that by taking advantage of the analytical DFR relation, this θ-wise integration can be avoided using the reciprocal approach instead for a diffuse sea excitation. This would largely improve the computational efficiency and allow a very quick estimation for the cross spectrum of the blocked force and the resulted structural responses. The response of an offshore structure can be sensitive to both the frequency and the heading of an incident ocean wave, and the most realistic way of ensuring that this effect is captured in a numerical simulation is to model the wave environment as a random spreading sea. If a frequency domain analysis is performed, then the dynamic response must be computed at a large number of combinations of frequency and wave heading. This can lead to large computational costs, particularly so at the early design stage when many possible design configurations need to be analysed. According to the design recommendation of structural design of offshore ships from DNV-RP-C102 The proposed diffuse field reciprocity (DFR) method provides a new efficient approach to estimate the hydrodynamic response. The improvement of efficiency is a result of the replacement of the integration over wave headings by an ensemble average as seen in Eq 7. Moreover, the analytical reciprocal relationship that relates the wave loading directly to the structure's radiation behaviour makes DFR principle well positioned for offshore engineering applications. This is because the hydrodynamic radiation problems have been extensively studied and the resulting hydrodynamic coefficients are well documented. For simple geometries, the analytical expressions are readily available. For example, a floating circular cylinder in finite-depth water in The DFR approach is based on potential flow assumption and as a result, the drag force contribution has been neglected. In cases that the drag mainly provides damping effect, such as for offshore floating structures of large dimensions, it is expected that DFR can still provide reasonable estimations for the hydrodynamic response because the drag force would be much smaller than the inertia force. And this is demonstrated in Section 5 using a spar type floating wind turbine. Wave spreading functions are generally dependent on the location of the site and the wave height This was generally thought to be the most conservative design practice as all the wave energy focused in one direction. However, this is not true in all situations because the transfer function G(ω, θ) in Eq (1) is also dependent on the direction of excitation. In cases where the structure has motions decoupled from the assumed excitation direction or the sensitive wave incident direction cannot be identified easily, the overall responses can be underestimated. On the contrary, all degrees of freedom for the structure are considered at the same time using the proposed diffuse field reciprocity (DFR) approach. If the wave spectrum in the diffuse field is chosen to be the peak amplitude of a spreading sea, an upper bound for the dynamic response can be obtained efficiently. To show that, we can take the peak amplitude of a spreading sea: where D 0 is generally smaller than one and commonly used spreading functions can be found in For example, one commonly used model for the spreading function is the cosine-squared model: where θ p is the dominant wave direction and is assumed to be zero in the following analysis. So the peak amplitude in this case is then given as: In a strict sense, scaling the diffuse field by 2πD 0 in Eq 22 violate the constraint given in Eq 5 where the total integration of the spreading function should be one. On the other hand, Eq 22 is equivalent to assume the worst case for wave excitation from independent wave headings ranging from 0 to 2π. Only that with DFR approach, this worst case response can be obtained with a single calculation. When the wave spreading function is unknown, D 0 can be taken as one in Eq 24. This provides a new way to estimate the worst possible responses for the design. In addition, as an upper bound, Eq 22 can be incorporated very efficiently in design optimization iterations to minimize the worst responses. 5 Demonstration study with a spar type floating wind turbine Floating offshore wind turbines (FOWTs) enables economic offshore wind electricity generation in deep waters where fixed foundation turbines are not feasible. Hywind Scotland is the world's first commercial wind farm using floating wind turbines and it consists of a spar type platform To apply the DFR method, we need two elements: 1) the hydrodynamic coefficients for the direct field dynamic stiffness matrix. As stated earlier, these coefficients are mostly well documented or ready to be extracted from standard numerical methods The hydrodynamic added mass and damping for OC3-Hywind spar wind turbine have been computed by Jonkman These coefficients are reproduced in Figure Given the data in Figure In frequency domain, we can formulate the transfer function matrix as below: where M, C and K are the inertia, damping and stiffness matrices. The inertia matrix includes the inertia of the structure M s and the added mass M a due to fluid acceleration. The damping matrix includes both potential C p and viscous damping C D . The potential damping is the result of waves travelling away due to radiation in a potential flow, while the viscous damping accounts for effect due to wave separation. As a simplification, the viscous damping part can be approximated using the linearized drag force from Morison's equation The structure is approximated as two uniform sections, as shown in Figure The values used for the simplified model in this study are listed in Table A JONSWAP wave spectrum, with wave significant height of 2.5 m and peak period of 0.8 rad/s, is used here. When using the reciprocal DFR approach, the wave spectrum S ηη (ω) can be used directly in Eq 10 to get the blocked forces. When Morison's method is used, assuming the area under the spectrum segment is equal to the variance of the wave component, the wave component amplitude is then related to the random wave spectrum, i.e., a w (ω) = 2S ηη (ω)dω. And this can be used in the Morison's equations to obtain the wave forces. c) Blocked force in a diffused field Morison's equation estimates the wave forces and takes account of the diffraction effect using the coefficient C a (C a = 1 is used here as Hywind is of circular cylinder shape). When the drag force contribution is small, as in this case for spar type FOWT with large diameter, it is expected that the estimation of blocked forces from the DFR approach should agree with the result using Morison's equation. If the blocked forces due to an incident wave at angle θ is denoted as f M (see for example Figure where D diff (θ) = 1/2π as there is equal probability of waves coming in any directions, as discussed in the introduction. The spectra of the wave forces on the FOWT, from both DFR approach and Morison's equation, are compared in Figure Although the DFR approach is based on potential flow assumption and as a result the drag force contribution has been neglected, for a typical spar type floating wind turbine, it is expected that the linearized drag mainly provides damping effect and the drag force would be much smaller than the inertia force because the structure diameter is large. This is confirmed in Figure As discussed in Section 4.2, the proposed DFR approach provides a very efficient way to estimate the worst possible responses for the design of offshore structures. The upper bound of the structural response spectrum with the normalization based on the cosine-squared spreading function in Eq 23, is shown in Figure As can be seen in Figure A new approach based on the diffuse field reciprocity (DFR) principle has been introduced in this paper to study the hydrodynamic response of offshore systems. This reciprocal approach, first developed for vibroacoustic analysis, is proven to be applicable in offshore context with verification against an analytical hydrodynamic diffraction analysis. The DFR approach is efficient because the wave heading integration is avoided in an idealised spreading sea. Moreover, the analytical DFR relationship that relates the wave loading directly to the structure's radiation behaviour makes DFR principle well positioned for offshore engineering applications. This is because the hydrodynamic radiation problems have been extensively studied and the resulting hydrodynamic coefficients are well documented (e.g., the Hywind example considered in Section 5). Once the hydrodynamic coefficients are known for the structure under design, the wave loading spectrum is readily available using the reciprocal DFR relationship. Using the DFR approach, it is possible to estimate an upper bound response in a spreading sea assuming the worst sea state is coming from all directions. Compared to the commonly used unidirectional sea assumption, the DFR approach provides a new reciprocal approach that is as efficient, considers all degree of freedoms and provides a higher safety factor. And this is demonstrated using a spar type floating wind turbine, where the normalised response from the reciprocal approach is higher than response due to a unidirectional sea. Although not explicitly demonstrated in this case study, it is expected that the DFR approach is most useful for general asymmetric offshore systems as all degree of freedoms of the structure under design can be considered at the same time. This would provide offshore designers and engineers a fast tool to estimate the upper bound response of the structure under study and minimize the risk of failure from early design stage.