Using ab initio band structure and DFT+dynamical mean-field theory methods we examine the effects of electron-electron interactions on the normal state electronic structure, Fermi surface, and magnetic correlations of the recently discovered double-layer perovskite superconductor La3Ni2O7 under pressure. Our results suggest the formation of a negative charge transfer mixed-valence state with the Ni valence close to 1.75+. We find a remarkable orbital-selective renormalization of the Ni 3d bands, with m * /m ∼ 3 and 2.3 for the Ni 3z 2 -r 2 and x 2 -y 2 orbitals, respectively, in agreement with experimental estimates. Our results for the k-dependent spectral functions and Fermi surfaces show significant incoherence of the Ni 3z 2 -r 2 states, implying the proximity of the Ni 3d states to orbital-dependent localization. Our analysis of the static magnetic susceptibility suggests the possible formation of the spin and charge (or bond) density wave stripe states. The recent discovery of superconductivity in the holedoped infinite-layer nickelate thin films RNiO 2 (R = La, Nd, Pr, Sr, Ca) Moreover, recent experiments (resonant inelastic Xray scattering, RIXS) provide evidence for the existence of sizable antiferromagnetic correlations (with no static magnetic order) So far, superconductivity has been observed in the epitaxial thin films of the hole-doped nickelates RNiO 2 and (undoped) quintuple-layer square-planar nickelate Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 systems synthesized using soft-chemical topotactic reduction of the parent perovskite compounds (with metal hydrides). Interestingly, superconductivity sets in in the thin films nickelates with the Ni ions in a mixed-valence average state near to Ni 1.2+ In this respect, the recently reported by Sun et al. superconductivity in the (bulk hydrogen free) single crystal double-layer perovskite La 3 Ni 2 O 7 with a high critical temperature ∼80 K under pressure between ∼14-43 GPa We address this topic in our present study. In our work, we explore the effects of correlations on the electronic structure and magnetic state of the normal state of the recently discovered double-layer nickelate superconductor La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under pressure We start by computing the correlated electronic structure and analysis of the orbital-selective behavior of the Ni 3d states. In our calculations we use the experimentally refined crystal structure (at about 29.5 GPa) and preform structural optimization of atomic positions using the nonmagnetic DFT The bands originating from the La 5d states are unoccupied and appear at about 2 eV above E F . We note however that for LNO with the experimental (unrelaxed) crystal structure the La 5d states cross the Fermi level near the Γ-point of the Brillouin zone (BZ). Our DFT+DMFT results for the unrelaxed LNO are summarized in Supplemental Material In order to treat correlation effects in the partially filled Ni 3d states (La 5d states are more extended, located above E F , and to a large extent can be considered as uncorrelated) we employ the DFT+DMFT method In low-spin state configurations, respectively. The latter suggest strong interplay of the S = 0 and S = 1/2 states in the electronic structure of LNO, similarly to that in RNiO 2 . The electron bands originating from the La 5d states are unoccupied and appear at 2.2 eV above E F . Overall, the physical picture remains similar to that obtained within DFT, complicated by a remarkable renormalization of the Ni 3d states and their substantial orbitalselective incoherence (bad-metal behavior) caused by correlation effects. In fact, the electronic structure of LNO is characterized by a Fermi-liquid-like behavior of the Ni 3d self-energies [see Fig. Next, we calculate the correlated Fermi surfaces [spectral functions A(k, ω) evaluated at ω = 0] of PM LNO within DFT+DMFT at T = 290 K. In Fig. Our results show multiple in-plane nesting of the calculated Fermi surfaces of PM LNO. We therefore proceed with analysis of the symmetry and strength of magnetic correlations in LNO. To this end, we compute the momentum-dependent static magnetic susceptibility χ(q) in the particle-hole bubble approximation within DFT+DMFT The most pronounced instability of χ(q) is associated with the ( In conclusion, using the DFT+DMFT method we explore the normal state electronic structure, orbitalselective behavior, Fermi surface topology, and magnetic correlations of the recently discover double-layer nickelate superconductor La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . Based on our results, we propose that LNO is a negative charge transfer mixedvalence material, with the Ni valence state close to 1.75+ (obtained from our analysis of the weights of different atomic configurations of the Ni 3d electrons). Our results reveal a remarkable orbital-selective renormalization of the Ni 3d bands, with m * /m ∼ 3 and 2.3 for the Ni 3z 2 -r 2 and x 2 -y 2 orbitals, respectively, in agreement with experimental estimates. Moreover, our results for the k-dependent spectral functions and correlated Fermi surfaces show significant incoherence of the electronic Ni 3z 2 -r 2 states. All these imply the proximity of the Ni 3d states to orbital-dependent localization. Our analysis of the momentum-dependent static magnetic susceptibility suggests the possible formation of the spin and charge (or bond) density wave stripe states, which seems to be important for understanding of the anomalous properties of LNO. We propose that superconductivity in double-layer nickelates at high pressure is strongly influenced, or even induced, by in-plane spin fluctuations. Our results suggest the emergence of different stripe states on a microscopic level, which interplay affects the electronic structure and superconductivity of this material.