Inspired by a recent experiment showing that La3Ni2O7 exhibits high Tc superconductivity under high pressure, we theoretically revisit the possibility of superconductivity in this material. We find that superconductivity can take place which is somewhat similar to that of the bilayer Hubbard model consisting of the Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals. Although the coupling with the 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals degrades superconductivity, Tc can still be high enough to understand the experiment thanks to the very high Tc reached in the bilayer Hubbard model. Introduction.-Seeking for new unconventional high T c superconductors has been a great challenge ever since the discovery of the two families of unconventional high-T c superconductors, cuprates One possible approach for pursuing even higher T c is to realize in actual materials the bilayer Hubbard model, for which several studies have shown that the superconducting T c can be higher than that of the d-wave superconducting state in the single-orbital Hubbard model In fact, one of the present authors proposed that a double layer Ruddlesden-Popper compound La 3 Ni 2 O 7 can be a good candidate for realizing the bilayer Hubbard model that satisfies the above-mentioned conditions Given this background, a recent experimental finding that La 3 Ni 2 O 7 exhibits high T c superconductivity at high pressures Inspired by this experiment, here we theoretically revisit the possibility of superconductivity in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 by constructing a four-orbital model that takes into account the crystal structure at high pressures. We find that s±pairing superconductivity, which is somewhat similar to that of the bilayer Hubbard model, can take place with high T c that is consistent with the experimental observation. Although the coupling between the d 3z 2 -r 2 and the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals degrades superconductivity, T c can still be high because of the very high T c attained in the bilayer Hubbard model. We also discuss ways to further enhance superconductivity of this material. Method.-First, we perform first-principles calculation to obtain the band structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 using the QUANTUM ESPRESSO code We then extract maximally localized Wannier functions We explore the possibility of superconductivity for the obtained low-energy four-orbital model within the fluctuation-exchange (FLEX) approximation The obtained Green's function and the pairing interaction, mediated mainly by spin fluctuations, are plugged into the linearized Eliashberg equation. Since the eigenvalue λ of the linearized Eliashberg equation reaches unity at T = T c , we adopt it as a measure of superconductivity at a fixed temperature, T = 0.01 eV. For convenience, we will call the eigenfunction (with the largest eigenvalue) of the linearized Eliashberg equation at the lowest Matsubara frequency iω(=iπk B T ) the "superconducting gap function". We take a 16×16×4 k-point mesh and 2048 Matsubara frequencies for the FLEX calculation. Further details on the model construction and the FLEX calculation are provided in the supplemental materials [51]. In Fig. To understand the origin of the large λ values, we study three other models in the same manner, namely, models in which the following couplings between the d 3z 2 -r 2 and the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals are eliminated: (i) the interorbital interactions U ′ , J, J ′ , (ii) the hybridization, and (iii) both the interorbital interactions and the hybridization. Definition of the models, including those discussed later, is summarized in Table The nature of the superconducting gap of the original model (Fig. In this context, it is also intriguing to give a look into the present system from a strong coupling viewpoint. Calculating within the second order perturbation, the interlayer exchange coupling between the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals gives J ⊥ = 4t 2 ⊥ /U ≃ 0.6 eV for U = 3 eV, which is quite large compared with, for example, the nearest neighbor superexchange coupling in the cuprates. J ⊥ is also much larger than the intralayer hopping between the neighboring d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals. Such a large J ⊥ should lead to opening of a spin gap, and induce interlayer pairing superconductivity In Refs. Finally, we discuss possible ways to further enhance superconductivity. The band filling dependence presented in Fig. The effect of increasing ∆E and/or |t ⊥ | can be understood by counting the number of electrons occupying the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals (namely, summing up the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital weight assuming the non-interacting band structure) for each case. In Fig. Summary.-To summarize, we have studied the possibility of superconductivity in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 taking into account the crystal structure under high pressure. The system can be considered as a bilayer Hubbard model of the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals coupled with the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals through interorbital interactions and hybridization. Although the interorbital couplings degrade superconductivity, the T c can still be high enough to explain the experimental observation, thanks to the very high T c reached in the bilayer Hubbard model. We have also discussed possible ways to enhance the superconductivity. Electron doping is likely to enhance superconductivity, but in case this is not feasible, increasing ∆E and/or |t ⊥ | are alternative ways of achieving a similar effect. This is because these modifications result in a self-doping of electrons from the d x 2 -y 2 to the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals. Studies on material designing along this line is underway.