Recent works 1 arXiv:2306.15086v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 26 Jun 2023 CDWs are instabilities in which electronic charge condenses in specific patterns across crystallographic structures of susceptible compounds. As such, their description (propagation vector of a scalar order parameter) strongly depends on details of the band filling and on the condensation mechanism (nesting or correlation-based, for example). Regardless of their origin, CDWs represent a great opportunity to investigate the competition among electronic states in materials. In this context, the case of layered cuprates (3d 9 CuO 2 planes) is of paramount importance for two main reasons: (i) CDWs are realized with in-plane propagation vector along a Cu-O bond direction across virtually all cuprates family, and (ii) the interaction between CDWs and high temperature superconductivity (HTSC) is highlighted by the doping evolution of the cuprates superconducting dome in their phase diagrams. In isostructural nickelates (Ruddlesden-Popper series with 3d 8 NiO 2 planes), CDWs appear with in-plane propagation vectors oriented at 45 • to the Ni-O bond direction, while no superconductivity at sizeable temperature has been reported. For these reasons, the recent claim of bond-parallel CDWs in superconducting infinite layer nickelates RENiO 2 (RE = La, Nd) grown on (001) SrTiO 3 (Ni2D-STO) has spurred a lot of interest in the scientific community. We present a critical investigation of the scattering signal reported at ∼ 0 eV energy transfer by Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering (RIXS), and of its attribution to CDWs in Ni2D-STO. We mostly refer to Tam et al. In Ni2D-STO samples the newly discovered elastic signal is described by an in-plane propagation vector of ( On a parent Ni2D-STO, equivalent to NNO 2 -1, we measured the energy profile of Q peak by Resonant Elastic X-ray Scattering (REXS), see Methods. Figure Our evidence on Q peak in Ni2D-STO question the resonant nature of the signal reported intensity by E fixQ . Some noticeable differences with the film remain, such as energy position, line shape, and signal intensity. However, these can be ascribed to specific details, and they do not affect qualitatively our observations. In conclusion, data acquired at Q peak on Ni2D-STO contain a substantial non-resonant contribution, resulting from tails of a substrate Bragg peak in third harmonic. While this does not prove the absence of CDWs in Ni2D-STO, the presence of an unexpected elastic nonresonant contamination suggests a different approach to distinguish spurious signals from proper electronic correlations in RIXS measurements is needed as done by REXS measurements in the past 