Probing the superconducting order parameter symmetry is a crucial step towards understanding the pairing mechanism in unconventional superconductors. Inspired by the recent discoveries of superconductivity in various van der Waals materials, and the availability of the relative twist angle as a continuous tuning knob in these systems, we propose a general setup for probing the order parameter symmetry of two-dimensional superconductors in twisted Josephson junctions. The junction is composed of an anisotropic s-wave superconductor as a probe and another superconductor with an unknown order parameter symmetry. Assuming momentum-resolved tunneling, we investigate signatures of different order parameter symmetries in the twist angle dependence of the critical current, the current-phase relations, and magnetic field dependence. As a concrete example, we study a twisted Josephson junction between NbSe2 and magic angle twisted bilayer graphene. Identifying the pairing symmetry of unconventional superconductors (SCs) is a central challenge in condensed matter physics. This is often the key step towards understanding the pairing mechanism. The structure of the order parameter may be probed by various experimental techniques, divided into non-phase-sensitive and phase-sensitive methods. Non-phase-sensitive methods probe the excitation spectrum, searching for gapless (nodal) quasi-particles. Phase-sensitive techniques, such as Josephson interferometry However, the order parameter symmetry of numerous SCs remains unknown. Among these are the recently discovered superconducting phases in graphene multilayers, including twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) Twisted Josephson junctions, in which two planar superconductors are rotated relative to each other, can provide information about the pairing symmetry. For instance, in a twisted c-axis Josephson junction between high T c cuprates, the twist angle dependence of the critical current should reflect the d-wave symmetry of the order parameter such junctions have been inconsistent Here, we propose a general setup for probing the pairing order parameter symmetry of 2D SCs by twisted Josephson interferometry, utilizing various symmetries of the system. As shown schematically in Fig. The rest of this article is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we present a symmetry argument based on the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory and a microscopic weak coupling model. In Sec. III, we demonstrate the probing principle in the twisted NbSe 2 and MATBG junction. Sec. IV presents in-plane magnetic field dependent Josephson couplings, and Sec. V proposes several experimental probing methods. Here, we focus on the twisted Josephson junction in which both SCs are invariant under C 3 rotation symmetry and time-reversal symmetry (TRS). These symmetries apply to our primary example of a junction between graphene and TMD-based SCs. The superconducting order parameter belongs to one of the following irreducible representations of the C 3 group: A (one-dimensional representation, s-wave like) or E (two-dimensional representation, (p x , p y ) or (d x 2 -y 2 , d xy ) like). 1 We assume that spin-orbit coupling is present (provided by the TMD) and that there is no inversion symmetry; hence, singlet and triplet superconductivity are not distinct. For simplicity, we will refer to the two representations as s-wave or (p x , p y )-wave, respectively. In the (p x , p y ) case, we distinguish chiral (p x ± ip y ) and nematic (αp x + βp y , with α, β ∈ R) states. If the two SCs forming the junctions have mirror symmetry with respect to a common vertical plane, further distinctions are possible. The different order parameters considered in this work are summarized in Table The lowest-order symmetry allowed Josephson coupling terms between SCs with either of these order parameters and an s-wave SC are: a. In the s-wave to 1 In cases where there is an additional C 2 , the A representation breaks into A 1 (even under C 2 , s-wave like) and A 2 (odd under C 2 , f-wave like), and similarly, E breaks into E 1 (even, (d x 2 -y 2 , dxy) like) and E 2 (odd, (px, py) like). These states remain distinct even in the absence of C 2 symmetry if the system is spin rotationally invariant, since one of them is a spin singlet and the other is a triplet. s-wave case, both order parameters form the trivial representation under C 3 and the first order term ∆ * s ∆ s is allowed. b. s-wave to p ± ip-wave case: the C 3 symmetry is compatible with the chiral order parameter. Under C 3 operations, the n th order term (∆ * s ∆ p± ) n accumulates a phase factor e ±i 2π 3 n . Therefore the lowest order term coupling is (∆ * s ∆ p± ) 3 , regardless of the rotation angle between two layers. Given the fact that third order coupling is parametrically smaller than the first order coupling in the perturbative tunneling regime, if we break the C 3 rotation symmetry it is possible to induce a first order coupling larger in magnitude than the existing third order. Consider breaking of the C 3 symmetry by an externally applied magnetic field B, we can write down the coupling terms in the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy: where γ denotes the third order C 3 symmetric coupling coefficient. α B and β B are the real coupling coefficients (Section IV). c. s-wave to p x,y -wave case: the nodal order parameter breaks C 3 spontaneously, therefore C 3 symmetry should not be respected by the GL theory in this phase. The first order term ∆ * s ∆ px,y is allowed for general twist angles. If we consider a case where both materials have mirror symmetry, the Josephson coupling should respect the mirror symmetry (D 1 ) when the two mirror planes are aligned. Under this condition, for the mirror-symmetric order parameter (denoted by ∆ px , mirror plane xz), the lowest order coupling is still ∆ * s ∆ px . For a mirror anti-symmetric order parameter (denoted by ∆ py ), the first order coupling is forbidden, as it accumulates a π phase under the mirror. The lowest order of coupling is (∆ * s ∆ py ) 2 . Similarly to the chiral case, we can induce a first order harmonic by coupling to an external field. The symmetry constrained Josephson couplings are summarized in table I. The above symmetry argument is general for different types of SCs. Here we consider a simplified microscopic weak coupling model to quantitatively describe Josephson couplings. This toy model well captures generic features of the twisted interface between TMDs (e.g., NbSe 2 ) and graphene-based SCs. A concrete example: NbSe 2 and MATBG twisted heterostructure, is considered in the next section. It shows consistent features compared to the toy model but gives quantitative magnitudes. Assuming momentum and spin conserving singleelectron tunneling element and singlet pairing, the toy model Hamiltonian is: where Ψ † l,p = (c † l,p,σ , c † l,p,σ , c l,-p,σ , c l,-p,σ ), and c l,p,σ annihilates a state with spin σ and momentum p in layer l (l = t, b). The momentum p ′ is determined by: are the reciprocal lattice vectors in both layers (marked in Fig. For the numerical analysis, we assume the following low-energy dispersion: ε t (p = K t + k, σ) = λ t |k| 2 for the probe layer, and y ) for the measured layer. The momentum k here is relative to the K l point of each layer l. The spectrum near the other valley K ′ l = -K l is directly related by TRS. We use the lattice constants of NbSe 2 for the probe layer and graphene for the measured layer to determine the relative position and twist of valleys. Due to the fast decay of t |p| , we consider only Bragg scattering events within the first Brillouin zone (BZ) of the measured layer. The Fermi surfaces (FSs) of the probe (purple) and measured (blue) layers are shown in Fig. With the toy model Hamiltonian, we can write down the first and higher order Josephson couplings explicitly, for different order parameter symmetries. Expanding the free energy to the second order in the tunneling element t (Appendix A), the leading first harmonic component is: where ω n = (2n + 1)π/β is the Matsubara frequency and ∆ s is the top probe layer order parameter (assume to be momentum independent) and ∆ k is the bottom layer order parameter. φ is the relative phase between top and bottom SCs. α k is the momentumdependent phase of the unknown order parameter, for instance, α (where n is the vector along the nodal direction) and α (p±ip) k = arg(k x ± ik y ) for p ± ip wave. i ∈ 1, 2, 3 is the Bragg scattering summation, where three processes are relevant within the first BZ of the measured layer. In Eq. 5 we see that each k point, gives a finite contribution to the first harmonic. However, a nontrivial k dependent phase α k , creates an interference effect upon integration over momenta and can lead to a vanishing coupling. For example, in the p + ip case, using C 3 symmetry and the identity 2 n=0 cos (φ + 2π 3 n) = 0, Eq. 5 gives a vanishing first order coupling, as expected from table I. For higher order terms, the nontrivial phase α k similarly enters the momentum integration and determines the leading harmonics (Appendix A). To quantitatively describe the probing principle, the Josephson current is numerically calculated by: where E 0 is a phase-independent constant and E kn is the n th positive energy eigenvalues of the BdG Hamiltonian H at momentum k. Eq. 6 is non-perturbative in the tunneling element t, which accounts for the cases when t ≲ |∆|. All plotted results are at zero temperature. The Josephson current at twist angle θ = 1 • is shown in Fig. Fig. Fig. For the chiral p + ip order parameter, only sin(3φ) component exists for all twist angles, as we predicted by symmetry. The variation of the FFT amplitude depends on the band alignments. Noticeably, for the p x wave case, we see a V-shaped drop of the first order term around twist angle 2.3 • . At this angle, the first order term vanishes due to destructive interference, and the second order coupling is dominant ( Fig. The toy model demonstrates how different order parameter symmetries of the system manifest themselves in the angle-dependent current-phase relation of the twisted junction. In order to provide quantitative predictions, we now study a concrete example: twisted Josephson junction between NbSe 2 , acting as an s-wave SC probe, and MATBG, an SC with an unknown order parameter symmetry. The two SCs are separated by two layers of WSe 2 that serve as a tunneling barrier. The barrier suppresses the interlayer hybridization and charge transfer, as confirmed by DFT calculations (Appendix D), such that the MATBG layer is not strongly perturbed by the NbSe 2 . For simplicity, we consider monolayer NbSe 2 as a probe. The MATBG layer is described by the continuum model The Josephson coupling has a complicated twist angle dependence. Figs. Figs. For the nodal p x wave case, the first order component generally dominates. There are several sign changes. Around them, the FFT amplitude shows sharp V-shaped drops in the first harmonic. Fig. For the chiral order parameter, we have shown a robust sin(3φ) dependence in the current-phase relation, regardless of the twist angle, as long as the C 3 symmetry is maintained. The third order harmonic scales as the interlayer tunneling amplitude t to the sixth power in the perturbative limit. On the other hand, if we slightly break the C 3 symmetry (either by an in-plane magnetic field or by strain), we can generate a first order component that scales as t 2 , which can be more significant than the intrinsic third order coupling. Phenomenologically, the phase-dependent free energy term is given in Eq. 1. Microscopically, an in-plane magnetic field generates both the Zeeman effect and the orbital effect. For a material with Rashba SOC, the Zeeman effect distorts the energy bands in a way that breaks the C 3 symmetry. By introducing these effects in the toy model, the Josephson current to the second order in t has the form (Appendix E): where α k is the order parameter's momentum-dependent phase and φ is the phase differences between two SCs. I 0k is independent of the Zeeman field and invariant under There is also a phase shift In the twisted NbSe 2 -MATBG junction as an example, Figs. 5a and 5b shows the current-phase relation and FFT amplitudes at twist angle θ = 19.5 • for different inplane Zeeman field strengths. A p + ip order parameter is assumed in the MATBG. At zero field, there is only a sin(3φ) component. As the field increases, a sin(φ) component is generated, whose amplitude is linear in the field strength. Next, we consider the orbital effect of the magnetic field. In an infinite junction, assuming fully momentumresolved tunneling, an arbitrarily small in-plane field completely decouples the order parameters of the two SCs. This is because the field creates a momentum mismatch between the two SC order parameters across the junction. If we relax the momentum conservation, assuming instead that the tunneling conserves momentum only up to 1/L (where L is the lateral size of the junction), we find a symmetry-breaking-induced first harmonic that is proportional to Φ 2 , where Φ is the flux through the junction. This is true for all orders in perturbation theory in t (Appendix E). Therefore, we expect the linear term related to the interplay of the Zeeman effect and Rashba SOC to dominate at small in-plane fields. Another way to create an orbital effect that breaks the symmetry is to drive an in-plane supercurrent through one of the SCs. Then, the order parameter in that layer acquires finite momentum 2q which results in a similar effect to that of the in-plane magnetic field. It also generates an additional symmetry-breaking effect from a shift of the energy spectrum of the quasi-particles. However, this effect does not contribute to the first harmonic Josephson coupling in linear order in q (Appendix E). We have studied how different order parameter symmetries of two-dimensional SCs manifest themselves in a twisted Josephson junction with an anisotropic s-wave SC as a probe. For an s-wave order parameter, the critical current dependence on the twist angle is expected to follow closely the dependence of the normal state conductance. Therefore, a strong deviation from this dependence is an indicator of a sign changing order parameter. The periodicity of the dominant term in the currentphase relation can be directly detected by Shapiro steps in the a.c. Josephson effect. Instead of integer steps in the dc voltage from the current bias: V dc = n ħωac 2e , we expect to see fractional steps: V dc = n m ħωac 2e for a sin(mφ) term. A further discussion of the fractional Shapiro steps, including estimates for experimental parameters where they may be observed, is provided in Appendix F. For nodal order parameters, we predict the suppression of the first order Josephson coupling at generic twist angles (not necessarily dictated by symmetry). The first order coupling shows V-shaped drops versus the twist angle. Around these angles, the energy-phase relation is expected to be dominated by the second harmonic. Generically, the second-order Josephson coupling has a sign that favors TRS breaking (i.e., the minimum of the energy occurs away from 0 and π.) The direct measurement of the angle dependent crit-ical current is also interesting. For the specific NbSe 2 -MATBG case, a strong enhancement of the critical current is predicted between twist angle θ = 20 • to θ = 40 • . In this twist angle range, the large NbSe 2 FSs around the Γ point in the second BZ intersect the tiny FSs of the MATBG around the K point. A similar situation is expected in other graphene-based superconductors. The recently developed quantum twisting microscope We thank Shahal Ilani for stimulating discussions. This work was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 817799), the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF), and the CRC 183 of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Project C02). In the toy model from Sec. II, the Green's function of the twisted junction is: , where H l is the Hamiltonian in layer l. T is the off-diagonal part, the interlayer tunneling matrix. We assume T i = tτ 3 , where τ i are Pauli matrices that act in Nambu space. In the perturbative limit in t, we can expand the free energy as: The leading first harmonic term is: where ω n is the Matsubara frequency and f (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. for p ± ip wave. n is the vector along the nodal direction. φ is the phase differences between the two SCs. j is the Bragg scattering summation. Within the first BZ of the measured layer, the momentum k is coupled to three different momenta k j in the probe layer, related by Bragg scattering j. F (1) 0 is the part of the free energy that does not depend on φ. In the last equation, we have taken the zero temperature limit, which gives Eq. 5 in the main text. For the leading second harmonic term, we have: where j 1 and j 2 are Bragg scattering summations. Mo-mentum k j3 is determined once specify j 1 and j 2 pro-cesses. Here we only kept the phase-dependent second harmonic Josephson couplings. The other terms are included in F (2) 0 (phase independent term and also a correction to the first harmonic at fourth order in t.). For the nodal order parameter p y (odd under mirror), the first harmonic vanishes as seen from Eq. 5 in the main text. For the second harmonic here, one possible term in Eq. 11 is α ka = α k b = α k , which gives the phase cos(2α k + 2φ). In this case, inserting α (py) k = arg(sgn(k • n)) gives a non-vanishing second harmonic coupling. The leading third harmonic coupling is generated at sixth order in t: ) . ( j 1,2,3 are Bragg scattering summations. Momentum k j4 and k j5 are determined once specify j 1,2,3 processes. The MATBG layer is described by the continuum model s,ξ,q,q ′ a † t,s,ξ (q)T ξ q,q ′ a b,s,ξ (q ′ ). a † t/b,s,ξ is a two-component spinor of creation operators for electrons in the two sublattices in the top or bottom (t or b) graphene later, with spin s and valley ξ. R± = cos θ 2 ± iσ y sin θ 2 is the rotation matrix of the top/bottom layer with relative twist angle θ. v f is the Fermi velocity of the graphene layer. σ α are Pauli matrices that act in sublattice space. q and q ′ are electron momentum related by Bragg scatterings: qq ′ = {q b , q tr , q tl }, ). a is the bond length in graphene. T ξ q,q ′ is the interlayer tunneling matrix, given in Ref. The Josephson current of the twisted interface is calculated by including the pairing potential in each layer and also the momentum-resolved interlayer tunneling. The pairing potential is added in the BCS mean-field way. For NbSe 2 , we use a constant superconducting gap ∆ s = 0.67 meV. For MATBG, we assume the nodal and chiral order parameter takes the form: with ∆ 0 = 0.2 meV. α k is the angle between k and the x axis, measured relative to the center of mini-BZ. The Cooper pair tunneling events include Bragg scatterings within the range of the first BZ of the graphene layer. Including the microscopic orbital symmetry, the largest interlayer coupling comes from the p z orbital of graphene and d z 2 orbital of NbSe 2 . The interlayer tunneling term is: T σ j = te iG T ,j τσ . σ is the sublattice index, with the corresponding sublattice vector τ σ . j is the Bragg scattering processes, which relates momentum by: G j,T and G j,NbSe2 are reciprocal lattice vectors in the top graphene layer and NbSe 2 , respectively. K g,ξ is the K point of the top graphene. To calculate the Zeeman field dependent Josephson coupling, we include Ising and Rashba SOC in the MATBG continuum model, with the SOC strength λ Ising and λ Rashba = 1 meV, consistent with the value reported in the literature As discussed in the main text, the critical current of nontrivial order parameter can be enhanced by increasing the interlayer tunneling strength t. Fig. We performed the density function theory (DFT) calculation using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) Here we consider a heterostructure of graphene-bilayer WSe 2 -monolayer NbSe 2 , as shown in Fig. where H t is the probe layer and H b is the measured layer. Ψ † l,k = (c † l,k,σ , c † l,k,σ , c l,-k,σ , c l,-k,σ ), and c l,k,σ annihi-lates a state with spin σ and momentum k in layer l. The momentum k is measured relative to the K point. The Ising SOC λ t σ z is included in the probe layer, which mimics the strong Ising SOC in NbSe 2 . The interlayer tunneling remains the form of Eq. 4 in the main text. For simplicity, we do not consider Bragg scatterings in the analytical expression shown below and momentum k determines the k ′ by the relation The second order perturbation gives: where, We sum the Matsubara frequency in pairs: ω n = (2n + 1)/β and ω -n-1 = -(2n + 1)/β. To the lowest order in |B|, the above equation ( where F 0k is independent of the Zeeman field and has C 3 symmetry. F 1k is a function of (k • B) 2 ,(k • B) 2 , |B| 2 , second order in |B|. There is also a phase shift , where b k (obtained from combining the sine and the cosine in Eq. 27) depends on microscopic parameters, e.g., momentum k, g t/b and λ t/b . For the s-wave case, we have a constant α k , which gives a non-zero F (2) = k F 0k cos(φ) in the absence of Zeeman field. Given the existing first order term, both the B induced F 1k term and the phase shift β k,B give a |B| 2 dependent critical current. For the p + ip case, k F 0k cos(φ + α k ) vanishes by C 3 symmetry. In the presence of an in-plane field, ). As a result, a first-harmonic Josephson coupling with a magnitude proportional to |B| is generated (seen directly from Eq. 27). Here we derive the orbital effect of an in-plane magnetic field. If the tunneling between the two superconductors is perfectly momentum-conserving, then any arbitrarily small in-plane orbital field completely decouples the two order parameters. To mimic the effect of the finite size of the system and the effect of disorder, we first relax the momentum conservation assumption made in Eq. 4, and instead, we write the tunneling element in the absence of magnetic field as t(p, p ′ ) = t ( p+p ′ 2 ) •f (p-p ′ ). f is a real and symmetric function peaked at zero (taking f to be a delta function recovers the momentum-conserving limit). We assume an in-plane magnetic field, and write the vector potential as A = zB × ẑ. The Hamiltonian is written as: where H t,b are as defined in Eq. 3, and T is given by where p = p + G 1 , p′ = p ′ + G 2 and q = e ħ dB × ẑ is the momentum boost due to the magnetic field. d is the distance between the two SCs. Using the fact that f is where Ψ † t,p = (c † t,p+q,σ , c † t,p+q,σ , c t,-p+q,σ , c t,-p+q,σ ), Ψ † b,p = (c † b,p,σ , c † b,p,σ , c b,-p,σ , c b,-p,σ ), p ′ is defined as in Eq. 4, and T is as defined in Eq. 32, substituting q = 0. Expanding the free energy to second order in T and to first order in q gives: The linear order term in q vanishes. To calculate the Shaprio steps, we use the RCSJ model where R and C are the junction resistance and capacitance. We input different current-phase relations for I JJ (φ) for different order parameter symmetries. Specifically, here we consider sin(3φ) case for the chiral order parameter and mixed first and second order harmonics case for the nodal order parameter. By solving Eq. 40 numerically, we derive the junction dynamic behavior. As shown in Figs. In cases where time reversal symmetry is spontaneously broken, the critical current through the junction can depend on the direction of the current 