I. Details about the mutual inductance coil assembly II. Detailed low-field inductive response V ′′ (H) and the extraction of effective penetration depth III. In-phase (dissipative) component V ′ of ac response IV. High-quality measurements of hysteresis in field-dependent screening response V. Temperature-and field-dependence of V ′′ at 20 kHz VI. Resistance and current-voltage characteristics of CsV 3 Sb 5 VII. Peak effect in critical current at 1.88 K VIII. Temperature-dependence of dc magnetization The screening response of vortices in kagome superconductor CsV3Sb5 was measured using the ac mutual inductance technique. Besides confirming the absence of gapless quasiparticles in zero external magnetic field, we observe the peak effect, manifested in enhanced vortex pinning strength and critical current, in a broad intermediate range of magnetic field. The peaks are followed by another crossover from strong to weak pinning, unlike the usual peak effect that diminishes smoothly at Hc2. Hysteresis in the screening response allows the identification of a vortex glass phase which strongly correlates with the onset of the peaks. A variety of features in the temperature-and field-dependence of the screening response, corroborated by resistance and dc magnetization measurements, have allowed us to extract an H-T phase diagram of the vortex states and to infer the irreversibility line Hirr(T ). Correlated metals in reduced dimensions often exhibit propensity to multiple ordered phases with similar energies, which leads to the phenomenon of "intertwined order" The appearance of superconductivity with T c ranging from ∼2.5 K to 4 K prompted further examinations of the relation between the normal and the superconducting states In this letter we examine the vortex phase diagram of CsV 3 Sb 5 through measurements of the superfluid response using a high-resolution mutual-inductance probe, supplemented by resistivity and magnetization measurements. Whereas the low-temperature zero-field data confirms the absence of gapless quasiparticles, we find an unusually wide temperature-range of phase fluctuations, which at a finite magnetic field evolves into a wide vortex liquid phase. For a constant magnetic field, an irreversibility line is observed, separating unpinned dissipative vortex liquid from a weak pinning regime characterized by weak sensitivity to the measurement time scale. The vortex lattice melting transition, appearing at lower fields and temperatures, is identified as an abrupt increase in inductive response. Finally, a pronounced "peak effect" is observed below the melting transition, exhibiting a hysteresis that weakens with increasing temperature. We therefore observe that CsV 3 Sb 5 provides a unique example of a clean anisotropic superconductor where a hierarchical succession of transitions and crossovers in the vortex state do not cross each other (by contrast to e.g. Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+y Peak effect is often observed in the inductive part of superfluid response, while exhibiting an enhancement in the depinning critical current density j c near H c2 The mutual inductance (MI) technique that we are adopting for our studies offers an alternative approach of measuring the full complex ac superfluid response CsV 3 Sb 5 single crystals were prepared by self-flux method We first focus on the superconducting transition in zero magnetic field as shown in Fig. eff (T ) from the measured V ′′ (T ). Nevertheless, such temperature independence as T → 0 is supported by the recent measurements of penetration depth that yielded similar results, i.e. nodeless superconductivity exhibiting no signature of gapless quasiparticles in zero magnetic field Upon applying a dc magnetic field along the c-axis H dc > H c1 ∼ 30 Oe at 0.12 K, the inductive response V ′′ (T ) is increasingly suppressed and becomes temperature-dependent as T → 0 in Fig. In Fig. rapidly weakening screening response, until a peak develops in each of the inductive response isotherms below ∼2 K. These peaks span a wide portion of the intermediate field range and correspond to the non-monotonic behavior in the temperature-dependence, reminiscent of the widely-known peak effect The peaks in CsV 3 Sb 5 appear more prominent at lower temperatures, approaching 30% of the maximal zero-field signal, while a peak was also found in critical current measurements (see supplementary). The peak's onset field (H onset ), peak field (H peak ), and width (|H base -H onset |) all increase with lower temperature, consistent with the canonical peak effect behaviors. Nevertheless, the peaks in CsV 3 Sb 5 are located at an intermediate range of magnetic field, rather than close to the onset of screening response at higher fields. Hysteresis in V ′′ (H) is largely seen at the low-field edges of the peaks with the largest split of ∼7 nV between upward and downward sweeps, and can be detected until at least 0.8 K where the split drops below measurement sensitivity. There also exists a much weaker hysteresis at lower fields (see supplemental information.) Such a hysteresis has been identified as a signature of vortex glass phase The rich features in the temperature-and field- dependence of superfluid screening response V ′′ allow us to identify various vortex phases in an H-T phase diagram Fig. From the field-dependence V ′′ (H), we extract the peak's onset H onset (T ) (violet), peak H peak (T ) (blue), and base H base (T ) (green) as a function of temperature. Independently, from the temperature-dependence V ′′ (T ) we extract T knee (H) (light blue) and T break (H) (light green) as a function of field as explained previously. The resulting curves are surprisingly consistent with each other, where T knee (H) and H peak (T ) as well as T break (H) and H base (T ) are perfectly aligned, respectively. The peaks become indistinguishable above ∼ 0.5T c ≈ 2 K. We begin with the low-field and low-temperature regimes of the H-T phase diagram. The strong hysteretic behavior (shadow) is bounded between H onset (T ) (violet) and H peak (T ) (blue), with its magnitude dropping below our sensitivity above ∼ 1 K. Consequently, H onset can be designated as the onset of a strongly hysteretic vortex glass phase, replacing a less-disordered dislocation-free "Bragg glass" phase at lower fields In previous studies of the vortex phase diagram in layered materials, particularly the cuprates, a gradual evolution in pinning strength is commonly expected between the boundary of the peak effect at H peak and H irr . In these cases and with no otherwise observable features, H peak is identified with the melting transition (see e.g. Returning to the peak effect, when compared with typical characteristics in both layered and non-layered superconductors In the high-field and high-temperature regimes, we attribute the onset of V ′′ (H irr (T )), for different frequencies, including dc, to the presence of pinned vortices, and thus an ac "irreversibility line" or "depinning line" H irr (T ) ∼ (T c -T ) α , where the exponent typically ranges from 4 3 to 2 Finally we note that debates persist for an unambiguous identification of the irreversibility line since it is highly sensitive to either geometrical barriers or the external drive current that causes depinning of vortices In summary, the screening response of vortices in kagome superconductor CsV 3 Sb 5 has been measured using the ac mutual inductance technique. Besides confirming the absence of gapless quasiparticles in zero external magnetic field, we observe the peak effect, corresponding to enhanced pinning strength and critical current, in a broad intermediate range of magnetic field. The peaks vanishes at a melting transition from strong to weak pinning, unlike the usual peak effect that ends near H irr or H c2 . Hysteresis in V ′′ leads us to the identify a vortex glass phase, where its onset is highly correlated with that of the peaks. The various features in the temperature-and field-dependence of the screening response, corroborated by transport and dc magnetization measurements, have allowed us to construct an H-T phase diagram of the vortex states and to infer the irreversibility line H irr (T ). Our mutual inductance (MI) probe is of the gradiometer-type consisting of compensated receive coils and a drive coil positioned co-axially with each other. The drive coil is supplied with an ac current of 20 μA, via a 100 kΩ currentlimiting resistor. The resulting ac magnetic field is screened by the superconductor, which can be characterized by a complex ac conductance, producing a screening current in response. The magnetic field associated with this screening current in turn induces an emf in the receive coils, whose potential drop is measured by a lock-in amplifier. The induced voltage for a certain coil geometry (captured within the mutual inductance function M (x)) is given by: (assuming sample as an infinite plane) The geometrical parameters of our coils are: (receive) radius r R = 0.75 mm; wire diameter δh R = 0.02 mm; number of turns N R = 56; distance to sample h R ≈ 0.02 mm; (drive) radius r D = 1.25 mm; wire diameter δh D = 0.08 mm; number of turns N D = 71; distance to sample h D ≈ 0.1 mm. The coil assembly is based on a machined Nylon base, and was encapsulated in Stycast 1266 epoxy for mechanical integrity. The whole coil assembly is screwed into a gold-plated copper stand, which also serves as a good thermal anchor for the coil assembly. Electrical connections to the coils were made by silver epoxy. The sample was loaded on the cold finger into a thick layer of silver paint to reduce the stress exerted by the coil on the sample. Fig. where h = h R + h D is the sample-coil distance, the dimensionless x = q t h is the transverse spatial wave vector in units of 1/h, and α, β, γ, δ are R D , R R , δh D , δh R in units of h, respectively. J 1 (x) is the n = 1 Bessel function of the first kind. With our coil geometry, the calculated mutual inductance function generally behaves as a Bessel function, where the inductance starts out as zero at x = 0, i.e. insensitive to spatially uniform magnetic flux. The largest inductance occurs at x = 1/4, where q t = 1/4h ∼ 2.5 mm -1 , corresponding to a wavelength roughly twice the diameter of our receive coil corresponding to the maximal flux. At x = 1/2 the wave vector q t ∼ 5 mm -1 , corresponding to the diameter of our receive coil, so the flux equals zero. For longer wavelengths the signal is largely canceled and therefore we are mostly sensitive to magnetic fields produced by the screening current with a wave vector around q t = 1/4h. In this study, due to the finite size of the CsV 3 Sb 5 crystal relative to the receive coils, Eqs. S.1 and S.2 cannot be directly applied for calculating the complex conductance. However, qualitative features can still be extracted from the measured temperature-and field-dependent superfluid response. Furthermore, due to the insufficient compensation between the astatic receive coil windings and any stray capacitive coupling between the coaxial transmission lines for coil wiring, there exists a temperature-independent background to either quadrature and a phase shift that mixes the two quadratures. In Fig. To improve data quality and to reduce the effect of finite time constant in lock-in detection, we repeated the fielddependent measurement at a much lower field ramp rate of ∼ 1 Oe/s in both ramp directions. For reference, the feature size relevant to the peak effect is ∼ 1000 Oe. This allows us to calculate the first order derivative versus magnetic field dV ′′ /dH. The local maxima/minima can be pinpointed whereas a peak in dV ′′ /dH at ∼ ±6.5 kOe corresponds to the melting transition from strong to weak pinning. As seen in Fig. Following the same method used in the 100-kHz analysis, we extracted the features T knee , T break , T c , H onset , H peak , H base , and H irr . The extracted features are plotted in Fig. At zero applied magnetic field, the zero-resistance superconducting transition temperature T c ≈ 3.25 K, consistent with the onset of superfluid screening response V ′′ in MI data when extrapolated to f → 0 (dc). The field-dependent T c (H) is taken as the onset of superconducting transition, where the resistance starts to deviate from its normal state value by one standard deviation of the signal fluctuation. The broadened superconducting transition suggests the crucial role of vortex dynamics in this material. Indeed, the I-V characteristics at T = 1.88 K in varying magnetic fields show a strongly non-Ohmic behavior over a broad range of excitation currents, further supporting the vortex glass picture. The applied magnetic field ranges from 0 Oe (violet) to 3 kOe (red). From the I-V characteristics we extract the critical current by vortex depinning. The critical current extracted from the I-V characteristics of Sample 2 (right axis) is compared with screening response V ′′ (H) of Sample 1 (left axis). Despite a small one, the peak in critical current is seen at similar H peak as the peaks in V ′′ (H). As peak effect is considered originating from enhancement in pinning force density f p , and thus critical current j c = f p /B, this is a solid evidence for the observation of the peak effect in CsV 3 Sb 5 .