In this study, we grow FeSe/SrTiO 3 with thicknesses of 4-19 nm using pulsed laser deposition and investigate their magneto-transport properties. The thinnest film (4 nm) exhibit negative Hall effect, indicating electron transfer into FeSe from the SrTiO 3 substrate. This is in agreement with reports on ultrathin FeSe/SrTiO 3 grown by molecular beam epitaxy. The upper critical field is found to exhibit large anisotropy (γ > 11.9), estimated from the data near the transition temperature (Tc). In particular, the estimated coherence lengths in the perpendicular direction are 0.15-0.27 nm, which are smaller than the c-axis length of FeSe, and are found to be almost independent of the total thicknesses of the films. These results indicate that superconductivity is confined at the interface of FeSe/SrTiO 3 . Monolayer FeSe on SrTiO 3 (STO) shows a significantly enhanced superconducting transition temperature (T c ) However, zero-resistivity has been reported only below 30 K by transport measurements In this study, we grow FeSe/STO with thicknesses of 4-19 nm using PLD and investigated their magnetotransport properties. The thinnest film (4 nm) exhibits negative Hall effect, indicating electron transfer into FeSe from the STO substrate. This is in agreement with reports on ultrathin FeSe/STO grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) FeSe films were grown on atomically flat STO (100) substrates using the PLD technique Resistivity and Hall measurements were conducted using a physical property measurement system (PPMS) from 2 to 300 K. Figures Electron transfer is limited to a few layers near the FeSe/STO interface in sample #1 (4 nm), whereas in the thicker sample sample #2 (19 nm) transferred carrier is diluted, leading to the positive R xy /B as a whole. Thus, thicker films showed positive R xy /B even at low temperatures. This also explains why superconductivity properties are different between the two samples even when superconductivity takes place at the interface. The difference in the carrier density can cause the difference in superconductivity properties. Indeed, a similar discussion is found in a paper To investigate the anisotropy of superconductivity in the grown films, we conducted magneto-transport measurements on the grown films across T c . Figure To look for the origin of the extremely confined superconductivity, we investigated ξ c (0) for various films with different thicknesses (Fig. In conclusion, we grew FeSe/STO with different thicknesses of 4-19 nm using PLD and investigated the magneto-transport effect, namely the Hall effect and the the upper critical fields for B//c and B//ab. The thinnest film (4 nm thickness) showed negative R xy /d even down to low temperatures, indicating the electron transfer from the STO substrate. The anisotropy of the upper critical fields estimated from the data near T c was very large (γ ≥ 11.9), and the estimated caxis coherence length, ξ c (0) is very short (≤ 0.27 Å) and almost independent of the total film thickness. All of these results indicate that superconductivity is confined at the interface of FeSe/STO in our PLDgrown films. Thus, the next step is to realize higher zero-resistance T c of this interface superconductivity, which is under investigation.