Stealthy electronically reconfigurable transmitarray antennas are essential components in wireless communication and radar detection systems. Therefore, this paper proposes a 1 bit electronically reconfigurable transmitarray antenna with out-of-band scatter suppression. The transmitarray consists of two layers, the absorptive frequency selective transmission (AFST) layer and reconfigurable transmitarray (RTA) layer, separated by air. Specifically, the AFST layer achieves out-ofband scattering suppression and in-band transmission performance by utilizing the first three resonant modes of a bent metallic strip with a centrally loaded resistor. Additionally, the RTA layer adopts a receiver-transmitter structure with an active receiving dipole and a passive orthogonal transmitting dipole. The 1 bit phase shift is achieved by alternating two pin diodes integrated on the active dipole to reverse its current direction. To evaluate the proposed design, a 16× 1 6-element transmitarray prototype is designed, fabricated and measured. For scattering, the 10-dB radar cross section reduction is realized within 4~5.2 GHz and 10.9~11.4 GHz, respectively. For radiation, the measured gain is 19.9 dBi at 7.5 GHz, corresponding to an aperture efficiency of 12.1%. and the beam scanning covers ±60 o with gain loss of 5 dB in both two principal planes. In modern long-distance communication and radar systems, high-gain antennas are essential for achieving a desirable signal-to-noise ratio. Over the past few decades, a variety of array technologies have been developed at a rapid pace, including phased array antennas, reflectarray antennas, and transmitarray antennas [1]- Reflectarrays and transmitarrays have gained popularity as competitive high-gain antenna candidates due to their ability to achieve high gains without the use of complex and lossy feed networks. Compared to reflectarrays, transmitarrays do not suffer from feed blockage, leading to substantial advancements in their design and implementation Various approaches have been explored to realize low RCS transmitarray antennas. These include the use of a resistive sheet, fixed bandstop Frequency Selective Surface (FSS), and adjustable bandpass FSS with phase-shifting capability to achieve absorption-type low RCS transmitarray antennas Compared to traditional transmitarray antennas, 1 bit reconfigurable transmitarray antennas (RTAs) offer several advantages, including low cost and electrically controllable radiation characteristics. As a result, they are better suited for modern high-integration application systems that require various functions. Previous research on 1 bit reconfigurable transmitarray antennas has primarily focused on improving bandwidth, polarization, and scanning angle performance To address this technology gap, we propose a 1 bit electronically reconfigurable transmitarray with out-of-band scatter suppression. The transmitarray comprises an AFST layer and an RTA layer. The AFST layer is utilized to suppress out-ofband scattering while maintaining in-band transmission performance, and the RTA layer is responsible for achieving 1 bit transmission phase shifting. To verify the design concept, we designed, fabricated, and measured a 16x16-element transmitarray prototype. The measured radiation and scattering results demonstrate that the proposed low RCS RTA achieves high-gain in-band radiation and beam scanning while effectively suppressing out-of-band scattering. The key step in designing the low RCS 1 bit RTA is to construct two RCS reduction bands in the lower and upper sides of the antenna's operating band while maintaining high-gain radiation and beam scanning in the middle band. The entire structure consists of two layers separated by an air cavity: the AFST and RTA layers, with the feed antenna located under the RTA layer at a specific distance. The designed low RCS RTA exhibits various frequency responses in different frequency bands, and its different components offer different functionalities, as described in Fig. As shown in Fig. The design process of the low RCS 1 bit RTA, based on the design concepts outlined in Section II, can be divided into three main steps: AFST design, 1 bit RTA design, and array design. Each of these steps is crucial in achieving the desired low RCS and high-gain and beam scanning radiation performance of the transmitarray antenna. In the first step of the low RCS 1 bit RTA design process, the AFST element was analyzed and designed. The AFST needed to have the ability to out-of-band absorption and inband transmission while maintaining a low profile and simple structure. To achieve these goals, multi-resonant modes on the metallic strip were used, with different functions assigned to different modes by loading resistor mance. The simulation is carried out using the HFSS commercial simulation software with Floquet ports and Master-Slave boundary conditions. Fig. After the design and analysis of the AFST, the next step is to design the 1 bit RTA element. As mentioned in Section II, the RTA structure must meet two key requirements. The first is to provide low insertion loss transmission and 1 bit phase regulation at f M = 7.5 GHz to enable in-band high gain and beam scanning performance. The second is to maintain perfect reflection characteristics near f L = 4 GHz and f H = 10.5 GHz to ensure the out-of-band RCS reduction performance of the AFST. Frequency (GHz) q = 0 o q = 30 o q = 50 o q = 60 o employs a receiver-transmitter structure with an active receiving dipole and a passive asymmetric transmitting dipole The element of the low RCS 1 bit RTA is constructed by integrating the AFST and 1bit RTA structures according to the design concepts in Section II, as shown in Fig. A 16×16 low RCS 1-bit RTA prototype is designed, fabricated, and measured based on the element structure described in Section III, as illustrated in Fig. ∆φ t = -2π λ (mP sin θ t cos φ t + nP sin θ t sin φ t ) ( Where ∆φ f and ∆φ t are the phase difference because of element position and beam scanning, and ∆φ is the reference phase. Then, the bit state of each element can be obtained using the formula ( The measurement process consists of two parts: RCS reduction evaluation and radiation performance measurement. Therefore, two different measurement systems are set up to complete the measurement process, as illustrated in Fig. The RCS reduction performance of the prototype can be determined from the simulated results shown in Fig. The simulated and measured monostatic RCS reduction performance under oblique incidence is shown in Fig. This paper presents a 1-bit electronically reconfigurable transmitarray with out-of-band scatter suppression, consisting of the AFST and RTA layers. The AFST layer uses the first three resonant modes of a bent metallic strip with a centrally loaded resistor to achieve out-of-band scattering suppression and in-band transmission performance. Meanwhile, the RTA layer adopts a receiver-transmitter structure with an active receiving dipole and a passive orthogonal transmitting dipole to achieve 1-bit transmission phase reconfiguration. Subsequently, a 16×16-element transmitarray prototype is designed and tested, revealing in-band high gain radiation and beam scanning capabilities, along with out-of-band RCS reduction. [1]. Y. Yusuf and X. Gong, "A low-cost patch antenna phased array with analog beam steering using mutual coupling and reactive loading," IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 81-84, 2008. Sim. q = 20 o Sim. q = 30 o Meas. q = 5 o Meas. q = 20 o Meas. q = 30 o Passband