We present comparative theoretical investigation of thermoelectric power and Hall effect in the Hubbard model for correlated metal and Mott insulator (considered as prototype cuprate superconductor) for different concentrations of current carriers. Analysis is performed within standard DMFT approximation. For Mott insulator we consider the typical case of partial filling of the lower Hubbard band (hole doping). We calculate the dependence of thermopower on doping level and determine the critical concentration of carriers corresponding to sign change of thermopower. An anomalous dependence of thermopower on temperature is obtained significantly different from linear temperature dependence typical for the usual metals. The role of disorder scattering is analyzed on qualitative level. The comparison with similar studies of the Hall effect shows, that breaking of electron -hole symmetry leads to the appearance of the relatively large interval of band -fillings (close to the half -filling) where thermopower and Hall effects have different signs. We propose a certain scheme allowing to determine the number of carriers from ARPES data and perform semiquantitative estimate of both thermopower and Hall coefficient using the usual DFT calculations of electronic spectrum. The problem of doping dependence of thermopower and Hall effect in strongly correlated systems is known for a long time. It remains actual with respect to experimental studies of these effects in copper -oxide (cuprate) high -temperature superconductors at different doping levels. One of the basic concepts in cuprate physics is that these systems are strongly correlated and their metallic (and superconducting) state is realized via doping of the prototype phase of the Mott insulator, which in the simplest case can be described in the framework of the Hubbard model. Most developed method of theoretical description of the Hubbard model for the wide range of parameters of this model remains the dynamical mean -field approach (DMFT) As noted above the general method to study the Hubbard model is the dynamical mean -field theory (DMFT) Anticipating the possible comparison with experimental data for cuprates in the following we consider the twodimensional model of electronic spectrum in tight -binding approximation: where a -is (square) lattice parameter. For this two -dimensional model in the following we shall consider a number of typical cases: 1. spectrum with hopping only between nearest neighbors (t ′ = 0) and complete electron -hole symmetry, 2. spectrum with t ′ /t = -0.25 qualitatively corresponding to electron in systems like LSCO, 3. spectrum with t ′ /t = -0.4, qualitatively corresponding to situation observed in YBCO. Thermopower is determined by the following expression where k B is Boltzmann's constant (in the following we write temperature in the units of energy assuming k B = 1), e is electronic charge, f (ε) = (e ε T + 1) -1 -Fermi distribution. Below the values of thermopower are shown in units of kB e ≈ 86 μV K . Relaxation parameter introduced in Eq. ( and is completely determined by Green's function G(pε) spectral density: In standard The usual (diagonal) static conductivity is given by while Hall (non -diagonal) conductivity determined by: where H is the magnetic field along z -axis. Here we also introduced Hall relaxation parameter: Thus, the Hall coefficient is: and it is also completely determined by spectral density A(pε), which we shall calculate within DMFT. Effective single Anderson impurity model of DMFT in this work, as in Refs. Consider the case of low temperatures (T ≪ E F ). For any function Φ(ε) (if integral is converges) we have: Then for diagonal conductivity from Eq. ( and thermopower at low temperatures is given by: so that from Eqs. where μ is the chemical potential (from which we always count the energy ε). Thus at low T the absolute value of thermopower linearly increases with the growth of T , while the sign of S is completely determined by the sign of dτ (ε) dε ε=0 or dσxx(μ) dμ . In the following we shall be interested in dependence on band -filling n = n ↑ = n ↓ = ∞ -∞ dεf (ε)N (ε) (we shall consider only the paramagnetic state), where N (ε) is the density of states per single spin projection. If we explicitly take into account the chemical potential Eq. ( Here dn dμ > 0 as at low temperatures Thus, the sign of S is completely determined by the sign of dτ (n) dn or dσxx(n) dn . Hall conductivity (6) at low temperatures with the account of Eq. ( and the Hall coefficient The sign of the Hall coefficient is completely determined by the sign of τ H (0) or by the sign of τ H (n). We see that the signs of thermopower and Hall coefficient are determined, strictly speaking, by completely different expressions, so that the band -fillings corresponding to their sign change, in general, can be quite different. To study this situation in more details we shall consider first the case when electron correlations are absent (Hubbard interaction U = 0.) In the absence correlations and other scattering processes of electrons (ideal conductor) both numerator and denominator in Eq. ( where γ ≪ t is scattering frequency (e.g. by impurities), so that the spectral density takes the form: Dependencies of thermopower and Hall coefficient obtained directly from Eqs. ( For γ ≪ t spectral density has a narrow peak at ε ∼ ε(p), then: so that we can write: where we have introduced Similarly where we have introduced Then at low temperature (T ≪ E F ) instead of Eq. ( and the sign of S is opposite to the sign of dτ0(n) dn . For Hall coefficient instead of Eq. ( and the sign of R H is opposite to the sign of τ 0H (n). Note that ∂ 2 ε(p) ∂py 2 is the only sign -changing entity in Eq. ( On the contrary, τ 0 (n) for t ′ /t = -0.4 (Fig. Thus with the growth of |t ′ | the band -filling, corresponding to the sign change of R H , moves to the region of n below half -filling of the band, while the band -filling, corresponding to sign change of S, more farther into the region of n > 0.5. As a result, the growth of |t ′ | close to half -filling leads to formation of a wider region of band -fillings, where Hall coefficient and thermopower have different signs, and the growth of the temperature makes this region even wider. Below we shall see that this tendency is observed also in systems with systems with strong electronic correlations. Before going to the results of our DMFT calculations we shall present an elementary qualitative analysis along the lines of Refs. In the case of electron -hole symmetry it is natural to suppose that both thermopower and Hall coefficient change sign close to half -filling of the lower Hubbard band n 0 ≈ 1/2. Consider the states with "upper" spin projection, then the full number of available states in the lower Hubbard band id 1 -n ↓ = 1 -n. Then the band -filling is determined by n Thus for the filling at which both thermopower and Hall effect we obtain the estimate n c ≈ 1/3, with corresponding "hole" concentration p c = 1 -2n c ≈ 1/3 In general case situation is obviously more complicated. In strongly correlated systems both thermopower and Hall effect (as well as other electronic properties) are significantly dependent on temperature. At low temperatures in these systems considered in DMFT approximation along with lower and upper Hubbard bands an additional narrow quaiparticle band forms close to the Fermi level leading to the so -called quasiparticle peak in the density of states In Fig. for the limit of U ≫ t. It can be seen that in this atomic limit thermopower changes sign at n = 1/3 in complete accordance with our estimate. It is possible that this significant difference is due to our use of DMFT approximation. Cluster DMFT For noticeable breaking of electron -hole symmetry our qualitative estimate becomes invalid both for the Hall coefficient In the low -temperature limit (curves with unfilled symbols in Fig. In general case calculation of disorder scattering effects (more so pseudogap fluctuations) upon thermopower is rather complicated problem. As a simple estimate below we present the results of calculations using Eqs. ( In Fig. In Fig. Recently quantum Monte -Carlo calculations of thermopower were done for the Hubbard model FROM ARPES DATA. Measuring thermopower and Hall coefficient are among the major experimental methods to determine the type and concentration of current carriers. However, as was demonstrated above, especially under the conditions of broken electron -hole symmetry (t ′ = 0) a wide region of band -fillings appear, where thermopower and Hall effect produce evidence for for different type of charge carriers (p-n anomaly). As was shown in Refs. Below we shall show, that a semiquantitative estimate of the number of charge carriers, as well as of thermopower and Hall coefficient in doped Mott insulator can be done using ARPES data and electron spectrum obtained within the standard DFT calculations. In systems with strong electronic correlations, doped Mott insulator including, Fermi -liquid description still holds, Fermi surface is well defined , as well as quasiparticles near it where μ is the chemical potential, determined from band -filling within DMFT, while Σ(0) is local (DMFT) selfenergy at the Fermi level. Let us introduce now μ ef f = μ -ReΣ(0), then instead of Eq. ( determining the Fermi surface like in the absence of electronic correlations (U = 0), but with chemical potential μ ef f . Obviously in general case spectral density is much "smeared" around the Fermi surface, but its maximum is still on it (Fig. Then from n 0 we can easily get the total filling of the whole band n. The total number of states in the lower Hubbard band is 1 -n, so that the total filling is n = n 0 (1 -n) and we get: In Fig. In low -temperature regime the presence of quasiparticle peak in the density of states of DMFT makes Eq. ( It is necessary to note once more, that anomalies observed in low -temperature regime are determined by the presence of quasiparticle peak in DMFT approximation, while it vanishes with increase of temperature or due to disorder, as well as due to account of nonlocal correlations outside DMFT. Thus, it is quite possible that qualitatively the results obtained in high -temperature regime are more or less general. Using ARPES data for doped Mott insulator we can determine n 0 (in fact it is just the area of the Brillouin zone below the Fermi surface) and then, using Eq. (28), define the total filling n and hole doping level as p = 1 -2n. Standard DFT calculations of electron spectrum, with the account of filling of uncorrelated band n 0 , allow using Eqs. ( We have studied the behavior of thermoelectric power in metallic phase originating by doping the Mott insulator. We mainly concentrated on the case of hole doping, characteristic for the major part of cuprates. We have considered a number of two -dimensional tight -binding models of electron spectrum, fitting the electronic structure of cuprates. In all of these models in doped Mott insulator we observe anomalous temperature dependence of thermopower S which is significantly different from linear dependence typical to usual metals. In low -temperature limit S is mainly determined by filling of quasiparticle peak, leading to negative values of thermopower at any hole doping and anomalous dependence of S on filling, when the negative (electron -like) thermopower increases its absolute value with addition of electrons. For thermopower these low -temperature anomalies, connected with the filling of quasioarticle peak, are much stronger than similar anomalies for Hall coefficient. In high -temperature limit, when the quasiparticle peak is essentially damped, S is mainly determined by the filling of lower (for hole doping) or upper (for electron doping) Hubbard band. In this limit the qualitative estimate shows that the sign change of both S and Hall effect in the simplest (symmetric, t ′ = 0) case takes place at band -filling n=1/3 per single spin projection, corresponding to hole doping p = 1 -2n=1/3. DMFT calculations show that S changes its sign at n=0.42, while Hall effect sign change takes place at n=0.36. Thus, even in the case of electron -hole symmetry there is narrow region of dopings, where R H is already positive, while S remains negative. The breaking of electron -hole symmetry leads to the increase of filling n, corresponding to sign change of S, and to the decrease of n, corresponding to sign change of R H , leading to rather wide region of fillings, where thermopower and Hall effect have different signs. We have also proposed a scheme, allowing to obtain the number of charge carriers in doped Mott insulator form ARPES data using DFT calculations of electronic spectrum and to perform a semiquantitative estimate of both Hall coefficient and thermopower. In principle, on the qualitative level, the possibility of different signs of thermopower and Hall effect is known for rather long time and was observed in a number of experiments in disordered systems Authors are grateful to P. Phillips, who called our attention to the importance of the studies of concentration dependence of thermopower within DMFT, and to D.I. Khomskii who actively participated in the initial stages of our work on the Hall effect. 