We use resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) at the O K-and Cu K-edges to investigate the doping-and temperature dependence of low-energy plasmon excitations in La2-xSrxCuO4. We observe a monotonic increase of the energy scale of the plasmons with increasing doping x in the underdoped regime, whereas a saturation occurs above optimal doping x ≳ 0.16 and persists at least up to x = 0.4. Furthermore, we find that the plasmon excitations show only a marginal temperature dependence, and possible effects due to the superconducting transition and the onset of strange metal behavior are either absent or below the detection limit of our experiment. Taking into account the strongly correlated character of the cuprates, we show that layered t-J-V model calculations accurately capture the increase of the plasmon energy in the underdoped regime. However, the computed plasmon energy continues to increase even for doping levels above x ≳ 0.16, which is distinct from the experimentally observed saturation, and reaches a broad maximum around x = 0.55. We discuss whether possible lattice disorder in overdoped samples, a renormalization of the electronic correlation strength at high dopings, or an increasing relevance of non-planar Cu and O orbitals could be responsible for the discrepancy between experiment and theory for doping levels above x = 0.16. In spite of intense experimental and theoretical research efforts, superconducting cuprates have retained an enigmatic character for more than three decades. On the one hand, it is well known that their high-temperature superconductivity emerges when charge carriers are doped into the CuO 2 planes, suppressing the long-range antiferromagnetic order that is prevalent in the Mott insulating parent compounds Insights into the electronic structure and the dynamics of doped charge carriers in these diverse phases can be gained by various spectroscopic techniques. For instance, x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and electron-energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) at the O Kedge or Cu L-edge have revealed how doped holes distribute within the CuO 2 planes, that is, they reside within the hybridized Cu 3d x 2 -y 2 and O 2p x,y orbitals, with a dominant influence of the latter orbitals A different technique for investigating the charge dynamics of cuprates, both in the normal and superconducting state, is infrared/optical spectroscopy Recently, resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) Plasmons are a fundamental collective excitation of the charge carrier density in metallic systems, mediated by long-range Coulomb interactions. An isotropic three-dimensional metal usually exhibits only one optical plasmon branch, while systems with stacked conducting planes that interact via poorly-screened interlayer Coulomb interactions exhibit a set of acoustic plasmon branches that disperse almost linearly towards zero energy at the BZ center In a broader context, low-energy plasmons in cuprates attracted considerable attention already before their detection with RIXS In this work, we use soft x-ray RIXS at the O Kedge and hard x-ray RIXS at the Cu K-edge to comprehensively map the evolution of low-energy plasmon excitations across the phase diagram of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 . Whereas the doping dependence of plasmon excitations in electron-doped cuprates was addressed in earlier studies Thin films of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 were synthesized by ozone-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) (see Appendix A for details). Our film with the lowest doping (x = 0.05) is non-superconducting and becomes insulating at low temperatures [Fig. As expected, we detect the highest superconducting transition of our film series for the optimal doping x = 0.16, that is, T c = 41 K. The T c decreases slightly in the subsequent film with x = 0.2, where the electrical resistivity varies almost perfectly linear as a function of temperature in the normal state at least up to 300 K [Fig. For the overdoped x = 0.3 film, we observe a decrease of T c to 26 K. The highly overdoped x = 0.4 film exhibits an onset of a superconducting transition around 5 K. This behavior in the latter two samples differs from reports on bulk La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , where the superconducting dome typically terminates around x ∼ 0.25 The XAS signal across the near-edge fine structure of the O K-edge contains hallmark fingerprints of the electronic structure of the cuprates In order to gain deeper insights into the dynamics of the doped holes and the ZRS state for each doping level, we measured RIXS with the incident photon energy tuned to the maximum of the hole-peak in the corresponding XAS from Figs. 2a-f. In the following, we denote the momentum transfer by (H, K, L) in reciprocal lattice units (2π/a, 2π/b, 2π/c), where a, b, and c are the lattice constants of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 . However, the crystallographic unit cell of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 contains two CuO 2 planes, whereas only the distance d = c/2 between adjacent CuO 2 planes is relevant for the periodicity of the plasmon dispersion The obtained RIXS spectra for in-plane momenta H = 0.04, 0.08, and 0.12 are displayed in Figs. In Figs. Figure For dopings beyond x = 0.16, we find that the plasmon energy does not continue to grow, but instead tends to saturate for x = 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4 [Figs. 2j-l and Fig. Besides the systematic evolution of the plasmon energy [Fig. Nonetheless, the RIXS data in Figs. 2g-l clearly demonstrate that plasmon excitations pervade the cuprate phase diagram at least from x = 0.05 to 0.4 and for momenta as large as H = 0.12. In particular, the unaffected emergence of plasmon quasiparticles in the overdoped regime raises the question, whether such an observation is compatible with previous proposals based on reflection EELS experiments To corroborate the existence of plasmon excitations in the strange metal regime and to obtain complementary information, we use RIXS at a different absorption edge, that is, the Cu K-edge. An advantage of the high energy of the hard x-ray photons tuned to the Cu K-edge is the wide range of reciprocal space that becomes accessible for RIXS. However, due to the increased penetration depth of the photons, we carry out the RIXS measurements on a bulk single-crystal instead of the La 1.8 Sr 0.2 CuO 4 thin film that was used for the O K-edge experiment above. Our single-crystal exhibits a T c of approximately 38 K and a similar T -linear transport behavior [Fig. Figure In order to identify the resonance energy where the emergence of the plasmon excitation is expected in RIXS, we briefly recall previous assignments of the Cu K-edge XAS features of cuprates. Note that low-energy plasmons were not observed in previous Cu K-edge RIXS experiments on hole-doped cuprates, whereas recent Cu K-edge RIXS studies on electron-doped cuprates revealed a low-energy excitation that is compatible with the typical plasmon dispersion Hence, we focus on incident energies in the region around peak A in our RIXS experiment, and use a much improved energy resolution of ∆E ∼ 80 meV. To reduce the strong elastic scattering at the Cu K-edge, we employ π-polarized photons and keep the scattering angle close to 90 • for all measurements. This condition is realized for out-of-plane momenta revolving around L * = 6.5 and small in-plane momenta. Further details about the scattering geometry are given in Appendix A. Figure Furthermore, the latter feature shows a distinct outof-plane dispersion [Fig. For a definitive assignment of the dispersive mode in Figs. In addition to the dependence of the plasmon excitation on the doping level x at a fixed temperature [Fig. The observed absence of strong renormalization effects of the plasmon energy and linewidth across T c is consistent with detailed ellipsometry experiments of the optical plasmon branch in Bi-based cuprates in Ref. Moreover, to detect significant renormalization effects of the acoustic-like plasmons across T c , it may be necessary to conduct the RIXS measurements in immediate vicinity to the in-plane BZ center (H = K ≈ 0). Specifically, at the in-plane BZ center the energy of acousticlike plasmons becomes minimal, and can be comparable to the energy scale of the superconducting gap 2∆, given that the interlayer-hopping t z of the material After our confirmation of the emergence of the plasmon excitation for x = 0.2 by Cu K-edge RIXS [Fig. Notably, the computed plasmon energies in Fig. In the present study, we employ the t-J-V model to explore the entire doping range of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 at momenta that directly correspond to the RIXS experiment. The t-J-V model takes into account strong correlations which are known to be responsible for the insulating state at half-filling (x = 0) Interestingly, above optimal doping and especially in the highly overdoped regime, the plasmon energies determined by RIXS tend to saturate around a doping that is lower than the prediction of the t-J-V calculation, except for the momentum H = 0.04 [Fig. Our RIXS measurements at the O K-edge revealed that from very low dopings up to x ≈ 0.2 the plasmon energy increases with increasing hole-doping [Fig. First, we address potential experimental shortcomings and note that the doping dependence of the plasmon energy probed by RIXS is reminiscent of that of the optical plasmon energy observed by optics experiments Second, there might be an overestimation of correlations in the t-J-V model, which pushes the crossover from a strongly correlated to a moderately or weakly correlated regime to higher dopings. In more detail, the broad maximum of the plasmon energy between 0.4 ≲ x ≲ 0.6 in the t-J-V calculation in Fig. Third, the activation of additional orbital degrees of freedom at large doping might play a significant role in the doping dependence. Such an activation is not captured by the one-band t-J-V model, which is an effective model for the three-band Hubbard model, where the Cu 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals are hybridized with the 2p x and 2p y orbitals of the in-plane oxygen ions, forming the ZRS band Besides the observed saturation of the plasmon energy, our results provide fresh insights into the debate on whether plasmons can exist at all doping levels in the cuprate phase diagram, or if specific phases preclude their emergence. In particular, previous reflection EELS experiments on Bi 2.1 Sr 1.9 CaCu 2 O 8+x In a broader context, we point out that a cautious use of the terminology for the plasmon phenomenology in cuprates is important. For instance, Ref. 65 refers to the ensemble of branches between the optical plasmon and the lowest-energy (quasi-)acoustic branch in terms of a plasmon continuum. Such a continuum is not directly related to the decay of a nominally sharp plasmon excitation into a continuum due to various classical or quantum critical damping mechanisms axes is small, and the films are twinned in the ab-plane, we do not distinguish between a and b in the following. The scattering angle 2θ was kept fixed at 90 • , while the angle θ between the sample surface and the incident xrays was varied to probe different momentum transfers. The XAS data were taken with σ-polarized photons at an incident angle θ = 35 • in partial fluorescence yield using a silicon drift detector, collecting only the O K α emission line. We denote the momentum transfer by (H, K, L) in reciprocal lattice units (2π/a, 2π/b, 2π/c), where a, b, and c are the lattice constants of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 . Note that the crystallographic unit cell of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 contains two CuO 2 planes, whereas only the distance d = c/2 between adjacent CuO 2 planes is relevant for the periodicity of the plasmon dispersion Additional O K-edge RIXS measurements on selected La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 films were conducted at the U41-PEAXIS beamline The Cu K-edge RIXS measurements on the La 1.8 Sr 0.2 CuO 4 single-crystal were carried out at the MERIX spectrometer at sector 27 at the Advanced Photon Source (APS). RIXS spectra were collected between 17 and 100 K. The incident photons were monochromatized by a four-bounce monochromator with asymmetrically cut Si (4, 0, 0) crystals. A spherical diced Ge Figure The observed trend of an increase of the peak energy with increasing doping concentration up to x = 0.16 does not depend on the details of our fitting procedure, such as the exact treatment of the bimagnon peak. For instance, a fit that captures both the plasmon and the bimagnon feature by a single broad peak function yields similar results to Fig. The components of a representative fit of the Cu Kedge RIXS spectra of the La 1.8 Sr 0.2 CuO 4 single-crystal of Fig. For the theoretical description of plasmon excitations in cuprates, we employ the layered t-J-V model where the sites i and j run over a three-dimensional lattice. The hopping t ij takes a value t (t ′ ) between the first (second) nearest-neighbors on the square lattice. The hopping integral between layers is scaled by t z . ⟨i, j⟩ denotes a nearest-neighbor pair of sites. The exchange interaction J ij = J is considered only inside the plane; the exchange term between the planes (J ⊥ ) is much smaller than J where V c = e 2 d(2ε ⊥ a 2 ) -1 and A(q x , q y ) = α(2 -cos q x -cos q y ) + 1 . Here α = ε (a/d) 2 , where ε = ε ∥ /ε ⊥ , and ε ∥ and ε ⊥ are the dielectric constants parallel and perpendicular to the planes, respectively; e is the electric charge of electrons; a is the lattice spacing in the planes and the in-plane momentum q ∥ = (q x , q y ) is given in units of 1/a; similarly d is the distance between the planes and the out-of-plane momentum q z is given in units of 1/d. To compute the plasmon excitations we use the large-N formalism given in Ref. where ω n are the Matsubara frequencies and a,b run from 1 to 6. The factor N in Eq. (D4) comes from the sum over the N fermionic channels after the extension of the spin index from 2 to N . The corresponding expressions for the bare bosonic propagator D (0) ab (q, iω n ) and the bosonic self-energy Π ab (q, iω n ) are given in Ref. The large-N formalism successfully captured the ex- perimentally observed low-energy plasmon dispersions in various cuprates for specific doping levels in prior works where χ (0) (q, iω n ) is the Lindhard function which accounts for the particle-hole continuum. The electron dispersion E k is where