I discuss uniform, isotropic, plane, singly connected, electrically linear, regular symmetric Hall-plates with an arbitrary number of N peripheral contacts exposed to a uniform perpendicular magnetic field of arbitrary strength. In practice, the regular symmetry is the most common one. If the Hall-plates are mapped conformally to the unit disk, regular symmetry means that all contacts are equally large and all contacts spacings are equally large, yet the contacts spacings may have a different size than the contacts. Such Hall-plates do not change when they are rotated by 360°/N. Their indefinite conductance matrices are circulant matrices, whose complex eigenvalues are computable in closed form. These eigenvalues are used to discuss the Hall-output voltage, the maximum noise-efficiency, and Van-der-Pauw's method for measuring sheet resistances. For practical use, I report simple approximations for Hall-plates with four contacts and 90°symmetry with popular shapes like disks, rectangles, octagons, squares, and Greek crosses with and without rounded corners. Hall-plates are thin flat pieces of (semi-)conductors with a large mobility of the majority charge carriers. If a magnetic field acts on the carriers the Lorentz force diverts the current streamlines, and this builds up a Hall-electric field E H . The exact solution of the electric field problem in closed analytical form is not trivial, all the more if the Hall-plates have a non-symmetric geometry with extended contacts. Even if the potential in response to a single input current is known everywhere in the Hall-plate, it is still much work to compute the conductance matrix, which relates the voltages at the contacts of the plate to the currents into all contacts. Luckily, all shapes, which are equivalent by conformal transformation, have the same conductance matrix 1 . Therefore, it is sufficient to study simple geometries, like circular disk Hall-plates, because from Riemann's mapping theorem 2 we know that there always exists a conformal transformation that maps the disk to any other singly connected domain. Recently, Homentcovschi and Murray found a general method to compute the conductance matrix of cicular disk Hall-plates without conformal transformation 3 . For singly-connected 2D-domains with N extended peripheral contacts, they defined two matrices, whose entries are numerical integrals that depend on the locations of the vertices of the contacts and on the Hall-angle. One of the matrices needs to be inverted and multiplied by the other one to get the resistance matrix normalized by the sheet resistance. The method is very general, but it does not readily give closed formulae for the resistance matrix of Hall-plates. Yet, for symmetric Hall-plates with N equal contacts the equations can be simplified and one gets closed formulae. This has been done for strictly regular symmetric Hall-plates 4 -they have the highest possible degree of symmetry (see Fig. This paper starts with the definitions of the indefinite conductance matrix, Ohm's law, and the stream function. The regular symmetry leads to a symmetry in the indefinite conductance matrix-it is a circulant matrix, whose eigenvalues and eigenvectors are computed in closed form in Section III. In Section IV I apply these findings to the theory of Homentcovschi and Murray, to get a closed formula for the complex eigenvalues. Section V discusses some basic properties of these eigenvalues. Section VI shows how to compute the resistance matrix from the eigenvalues. Section VII computes the output voltage of regular symmetric Hall-plates with four contacts. It also gives a very good approximation for the Hallgeometry factor of this most common type of Hall-plate and compares it to formulae given in the literature. Section VIII compares the maximum noise efficiency of regular symmetric versus strictly regular symmetric Hall-plates, and Section IX explains how to generalize van-der-Pauw's method for regular symmetric Hall-plates with four contacts with or without applied magnetic field. The appendix specifies how Hall-plates with popular shapes (Greek crosses, octagons, and rectangles) are equivalent to disk shaped Hall-plates. In electrically linear Hall-plates the currents into the terminals are linear combinations of the potentials at the terminals. Suppose that the Hall-plate has N terminals. Let us group all N currents to a vector I and all N voltages to a vector V . Then we can express the linear combination as a matrix multiplication I = i GV , with the indefinite conductance matrix i G. Hereby I use the historic nomenclature in circuit theory 5-8 , where 'indefinite' denotes undefined reference potential (ground node). In a mathematical sense the indefinite conductance matrix is not indefinite, but positive semi-definite. Both indefinite and semi-definite matrices have zero determinants, and therefore i G cannot be inverted. If we ground the l-th terminal, we write I = GV , where we delete the l-th current and voltage in I, V , respectively, and we delete the l-th row and column in i G to get G. The definite conductance matrix of any passive (= dissipative) system is positive definite, its determinant is positive, and an inverse arXiv:2306.14450v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 26 Jun 2023 exists: V = RI with the resistance matrix R = G -1 . In the presence of the Hall-effect Ohm's law is 9 with the electric field, E = -∇φ , being the negative gradient of the electrostatic potential φ , with the current density J , the vector product ×, the unit vector n z orthogonal to the plane Hall-plate, and with the z-component of the magnetic flux density B z . ρ is the homogeneous specific resistivity and μ H is the Hall-mobility. In (1) I use the traditional sign convention for μ H , which means negative Hall-mobility for electrons as majority carriers, and I neglect minority carriers. According to (1) E and J are not colinear -there is the Hall-angle θ H in-between, with tan(θ H ) = μ H B z . I use the following abbreviations, whereby t H is the thickness of the Hall-plate. For a square plate with two contacts fully covering two opposite edges, the resistance between these contacts is the sheet resistance R sheet at zero magnetic field, and it is the square resistance R sq in the presence of a magnetic field 10 . In two-dimensional space we can describe the current density J by a stream function ψ via with the nabla operator ∇ and the Cartesian unit vectors n x , n y , n z , the last one being orthogonal to the plane Hallplate. Equation (3) holds only, if current enters and exits the Hall-plate merely through contacts on the single boundary 11,12 . Then the continuity equation ∇ • J = 0 follows immediately from (3) (the dot denotes the scalar product of two vectors). J is orthogonal to the gradient of ψ, which explains the name 'stream function': it is constant along current streamlines. Along the insulating segments of the boundary there are also specific current streamlines. Therefore, ψ is constant along each insulating segment. Thus, ψ behaves on the insulating boundary segments just like φ behaves on the conducting boundary segments. In the stationary condition Maxwell's second equation is In the first line of (5) I used with The unit vector n is normal to the contour pointing away from the Hall region, and t is the unit vector tangential to the contour pointing from 1 to 2, t = dx n x + dy n y . Suppose we have a regular symmetric boundary with N contacts of equal size, the spacings between the contacts are all equal, yet they are not necessarily identical to the size of the contacts (see Fig. We get G from i G by deleting the row and column which corresponds to the grounded contact. G and i G are Toeplitz matrices, which have the property that G l,m = g l-m , which depends only on lm. Moreover, i G is a circulant matrix with g l-m = g l-m+N . Third, the sum of entries per row in any indefinite conductance matrix has to vanish, because no currents flow if all contacts are at identical non-zero potential 6-8 . If we map a regular symmetric Hall-plate to the unit disk, its contact C m ranges from azimuthal angles for χ ∈ (0, 2) and m = 1, 2, . . . , N. Contacts are small for χ → 0, whereas contact spacings are small for χ → 2. The case χ = 1 gives strictly regular symmetric Hall-plates, whose contacts are equally large as the contacts spacings (see Fig. for the eigenvalues of any real circulant matrix, where z C is the complex conjugate of z. We use Ref. whereby φ m is the potential on C m (= the m-th peripheral contact), and ψ m is the stream function on the insulating peripheral segment between C m and C m+1 , with C N = C 0 . In Ref. 3 the entries of the matrices A, B are defined as Note that in Multiplying the left equation of ( (14) From ( This means Inserting ( This equation is valid for arbitrary voltage vectors φ, therefore we can skip φ on both sides of 1 is a circulant N × N matrix, which is obtained from the identity matrix 1 by shifting all entries up once, in a rolling way (= by cyclic permutation). It holds 1-1 = 1T , and det(1-1) = 0. Multiplying whereby I used the fact that i G and (1-1T ) are circulant matrices, and therefore they commute. Writing out the product in detail gives whereby I used It holds Inserting this into Inserting ( Back-inserting this into Let us insert (25), ( Finally, this gives the complex eigenvalues i γ m for m ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} of the indefinite conductance matrix i G of a regular symmetric Hall-plate with N peripheral contacts of size χ as a function of the Hall-angle θ H , Let us replace χ = 1 + ε with ε ∈ (-1, 1), and τπ/2 = y with and Splitting up the integration range [0, π/2] into [0, π/4] and [π/4, π/2] and replacing y = x + π/4 finally gives V. SOME PROPERTIES OF THE EIGENVALUES i γ m A. General Symmetry Properties of i γ m If we reverse the magnetic field in where I used (10) for the rightmost equality. Thus the argument of each eigenvalue is an odd function of the Hall-angle, Consequently, at zero magnetic field the eigenvalues become real numbers. Moreover, the magnitudes of the eigenvalues are independent of the polarity of the magnetic field At large positive Hall-angle, θ H → π/2 the integrals in the numerator and in the denominator of (32) grow unboundedly. The h-functions at (-θ H ) are responsible for this. Therefore, we can discard the h-functions at θ H in this asymtotic limit. Let us first study the two limits In the second line of (36) the first integral is finite-we can neglect it against the infinite second integral. We use It means that the eigenvalues of the indefinite conductance matrices of regular symmetric Hall-plates at strong magnetic field are proportional to cos(θ H ). They tend to zero, while their arguments are linear functions of m/N, aequidistantly distributed between -90°and 90°. Thereby, the size of the contacts is irrelevant; ε does not show up in From which is yet another form of the Reverse Magnetic Field on Complementary Device-principle (RMFoCD) 15,16 , relating the eigenvalues of a regular symmetric Hall-plate, i γ m (ε, θ H ), to the eigenvalues of its complementary Hall-plate at reverse magnetic field, i γ m (ε, -θ H ) = i γ m (-ε, -θ H ). A complementary Hall-plate is obtained from an original Hall-plate by swapping all insulating and conducting segments on the boundary. All properties of complementary Hall-plates are denoted by an overbar. In matrix form ∆ is a diagonal matrix 4 . δ k,l is Kronecker's delta. i Γ is a diagonal matrix. i Γ + is the pseudo-inverse (= Moore-Penrose inverse) of i Γ. In this simple case of a diagonal matrix it means for  0, 0.5, 0.9, 0.99, 0.99999,  10 + / -0 . 5 ε = 0 ε = + / -0 . 9 9 9 9 9 + / -0 . 9 9 + / -0 . 9 1.0 (a) For θ H → 0 (weak magnetic field limit). + / -0 . 9 ε = + / -0 . 9 9 9 9 9 + / -0 . 9 9 + / -0 . 5 1.0 (b) For θ H = 3π/8 (strong magnetic field). FIG. where we simply wrote i γ m instead of i γ m (ε, θ H ) and i γ m instead of i γ m (ε, θ H ). From (40) it follows From Figures For even N and θ H = 0 equation sin((1+ε)π/4) , cos((1-ε)π/4)sin((1+ε)π/4) F cos((1+ε)π/4) sin((1-ε)π/4) , cos((1+ε)π/4)sin((1-ε)π/4) . Here, * means a multiplication of two scalars. In It is defined by If N is an integer multiple of three, equation If N is an integer multiple of four, equation wherein K(k) = F(1, k) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind, also available in Mathematica, We can get simpler expressions than Next, we relate the conductances to the resistances in the equivalent resistor circuit (ERC) according to Ref. 17, , and A key parameter of Hall-plates with four contacts is the effective number of squares, λ . It is defined as the ratio of the zero magnetic field resistance measured between two nonneighoring contacts over the sheet resistance, A rectangle with end contacts and aspect ratio equal to λ has the same resistance as the four contacts Hall-plate at zero magnetic field. Note that in the ERC of the Hall-plate the resistor r 2,4 = 2R D lies between the contacts C 2 and C 4 , whereas the resistance measured between these contacts is R 2,2 , with R 2,2 ̸ = 2R D . Moreover we define the cross-resistance, R x , measured between two terminals, where the contacts with even numbers are connected to the first terminal and the contacs with odd numbers are connected to the second terminal. At zero magnetic field it holds with λ x being the number of cross squares. It is straightforward to show how the resistors in the ERC are related to λ , λ x (see also Ref. From Ref. with Finally, we express the effective number of squares, λ , by the azimuthal angle, 2θ , subtended by a contact of the Hall-plate when the plate is mapped conformally to the unit disk 20 (see Fig. (Do not mix up the geometrical parameter θ with the Hallangle θ H .) According to (8) and with χ = 1 + ε it holds Appendix B shows how to combine ( with the abbreviation Equations ( . Combining all these facts gives the eigenvalue of a three-contacts regular symmetric Hall-plate at zero magnetic field, In the limit of vanishing spacings between the contacts, ε → 1, the eigenvalues of ( Conversely, in the limit of vanishing contacts sizes, ε → -1, these eigenvalues go to zero like 1/K ′ (k → 0) = 1/ ln (4/k). Fig. The strongest deviation of arg{ i γ m }/θ H from the straight line in Fig. Regular symmetric Hall-plates with very small contacts spacings, ε → 1, or with very small contacts ε → -1, are linked by In Section VII we compute the output voltage of a regular Hall-plate with four contacts, see (84). Alternatively, we may compute the output voltage via the resistance matrix, where we used (81). In the limit of weak magnetic field we can insert (55) into (59) and set the result equal to (84). This gives If we use (95) -(97) for H0 in (60) we can compute the argument of the eigenvalue as a function of the size of the contacts, ε. Thereby, we link the integral in G (4C) H0 (see (97)) with the integral in i γ 1 (see For ε = 0.99999 and m/N = 0.25 (61) gives a value of 0.113547, which differs from the exact value in Fig. 6: Absolute error of the approximation For larger Hall-angles the error becomes smaller. For |ε| < 0.5 the worst case error is below ±0.063. 0.32%, and even for ε = 0.9 the relative error of (61) is still only 3.3%. With the same method we can compute arg{ H0 from Ref. 21 and (58). In Ref. 21 the Hall-geometry factor for Hall-plates with three contacts was defined by whereby contact C 0 was grounded, current I 1 was supplied by a current source into contact C 1 and the potential at C 2 was sampled at positive and negative magnetic field with a voltmeter. Alternatively, we may write whereby we used (79). Setting (62) equal to (63) at weak magnetic field gives lim where we used (58). For small contacts, ε = -1 + dε with dε → 0, it holds G (3C) For ε = 0.99999 and m/N = 1/3 (65) gives a value of 0.0676669, which differs from the exact value in Fig. The special case of stricly regular symmetric Hall-plates (χ = 1 ↔ ε = 0) was thoroughly discussed in Ref. Here we used tan(π/8) = √ 2 -1 and The right hand side of (66) is the same as (66) in Ref. versus size of contacts, for θ H = 0, π/4, (9/10) * π/2 and m/N = 1/2. At zero magnetic field, θ H = 0, the curve is given in closed form by For N = 3 and ε = 0 it holds G (3C) Here we used cos(5π The right hand side of (67) is the same as (66) in Ref. By almost strictly regular symmetric Hall-plates, we mean regular symmetric Hall-plates with small |ε|, say |ε| < 0.5. Then, according to Fig. which has an absolute accuracy of ±0.063, whereby the error is smaller for large magnetic fields than for weak ones, see Fig. The accuracy of (69) is worst for large |ε| and m/N = 1/2. For |ε| ≤ 0.5 the relative error is bounded by +0/ -0.0751, for |ε| ≤ 0.25 it is bounded by +0/ -0.01714. The right hand side of (69) gives the tangents on the curves in Fig. Inversion of (9) gives the eigenvalues in terms of the indefinite conductance matrix, see (83). This works also for regular symmetric Hall-plates with holes, because it only relies on the fact that the indefinite conductance matrix is a circulant matrix, regardless if the Hall-plate is a singly-or multiply-connected domain. The conductance matrix of Hallplates with four contacts and a single hole with insulating hole boundary at weak magnetic field is given in Ref. with λ , λ x as defined in ( is the Hall-geometry factor for regular symmetric Hall-plates with a hole with insulated hole boundary. For singly-connected Hallplates λ x is a function of λ only (see According to Ref. 24 the complementary Hall-plate has the hole boundary clad with a contact, that is not connected (no current flows in or out of this 'floating' contact, and therefore this contact does not correspond to any row or column in the conductance matrix). For regular symmetry this gives the eigenvalues With (C8) and (C9) and with (5.1) from Ref. with G (4C1H) H0 being the Hall-geometry factor of the complementary Hall-plate, whose hole has a floating contact. According to Ref. 24 it holds Equations ( Multiplying the eigenvalues of the original and the complementary doubly-connected Hall-plates gives lim for m ∈ {1, 2}, N = 4. Thus, at weak magnetic field the eigenvalues of complementary regular symmetric Hall-plates with four contacts are related according to We can make good use of ( The RMFR-principle 27,28 says G T = G(-θ H ) and inserting (39) into (9 In (75) the matrices have N -1 rows and columns, whereas in (76) they have N rows and columns. Next, we combine (75) and ( With the identity valid for k, m, l ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N -1} we get In matrix form this reads where R has N -1 rows and columns and all other matrices have N rows and columns. Decomposition into even (magneto-resistive) and odd (Hall) terms gives whereby ⌊x⌋ is the integer part of a positive real number x. If the resistance matrix or the conductance matrix is given, we can compute the eigenvalues by inverting (80). This gives i where all (N -1) × (N -1) matrices are obtained from the corresponding N × N matrices by deleting the last row and column. However, it is simpler to use only which follows from (9). This equation also works for regular symmetric Hall-plates with holes, because it only relies on the fact that the indefinite conductance matrix is a circulant matrix. The vast majority of modern Hall-plates uses contact commutation schemes 29-32 to cancel out offset errors (= zero-point errors). These schemes rely solely on the RMFR-principle 27,28 , and therefore they work for all electrically linear Hall-plates regardless of their symmetry. However, for the electronic circuits which supply the Hall-plate with power and which amplify its output signal, it is advantageous to use Hall-plates with 90°symmetry (= regular symmetry). Therefore a formula for the output signal of regular symmetric Hall-plates with four contacts is of great practical relevance. The output voltage of an ordinary Hall-plate with four contacts can be expressed as 4 which holds for regular symmetric Hall-plates. In the special case of strictly regular symmetry the prefactor simplifies, 2/(R sq | i γ 1 |) → √ 2. At weak and strong magnetic fields closed formulae for the eigenvalue i γ 1 are given in ( (60) ⇒ lim And we try the same θ 2 H -law for the reciprocal of the prefactor, (R This gives with λ from (C7), and with the weak magnetic field limit of the Hall-geometry factor, The accuracy of ( Inserting ( It also holds In Ref. Fig. H0 as a function of geometrical parameters for several common geometries like disks, squares, octagons, and Greek crosses. Alternatively, we can give G (4C) H0 as a single function of a single parameter λ , and only in a second step we relate λ to the geometrical parameters of the various shapes of Hall-plates (see Appendix C). The parameter λ has a physical meaning: it is the effective number of squares of the input resistance of the Hall-plate at zero magnetic field in according to (81). Large λ means small contacts and small λ means large contacts. However, the largest signal-to-thermalnoise-ratio-per-power is obtained for λ = √ 2 which corresponds to medium-sized contacts, for which it holds ε = 0 (see Section VIII or more detailed in Ref. FIG. of +0/ -2% is with λ from (C7). A more accurate approximation with an error of -0.006% . . . + 0.02% is H0 is also known 34 , According to (9) and (10) we can express the conductance matrix in terms of the eigenvalues with R{z} and I{z} being the real and imaginary parts of a complex number z. Check: the sum of these four entries vanishes, since they are the first line of the indefinite conductance matrix 6-8 (see also (7)). Inverting the G-matrix gives the R-matrix, with cos 1 = cos (arg{γ 1 }) and sin 1 = sin (arg{γ 1 }) . We can measure the eigenvalues with the circuits of Fig. For the magnitude of the first eigenvalue we can use the same circuit of Fig. For the second eigenvalue we need the circuit of Fig. In Ref. SNR is the ratio of the output signal over the thermal noise, k b is Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature, ∆ f is the effective noise bandwidth in which one observes the output signal, and P d is the power dissipated in the Hall-plate. For optimized patterns of supply voltages or currents and optimized weighting coefficients in the linear combinations of the output signals the maximum noise efficiency at weak magnetic field was found 4 (104) holds for all Hall-plates, regardless of their symmetry, provided that the eigenvalues are sorted in such a way that i γ 1 has the largest argument. Fig. Van der Pauw's original method of measuring the sheet resistance R sheet works for plane, uniform, singly connected domains with four peripheral point-sized contacts 39 . His main achievement is to give a single simple equation which relates the sheet resistance to measureable quantities, the so-called trans-resistances. These are voltages between two contacts divided by currents through the other contacts, and they can also be expressed as differences of entries of the resistance matrix, Note that for point-sized contacts all entries R l,m of the resistance matrix tend to infinity, yet the trans-resistances R 3,1 -R 2,1 and R 3,1 -R 3,2 remain finite. Van der Pauw's equation ( The restriction to point-sized contacts brings the big advantages that van der Pauw's equation is independent of the shape of the Hall-plate (as long as it remains singly connected and the contacts are at the circumference) and it is also independent of the applied magnetic field (the latter is a consequence of (16c) in Ref. 11). Moreover, the resistances of the leads and of the physical contacts at the interface between the probe tips and the Hall-plate do not cause measurement errorsthis follows from the simple fact that they are in series to the point-sized contacts, which have infinite resistance, anyhow. In practice, the point-sized contacts are also a drawback, because they cause infinite electric field and current density. This leads to velocity saturation, self heating, inhomogeneous temperature, and mechanical stress, which may cause again errors in the measurement of the sheet resistance. If the contacts are extended, the situation becomes much more complicated, yet one can still generalize van der Pauw's method. The basic idea is to measure the full resistance matrix. If we can express the resistance matrix as a function of the contact geometry, the Hall-angle and the sheet resistance, we can solve this system of equations (at least numerically), provided that this set of nonlinear equations has a unique solution and that there are enough equations. For regular symmetric geometries with extended contacts at zero Hall angle, θ H = 0, one can use a simple generalized van der Pauw method 18 . Equation (5b) in Ref. whereby the voltages and currents are explained in Fig. with all resistances evaluated at θ H = 0. Using (99) in (108) and inserting it into (107) gives If we insert ( the modular lambda function L(y) from 51. Equation ( With Thus, for strictly regular symmetric Hall-plates at arbitrary magnetic field it holds On the other hand, | i γ 2 / i γ 1 | depends stronger on the contacts size ε at zero magnetic field than at non-zero magnetic field. From ( (112) We used the asymptotic limit K(x → 1) = ln(4/ √ 1x 2 ) and de l'Hopital's rule. Consequently, the ratio of the magnitudes of both eigenvalues of a four-contacts regular symmetric Hallplate at arbitrary magnetic field is limited Simultaneously, the argument of i γ 1 is also limited to according to Fig. This work discussed plane, uniform, isotropic, singlyconnected Hall-plates with an arbitrary number of N extended contacts and with N-fold symmetry (i.e., transforming the Hall-plate conformally into the unit disk and rotating the disk by integer multiples of 360°/N gives again the same disk). A special case of great practical relevance is Hall-plates with four contacts and 90°symmetry. The starting point for this paper was a matrix equation from Homentcovschi, Bercia, and Murray 3,40 , which links the potentials to the currents at the contacts of a general uniform singly connected Hall-plate with peripheral contacts. There, I introduced the indefinite conductance matrix, which is a circulant matrix, due to the assumed regular symmetry of the Hall-plates. This admits a closed analytical solution for the complex eigenvalues of the indefinite conductance matrix. The resistance and conductance matrices are sums of weighted eigenvalues. It was shown how the eigenvalues change with contacts size and Hall-angle, and simple approximations were given. The Hall-geometry factor describes how the shape of the Hall-plate affects the magnitude of the output voltage and the nonlinearity of the output voltage versus magnetic field. Exact and approximate formulae for the Hall-geometry factor of plates with four contacts were given and compared to prio art literature. Based on the eigenvalues it was also shown that strictly regular symmetric Hall-plates have better noise efficiency than regular symmetric ones-highest possible degree of symmetry is favorable for low thermal noise. Finally, a generalized van-der-Pauw method for the measurement of the sheet resistance was explained, and it was proven that a unique solution for the sheet resistance exists, regardless of the applied magnetic field. Up to my knowledge this work gives the most comprehensive, simple, and read-to-use body of equations to quantify all electrical parameters of regular symmetric electrically linear Hall-plates at arbitrary magnetic field. This paper is also published in Ref. for N ≥ 2, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N -1}, and integer m. First we replace k = N by k = 0, then we express the sines by complex exponentials, . (A2) Then we make twice a Taylor series expansion of the type The sum over index k vanishes, except for m -1 -lq = -pN with p = 0, 1, 2 . . ., hence it equals Nδ q,m-1-l+pN . We re-arrange the double sum over indices l, q as a double sum over indices a, b with a = lq, b = l + q (see Fig. whereby the index a is incremented by ∆a = 2. We replace the index a by c via a = 2cm + 1 -pN. This gives = (-1) jp sin (π jm/N) sin (π j/N) . The main text of this paper discussed the electrical properties (= the eigenvalues) of circular disk-shaped regular symmetric Hall-plates. This appendix shows how to find other wellknown singly connected geometries with peripheral contacts (Greek crosses, octagons, rectangles, squares), which have identical electrical properties (= identical eigenvalues) as the disks. The fundamental idea is, to figure out how large the contacts for these shapes must be, in order to have the same resistance like the disk at zero magnetic field. According to (95) and (97) the weak field magnetic sensitivity depends only on the effective number of squares, λ = R 2,2 (θ H )/R sheet , and all properties at larger magnetic field relate uniquely to the zerofield properties via conformal transformation-consequently, they are also identical to the properties of the disk. Thereby, we can choose λ or λ x , because both are related by It maps the interior of the circular segment in the z-plane onto the upper half of the t-plane, with z l → t l , (l = 1, . . . , 4). The point z 4 = exp(-iθ ) corresponds to t 4 = -(tan(2θ )) 2 . The bilinear mapping maps the upper half of the t-plane onto the upper half of the ζplane whereby the contacts are made symmetric with respect to the origin ζ = 0. Finally, the point where we used FIG. It gives the resistance from In the subsequent paragraphs we will map the unit cells of the electric potential during the measurement of R x of other geometries of Hall-plates to the upper half of the ζ -plane, whereby we require the same ζ 2disk as in (C4). Occasionally, we will make reference to complementary Hall-plates, where contacts and insulating boundary segments are swapped. If a Hall-plate has normalized resistances λ and λ x , the complementary Hall-plate has normalized resistances λ and λ x . The unit cell in Fig. (C10) The shape in the upper part of Fig. A comparison of the lower part of Fig. With (C8) we get wherein we used (27) from Ref. Thereby we took into account that the complementary device (with 4λ x ) corresponds to a disk with contacts size 2θ , and therefore the original device (with 4λ x ) corresponds to a disk with contacts size π/2 -2θ . We define the filling factor f CC as the sum of the lengths of all contacts in Fig. The integrals are solvable with Mathematica in terms of Gauss' hyper-geometric function, and we use the identity 46 The result is (C16) In (C16) a disk with contacts size ε is equivalent to a Greek cross with corner contacts having the filling factor f CC (ε). The complementary device is a disk with contacts size -ε, which is equivalent to a Greek cross with end contacts having a filling factor 1f CC (ε). Hence, a disk with contacts size ε corresponds to a Greek cross with end contacts with a filling factor f CE (ε) = 1f CC (-ε), which means (C17) For medium-sized contacts we can develop (C16) and (C17) into Taylor series in ε, The relative errors of both approximations in (C18) are less than 1% for -0.6 < ε < 0.7. Fig. Disk-shaped Hall-plates and Greek crosses with end contacts and with corner contacts were modelled for three cases, case ε θ f CE f CC 1 -1/4 3π/32 0.520614 0.357187 2 0 π/8 0.580980 0.419020 3 5/7 3π/14 0.782991 0.608121 (C20) A current of 1 A was injected into contact C 2 , while C 0 = C 4 was grounded, and the other contacts C 1 ,C 3 were not connected. The potentials at C 1 ,C 2 ,C 3 were computed for -2 ≤ tan(θ H ) ≤ 2. The potentials of the disks and the Greek crosses differed by less than 500 ppm (see the plots in Figs. Fig. During the measurement of R x a quarter of the Hall-plate is shown in Fig. This formula is given in Refs. 51 and 52 (it is a simple combination of two mappings, one from the square to the upper half plane, and the second from the disk to the upper half plane). The constant This transformation mapps the circle |z| = r Q onto a segment S Q in the ζ -plane, which deviates slightly from a quarter circle (see Fig. For small r ′ we may approximate the integrands by 1t 4 /2, which gives The final transformation z → log(z) maps the quarter of the annular region in Fig. Finally, (C25) and (C24) give the cross-resistance R x as a function of the normalized quarter-circle radius r Q This approximation for r Q is accurate up to 0.4% at r Q = 0.4 (which means λ x = 1.33164 and λ = 3.10440), and even more accurate at smaller r Q (which means smaller λ x and λ ). A Greek cross with rounded corners and end contacts is equivalent to a disk-shaped Hall-plate with contacts size 2θ , if its normalized quarter-circle radius equals A numerical fit of (C27) gives with θ in units of radians in (C28). The cubic fit deviates from (C27) less than ±1% for 11°< 2θ < 76°, and the linear fit has the same accuracy for 12°< 2θ < 67°. The complementary Hall-plate is a Greek-cross with quarter circle contacts (instead of end contacts). If the original disk plate with contacts size 2θ corresponds to a Greek-cross with rounded corners with r Q having end contacts, the complementary disk plate has contacts size 2θ = π/2 -2θ , and it corresponds to the very same Greek-cross shape, i.e. the same r Q , yet with quarter circle contacts instead of end contacts. Hence, for the Greek cross with quarter circle contacts we simply have to replace θ → π/4θ in (C27). It holds whereby the last identity comes from In (C30) we used the overbar to distinguish it from (C27): r Q is the radius of the quarter circle segment in the smooth Greek cross with end contacts, whereas r Q is the radius of the quarter circle segment in the smooth Greek cross with quarter circle contacts. A numerical fit of (C30) gives r Q ≈ 0.07 + 0.61 * θ -0.6 * θ 2 + 0.47 * θ 3 ≈ 0.1 + 0.37 * θ , (C31) They come from the approximation explained in Fig. with θ in units of radians in (C31). The cubic fit deviates from (C30) less than ±1% for 17°< 2θ < 83°, and the linear fit has the same accuracy for 24°< 2θ < 78°. Fig. If a Hall-plate is octagonal, its complementary plate is also octagonal. Let us call the plate in Fig. The shape in Fig. With (C8) we get wherein we used (27) from Ref. Thereby we took into account that the complementary device (with 4λ x ) corresponds to a disk with contacts size 2θ , and therefore the original device (with 4λ x ) corresponds to a disk with contacts size π/2 -2θ . We define the filling factor f OC as the sum of the lengths of all contacts in Fig. 2 . A numerical fit of (C37) gives In the (C38) the linear approximation is accurate up to ±1% for -0.59 < ε < 0.68 and the cubic one for -0.78 < ε < 0.87. Fig. Numerical checks of (C37), analogous to the ones in the preceding sections, are shown in Fig. In practice, ocatgonal Hall-plates are the second best choice (after Greek crosses with rounded corners), because the electric field and the current density have less pronounced singularities at the vertices of the contacts 53 . This leads to smaller electrical non-linearity caused by velocity saturation, and finally, this gives smaller residual offset errors of spinning current schemes. A square Hall-plate can have mid-contacts as in Fig. (C40) The shape in the ζ ′ -plane in Fig. We define the filling factor f SC as the sum of the lengths of all contacts in Fig. The integrals are tabulated in Refs. 54 and 55 (C43) This finally gives the filling factor f SC for a square Hall-plate with corner contacts from Fig. In (C44) a disk with contacts size ε is equivalent to a square with corner contacts having the filling factor f SC (ε). The complementary device is a disk with contacts size -ε, which is equivalent to a square with mid-contacts with the filling factor 1f SC (ε). Hence, a disk with contacts size ε corresponds to a square with mid-contacts of size f SM (ε) = 1f SC (-ε), which gives For medium-sized contacts we can develop (C44) and (C45) into Taylor series in ε, f SC ≈ 0.684 + 0.36ε -0.08ε 2 + 0.04ε 3 ≈ 0.677 + 0.36ε, f SM ≈ 0.32 + 0.36ε + 0.07ε 2 + 0.035ε 3 ≈ 0.32 + 0.36ε. The relative errors of the linear approximations in (C46) are less than 1% for -0.37 < ε < 0.49 for f SC and -0.27 < ε < 0.31 for f SM . For the cubic approximations the relative errors are less than 1% for -0.63 < ε ≤ 1 for f SC and -0.76 < ε < 0.64 for f SM . Fig. In general, the rectangular Hall-plate of Fig. If we have a disk-shaped Hall-plate with contacts size ε, we use (C49) to get k. With (C48) we get the aspect ratio l/w and the size of the partial contacts s/l in Fig. At the same time, the complementary disk has contacts size -ε, and it corresponds to the complementary rectangle as shown in Fig. In (C50) we used the overbar to distinguish it from (C49): k specifies the aspect ratio of a rectangular Hall-plate in Numerical checks of (C49) and (C50), analogous to the ones in the preceding sections, are shown in Fig. 