Ultra-compact spectrometers are becoming increasingly popular for their promising applications in biomedical analysis, environmental monitoring, and food safety. In this work, we report a novel single-pixel-photodetector spectrometer with a spectral range from 480 nm to 820 nm, based on the AlGaAs/GaAs p-graded-n junction with a voltage-tunable optical response. To reconstruct the optical spectrum, we propose a tailored method called Neural Spectral Fields (NSF) that leverages the unique wavelength and bias-dependent responsivity matrix. Our spectrometer achieves a high spectral wavelength accuracy of up to 0.30 nm and a spectral resolution of up to 10 nm. Additionally, we demonstrate the high spectral imaging performance of the device. The compatibility of our demonstration with the standard III-V process greatly accelerates the commercialization of miniaturized spectrometers. Optical spectrometers are broadly deployed in scientific and industrial applications, ranging from spectral detection Instead of using an array, single-pixel-photodetector spectrometers have recently emerged as a plausible alternative. By employing electrically reconfigured response functions We instead present a p-graded-n junction photodetector with voltage-tunable-response based on Al x Ga 1-x As/GaAs materials as a spectrometer. Such spectrometers can be fabricated by standard III-V process with an ultra-small footprint down to μm level and a broad spectral range from 480 nm to 820 nm. The device has a high responsivity of 0.51 A/W at 775 nm, and a low dark current density of 3.47×10 -9 A/cm 2 at room temperature, corresponding to a calculated detectivity of 1.86×10 13 cmHz 1/2 /W . For spectrometer applications, the device exhibits a longer cut-off wavelength as the bias voltage increases, contributed by the newly depleted region of the junction. Thus, the junction produces a unique 'voltage accumulative' responsivity matrix: higher voltages induce broader spectral response curves. Yet, overlaps of these curves cause the spectral reconstruction problem ill-posed. Traditional methods based on L1 or L2 regularizers require elaborate parameter fine-tuning to achieve a high-resolution reconstruction. We tailor a fully automated scheme that directly extracts deep features from the measured currentvoltage curves and then conducts continuous spectral reconstruction via Neural Fields (NFs). Specifically, our feature extractor is trained on a comprehensive synthetic dataset to reliably capture unique characteristics of the current-voltage curves. These features, concatenated with wavelength positional encoding, are then fed into an Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) to decode the inputs into a continuous spectral function. The self-supervised process is analogous to neural field reconstructions for radiance fields The p-graded-n structure of the device is illustrated in Fig. The p-graded-n structure enables voltage-tunable-response in this photodetector. The structure comprises a gradient bandgap Al x Ga 1-x As n-layer, with different Al composition, where the higher bandgap Al x Ga 1-x As is closer to the p-n junction. At low reverse bias, holes generated by longer wavelength incident light absorbed in low-Al Al x Ga 1-x As layer are blocked by the valence band barrier from the high-Al Al x Ga 1-x As layer and InGaP layer. Thus, these holes cannot diffuse into the depleted region and have no contribution to the photocurrent, as shown in Fig. Fig. For spectrometer applications, our device has electrically reconfigurable response. The device exhibits a longer cutoff wavelength as the reverse bias increases, where the longer wavelength response is contributed by the newly-depleted region of lower bandgap AlGaAs materials. We encoded the variation of responsivity versus the wavelength and reverse bias into a spectral response matrix for spectrum reconstruction. Fig. where I (V ) is the measured photocurrent curve by our spectrometer and the integration range (λ min , λ max ) denote the minimum and maximum functional wavelengths of the spectrometer, respectively. We observe that the voltage accumulative spectral responsivity produces some unique features in the measured current. And different input spectra will cause different features. Such features can play an important role in spectrum reconstruction, but they are hard to be analyzed by traditional spectral reconstruction algorithms. Thus, we adopt a neural feature extractor to utilize these features in measured current. We create a synthetic dataset to provide an amount of paired data of photocurrent and optical spectrum. Then we let the feature extractor learn deep priors of photocurrent on the synthetic dataset. In Fig. At the core of our approach, we use Neural Spectral Fields (NSF) to decode the spectrum from the extracted features and wavelength. NSF can provide a continuous reconstruction of spectrum inputting a spectrum feature and positional encoding of wavelength without any fine-tuned efforts. To further improve the accuracy of the spectrum reconstruction, we apply a simple yet effective physics-based refinement algorithm following NSF to adjust the amplitude, width, and shift of the NSF output spectrum to obey integral constraint Eqn. 1. The incident light spectrum consists of single-peak and double-peak beams generated by a supercontinuous laser and unknown spectra with uncertain full width at half maximum (FWHM) produced by LED lamps. The accuracy of the reconstructed spectra is evaluated against the ground truth measured with a commercial spectrometer YOKOGAWA AQ6374. Our proposed approach achieves high-quality reconstruction results for a series of single-peak incident light over a broad working range of 480-820 nm, as illustrated in Figure The minimum double-peak resolution of the single-pixel p-graded-n junction spectrometer is about 10 nm, as demonstrated in Figure Overall, these results demonstrate the remarkable potential of our single-pixel p-graded-n junction spectrometer for high-precision spectral reconstruction in a variety of settings. We conduct experiments on an imaging target of a painting to explore the potential applications of our spectrometer in spectral imaging. As shown in Fig. The X-Y sampling rate is set to be 100 × 100. The target image is a yellow Chinese character "Fu" on a red background, illuminated by a white LED light source. We reconstruct the image using the measured current-voltage data of the pixel, which is then mapped into RGB according to the CIE 1931 Miniaturization of optical spectrometers is crucial for various applications, including portable spectral detection, hyperspectral imaging, and wearable spectroscopy. In this study, we introduce a novel voltagetunable-response III-V spectrometer based on the p-graded-n junction, which exhibits significantly improved device performance as a photodetector, particularly in terms of dark current and optical responsivity. We also propose a new method, Neural Spectral Fields (NSF), to reconstruct the spectrum from accumulated current, achieving high accuracy and robustness in spectrum reconstruction. Our work represents a major advancement in the miniaturization of optical spectrometers for diverse applications. Future research will be aimed at realizing in-situ spectral imaging using arrays of single-pixel p-gradedn junction spectrometers with a readout circuit (ROIC). Our 'spectrometer camera' provides multi-channel spectral information with an ultra-small footprint, without the use of a dispersive light path or detector array. This technology could push the boundaries of true color imaging and find applications in aviation and machine vision. where n is the dimension of positional encoding. We choose n = 5 in all experiments in our manuscripts. The positional encoded wavelength and extracted features are then fed into a small MLP with only 3 hidden layers and 256 neurons for each hidden layer. The output of the MLP is the spectral intensity at the input wavelength. Thus the NSF outputs the continuous spectrum give the queried wavelength. Physics-based refinement. The output spectrum from NSF is close to the actual spectrum, but it does not accurately correspond with the measured current. We use a physics-based refinement algorithm that iteratively adjusts the amplitude and scale to minimize the loss between the corresponding current and the measured currents. During each iteration, we randomly shift the NSF spectrum by 1nm and scale the amplitude by 1.1 and 0.9. We repeat this process for 200 iterations for each input current. At the end of the refinement process, we select the spectrum with the lowest corresponding current error as the final result.