Two-dimensional Josephson junction arrays frustrated by a perpendicular magnetic field are predicted to form a cascade of distinct vortex lattice states. Here, we show that the resistivity tensor provides both structural and dynamical information on the vortex-lattice states and intervening phase transitions, which allows for experimental identification of these symmetry-breaking ground states. We illustrate our general approach by a microscopic theory of the resistivity tensor for a range of magnetic fields exhibiting a rich set of vortex lattices as well as transitions to liquid-crystalline vortex states. Introduction.-Josephson junction arrays display a fascinating variety of classical and quantum phases and phase transitions Here, we show that the full resistivity tensor is a powerful tool to probe these vortex-lattice phases. Measurements of the longitudinal and transverse resistivity of Josephson junction arrays in a perpendicular magnetic field reveal a dramatic sensitivity as a function of the magnetic field Our work is motivated by recent advances in the nanofabrication of Josephson junction arrays based on semiconductor-superconductor hybrids Model.-We describe the Josephson junction array by viewing the superconducting islands as classical xy spins. Neighboring spins are subject to an effective ferromagnetic interaction due to the Josephson coupling of strength E J between islands and the perpendicular magnetic field introduces frustration into the xy model, Here, a is the lattice constant. We assume that the charging energies of the superconducting islands can be neglected, so that finding the equilibrium state of the array is a problem of classical statistical mechanics. The perpendicular magnetic field is accounted for by the vector potential A ij , with the flux per plaquette in units of the superconducting flux quantum φ 0 = h/2e defining the frustration f . In the absence of the magnetic field, it is energetically favorable for the phases φ i of all superconducting islands to align. The magnetic field introduces vortices, which have a natural inclination to order. The resulting vortex lattice Additional vortices can be accommodated into the channels by adding to the partially filled diagonals, changing the frustration f by 1/N 2 . (f) Energy per lattice site of various vortex lattice structures as a function of f . The energy vs. f is computed by gradually filling the channels with vortices. There are five color-coded regions I-V, separated by dashed lines (with the corresponding f indicated). Results are limited to short periods between channels. Note that this masks the transition at f = 2/5, which occurs in the limit of large periods. The magnetic field introduces vortices, which have a natural inclination to order. The resulting vortex lattice is a highly sensitive function of the magnetic field, reflecting the competition between the intrinsic tendency of vortices to order into a triangular structure and pinning by the lattice (which we take to be a square array). This is exemplified in Fig. Resistivity tensor.-For a square array of Josephson junctions, the resistivity will be isotropic as long as the ground state respects the underlying fourfold symmetry, e.g., at f = 1 2 . More generally, however, the formation of a symmetry-breaking vortex lattice will be signaled by an anisotropic resistivity tensor. The resistivity tensor is a sum of symmetric and antisymmetric contributions, The symmetric contribution describes the dissipative resistivity and can be diagonalized with eigenvalues ρ 1 and ρ 2 . The antisymmetric contribution is invariant under changes of the coordinate system and describes the Hall resistivity ρ H of the array. As a consequence of the Onsager relation ρ xy (B) = ρ yx (-B), the two contributions ρ s xy and ρ H to the transverse resistance ρ xy can be separated by their behavior under reversal of the perpendicular magnetic field B. While the Hall resistivity ρ H is odd under reversal of the magnetic field, ρ H (B) = -ρ H (-B), the transverse resistivity ρ s xy is even, This is in line with the fact that the eigenvalues ρ j (with j = 1, 2) are even in magnetic field. It follows from this discussion that measurements of the full resistivity tensor reveal rich information on the vortex-lattice states. The eigenvalues ρ 1 and ρ 2 contain FIG. is a highly sensitive function of the magnetic field, reflecting the competition between the intrinsic tendency of vortices to order into a triangular structure and pinning by the lattice (which we take to be a square array). This is exemplified in Fig. Resistivity tensor.-For a square array of Josephson junctions, the resistivity will be isotropic as long as the ground state respects the underlying fourfold symmetry, e.g., at f = 1 2 . More generally, however, the formation of a symmetry-breaking vortex lattice will be signaled by an anisotropic resistivity tensor. The resistivity tensor is a sum of symmetric and antisymmetric contributions, The symmetric contribution describes the dissipative resistivity and can be diagonalized with eigenvalues ρ 1 and ρ 2 . The antisymmetric contribution is invariant under changes of the coordinate system and describes the Hall resistivity ρ H of the array. As a consequence of the Onsager relation ρ xy (B) = ρ yx (-B), the two contributions ρ s xy and ρ H to the transverse resistance ρ xy can be separated by their behavior under reversal of the perpendicular magnetic field B. While the Hall resistivity ρ H is odd under reversal of the magnetic field, ρ H (B) = -ρ H (-B), the transverse resistivity ρ s xy is even, This is in line with the fact that the eigenvalues ρ j (with j = 1, 2) are even in magnetic field. It follows from this discussion that measurements of the full resistivity tensor reveal rich information on the vortex-lattice states. The eigenvalues ρ 1 and ρ 2 contain information on the density of mobile vortices and their mobility, while the principal axes reveal structural information about the vortex lattice. In particular, the observation of a transverse resistivity that is symmetric under reversal of the B field is a direct indication of an anisotropic resistivity tensor and thus of spontaneous breaking of rotation symmetry by the vortex lattice. Interestingly, a B-symmetric transverse resistivity has been observed in experiments on vortex lattices We illustrate these general ideas by considering the resistivity tensor for a rich set of vortex lattice states appearing in the range of frustrations 1/3 < f < 1/2. In this range, the vortex lattices are composed of a regular sequence of completely and partially filled as well as empty diagonals as illustrated in Fig. The basic process governing the resistivity tensor is vortex hopping along the partially filled diagonals (Fig. Since hopping of vortices is constrained to occur along the partially filled diagonals, the resistivity tensor will be strongly anisotropic, with principal axes aligned along and perpendicular to the partially filled diagonals. In the absence of vortex hopping out of the partially filled diagonals, there is no voltage drop along the diagonals and the resistivity eigenvalue ρ 2 for currents applied along the diagonals vanishes, ρ 2 = 0. In contrast, current applied perpendicular to the diagonals of the vortex lattice induces vortex motion along the diagonals. This generates a voltage drop along the current direction, resulting in a nonzero resistivity eigenvalue ρ 1 . To compute the nonzero eigenvalue ρ 1 of the resistivity tensor, we consider an applied current j c flowing perpendicular to the diagonals of the vortex lattice. Provided that current flow is uniform, this induces potential drops for vortices on neighboring sites in the horizontal (x) and vertical directions (ŷ) direction, which are equal to Equation ( For ν > 1/2, there are two heavy domain walls for each additional vortex. Thus, the areal density of domain walls is equal to 2p(ν -1 2 ) 1 a 2 . When ν is not too much larger than 1/2, the domain walls are dilute and the probability of two directly adjacent domain walls can be neglected. Accounting for the potential drop of 2∆U between initial and final state of the vortex hop in linear response, a vortex in a heavy domain wall has an effective hopping rate of (2∆U/T )Γ. As a result, we find an areal vortex current density of along the diagonals of the vortex lattice. We finally relate the vortex current density to the voltage drop in the perpendicular direction The electric field E points in the direction perpendicular to the vortex motion and thus perpendicular to the partially filled diagonal. Combining Eqs. ( in the limit of dilute domain walls. While the partially filled diagonals order into a regular pattern at low temperatures, numerical results indicate that these ordered arrays melt prior to the melting transition of the entire 2D vortex lattice Well above the melting transition, we can assume that the vortex occupations become uncorrelated along the partially filled diagonals. Vortex motion along the diagonals can then be characterized by a diffusion constant D = 2a 2 /τ and the vortex current becomes so that Unlike in the low-temperature phase, the hopping rate 1/τ is no longer activated, so that the melting transition is signaled by a substantial increase in resistivity. We now consider the resistivity tensor for currents applied along the lattice directions of the underlying square array. Rotating the resistivity tensor, we find The sign of the transverse resistivities depends on the direction of the diagonal vortex structure. We also use that ρ H = 0 within our rate-equation theory of vortex dynamics. Due to the diagonal structure of the vortex lattice, the diagonal resistivities ρ xx and ρ yy are identical. The formation of the vortex lattice is still signaled by the nonzero transverse resistivity. Since vortex motion is constrained to be along the diagonal, a current applied, say, along the x-axis induces equal voltage drops along the x and y-directions. Thus, ρ xx and ρ s xy are equal in magnitude, a feature that directly correlates with the diagonal structure of the vortex lattice. Magnetic-field dependence.-There will also be substantial and characteristic variations with magnetic field. This dependence emerges from the intricate sequence of vortex lattices for frustrations between f = 1/3 and f = 1/2 These structures were identified by Monte Carlo simulations in Refs. The structure of the vortex lattice remains unchanged over a substantial range in magnetic field in the regions II (blue) and V (yellow). Here, p remains fixed and the resistivity depends smoothly on magnetic field. In contrast, the vortex-lattice structure, and hence p as well as the resistivity tensor, depend sensitively on magnetic field in regions I (red), III (green), and IV (purple). Note that in these regions, there are more vortex-lattice states than shown in Fig. Our vortex-lattice simulations use periodic boundary conditions. In real samples, boundary effects as well as disorder may lead to domains of different orientations of the vortex lattice. One expects that this reduces the anisotropy of the resistivity and hence the magnitude of ρ s xy relative to ρ xx and ρ yy . The reduction would be a direct measure of the degree of domain formation of the vortex lattice. Conclusions.-We have shown that measurements of the full resistivity tensor are a powerful tool to identify and probe the rich set of symmetry-breaking vortexlattice states as a function of magnetic field, providing both structural and dynamical information. This in-cludes the liquid-crystalline vortex states above the melting transition of the partially filled diagonals, which have the remarkable property of being resistive in one direction and superconducting in the other. Our general approach carries over to other (nematic) electronic states which break the underlying rotational symmetry (for a very recent discussion, see Ref. We have focused on vortex configurations aligned along the diagonal, which cover a wide range of frustrations. In these states, the vortex dynamics is particular transparent. However, one in principle expects anisotropic resistivity tensors also for other symmetry-breaking vortexlattice states. This includes states such as the f = 1/5 state [see Fig. Our discussion neglected capacitive effects and was limited to classical modeling of the Josephson junction arrays. While our qualitative conclusions are expected to persist, it is an interesting question for future work to relax these assumptions and account for quantum fluctuations, which may, e.g., induce a nonzero Hall resistivity ρ H . The Josephson junction array described by Eq. ( where i and j run over the N 2 lattice sites located at r i and The components of k are quantized in multiples of 2π N . We use the vortex representation for the calculations underlying Fig. For a given combination of elementary building blocks of striped vortex lattices, e.g., aac, we compute the energy via Eq. (S1) for ν = 1/2. We then increase the magnetic field in units of 1/N 2 by adding vortices to the channels. We minimize the energy of a given lattice structure by means of a metropolis algorithm. We also use this algorithm to decide to which channel the additional vortex is added. Finally, we allow the partially filled diagonals to shift against each other, which significantly decreases the energies of the c and d structures. We use system sizes N ∼ 100, chosen in such a way that they are commensurate with the structure (i.e., for c structures, we choose system sizes which are a multiple of 14, for aac, N is chosen as a multiple of 26, etc.) We find that the energies do not exhibit significant N dependence if N is increased further. We comment on trends evident in Fig. In the region 5 14 < f < 8 21 (blue), the lowest energy structure consists of channels c only, with the partially filled diagonal filling up from being half filled (f = 5 14 ) to being two-third filled (f = 8 21 ). Thus, one expects that the energy 6 The Josephson junction array described by Eq. ( where i and j run over the N 2 lattice sites located at r i and The components of k are quantized in multiples of 2π N . We use the vortex representation for the calculations underlying Fig. For a given combination of elementary building blocks of striped vortex lattices, e.g., aac, we compute the energy via Eq. (S0.12) for ν = 1/2. We then increase the magnetic field in units of 1/N 2 by adding vortices to the channels. We minimize the energy of a given lattice structure by means of a metropolis algorithm. We also use this algorithm to decide to which channel the additional vortex is added. Finally, we allow the partially filled diagonals to shift against each other, which significantly decreases the energies of the c and d structures. We use system sizes N ∼ 100, chosen in such a way that they are commensurate with the structure (i.e., for c structures, we choose system sizes which are a multiple of 14, for aac, N is chosen as a multiple of 26, etc.) We find that the energies do not exhibit significant N dependence if N is increased further. We comment on trends evident in Fig. In the region 8 21 < f < 2 5 (green), we find structures that combine channels c with the basic unit b of the f = 2 5 ground state. As f increases within this region, one thus expects that the b blocks become energetically more favorable, while the c blocks become energetically more costly as the partially filled diagonal increase in occupancy. This is consistent with the weaker f dependence of the configurations combining b and c blocks. We also note that the bc structure can be competitive with a pure c structure near f = 8 21 , since the filling of the channel is much lower in bc than in c at these frustrations. Similarly, the bcc structure can have a higher energy than the bc structure, since the channels have a larger occupation in bcc than in bc. Eventually, this trend would have to reverse however, as structures of the form bc. . .c should become close in energy to a pure c configuration, as the number of c building blocks increases. In the purple region, one expects a transition from channels c to thick channels of type d interspersing b-type building blocks. This transition will presumably happen in the limit of rare interspersing (thick) channels, so that it is masked in Fig. In the region 9 22 < f < 14 33 (orange; not previously identified), we find that the ground state is built from thick channels d, with the partially filled diagonal again varying from half to two-third filling. Compared to the channels c, we observe that the energy of the structure is more weakly dependent on the frustration f . Finally, we remark that in the white region in Fig. To search for minima and saddle points of the phase configurations, we start from Eq. ( In the range f = 1/3 to f = 1/2, a direct application of this algorithm To identify the relevant hopping processes of vortices, we proceed as follows. We apply the climbing-string method described in the next section to the phase model in Eq. ( We compute the energy barrier between two minima of the vortex lattice using the climbing-string method, see Ref. Step 1: We denote the minimum of the vortex lattice by the vector Φ 0 = (φ 1 , φ 2 , ..., φ N 2 ). We start with an initial random configuration Φ M close to Φ 0 . We linearly interpolate between these two configurations to obtain M -1 images Φ i with i = 1, ..., M -1, which form a string with the end points Φ 0 and Φ M . We now keep Φ 0 fixed and evolve the images according to the equations of motion Φi = -∇H, 0 < i < M (S3) ΦM = -∇H + θ(∇H • τ )τ . (S4) with θ > 1 and the approximate tangent vector τ given by The endpoint Φ M is thus climbing up the basin of the minimum Φ 0 in the tangent direction of the string, while following steepest decent dynamics in the perpendicular direction. The other points of the string are moving towards the minimum. Step 2: To ensure that the endpoint converges to an adjacent saddle point, one checks after k timesteps whether the energy rises monotonically along the string. If there is an image Φ J with H(Φ J ) > H(Φ J+1 ), the string is truncated at Φ J . Furthermore, the set of images is rebalanced such that they remain evenly distributed along the string. We parametrize the images in terms of the arclength, computed as The parameters of the images are then given by The images with their associated parameters are used to calculate an analytic expression for the string via, e.g., cubic interpolation. The curve γ = {Φ(α), α ∈ [0, 1]} is evaluated at α = i/M for 0 ≤ i ≤ M to recover a set of evenly distributed images. and otherwise identical phases. This choice ensures that the saddle point is connected to a domain-wall hop. We further use M = 20 images, a time step ∆t = 0.01, a force parameter θ = 1.2, and a tolerance δ = 0.0001. We rebalance the images after k = 500 time steps. The bond energy E J is set to unity.