The self-assembly of anisotropic nanocrystals (stabilized by organic capping molecules) with pre-selected composition, size, and shape allows for the creation of nanostructured materials with unique structures and features. For such a material, the shape and packing of the individual nanoparticles play an important role. This work presents a synthesis procedure for ω-thiolterminated polystyrene (PS-SH) functionalized gold nanooctahedra of variable size (edge length 37, 46, 58, and 72 nm). The impact of polymer chain length (Mw: 11k, 22k, 43k, and 66k g•mol -1 ) on the growth of colloidal crystals (e.g. mesocrystals) and their resulting crystal structure is investigated. Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) methods provide a detailed structural examination of the selfassembled faceted mesocrystals based on octahedral gold nanoparticles of different size and surface functionalization. Three-dimensional angular X-ray cross-correlation analysis (AXCCA) enables high-precision determination of the superlattice structure and relative orientation of nanoparticles in mesocrystals. This approach allows us to perform nondestructive characterization of mesocrystalline materials and reveals their structure with resolution down to the nanometer scale. In nanotechnology and materials science, the bottom-up production of nanoparticles with regulated structure and elaborate functionality is constantly a conceptual challenge. In this work, we studied gold nanoparticles with octahedral shape stabilized by polymer macromolecules with a specific chain length, which not only defines the interparticle distance in assembly, but also affects the effective shape of the nanoparticles, particle-particle, and particle-solvent interactions. This provides an excellent playground system to create ordered plasmonic self-assemblies with potentially tunable structures and properties. We herein present a synthesis procedure for ω-thiol-terminated polystyrene (PS-SH) functionalized gold nanooctahedra of variable size (edge length 37, 46, 58, and 72 nm) and investigate the impact of the polymer chain length (Mw: 11k, 22k, 43k, and 66k g•mol -1 ) on the growth of colloidal crystals (e.g. mesocrystals) and their resulting crystal structure. Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and advanced X-ray and electron imaging methods provide a complete structural examination of the self-assembled superstructures based on nanoparticles of various compositions and forms. Octahedral nanocrystals (37 -72 nm edge length) are synthesized in aqueous dispersion according to the literature ) within the process of a phase transfer to toluene (detailed synthesis parameters can be found in the Supporting Information). Three-dimensional superstructures with well-defined faceting (rhombic dodecahedral shape) and suitable size are obtained for 5 polymer-nanocrystal combinations (Figure The XRD experiment (see Figure We assumed that the real space structure for all measured samples is body-centered cubic (bcc). We performed modeling of the correlation peak positions corresponding to this structure and optimized the unit cell parameter to fit the experimental peak positions (see for details Ref. The deviation of the unit cell parameters within each sample were estimated from the Bragg peak widths using the Williamson-Hall method (the details of the analysis are given in section S3.5, Supporting Information). After analysis of the Bragg peaks originating from the superlattice, we turn our attention to the angular orientation of individual octahedra inside the superlattice. The octahedral shape of the nanoparticles is defined by eight {111}AL facets that lead to a highly anisotropic form factor of a single nanooctahedron with fringes normal to the facets. The cuts of the 3D intensity distribution through the crystallographic planes of the superlattice, presented for O1 sample in Although the bcc superlattice structure with tip-to-tip oriented nanooctahedra does not provide the highest possible packing density for nanooctahedra, it was previously reported for mesocrystals consisting of nanooctahedra capped by organic ligands. The revealed angular orientation of the nanooctahedra makes it possible to compare the defined superlattice unit cell parameters with the nanooctahedra dimensions. First, we extracted the nanooctahedra dimensions from the TEM measurements. An average edge length l was determined from the projections of individual nanooctahedra along the [111]AL direction for each sample (see section S1.2, Supporting Information). From the edge length, the facet-tofacet distance dd ff-ff , and the ideal tip-to-tip distance dd tt-tt iiiirrrrrr were calculated as dd ff-ff = √6ll 3 ⁄ and dd tt-tt iiiirrrrrr = √2ll, respectively. All obtained values are summarized in Table In its turn, the adjacent nanooctahedra along the ⟨100⟩SL axes touch each other with their tips. The unit cell parameters a, equal to the distance between the adjacent nanooctahedra in these directions and summarized in Table In the experiment, we deal with nanooctahedra with slightly truncated tips that lead to the reduction of the particle "overlap". Moreover, the observed angular disorder enables more effective packing where the nanooctahedra touch the next ones not directly with their tips but with their edges or facets close to the tips as shown in Figure Table Williamson-Hall method. The edge length l was measured from the TEM, error bars are the standard deviation of a few measured samples. The tip-to-tip distance dd tt-tt iiiirrrrrr and facet-to-facet distance dd ff-ff were calculated from the edge length as described in section S1.3 of Supporting Information. The first Bragg peak q-value is obtained from the average radial profiles shown in 1.0 ± 0.3 0.9 ± 0.3 0.9 ± 0.4 1.3 ± 0.6 0.9 ± 0.6 In summary, we presented a synthesis procedure for PS-SH functionalized gold octahedral nanoparticles of variable size (edge length 37, 46, 58, and 72 nm) and investigated the impact of polymer chain length (Mw: 11k, 22k, 43k, and 66k g•mol -1 ) on the growth of faceted colloidal crystals (i.e., mesocrystals) from toluene solution using a gas-phase diffusion technique. To resolve the structure of the grown rhombicdodecahedral mesocrystals we performed an XRD experiment in SAXS geometry at a synchrotron source. By applying the AXCCA method, we identified that in all cases nanocrystals self-assemble in a bcc superstructure, where gold octahedral nanoparticles are predominantly oriented tip-to-tip. This, at first, seemingly unfavorable orientational order is possible due to a slight truncation of nanooctahedra along the ⟨100⟩ direction and their angular disorder within the superlattice, which enables a more effective packing. HAADF-STEM tomographic reconstruction revealed the degree of octahedra truncation along ⟨100⟩ directions to be approximately α = 0.14±0.02. This experimental system provides an important contribution in understanding the packing behavior of octahedral nanoparticles with tunable surface properties (due to the functionalization by polymers with variable chain length) and reveals conditions for crystallization of the faceted mesocrystals. The latter is important for studying of optical properties of such highly ordered assemblies with a tunable distance between the plasmonic nanoparticles (due to surfactants with different polymer chain length) and different coordination geometries. This coordination is determined not only by the symmetry of the superlattice, but also by the location of nanoparticles within the bulk volume, and the orientation of vertices of the faceted mesocrystals. The exact coordination structure of faceted mesocrystals can be further explored in the future by Coherent X-ray Diffraction Imaging (CXDI), which can achieve nanoscale spatial resolution, allowing the presence of different types of structural defects to be revealed. The synthesis of the nanocrystals is conducted as published previously, The nanocubes were assembled to mesocrystals using a gas-phase diffusion technique (Figure The experiment took place at In-situ X-ray diffraction and imaging beamline P23 of the PETRA III storage ring at DESY (Germany). Monochromatic X-rays with a photon energy of 8.32 keV (λ = 0.149 nm) were focused by beryllium (Be) compound refractive lenses (CRLs). At this photon energy, the approximate beam size in the vertical direction was 7 -12 μm (Full Width at Half-Maximum, FWHM) and about 21 -36 μm (FWHM) in the horizontal direction. This allowed the X-ray beam to completely cover the colloidal crystal grains which have sizes We used the AXCCA method modified for applications to 3D intensity distributions as described in Ref. where II ̃(qq 11 ) and II ̃(qq 22 ) are normalized intensities taken at the momentum transfer positions q1 and q2 in 3D reciprocal space and δδ(xx) is a Dirac delta-function. The averaging is performed over the all momentum transfer positions of q1 and q2 with the lengths q1 = ||q1|| and q2 = ||q2||, respectively. The intensities are normalized to the mean values at the corresponding q-value as where averaging is performed over all positions corresponding to qi with the length qi = ||qi||. In this work, we calculated CCFs C(q1,q2,Δ) for a fixed momentum transfer value q1 corresponding to the first Bragg peak position and varying momentum transfer values q2. These CCFs are represented as corresponding maps in (q2,Δ)-coordinates. emitter operated at 80 kV and equipped with a Koehler illumination system. HAADF-STEM-Tomography has been performed at a FEI Themis operated at 300kV. The synthesis of the nanoparticles was conducted as published previously, Synthesis of initial seeds. An aqueous solution of HAuCl4 (0.25 mL, 0.01 ᴍ) and CTAB (7.50 mL, 0.10 ᴍ) were mixed in a glass vial (50 mL) and temperated to 27 °C. 0.60 mL of freshly prepared, ice-cold solution of NaBH4 (0.01 ᴍ) was added under vigorous stirring. The resulting solution turned brown immediately. The seed solution was aged for 90 min at 27 °C to ensure complete decomposition of excess borohydride. Synthesis of spherical seeds. The synthesis of spherical seeds was adapted from Zheng et al. Synthesis of faceted nanoparticles. Aqueous solutions of HAuCl4 (1 ml, 0.01 ᴍ), KBr, and CPC (50 ml, 0.1 ᴍ) were mixed in a glass vial (100 ml) and tempered to 27 °C. An aqueous solution of AA (1.5 mL, 0.1 ᴍ) was added, followed by rapid injection of washed spherical seeds. The solution turned pinkish red and was kept at 27 °C for 3 h. The NPs were collected by centrifugation at 9000 RPM for 5 min and redispersed in CPC solution (0.02 ᴍ). For discrete amounts of KBr and seeds and the resulting edge lengths l of the octahedral see Table The octahedra sizes are estimated from TEM micrographs assuming ideal octahedral shape of the particles lying on their {111} facets (Table The degree of truncation along the <100> and <110> directions was estimated by comparison with an ideal octahedra (see Section 2.1.). overlayed by an ideal cross-section of an octahedra (red dashed-lines). DLS was measured at 25 °C. As only one particle species and thus one main peak was expected, the Z-Average and polydispersity index (PDI) were selected for evaluation. The Zaverage represents the hydrodynamic diameter of the nanoparticles, while the PDI is a scale for the dispersity of the system. In PDI values smaller than 0.05 are mostly measured from monodisperse standards, and values greater than 0.7 indicate that the sample has a very broad size distribution. This diameter was then subtracted from the overall hydrodynamic diameter, and the result was halved for an estimation of the extension length of the polymer from the nanoparticle surface into the solution (Figure A sketch of the gas-phase diffusion setup can be found in Figure The averaged radial profiles of the scattered intensity I(q) were calculated according to the following equation where II(qq ii ) is the intensity value at the point of 3D reciprocal space with the coordinates qi and ε is the averaging window defining the resolution. In this work we used the value of ε = 0.005 nm -1 providing sufficient resolution. The form-factor radial profiles were calculated according to the same Equation (S1), but the points qi in the vicinity of the Bragg peaks were excluded from the averaging. The resulting radial profiles are shown in Figure To reveal the superlattice structure of the samples, we applied the AXCCA method to the obtained 3D scattered intensity distributions. We used the AXCCA method modified for applications to 3D intensity distributions, details of which can be found in Ref. where qq ii , qq jj are the points close to the spheres of the radii qq 1 and qq 2 in reciprocal space, respectively, ∆ iijj is the relative angle between these points. The sum is calculated over all pairs of points qq ii , qq jj with the corresponding relative angle ∆. The angular resolution of Δ was experimentally set to 0.5° that allows one to resolve all peaks in the resulting CCFs. The angular averaging window dΔ was correspondingly set to 0.25°. The value of the first momentum transfer q1 was fixed to the position of the first Bragg peak in the radial profiles shown in Figure In order to determine the lattice symmetry and parameter, modelling of the peak positions was performed as described in Ref. The corresponding unit cell parameter a was varied to fit the peak positions in the experimentally obtained CCFs. The expected peak positions for the optimized unit cell parameters are shown in Figure Apparently, the disorder is the main reason for the Bragg peak broadening for these samples (the offset in the Williamson-Hall plots is close to zero, see Figure The octahedral shape is defined by eight {111}AL facets that leads to a highly anisotropic form factor of a single nanooctahedron with fringes normal to the facets. This anisotropy allows determination of the angular orientation of the nanooctahedra in the superlattice To prove that, we compared the slices of the measured scattered intensity with cuts of the simulated scattered intensity from an ensemble of nanooctahedra. The form factor amplitude of an ideal octahedron can be calculated according to the following equation where R is half of the tip-to-tip distance (RR = ll/√2, where l is the octahedron edge length). The Information).