Fermi-level pinning (FLP) effect was widely observed in thin-film transistors (TFTs) with van der Waals (vdW) layered semiconductors (organic or two-dimensional) when contact electrodes were thermally evaporated 1-3 . Intensive investigation was implemented for formation of FLP-free interfacial states by eliminating chemical disorder and crystal defects arising from metal deposition 4-9 . However, technical and principal challenges are still existing towards high-yield, wafer-scalable and low-cost integration of TFT devices. Herein, we developed a general, scaling-up strategy to fabricate large-scale, high-performance FLP-free organic TFT (OTFT) arrays by using printed vdW contacts consisting of MXene composite electrodes and 2, 7-dioctyl [1] benzothieno [3, 2-b] [1] benzothiophene (C8BTBT). Room-temperature processes allow for a physically stacked junction without any structural or chemical damages. The OTFT arrays can be printed on a large-area silicon wafer or plastic film with 100% yield, exhibit ultrahigh field-effect mobility (μ FE ) over 17.0 square centimetres per volt per second (cm 2 V -1 s -1 ), high on/off ratio exceeding 10 8 , relatively low contact resistance of 3k ohm micrometres. The underlying mechanism for the high device performance was unveiled by Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) combined with theoretical simulation. The results indicate that work function (W F ) of the printed electrodes can be tuned at a wide range of 4.8-5.6 eV, thus significantly lowering the charge-injection barrier at the contact interfaces with ideal FLP-free character (the interfacial factor reaches 0.99 ± 0.02). This study paves a general strategy for achieving large-scale, high-performance thin-film electronics. Organic semiconductors with low-temperature processability show intriguing applications in low-cost, scaling-up fabrication of electronic devices. In past decades, in order to unveil the fundamental charge transporting principles of semiconductormetal interface in high-performance electronic devices, the Schottky barrier height (SBH, ∅ B ) for charge injection from the metal electrode to the semiconductor has often been extracted as one of the most crucial electrical characteristics To date, a wide variety of interfacial tuning methods for contact-semiconductor systems have ever been reported to eliminate the FLP, including introduction of a doping interlayer Both of them are intensively implemented in organic electronics to inhibit metal clusters to penetrate into the semiconductor thin film, and are confirmed to allow for offering a clean, damage-free metal/semiconductor interface to significantly reduce the ∅ B values. However, an ideal metal/semiconductor contact with negligible FLP effect has not yet been realized experimentally, since there is still a lack of metal deposition strategies to minimize the energy offset between the E F and the onset of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO)/the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) in organic semiconductors. In this study, we report scaling-up fabrication of wafer-scale, high-performance, FLP-free OTFT arrays by using screen-printed vdW contacts with a physically stacked metal/semiconductor junction. A printable conductive ink (M-PBr) consisting of water base, MXene sheets and the polymer dopant (Poly [ (9,9-bis (3'-((N, N-dimethyl)-Nethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] dibromide, PFN-Br, 0.1-2 wt%) was prepared as illustrated in Fig. MXene and the doping by PFN-Br as well. Moreover, the introduction of dopants does not change the lattice parameters and the in-plane and out-of-plane vibration peaks of titanium atoms of M-PBr ink compared to MXene ink. In particular, the PFN-Br acts as charge carrier transporting material for high-performance photovoltaic devices In comparison to the transferring method that has been widely used in twodimensional vdW devices, the screen-printing strategy associated with the aqueous M-PBr ink allows for scaling-up patterning of conductive electrodes on the top surfaces of various organic semiconducting films to fabricate large-area OTFT arrays. Wafer-scale, ultra-thin C8BTBT films prepared by blade shearing were selected to demonstrate the rapid operation speed and the high uniformity of the printed top-contact electrodes. One of the OTFT arrays in 4-inch wafer size (the maximum size limited by our screening printer) containing more than 50 × 50 M-PBr-vdW source-drain electrode pairs (Fig. When the top source-drain electrode was doped by PFN-Br, on-state current of the OTFT remarkably increased by one order of magnitude comparing with non-doped devices (Fig. We further explore the transmission types of the devices by analyzing the temperature dependence of the mobility. Arrhenius fitting indicates that the mobility is positively correlated with temperature, indicating that the printed vdW OTFT has an activated behavior (Fig. in which σ, T and K B represent the conductivity, the absolute temperature (K), and Boltzmann's constant (known as physical constant equal to 8.617 × 10 -5 eV/°C). The device with M-PBr has a smaller activation energy of 0.06 eV than that of the one with MXene (0.14 eV) , indicating that the energy required for the carrier activation transition in the M-PBr/C8BTBT contact is relatively low, which leads to a high carrier transfer efficiency. The curves of device mobility versus drain voltage (VD) follow the power law , where M-PBr has a lower power law index than MXene, implying enhanced charge carrier transport performance. The uniformity and stability of electrical properties in the printed vdW-OTFT can be demonstrated by investigating the μ FE distribution and the relative attenuation rate over time, respectively. The narrow μ FE distribution (μ̅ FE =10.2 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , Confidence interval is (9.5, 10.9)) of 100 M-PBr OFETs displayed in Fig. In an ideal device, the barrier can be theoretically predicted by the Schottky-Mott rule, ∅ B = I s -W F , I s and W F are the ionization potential of semiconductors and the work function of the metal, respectively M-PBr electrode with the WF of -5.41 eV was employed to construct a sandwiched device with three different configurations of MXene/C8BTBT/MXene, MXene/PFN-Br/C8BTBT/PFN-Br/MXene, and M-PBr/C8BTBT/M-PBr. According to the expression: ∆∅ B = -( e ε 0 ⁄ )∆P , where ∅ B , e , ε 0 , and P represent the WF, the amount of electron charge, the vacuum dielectric constant and the surface dipole moment, respectively; thus, the change of surface dipole moment, ∆P, was calculated to be 4.11 To determine true ∅ B values, temperature-dependent current measurement was carried out on the OTFT devices with M-PBr contacts (Fig. where Ids is the source-drain current. A is the junction area. A* is the Richardson constant. K is the Boltzmann constant. T is the temperature. We noted that all the SBHs extracted using this formula are determined from the flat-band condition. SBH extraction value of M-PBr OTFTs is 0.022 eV, which is located at the same order of magnitude with the theoretical calculation (0.08 eV). Such a low SBH was believed to introduce low contact resistance, and thus to lead to the linear behavior in IV curves in Fig. Theoretical investigation for revealing the mechanism of tuning WF of M-PBr was implemented via Density functional theory (DFT) calculation. Charge density difference plots associated with the planar averaged charge density (Fig. PEDOT (M-PEDOT) exhibited the FLP effect with S = -0.67, which was speculated to originate from a potential chemical bonding between PSS chains with BTBT cores. This hypothesis was supported by the result of PSSNa, which is believed to physically interact with the organic semiconducting molecules to form FLP-free OTFTs. Further understanding for this phenomenon is still under investigation. Despite the fact that the free-FLP TFTs can be often achieved with 2D materials, the printed vdW OTFT with doped MXene electrodes was proposed for the first time (Fig. Both the extracted contact resistance and charge injection efficiency exhibited remarkable SBH dependence (Fig. Furthermore, other semiconductors, including 2D materials, carbon nanotubes, and metal oxides, can be selected as the active layers for fabricating high-performance TFT devices by utilization of the proposed strategy.