This paper presents a simple yet novel two-dimensional modelling approach for approximating the coupling coefficient between neighbouring inductors as a function of co-planar separation and relative angular displacement. The approach employs simple geometric arguments to predict the effective magnetic flux between inductors. Two extreme coil geometry regimes are considered; planar coils (i.e. on printed circuit board), and solenoid coils, each with asymmetric ferrite cores about the central magnetic plane of the inductor. The proposed geometric approximation is used to predict the coupling coefficient between sensors as a function of separation distance and angular displacement and the results are validated against two-dimensional finite element modelling results. The analytical approximations show excellent agreement with the FE analysis, predicting comparable trends with changing separation and angular displacement, enabling best fitting to 2D FE and 3D numerical data with a residual standard deviation of less than 0.5% for the planar coil approximation. The work demonstrates the validity of the analytical approximation for predicting coupling behaviour between neighbouring coils. This has practical uses for the automated estimation of the physical separation between coils, or the curvature of surfaces they are rested or adhered to. Inductors are found in a diverse range of applications from non-destructive testing (NDT) Solutions to these problems typically rely on either finite element modelling techniques In this paper, a simplified two-dimensional (2D) approximation is devised for computing the magnetic flux shared between neighbouring coils, employing trigonometric arguments. First order formulae are derived to predict the coupling coefficient as a function of separation and relative angle between the coils. Two distinct coil designs are considered; planar-style coils (i.e. printed circuit board windings), and solenoid-style coils. The resulting approximations are validated against 2D and 3D finite element models. Determining coupling coefficients between neighbouring coils is an active area of research for many, particularly for those interested in wireless power transfer applications. Solutions to these problems are non-trivial and often require numerical integration of specific elliptical functions to arrive at analytical formulae. Details of these can be found in resources such as To calculate the changes in the coupling coefficient, k, due to the geometric configuration of a sensor system, we can consider a simple theoretical model for the magnetic flux between two neighbouring sensors. Figure where n 1 is the turn density of the coil, μ is the permeability of the core and a 1 is the planar crosssectional area of its core. We can express the magnetic flux through coil 2 as where B is the magnetic flux density passing through coil 2, a 2 is the cross-sectional area of coil 2, and da is the incremental area. We can then define simplified expressions for the flux through the secondary coil for semi-infinite coil configurations shown in Figure The magnetic flux through coil 2, Φ 2 , is the integral of the magnetic flux density generated by coil 1, B, over the area enclosed by coil 2, a 2 . Let us consider that coils 1 and 2 have identical filament turns and semi-infinite lengths into the page -equivalent to long narrow coils (i.e. where the radius r 1 = r 2 = r c ≪ l c ), where l c is the length of the coils. In this scenario, the magnetic flux density can be assumed to be the same at all points along the length of the coil. Therefore the coupling coefficient, k, can equally be expressed as the ratio between the flux per-unit-lengths (Φ where ds is the incremental length across the plane of coil 2, and s 2 is equivalent to the width of coil 2. Assuming, for an infinitely long coil, the magnetic flux density decays as 1/(2πr) away from the current source (as for around a line current), and that the total flux to one side of the excitation coil must be equal to half the total flux inside the coil where r ′ is the radial distance from the magnetic field source (centre of magnetism) within the windings. Equation 3 therefore gives, where r ′ 2a and r ′ 2b are the radial distances from the magnetic point source (at r ′ = 0) to the nearest and furthest windings of coil 2 respectively, and can be defined for any separation a, coil height, h, and relative angle between coils θ. Note that this expression is not dependant on the size of the primary coil. The following sections detail the calculation of coupling coefficients for 2D planar and solenoid coil geometries, where the coil height is much smaller, or much larger than the radius of the coil respectively. In this instance, r ′ 2a and r ′ 2b can be geometrically defined for any separation a and relative angle θ (see Figure where ζ = a/r 2 is defined as the separation ratio. Note that for simplicity, here we have assumed that the normal component of the magnetic flux will be normal to the central plane of the coil thereby eliminating the need to resolve the components of the B-field. This simplifies the integration in equation 5. The sections below discuss specific cases for how the coupling between coils will change as a function of different variables -co-planar separation (a) and angular displacement (φ = π -θ). When the coils are co-planar (θ = π), as shown in Figure The equation follows the expected 1/a form for the decay in magnetic field around a current carrying wire When the two planar coils are no longer co-planar, i.e. θ < π (φ > 0), the full expressions for r ′ 2a and r ′ 2b (equations 6-7) can be used to calculate the relationship between θ and the coupling coefficient. In order to aid the inversion of the relative angle between the coils, a simplified first order expression for this relationship is derived in Appendix A. The coupling coefficient, k, can therefore be defined as, where φ is given in radians. To approximate the behaviour of finite-height 2D coils, we make the assumption that the solenoid coils exhibit magnetic flux densities with north-south symmetry about a central plane (centre of magnetism -CoMag) at some height, h, along the coil axis. Here we have assumed that the coils are identical such that h 1 = h 2 = h. This is taken as the averaging plane of the sensor and is the plane along which the flux density will be integrated. If coils contain ferrite cores, these will act to shift the CoMag plane, depending on the relative height and location difference between coil windings, h w , and core, h c , (see Figure where, It is clear that, in the case when θ = π (φ = 0), r ′ 2a and r ′ 2b simplify to the same expressions for the co-planar separation defined in section 2.1.1, giving the same formula for k as given in equation 8. Equations 10-12 can therefore be considered the generalised formulae for calculating k between neighbouring identical coils. Substituting these new expressions for r ′ 2a and r ′ 2b into equation 5 allows us to calculate k as a function of φ for increasing CoMag heights, h, as shown in Figure The first-order approximation of k can therefore be defined as, Figure The approximate formulae derived above are only valid for the condition when a coil can be approximated to a 2D coil. Finite element (FE) simulations of coils in 2D are unable to predict parameters such as inductance, capacitance or resistance of the coil, however they can be used to quantitatively predict the magnetic flux density surrounding neighbouring coils in order to determine the expected flux sharing (i.e. coupling coefficient) between elongated coils. The magnetic flux in the region around a 2D simulation can be presumed valid if a coil is sufficiently elongated in the out-of-plane (z-axis) direction In order to validate and compare to the coupling coefficients predicted in section 2, a virtual study was conducted to determine at what aspect ratio of coil length, l c , to diameter, d c , a 3D coil will begin to behave like an infinite 2D coil. A 3D The results show that for an elongation ratio of 5, the 3D model predicts B y at the centre plane of the coil to be 93% of B y-2D . At an elongation ratio of 10, the 3D models B-field reaches 98% of B y-2D . While the B-field along the central plane of the coil in 3D is comparable to the 2D model, the B-field along the full length of the coil will not be the same as the 2D model. However, this virtual study indicates the minimum coil aspect ratio to begin physically approximating a 2D coil is l c > 5d c . The simple analytical models developed in section 2 are based upon an assumption that the magnetic field from a coil can be modelled as circular, being emitted from a magnetic point source within the coil. This point source is assumed to be centred at the mean of the winding radius, and at a height h from the basal plane. For a coil perfectly coaxial with a core equal in height to the coil windings (h c = h w ), or if the coil is air-cored, then the centre of magnetism (CoMag) would be expected to be half way up the coil windings (h w /2), as shown in Figure The results shown in figure The following section compares the coupling coefficients predicted by the 2D FE models to the first order approximations developed in section 2, as a function of co-planar separation and relative angle. The magneto-static 2D FE models were extended to simulate the magnetic flux sharing between two identical coils (one driver, one passive) during separation and angular displacement. The coupling coefficient k between the coils was evaluated by analysing the flux through the CoMag of each coil and taking the ratio as defined by equation 2. Only coils with equal core and coil winding heights were considered such that the CoMag was in the mid-plane of each coil (see Figure Figure The results shown in Figure Figure The same process of first-order approximation curve fitting was applied to both the planar and solenoid coil FE results for angular displacement with the results in Figure Table The simplified 2D coupling coefficient models developed in this paper demonstrate excellent agreement with the trends produced using 2D FE models for both co-planar separation, and for angular displacement within the range φ = 0 -90 o , but is limited to this angular range. Due to the approximations made, these simple formulae are unable to accurately predict explicit values for the coupling coefficients given specific input parameters. This is demonstrated in table 2 where the fitted coefficients for the angular displacement curves are used to invert the physical variables of the system, separation and aspect ratios (ζ and η respectively) from the equations in section 2. The table compares the calculated values to the predicted ratios, as determined from the geometric properties of the coil system, assuming that the centre of the magnetic field is in the middle of the coil windings as r 2 = 3 mm. The results show the deviation between the simplified model prediction and the calculated values demonstrating the limitations in the prediction capabilities of this first order approach. This is not surprising giving the many assumptions that were employed to reach the formulae derived. However, future work may find insight by evaluating the separation and coil aspect ratios in order to inform the geometric location (a, h) of the equivalent magnetic point sources for the planar and solenoid first order models. There are many different factors that have been omitted from the model for simplicity in order to arrive at simple formulae for easy fitting which have been shown to be sufficient for the extreme coil geometry cases proposed. Factors include variation in magnetic permeability with different core aspect ratio The proposed first-order model exhibits comparable trends in coupling coefficient predictions as those calculated using the numerically solved formulae provided in the supplementary data by Poletkin & Korvink A novel set of equations have been derived using simple geometric arguments and first-order approximations to predict the trends expected in the coupling coefficients between neighbouring identical coils as a function of relative angle and co-planar displacement. While the equations proposed are not suitable for accurate forward calculation of coupling coefficients, the formulae accurately predict the trends simulated in magneto-static 2D FE models, and can be used to fit to coupling coefficient measurements with exceptional agreement between 0 -90 o to both 2D FE and 3D numerical models, thereby enabling the possibility of direct physical inversion of the relative displacement between coils, based on a fitted calibration curve. It is expected that these 2D formulae have applications in the fields of wireless power transfer, electro-mechanical motor design, and inductive sensing measurement, as a fast and accurate technique for enabling experimental calibration of flux sharing multi-coil sensing systems. Moreover the formulae could be employed for simple coil geometry optimisation either to enhance or minimise the effects of relative changes in angle between neighbouring coils. Future work will experimentally confirm the validity of these expressions and apply them for the direct inversion of displacement between coils. From the general expressions for the radial distance to the nearest and furthest edges of coil 2 (equations 6-7), and recognising that cos θ = cos (π -φ) = -cos φ, we can define, Using the Taylor series of the cosine term up to O(φ From Figure where h = h 1 = h 2 is the centre of magnetism plane in coils 1 and 2 and φ is the angular displacement from co-planar (i.e. φ = π -θ). Via the trigonometric identities, tan φ 2 = (1 -cos φ)/ sin φ, cos φ = cos (π -θ) = -cos θ, and sin φ = sin (π -θ) = sin θ we have, = a 2 (1 + cos φ) + h 2 (1 -cos φ) 2 (1 + cos φ) = a 2 (1 + cos φ) + h 2 (1 -cos φ). Applying the first-order cosine Taylor series approximation used in section A, we can reach the approximation, Setting η = h/r 2 and using the same trigonometric identities as before, an expression for r ′ 2b can be given by, Alexis Hernandez's research is funded by the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (CONACYT).