Space-division multiplexing (SDM) with multicore fibers (MCFs) is envisioned to overcome the capacity crunch in optical fiber communications. Within these systems, the coupling optics that connect single-mode fibers (SMFs) to MCFs are key components in achieving high data transfer rates. Designing a compact and scalable coupler with low loss and crosstalk is a continuing challenge. Here, we introduce a metasurface-based free-space coupler that can be designed for any input array of SMFs to a MCF with arbitrary core layout. An inverse design technique -adjoint method -optimizes the metasurface phase profiles to maximize the overlap of the output fields to the MCF modes at each core position. As proof-of-concepts, we fabricated two types of 4-mode couplers for MCFs with linear and square core arrays. The measured insertion losses were as low as 1.2 dB and the worst-case crosstalk was less than -40.1 dB in the O-band (1260-1360 nm). Owing to its foundry-compatible fabrication, this coupler design could facilitate the widespread deployment of SDM based on MCFs. Index Terms-metasurface, multicore fiber (MCF) based multiplexing is necessary to expand the capacity of current systems. For this reason, the coupler that interfaces between SMFs and MCFs is a vital component for successful SDM-based communications. Various techniques exist for designing MCF couplers, also known as fan-in fan-out (FIFO) devices, each with unique strengths and weaknesses. These can be categorized into three main classes: (i) free-space optics In this paper, we report the first, free-space coupler for MCFs based on metasurfaces. Metasurfaces -planar optics composed of subwavelength-scale scatterers -have been used to engineer various aspects of light Fig. It is important to note that these metasurfaces are not necessarily simple lensing elements that (de)focus the incident beams. The adjoint design approach simultaneously optimizes the phase profiles imparted by the front and back metasurfaces. As a result, all wavefront operations such as deflection, collimation, focusing, and mode-matching are co-optimized between these two planes. Compared to previous free-space coupling demonstrations Obtaining analytical phase profiles for the metasurfaces that minimize the losses of all modes is not straightforward under the constraints set by the device parameters. The key design challenge for the metasurface coupler is the following: given an incident field at some input plane and a target field at some output plane, determine a series of metasurfaces that maximizes the overlap between the launched incident field and the target field at the output plane. This is a well-known inverse design problem in photonics that can be addressed using a method called adjoint optimization In the context of a SMF-to-MCF coupler, uu kk iiii would be a SMF mode and vv kk oooott would be the mode of a MCF core that we want to couple. In other words, the objective function (1) is just the mode-averaged insertion loss. Crosstalk, which is defined as the amount of power coupled into undesired cores or |〈uu kk oooott |vv mm oooott 〉| 2 for modes mm ≠ kk, is another important figure of merit for mode couplers. However, it is not necessary to include it in the objective function The gradient of (1) can be calculated with respect to the ii tth metasurface phase φφ (ii) as where Im is the imaginary part, † is the Hermitian adjoint, * is the complex conjugate, and • indicates element-wise multiplication. uu kk (ii) is the forward-propagated field defined just before the ii tth plane and vv kk (ii) is the back-propagated (or adjoint) field defined just after the ii tth plane. A full derivation of the gradient can be found in The product of the terms inside the round brackets reduces to a constant. Thus, the physical interpretation of ( Although the adjoint optimization of the metasurface coupler allows full freedom over the device parameters, it does not guarantee the convergence of (1) to a large field overlap value. For example, if the device is constrained to a single transmission mask, beam displacement becomes physically impossible. Then, any input field uu iiii kk and target field vv oooott kk that is laterally displaced will experience high loss using a singlemask coupler. Moreover, the objective (1) is not for a single pair of input and target fields, but for KK pairs to be matched in limited space, making it further constrained. At the same time, adopting a large number of masks is not practical. The phase masks are modelled in the optimization as unitary but, in practice, the metasurfaces do not realize the masks with complete fidelity. The nanostructures composing the metasurface may reflect, absorb, or introduce phase errors which distort the desired wavefront transformation. As a result, it is beneficial to minimize the total number of masks needed in the coupler design. Consequently, our metasurface platform is comprised of no more than two surfaces; physically, this is sufficient to relay a mode from the input plane to any position on the output plane. Once the optimized phase profiles are obtained, a look-uptable is used to map the nanopillar geometry, that best realizes the phase φφ (ii) (xx, yy), to each location in the plane (see Appendix A). This defines the pattern of each metasurface. In principle, any technology platform (e.g., spatial light modulators, multilevel diffractive optics etc.) can be used to realize these phase masks as long as it is compatible with the parameters of the Fig. xx zz yy coupler model. In this regard, metasurfaces are advantageous for theoretical and practical (fabrication-related) reasons compared to other platforms. For the former, metasurfaces can support subwavelength pixel sizes which allow phase gradients large enough to direct a beam in any direction. The nanostructure within a pixel can also be designed to compensate for dispersion, enabling broadband performance Four different types of metasurface couplers were designed for the O-band centered at 1310 nm. Table The wafer-scale compatibility of metasurfaces greatly simplifies their fabrication in contrast to other techniques. For example, to construct conventional lens-based couplers, every lens element must be precisely aligned relative to each other. As the mode count increases, the number of elements also increases and the alignment difficulty compounds. This problem does not exist in metasurfaces since all elements are lithographically written on a plane. Further, this allows high through-put scalability The 4-mode couplers, A and B, were fabricated on the same fused silica substrate since they shared the same thickness parameter dd in the adjoint method. The a-Si films were grown on the top and back sides of the substrate. To ensure that the front and back metasurfaces would be aligned, gold (Au) crosshairs were first patterned on the front surface using a maskless aligner and lift-off process. Then, this was repeated on the back using the backside alignment feature of the maskless aligner such that the positions of the Au crosshairs matched those on the front. This alignment accuracy is better than 1 μm. The metasurface patterns were written and positioned relative to the crosshair positions, using e-beam lithography (EBL). Reactive ion etching (RIE) was used to etch the a-Si pillars. Full details of the fabrication steps are illustrated and described in Appendix C. Fig. To first characterize Couplers A and B, the intensity profiles of the modes at the output plane were imaged. A schematic of the measurement setup is shown in Fig. where II mmmmmmmm is the spatial intensity profile of the output captured by the camera and vv MMMMMM is the analytical field of the MCF mode. Taking the square root of II mmmmmmmm approximates the field of the output image by dismissing its phase information. Each field quantity is normalized to have the same power. As a result, (3) ignores power losses and measures the mismatch of the two profiles in amplitude. This also quantifies information about stray light scattered away from the cores which cannot be obtained by simple MFD measurements. We emphasize that this calculation cannot be a direct estimate of loss since phase mismatch is excluded. Table Fig. The crosstalk for all 4-mode combinations is plotted in Fig. In this section, we break down the measured insertion losses for Coupler A into two major sources: transmittance and phase error. A comparison between the measured (Fig. Recall that the simulated insertion loss assumed unitary transmission through each metasurface. To test its validity, a simple transmittance measurement can be conducted. The same setup as Fig. A loss can be correlated with this phase error by modelling the propagation of the input SMF mode through the measured phases. Each metasurface is treated as unitary. The overlap of this field at the output plane with the analytical MCF core mode yields this extra loss plus the simulated loss. For Mode 2, the result is 1.0 dB and the portion due to phase error is 0.8 dB. Ideally, the sum of the simulated loss, phase error contribution, and transmittance loss (1.7 dB) should equate to the measured insertion loss at 1310 nm (1.4 dB). The difference of 0.3 dB could arise from the missing high-NA component of the measured backside phase, the cavity effect between the device substrate and the output SMF fiber, and redundancies in transmittance and phase error loss since guided/forwardscattered light beyond the detector is counted in both. Despite these simplifications, the discrepancy is small and most of the insertion loss seems to come from both sources with comparable contribution. For the rest of the O-band, we expect the phase error to increase since the a-Si nanopillars were designed at 1310 nm wavelength. Reducing both transmittance and phase error loss involves further design and fabrication considerations. First, part of the transmittance loss is caused by reflection at either metasurface. This is expected since the library of a-Si pillars (Appendix A) shows transmission amplitudes varying from 0.9 to 1 depending on the pillar diameter; the rest of the light is reflected. These nanopillars behave as truncated waveguides with each facet having some reflectivity due to the index mismatch of the propagating waveguide mode and air/substrate. Reflections can be lowered by designing a library with facets flanked by materials that are better index-matched to the propagating mode of the pillars. This can be partly realized by a leave-on, oxide mask sitting on top of the a-Si. Second, the loss due to phase error is a result of fabrication defects and limitations of librarybased metasurfaces. Geometric distortions from the intended pillar diameters introduced during fabrication contribute to this error and can be refined by fine tuning e-beam patterning. On the design side, the library only considers interactions between identical pillars, while the actual device includes distinct neighboring pillars. Such interactions impact both the amplitude and phase response at each meta-atom and must be taken into account using full device optimization (although this is currently a computational challenge given the large area of our device) We report the first demonstration of a metasurface-based freespace coupler between SMFs and MCFs. These devices are fabricated with foundry-compatible processes that allow highthroughput scalability beyond current MCF coupler platforms. Metasurface couplers operate similarly to couplers based on free-space optics. However, the former offers more design degrees-of-freedom such as coupling from arbitrary fiber arrays to arbitrary MCF core arrangements. This is made possible given the wavefront manipulation capabilities of metasurface at sub-wavelength spatial resolution. Two different versions of metasurface couplers were fabricated and had measured insertion losses down to 1.2 dB in the O-band. The worst-case A. Metasurface nanopillar library Fig. Fig. Out of the four coupler designs, Coupler A and B were the only two fabricated since the device parameters were closest to existing optimized recipes at our cleanroom facilities. Coupler C and D both have thicker substrates which impact thermal equilibration during resist baking and cooling during etching. This can be addressed by adjusting baking times and substrate cooling temperatures, respectively. The fabrication steps are illustrated in Fig. The measured insertion loss and crosstalk reported in Fig. Fig. 