We analyse the impact of temperature on the diffusion coefficient of an inertial Brownian particle moving in a symmetric periodic potential and driven by a symmetric time-periodic force. Recent studies have revealed the low friction regime in which the diffusion coefficient shows giant damped quasi-periodic oscillations as a function of the amplitude of the time-periodic force [I. G. Marchenko at al., Chaos 32, 113106 (2022)]. We find out that when temperature grows the diffusion coefficient increases at its minima, however, it decreases at the maxima within a finite temperature window. This curious behavior is explained in terms of the deterministic dynamics perturbed by thermal fluctuations and mean residence time of the particle in the locked and running trajectories. We demonstrate that temperature dependence of the diffusion coefficient can be accurately reconstructed from the stationary probability to occupy the running trajectories. For the several last decades methods of diffusion processes have been applied in analysis of a very large number of phenomena not only in physics, chemistry, biology, material science or engineering but also in finance markets, communication, innovations However, there are systems which can exhibit the opposite effect, i.e., the diffusion coefficient decreases when temperature increases Lately, another interesting non-monotonic behavior of D has been found out, namely, the giant quasi-periodic changes of the diffusion coefficient when the amplitude of the time-periodic force increases The paper is structured as follows. The presentation starts in Sec. II, where we define the system in terms of the dimensionless Langevin equation of the Brownian particle moving in the spatially periodic potential driven by an unbiased time-periodic force. In Sec. III, we discuss the impact of temperature on the oscillating character of the diffusion coefficient D and report regimes where the normal and abnormal temperature dependence of D takes place. Sec. IV contains the main points of analysis of the deterministic counterpart of the model which are crucial for noisy dynamics. The most important deterministic property is the existence of two classes of the particle trajectories, namely the running and localized ones. In Sec. V, we study the full noisy dynamics with emphasis on behavior of the diffusion coefficient. We consider regimes where its attains its extremal values. The impact of temperature on the diffusion coefficient is analyzed by applying several quantifiers like spread of trajectories, mean residence times in different states, etc. Sec. VI contains summary of the findings. In Appendix A, we detail the scaling scheme for Brownian dynamics and the corresponding dimensionless Langevin equation. Appendix B provides information about simulations of the Langevin equation. We consider the same model as in Ref. Langevin equation ẍ + γ ẋ =sin x + a sin(ωt) + 2γQ ξ(t). (1) In this scaling the dimensionless mass m = 1, the parameter γ is the friction coefficient and Q ∝ k B T is the dimensionless temperature of the system. The coupling of the particle with thermostat is modeled by the δ-correlated Gaussian white noise ξ(t) of vanishing mean, namely ⟨ξ(t)⟩ = 0 and ⟨ξ(t)ξ(s)⟩ = δ(ts). The starting dimensional equation is presented in Appendix A, where the corresponding scaling and dimensionless parameters are defined. The complexity of the underlying dynamics with the nonlinear force f (x) =sin x, timeperiodic force of the amplitude a and frequency ω, and thermal fluctuations of the intensity 2γQ do not allow for a reasonable analytical approach which presently is clearly beyond known mathematical methods. Therefore numerical simulations were employed and their methodology is described in Appendix B. The Langevin equation ( In Eq. ( ( Here and below ⟨•⟩ stands for the average over the ensemble of thermal noise realizations. Since the system is driven by the time-periodic force, the velocity ⟨v⟩ can be calculated as where is the particle velocity averaged over the period T = 2π/ω of the external driving a sin (ωt) which implies that In the deterministic case, when Q = 0, the dynamics may be non-ergodic and therefore sensitive to the specific choice of the starting position x(0) and velocity v(0) of the particle. In such a case we should modify the driving to the form a sin (ωt + φ 0 ), where φ 0 is the initial phase. Consequently, all quantities of interest should be averaged over {x(0), v(0), φ 0 } with uniform distributions to get rid of this dependence. However, for any non-zero temperature Q > 0 the system is ergodic and the initial conditions do not affect its properties in the long time stationary regime. The dynamical system described by the deterministic counterpart of Eq. ( In Ref. On the other hand, at the local minima, D is smaller than the Einstein diffusion coefficient. E.g., if the driving amplitude is a ≈ 9.81 and temperature reads In this paper, we want to analyze the impact of temperature on the characteristics presented in Fig. IV. NOISELESS DYNAMICS, Q = 0 The noiseless system corresponding to Eq. ( At the first maximum a = 6.3, there are five states v ∈ {v 0 = 0, ±v 1 = ±ω, ±v 3 = ±3ω}, i.e., the localized state v 0 (the particle oscillates in one or several potential wells and the motion is bounded in the coordinate space), two dominant running solution with the velocities ±v 1 and as well as two remaining running states ±v 3 . One should pay attention to the fact that the vertical axis in Fig. velocities as well as the same number of states transporting the particle in the negative direction. The structure of solutions is similar in the remaining maxima and minima presented in Fig. Thermal fluctuations existing at non-zero temperature makes the noisy dynamics ergodic. Consequently, the initial conditions do not affect the results in the long time limit while their impact can be still relevant for transient regimes. The latter can last extremely long especially when the thermal noise strength Q tends to zero. However, it is not the case for high temperature Q ∈ [0.1, 1] presented in Fig. Although the asymptotic state is non-equilibrium and non-stationary, in some regimes it can effectively be described in the framework of equilibrium statistical mechanics, at least for some observables. For example, in Ref. where f (x) is some effective time-independent force. A similar approach is also presented in Ref. We continue our analysis by investigating temperature dependence of diffusion at the first maximum a = 6.3. In the deterministic case, when Q = 0, the system exhibits both the locked and running states v ∈ {v 0 = 0, ±v 1 , ±v 3 }, see panel (c) in Fig. In panel (a) of Fig. In Fig. As the next point of our analysis we consider diffusion for the driving amplitude a = 9.81 corresponding to the first local minimum, see Fig. Since our system is symmetric a preferential direction of motion is impossible in the asymptotic stationary state implying ⟨v⟩ = 0. This condition imposes a fundamental constraint on the impact of thermal fluctuations onto the set of deterministic solutions for the particle velocity. The latter can be quantified by temperature dependence of the stationary probabilities to reside in each of the states existing in the noiseless case. From a qualitative perspective there are only two distinct classes of states, namely the locked v = 0 and running v ̸ = 0 one. Therefore in Fig. We detect that at the minima of the diffusion coefficient the probability p 0 = 1 in a wide interval of temperature Q ∈ [0.1, 1]. It means that thermal fluctuations destroy the running solutions and all trajectories eventually are localized in the locked state in which by definition the time average velocity v = 0 and consequently the symmetry condition is satisfied ⟨v⟩ = 0. It explains why the diffusion coefficient D at the minima can be reduced even well below its value for a free particle. We note that for asymmetric systems thermal noise induced dynamical localization in a running state can lead to emergence of transient but long-lasting subdiffusion without broad distributions or strong correlations traditionally identified with disorder, trapping, viscoelasticity of the medium or geometrical constraints On the other hand, in the symmetric system localiza-tion can occur also in a pair of the running states transporting the particle into the opposite directions so that the symmetry condition ⟨v⟩ = 0 is still satisfied. Since such a type of trajectories maximizes the spread it has the greatest impact on the diffusion coefficient. It can be inferred from the panel (b) of Fig. With this study we numerically analyzed diffusion of the Brownian particle moving in a spatially periodic potential and driven by an unbiased time-periodic force. Our investigation was focused mainly on temperature dependence of the diffusion coefficient D in the regime in which its quasi-periodicity with respect to the driving amplitude is observed. We revealed that for lower temperature the diffusion coefficient at the minima is extremely reduced even well below the Einstein diffusion coefficient for a free particle. The origin of this effect lies in thermal noise induced localization of all system trajectories in the locked state in which the particle motion is bounded to a finite number of the periodic potential wells. If temperature grows the diffusion coefficient increases as it is commonly expected. In contrast, for the same lower temperature this quantity at the maxima is extremely large. If temperature increases in this regime the anomalous behavior is detected in which the diffusion coefficient decreases when temperature grows. As a reason for this intriguing effect we identified peculiar influence of thermal fluctuations on transitions between two classes of trajectories, namely the locked and running ones, existing in the deterministic dynamics of the system. In particular, we found out that temperature dependence of the diffusion coefficient in its minima and maxima can be qualitatively reconstructed by temperature dependence of the stationary probability to reside in the running state. As a final note we point out that it is not a nuisance that the non-monotonic temperature behavior of diffusion coefficient is related to proportion between the number of locked and running trajectories but seemingly it emerges rather as an universal property observed for different systems in various regimes 