Many precision applications in the mid-infrared spectral range have strong constraints based on quantum effects that are expressed in particular noise characteristics. They limit, e.g., sensitivity and resolution of mid-infrared imaging and spectroscopic systems as well as the bit-error rate in optical free-space communication. Interband cascade lasers (ICLs) are a class of mid-infrared laser exploiting interband transitions in type-II band alignment geometry. They are currently gaining significant importance for mid-infrared applications from <3 μm to >6 μm wavelength, enabled by novel types of high-performance ICLs such as ring-cavity devices. Their noise-behavior is an important feature that still needs to be thoroughly analyzed, including its potential reduction with respect to the shot noise limit. In this work, we provide a comprehensive characterization of λ = 3.8 μm-emitting, continuous-wave ring-ICLs operating at room temperature. It is based on an in-depth study of their main physical intensity noise features, such as their bias-dependent intensity noise power spectral density (INPSD) and relative intensity noise (RIN). We obtain shotnoise-limited statistics for Fourier frequencies above 100 kHz. This is an important result for precision applications, e.g. interferometry or advanced spectroscopy, which benefit from exploiting the advantage of using such a shot-noise limited source, enhancing the setup sensitivity. Moreover, it is an important feature for novel quantum optics schemes including testing specific light states below the shot noise level, such as squeezed states. Interband cascade lasers (ICLs) are semiconductor-based, coherent mid-IR light sources, first demonstrated by Yang et al. in 1995 techniques like dual-comb spectroscopy First, a typical ring-ICL is characterized in order to determine its optimal working point when operated at a fixed temperature of 16 • C in CW mode. In our setup, the ring-ICL is driven by an integrated modular controller (ppqSense s.r.l., QubeCL10) including temperature stabilization by using a thermo-electric cooler. Its laser driving unit is characterized by a low bias current noise density, typically around 300 pA/ √ Hz, for reducing its effect on the intensity noise of the operated device. As shown by the LIV curve in Fig. Coming back to the characterization of the tested ICL, it clearly benefits from a shot-noise-limited intensity noise within the tested detector efficiency. Indeed, the obtained data shows an INPSD of the sum signal (green trace, Fig. In conclusion, we investigated the noise characteristics of a 2 nd -order DFB ring-ICL emitting at λ = 3.79 μm for a fixed temperature of 16 • C. The INPSD level found at a driving current I = 140 mA, i.e. far from the laser threshold and from the laser rollover, with a balanced-detection setup demonstrates shot-noise limited operation between 10 kHz and 5 MHz. In the setup, we employed two HgCdTe photovoltaic detectors with similar responsivity, which are moreover linear in the whole range of investigated laser bias currents. Sub-shotnoise detection is shown to be potentially possible with such Frequency (Hz) a configuration. For this purpose, the detector quantum efficiency should be improved, in order to enhance the chance of unveiling sub-classical emission, by limiting losses. We further investigated the RIN of our experimental configuration, obtaining decreasing RIN values with increasing laser bias currents. Moreover, in contrast to previous RIN studies in ICLs In the future, better detection technology with significantly higher quantum efficiencies (currently ∼13-14 %) are needed, to explore the sub-classical regime and quantum optics applications. For each plot the theoretical shot-noise level is shown with a dashed black line, the detector background is depicted in gray, the sum of these two quantities is in red, the INPSD of the difference in blue, and the INPSD of the sum in green. As described in Fig. 