A study of Helium-Neon laser plasma lines was done using a double grating spectrometer and a He-Ne laser with an emission wavelength of 632.8 nm (15,802 cm -1 ). The absolute wavenumber, measured to within ∼ 0.1 cm -1 , and wavelength of each plasma line are presented, along with intensity and shift relative to the main laser line. Several of the measured lines have not been reported in the literature and are observed at shifts between 0 -1500 cm -1 from the laser line, a spectral region commonly probed by optical Raman scattering experiments. Accounting for the possibility of second-order diffraction permitted many previously unassigned lines to be attributed to known He or Ne electronic transitions with wavelengths in the ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Despite increasing adoption of solid state lasers, the He-Ne gas laser is still one of the most commonly used light sources in research and industrial applications. Like all gas lasers, He-Ne lasers often emit so-called plasma lines arising from spontaneous emission in the laser tube in addition to the desired stimulated emission resulting from population inversion. In laser spectroscopy experiments where precise knowledge of the wavenumbers associated with spectra features of interest are required, these plasma lines can serve as "built-in" calibration standards. It is therefore surprising that the literature on plasma emission lines for He-Ne lasers is scant. There appears to be only one in-depth study of He-Ne laser plasma emission lines Motivated by the above-noted paucity of literature data and the inconsistencies in that which is available, we present in this paper the results of a comprehensive study on plasma lines from a He-Ne laser with an emission wavelength of 632.8 nm. We report plasma lines with shifts of 0 -1500 cm -1 from the primary emission line at 15802.4 cm -1 , a commonly probed spectral range for optical Raman scattering studies, and tabulate absolute wavenumber, measured intensity, and wavenumber shift from the primary emission line. This information is also provided for some second-order lines in the ultraviolet spectral region. In addition, the atomic species (He or Ne) associated with each transition is identified. Fig. Experiments were conducted over shifts of 0 -1500 cm -1 relative to the laser wavelength at 632.8 nm with crystalline silicon, aluminum, and superconductor Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8.17 as scattering sources to ensure that the origin of peaks assigned to plasma lines was indeed emission from the laser tube and not inelastic scattering from a particular material. To ensure proper calibration of the spectrometer before each run, the signal from the primary emission line was first obtained over the range 15,809.8 cm -1 to 15,800.5 cm -1 with a grating step size of 0.05 cm -1 by placing several neutral density filters in the beam path to heavily attenuate the incident light. Following this, the filters were removed and spectrum collection was resumed (with no change in scan direction so as to eliminate possible dial backlash issues) at a starting wavenumber of 15,800.5 cm -1 and a step size of either 0.15 or 0.3 cm -1 , corresponding to total acquisition times of ∼ 222 hours and ∼ 111 hours, respectively. Fig. Comparison of our spectra to the data in Ref. The absence in the literature of multiple lines that appear in our spectra is surprising, especially given that our results indicate that the intensity of many of the these lines is greater than that of some previously observed 1 . This can be largely reconciled by noting that ultraviolet lines corresponding to known He or Ne transitions with emission wavelengths of ∼ 300 nm 5 can satisfy the grating equation for second-order diffraction. Furthermore, there are several lines listed in Ref. Table Plasma lines from a He-Ne laser source were investigated by probing a spectral region 0-1500 cm -1 from the primary emission wavelength of 632.8 nm (ν a = 15, 802. lines were identified with energies that correspond to known electronic transitions in He or Ne. The shifts of several of the lines are consistent with second-order diffraction in the UV region of the electromagnetic spectrum. This work complements published He-Ne laser emission line compilations and refines previously measured plasma peak shifts through use of a spectrometer with higher resolution. With an estimated uncertainty of ∼0.1 cm -1 , the data reported in the present work constitute the most complete and accurate compilation of He-Ne emission line wavelengths to date and should prove useful to those performing spectroscopy experiments that employ a He-Ne laser as a calibration or incident light source in the visible and ultraviolet spectral regions. Table 