Two-dimensional van der Waals materials have become an established platform to engineer flat bands which can lead to strongly-correlated emergent phenomena. In particular, the family of Ta dichalcogenides in the 1T phase presents a star-of-David charge density wave that creates a flat band at the Fermi level. For TaS2 and TaSe2 this flat band is at half filling leading to a magnetic insulating phase. In this work, we theoretically demonstrate that ligand substitution in the TaSe2-xTex system produces a transition from the magnetic insulator to a non-magnetic metal in which the flat band gets doped away from half-filling. For x ∈ [0.846, 1.231] the spin-polarized flat band is self-doped and the system becomes a magnetic metal. In this regime, we show that attractive interactions promote three different spin-triplet superconducting phases as a function of x, corresponding to a nodal f-wave and two topologically-different chiral p-wave superconducting phases. Our results establish monolayer TaSe2-xTex as a promising platform for correlated flat band physics leading to unconventional superconducting states. The presence of flat bands around the Fermi level is one of the key ingredients to stabilize exotic orders in quantum materials. In the flat band regime, the kinetic energy of electrons is much smaller than the Coulomb interactions. As a result, the physical behavior of the system is dominated by electronic interactions which lead to strongly correlated phenomena In recent years, the successful synthesis of twodimensional (2D) van der Waals materials has led to novel ways of engineering flat bands In this work, we use a combination of ab initio calculations and low-energy models to demonstrate that monolayer 1T-TaSe 2-x Te x undergoes a transition from a magnetic insulating phase to a non-magnetic metallic one. At intermediate concentrations x ∈ [0.846, 1.231] the system becomes a magnetic metal in which the spin-polarized flat band is self-doped by the ligand substitution. We show that attractive interactions in this regime give rise to spin-triplet superconductivity. In particular, we observe that three different triplet-superconducting phases can occur as a function of the ligand substitution: nodal fwave, topological chiral p-wave, and trivial chiral p-wave superconducting phases. We start our analysis performing density functional theory (DFT) calculations in TaSe 2-x Te x in the 1T √ 13 × √ 13 CDW phase We analyze now the evolution of the electronic structure as a function of the ligand substitution in TaSe 2-x Te x . Figures After having established from an ab initio perspective that TaSe 2-x Te x undergoes a transition from a half-filled to a fully filled flat band, we analyze with a low-energy model derived from the DFT calculations the doped flat band phase. This regime is particularly interesting since it corresponds to a doped spin-polarized flat band in which Coulomb interactions dominate. From our firstprinciples calculations, we can extract a single-orbital Hamiltonian for the flat band in a triangular lattice: where c † i,s (c i,s ) are the creation (annihilation) fermionic operator at site i and for spin s, t ij are the hoppings between Wannier states of the flat band, and U is the effective on-site repulsive Coulomb interaction that leads to the spin splitting of the flat band. We can extract all the t ij hoppings and the U from the DFT calculation[49] and the single orbital corresponds to that shown in Fig. A schematic of the low-energy model can be seen in Fig. First, a ferromagnetic order characterized by the magnetization M = ⟨c † ↑ c ↑ ⟩ -⟨c † ↓ c ↓ ⟩ as the order parameter. This is a consequence of the repulsive on-site Coulomb interaction U . Increasing the filling of the flat band decreases the magnetization (Fig. , is finite for every ν in the doped flat band regime (Fig. We can analyze the spectral gap associated with the spin-triplet superconducting state (Fig. In the fully-gapped p-wave regime, a Chern number C can be defined, and the topology of the spin-triplet superconductor be analyzed (Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that TaSe 2-x Te x undergoes a transition from a magnetic insulating phase to a non-magnetic metallic one as a function of x. For x ∈ [0.846, 1.231] the system becomes a magnetic metal in which a spin-polarized flat band is self-doped by the isoelectronic ligand substitution. In this regime, we have shown that attractive interactions promote three different spin-triplet superconducting phases: a nodal f-wave, a chiral topological p-wave, and a chiral trivial p-wave phase. These can be accessed by ligand-substitution engineering at particular concentrations. Our results demonstrate that monolayer TaSe 2-x Te x is a potential platform for a variety of unconventional spin-triplet superconducting states and strongly correlated driven flat band phenomena. NODAL F-WAVE PHASE In this section, we include supplemental material for the nodal f-wave superconducting phase that occurs for Te concentrations in the range 0.846≤ x ≤1.225. Figure In this section, we provide the density of States (DOS) that allows us to analyze the characteristic features of the spectra for the spin-triplet superconducting phases (Fig. 