Resistivity measurements are widely exploited to uncover electronic excitations and phase transitions in metallic solids. While single crystals are preferably studied to explore crystalline anisotropies, these usually cancel out in polycrystalline materials. Here we show that in polycrystalline Mn3Zn0.5Ge0.5N with non-collinear antiferromagnetic order, changes in the diagonal and, rather unexpected, off-diagonal components of the resistivity tensor occur at low temperatures indicating subtle transitions between magnetic phases of different symmetry. This is supported by neutron scattering and explained within a phenomenological model which suggests that the phase transitions in magnetic field are associated with field induced topological orbital momenta. The fact that we observe transitions between spin phases in a polycrystal, where effects of crystalline anisotropy are cancelled suggests that they are only controlled by exchange interactions. The observation of an off-diagonal resistivity extends the possibilities for realising antiferromagnetic spintronics with polycrystalline materials. The combined approach of experimental and theoretical research has recently led to a deeper understanding of electronic transport phenomena in antiferromagnetic (AFM) materials, fostering the development of future antiferromagnetic spintronic devices for which the manipulation of antiferromagnetic order by external means is a key issue In particular, antiferromagnets with non-collinear magnetic structure are quantum materials that exhibit unique spin-dependent properties Theoretical calculations of the electronic transport properties are most often carried out for single-crystalline materials, where the various anisotropies have to be taken into account. From a materials science point of view, polycrystalline materials are just as interesting as single crystals, since they are used more frequently in applications and crystallographic dependencies are balanced out by the randomly arranged crystallites. Moreover, in the case of a polycrystalline non-collinear antiferromagnet, it is not a priori clear that all non-diagonal elements of the resistivity tensor cancel when subjected to an applied magnetic field, which can change the AFM structure in each crystallite. Prime examples of compounds where the non-collinear AFM order is susceptible to small variations of composition, strain, and magnetic field are Mn-based Mn3AX (A = Ga, Ge, Zn, Ag, Ni; X = C, N) compounds of cubic antiperovskite structure. They are well known for their large magnetovolume, piezomagnetic, and barocaloric effects and negative thermal expansion due to a strong spin-lattice coupling Here we report an investigation on A-site doped Mn3(Zn0.5Ge0.5)N powder samples where spontaneous changes occur in the longitudinal and transverse resistivity at low temperatures which are susceptible to weak magnetic fields. This is attributed to a magnetic phase transition between different non-collinear phases. The subtle change in magnetic structure is supported by neutron diffraction demonstrating its high sensitivity to minute changes in magnetic structure. The fact that the magnetic phase transitions between different spin phases are observed in a powder sample, where effects from crystalline anisotropy are cancelled suggests that they are controlled only by exchange interactions, in contrast to the SO interactions controlling, e.g., the  5g - 4g transition. This can be adequately described in a phenomenological model revealing the presence of a magnetic-field induced topological orbital momentum. The unexpected and surprising result that a finite transverse resistivity remains in a polycrystal of noncollinear AFM order is not due to symmetry effects or the AHE and provides information about the nontrivial magnetic phase diagram when properly investigated. The Mn3Zn0.5Ge0.5N sintered-powder samples with a crystallite size of ~ 400 nm exhibit the coplanar Γ 5g type antiferromagnetic order below the Néel temperature TN = 411 K derived from neutron diffraction and magnetization measurements The magnetic field dependences of ρ║ and ρ┴ below T* are even functions of the magnetic field (Fig. The size of ┴ is independent of the magnetic field orientation (Fig. The observed transition cannot be ascribed to superconductivity Measurements of the magnetoresistance down to 0.1 K establish a H-T phase diagram with phase boundaries appearing between different spin configurations (Fig. The integral magnetization M of Mn3Zn0.5Ge0.5N is very small, corresponding to a tiny average magnetic moment of 3.6×10 -5 μB/Mn and does not show a transition at low temperatures at 2 K (Supplementary Fig. M2y is determined from the minimalization of the refinement parameter χ 2 (Supplementary Fig. Hence, the coplanar triangle Γ 5g phase (Fig. The fact that we experimentally observe temperature and/or magnetic field induced changes in the diagonal and off-diagonal elements of the resistivity tensor and in the magnetic neutron scattering lets us to preliminary conclude that these changes occur due to transitions between three magnetic phases with different spin symmetries, i.e., with different relative angles between the neighboring spins In the following, we develop a phenomenological model to describe the observed field and temperature dependencies of the resistivity tensor. The model is based on analyzing the spin symmetries of the existing phases, as illustrated in Fig. From the symmetry point of view it is convenient to introduce linear combinations N 1 = (M 1 + M 2 -2M 3 )/√6 and N 2 = (-M 1 + M 2 )/√2 , that form a multidimensional order parameter of the antiferromagnetic phases, and the combination M = (M 1 + M 2 + M 3 )/√3, which is the total magnetization Our model is based on the analysis of the magnetic energy F which, in the spirit of the Landau's theory of phase transitions, we introduce in a following way (for details see Supplementary Materials Note 5) The first three terms of the equation represent the bilinear (Heisenberg) and the biquadratic exchange coupling. The strength of coupling is characterized by phenomenological constants J(T), D, and D'. We assume a linear temperature dependence of J(T) =  T with  > 0. The last term in Eq. ( To obtain magnetic configurations corresponding to the triangle, flower, and fork phases, we minimized the energy Eq. ( . Hence, at the triple point H cr ≡ M s √3βT c /Λ CC , the transition to the FO phase occurs simultaneously with the growth of the noncoplanar magnetization component. In this case, the transition line is T < T c -Λ ̃CC H 2 /(3βM s 2 ), where Λ ̃CC < Λ CC (line separating Γ 5g and intermediate phase I in Fig. The above considerations are relevant for interpreting the phase diagram of a single crystalline sample. However, to analyze the resistivity data and extract the phase diagram of a powder sample consisting of single-domain particles, we assume an equiprobable distribution of particle orientations. In addition, we employ symmetry considerations, assuming that ρ xx -ρ yy ∝ (N 1 ⋅ M) 2 determines the field and temperature dependencies of the AMR. We also neglect any variations in the component ρ zz and consider its value to be the same in all three phases. We compute the resistivity tensor for each phase by considering all possible orientations of the magnetic field with respect to crystallographic axes. After computing the average over the particle distribution, we obtain a phase diagram that can be divided into three distinct regions (Fig. Within the first region, denoted as Γ 5g , either the triangle or FL high-symmetry phase remains stable. These two phases have identical resistivity tensors, which makes it impossible to distinguish between them and resolve the transition line (Fig. Consequently, the AMR exhibits a kink (Fig. In the polycrystalline material, different grains within the sample are affected by different components of the magnetic field. The transition from the fully compensated Γ 5g phase to the low-symmetry FO phase is induced by the field component that is parallel to the {111} ordering planes. On the other hand, the transition to the high symmetry non-coplanar FL phase is induced mainly by the field component that is perpendicular to the ordering plane, and additionally stabilized by the in-plane component in the vicinity of the triple point H cr (2.8 K). Importantly, we find that the transition between the noncoplanar FL and low-symmetry phases occurs at a higher field strength compared to the transition from Γ 5g to the low-symmetry FO phase. Consequently, the phase diagram of the polycrystalline sample comprises two distinct phase transition lines that delineate the transitions into the low-symmetry phase from Γ 5g and from the FL phase into the I phase, respectively. Finally, we discuss the origin of the nonzero transverse resistivity component. The spin symmetry, which describes the effects of exchange interactions, can only account for diagonal components of the resistivity tensor. However, the contribution of magnetic symmetry, which captures the effects of SO interactions, cannot be ignored as it can lead to magnetic order and subsequently affect the resistivity tensor. Therefore, the influence of both spin and magnetic symmetries on the resistivity tensor needs to be considered in order to fully understand the transverse resistivity component. We performed a qualitative analysis of the magnetic symmetry in all three phases. The magnetic symmetry group of the high-symmetry triangle and flower phases still includes third-order rotations, which results in the exclusion of transverse resistivity components in these cases. However, in the low-symmetry fork phase, the appearance of in-plane magnetization is related to the rotation of spins out of the {111} crystallographic planes Sintered polycrystalline samples of the composition Mn3Zn0.5Ge0.5N and Mn3Ag0.95N were prepared by solid-state reaction using fine powders of Mn2N, Zn, Ge, and Ag as starting materials The crystalline and magnetic structure was characterized by the time-of-flight (T. O. F.) diffractometer GPPD (general purpose powder diffractometer) at CSNS (the China Spallation Neutron Source), Dongguan, China. The neutron beam of GPPD with the high intensity and good spatial resolution makes it well suited for the accurate analysis of magnetic materials with complex orderings F. mode with wavelength bands of 0.1 -4.9 Å between 2 K and 300 K. The General Structure Analysis System (GSAS) program was used for Rietveld refinement with scattering lengths of -0.373×10 -12 , 0.568×10 -12 , 0.818×10 -12 , 0.592×10 Electronic-transport properties and the specific heat were measured in a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design) for temperatures 1.8 -400 K and in magnetic fields up to 9 T. Measurements down to 0.1 K have been taken in a 