FeSe 1-x S x remains one of the most enigmatic systems of Fe-based superconductors. While much is known about the orthorhombic parent compound, FeSe, the tetragonal samples, FeSe 1-x S x with x > 0.17, remain relatively unexplored. Here, we provide an indepth investigation of the electronic states of tetragonal FeSe 0.81 S 0.19 , using scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/S) measurements, supported by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and theoretical modeling. We analyze modulations of the local density of states (LDOS) near and away from Fe vacancy defects separately and identify quasiparticle interference (QPI) signals originating from multiple regions of the Brillouin zone, including the bands at the zone corners. We also observe that QPI signals coexist with a much stronger LDOS modulation for states near the Fermi level whose period is independent of energy. Our measurements further reveal that this strong pattern appears in the STS measurements as short range stripe patterns that are locally two-fold symmetric. Since these stripe patterns coexist with four-fold symmetric QPI around Fevacancies, the origin of their local two-fold symmetry must be distinct from that of nematic states in orthorhombic samples. We explore several aspects related to the stripes, such as the role of S and Fe-vacancy defects, and whether they can be explained by QPI. We consider the possibility that the observed stripe patterns may represent incipient charge order correlations, similar to those observed in the cuprates. Iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) exhibit intertwined orders, including superconductivity, spin-density waves (SDWs), and nematicity. While most FeSC systems have neighboring magnetic and nematic phase transitions, the SDW phase is absent in FeSe 1-x S x at ambient pressure. The substitution of S for Se suppresses the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic transition temperature to zero at x = x c ≈ 0.17 (Fig. Identifying broken symmetry states beyond superconductivity in tetragonal FeSe 1-x S x presents a challenge due to the random location of S. This is because the spatial inhomogeneity induced by S may limit the correlation length of such states, making their detection by spatially averaged experimental probes difficult. Moreover, the random S distribution may negatively impact spatially averaged probes of the band structure causing inhomogenous broadening effects on spectral features. This is observed, for example, in some ARPES measurements of tetragonal FeSe 1-x S x , which yield broader band features than those observed in FeSe We focus our studies on tetragonal FeSe 1-x S x samples with x = 0.19. We describe our various results in the following order: (i) STS imaging experiments over a 45 × 45 nm 2 area reveal distinct sets of quasiparticle interference (QPI) vectors when analyzing two distinct real-space regions. Specifically, areas near and away from the sparsely distributed Fe-vacancies (FeVs) yield different QPI features. Separating the Fourier transform analysis of these regions allows us to disentangle QPI features that are otherwise unresolved when the Fourier transform is done over the full fieldof-view of our measurements. (ii) This scatterer-resolved QPI (SR-QPI) analysis enables a detailed comparison of the experimental data to theoretical Green's function calculations informed by ARPES measurements. This comparison allows us to identify the momentum space origin of various QPI scattering vectors. Notably, we identify QPI from the bands that form the electron pockets at the M/A points, which had not yet been identified in tetragonal Fe(Se, S). (iii) We find that the strongest periodic modulations observed in the STS measurements occur in the 0 to 10 meV energy range, along the nearest Fe-Fe distance, with an energy-independent wave vector ( ≈ 0.12 Å -1 ) and in the regions away from FeVs. (iv) An analysis of this feature in real space reveals that it appears as alternating domains of short-range stripe patterns. Interestingly, we find that these stripe patterns coexist with four-fold symmetric QPI signals emanating from FeVs, whose locations are correlated with the boundaries between the stripe domains. Since QPI around FeVs are known to be two-fold symmetric within orthorhombic domains, the stripe patterns revealed in our measurements of tetragonal FeSe 1-x S x must be distinct from the nematic correlations in orthorhombic samples. Altogether, our observations suggest the presence of a periodic electronic modulation that breaks both translational and rotational symmetry in FeSe 0.81 S 0.19 . Although our main findings relate to tetragonal FeSe 1-x S x , we first compare STM/S measurements of FeSe and FeSe 0.81 S 0.19 in Fig. In Fig. Fourier transforms over these distinct areas show significant differences, as can be seen for selected energies in Fig. The SR-QPI analysis introduced above has a clear practical utility in differentiating overlapping or nearby QPI features. This is particularly evident when analyzing dispersion maps, such as the ones shown in Figs. To illustrate the practical result of the SR-QPI analysis, we show three different dispersion maps in Fig. The wave vectors of QPI patterns at a given energy reflect the momentum transfer for scattering processes between states on the contours of constant energy of the band structure. To relate the STS data to the band structure, we use the low-energy model that describes the band structure in FeSe and FeSe 1-x S x In principle, each experimental QPI feature can be matched to different lines in the theory simulations. However, in practice, this can be challenging because signals from different parts of the Brillouin zone overlap in the FTs of the STS data. We overcome this challenge with the SR-QPI analysis. Figure q a (Å -1 ) q a,b (Å -1 ) q x,y (Å -1 ) -60 intra-pocket scattering from the electron pockets at M/A points (represented by purple lines), which had not been resolved in QPI of FeSe 1-x S x before. These results not only demonstrate how STS measurements can access the electron pockets at the M/A points in FeSe 1-x S x , but they also validate our use and interpretation of the SR-QPI analysis. Non-dispersive broken-symmetry signal above the Fermi level Despite the success of our theoretical modeling in capturing most of the experimental QPI features, the calculations are unable to explain the signal just above the Fermi level. The feature between 0 and 10 meV, near q a, b = 0.12 Å -1 , stands out as the most intense signal in our STS measurements, which is evident in the dispersion maps obtained from the entire FOV of Fig. To better understand the non-dispersive modulations, we can examine their local rotational symmetry. Figure which shows that the large FOV map in Fig. Our theoretical modeling informed by ARPES measurements is successful at explaining in detail the observed QPI patterns, despite the intricate band dispersions inherent to this multi-band system. However, there remains an outstanding feature that calculations could not capture: the non-dispersive excitation shown in Fig. Stripe-like modulations in FeSCs with different periods and coherence lengths have been reported by STM/S in two other situations: LiFeAs under external uniaxial stress Since nematic fluctuations persist with S-substitution in tetragonal FeSe 1-x S x samples As the non-dispersive feature is not present in S-free crystals it is also important to assess the possible relevance of disorder to the characteristic length scale of the stripe modulations. The wavelength of these modulations, which is about 52 Å, is much larger than the average distance between S atoms, which is ≈ 8 Å. The discrepancy between these numbers, combined with the fact that S atoms sit at C 4 symmetric locations on the lattice, suggests that, at the length scale of the non-dispersive modulation wavelength, the random S may simply be thought of as a weak and quasi-isotropic strain field. As far as Fe vacancies are concerned, it is reasonable to consider whether the local twofold symmetric patterns could arise from a random configuration of these vacancies. In principle, a possible explanation is that fourfold symmetric QPI patterns emanating from adjacent FeVs could interfere in a way that results in two-fold symmetric patterns in the intermediate regions. However, in this simple scenario, one would expect the modulations to be strongest near the FeVs and to progressively dampen out the further one moves away from them. This contradicts a salient aspect of our data, where the intensity of the non-dispersive modulations is strongest in the regions between the FeVs. The phenomenology of the strong, non-dispersive feature is, however, remarkably similar to that of broken-symmetry states in cuprate superconductors where the existence of a stripe-like charge ordering (CO) state is well established. For example, the CO in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+x appears in the real-space dI/dV as local domains of alternating stripes Existing theoretical work provides further insight into why the FeSe 1-x S x system could be unstable towards a CO state. On one hand existing calculations show that electronic compressibility in FeSe crystals is enhanced by decreased electronic correlations wavelength predicted by this theory may explain the recent observations of modulated nematic order in FeSe and BaFe 2 (As 0.87 P 0.13 ) 2 by photoemission electron microscopy In conclusion, our STS experiments and SR-QPI analysis represent significant progress in the measurements of QPI features, band structure mapping and detection of broken symmetry states in FeSe 1-x S x samples. Informed by ARPES, our QPI simulations are successful at explaining almost all features observed in our STS dispersion maps, but fail to capture the strongest STS signal, which is present along the shortest Fe-Fe crystallographic direction at q a, b ≈ 0.12 Å -1 and occur for energies just above the Fermi level. Our STS measurements further reveal that these modulations appear in the form of short-range stripe patterns, whose origin is unrelated to the nematic order in orthorhombic FeSe 1-x S x . Phenomenological similarities between STS observations in FeSe 0.81 S 0.19 and in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+x suggest that the stripe modulations reported here may be due to incipient charge order correlations, a scenario that finds support in existing theoretical work. Single crystals of FeSe and FeSe 1-x S x were grown using the chemical vapor transport method in a tilted furnace following the methods outlined in ref. npj Quantum Materials (2023) 60 Published in partnership with Nanjing University 1234567890():,; Published in partnership with Nanjing University npj Quantum Materials (2023) 60 npj Quantum Materials (2023) 60Published in partnership with Nanjing University