Iron-based superconductors display a large degree of variability in electronic structure at the Fermi surface, resulting in superconducting gap structures, Tc's, and other properties that vary considerably from family to family. Recently it was noted that across many different families of Febased systems, the ratio ∆max/Tc is found to be quasi-universal with a large value of ∼3.5 compared to the the one-band BCS weak-coupling result of 1.76. Here ∆max is the measured maximum gap across the Fermi surface. This remarkable fact was attributed to strong-coupling effects arising from Hund's metal physics. Here we perform a "high-throughput" scan across band masses, Fermi energies, and interaction parameters in a weak-coupling Suhl-Matthias-Walker model. We find that unexpectedly large values of ∆max/Tc can be achieved within weak coupling, and that quasiuniversal behavior similar to experiment emerges for those systems where interband interactions dominate intraband ones. However, within the current framework, a large mass contrast between bands is required. I. Iron-based superconductors have fascinated the superconductivity community for more than a decade. Originally hailed after their discovery in 2008 In addition to strongly differing low-temperature gap sizes and structures, the the FeSC display a wide range of superconducting transition temperatures, from a few Kelvin up to ∼ 70K in monolayer FeSe grown on SrTiO 3 . Variations in overall strength of the superconductivity across this family are generally attributed to Fermi surface features Thus an apparent overall lack of universality in the properties of the Fe-based systems themselves hinders the search for the underlying, presumed universal physical mechanism of superconductivity. Recently, however, it was pointed out by Miao et al. Lee et al. Here we take a quite different approach, arguing that the large ∆ max /T c ratio of ∼ 3.5 may in fact be most naturally explained in the framework of simple multiband weak-coupling theory. By weak-coupling, we mean that the interactions within and among bands are assumed much smaller than the relevant Fermi energies and the energies of the pairing bosons. We show, within a simple Suhl-Matthias-Walker (SMW) ansatz of constant pairing interactions in band space In contrast to Ref. We have modeled the intraband interactions V 11 and V 22 , as well as interband interactions V 12 , using the λ interaction matrix- where m 1 and m 2 are the band masses and positive interactions are taken to be attractive. The two-band BCS equations that determines ∆ and T c are and the functions F α (∆, T ) for the electron and hole bands α = 1, 2 are where we have taken the Fermi energies (band extrema) equal We performed a consistency check of our code for mass ratio 2 and different regimes of interband and intraband couplings. We observed from FIG. To differentiate between the different regimes of inter vs intra band interactions we define a lograrithmic quantity- which parameterizes the degree of interband pairing. β → ∞ is pure interband pairing, while β → -∞ is pure intraband pairing. In a a materials class with many different members with quite different electronic structure, it is an appropriate starting point to assume them to have random values of the parameters determining ∆ max and T c within reasonable physical ranges. First, we consider a uniform probablility distribution of the most important such parameters, namely the individual interaction matrix elements λ ij , as shown in Fig. Fig. Our "high throughput" approach then involves solving (4) for T c and the superconducting gaps for the various different values of λ ij . We repeat the exercise for differing values of the Fermi energies, effective masses, and BCS pairing cutoffs to check what influences the ∆ max /T c ratio. The overall coupling strength is adjusted to keep T c in a reasonable physical range for Fe-based superconductors. In Fig. In order to achieve a large "universal" value of the ∆ max /T c ratio within the current simplified framework, it is clear that we must assume that all materials are dominated by interband pairing interactions, β > 1. In this case, we have a cluster of points near the upper limit for each mass ratio, so the ∆ max /T c ratio is constant and larger than the BCS value for all "samples". The interesting observation is that the upper limit increases with increasing in the mass ratio, as shown in Figure Other parameters in the model were found to have much less significant impact on the ∆ max /T c ratio. For example, we have considered how these results change when the Fermi energies E F 1 and E F 2 are varied. We find that the values of ∆ max and T c change but the ratio of ∆ max /T c does not. The same was true for changes in the energy cutoff. As expected in the weak-coupling FIG. We have considered the effect of varying the most common physical quantities thought to influence a superconductor's critical temperature and gap function It is therefore tempting to speculate that it is the failure to include orbitals and their differentiated elec-tronic correlations in the Fe-based systems which is the principal deficiency of the current model. As has been pointed out in many places, Hund's metal correlations drive a strong asymmetry between d xy and d xz /d yz correlations, e.g. effective masses, a trend observed in nearly all the Fe-based materials As a final sanity check, it is useful to compare the current analysis to the more familiar case of MgB 2 , to which the 2-band model has often been applied To investigate the possible existence of "universality" of the ratio ∆ max /T c in iron-based superconductors as claimed by Miao et al. Hole-band Electron-band Average ratio max ratio FeTe0.55 Se0.45 