Van der Waals atomic solids of noble gases on metals at cryogenic temperatures were the first experimental examples of two-dimensional systems. Recently such structures have also been created on surfaces under encapsulation by graphene, allowing studies at elevated temperatures through scanning tunneling microscopy. However, for this technique, the encapsulation layer often obscures the actual arrangement of the noble gas atoms. Here, we create Kr and Xe clusters in between two suspended graphene layers, and uncover their atomic structure through direct imaging with transmission electron microscopy. We show that small crystals (N < 9) arrange as expected based on the simple non-directional van der Waals interaction. Crystals larger than this show some deviations for the outermost atoms, possibly enabled by deformations in the encapsulating graphene lattice. We further discuss the dynamics of the clusters within the graphene sandwich, and show that while all Xe clusters with up to N ∼ 100 remain solid, Kr clusters with already N ∼ 16 turn occasionally fluid under our experimental conditions with an estimated pressure of ca. 0.3 GPa. This study opens a way for the so-far unexplored frontier of encapsulated two-dimensional van der Waals solids with exciting possibilities for fundamental condensed matter physics research and possible applications in quantum information technology. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals atomic crystals are one of the simplest conceivable solids, described to a large extent with the simple pairwise interaction approximated by the Lennard-Jones potential. Such structures formed by noble gas atoms have been experimentally studied since the 1960's at cryogenic temperatures Studies on van der Waals structures were for a long time limited to cryogenic temperatures due to the weakness of the van der Waals interaction. Only after the discovery of the impermeability of graphene to the smallest gases in 2008 However, the graphene encapsulation complicates imaging the atomic structure of the crystallites which has even lead to misidentification of such structures in the past Here, we create 2D few-atom noble gas clusters by implanting Kr and Xe between suspended graphene sheets using ultralow-energy ion irradiation, and image them at room temperature using atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), complemented by electron energy loss spectroscopy for confirming the chemical identity of the atoms. Our samples consist of both mechanically exfoliated bi-and few-layer graphene as well as commercial graphene grown via chemical vapor deposition (CVD). For the CVD-grown samples, two graphene monolayers were stacked on top of each other to create an artificial double layer with a random misorientation between the graphene crystals. This allows us to compare samples where the van der Waals gap has never been exposed to air or contamination to samples where the two layers are joined under ambient conditions, and different moiré periodicities. In all cases, similar noble gas clusters were found with no discernible difference. Samples were irradiated with singly charged ultralow-energy Kr or Xe ions to introduce the noble gases. For Kr-irradiated samples, successful implantation between two graphene layers was achieved at 60 eV, and for Xe-irradiated samples at 55 eV and 65 eV, close to the simulated lower bound for Xe implantation of 70 eV After the implantation, the samples were imaged via STEM at 60 kV using either the high or the medium angle annular dark field (HAADF and MAADF) detectors. Before being inserted into the vacuum system connected to the microscope, the samples were baked in vacuum at ca. 150 • C for at least 8 h. Some samples were additionally cleaned before imaging with a laser at the microscope column Clusters with N Kr ∈ The same cluster shapes are found both for Xe as well as Kr, and in samples using both exfoliated graphene and graphene grown via CVD. Therefore, there is no plausible way that the clusters could contain any other element that remains invisible in our microscopy images. The hexagonal close-packed structure minimizes the number of lower-coordinated atoms while at the same time maximizing the number of nearest neighbors within the cluster (see also Fig. Nearest neighbor distances for the clusters are shown in Fig. The increasing pressure when the cluster size decreases is likely due to the higher necessary local curvature for graphene required for accommodating the smaller clusters. Additionally, the pressure for the smallest experimental clusters appears to increase even faster than what is predicted by the simulations. This can be related to the size of the point defect trapping the clusters, as discussed below. To understand the influence of the graphene sandwich on the shape of the crystals, we carried out further structure optimization for cluster sizes up to 18 atoms (Fig. It is rather surprising, that the small clusters remain stationary at room temperature for long enough to allow their imaging in the microscope. In fact, one could even expect that all noble gas atoms would escape through edges from between the two graphene layers before they are able to form solid structures. While loosing all atoms is unlikely due to the large size of the samples (up to tens of μm for exfoliated samples and up to even mm for the CVD-grown ones) compared to atomic length scales, the motion of noble gases in the graphene sandwich warrants a discussion. To study this, we turn to room temperature molecular dynamics simulations. Our simulations of individual Kr and Xe atoms show that they are both highly mobile in a graphene sandwich with estimated speeds of ca. 316 m/s and 233 m/s, respectively. For three-atom clusters this changes to ca. 334 m/s and 231 m/s and for the Kr 7 cluster to ca. 369 m/s at 300 K. (The corresponding speeds in gas under normal conditions, according to ideal gas law, would be 180 m/s and 130 m/s, respectively, for two dimensions). Therefore, for all simulated clusters the speed within the graphene sandwich would be too high for imaging with the experimental time resolution of ca. 1 s per image. The simulations further reveal that despite the weakness of the interaction between the noble gas atoms, already at N = 3, all atoms within the clusters move together rather than separating (also seen for Kr 7 in Fig. Obviously, regardless of the fast expected migration, the clusters remain static for long enough for us to be able to image them. This suggests that the experimentally observed clusters are pinned to their positions either by corrugations associated with the surface contamination (many clusters appear at the edges of contamination) or by defects the smallest clusters may fit into the deformation without further bending graphene by being squeezed tighter together leading to less bending in graphene but tighter pressed Xe atoms. Interestingly, we also see occasionally that the clusters in the experiments jump between different sites in the graphene sandwich, even in areas void of visible contamination. As an example, Fig. Another example of a jumping cluster is shown in Fig. Our interpretation is also in line with Ref. One interesting question regarding the pressure-induced stability of 2D van der Waals atomic structures is under which conditions they remain solid. The solid-fluid phase transitions carry infor- mation of the size-dependent interaction strength within the noble gas clusters, being of high relevance for future studies. This is also interesting, since from a purely energetic point of view, one would expect smaller clusters to have a lower melting point and therefore to display liquid-like characteristics before the larger ones. However, in the case of our clusters sandwiched between two graphene sheets, this is counterbalanced by the increasing pressure for the decreasing cluster sizes, as discussed above. Nevertheless, it is natural to expect that there is a pressure-and temperature-dependant size limit, beyond which the energy cost of the undercoordinated atoms at the rim (corresponding to the surface energy of a 3D structure) becomes too large, and the structure undergoes a transformation into a three-dimensional shape. Phase diagrams suggest a solid-to-liquid transformation at room temperature for pressures slightly above 1 GPa for Kr and around 0.5 GPa for Xe As is evident in all images of clearly liquid-like structures (Fig. Creation of small solid state noble gas clusters in a graphene sandwich, as was demonstrated here, opens the so-far unexplored frontier of encapsulated 2D van der Waals atomic solids. Simulations show that the small clusters would assume a 3D shape without the graphene encapsulation, even at zero temperature, and that noble gas clusters are extremely mobile in the graphene sandwich, unless pinned to a position due to a deformation in at least one of the encapsulating graphene layers. Although small clusters remain solid for both Kr and Xe, larger Kr clusters (N > 16) start loosing their solid structure whereas Xe clusters remain solid up to N ∼ 100. Larger solid structures may be achieved by providing more structural rigidity for example through increasing the number of the encapsulating layers, which can be expected to increase the pressure. Combined with in situ techniques for example allowing experimentation from cryogenic to elevated temperatures, encapsulated 2D noble gas structures provide exciting possibilities for studies in fundamental condensed matter physics ranging from research on the growth and atomic-scale dynamics in solids to phase transitions and topological defects. They may also lead to well-defined systems for example for quantum information research. Supplementary material includes description of methods, overview images and electron energy loss spectra, a schematic presentation of the observed atomic structures, images of additional observed shapes of small Kr and Xe clusters, time series of a Kr cluster changing size over time, simulations of shape changes of a cluster, all different simulated 2D and 3D shapes, simulation results for the energetic differences between 2D and 3D clusters and an additional example of an image series of a Xe cluster that jumps within the graphene sandwich. Samples. Few-layer graphene samples were fabricated using both mechanical exfoliation as well as stacking single-layer graphene grown via CVD (EasyTransfer graphene by Graphenea, Inc.) on top of each other. Mechanically exfoliated samples were transferred using the typical transfer procedure Ion irradiation. Most samples were irradiated at the University Helsinki using the 500 kV ion implanter KIIA operated at 20 kV with an electrostatic deceleration lens slowing the ions down to 20 -100 eV. To reduce sample contamination during the implantation process, some of the samples were baked in air for 1 h at 300 • C and inserted warm into the irradiation setup. For Kr-irradiated samples, successful implantation between two graphene layers was observed at 60 eV irradiation, and for Xe-irradiated samples at 55 eV and 65 eV. Additional irradiations were carried out within the vacuum system CANVAS (11) at the University of Vienna, which connects the Nion UltraSTEM 100 with other experimental stations. Here, a plasma source was used to create a Xe beam. The energy of the plasma was measured by biasing a Faraday cup and measuring the current as a function of the bias voltage. For implantation, the beam was decelerated using sample bias until the energy of the ions was ca. 30 eV. Results from these irradiations are shown in Fig. Electron microscopy and spectroscopy. All samples were imaged at the University of Vienna with the Nion UltraSTEM 100 dedicated scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) instrument at 60 kV using either the high or the medium angle annular dark field (HAADF and MAADF) detector with annular ranges of 60 -200 mrad and 80 -300 mrad, respectively. The convergence semi-angle was 30 mrad, and a typical beam current ca. 30 pA. Electron energy loss spectroscopy was carried out with the same instrument with a Gatan PEELS 666 spectrometer retrofitted with an Andor iXon 897 electron-multiplying charge-coupled device camera using a collection semi-angle of ca. 35 mrad. Before being inserted into the vacuum system connected to the microscope, the samples were baked in vacuum at ca. 150 • C for at least 8 h. Some samples were additionally cleaned before imaging with a laser at the microscope column (50 μs laser pulse, power 20 mW, wavelength 473 nm and spot size ca. 700 μm 2 ). The images were calibrated using the auto scaling algorithm Image processing. Image filtering was done by applying a double Gaussian For the double Gaussian filter, the inner radius was set as 0.15 times the distance from the centre to the first set of graphene spots in the fast Fourier transform (FFT) and the radius of the outer Gaussian was set as 1.3 times the respective distance to the outer set of FFT spots. In the Fourier filter, the spots corresponding to graphene were deleted and thus lattice was removed after back-transformation. Atomistic simulations. The molecular dynamics simulations were conducted using the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS). The periodic system consisted of two 10×10 nm 2 AB-stacked graphene layers (7872 C atoms) with the interlayer distance of 3.39 Å relaxed to a local energy minimum with the Polak-Ribiere modified conjugate gradient algorithm The defected graphene sheets with an interlayer bond and a defect with negative curvature were created by introducing the defect to the relaxed AB-stacked graphene and re-relaxing the system. After the initial relaxations, the noble gas atoms were introduced between the graphene layers in the 2D form as observed in the experiments and the system was relaxed again. Optimised 3D clusters were obtained from these 2D forms by annealing the cluster without graphene at 80 K over 40 ps followed by cooling down to 1 K during 800 ps and relaxation. The rapid annealing and slow cooling was introduced to escape possible local energy minima. For observing the cluster transformation into 2D, two optimised 3D clusters (Kr 6 and Kr 12 ) were individually placed between the relaxed graphene sheets and then relaxed again. The room temperature dynamics of a single atom, a three-atom cluster and a seven-atom cluster were simulated by first ramping the temperature from 0 K to 300 K over 0.2 ns, after which the simulation was run at 300 K for another 1 ns. The output was printed every 500 steps with a time step of 0.2 fs. The pressure of the Kr and Xe clusters were calculated from a 4 × 5 atom semiperiodic cell. The bond lengths were scaled to the selected value and the forces (F y ) between atoms taken from the initial structure along the nonperiodic direction when conjugent gradient energy minimisation was started. Pressure was calculated with P y = F y /A, where A is the 2D area given by the distance between two neighboring atoms and the height of the van der Waals gap containing the cluster (3.4 Å for Kr, 3.3 Å for Xe). The Xe M 4 and M 5 core loss peaks arise from the area spatially located at the cluster, as can be seen from the spectrum obtained by subtracting the graphene signal (from within the area marked with a white rectangle) from the signal corresponding to the area marked by the black rectangle (the spectra were normalized to the values before the peak onset at 672 eV. Two very bright pixels, possibly caused by cosmic rays hitting the detector, were replaced by their average surrounding. The numbers indicate the size of the cluster (positions marked with i ≤ N constitute the cluster with N atoms). For each added atom, the bonds with the same color as the circle are new compared to the cluster with one less atom. The position shown with gray outline and black number 6 corresponds to the position of the sixth atom in Xe 6 in the observed cluster, whereas the colored circle with white 6 is the position of the sixth atom in all clusters with N > 6. In contrast, the colored circle with white 13 corresponds to the observed structure of Xe 13 , whereas the gray circle with black 13 would lead to a more symmetric structure but with the same number of nearest neighbor interactions. 