We report the elastic properties of the Kondo semimetal CeBi by resonant ultrasound spectroscopy measurements at zero magnetic field. Clear elastic softening is found in bulk modulus CB below ∼ 60 K. Such a softening in CB, in addition to the anomalous temperature dependent Poisson's ratio, is hardly attributable to multipolar response for stable localized 4f orbital, but can be well described by a two-band model arising from the hybridization between conduction-and 4f -electrons. These results probably are consequences of the valence fluctuations in this Kondo semimetal as originally suggested by a Fermi-surface expansion observed in a previous angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy study [P. Materials encompassing valence instability have attracted a broad audience ever since decades ago Recently, CeBi was suggested as a rare example of valence fluctuations in the Kondo regime In this paper, by employing the resonant ultrasound spectroscopy (RUS) technique that is both thermodynamic and symmetry-sensitive (cf Table High-quality single crystals of CeBi were grown by the Bi-self-flux method as mentioned in previous papers For RUS measurements, the CeBi sample was polished into a parallelepiped along the principle axes with dimensions 0.972×0.790×0.403 mm 3 and mass 2.54 mg. A similar parallelepiped was also prepared for LaBi, with dimensions 0.979×0.856×0.673 mm 3 and mass 4.45 mg. Strain ). The data were taken in a field-cooling protocol. Two AFM transitions can be identified at TN1 = 25 K and TN2 = 13.5 K for CeBi. The magnetic susceptibility of LaBi is temperature-independently small, manifesting the absence of detectable ferromagnetic impurity. Inset, magnetic structure of CeBi for TN2 < T < TN1 RUS measurements were carried out in a lock-in technique by sweeping frequency from 0.5 to 5 MHz at stabilized temperatures ranging from 5.4 to 300 K in a helium-flow cryostat (OptistatCF, Oxford). A cartoon illustration of the RUS setup is shown in Fig. A representative vibrational spectrum of CeBi is shown in the bottom panel of Fig. Before presenting the results of CeBi, we start from its non-4f reference LaBi. The temperature dependence of C 11 , C 12 and C 44 are displayed in Fig. The elastic constants of CeBi are also shown in Fig. For CeBi, all C ij s stiffen initially upon cooling, and then soften at low temperature. After converting C ij into bulk and shear moduli, we find C T increases monotonically with decreasing temperature; whereas C B maximizes near 60 K, and then turns down rapidly [Fig. First, earlier elastic investigations on PrSb The CEF Hamiltonian for Ce 3+ in O h point-group (cubic) symmetry is written as where Ô0 4 and Ô4 4 are Stevens operators Here Γ λ (λ = 1, 3, 5) are irreducible representations, and g Γ λ are the coupling constants. The irreducible representation and the associated strain and elastic constants are summarized in Table Second, previous ultrasound-velocity measurements on SrTiO 3 revealed that bulk and shear moduli soften sharply when approaching the structural transition at 112 K, while the onset of this change occurs ∼ 20 K prior to the structural distortion An alternative possible explanation for the elastic anomaly in CeBi might be valence fluctuations. This is usually understood in terms of a two-band model as depicted in Fig. where d ij k,Γ λ = ⟨i| ÔΓ λ |j⟩ (i, j = u, l). As the changes in cerium valence (Ce 3+ ↔ Ce 4+ ) is also accompanied with an expansion / shrinkage in ionic radius, it is natural that C B which couples to an isotropic strain with Γ 1 (A 1g ) symmetry will response. This scenario has been successfully applied for the valence fluctuations in many Kondo lattice compounds like SmB 6 The free energy of this deformed system reads in which n is the total number of conduction electrons, E u(l) k (ε Γ λ ) is the upper-(lower-) band energy in the presence of strain After some tedious mathematics, the elastic constants can be deduced , and g 2 Γ λ D|d ul Γ λ | 2 are the fitting parameters. In reality, the third term of Eq. ( In CeBi, ν decreases by only ∼0.008 from 60 to 30 K, which probably suggests a small valence change of Ce. Although we do not have the data for below 30 K, considering the small hybridization gap we have obtained, this conclusion potentially remains valid even for low temperature. Qualitatively, this is in agreement with the small amount of valence change ∼ 0.01 estimated by ARPES measurements In conclusion, the full set of symmetry-resolved elastic constants of the Kondo semimetal CeBi are investigated by resonant ultrasound spectroscopy measurements at zero magnetic field. Below ∼ 60 K, clear softening behavior is observed in elastic constants especially in bulk modulus C B . Poisson's ratio decreases abnormally below ∼ 60 K, too. Such anomalies are absent in the non-4f reference LaBi. These peculiar features can not be understood by a simple multipole-strain coupling with stable localized 4f orbital, but can be well reproduced by a two-band model arising from the c -f hybridization. The possible explanations based on valence fluctuations, structural or magnetic transitions are discussed for these elastic anomalies. Additional microscopic and dynamic measurements should be invited to further clarify this issue. Yupeng Pan 1 , Xiaobo He 1 , Shuo Zou 1 , Hai Zeng 1 , Yuqian Zhao 1 , Ziyu Li 1 , Yuesheng Li 1 , and Yongkang Luo 1 * 1 Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center and School of Physics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. The chemical compositions of CeBi and LaBi were determined by energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) measurements. In CeBi, the average mole ratio Ce : Bi = 51.1 : 48.9, while in LaBi, the ratio La : Bi = 51.95 : 48.05; both are close to the stoichiometric ratio. The sample quality of the polished single crystals was also characterized by Laue X-ray diffraction (XRD). The nice patterns on [001] surface as shown in Fig. In an elastic three-dimensional material, we can write its Hooke's law: In detail, we can also write this equation in three dimensions. However, this description is cumbersome. Usually the so-called Voigt notation is employed to simplify the subscripts: xx ↔ 1; yy ↔ 2; zz ↔ 3; yz, zy ↔ 4; xz, zx ↔ 5; xy, yx ↔ 6. (S2) In this representation, the Hooke's law is transformed to a 6th-order tensor: The elastic constants obey the primary symmetry C ij = C ji , so there are at most 21 different elastic constants to describe a system. This amount can be further reduced by symmetry where N is the total number of recognized peaks, f n cal and f n exp are the calculated and experimental frequencies, respectively. Table The uncertainties can be calculated by Levenberg-Marquardt Algorithm 2 to a Taylor series in the independent elastic parameter space {C α }, where α = 11, 12 and 44. Combining with the extreme condition ∂F ∂Cα = 0, we can obtain the uncertainties of parameters: where the elements of tensors A and B are: 