NaCl-type metal tellurides (MTe) have been widely studied due to unique physical properties. We investigated the In-doping effects on structural and physical properties of Na-Cl type (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe and the superconducting properties of the In-doped samples. Polycrystalline samples with x = 0-0.5 were synthesized by utilizing highpressure synthesis. For x = 0.2-0.5, superconductivity was observed in magnetization measurements, where the highest transition temperature (Tc) was 2.8 K for x = 0.4. We measured specific heat for x = 0.4 and confirmed the bulk nature of the superconductivity. The evolution of the Seebeck coefficient and lattice constant by In doping suggests that In valence state is In +3 , and the In doping generates electron carriers in the (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe system. Metal tellurides (MTe) with a NaCl-type structure, such as SnTe, PbTe, and InTe, have been extensively studied because of their unique physical properties as a topological insulator and superconductors Furthermore, equimolar AgSnBiTe3 exhibits superconductivity by In doping AgPbBiTe3 does not exhibit superconductivity at ambient pressure. By applying pressure (P), superconductivity is induced at P = 2.6 GPa, and the highest Tc was 6.5 K at P ~ 25 GPa Polycrystalline sample of (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe with x = 0 was prepared by a melting method in an evacuated quartz tube under ambient pressure. Powder of Ag (99.9%up) and grains of Pb (99.9%), Bi (99.9999%) and Te (99.999%) were mixed with normal compositions and melted in an evacuated quartz tube; the quartz tube was heated at 800°C for 15 h. The obtained sample was powdered, pelleted, sealed in an evacuated quartz tube, and heated at 400°C for 15 h. For x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5, high-pressure annealing of respective precursor powders was used to obtain In-doped samples. InTe under ambient pressure is orthorhombic and not cubic NaCl-type; with the effects of external pressures, NaCl-type structure is achieved To examine the phase purity and crystal structure of the obtained (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe samples, powder Xray diffraction (XRD) was performed by the θ-2θ method with a Cu-Kα radiation using a MiniFlex600 diffractometor (RIGAKU) equipped with a high-resolution detector D/tex-Ultra. The obtained XRD patterns were refined by the Rietveld method using Jana2020 software The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility was measured using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) on a magnetic property measurement system (MPMS3, Quantum Design) at zero-fieldcooling (ZFC) and field-cooling (FC) conditions with a magnetic field of B = 10 Oe. The temperature dependence of electrical resistivity was measured by a four-probe method with an applied DC current of 5 mA on a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design) under magnetic fields. The temperature dependence of specific heat was measured by a relaxation method on the PPMS under 0 and 5 T using a 3 He probe system (Quantum Design). Seebeck coefficient (S) at room temperature was measured by a four-probe method with a ZEM-3 (Advance Riko) instrument for x = 0 and on a prober system for x = 0.1-0.5. The thermo-electromotive force (ΔV) and the temperature difference (ΔT) were measured simultaneously, and S was estimated from the liner slope of ΔV/ΔT. The actual compositions of the obtained samples estimated by EDX are listed in Table shows the powder XRD patterns for (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe (x = 0-0.5). For all samples, the XRD patterns coincided with that of a NaCl-type structure (space group: Fm-3m, #225, Oh 5 ), as shown in Fig. In solid solution systems, lattice constant could be calculated by Vegard's law. For (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe, a is calculated in following formula: where a1 and a2 are lattice constant of AgPbBiTe3 and InTe, respectively. This function is shown by the dashed line in Fig. shows the temperature dependence of resistivity of x = 0.4 under magnetic fields up to 0.7 T with an interval of 0.1 T. At B = 0 T, the Tc onset is around 2.7 K, and zero resistivity was observed below Tc zero = 2.6 K. By applying magnetic fields, both Tc zero and Tc onset shift to lower temperatures. Tc zero was not observed at B > 0.3 T, and Tc onset was not observed at B > 0.5 T. To estimate the upper critical field (Bc2), the estimated Tc onset were plotted in Fig. where t = T/Tc is the reduced temperature, and Bc2(0) is the upper critical field at T = 0 K was estimated as 1.5 T. 5 , where the first, second, and third terms represent contributions from electron, lattice, and anharmonicity of the lattice, respectively. By fitting the data for B = 5 T, γ, β, and δ were estimated as 2.02(2) mJmol -1 K -2 , 0.718(4) mJmol -1 K -4 , and 0.0204(2) mJmol -1 K -6 , respectively. The Debye temperature (θD) was calculated from β = (12/5)π 4 (2N)kBθD -3 , where N is the Avogadro constant, and kB is Boltzmann constant; the calculated θD was 175.6(4) K. The electronic contribution of specific heat (Cel) was calculated by subtracting phonon contribution from the total specific heat for B = 0 T. Cel/T was plotted as a function of T in Fig. To investigate the carrier type, Seebeck coefficient (S) was measured at room temperature for (AgPbBi)(1- x)/3InxTe. Figure In valence is greater than +2 in the present system. This trend in (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe is quite similar to those observed in In-doped AgSnBiTe3 