Charge-transfer excitations are of paramount importance for understanding the electronic structure of copper-oxide based high-temperature superconductors. In this study, we investigate the response of a Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ crystal to the charge redistribution induced by an infrared ultrashort pulse. Element-selective time-resolved core-level photoelectron spectroscopy with a high energy resolution allows disentangling the dynamics of oxygen ions with different coordination and bonds thanks to their different chemical shifts. Our experiment shows that the O 1s component arising from the Cu-O planes is significantly perturbed by the infrared light pulse. Conversely, the apical oxygen, also coordinated with Sr ions in the Sr-O planes, remains unaffected. This result highlights the peculiar behavior of the electronic structure of the Cu-O planes. It also unlocks the way to study the out-of-equilibrium electronic structure of copper-oxide-based high-temperature superconductors by identifying the O 1s core-level emission originating from the oxygen ions in the Cu-O planes. This ability could be critical to gain information about the strongly-correlated electron ultrafast dynamical mechanisms in the Cu-O plane in the normal and superconducting phases. After more than thirty years of study, the mechanism that induces a superconducting state in some layered copper oxides remains obscure. Nonetheless, much information has accumulated. In particular, we know that many-body interactions in the Cu-O planes are the key to elucidating the process of Cooper-pair formation and condensation into a superconductive state at temperatures that cannot be accounted for by a model that attributes the superconductivity to the electron-phonon coupling Here we show that with an element-and coordination-sensitive probe it is possible to disentangle the dynamics of the charge redistribution processes induced by a ∼ 70 fs infrared light pulse in a cuprate superconductor. In particular, we report on the first sub-picosecond time-resolved XPS study on optimally-doped Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi2212) above the superconducting transition temperature, to unveil the response of the oxygen and strontium ions far from the equilibrium conditions. We prove that the effects induced by a charge redistribution in the valence band of Bi2212 can be observed by inspection of the core-level dynamics. Thanks to a time-resolved XPS experiment with improved energy resolution, our measurements reveal marked differences in the ultrafast dynamics of the three components contributing to the O1s line emission. In particular, the oxygen in the Cu-O plane is the most affected by photoexcitation, as signaled by a shift and a broadening of the corresponding spectral component. The effects experienced by the oxygen in the Sr-O plane are instead negligible, as also confirmed by inspection of the Sr 3d emission. This result indicates that the response of cuprate systems to the charge redistribution induced by the infrared pump pulse predominantly involves the Cu-O plane. A schematic crystal structure of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 (Bi2212) is shown in Fig. A recent study on La 1.905 Ba 0.095 CuO 4 employed the chemical sensitivity provided by time-resolved X-ray absorption spectroscopy to detect a photoinduced renormalization of the effective Coulomb repulsion giving rise to the Hubbard gap Both X-ray absorption and angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopies, however, are not site-sensitive techniques. In the case of cuprates this means that the role of planar, apical, and reservoir-layer oxygens in the charge redistribution cannot be disentangled. The hypothesis is that the different role of these oxygens in determining the properties of cuprates is mapped into a distinct response to charge redistribution. Site specificity can be recovered by looking at core levels via XPS. As shown in Fig. Figure The existence of the sidebands is strictly related to the simultaneous presence of photons from the pump and from the probe at the sample position. This can be used as a reference for the origin of the time delay scale, but it is also a reference for establishing the time resolution in our experiment. For this reason, we extract the difference intensity traces from the energy regions marked by round markers in Fig. To rationalize the response of the system in terms of lineshape changes, we fit each spectrum of the time series. Each sideband is taken into account as an additional feature with the same lineshape as the corresponding main emission, but a smaller amplitude. Our model thus comprises three oxygen components accompanied by two sidebands. Since each feature is defined by three parameters (amplitude, binding energy, and Lorentzian FWHM), this would yield a total of twenty seven parameters. This number must be reduced also in view of the vicinity of the oxygen components with respect to their width, and of the signal-to-noise ration of the pump-probe measurement. The equal probability of absorption and stimulated emission allows constraining the amplitude of the upper and lower sidebands to be equal. The energy separation of the sidebands is independent of the pump-probe delay, being defined by the pump photon energy. The Gaussian broadening is kept fixed to the equilibrium value The evolution of the fitting parameters is shown in Fig. The Sr ions are bound to the apical oxygens, hence lying in the plane adjacent to the Cu-O one. Due to this coordination and geometry, the Sr core levels offer additional information on the role of the apical oxygens in the charge redistribution process. Fig. First-order sidebands are clearly visible in the map of Fig. Figure Our study proves that a charge redistribution in the valence band of Bi2212 induces detectable changes in both O 1s and Sr 3d core levels. In the first place, the efficiency of sideband generation is markedly different for the two atomic species. Since second-order sideband generation involves the absorption or emission of two photons, its relative efficiency will scale approximately as the square of the first-order one. For O 1s the latter is about 30 times smaller than in Sr 3d, so second-order sidebands are expected to be roughly 1000 times weaker. This rationalizes the absence of second-order sidebands in the O 1s spectra around time zero. Our experiments also prove the capability of detecting the chemical environment-dependent dynamics of oxygen states in Bi2212. In particular, the response of the three components to photoexcitation is quantitatively different. The largest changes are witnessed by the oxygen in the Cu-O plane. Notably, these are the atoms involved in the charge-transfer process described before as the first excitation of the undoped compound. This points to the explanation that the charge redistribution induced by the pump pulse involves predominantly the Cu-O plane, and thus the charge transfer among Cu and O plays a major role. The oxygen binding energy and width, however, do not relax to the equilibrium values within the measured time delay of ∼ 1.4 ps. The effects experienced by the apical oxygen are not significant in our experiments. This might be due to the larger signals of the neighboring components, which also cause the large uncertainty in the fitting parameters (see error bars in the green curves of Fig. In conclusion, our experiment has proven the effectiveness of time-resolved XPS in unveiling the element-and coordinationspecific dynamics in a cuprate superconductor. The results highlight the peculiar role of the Cu-O plane in the relaxation of the system upon impulsive infrared photoexcitation, and possibly open a new route for studying the dynamics of the many-body interactions in these compounds. The experiments were performed on an optimally-doped Bi2212 high-quality sample. The superconducting transition temperature, as measured by transport and magnetic (SQUID) methods, was ∼ 91 K. The time-resolved XPS measurements were performed at a base temperature of 100 K, which is above the superconducting transition temperature, in order to minimize thermal broadening effects in the photoemission spectra. The experiments were performed at the PG2 monochromator beamline at the free-electron laser FLASH at DESY in Hamburg The laser source consisted in a Yb:YAG amplifier system delivering pulses at 1030 nm with an energy up to 30 μJ/pulse. The laser source was equipped with a Herriott-type multipass cell for bandwidth broadening, allowing compression of the pulses to ∼ 70 fs The photoelectrons were detected using a momentum microscope based on a Time-of-Flight design The pump-probe configuration was obtained by coupling an optical laser pulse into the propagation path of the X-ray pulse in a quasi-collinear configuration. The pump and probe pulses impinged on the sample at an angle θ = 68 • with p-polarization, and the optical pulse was stabilized to maintain the spatial overlap with the X-ray pulses. The calibration of the energy and time delay axes was conducted as described in previous works To fit the pump-probe measurement, the fitting procedure was repeated for each spectrum at a variable time delay. The initial parameters were obtained from the fit of the spectrum integrated before time zero; the results of the fit of the n-th spectrum were then used as initial parameters to fit the (n + 1)-th spectrum in the time series. of the O 1s parameters extracted from the fit in Fig.