We present an angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy study of the single-layer T*-type structured cuprate SmLa1-xSrxCuO4 with unique five-fold pyramidal oxygen coordination. Upon varying oxygen content, T*-SmLa1-xSrxCuO4 evolved from a Mott-insulating to a metallic state where the Luttinger sum rule breaks down under the assumption of a large hole-like Fermi surface. This is in contrast with the known doping evolution of the structural isomer La2-xSrxCuO4 with six-fold octahedral coordination. In addition, quantitatively characterized Fermi surface suggests that the empirical Tc rule for octahedral oxygen-coordination systems does not apply to T*-SmLa1-xSrxCuO4. The present results highlight unique properties of the T*-type cuprates possibly rooted in its oxygen coordination, and necessitate thorough investigation with careful evaluation of disorder effects. bling the lower Hubbard band (LHB) of T-La 2 CuO 4 Strong electron correlation lies at the heart of hightemperature superconductivity in cuprates Structural isomers of single-layer 214-type cuprates provide a unique platform for this purpose. The local oxygen coordination around Cu can be varied from sixfold octahedral [T-type, Fig. Here, we present an angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) study of T*-SLSCO (x = 0.25) annealed under various conditions. By compensating oxygen vacancies, T*-SLSCO evolves from a Mott-insulating to a metallic state in a fashion distinct from the doping evolution of T-LSCO. Furthermore, quantitative analysis of the metallic Fermi surface suggests deviation from empirical scaling law between T c and Fermi surface curvature or hole doping level. The present work suggests unique properties of the T*-type cuprates that are either intrinsic or dominated by disorder. Single crystals of T*-SLSCO (x = 0.25) were grown by the traveling solvent floating-zone method. Three kinds of samples, as-grown, Ar-annealed, and O 2 -annealed, were prepared. Ar annealing was performed at 800 • C and 0.1 MPa for 12 hours and O 2 annealing at 500 • C and 45 MPa for 72 hours. The shortening and elongation of the c-axis lattice constant by Ar and O 2 annealing [Fig. The electronic-structure evolution by annealing treatment is displayed in Fig. In order to quantitatively characterize the Fermi surface of O 2 -annealed T*-SLSCO (x = 0.25), we fitted peak positions of the momentum distribution curves (MDCs) at E F to the tight-binding model [Fig. where t, t ′ , and t ′′ represent nearest, second-nearest, and third-nearest neighbor hopping parameters, respectively, and ε 0 is the center of the band relative to the chemical potential μ. Fixing t ′′ /t ′ at -0.5 as frequently assumed Examining EDCs at k F positions [Fig. timate (p = 0.17) on polycrystalline O 2 -annealed T*-La 1-x/2 Eu 1-x/2 Sr x CuO 4 (x = 0.25) Having clarified the doping evolution of T*-SLSCO from the Mott insulating to a metallic state with a small Fermi surface, let us compare with the case of T-LSCO. For T-LSCO, upon hole doping, a quasiparticle peak emerges abruptly by spectral-weight transfer from LHB while the position of LHB remains virtually unaffected [Fig. In a broader perspective, it is of primary importance to make a comparison between the single-layer cuprates with pyramidal and octahedral oxygen coordination in general. To that end, the values of -t ′ /t that defines the curvature of the underlying large Fermi surface are extracted from previous ARPES works on cuprates with octahedral oxygen coordination If one applies the empirical T c -versus-p scaling commonly used for hole-doped cuprates, 1 -T c /T c,max = 82.6 × (p -0.16) 232,49 , the T c of the O 2 -annealed T*-SLSCO (x = 0.25) with respect to the optimal value 8 yields p = 0.235. This would fall deep in the overdoped regime that is comparable or even beyond the typical pseudogap endpoint (p * ∼ 0.19-0.23) In summary, we have investigated the electronic structure of T*-type cuprate SLSCO (x = 0.25) with pyramidal oxygen coordination by means of ARPES. By compensating apical-oxygen vacancies and thus doping holes, T*-SLSCO evolved from the Mott-insulating to metallic state with a small Fermi surface. This doping evolution is similar to other hole-doped cuprates except for T-LSCO, highlighting the peculiarity of T-LSCO arising likely from its particularly large effective onsite interaction. The empirical relationships such as maximal T c versus -t ′ /t and T c versus p apparently do not hold for the T*-type cuprates. Systematic doping-dependent studies on superconducting samples with careful assessment of disorder effects will pave the way for unveiling the full picture of its potentially unique phase diagram. In order to test the validity of tight-binding parameters determined from the Fermi surface, we examined electronic states at deeper binding energies. Figure 