We extend the Mattis-Bardeen theory for the dynamical response of superconductors to include different types of Hall responses. This is possible thanks to a recent modification of the quasiclassical Usadel equation, which allows for analyzing Hall effects in disordered superconductors and including the precise frequency dependence of such effects. Our results form a basis for analyzing dynamical experiments especially on novel thin-film superconductors, where ordinary Hall and spin Hall effects can both show up. Simultaneous application of electric and magnetic fields on a conductor leads to the presence of a charge current with a transverse component perpendicular to both fields, in addition to the ordinary longitudinal current in the direction of the electric field. This ordinary Hall effect has been known since the 19th century In type II superconductors, motion of vortices and the flux they carry gives additional contributions to the Hall effect In the presence of spin-orbit interaction, another type of Hall effect called the spin Hall effect occurs In superconductors, the spin Hall effect couples (equilibrium) supercurrents and spin Our work is based on the recent extensions of the quasiclassical Usadel equation to govern ordinary and spin Hall effects Our paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we outline the theory for describing the various Hall effects in superconductors by introducing ordinary and SU(2) vector potentials and the accompanying field strength tensor terms into the Usadel equation. In Sec. III we analyze the symmetry properties of the resulting dynamical response matrix. This section uses dynamical SU(2) fields as a formal tool for uncovering those symmetries. Section IV shows how the ordinary Mattis-Bardeen response In this section, we introduce the specific scenarios and main equations used in this paper. Our study encompasses a broad scope, focusing on superconductors subjected to electromagnetic fields, alongside exchange fields and linear-in-momentum spin-orbit coupling, which can be treated as effective SU(2) potentials where p is the momentum, m is the electron mass, μ ch is the chemical potential, ∆ = ∆τ 1 is the superconducting order parameter for s-wave superconductors, and σ j and τ j are the Pauli matrices in spin and Nambu spaces, respectively. V imp is a random impurity potential that consists of the usual elastic scattering and the spin-orbit interaction φ and A are the usual U(1) scalar and vector electromagnetic potentials, while A 0j and A ij are SU(2) potentials describing the Zeeman or exchange field and the linearin-momentum SOC, respectively As in conventional electrodynamics we can define the field strength associated with Ǎ: The last commutator appears because of the fact that the SU(2) components are non-abelian. Here and below Greek indices range μ = 0, 1, 2, 3. In what follows, we are interested in the currents (charge and spin) generated by the electric field, which is given by the Ěj ≡ F 0j = -eE j τ 3 + (ħ/2)E jl σ l components of the field strength tensor Here j i0 are the components of the charge current whereas j ij is the spin-current tensor. The usual U(1) electric field is given by E j ≡ E j0 , and E jl denote the components of the SU(2) electric field. The real part of σ iμ,jν describes the in-phase response, and the imaginary part is the out-of-phase response of the current to the field. Our goal is to find the conductivity tensor σ iμ,jν (ω) in diffusive superconducting systems showing different types of Hall effects. For this we use the quasiclassical approach generalized in Refs. To describe the transport properties of the system we use the gauge covariant quasiclassical Green's function (GF) formalism. The GF ǧ(t, t ′ ) is an 8 × 8 matrix in Keldysh-Nambu-spin space In systems with time translational symmetry, the Green's function can be Fourier transformed in the τ = t -t ′ variable into the energy domain as ǧ(ε) = dτ e iετ /ħ ǧ(τ ) . ( For a bulk superconductor the retarded and advanced GFs in the energy domain are given by ǧR/A where g 0 and f 0 are the normal and anomalous parts of the bulk GF and the equilibrium distribution function is given by ȟ(ε) = tanh ε 2k B T . The upper and lower signs correspond to the retarded and advanced GFs respectively. The convergence factor Γ → 0 + guarantees that the retarded (advanced) GF is 0 for negative (positive) time t -t ′ . Nonetheless, a finite Γ may also describe inelastic scattering effects present in real materials where ω n = 2πk B T (n + 1/2), n ∈ Z, are the Matsubara frequencies, T c0 is the zero-field critical temperature and f 0 (ω n ) is the Matsubara anomalous GF (7b), obtained by analytic continuation of the GF to the complex plane ε + iΓ → iω n . In diffusive systems where the scattering rate τ -1 is much higher than the other energy scales in the system, excluding the Fermi energy, the GF is determined from the well-known Usadel equation and for extrinsic SOC is the covariant derivative, Ť is an extrinsic SOC correction due to an effective torque originating from the spin Hall and the spin swapping effects and Ji is the matrix current given by for intrinsic SOC for extrinsic SOC Here κ = 2p 2 F λ 2 /3 and θ = 2ħp F λ 2 /l are spin-swapping and spin Hall coefficients The Usadel equation together with the normalization condition specifies the value of the GF. The observable quantities of the system are given by the GF, for example, the charge and spin currents are given by where the Drude conductivity is given by σ D = ν F e 2 D, ν F is the density of states at the Fermi energy and the K superscript denotes the Keldysh block of the matrix current. The Onsager reciprocal relations relate the conductivities between different pairs of driving fields and their conjugate currents. They demonstrate the reciprocity between inverse effects, such as the Hall, the spin Hall or spin-galvanic effects and their corresponding inverse effects. The conductivity tensor in Eq. ( The elements of the conductivity tensor are related through the Onsager reciprocal relations σ j0,i0 (B) = σ i0,j0 (-B), σ jl,ik (B) = σ ik,jl (-B) and σ i0,jl (B) = -σ jl,i0 (-B), where B comprises all time-reversal symmetry (TRS) breaking fields The susceptibility χ = iωσ is the response function to the vector potentials. From the fluctuation-dissipation theorem for χ In this section we apply the quasiclassical GF formalism introduced in Sec. II to the linear response theory to compute the longitudinal (charge) conductivity of a diffusive superconductor subjected to a time-dependent electric field E(t). In particular, we consider a superconductor in a microwave field which has extensively been experimentally realized In diffusive normal metals the Drude model predicts a purely dissipative response We assume that the electric field is small enough so that it can be treated perturbatively. The bulk GF ( where ε + = ε+ħω. The expression is lengthy, but we can identify the different parts. The first term on the first line is the dissipative contribution. It yields the normal-state result σ xx = σ D when f 0 (ε) = 0 and g 0 (ε) = 1. The rest of the terms are out of phase and describe the supercurrent effects. The prefactors of the distribution function terms are non-zero only when ε is of the order of ∆ and decay at large energies, ensuring the convergence of the integrals. In general, the integral needs to be evaluated numerically. In Fig. Regarding the imaginary part of the conductivity, at T = 0 it diverges as 1/ω for ħω ≪ 2∆ 0 . In superconductors where the electromagnetic field varies slowly in space on the scale of the coherence length the charge current is determined by the London equation At the critical temperature the gap is completely suppressed ∆(T c0 ) = 0 and the metal transitions into the normal state, so the conductivity is given by the AC Drude model In this section we study the Hall response of a superconductor in a microwave field subjected to a constant magnetic field B = B 0 ûz . In the Landau gauge, the vector potential is given by Ǎx = -e(-iE 0 /ωe -iωt -B 0 y)τ 3 . The only non-zero elements of the field strength tensor (3) are F xy = -F yx = -eB 0 τ 3 . We assume that both the electric and magnetic fields are small and compute the electric currents to leading order in both fields. In addition to the longitudinal conductivity given by the Mattis-Bardeen response (17), the system shows a transverse conductivity σ yx due to the interaction between the magnetic field and the electric current. The leading term of the Hall current is proportional to E 0 B 0 and it is given by the second current term in Eq. where ω c = eB 0 /m is the cyclotron frequency and In the normal state g 0 (ε) = 1 and f 0 (ε) = 0, the first line in the integrand tends to 2[h(ε + ) -h(ε)] and integrates to 4ω, whereas the two other lines tend to zero. Together, these terms provide the normal-state Hall conductivity σ yx = σ D ω c τ , valid to the first order in ω c . In Fig. The real part of the conductivity is finite at T = 0, while the imaginary part remains equal to zero until a threshold frequency is achieved. This is consistent with the experimental measurements of the Hall conductivity in super- conducting YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ samples by Spielman et al. Note that although the off-diagonal elements of σ remain nonzero in the static limit ω → 0 in the superconducting state, all elements of the resistivity tensor ρ = σ -1 vanish for ω → 0. Hence, the relation j = σE, or E = ρj, does not imply here that uniform static supercurrent generates electric fields or a Hall effect. Such equilibrium electric fields are expected to exist when the superflow is non-uniform, The Hall conductivity can be probed optically through the Faraday or Kerr effect measurement as shown in Fig. The skin depth can be obtained by solving the Maxwell equations inside the material. Disregarding the small correction from the Hall effect, it is obtained from On the other hand, the London penetration depth λ is the zero-frequency limit of this skin depth. At T = 0, σ xx ≈ iχ 0 /ω, where χ 0 = π∆ 0 σ D /ħ, and hence λ ≈ c/ χ 0 /ε 0 . For the simplest geometry, i.e., normal incidence of a linearly polarized electromagnetic wave onto the sample, using Maxwell equations and the boundary conditions, one can obtain the Kerr φ K and Faraday φ F angles as where r ± are the reflection coefficients for left-and righthanded (with respect to the applied field) circularly polarized light, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity and d is the sample thickness. Note that the expression is obtained by assuming a small perturbation from the external magnetic field and only considering linear terms in the Hall conductivity (σ yx ). This approximation is valid when the Hall conductivity is much smaller than the longitudinal conductivity, a condition often met in many materials. Noting σ D as a natural scale of conductivity and defining the plasma frequency ω p = σ D /(ε 0 τ ), we notice that the latter term inside the square root can also be written as σ xx /(ωε 0 ) = (σ xx /σ D )ω 2 p τ /ω, providing a direct way to compare dimensionful quantities. For frequencies of interest here, ω ≲ ∆/ħ, the typical range is ω ≪ ω p , 1/τ , and therefore the first term inside the square root in Eq. ( In Fig. Besides coupling to free-space light, the dynamical Hall effect can be accessed by studying the scattering parameters of microwaves in a multiterminal geometry. In particular, the matrix S of scattering parameters depends on the admittance matrix Y (ω) of the studied sample where Z = diag(Z 1 , . . . , Z N ) is a diagonal matrix containing the characteristic impedances of transmission lines connected to each terminal i. This way, in case the bulk superconductor response gives the dominating contribution to the admittance matrix -in other words, interface effects can be disregarded -the Hall response can be related with the off-diagonal components of S. In this section we study the spin Hall effect in a superconductor with SOC subjected to a microwave field. Several methods have been proposed and realized to measure the spin Hall and its inverse effects including electrical measurements Alternatively, the measurement can be realized with a dynamic version of the setup used in Ref. First, we study the spin Hall effect in a superconductor with Rashba SOC subjected to a microwave field. The Rashba SOC interaction is linear in momentum so it can be described through the SU(2) four-potential Ǎx = mασ y , Ǎy = -mασ x . The term -eA x τ 3 should be added to Ǎx to account for the time-dependent electric field. For Rashba SOC the non-zero elements of the field strength tensor are F xy = -F yx = 2m 2 α 2 σ z /ħ. The terms contributing to the spin Hall current in Eq. ( Plugging the solution into Eq. ( In Fig. In the superconducting state, the temperature dependence of the spin Hall conductivity is most relevant at frequencies lower than 2∆. The absolute values of the real and imaginary parts of the spin Hall conductivity have a minimum at ħω = 2∆. Due to the σ i0,jl = -σ jl,i0 Onsager relation, the dissipative component of the spin Hall conductivity is given by the imaginary part of σ yz,x0 . Similar to the ordinary Hall response, at T = 0 the outof-phase spin current vanishes below the absorption edge 2∆ 0 . We consider the response of the system with SOC due to extrinsic impurity scattering. In this case, the matrix current takes the form which do not depend on the frequency or temperature. This is a consequence of the diffusive regime considered in this work. For extrinsic SOC, the spin Hall conductivity is real, i.e., it is non-dissipative. In the following section we study the inverse Hall effect in systems with intrinsic and extrinsic SOC and explicitly show that the Onsager relations are satisfied. In this section we compute the charge current generated in systems with intrinsic and extrinsic SOC due to the inverse Hall effect. The charge current and the U(1) electric field are conjugate variables, in the same way the spin current has a conjugate force field E jl which generates l-polarized spin currents along the j direction. This force field can be generated by the gradient of a Zeeman field, a time-dependent SOC or a spin dependent chemical potential We consider an SU(2) driving field E yz (t) = E 0 e -iωt which generates a z-polarized spin current in the ydirection. This electric field is described via the SU(2) vector potential Ǎy (t) = -iħE 0 /(2ω)e -iωt σ z . Taking the Rashba SOC into account, the vector potentials are given by Ǎx = mασ y , Ǎy = -mασ x -iħE 0 /(2ω)e -iωt σ z , so that the non-zero elements of the field strength tensor are F xy = -F yx = 2m 2 α 2 σ z /ħ-i(mαE 0 /ω)e -iωt σ x . Following a similar procedure to the one used in Sec. VI A, we obtain the correction to the bulk GF due to the driving field [see Appendix A] and compute the charge current along the x-direction using Eq. ( Evaluating Eqs. ( As it has been argued in Sec. VI B, systems with extrinsic SOC subjected to an electric field generate spin currents in both directions perpendicular to the electric field. For this reason, we consider two driving fields E yz (t) = E 0 e -iωt and E zy (t) = E 0 e -iωt and compute the charge current generated in the x-direction in each case. Following an equivalent procedure to Sec. VI B, it is possible to obtain the inverse spin Hall conductivities analytically. They are In this case we may evaluate the Onsager symmetry analytically by comparing Eqs. ( In this work, we have used a unified description of charge and spin transport to study the dynamical response of dissipative superconductors to U(1) and SU(2) electric fields. We have used the gauge covariant quasiclassical GF formalism to obtain the charge and spin conductivities of superconductors in the presence of magnetic fields and spin-orbit interaction. Our model recovers known results in the appropriate limits, such as the normal state Hall conductivity and the spin Hall conductivity for normal metals with Rashba spin-orbit coupling. While diffusive normal metals show a purely dissipative response, superconductors show a reactive current that decays in frequency as ω -1 , as described by the Mattis-Bardeen theory. We have analyzed the Onsager reciprocal relations between the direct and inverse Hall effects and have explicitly shown that they are satisfied. Our findings show that both the ordinary and spin Hall conductivities show a dissipative component related to the out-of-phase current. In the case of the ordinary Hall effect, the dissipative current contribution only arises in the superconducting state. For intrinsic spin Hall effect, the imaginary (dissipative) part of the Hall conductivity is always weaker in the superconducting state than in the normal state. At low frequencies, the spin Hall conductivity of a superconductor with Rashba SOC is dominated by the in-phase component, while in the normal state it is of the same order as the out-of-phase component. For extrinsic SOC, the spin Hall response is frequency and temperature independent and proportional to the spin Hall angle. In other words, there is no correction from superconductivity on the extrinsic spin Hall conductivity. The dynamical Hall effect can be observed in optical spectroscopy via the Faraday-Kerr rotation of the polarization state of light in conventional superconductors. Suitable materials for the measurement of the spin Hall effect due to intrinsic SOC are Bi 2 Se 3 /monolayer NbSe 2 heterostructures Our study focuses on investigating the dynamic charge and spin responses in conventional singlet single-band superconductors. It is worth noting that spin ordering, as for example on iron based superconductors The inverse spin Hall conductance Eq. ( 