Graphene can support surface plasmons with higher confinement, lower propagation loss, and substantially more tunable response compared to usual metal-based plasmonic structures. Interestingly, plasmons in graphene can strongly couple with nanostructures and gratings placed in its vicinity to form new hybrid systems that can provide a platform to investigate more complicated plasmonic phenomena. In this Perspective, an analysis on the excitation of highly confined graphene plasmons and their strong coupling with metallic or dielectric gratings is performed. We emphasize the flexibility in the efficient control of light-matter interaction by these new hybrid systems, benefiting from the interplay between graphene plasmons and other external resonant modes. The hybrid grapheneplasmon grating systems offer unique tunable plasmonic resonances with enhanced field distributions. They exhibit a novel route to realize practical emerging applications, including nonreciprocal devices, plasmonic switches, perfect absorbers, nonlinear structures, photodetectors, and optical sensors. Graphene is the flagship two-dimensional (2D) material made of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice. It has attracted a surge of research interest for its unique electrical, mechanical, optical, and thermal properties. The combination of graphene and metallic (plasmonic) nanostructures offers a unique way to enhance absorption at their resonance, where sharp peaks of reflectance or transmittance, combined with enhanced fields are present. This is the fundamental response behind the realization of a wide range of potential applications, including sensing, light modulation, and photodetection. The use of metallic subwavelength gratings is an appealing approach to boost the excitation efficiency of GPs along a continuous graphene monolayer. By placing graphene below a metallic aperture, a novel class of plasmon resonance was reported, where strong coupling occurs between the newly created hybrid plasmon mode and incident THz radiation. An alternative relevant design was recently demonstrated, made of a continuous, largearea graphene sheet grown on silica substrate and coated with a square periodic array of metallic nanoparticles. , where a transmission dip is observed that becomes more pronounced for higher applied gate voltage (VGS) values. However, the resonant frequency is always constant and approximately equal to 7 THz. This work illustrated that the plasmonic transmission and absorption behavior is not consistent with the predicted theoretical analysis when large variations in carrier density N across the graphene sample are present. The aforementioned multimode coupling provides additional energy exchange channels and is expected to attract increased attention compared to the single coupling mode. Towards this end, the hybrid coupling among GP and MP modes was theoretically investigated by the multi-coupled hybrid system shown in Fig. Graphene monolayers exhibit only 2.3% absorption in optical frequencies mainly due to their single-atom ultrathin thickness. Composite metallic gratings covered by a graphene layer are demonstrated in Fig. Besides numerical simulations of HGPGs, experimental realization of broadband THz absorbers based on graphene was recently reported, Furthermore, the experimental demonstration of peak absorption over 99% was reported for a hybrid structure composed of a monolayer graphene sandwiched between a 1D polymethy1-methacrylate (PMMA) grating and a silica layer, the metallic slit is 100 nm wide while the 50 nm wide graphene ribbon is off to one side. The narrower slit in this configuration can more efficiently confine the incident radiation, leading to larger field enhancement and much higher light absorption compared to the configuration where the graphene ribbon is located in the center of the metallic slit. Figure Enhancing the interaction between graphene and incident waves is not only important for linear optics but also even more significant in the nonlinear optics regime, especially at IR and low THz frequencies, where nonlinear effects are usually very weak. Towards this goal, many approaches were reported to strengthen the interaction between graphene and light, such as graphene patterned structures, The most attractive advantage of graphene is the gate voltage tunability of its nonlinear conductivity, in a similar and even more sensitive way compared to its linear conductivity. Gate-controllable enhanced third-harmonic generation in single graphene monolayers was experimentally reported over an ultrabroad bandwidth by modulating their Fermi level or tuning the incident photon energy. More specifically, noticeable THG efficiency improvement was reported when a graphene layer was placed on grating substrates. The inherent nonlinear properties of graphene are particularly strong in the THz frequency range. It was computed that graphene has an especially high third-harmonic susceptibility value at THz frequencies, many orders of magnitude larger compared to near-IR. Different, but always enhanced, nonlinear effects with hybrid dielectric grating-graphene structures were demonstrated in various previous works, including optical bistability and second harmonic generation (SHG). GPs can be flexibly tuned through optical excitation and electrical gating due to increased chemical doping in graphene. in Fig. To achieve simultaneously high THz modulation efficiency and speed, graphene-based grating-gated devices were presented The first experimental demonstration of a THz sensor based on hybrid graphenemetamaterial heterostructure was realized by adding chlorpyrifos methyl molecules on top of this structure. where sample reference () RR is the measured reflectance with (without) chlorpyrifos methyl. Figure Photodetection consists a very important property for a range of fields, such as optical communications, environmental monitoring, and image sensing. The first example of photodetectors based on graphene exhibited photo-responsivity of 6.1 mA/W at 1.55 um. Interestingly, a novel mechanism of photoconductive gain induced by plasma waves was reported in a graphene field-effect transistor (FET) design. Next, structure asymmetry was introduced in hybrid graphene-grating designs to couple the incoming radiation more efficiently to the FET channel. In the case of THz photodetectors, the photovoltaic response was enhanced only when asymmetry was introduced into the FET unit cell design. The induced electric field distributions can be different for opposite excitation directions due to the structure's asymmetry. HGPGs are a promising class of emerging structures exhibiting unique properties that are not present in either graphene or grating alone. This perspective paper illustrated how the HGPG designs enable superior performance compared to other relevant designs based solely on graphene or gratings. We emphasize some unique features of GPs, such as high tunability, strong light confinement, and low loss compared to conventional metal-based plasmons. Optical gratings provide strong localized electric fields and are widely used to excite GPs more efficiently along a continuous graphene layer. Hybrid designs consisting of grating structures combined with graphene benefit from the merits of both systems. More importantly, strong coupling between GPs and gratings plays an important role in improving the performance of these complex structures. Various applications of HGPG in diverse research areas are presented, such as perfect absorbers, nonlinear structures, modulators, sensors, photodetectors, and nonreciprocal devices. The physical mechanisms are highlighted for each application by demonstrating theoretical analysis and experimental implementations. Although the recent progress of graphene-based hybrid structures has shown great opportunity in various applications, several challenges still exist that prohibit the establishment of this new technology. First, the graphene simulation models need to be further improved to consider more practical parameters. For example, we can introduce additional parameters to precisely define graphene material properties, since the surface conductivity model used in the majority of current simulations is valid only for single graphene layer. Second, large electron momentum relaxation time is extremely challenging to be achieved in experiments involving the more practical large-area CVD-grown graphene 136 . It should be noticed that the relaxation time value used in numerical simulations are usually taken one or even two orders of magnitude higher than that in practical experiments, 137 because ideal conditions are assumed in the fabrication process mainly in terms of temperature, doping level, external field, and various substrate materials, to name a few. It has been demonstrated that larger relaxation time will introduce stronger absorption. As a result, improving the quality of graphene used in experiments will be a significant milestone to boost the efficiency of HGPG structures. Furthermore, the shift in the plasmonic resonance frequency of HGPGs to near-IR or even visible frequency bands still remains challenging. Fortunately, some progress has been recently reported in this field, for example, higher doping to increase the carrier density through optical pumping or electron injection. 