This paper is dedicated to the memory of Professor K. Alex Müller. I present a few remarks about my interactions with Alex over the years. Then I present a very brief summary of recent transport studies of the strange metal normal- I first met Alex sometime in early 1982 when he came for a visit to the IBM San Jose (now Almaden) Research Laboratory. I was the leader of a group that had just discovered the first example of superconductivity in a two-dimensional organic metal In this paper I will present a few brief comments on the experimental status of the so-called "strange metal" normal-state of the cuprates. Most of what I will say here is discussed in more depth by several review articles The resistivity had the same linear slope at all temperatures, i.e., did not saturate at the highest temperature and violated the Mott-Ioffe-Regal (MIR) limit. This anomalous high-temperature resistivity behavior has been called a bad metal while the low temperature linear behavior has been called a strange metal. Here I will only discuss the strange metal behavior. The lower temperature T-linear resistivity has now been seen in many other superconducting cuprates that are driven into the normal-state by a magnetic field Another conjecture for the origin of low temperature T-linear resistivity is based upon the Planckian dissipation time tPl = ħ/kT, the shortest time for energy loss in a many-body quantum system) More significantly, the slope (strength) of the T-linear resistivity has been shown to be directly correlated with the magnitude of Tc There are a few other puzzling aspects to the resistivity in the cuprates that are worth mentioning here. In the hole-doped cuprates, the low temperature T-linear behavior continues to very high temperatures (apparently through the MIR limit) with NO change in slope. This suggests that the cause of the T-linear resistivity is the same at all temperatures in hole-doped cuprates. In contrast, in electron-doped cuprates the low temperature T-linear resistivity becomes approximately quadratic above ~50K and continues as ~ T 2 up to the highest temperatures that can be measured The low temperature thermopower is another transport property that is strange. An example is shown in Fig. Another transport property that has been measured extensively in the cuprates is the Hall effect. The temperature and doping dependence of the Hall coefficient RH was found to have unconventional behavior. For example, in the single band hole-doped cuprate LSCO at optimal doping RH varies as 1/T in violation of Fermi-liquid theory A few more comments. The frequency and temperature dependence of the optical properties of the cuprates are also rather unconventional In this short paper dedicated to the memory of K. Alex Müller I have tried to highlight the most recent experiments on the transport properties of the strange metal normal-state of the cuprates. And the many puzzles that they present. Alex was as puzzled as his peers about the unconventional properties of the cuprates, although he certainly had his strong opinions about what was causing them. But, I'm certain that even the great scientist that Alex was in 1986 could not imagine how his pursuit of Jahn-Teller polarons as a driver of higher Tc superconductivity would lead to the astounding new physics that has been discovered in oxides since then. All of us who worked with Alex will miss his humble nature and brilliant scientific mind. Personally, I am sad that I never made the time to swoosh down a ski slope with Alex to see his unbridled joy at being at home in the mountains. 