The interplay of quantum spin liquids with itinerant conduction electrons is of crucial interest for understanding layered structures composed of frustrated magnet and metal monolayers. Using parton-mean-field theory, we here demonstrate that a type-II heavy Fermi liquid, which is characterized by a vortex lattice in the slave boson condensate, can occur in the vicinity of the quantum phase transition separating fractionalized and heavy Fermi liquid phases. The magnetic flux threading each such vortex is about v f /137c times smaller than the magnetic flux threading vortices in type-II superconductors, where v f is the speed of magnetic excitations and c the speed of light. This makes a magnetic observation of this effect challenging. We propose scanning tunneling spectroscopy instead and investigate its signatures. If a type-II heavy Fermi liquid is cooled into a type-II superconductor, vortices in the slave boson condensate and in the superconducting condensate mutually attract. We argue that the type-II heavy Fermi liquid thereby provides a compelling explanation for the magnetic memory observed recently [Persky et al., Nature 609, 692 (2022)] in thermal cycles of 4Hb-TaS2. Introduction. Unconventional superconductors emerging in quantum materials with strongly entangled spin degrees of freedom are fascinating phases of matter of prime theoretical and experimental interest. While classic examples are heavy fermion superconductors 1 and cuprates 2 , this interest was recently boosted by the advent of van-der-Waals materials 3 . In particular, the past decade witnessed tremendous experimental progress in the ability to synthesize, stack, align, twist, and gate a variety of two-dimensional materials with superconducting, magnetic, semimetallic, and semiconducting properties. This letter is motivated by experiments on allotropes of the transition metal dichalcogenide TaS 2 , which are all layered and exfoliable. 2H-TaS 2 is a metal turning into an Ising superconductor below T c = 0.7K A major puzzle relates to the magnetic memory effect 28 of 4Hb-TaS 2 . In this experiment, first, the sample is field-cooled below T c , then the resulting vortex configuration, which is rather irregular, is mapped out using the scanning SQUID technique. Subsequently, the sample is heated to a temperature T cycle > T c , before being zero-field cooled (ZFC) below T c , again. The magnetic memory consists in the fact that a fraction of vortices (up to 12 %) survives the cycle, as long as T cycle < T * ≃ 3.6K. At the same time, the measured magnetic field in the normal state is virtually absent, which is consistent with previously mentioned μSR data Main assumptions of the theory. Given that we study magnetic field-induced vortices, the first and main assumption of our theory is the tacit supposition that heavy fermion physics is at play and that orbital field effects dominate over Zeeman effects ("Pauli-limit"), not only for ∆ but also for V . The latter assumption is motivated by recent susceptibility measurements 7 uncovering a minute magnetic moment per star of David in 1T-TaS 2 and by early theoretical proposals 6 advocating a negligible g factor in the same material. It is however most strongly motivated by the experimental fact that the fields applied in the magnetic memory experiments 28 are below 1 mT, while the splitting of the Kondo peak in STM is not observed in 4Hb-TaS 2 up to 9T Overview. Abrikosov's 46 explanation of the Ryabinin-Shubnikov superconducting phase 47 with imperfect Meißner effect involves vortex lattices in the complex, charge 2e order parameter ∆ ∼ ⟨c ↑ c ↓ ⟩, where c α is the annihilation operator of a conduction fermion of spin α. The condition to stabilize the flux phase in type-II superconductors is a large London penetration depth λ as compared to the coherence length ξ (which sets the scale of the vortex core diameter). Kondo lattice systems are commonly described using a fractionalized representation of spins 48,49 Ŝ = f † α σ αβ f β where f are fermionic spinon operators of emergent gauge charge e * . On the mean-field level, the complex Kondo hybridization V ∼ α ⟨c α f † α ⟩ [which has charge (e, -e * )] condenses. Similarly, in mixed-valence systems a spinless, charge (e, -e * ) slave-boson Real space vortices in the slave boson condensate were first considered in the context of cuprates Setting ħ = 1, we define fundamental flux quanta Φ 0 = π/e and Φ K = π/e * . The parameters α ∼ (T -T c ) and α K ∼ (T -T K ) define the mean-field transitions. Bold-face vectors live in physical 3D space. The dispersion of both V and ⃗ ∆ = (∆ dxy , ∆ d x 2 -y 2 ) may be highly anistropic with predominant 2D kinetics, but for notational simplicity this is disregarded. Note that Eq. ( It is important to emphasize that the proposed mechanism of magnetic memory is independent of the pairing symmetry. Consistently, in Figs. 1, 2 we omit the vector on ⃗ ∆, as if s-wave superconductivity was considered. The electromagnetic terms f MW , f mw contain external fields H, h and are a functional of internal fields B = ∇×A, b = ∇×a, where upper (lower) case letters refer to electromagnetic (emergent) gauge fields. The parameters of the Ginzburg-Landau functional, Eq. ( for both superconducting and heavy fermion "order parameters", where mean-field values of V , ∆ are implicitly understood. We remark in passing that, for Cooper pair and slave boson condensation alike, true spontaneous symmetry breaking is disallowed by Elitzur's theorem Microscopics. While Eq. ( (2) For the solution above T c , note that a vortex in V implies a quantized flux of eB -e * b, while the orthogonal combination e * B + eb is blind to the vortex and in the experimentally relevant case e ≪ e * , the flux very unevenly distributes between emergent and physical gauge fields. Using microscopic calculations, we find an extremely small magnetic field We next present the energy of a vortex relative to the homogeneous condensate in the limit of large κ K ≫ 1 and e 2 * /e 2 and to leading order in applied fields H, h. For T < T c we further concentrate on the limit of large κ = λ/ξ and comparable λ, λ K (for other limits see Ref. (3) The reference magnetic fields are Tunneling into type-II hFLs. As highlighted above, the characteristic inhomogeneous magnetic signal of V -vortices in type-II hFLs may be too weak to be experimentally accessible. We therefore consider another probe, namely tunneling spectroscopy/microscopy of hFL vortex cores. Qualitatively, the vanishing hybridization function inside the vortex core implies line defects of FL * character. At the semiclassical level, the tunneling density of states (DOS) inside the vortex core is therefore small as compared to the hFL far away from the vortices (it is given by the bare mass of conduction electrons rather than the heavy mass). Moreover, in the hFL phase, electrons of the tip can tunnel into both cand f -fermions 70 . While hFLs display a rich and characteristic tunneling spectrum due to multiple interfering tunneling channels, semiclassically these features disappear in the vortex core. Quantum effects in the tunneling spectra of type-II hFL are expected to be strongest at a finite bias voltage corresponding to the energy E gap around which the hybridization gap opens. Here, the DOS vanishes outside the vortex cores (called "Kondo insulator" when E gap coincides with the Fermi energy E F ), but bound states are expected to be trapped inside the core 62 . Using the approximation of parabolic bands employed above and generalizing a classical calculation by Caroli et al. Of course, this discussion of tunneling signatures assumes that the picture of the slave boson condensate survives to energies E gap away from the Fermi energy, which is expected to Discussion. In summary, we studied the type-II heavy Fermi liquid phase, in which external magnetic fields induce vortex lattices in the slave boson condensate, or equivalently the Kondo hybridization V ∝ ⟨b⟩. Within mean-field slaveboson calculations this phenomenon is demonstrated to occur in the vicinity of the QPT between fractionalized Fermi liquid and heavy Fermi liquid, provided ring-exchange terms are strong enough. While the magnetic signal of V -vortices is strongly suppressed, we propose tunneling microscopy as a means to experimentally access the effect and present the spectrum of subgap states trapped inside the vortex core. We argue that the type-II heavy Fermi liquid provides a compelling scenario for the magnetic memory effect in 4Hb-TaS 2 , by means of mutual attraction of superconducting vortices and V -vortices combined with pinning effects of V -vortices. We briefly comment on the Ginzburg-Landau functional, Eq. ( , where E (L) denote energy (length) dimensions. In particular, in these units and keeping ħ = 1 where c is the speed of light. The upper critical field corresponds to the shift in T c , T K due to the zero point-motion of the states in the lowest Landau level. We solve the linearized mean-field equations Using the standard expression ω c = qH/mc we obtain for the lowest Landau level Thus we find the following following two conditions for the upper critical fields where we introduced H ξ = 1/(2eξ 2 ), h ξ K = 1/(2e * ξ 2 K ). Note that the upper critical field of h is not merely given by h ξ K (Fig 2 The Ginzburg-Landau functional, Eq. (1) of the main text, implies below T c and T K , respectively, that We introduced the phase of ⃗ ∆ (V ) as θ (θ K ), the penetration lengths defined in the main text and the flux quanta Φ 0 = π/e (Φ K = π/e * ). We are interested in the result to zeroth order in external fields H, h. From the variation of the free energy with respect to A, a we obtain We take the rotation of these equations and consider (potential) vortex solutions These equations are valid for r = x 2 + y 2 > ξ, ξ K . Inside the vortex core or above T c or T K , we just replace λ → ∞ and analogously for λ K . Integration of Eq. (S8) over space leads to Φ tot = d 2 xB = B(q = 0), φ tot = d 2 xb = b(q = 0) and thereby to Eq. ( We now determine the spatial dependence of B(r), b(r). The Green's function of Eq. ( 1 e e * e e * e 2 e 2 * . (S9) Here, K 0 (r) is the zeroth modified Bessel function of the second kind. We here consider the solution when both order parameters are present. For simplicity, we concentrate on max(ξ K , ξ) < min(λ K , λ), which should be valid sufficiently far from T c . Using this Green's function we find Note that in the limit when ζ = 0, the physical B field is of order e 2 /e 2 * ≪ 1. 2. Case ∆ = 0 but V ̸ = 0. To access the regime above T c we set 1/λ 2 = 0 in Eq. (S8). To obtain the total flux, we use the q → 0 limit of the Fourier transformed fields Inverting this pair of equations leads to Eq. ( We determine the spatially dependent fields in the limit e 2 ≪ e 2 * and obtain We can estimate the magnetic field in the vortex core (the highest field induced by the vortex) by its value at the boundary of the vortex core, i.e. This is the result quoted in the main text below Eq. (2). 3. Case ∆ ̸ = 0 but V = 0. Finally, from Eq. (S8) at 1/λ K = 0, we reproduce the textbook results for type-II superconductors for total fluxes Φ tot = ζΦ 0 and fields B(r) = ζΦ0K0(r/λ) 2πλ 2 , while b(r) = 0. Generalizing textbook arguments to the present case of V and ∆ vortices and using B = B(r)ê z and b = b(r)ê z we obtain at the saddle point level Note that for T > T c the first term drops from the equation, see Eq. (S12). We here use Note that the second and third line in Eq. ( 2. Case ∆ = 0 and V ̸ = 0 Because of the above discussion of the zero mode, only the f K contributes to the kinetic energy and we obtain ) 3. Case ∆ ̸ = 0 and V = 0. In this case We consider a magnetic field in z direction and H = He z , h = he z and note that h < 0 will also be considered (H < 0 is related to our findings by symmetry) and consider only the leading order H, h. We thus find for the free energy functional for vortices ζ, ζ K that the change in free energy per vortex string length is In these cases we find The upper line corresponds to the condition for the orbitally limited Kondo effect, while the lower line is the condition for H c,1 for the SC. Thus, apart from the some coefficients, the relationship between the definition of the upper critical field and lower critical fields is in parallel to the case of the superconductor and here given by (cf Eq. ( We here determine the phase diagram in the plane of H and h in Fig. In Fig. In this section of the supplement we derive the microscopic parameters of the Ginzburg-Landau functional starting from a large-N description of a mixed-valence system, see e.g. Eq. ( We use the identification V = t cd b/ √ N , where t cd is the hopping matrix elements between localized 1 -T orbitals denoted by d † -creation operators and conduction electrons c (S23) Here we assume a separation of scales between the temperatures of the ⟨t ⟨r,r ′ ⟩ ⟩ ∼ t f condensation (i.e., mean-field QSL behavior) and V condensation and expand in |t f | ≫ |V |, so that we find on the mean-field level where f -fermion correlators are calculated in the presence of spinon hopping t f . This lead to t f ∼ J H at lowest temperatures 73 . We will consider temperatures near the mean-field U(1) FL * to hFL transition, where per definition |t f | ≫ |V |, cf. Fig. Here, we introduced and λ ≈ 0.8t f is given by the dispersion of spinons on the triangular lattice. For simplicity and to be concrete, we here consider purely 2D motion, the inclusion of a third dimension will only quantitatively affect the results, and we focus on particle-like (hole-like) electrons (spinons) ξ = p 2 /2m -μ (ξ f (p) = -p 2 /2m f + μ f ), as well as the limit of m f ≫ m, where, effectively, the band masses are t c a 2 ∼ 1/m, t f a 2 ∼ 1/m f . We will further use the notation m = mm f /(m f + m) ≡ mm f /m tot for the reduced mass. We assume a small conduction electron pocket p c < p f ∼ 1/a, where A. Ginzburg-Landau parameters for homogeneous fields We calculate the susceptibility bubble for the hybridization "order parameter" [ Note that the pole at ξ = ξ f is avoided. In the limit of small temperatures we obtain Here, we used the that the upper cut-off of the momentum integral is of the same order of magnitude as p f . In the last line, we kept leading terms in the limit of m f ≫ m, μ ≫ μ f . Note that we formally expanded in small temperatures, which is justified for T < μ f (1 -p 2 c /p 2 f ). We thus find where a (a c ) are in-plane (out-of-plane) lattice constants. We used the following notation for the mean-field Kondo temperature Note that the mean-field QPT occurs at The fourth order term can be written as Next we determine the stiffness below T K and by these means the parameter m K of the Ginzburg-Landau functional. The stiffness, as obtained by second order gradient expansion of the free energy in ∇φ is The last line is not only an expansion in small m/m f , μ f /μ. This implies for the parameter of the kinetic term in the Ginzburg-Landau functional that . (S33) This leads to the coherence length Note that the Kondo coherence length is thus given by the smaller of the two velocities divided by the order parameter. Finally, we estimate the effect of ring-exchange terms on the mean-field level following Ref. Here, f ABC = tr τ A τ B τ C (fully antisymmetrized with respect to all indices) and χ ABC = tr τ A τ B τ C τ D (fully symmetrized for all indices), and τ A are the generators of SU(N) (traceless, hermitian, N×N matrices). For N > 2, there is also a term and |h| ∼ N J 3 e * /a c . For simplicity we have dropped J ′ 3 terms vanishing in the SU(2) limit (note that J 3 and J 4 terms survive the N = 2 limit). We also remark that in the limit of large J 4 ∼ J H one may estimate e -2 * ∼ v f (the speed of spinons), corresponding to a dimensionless coupling of order unity, as expected for U(1) QSL with spinon Fermi surface. This concludes the estimate of the ratio of London penetration and coherence lengths as quoted in the main text. We can estimate their ratio as Note that within our calculation one may replace μ f ∼ J H (and near the Mott transition J 4 ∼ J H ) and p f ∼ 1/a. Note that a T (0) K /J H larger than the QPT value, additional factors of t/J H , Eq. (S24), enter and reduce κ K such that it eventually drops below unity. Using the coherence length, Eq. (S34), we obtain for the Kondo-London penetration depth which for J 4 ∼ μ F ∼ J H leads to the rough estimate λ K ∼ a t c /(T -T K ) ∼ .1μm/(1 -T /T K ) 1/2 . We here use a ∼ 1 nm in the CDW phase, T K ∼ 1K (if we identify the maximal temperature for the magnetic memory with the mean-field Kondo temperature) and t c ∼ 10000K. For the estimate of the magnetic field in the vortex core, which relies on Eq. (S13), we additionally employ (using a c ∼ a) e 2 e 2 * = α QED J 4 a c , (S42) so that In the main text, we drop the last term, assuming p c ≲ p f , T ≲ T K and ln(κ K ) = O(1). This concludes the estimate presented below Eq. ( In this section of the supplement, we discuss the tunneling density of states above the superconducting transition temperature. We concentrate on the center of the vortex and, to be concrete, employ the same model of parabolic bands, Eq. (S25), as in the microscopic derivation of the Ginzburg-Landau free energy, except that we now fix V (r) = V (r)e iφ to contain a vortex. Case ∆ ̸ = 0, V ̸ = 0.We thus obtain for the free energy contribution of the string