Most theoretical treatments of inhomogeneous superconductivity/fermionic superfluidity have been based on the Bogoliubov-deGennes equations (or, else, on their various simplified forms), which implement a standard mean-field decoupling in the presence of spatial inhomogeneities. This approach is reliable even at finite temperature for weak inter-particle attraction, when the Cooper pair size is much larger than the average inter-particle distance (corresponding to the BCS limit of the BCS-BEC crossover). However, it looses accuracy for increasing attraction when the Cooper pair size becomes comparable or even smaller than the average inter-particle distance (corresponding to the BEC limit of the BCS-BEC crossover), in particular when finite-temperature effects are considered. In these cases, inclusion of pairing fluctuations beyond mean field is required, a task that turns out to be especially difficult in the presence of inhomogeneities. Here, we implement the inclusion of pairing fluctuations directly on a coarse-graining version of the Bogoliubov-deGennes equations, which makes it simpler and faster to obtain a solution over the whole sector of the temperaturecoupling phase diagram of the BCS-BEC crossover in the broken-symmetry phase. We apply this method in the presence of a super-current flow, such that problems related to the Josephson effect throughout the BCS-BEC crossover can be addressed under a variety of circumstances. This is relevant in the view of recent experimental data with ultra-cold Fermi atoms, to which the results of the present approach are shown to favorably compare in the companion article. Soon after the properties of homogeneous fermionic superfluids have been accounted for on the basis of the BCS pairing approach Numerical solutions of either Gor'kov or de Gennes approaches were mostly implemented in what is currently referred to as the weak-coupling (BCS) limit of the BCS-BEC crossover In principle, the Gor'kov and de Gennes approaches can be applied to the whole BCS-BEC crossover, for given attractive inter-particle interaction and at any temperature below T c , by taking care of the density equation that determines the evolution of the thermodynamic chemical potential throughout the crossover Nevertheless, efficient numerical methods to solve the BdG equations in the presence of non-trivial geometrical constraints and/or confinements are still lacking. This is because, in spite of their apparent simplicity, the numerical solution of the BdG equations poses severe problems related both to computational time and memory space To make these computational problems less severe, a (highly) non-linear differential equation for the gap parameter ∆(r) (called the LPDA equation, for it entails a Local Phase Density Approximation) was introduced in Ref. In addition, owing to this capability of spanning the whole BCS-BEC crossover, the differential LPDA equation has a definite advantage over the mean-field Eilenberger In practice, solving for the LPDA equation leads to a considerable reduction of time and storage requirements with respect to the BdG equations Even though solving for the LPDA equation in the place of the BdG equations represents a useful practical improvement when addressing problems of physical interest across the BCS-BEC crossover, it is clear that the LPDA approach can at most recover the results ob-tained by solving the original BdG equations, but not more than that. In particular, the mean-field decoupling for the inhomogeneous case (on which the BdG approach rests) is expected not to be appropriate at finite temperature, when the inter-particle coupling is increased from the (BCS) weak-coupling to the (BEC) strong-coupling limit. This is in line to what happens for the homogeneous case, when the mean-field decoupling alone is not able to recover the Bose-Einstein critical temperature in the BEC limit of the BCS-BEC crossover In principle, the inclusion of pairing fluctuations beyond mean field for the inhomogeneous case could be implemented by a suitable generalization of the BdG equations. An initial attempt in this direction was made in Ref. In the spirit of the LPDA approach discussed above, we prefer to retain the advantages of solving a single (although highly non-linear) differential equation directly for the gap parameter ∆(r), and to include the effects of pairing fluctuations for the inhomogeneous Fermi system of interest directly on top of the LPDA equation, which was itself derived from an inhomogeneous mean-field decoupling. To this end, we take advantage of the approach of Ref. spirit of a local-density approach. This replacement effectively transforms the LPDA approach of Ref. For definiteness, in this article we implement the mLPDA approach by dealing with the Josephson effect at finite temperature throughout the BCS-BEC crossover, whereby pairing fluctuations need to be included in the expressions of both the local particle density n(r) and current j(r). In this case, the requirement for the particle current to maintain everywhere a uniform value will act as a constraint on the numerical solution of the mLPDA equation, in close analogy to what was done in Ref. The diagrammatic t-matrix approach for the superfluid phase, here considered in conjunction with the LPDA equation to yield the mLPDA approach for dealing with inhomogeneous spatial situations while spanning the BCS-BEC crossover, is an approximation that has often been adopted for including pairing fluctuations beyond mean field in the homogeneous case. And this was done not only in Ref. In this article, we focus on the mLPDA approach as schematically summarized in Fig. The present article is organized as follows. Section II sets up the theoretical framework through which pairing fluctuations can be included in the LPDA approach, specifically in the context of the Josephson effect. Section III describes the numerical procedures that we have exploited in this context. Section IV reports on a number of physical results for which pairing fluctuations play an essential role in the context of the Josephson effect. Section V gives our conclusions. Appendix A derives the expression of the particle-particle ladder in the presence of a super-current, and Appendix B discusses how the bosonic two-fluid model is obtained analytically in the BEC limit of our expression for the current in the presence of pairing fluctuations. Throughout, we shall consider balanced spin populations and set = 1 for convenience. In this Section, we describe in detail the steps required to implement the inclusion of pairing fluctuations in the LPDA approach of Ref. As mentioned in the Introduction, for definiteness we shall find it convenient to discuss the implementation from the LPDA to the mLPDA approaches in the context of the Josephson effect, which was recently studied at the level of the LPDA equation as a function of both temperature and inter-particle attraction along the BCS-BEC crossover Quite generally, the local number density and current in the broken-symmetry phase can be expressed in the form Here, β = (k B T ) -1 is the inverse temperature (k B being the Boltzmann constant), η a positive infinitesimal, m the fermion mass, and ω n = (2n + 1)π/β (n integer) a fermionic Matsubara frequency where the imaginary time τ is limited by 0 ≤ τ ≤ β, x = (r, τ ) is a four-variable, i = (1, 2) a Nambu index ) for the off-diagonal component (where x + 1 signifies that the time variable is augmented by a positive infinitesimal) and neglect the diagonal components of the self-energy. In our case, we need an expression for G 11 (r, r ′ ; ω n ) to be used in Eqs. ( To construct the expressions for n(r) and j(r) we are after, which include local pairing fluctuations in the context of the Josephson effect, it is convenient to first consider the homogeneous case when the external potential V ext (r) in Eq. ( (4) Here, q is a wave vector in the direction of the flow that enters the linear phase 2q•r of the gap parameter, while ∆ q stands for the associate magnitude of the gap parameter (which at zero temperature may itself depend on the magnitude of q when this exceeds a critical value Quite generally, to comply with the spatial dependence of ∆(r) of the form (4) (not only at the mean-field level but also beyond it), we proceed operatively in the following way. The single-particle Green's functions entering the Dyson equation ( (5) where with the fermionic four-vector k = (k, ω n ) and the shorthand notation Note that in Eqs. ( We further assume that the self-energies Σ ii ′ (x, x ′ ) in the Dyson equation ( and Note that, while the symbol Σ ij for the self-energy is associated with the full single-particle Green's function G ij like in Eq. ( By introducing also the expansion in analogy with Eq. ( With the further result the Dyson equation ( with the notation ξ(k) = k 2 /(2m) -μ. Solution to this matrix equation yields: where the properties S 22 (k; q) = -S 11 (-k; q) and S 12 (k; q) = S 21 (k; q) hold (analogous relations hold for the components of G ii ′ (k; q)). The mean-field and t-matrix approximations corre-spond to different choices for the reduced self-energy S ij , which we are now going to consider separately. We first specify the general results of Sec. II-A to the mean-field (mf) case. In this case, we take S mf 11 (k; q) = S mf 22 (k; q) = 0 and S mf 12 (k; q) = S mf 21 (k; q) = -∆ q , where ∆ q is the quantity entering Eq. ( where with the notation In these expressions, the wave vector q associated with the superfluid flow plays the role of an external parameter. When q = 0, the expressions ( For finite q, the expressions ( As already anticipated, to include in the results of Sec. II-A the effect of pairing fluctuations over and above mean field, we shall rely on the t-matrix approach of Ref. In Appendix A, a detailed analysis is provided of the diagrammatic structure for the series of ladder diagrams in the broken-symmetry phase in the presence of a superfluid flow . This analysis yields the following expressions for the reduced self-energies S pf ii ′ (k; q) with the inclusion of pairing fluctuations (pf): is a short-hand notation, the diagonal (normal) reduced single-particle Green's function G mf 11 (k; q) is given by the mean-field expression Entering the expressions Note that the mean-field result Next, we proceed to manipulate the expression (18) at the mean-field level and the expression The LPDA and mLPDA approaches differ from each other as far as the expressions (1) of the local particle density and (2) of the local particle current are concerned, in the sense that different forms of the singleparticle Green's function G 11 are utilized in the two cases. In the inhomogeneous case of interest, the singleparticle Green's function G 11 should, in principle, be obtained from the solution of the Dyson equation ( Although this strategy was already utilized in Ref. Quite generally, in a local approach one is willing to approximate (cf. Eqs. ( where the local version of G 11 (k; q) needs to be suitably specified. [The "mid-point" rule in Eq. ( Specifically, the replacements ( , where the wave vector Q 0 would be associated with a superfluid flow also in the homogeneous case, while the additional phase φ(r) arises from the presence of the external potential V ext (r) (which for the Josephson effect may correspond to a onedimensional barrier embedded in an otherwise homogeneous superfluid -cf. Sec. III). In this way, the expression (1) for the local particle density becomes where f F (ǫ) = e βǫ + 1 -1 is the Fermi function and are obtained from the expressions ( Similarly, for the local particle current one gets: ) with n(r) given by Eq. To go beyond the mean-field level and include the effect of pairing fluctuations in the expressions of the local density and current needed for implementing the mLPDA approach, we have to convert the expression In this case, however, one cannot simply rely on making the local replacements ( To achieve these goals within contained numerical efforts, we have adopted the following strategy: (i) We have replaced ∆ q → |∆(r)| and μ → μ -V eff (r) in the quantities ξ(k; q) and E(k; q) given by Eqs. ( (ii) We have generated the shape of the effective potential V eff (r) corresponding to a given local gap profile |∆(r)|, by solving at each r the now local gap equation (A7) with Q = 0, where the local replacements of step (i) are also made (iii) We have consistently made the above local replacements also in the single-particle Green's function G mf 11 (Q-k; q) which closes the loop in the diagonal selfenergy Note that in Eq. ( (v) We have eventually approximated the expressions (1) for the local particle density and (2) for the local particle current in the following way: As already mentioned, there still remains to specify the way the spatial profiles of the magnitude |∆(r)| and phase φ(r) of the gap parameter are obtained, on whose a priori knowledge the above prescriptions have been built. This will be done in Sec. III, where the expressions (38) for n(r) and (39) for j(r) will serve to set up the numerical procedure for the inclusion of pairing fluctuations within the mLPDA approach. Accordingly, in Sec. III the local gap profile ∆(r) will be obtained from the (selfconsistent) solution of the mLPDA equation, for which the condition |j(r)| = J for the spatial uniformity of the local particle current j(r) given by Eq. ( Besides being utilized in conjunction with the mLPDA equation, the expression (39) for the local particle current is relevant in itself because it generalizes to the whole BCS-BEC crossover the two-fluid model at finite temperature, even in the presence of spatial inhomogeneities. In particular, Eq. ( In this Section, we describe the numerical procedures utilized for solving the differential mLPDA equation with the inclusion of pairing fluctuations beyond mean field. We will specifically be concerned with the Josephson effect, whereby a stationary supercurrent flows (say, along x) across a fixed barrier that acts like an external potential V ext (x). Following Ref. L , which is centered at x = 0 and has height V 0 and variance σ L . By complying with typical values of condensedmatter samples When dealing with a Fermi gas with attractive interparticle interaction like in the present case, a common practice is to span the corresponding BCS-BEC crossover in terms of the dimensionless coupling (k F a F ) -1 , where a F is the scattering length of the two-fermion problem in vacuum While Ref. With these premises, the differential LPDA equation introduced in Ref. Here, ∆(x) = e -2iQ0x ∆(x) ≡ | ∆(x)| e 2iφ(x) with Q 0 = |Q 0 | (cf. Eq. ( where Note that the expressions ( Following Appendix A of Ref. for the local particle current to be everywhere uniform. This replacement is common practice when solving for the GL equation close to the critical temperature In Ref. Here, we improve on that approach and take instead the local particle current j(x) of the form This replacement of the expression of the local particle current (from Eq. ( B. Solving for the particle-particle ladder in the presence of a supercurrent We now describe the numerical procedure we have followed for calculating the expressions (A2)-(A4) for the particle-particle ladder Γ 11 (Q; q) and ( To begin with, special care has to be used when handling the sums over the bosonic Matsubara frequencies Ω ν in Eq. ( In addition, while the angular integration over the bosonic wave vector Q in expression Finally, the dependence on the spatial coordinate r, which is required to obtain the local particle current j(r) needed for the numerical solution of the mLPDA equation, is introduced in the expression of S pf 11 (k; q) via the prescriptions described in Sec. II-E. All these calculations are repeated at each cycle of selfconsistency during the numerical solution of the mLPDA equation, with the magnitude and phase of the gap parameter being consistently updated at each cycle. To speed up the interconnection between the two numerical codes, one for the solution of the mLPDA equation (cf. Sec. III-A) and the other one for the calculation of the diagonal self-energy S pf 11 within the t-matrix approximation (cf. Sec. III-B), it is convenient to somewhat modify the numerical procedures previously utilized in L with V0/EF = 0.1 and kF σL = 2.5 (broken line). The spatial profiles of V eff (x) are shown for three couplings across the BCS-BEC crossover and several temperatures, with Q0 taken at the maximum of the Josephson characteristics in each case. Ref. Specifically, when solving for the LPDA equation in Ref. To work around this problem, we have kept the above grid of 100×100×100 points in the variables (|∆|, μ, Q 0 + dφ(x) dx ) supplemented as before by a linear interpolation for calculating I 1 and I 0 ; but at the same time we have drastically reduced the size of the grid for calculating the density and current to 5 × 5 points only in the variables (|∆|, Q 0 + dφ(x) dx ), now supplemented by a more sophisticated 2D spline interpolation in each variable. Eliminating here the chemical potential μ from the grid is connected with the procedure described in Sec. II-E, which takes care of the local chemical potential in the process of calculating the local effective potential. In addition, back to the context of the LPDA equation, we have verified that a grid of 5 × 5 × 5 points in the variables (|∆|, μ, Q 0 + dφ(x) dx ) supplemented by a 3D spline interpolation in each variable would suffice to obtain the density and current with good enough accuracy, when compared with the more lengthy calculations with 100 × 100 × 100 points made originally in Ref. In this Section, we report on a number of numerical results obtained by solving the LPDA and mLPDA equations on equal footing. Specifically, this will be done by considering a simple Josephson configuration, where a potential barrier V ext (x) with a slab geometry of the SsS type is embedded in a otherwise homogeneous fermionic superfluid which extends to infinity on both sides of the barrier. Detailed consideration of more complex Josephson spatial configurations, like those corresponding to the experiments of Refs. In Sec. II-E we have argued that, when solving for the mLPDA equation, one needs to introduce an effective potential V eff (r) in the diagonal element Γ 11 (Q; q|r) of the particle-particle ladder, in the place of the external potential V ext (r) corresponding to the geometrical constraints in which the Fermi superfluid is embedded. We have also concluded that, by construction, the effective potential V eff (r) depends not only on the external potential V ext (r), but also on coupling, temperature, and the wave vector Q 0 associated with the supercurrent. Figure A direct comparison between the solutions of the LPDA and mLPDA equations is shown in Fig. The above decrease of J c when including pairing fluctuations persists at low enough temperature over the whole crossover region on both (BCS and BEC) sides of unitarity. This is shown in Fig. Throughout the present article, we have implemented the inclusion of pairing fluctuations over and above the LPDA approach of Ref. In the homogeneous case, on the other hand, a quite general procedure was proposed in Ref. In principle, no impediment should appear in further adapting this extended GMB approach to spatially inhomogeneous situations, aiming at further improving on the mLPDA approach as anticipated in Sec. I. the extended GMB approach could be combined with the differential LPDA equation, resulting in an "extended" version of the mLPDA approach which may shortly be referred to as mLPDAext approach. In practice, however, implementing this mLPDAext approach is expected to require substantial theoretical and computational efforts (especially in the presence of a supercurrent), which by far exceed the aims of the present work. Nonetheless, we can here provide a preliminary yet meaningful demonstration of how the inclusion of the extended GMB correction may influence a physical quantity like the superfluid density ρ s , of interest to the present context. To this end, we calculate the current j without the presence of a barrier for an infinitesimal (in practice, quite small) value of Q 0 , such that ρ s is obtained from the relation j = ρ s Q 0 /m for various couplings and temperatures. We do this, first at the level of the LPDA approach using for j the expression This improvement can be achieved in a preliminary fashion, by adapting to the present context the simplified procedure described in Ref. A similar procedure is also applied in Fig. In this article, we have set up and implemented the mLPDA approach that allows for the inclusion of pairing fluctuations beyond mean field in inhomogeneous superfluid Fermi systems, with the purpose of dealing with problems of physical and experimental interest for which the effects of non-trivial geometrical constraints are as important as those originating from the inter-particle dynamics and have thus to be treated on equal footing. The BCS-BEC crossover occurring in ultra-cold trapped Fermi gases is an ideal setting for testing this type of approach, since it involves spanning a wide region of coupling and temperature that can be reasonably dealt with only by a sufficiently broad-ranging theoretical approach. To this end, the strategy we have adopted has rested on including pairing fluctuations directly on the differential LPDA equation of Ref. The above strategy may acquire an even broader importance, when connecting it with the approach developed in Ref. It should be emphasized that, irrespective of whether one stops at the level of the mLPDA approach (as we have done in the present article) or plans for further improvements (like the extended mLPDAext approach outlined above), our whole strategy for including pairing fluctuations in the context of the LPDA differential equation of Ref. However, when comparing available experimental data with theoretical results, obtained even in the absence of internal parameters like in our case, the unavoidable occurrence of experimental uncertainties introduces a source of "external" parameters in the theoretical calculations, which have accordingly to be taken into account for the sake of the comparison. For instance, in experiments with ultra-cold trapped gases the uncertainty in the total number of atoms N can be as large as 30%, such that theoretical results aiming at comparing with experimental data for these systems should consider N like an external parameter, as it is done in the companion article In this Appendix, we explicitly implement the form (25) of the self-energy that includes pairing fluctuations in the presence of a stationary supercurrent within the tmatrix approach. To this end, it is sufficient to construct the diagonal component Γ 11 of the particle-particle ladder in the broke-symmetry phase, since the normal singleparticle Green's function G mf 11 needed in Eq. ( We begin by briefly recalling the procedure described in Appendix A of Ref. By this regularization, the limits v 0 → 0 -and k 0 → ∞ are taken simultaneously so that a F is kept at the desired value. In this way, only selected classes of diagrams of the many-body diagrammatic structure survive the regularization (A1) when the limit v 0 → 0 -is taken. Specifically, for the the particle-particle ladder of interest here it was shown in Appendix A of Ref. (a) x 3 1 x 5 1 x 7 1 x 9 1 x 4 1 x Finally, by combining the structures Γ11 and Γ22 in all possible ways through rungs of pairs of either G 12 or G 21 Here, where the regularization (A1) and the short-hand nota-as well as in the Doppler shifted frequency iΩ ν -Q•q m . In addition, the expressions (A5) and (A6) can be expanded to the leading order in the dimers kinetic energy Q 2 4m , since on physical grounds this may be comparable with the bosonic chemical potential μ B . We can then resort to the analytic methods of Ref. [54] and obtain in the BEC limit (cf. also Appendix A of Ref. such that from Eq. (A2) where is the Bogoliubov dispersion relation with μB = n 2 . This expression corresponds to the value a B = 2a F of the dimer-dimer scattering length, consistently with that obtained in the BEC limit of the LPDA equation are the Bogoliubov coherence factors such that u B (Q The result (B8) can now be used in the expression (25) for the diagonal fermionic self-energy S pf 11 (k; q), which in the BEC limit can be further approximated by where G (0) (k; q) = [iω n -ξ(k + q)] -1 . By a similar token, the diagonal single-particle Green's function G pf 11 (k; q) to be used in Eqs. (B1) and (B2) takes the form G pf 11 (k; q) ≃ G (0) (k; q) + G (0) (k; q) S pf 11 (k; q) G (0) (k; q) + G (0) (k; q) (-∆ q )(-G (0) (-k; q))(-∆ q )G (0) (k; q).(B12) We are thus left with entering the results (B8), (B11), and (B12) into the expressions (B1) for the density and (B2) for the current. In both cases, we make use of the following result where in the second line we have exploited the BEC limit and in the third line we have retained the leading significant terms in Q. In particular, in the third line of Eq. (B13) the first term within brackets contributes to the expression (B1) of the density while the second term within brackets contributes to the expression (B2) of the current. In the BEC limit, the expression (B1) of the density thus becomes: where n 0 = ∆ 2 q (m 2 a F )/(4π) is (twice the value of) the condensate density of composite bosons that form in this limit In a related fashion, the expression (B2) of the current becomes: This expression has the typical form of the current within a two-fluid model 