Piezoelectric motors are widely used in various applications where both precision positioning and miniaturization are required. Inertial or quasi-static motors are commonly employed because of their high accuracy, which demands consistent sliding friction between moving sliders and their static counterparts for reliable operation. In general, slider wear is unavoidable after long-term use. This wear can often lead to more serious cold welding in vacuum, which is also referred to as friction welding induced by direct contact between similar metal surfaces. Non-metallic coatings can prevent such unwanted cold welding in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) applications. However, the practical reliability of available coatings under UHV conditions still remains to be elucidated. Here, we systematically investigate the practical reliability of commonly used UHV-compatible lubricant coatings for piezoelectric motors in vacuum. We demonstrate that polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) shows the most reliable long-term operation in vacuum, while other coatings eventually lead to wear-induced cold welding and motor failure. Our findings provide a simple and effective method to improve the long-term performance of UHV piezoelectric motors by coating the slider surface with PTFE. Piezoelectric motors, which have long travel ranges with high positioning accuracy, are widely used in various fields where nanopositioning with small physical dimensions is required. Here, we systematically investigate various UHVcompatible coatings on metal sliders for the practical long-term reliability of a piezoelectric motor under vacuum. Long-term operation for each coating is performed automatically using a vision-based positioning method. Our results reveal that a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) coating exhibits the most consistent long-term operation in the UHV environment. In sharp contrast, other coatings become stuck after some operations in vacuum. This finding can be directly applied to other UHV piezoelectric motors without significant modification. In this work, a homemade KoalaDrive-type quasistatic piezoelectric motor Subsequently, we investigate N cycle for different types of coatings on the slider. A bare SS tube (diameter: 0.70 mm), which worked well in air, becomes stuck after only two cycles in vacuum [see SS-Air* and SS (0.70 mm) in Fig. To obtain thicker oxide layers against the wear in vacuum, we further oxidize the SS tube by heating it to ≈ 500 K in air for 2 h. To prevent cold welding due to direct contact between the SS tube and the BeCu springs, we can replace the SS tube with a non-metallic quartz tube of the same dimensions. We then examine the long-term reliability of the quartz tube in the same way as before. After about 50 cycles [black bar in Fig. Alternatively, we try to coat UHV-compatible dry lubricants such as Dicronite ®25 (coating thickness: ≤ 0.5 μm) and diamond-like carbon (DLC) Finally, we demonstrate the performance of our piezoelectric motor by conducting STM experiments. We built an STM combined with the piezoelectric motor using the PTFE coated slider. The schematic drawing and photo of our homemade STM head with the piezoelectric motor are shown in Figs. In this work, we explored the long-term reliability of the piezoelectric motor under vacuum with various UHVcompatible coatings on the slider. In particular, the PTFE coated slider shows the most reliable performance compared to the other dry lubricants tested, leading to the consistent motion with each cycle. In addition, our homemade STM head equipped with the PTFE coated slider demonstrates successful low-temperature operation under UHV without any noticeable wear-induced cold welding. We expect that the PTFE coating can be directly applied to other piezoelectric motors in various vacuum SPMs to avoid wear and cold welding.