epiq (Electron-Phonon wannier Interpolation over k and q-points) is an open-source software for the calculation of electron-phonon interaction related properties from first principles. Acting as a post-processing tool for a density-functional perturbation theory code ( Quantum ESPRESSO ) and wannier90, epiq exploits the localization of the deformation potential in the Wannier function basis and the stationary properties of a force-constant functional with respect to the first-order perturbation of the electronic charge density to calculate many electron-phonon related properties with high accuracy and free from convergence issues related to Brillouin zone sampling. epiq features includes: the adiabatic and non-adiabatic phonon dispersion, superconducting properties (including the superconducting band gap in the Migdal-Eliashberg formulation), double-resonant Raman spectra and lifetime of excited carriers. The possibility to customize most of its input makes epiq a versatile and interoperable tool. Particularly relevant is the interaction with the Stochastic Self-Consistent Harmonic Approximation (SSCHA) allowing anharmonic effects to be included in the calculation of electron- * These authors contributed equally. Electron-phonon interaction plays a central role in solid state physics as it is involved in almost any material property of practical interest. Some prominent examples are electronic transport in metals In this work we introduce epiq (Electron-Phonon wannier Interpolation over k and q-points), an open-source software studied to facilitate the calculation of electron-phonon related properties of materials. epiq acts as a post-processing of a plane wave DFPT calculation. By operating a Fourier interpolation of the electron-phonon matrix elements in the optimally smooth subspace identified by MLWF, the code allows to precisely calculate phonon frequencies and electron-phonon matrix elements at an arbitrary Brillouin zone wavevector with a low computational cost. epiq acts as a simple postprocessing tool of the Quantum ESPRESSO package and is very easy to install and execute on any calculator equipped with the free linear algebra blas and lapack libraries. epiq exploits the concept of maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) The paper is organized as follows. In Sec.2 we describe the theoretical framework underlying epiq, as well as the practical implementation of these concepts in the software, in Sec.3 we present the type of calculations available in epiq and in Sec.4 we demonstrate some exemplar applications. In sec. 5 we explain the technical details of the implementation and in sec. 6 we give all the technical details to reproduce the simulations in the paper. Finally in Sec.7 we draw our conclusions. The core of epiq is the Wannier interpolation kernel. Taking advantage of the MLWF representation For the sake of simplicity, we consider a composite set of bands, i.e. a set of N w bands isolated from all the others. In an insulator, it is always possible to identify such a set of bands. The choice of the single-particle Kohn-Sham Bloch functions (|ψ kn ⟩) in this subspace is not unique as any unitary transformation of the kind leads to an equally acceptable Kohn-Sham Bloch function. The n-th Wannier function on the R-th cell is defined as where N w k is the number of points in the k-grid used to perform the integral (i.e. the number of electron momentum k-points in the Wannier procedure). As it is clear from Eq. 2, there are N w Wannier functions, the same number of the bands forming the composite set. They are not unique as different choices of U mn (k) lead to different Wannier functions with different degrees of localization. The converse relation of Eq. 2 is: The ideal situation would be to have Wannier functions exponentially localized as in this case Fourier interpolation can be used to obtain observables in the Bloch function basis on any k and q points. The localization properties of the Wannier functions are related to the regularity of the periodic part of the Bloch function, u kn = e -ikr ψ kn N w k as a function of k. The more regular the states, the more localized the Wannier functions For one-dimensional insulating systems, Kohn MLWF are obtained by imposing that the sum of the spreads of the Wannier functions is minimized. Namely, the spread functional is minimized with respect to the matrices U nm (k). The following quantities have been defined in Eq. 4, namely ⟨r 2 ⟩ n = ⟨0n|r 2 |0n⟩ and r n = ⟨0n|r|0n⟩. The Wannier functions minimizing the spread Ω are called MLWF and the corresponding transformation U mn (k) leads to the optimally smooth subspace via Eq. 1. It should be stressed that this transformation does not necessary leads to Bloch functions analytic in k and, consequently, to exponentially localized Wannier functions. However, as the minimization of the spread leads to Wannier functions with a substantial degree of localization, it is expected that the corresponding Bloch functions posses a certain degree of smoothness (even if they are not necessarily analytic in k). In the case of systems with entangled bands, namely metals or system with substantial band mixing, it has been shown In the construction of Wannier functions (disentanglement and minimization of Ω) the epiq code closely follows Ref. We distinguish two kinds of matrix elements, namely those related to operators diagonal in the electron-momentum space and those not diagonal in the electron-momentum space. 2.2.1. Operators diagonal in the electron momentum. We consider an operator O diagonal in the electron-momentum k, where |u P W km ⟩ are the periodic parts of the Bloch functions obtained from a density functional theory code (Quantum ESPRESSO where From Eq. 6, it is seen that the operator in the Wannier function basis is connected via a Fourier transform to the operator Õ(k). The following procedure is then adopted: O nm (k) in Eq.5 is obtained from the Quantum ESPRESSO output, then by using Eq. 7 and Eq. 6, the operator O nm (R) is obtained on a real-space supercell of size N w k . As Eq. 6 is an inverse Fourier transform, we can use Fourier interpolation to estimate the operator Õ( k) at any point k in the Brillouin zone, namely For short range operators the accuracy of the Fourier interpolation is dictated by the degree of localization of the Wannier functions. One last step is needed to obtain the matrix element O nm ( k), namely we have to left and right multiply by the transformation matrices, namely The problem in performing this last operation is that the transformation matrices U nn ′ ( k) are not known in a point k that does not belong to the initial N w k k-point grid. In order to circumvent this difficulty it is sufficient to consider the electronic bands ε P W kn and note that Eq. 6 applied to the Hamiltonian H leads to It is then possible to obtain via Fourier interpolation of H nm (R) the matrix Hnm ( k) at any point k in the Brillouin zone. Diagonalization of Hnm ( k) provides the interpolated electronic structure ε kn (eigenvalues) and the desired transformation U nm ( k) (eigenvectors). As an example of an operator diagonal in the electron-momentum, we consider the electron velocity operator, namely defined as the commutator of the Bloch Hamiltonian H k = e -ikr He ikr and the position operator r (the index α labels the Cartesian component). This operator is pivotal to calculate the response to the external electro-magnetic field within the dipole approximation. Contrary to the case of the position operator, the electron velocity remains well-defined even if the Born-von Karman boundary conditions are applied We then use Eq. 6 to obtain the representation of the velocity operator in the Wannier functions basis and Fourier interpolation to obtain v α mn ( k) As an example of operators not diagonal in the electron momentum, we consider the deformation potential matrix element, namely In the previous equation q is the phonon momentum, u qs is the Fourier transform of the phonon displacement, V SCF = e iqr v SCF is the screened Kohn-Sham potential and s is a cumulative index for atom in the cell and cartesian coordinate. By applying the transformation in Eq. 2 we obtain where and R L is the direct lattice vector related to the Fourier transform of the phonon momentum. From Eq. 15 we see that the deformation potential in the Wannier basis is obtained via a Fourier transform of the matrix element It is important to underline that in metals, the quantity dV SCF du sL is not necessarily short ranged (for example in the case of Kohn-anomalies or in proximity of charge density waves). Thus, the real-space localization of d s m,n (R, R L ) is not simply related to the localization of the Wannier functions, but depends also on the localization of the real-space force constant matrix. Finally, by applying Eq. 2, we obtain the Fourier interpolation formula for the deformation potential, namely where k and q are any vector in the Brillouin zone. The transformation matrices U n ′ n ( k) are obtained following the procedure described below Eq. 7. The electron-phonon matrix elements are calculated from the following basis transformation, The diagonalization of the dynamical matrix at phonon momentum q provides the phonon frequencies ω q,ν and the cartesian components of the phonon eigenvectors e s q,ν in Eq. 18. The dynamical matrix at q is obtained either from Fourier interpolation of the dynamical matrices obtained via linear response or by using the Wannier interpolation technique described in Sec.2.2.2. Alternatively, the dynamical matrix can also be read from input as a result of another calculation. A typical example is the use of anharmonic dynamical matrices within the SSCHA. The Wannier interpolation of electron-phonon interaction in the case of of polar semiconductors has to be treated with special care, as the long range Frölich interaction is not localized in the real-space Wannier basis. Within epiq, the Frölich interaction in polar semiconductors is calculated within the microscopic theory introduced by Vogl Several quantities can be interpolated and computed in epiq, sharing the same Wannier interpolation kernel. 1. Adiabatic (static) and non-adiabatic (dynamic) force constant matrices. 2. Electron-phonon contribution to the phonon linewidth and related quantities. 3. Isotropic and anisotropic Eliashberg equations. 4. Double Resonant Raman scattering. 5. Electron lifetime and relaxation time. The knowledge of the deformation-potential throughout the full Brillouin zone via Wannier interpolation allows for the calculation of adiabatic (static) or non-adiabatic (dynamic) force constant matrices at any phonon momentum q. In particular, it is possible to start from the first principles adiabatic (static) force constant matrices calculated in linear response with Quantum ESPRESSO by using a given electronic temperature T ph on a given grid of electron-momentum k-points N k (T ph ) and on a given grid of phononmomentum q-points and obtain the adiabatic (static) or non-adiabatic (dynamic) force constant matrices calculated at any electronic temperature T 0 on any k-point grid N k (T 0 ) and at any phonon momentum q. We briefly outline the procedure implemented in epiq and we refer to Ref. In the presence of a time dependent monocromatic harmonic perturbation of the ions, the force at time t acting on the J-th nucleus (J = {M, r}) due to the displacement u I (t ′ ) of the atom I-th at time t ′ is labeled F J (t). The force constants matrix is defined as: where we used the translational invariance of the crystal and make evident the dependence of C IJ on the lattice vector R L -R M (to lighten the notation we omit it in the following equations where no confusion may arise). For the causality principle we can suppose that: The ω-transform of the force-constants matrix is thus: While the force-constants matrix C IJ (t) is a real quantity, its ω-transform C IJ (ω) is not real and has both a real and imaginary part. The Fourier transform of the force-constant matrix is where, without loss of generality, we have chosen R M = 0. The Hermitian combination of the force-constant matrix in momentum space leads to the dynamical matrix: where M s is the mass of the s-th atom in the unit cell. Eq. 23 is valid also in the adiabatic (static) case by setting ω = 0. If the imaginary part of the dynamical matrix A sr (q, ω) = MsMr [C sr (q, ω) -C rs (q, ω) * ] is small with respect to the real part, i.e. then the self-consistent condition determines non-adiabatic/dynamic phonon frequencies ω qν and phonon eigenvectors e s qν s=1,N and ν = 1, 3N indicates the phonon branches. The adiabatic/static phonon frequencies and eigenvectors are obtained considering a static perturbation, thus diagonalizing D rs (q, ω qν = 0). We label with C sr (q, 0, T ph ) the adiabatic (static) force constant matrix obtained from a linear response calculation by using and electronic temperature T ph and a k-point grid N k (T ph ). By adopting the assumptions and the reasoning explained in Ref. where ∆ sr (q, ω, T 0 , T ph ) is the difference between the phonon self-energies with fully screened vertexes, namely where f kj (T ) is the Fermi occupation of the band ε kj at a temperature T . We underline that Eq. 28 requires the knowledge of the electronic band energies and wavefunctions only in a region of energy around the Fermi level of the order of the maximum among k B T ph and ħω. As such, ∆ sr (q, ω, T 0 , T ph ) can be very efficiently interpolated via MLWF. As the deformation potential d s ij (k, k + q) is interpolated by epiq at any electron-momentum, Eqs. 27 and 28 allow for the calculation of the nonadiabatic (dynamic) force constant matrix at any electronic temperature and on any k-point grid but at fixed phonon momentum q. Eqs. 27 and 28 are valid also in the adiabatic (static) case by setting ω = 0. The procedure to obtain Csr (q, ω, T 0 ) is implemented in epiq by choosing the option calculation=phonon_frequency_grid. Namely, the code reads the linear response adiabatic (static) force constant matrices on a phonon momentum grid and calculates the non-adiabatic (dynamic) or adiabatic (static) ones via Eqs. 27 and 28 on any k-point grid and at any temperature at fixed phonon momentum q. A similar strategy is used to interpolate adiabatic (static) and non-adiabatic (dynamic) force constant matrices at any phonon momentum. The idea is to separate in the force-constant matrix obtained in Eq. 27 in the short and long range components. The long range force constants are associated to Kohn anomalies driven by Fermi surface nesting, and, as such, they cannot be easily Fourier interpolated and require an accurate sampling of the Fermi surface achievable via Wannier interpolation. The short range part instead can be easily Fourier interpolated. The procedure is the following. We first obtain the smooth high-temperature (short-ranged) adiabatic force constant matrices via the equation: This amounts at using the same interpolation procedure at fixed phonon momentum outlined before but on the grid N k (T ph ) = N k (T ∞ ) and at a hotter temperature T ∞ . The temperature T ∞ is an electronic temperature large enough in order to have only short range force constants named Csr (q, 0, T ∞ ) and no Kohn anomalies in the corresponding phonon branches. The force constant matrices Csr (q, 0, T ∞ ) can then be interpolated to every phonon momentum q in the Brillouin zone. We then obtain the desired adiabatic (static) or non.adiabatic (dynamic) force constant matrix by using again Eq. 27 as, Csr (q, ω, T 0 ) = Csr (q, 0, T ∞ ) + ∆ sr (q, ω, T 0 , T ∞ ) Namely we start from the Fourier interpolated hot dynamical matrices and we cool them down via Wannier interpolation. In this way, the Kohn anomalies are correctly taken into account via the interpolation of the electron-phonon matrix element at any electron and phonon momentum and by employing a much denser k-point grid. These last two steps are obtained by using the option calculation = phonon_frequency (adiabatic) or calculation = phonon_frequency_na to also calculate the non-adiabatic frequencies. 3.2. Electron-phonon contribution to the phonon linewidth and related quantities. epiq performs the calculation of the electron-phonon contribution to the phonon linewidth and related quantities at an arbitrary wavevector q by using any chosen N k electron momentum mesh. The electron-phonon contribution to the phonon linewidth (FWHM) at lowest order (bubble diagram or Fermi golden rule) is defined as where f kn is the Fermi occupation of the band ε kn . At temperatures such that k B T ≫ ω qν or in the case of a temperature independent γ qν , by using the δ-function condition δ(ε k+qm -ε kn -ω qν ) in Eq. 31 one can substitute in Eq. 31, If the temperature dependence in equation ( This approximation has been discussed in details in Ref. The reader should however be aware that Eq.34 leads to an incorrect (divergent) behaviour of the intraband contribution to the phonon linewidth close to zone center as it misses the threshold for Landau damping, as demonstrated in Ref. The mode-resolved electron-phonon coupling constant λ q,ν is related to the phonon linewidth from the Allen formula where γ q,ν is obtained from Eq. 34 and N (ε F ) is the density of states at the Fermi level. The knowledge of these quantities allows the evaluation of the average electron-phonon coupling constant λ and of the Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω) via the relations: where N q is the number of phonon-momentum point of the grid on which λ qν is interpolated. Finally, the logarithmic average of the phonon frequencies to be used in the Allen and Dynes formula The Eqs. 36,37 and 38, as well as the Allen and Dynes formula for T c , are calculated from the output of epiq by the postprocessing tools alpha2F.x and average_lambda.x. epiq offers an especially convenient method to calculate the superconducting gap within the Migdal-Eliashberg theory. The linearized Eliashberg equations on the imaginary frequency axis read where Z(ks, iω n ) is the mass renormalization term for the s th band, ∆(ks, iω n ) is the momentum and frequency resolved superconducting gap for the s th band, the n, n ′ indices denote the Matsubara frequencies ω n = (2n + 1)πβ, and the term is the band-resolved, anisotropic Eliashberg function defined as Here, we are neglecting impurity terms. epiq employs a random k-point generation algorithm onto an energetic neighborhood of the Fermi level in order to mitigate the computational cost due to the double cycle on k and k ′ = k+q. Furthermore, to speed up even more the calculation, epiq uses the symmetry properties of the normal part of the Green function, namely Once the Migdal-Eliashberg equations have been solved in the imaginary axis and the superconducting gap value is known at the N ω Matsubara frequencies, epiq also allows to analitically continue the gap function to the real space by the calculation of its N-point Padé approximant. This is done in epiq employing the algorithm introduced in Ref. The single particle self-energy calculated in the Migdal-Eliashberg approach can be used for computing the single particle propagator where τ i are Pauli matrices in the Nambu-Gor'kov In materials where the superconducting gap is known to be isotropic, the full k-dependence of the gap can be neglected by averaging over k-space, while still obtaining good comparison with experiments. In this case, the Eliashberg equations take the following isotropic form: where now we have The isotropic solution requires a negligible computational effort once the isotropic Eliashberg function α 2 F (Ω) defined in Eq. 37 is known, as there is no need to perform any sum over k-points. The postprocessing tool isotropic_ME.x solves the isotropic Eliashberg equations having as input an α 2 F (Ω) calculated with epiq. Both the isotropic and anisotropic approach have already been employed in previous literature Double-resonant Raman is a rich spectroscopic technique that provides detailed insights on the vibrational and electronic excitations simultaneously. It probes the forth-order response of the system to the impinging laser of frequency ω L . A comprehensive theoretical description of this phenomenon is presented in Refs. Following Ref. where n(ω μ q ) is the Bose occupation for mode μ. The probability of exciting two phonons is where the matrix elements K pp β (k, q, ν, μ) are defined by expressions involving the electron and phonon band dispersion, the electron-phonon coupling g μ kn,k+qm and the electron-light D kn,km matrix-elements throughout the full Brillouin Zone (see appendix A of Ref. Due to electron-phonon interaction, electronic carriers acquire a finite lifetime, as a result of phonon emission and absorption processes. In particular, for an electron characterized by crystal momentum k and band index n, the average electron-phonon lifetime, τ el-ph n,k , is defined in terms of the imaginary part of the electron-phonon self energy, Σ el-ph n,k , as , where This quantity can be calculated within epiq, and is especially relevant for the evaluation of the excited carriers lifetime in semiconductors As a first step, we qualitatively discuss the behavior of the deformation potential in the real space, both as a function of the real-space electronic coordinate R and phononic coordinate R L , evaluated for all the cells belonging to the supercell of size N w k . The results are depicted in Fig. We solve the anisotropic Eliashberg equations, Eqs. 39,40, in order to calculate the superconducting gap for MgB 2 at T= 10 K. In this specific case, an isotropic approach is not appropriate since the compound hosts multiband superconductivity. As such, a fully anisotropic calculation is performed. The resulting k-resolved superconducting gap is depicted in the right panel of Fig. We demonstrate phonon frequency interpolation within the differential approach in MgB 2 , following the steps described in Sec.3. In Fig. Thanks to the epiq interpolation kernel, it is possible to compute the resonant Raman intensity in graphene multilayers, as done in Refs. We demonstrate the usage of epiq to calculate the relaxation of excited carriers in a gallium arsenide. We employ Eq. 49 to estimate the electronphonon self-energy Σ el-ph , for excited carriers occupying the lowest conduction band. The results are shown in Fig. Σ el-ph , we plot the mode-averaged density of final states (FDOS) for the lowest conduction band, i.e. the quantity As already partially discussed in Ref. epiq supports parallel execution both on k-and q-points. Depending on the number of processors, number of k-points and number of q-points included in the calculation, epiq automatically establishes whether to perform a q-point or k-point parallel execution. We test the scalability of epiq on the specific case of electron doped monolayer MoS 2 . We consider the two most expensive operations, namely the rotation to the Wannier basis and the Fourier interpolation back to the reciprocal space. The cumulative cost of all the other operations performed by epiq is typically negligible with respect to this two operations. To study how the rotation to the Wannier basis scales, we consider a 8×8 Wannier grid (64 points) and use 13 Wannier functions. The results are presented in Fig. We now give a brief practical description of the steps necessary to perform any epiq calculation. A detailed explanation on how to run epiq can be found in the dedicated website, https://the-epiq-team.gitlab.io/epiq-site/. Any calculation performed using epiq relies on the following files produced by The calculation of any quantity within epiq is characterized by a precise and simple workflow , which we briefly summarize here (see also Fig. 1. Produce prefix.chk and prefix.eig files using wannier90. 2. Produce electron-phonon matrix elements using Quantum ESPRESSO. 3. Execute a preliminary epiq run in order to transform the electronphonon matrix elements in the MLWF basis, setting dump_gR=.true. 4. Calculate the quantity of interest setting the opportune value for the 'calculation' variable and setting read_dumped_gR=.true. in the '&control' namelist. In order to correctly fix the gauge, both the wannierization in Step 1. and the calculation of electron-phonon matrix elements in Step 2. must be performed employing the same wavefunctions. To this aim, both steps must be performed on top of the same non-self-consistent calculation. This is possible thanks to the Quantum ESPRESSO-epiq interface, which is activated when calculating the electron-phonon in the ph.x code with the flag electron_phonon='Wannier'. Detailed instructions are given in the epiq website. All the input parameters of an epiq calculation must be specified in the input file. Input parameters are organized in three namelists: '&control', '&electrons', '&phonons'. The '&control' namelist contains all the general control parameters of the calculation. epiq gives the possibility to perform different types of calculation that are specified by the following values of the 'calculation' parameter in the '&control' namelist: 'ph_linewidth' Calculation of phonon linewidths at specific Brillouin zone wavevectors. 'phonon_frequency_grid' and 'phonon_frequency' First, 'phonon_frequency_grid' is specified to calculate dynamical matrices at T = ∞ on the symmetrized q-grid; the obtained dynamical matrices are then interpolated to the desired q-point ( using the post-processing matdyn.x of the Quantum ESPRESSO release), and finally non-adiabatic or adiabatic phonon frequency at the desired q-point are produced performing another epiq calculation using calculation = 'phonon_frequency' (adiabatic) or 'phonon_frequency_na' (non adiabatic), respectively, according to the formalism explained in Sec.3.1. The detailed procedure can be found in the epiq website. Perform the solution of the anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations. Compute the electron-phonon driven excited carrier relaxation time. 'resonant_raman' Calculate the resonant Raman spectrum. In epiq it is implemented the possibility of using alternative dynamical matrices with respect to the ones employed in the calculation of the electronphonon coupling matrix elements. This feature allows the user to evaluate the isotope effect or to include anharmonic effects in the dynamical matrices, for example employing the Hessian of the free energy calculated within the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (SSCHA). epiq also includes some post-processing tools to analyze the outcome of calculations, namely alpha2F.x, average_lambda.x, analyse_ME_gap.x, pade.x, plot_me_FS.x and isotropic_ME.x. The former two help the user to process the result of a phonon linewidth calculation and produce the Eliashberg function α 2 F (ω) and the electron-phonon coupling parameter λ, together with an estimation of the superconducting critical temperature in the Allen-Dynes formalism and other related data. analyse_ME_gap.x processes the output of an anisotropic Eliashberg calculation, while pade.x calculates the Eliashberg gap in real space using N-point Padé approximants First-principles calculations were preformed within density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Quantum ESPRESSO(QE) distribution In this paper we presented epiq, a new tool for the computation of abinitio electron-phonon coupling related properties. epiq aims to simplify the calculation of many different properties of solids, making it accessible to the whole condensed matter and material science community by employing a straightforward workflow and easy-to-read input and output files. epiq is interfaced with the Quantum ESPRESSO plane-wave code and with the