Ptychography provides high dose efficiency images that can reveal light elements next to heavy atoms. However, despite ptychography having an otherwise single signed contrast transfer function, contrast reversals can occur when the projected potential becomes strong for both direct and iterative inversion ptychography methods. It has recently been shown that these reversals can often be counteracted in direct ptychography methods by adapting the focus. Here we provide an explanation of why the best contrast is often found with the probe focused to the middle of the sample. The phase contribution due to defocus at each sample slice above and below the central plane in this configuration effectively cancels out, which can prevent contrast reversals when dynamical scattering effects are not overly strong. In addition we show that the convergence angle can be an important consideration for removal of contrast reversals in relatively thin samples. The phase images produced by electron ptychography in scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) provide significant advantages over conventional high resolution electron microscopy, such as higher dose efficiency The bottleneck to scan speed imposed by cameras in 4D STEM has now been greatly reduced. Frame based cameras However the contrast of the ptychographic images is not always without complication as contrast reversals can appear with both direct and iterative methods, often with the columns taking on what can be described as a donut or caldera shape In both SSB and WDD ptychography, the intensity captured by the camera is Fourier transformed with respect to probe position resulting in where Q p is the spatial frequency, Ψ s denotes the Fourier transform of the specimen transmission function, and ] is an aperture function describing both the extent of the aperture via the top hat function a(K f ) and any lens aberrations present via the aberration function χ(K f ). To motivate the SSB ptychography method, the WPO approximation is applied to simplify the expression to where and ∆z is the z-distance from the focal plane of the probe. We now adapt the concept of the integrated CTF (iCTF) introduced for ABF Note that the iAA remains a function of Q p , K f and the thickness t, and is a complex object retaining phase due to defocus. The complex iCTF is then the same as the iAA with the triple overlapped area excluded. Figure Figure To illustrate the effect of the defocus as a function of the distance from the focal point of the probe we plot the phase and amplitude of a double A function vs spatial frequency in Figure Figure space at each spatial frequency as well as the influence of the defocus. When defocus induced phase variations inside the double disk overlaps are integrated destructive interference occurs, diminishing the amplitude of the spatial frequencies as seen in figure If we consider the effect on the electron beam as the coherent summation of the effect of each slice of the sample, as in the iCTF concept used to explore the optimal focus of ABF imaging When the probe is not focused to the central plane of the sample, not all planes of the sample will have matching planes with the opposite value of defocus, and there will remain a significant defocus phase contribution to the final image. We can illustrate this using the iCTF concept adapted for SSB ptychography and integrate the double A function over the sample thickness to observe the cumulative effect of defocus over all the slices in a sample on the total extracted phase and amplitude. The iCTF for SSB ptychography is derived as shown in the supplementary information. The results are shown in Figure These effects can explain why the optimal focal plane of the probe for direct ptychography is often in the centre of the sample for intermediate thickness samples. When there exist slices with a defocus not balanced with a slice elsewhere in the sample, the defocus effect on the phase contribution of these slices is significant. The greater the amount of sample thickness without identical slices of sample at an equal and opposite defocus, the greater the overall contribution of defocus phase to the final phase image. When the probe is centered exactly at the central plane the defocus contributions cancel at every plane of the sample away from the central slice, again assuming the sample is uniform. If the sample is not uniform then the interaction with the defocused probe will alter somewhat even if the overall effect is likely often similar in terms of optimal focus being relatively near the central plan of the sample. We emphasise that this analysis of the defocus influence across the thickness of the sample and the cancellation of the defocus phase in the slices above and below the probe focus ignores the effects of dynamical scattering. Dynamical effects will be sample dependent, and it is interesting to note that while with STO central focusing has been observed to be optimal for 16, 20, 24 and 28 nm We therefore now test what happens with much thinner 5 nm thick STO as a function of both physical probe focus and convergence angle in figure With the whole sample in focus the effect of defocus within the sample seems natural to make less difference than when the sample thickness exceeds the depth of field. Even though the defocus values are not by themselves different when the probe is focused to different points within the sample with different convergence angles, the effect on the double disk overlaps as a whole should be reduced with the sample entirely within the depth of field, as can be understood in terms of the optical sectioning effect. At 200 kV the 20 mrad convergence angle we used earlier, the depth of field is 11 nm. So one might think that 5 nm of STO, with less sample potential within the depth of field, would show less contrast reversals than 16 nm or more of STO with the same conditions. Interestingly, this is not what is observed. To further explore this we turned to 12 nm thick STO simulations. As shown in figure Dynamical effects are generally more associated with thicker samples, and 5 nm is certainly on the thin side, so one would expect dynamical scattering to effect the contrast of samples thicker than 5 nm more. Indeed, the divergence from central focusing being optimal seen at 50 nm of STO, where focusing to the exit surface was instead found to be optimal, seems more naturally a result of strong dynamical effects being balanced by defocus. The convergence angle of course weights the frequencies differently, as is already usually considered when optimizing the contrast transfer function without considering contrast reversals. However different frequency weightings will also naturally change where asymptotes occur in the frequency response, due to phase wrapping in probe reciprocal space, which in turn effects the appearance of contrast reversals. Given that optimal contrast is generally obtained for ADF with the probe focused to the entrance surface and generally for both iCoM and direct ptychography methods with the probe deeper within the sample, the optimal focus for ADF and iCoM and direct ptychography methods such as SSB can increasingly deviate as the sample increases in thickness. Different strategies can therefore be employed depending on the needs of the sample. One can optimize for the iCoM and ptychography by aiming to put the probe deep within the sample at the cost of contrast in the ADF signal, or one can put the focus to the entrance surface as is best for the ADF. In practice the first option has been easier to achieve experimentally, using the ADF to guide selecting a region of interest and final tuning, including the focus. However live processing options becoming available for both iCoM We have provided an explanation of why the overall strength of direct SSB electron ptychography is often at its maximum when the probe is focused midway through the sample. By focusing the probe to the center of a sample, equal and opposite defocus induced phase cancels out at sample planes equally far from the focal plane of the probe. This removes most of the defocus contribution from samples planes away from the focal point of the probe allowing samples to be seen most clearly when other effects such dynamical scattering are not overly strong. We demonstrated this using the iCTF concept in combination with simulations of STO, but the concept can be expected to extend to many materials typical of materials science. In addition we have demonstrated the convergence angle can be a crucial factor in determining if contrast reversals will be present at all and if central focusing will remove them. This knowledge will therefore help inform the design of focused probe ptychography experiments of thicker samples in determining where exactly to focus the probe.