Graphene is a powerful membrane prototype for both applications and fundamental research. Rheological phenomena including indentation, twisting, and wrinkling in deposited and suspended graphene are actively investigated to unravel the mechanical laws at the nanoscale. Most studies focused on isotropic set-ups, while realistic graphene membranes are often subject to strongly anisotropic constraints, with important consequences for the rheology, strain, indentation, and friction in engineering conditions. Graphene in particular is recognized as the thinnest solid lubricant material and a large amount of work has been dedicated to understanding the fundamentals mechanisms of this effect and to unravel parameters relevant to its technological development. Here we experimentally show how graphene's frictional response to an external indenter is severely altered by conditions of anisotropic suspension, specifically when graphene is clamped across a long and narrow groove. Results show that the friction coefficient is significant when the tip is sliding parallel to the groove while becoming ultra-low in the orthogonal direction. While the experimental data suggest that -rather unexpectedly -pre-strain of the graphene sheet as a result of clamping is negligible, the key to understanding the underlying mechanism is provided by simulations. The paramount mechanism is provided by the extra anisotropic strain induced from indentation under anisotropic constraints, which in turn produces an anisotropic stiffening of the graphene. While the focus of this work is on graphene, we believe our experimental protocol and the physical mechanism uncovered by our model can be applicable to other 2D membrane-like materials. The rheological and frictional behavior of pristine graphene has attracted much fundamental and technological interest during the last decade. From the mesoscale down to the atomic level, a great research effort is underway to unveil the physical mechanisms underpinning the indentation, twisting, wrinkling and crumbling phenomena Here we go beyond the isotropic setup in Ref. The suspended graphene was obtained by depositing a commercial single layer CVD graphene on a standard silicon dioxide-based calibration grating array. from supported graphene (gray) and data within the patterned area which include supported graphene on the crest and suspended graphene (green and red, respectively). Lines represent the linear fit from supported graphene (gray line, slope 0.94), graphene on crest (green line, slope 0.94), and from suspended graphene (red line, slope 1.13). The neutrality point indicated by the black dot at position (1581.6 cm -1 , 2676.9 cm -1 ) in the Pos2D versus PosG correlation plot, and the additional axes to quantify strain and doping are taken from Ref. A schematic representation of the sample construction is shown in Supporting Information The graphene membrane was then characterized by Raman spectroscopy, a well-established method used to quantify the purity, thickness and strain of graphene films The absence of the disorder-related D peak near 1350 cm -1 on the suspended part and the weak intensity on the supported one indicate that CVD graphene film is composed of large, defect-free single-crystal domains. The downward shift of both peaks positions in the suspended regions with respect to the supported graphene is evident and indicative of the different extent of both deformation and doping effects To disentangle doping and strain effects, we performed extensive Raman maps on graphene on the patterned area and graphene supported on the surrounding flat silicon region. Each map comprised about 80 points where we measured and fit Raman spectra to obtain G and 2D peak positions (PosG and Pos2D in the following). We computed the Pos2D/PosG correlation shown in Fig. By contrast, the red data are representative of suspended graphene: they group close to the doping axis so that the extrapolation towards strain axis indicates a negligible pre-strain. Indeed the linear fit yields a slope of 1.13 consistent with the value of 1.09 reported by Gajewski et al. Following the structural results of the Raman spectroscopy analysis, the membrane rheology was proved by Friction Force Microscopy (FFM) (Fig. Care has been taken to analyse regions free from pre-existing extended wrinkles, which are clearly identifiable due to the strong contrast they produce on the lateral force signal The measured frictional dissipation F was found to depend strongly on the scanning direction: the friction force recorded during scans parallel to the groove was typically three times that the orthogonal, at the same load P (see Fig. In particular we notice that along the orthogonal direction the extremely low COF values are in agreement with those measured by Z. Deng et al. on single, bi and tri layer graphene suspended on micrometre size circular hole The FFM scans were performed over hundreds of nanometers, providing the mesoscopic tribological response arising from a nanoscale contact. Over this length scale the atomistic stickslip events cannot be detected by our equipment. Nevertheless, the atomistic nature of the dissipation can be indirectly assessed from the velocity dependency of the COF. We found that halving and doubling the sliding velocity yielded the same COF (Supporting Information In order to understand the atomistic mechanism underlying the microscopic experimental measures, we consider the minimalistic model sketched in Fig Construction of the substrate in the PT model (i.e. the 2D membrane on which the tip slides) was key in this model, as it needed to capture the deformable nature of the suspended graphene sheet while at the same time preserving the atomistic nature of the contact -a smooth membrane cannot yield a stick-slip dynamics and a discrete graphene membrane without the mesoscopic clamping asymmetry cannot deform realistically under the tip. To achieve a reasonable tradeoff between these two opposite requirements, we modeled the experimental membrane as a classical graphene sheet where the AIREBO An external load P was applied to the model tip (as sketched in Fig. For each indentation load, the tip can slide in the orthogonal and parallel directions. The sliding was performed for a load from 0 to 2.24 nN. Note that the loads applied to a point-like tip do not relate directly to the experimental one. One can estimate the relative pressure and membrane vs tip size ratio between MD and experiments. Taking the equilibrium tip-membrane distance according to the LJ potential R=0.35 nm as tip radius in MD and assuming an Hertzian contact area (see Supporting Information Force traces along the orthogonal and parallel directions for selected loads are reported in Fig. After an initial transient, the kinetic friction was calculated as the average sliding force shown in Fig. From Fig. Note that the COF from MD simulations are higher than in experiments. This discrepancy can be linked to the system being an ideal crystal at zero temperature, representing an upper bound for the friction force in the real system. At the same, the agreement between trends found in experiments and in MD simulations are robust against variations of crystal orientation and boundary conditions (see Supplementary Information These "in-silico frictional experiments" were crucial to understand the origin of this asymmetric rheological response of suspended graphene in absence of pre-strain. Figure The computational results indicate that the anisotropic stiffening of the membrane induced by the clamping during indentation, and not an anisotropic pre-strain, which is absent in our case, is the mechanism underpinning the different frictional response in the orthogonal and parallel directions. This argument is further corroborated by the experiments. Analyzing the effective piezo elongation as a function of the applied loads during the acquisition of friction vs load images (see Supporting Information The mechanics is that of two springs in series: one is given by the flexural constant KN of the AFM cantilever, the other represents the elastic response of the graphene membrane subject to normal load, whose constant is termed here KGr. Fig. Hence, the intrinsic membrane elasticity as described by KGr strongly depends on the scan direction. In particular, the orthogonal scan reveals a non-uniform response along the profile: the center region is softer while the system gradually becomes effectively stiffer approaching the clamping constraints. On the contrary, in the parallel scan direction, the response is essentially constant, as expected from the model. The behavior described by the intrinsic membrane elasticity is consistent with computational results: the induced-strain reported in Fig. The effect of in-plane strain on the frictional mechanics of free-standing 2D membranes has been addressed only recently. Within the effort of understanding the nano-rheology of 2D materials under strain, graphene has been investigated in different conformations, from freely suspended on a circular hole to strained as the hole gets pressurized. We found unexpected results on the asymmetric tribological response of a single layer CVD graphene freely suspended over a specially designed groove geometry. FFM measurements and friction vs load analysis performed at the membrane center reveal a remarkably large anisotropy with respect to the groove axis. A very low COF is measured by sliding transverse to the groove while an unexpected nearly threefold increase is obtained when moving parallel. As the pre-strain discussed in the literature is absent in our system, a different mechanism is required to explain the observed anisotropy. Our MD model, corroborated by subsequent measurements, suggests that deformation induced by indenting and sliding action of the tip is anisotropic due to the asymmetric clamping conditions. This also reflects into anisotropic friction response of the graphene membrane. Sliding orthogonally to grooves produces a larger strain, whence the membrane stiffens and the force needed to drive the tip drops. On the contrary, moving parallel to grooves the graphene membrane deforms easily and a larger force is needed to slide. This mechanism is amplified with increasing load, which results in an asymmetric dependence of friction vs load. These experimental results complemented by numerical simulations demonstrate how strong adhesion (clamping) and decoupling (suspension) from the substrate can modulate the stiffness and the friction on these membrane-like systems. Strongly anisotropic geometries, such as that investigated here for the first time to the best of our knowledge, are likely to occur in realistic systems. Hence, we believe that our results and analysis will be relevant to design and tune future graphene-based systems such as nano-mechanical devices and ultra-low friction coatings. CVD Graphene Deposition: Commercial single-layer CVD graphene (ACS Materials, Pasadena, CA, USA) was deposited over a SiO2-based calibration grating (TGZ3, NT-MDT Spectrum Instruments) whose pattern's design consists of long parallel grooves spaced by 3 ± 0.05 μm and a step height of 520 ± 20 nm through the standard polymer-assisted wet transfer method. Briefly, by this procedure graphene sheet is provided with one side covered by PMMA polymer and it is supported on a water soluble polymer thick base which makes it easy to handle. Graphene was dipped into DI water taking care of avoiding its rolling up, then left floating at the air-water interface with PMMA side on top for at least 30 minutes to ensure it was fully soaked before transferring it on the substrate of interest. The commercial calibration grating TGZ3 was then used to pick up the floating graphene sheet. Once transferred, the sample was held vertically for few minutes to let excess water flow out, then dried at room temperature for 30 minutes and finally baked at 100°C for 20 minutes. Sample Cleaning: PMMA residues were removed by dipping TGZ3 with graphene on top firstly in hot acetone bath (50°C for 60 minutes), then in hot isopropyl alcohol bath (50°C for 30 minutes); the samples were then baked at 50°C with the blower running on low speed for 20 minutes. The polycrystalline nature of CVD graphene here used which entails the presence of several line defects such as wrinkles and grain boundaries has to be pointed out, as well as PMMA residues that may significantly influence strain, doping and friction force. Nevertheless, Raman analysis revealed the presence of large enough defect free regions (several square micrometers areas) and we never detect suspended bilayer. Finally, all the areas subject to FFM analysis were initially mechanically cleaned from small physisorbed impurities with a sacrificial cantilever and tip different from that used for friction measurement. After CVD graphene was deposited on TGZ3 grating and properly cleaned, AFM images (tapping mode) were acquired in air, at ambient conditions. The 3D topographical reconstruction in Figure Topographical analysis as well as friction measurements were carried out by using a commercially available Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) NT-MDT NTEGRA AURA system. All the measurements were performed in air, under ambient conditions (T≈25°C, RH≈55%) using commercially available rectangular shaped silicon cantilevers with nominal elastic constants between 0.3 and 0.8 N m -1 (MikroMasch HQ:CSC37/NoAl). Calibration of normal and torsional spring constants were done according to Sader method 42,43 . Friction force loops were typically used to build friction force vs normal load plots. In particular, the areas of interest were scanned in two different directions, namely orthogonal and parallel to the grooves axis by rotating the sample of 90° thus keeping the fast scan direction along the x axis. The normal load applied was calibrated by previously acquiring force-distance curves on a flat supported region to calculate the sensitivity factor of the cantilever deflection. The scans were acquired in "one line" mode by decreasing the normal load every forty second (i.e. forty lines at 1Hz scan rate) from ≈25nN to the pull-off value; in this mode the tip continuously slides along the same region net of negligible thermal drift. The friction forces resulting from the difference between forward and backward lateral force signals are then averaged on approximately thirty lines having a constant normal load (far from the set point changes) to produce one data point. All the areas analyzed have been previously mechanically cleaned with a sacrificial cantilever, different from that used for friction measurement, using a normal load (∼40nN) greater than the highest load reported in the plot. AFM image processing, including the three-dimensional display of data, was carried out using both the software provided by NT-MDT and the free modular software Gwyddion (version 2.55). Tip apexes were estimated regularly during FFM measurements by performing a deconvolution of the topography obtained on a AFM calibration sample (PA01/NM) and also post -experiment by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Typical apex radius is about 15 nm. Friction vs load curves were evaluated by working in contact mode using single line acquisition and applying a constant normal force. The tip always scanned the same region in back and forth, unless the unavoidable thermal drift, and the applied load was modified by varying the setpoint at regular time intervals maintaining a continuous contact on the surface. The setpoint is converted to load using the independent measurement of the normal elastic constant KN obtained previously from the dynamic characteristics of the cantilever and according to the sensitivity factor measured from the force vs distance calibration curve on a rigid portion of the sample. Sensitivity is checked regularly during friction vs load analysis. To understand the procedure we have used to evaluate the elastic deformation of the graphene membrane, let's consider first a rigid surface. The height profiles on a rigid and flat substrate at different loads correspond to different piezo extensions as shown by continuous lines on figure As expected, these points completely overlap on the linear region of the load vs distance standard calibration curve (red continuous line) because here piezo elongation just deforms the AFM cantilever. The same type of analysis gives a different result and it becomes very useful when the surface could deform under load and there are no fixed points along the profile to properly evaluate the induced deformation. This is exactly the case of our FFM measurements on suspended graphene where we measured just at the membrane center without touching the rigid clamping regions. Figure In panel b, d we show the load vs distance curve reconstruction by plotting for a particular position of the profile (x= 500 nm) the applied load as a function of the piezo extension (colored dots). In this case the linear portion of the reconstructed curve does not overlap on the corresponding load vs distance calibration curve (red line) and this is a clear indication of substrate deformation. Fitting the linear region of the reconstructed curve (dash black line) allow us to extrapolate the effective elastic constant (Keff) for the system composed of cantilever and graphene which can be thought as two springs in series: being known the elastic constant of the cantilever (KN) it is possible to easily identify that of graphene under strain (KGr). By repeating this argument for all the profile positions (512 pt) we reconstructed the position sensitive KGr presented on Fig. Method. Non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD) simulations are performed using LAMMPS 54 . The graphene membrane is modeled using the AIREBO potential 55 and LJ for graphene-Si interaction ε=0.0087 eV and σ=3.595Ǻ 27 . To mimic the suspended graphene, we clamp and hold both sides of graphene in the Xdirection with strong springs of stiffness Kc = 1602.17 N/m. This large value is chosen as a compromise between vertical load and size of the system, which is also close to Young's modulus of graphene given its nanometric size. However, the overall features of simulations remain independent of this choice; smaller values would intuitively reproduce the same results for a smaller scale of vertical loads. Simulations with both open and periodic boundary conditions (OBC and PBC) along Y-direction are performed. To test the effect of the membrane crystalline orientation, all measurements are done for both armchair and zigzag orientations of graphene. The relaxed indentation configurations are obtained in three steps; first, imposing an initial constant vertical load on the tip which allows preliminary shaping during N=3000000 steps of MD simulation with the time step dt=1 fs. Second, using CG minimisation with tolerance 10 -16 eV on the energy allows fast readjustments of the configurations. Third, a final MD run with N=3000000 steps gives us realistic results, allowing for fine readjustment. To simulate frictional measurements, the system is kept at zero temperature using a Langevin thermostat with damping factor gamma=0.05 ps. We performed more simulations for various values above and below this value, and the results of this work are confirmed to be independent of a specific choice. To measure friction, the tip is attached to a moving stage with constant velocity vdrag=2.0 m/s with a spring of stiffness Kdrag~0.08 N/m. The friction force is computed as F=Kdrag [vdrag tri(t)] where ri(t) is the instantaneous position of the tip along the direction i, which could be perpendicular (x axis) or parallel (y axis) to the clamps. Finally, to confirm the consistency of results, the procedure is repeated back and forth many times to regain the same hysteresis.To estimate the contact area of atomically-thin tip adopted in MD simulation of the PT model, we adopt a simple Hertian model. The radius a of the contact area is expressed in terms of the applied load P and mechanical properties of the tip by aa = ( 3 PP RR 4 EE * ) , where R is the curvature radius of the tip, here the LJ interaction R=0.35 nm, and the effective Young modulus of the contact is given by 1/EE * = (1 -νν 1 2 )/EE 1 + (1 -νν 2 2 )/EE 2 . The Young and Poisson moduli for graphene and silicon tip, respectively, are taken from the Material Project 56,57 : EE 1 = 371 GPa, νν 1 = 0.19 EE 2 =151 GPa, νν 2 =0.20. As we perform zero temperature friction simulation, the tip might get trapped in unstable configurations along high-symmetry directions. In order to break the symmetry along these directions, a small temperature of 0.001 K is added to the tip only: this allows the tip to jump the center of the graphene hexagons when dragged along the armchair direction (x axis), resulting in the well-document stick-slip zig-zag trajectory. From simulations we obtain the ratio COFy/COFx for zigzag orientation with OBC and PBC, 2.273 and 1.851 respectively. These results confirm higher friction along Y-direction, as observed previously for armchair orientation; 1.615, and 1.763 -for OBC and PBC. In agreement with known dissipation asymmetry due to crystallographic orientation 59 