Ultrafast and coherent generation of magnons is of great significance for high-speed antiferromagnetic spintronics. One possible route is by exciton-magnon pairwise optical excitation. To date, such exciton-magnon transitions have been studied mostly by linear optical means in a limited number of conventional three-dimensional antiferromagnets. Here we investigate this correlated transition in van der Waals antiferromagnet MnPS3 by using resonant second-harmonic generation spectroscopy, a nonlinear optical probe sensitive to the symmetry of electronic and magnetic excitations. Two exciton-magnon peaks are observed, in line with the exciton-induced splitting of magnon density of states predicted by a Koster-Slater type theory, indicating significant exciton-magnon interactions. In addition, a large linear magnetoelectric effect of excitons is observed. These findings provide renewed understandings on the correlation effects in two-dimensional magnets with enhanced quasiparticle scattering cross-sections, and point to potential coherent control among charge, spin and orbital degrees of freedom in two-dimensional magnets by optical means. Recent discoveries of two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) antiferromagnets (AFMs) TM PX 3 (TM = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn; X = S, Se) with intralayer antiferromagnetic orders have brought antiferromagnetic spintronics to an unprecedented 2D realm with significant correlation and quantum effects Magnons have been excited through the coupling between spin and intermediary excitations such as onsite d-d transitions in MnPS 3 and localized Zhang-Rice excitons in NiPS 3 On the other hand, the exciton fine structures in these vdW AFMs [4, quasiparticle correlations. In particular, the exciton-magnon coupling revealed by the magnon-sideband in MnPS 3 Optical second-harmonic generation (SHG) is powerful for probing the magnetic symmetry in TM PS 3 Using resonant SHG with symmetry analysis, we unveiled the substantial exciton-magnon interaction in MnPS 3 , as demonstrated by the identification of two magnon bands split by excitonic perturbations, not observed in conventional 3D AFMs. The observed magnon splitting is in good consistency with the prediction by our theory of exciton-perturbed magnons. Furthermore, a large field-enhanced SHG at exciton resonance is revealed, attributed to an excitonic linear magnetoelectric effect. These findings provide renewed understandings on the correlation among quasiparticles in (quasi-)2D AFMs and may lead to efficient and coherent generation of multimode magnons. Exciton fine structures in SHG spectra.-MnPS 3 has a monoclinic crystal structure with space group C2/m (Fig. Figure As detailed in Fig. Exciton-magnon transitions and exciton-magnon interactions.-A bipartite AFM without intersublattice interactions holds sublattice exciton |E i , k⟩ or magnon |M i , k⟩ eigenstates residing on a single sublattice i (= a or b) with wavevector k In real systems with intersublattice interactions, exciton or magnon wavefunctions can spread over neighboring sublattices, leading to the relaxation of parity/spin-selection rules and mixing of ED/MD characters. In MnPS 3 , an exciton-magnon transition is both ED-and MD-allowed for internal k throughout the Brillouin zone (Supplemental Material IB). Therefore, due to the near-flat exciton dispersion (Supplemental Material IC) and assuming weak exciton-magnon interactions, the magnon-sideband is anticipated to inherit mostly the spectral features of magnon density of states (DOS) exhibiting a single peak (Fig. Symmetry of exciton and exciton-magnon transitions.-To gain insights into the symmetry of the fine structures, we plot the rotational anisotropy (RA) of E 0 , EM 1 and EM 2 under magnetic fields in Figs. This relation serves as an informative clue for our symmetry analysis of the exciton-magnon states. magnetic field conditions). The SH intensities in these cases are given below. Here, L(R)/L(R) denotes the left-handed (right-handed) circular polarization for fundamental/SH light. Again, χ d,e,f = 0 holds for H = 0 (C2 ′ /m) and H ∥ b (Cm). Remarkably, for EM 1 and EM 2 (2.638-2.648 eV), L/R and R/L overlap and show almost no magnetic field dependence, and L/L and R/R signals are constantly zero. This observation confirms that Eq. 2 holds individually for EM 1 and EM 2 . In contrast, E 0 shows different peak intensities for the four polarization configurations at finite magnetic fields and exhibits distinct field dependences, thereby indicating the breakdown of Eq. 2 for the pure exciton (Supplemental Material IG). It is noteworthy that the magnetic space groups C2 ′ /m, Cm and C2 ′ impose no constraints on the relation among χ a,b,c,d,e,f (except for the vanishing of χ d,e,f as H approaches 0). Equation Theory of exciton-perturbed magnons.-The overall similarities between EM 1 and EM 2 revealed by SHG suggest that they should bear similar and related physical origins, i.e., both are exciton-magnon states split from the same source. To explain the splitting, we developed a Koster-Slater type theory for magnons on a Néel AFM honeycomb lattice under the local influence due to a Frenkel exciton (See Supplemental Material II for detailed formulations). For concreteness, we conceive a physical picture of an exciton localized around an atomic site as the disturbance to the spin Hamiltonian, which changes local spin magnitude (from 5/2 to 3/2) and exchange interaction (from J to J + δJ) in its vicinity (Fig. By solving the Green's function for the local cluster directly influenced by the exciton, two types of magnon sidebands appear. To see this, the spectral function tr(A(ω)) with the sublattices summed up for the two sidebands are shown in Fig. relative to E 0 , while the quasi-bound band has a similar broadened feature as EM 2 . This correlation allows for a notable correspondence between the theoretically predicted quasi-free and quasi-bound bands and the experimentally observed magnon components of EM 1 and EM 2 , respectively. As is clear from Figs. 4(b) and 4(c), δJ is decisive to the splitting magnitude between the quasi-free and quasi-bound magnons and hence, EM 1 and EM 2 . The generation of a Frenkel exciton from the Mn 2+ high-spin ground state with half-filled d-orbitals will create unoccupied and double-occupied orbitals, which allow ferromagnetic exchange processes with neighbors according to Goodenough-Kanamori-Anderson rules, thereby reducing the antiferromagnetic coupling in its vicinity and leading to negative δJ. Comparing the theoretical spectral functions to the SHG spectra indicates that exciton causes a ∼25% reduction in local exchange interaction. The substantial exciton-induced magnon splitting in MnPS 3 , not identified in 3D AFMs, suggests a much stronger charge-spin-orbital correlation in this (quasi-)2D AFM. Discussions.-From a symmetry perspective, the large exciton-magnon splitting in MnPS 3 is associated with the shared transformation properties (ICRs) of excitons and magnons for all internal k, fully unlocking their interactions, enabled by the material's specific site and global symmetry. This contrasts with the typical 3D AFM MnF 2 , where exciton-magnon interactions are much suppressed due to the lack of mutual ICRs in excitons and magnons at majority high-symmetry points. A full group theoretical discussion on the magnon splitting and the related symmetry aspects of the exciton-magnon SHG is provided in Supplemental Material IB and ID. Furthermore, as illustrated by the cartoon view in Fig. 