The possibility of superconductivity at ambient pressure and temperature has been a long-standing dream in condensed matter science. The past few years have been witness to significant breakthroughs in this area with the discovery of novel hydrogen-rich materials exhibiting superconductivity in the vicinity of room temperature under pressure. [1][2][3][4][5] We obtained samples synthesized by the University of Rochester group and prepared for electrical resistance measurements in diamond anvil cells (DACs) as described by Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. In contrast to the above results, Ming et al. Additional transport measurements provide insight on this sample variability. R-T measurements on another sample obtained from the University of Rochester group are shown in Fig. Figure The pressure was measured using the standard ruby fluorescence method at ambient temperature after the completion of the warming cycle. The R-T relation at 8.5 kbar indicates two large drops in resistance which were not present in higher pressure measurements (Fig. A current-regulated AC signal was injected into two adjacent electrical contacts. The signals were generated using a DC and AC current source (Keithley 6221) with a sinusoidal waveform and zero DC offset with amplitudes ranging from 7.5 μA to 750 μA and a frequency of 17 Hz. A differential voltage signal was measured across the other two adjacent probes. The measured signal was fed into a high input-impedance transformer preamplifier (Stanford Research SR554) with the gain set to 500X. The preamplifier signal was then sent to a 500 kHz DSP lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research SR860). The sample itself was not electrically connected to earth ground, i.e., for the superconducting sample all electrical measurements were differential and floating with respect to the building ground. The cryostat body and the measuring equipment were referenced to the building ground for shielding. For the non-superconducting sample shown in Fig. The SR860 lock-in amplifier was fed a reference modulation frequency from the Keithley 6221 internal oscillator. The time constant for the integration stage was set to 1 second and the internal low-pass filter was set to 24 dB. The lock-in amplifier was set to automatically adjust the range and sensitivity of the measurement. For the normal (non-superconducting) state the voltage from the pre-amplifier was on the order of 100 mV for measurements using a 750 μA current, and 10 mV for those using the 75 μA current. The signal in the superconducting state was below the noise floor of the instrument with a measured value on the order of 10 -6 mV. All data was collected using a custom LabVIEW program and no post-processing of the data was performed. Figure Because of the low signal levels associated with the small DAC sample and low current required for the measurement, phase-sensitive detection was used to monitor a voltage across the sample with a lock-in amplifier. This method was used, for example, in similar to methods employed in Ref. 1 and some experiments described in Ref. 2. Though lock-in detection greatly suppresses noise, it introduces a phase ambiguity when only the magnitude of the voltage |ΔV| difference is recorded. Using |ΔV| to compute the resistance (|R|) results in a positive offset being observed even in a zero-resistance material (i.e., superconductor). This offset scales with the noise level. Phase-sensitive detection devices such as lock-in amplifiers exploit the fact that sinusoidal signals are orthogonal up to a phase. ) !"#$% ≪ 1 irrespective of how little noise is present in the measurement. Instead of the resistances fluctuating around zero, using |∆V| to compute |R| results in values that are always positive and clustered around an offset proportional to the noise level of the measurement (Fig. The temperature dependance of the in-phase and quadrature voltages reveal the signals approaching and crossing zero at Tc (Fig. 