London penetration depth was measured in niobium foils, thin films, single crystals, and superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) cavity pieces cut out from different places. The low-temperature (T < Tc/3) variation, sensitive to the low-energy quasiparticles with states inside the superconducting gap, differs dramatically between different types of samples. With the help of phenomenological modeling, we correlate these different behaviors with known pair-breaking mechanisms and show that such measurements may help distinguish between different pair-breaking mechanisms, such as niobium hydrides and two-level systems (TLS). The conclusions also apply to SRF cavities when tracking the temperature-dependent quality factor and the resonant frequency. Superconductors are characterized by unique properties that make them particularly attractive for quantum computing While a significant effort has been devoted to study properties of niobium over years with first significant results appearing in the late 1930s As all refractory metals, niobium has some physicalchemical issues that complicate and sometimes impede its use in applications. One of the most pressing issues in Nb SRF cavities is the so-called "hydrogen Q -disease", a severe degradation of the quality factor, Q Therefore, continuing studies of niobium's intrinsic properties, in particular its electromagnetic response, are still needed to improve qubits, accelerators, and other technologies that leverage the unique traits of this metal. The ongoing significant effort in development these technologies emphasizes the importance of such research, which directly influences advancements in many sectors, including cryptography, optimization, and high-energy physics With so many factors that may affect the properties, hence the ultimate performance of superconducting devices, the question is how to distinguish between different mechanisms that create problems? For example, there is no universal suppression of properties by generic hydrides. Their influence depends on concentration, morphology, and size distribution. Likewise, the influence of surface layers of oxides and hydrides depend on their thickness, conductivity, magnetism and, of course, chemical makeup To (partially) address these questions, we performed precision measurements of the London penetration depth using sensitive tunnel-diode resonator technique. Seven representative samples were studied: different parts of niobium SRF cavity; a thin film used in a superconducting transmon qubit; commercial foil; and single crystals for comparison. The samples were not treated in any special way and most contained the hydrides from previous handling, but not all as we could observe directly in low-temperature polarized microscope. At the low temperatures, below roughly T c /3, the superconducting gap is constant and the temperature -dependent superfluid density is determined by the quasiparticles that were created by different non-thermal pairbreaking mechanisms, such as TLS or spin-flip scattering. In order to understand the results, we modeled penetration depth using Dynes model of superconductivity, first by itself with only two parameters, pair-breaking and pair-conserving, Γ and Γ s , respectively, and then extended to incorporate TLS into the total density of states. As a result, we found a unique fingerprint of TLS in our measurements, thus providing protocol on how to identify TLS and distinguish them from other sources of pair-breaking scattering. Seven niobium samples (four different types) were used in this work. Indeed, many samples of each type were measured during this study. The sample types are: (1,2) Two single crystals, both cut from the same large ingot and polished using water. They absorbed large amounts of hydrogen. (3) Commercial Nb foil from Alfa Aesar, 250 μm thick, 99.98% purity. It has been kept in a desiccator and showed no presence of hydrides. (4) Sputtered 160 nm thick niobium film, also kept dry and showing no obvious hydride formation. Identical films are used to make transmon qubits The London penetration depth was measured by using a sensitive tunnel diode resonator (TDR) technique The two-dimensional distribution of the magnetic induction was mapped in real-time employing magnetooptical imaging using Faraday effect in transparent ferrimagnetic indicators (bismuth-doped iron garnets) placed on top of the samples. Details of the technique can be found in our previous studies of Nb The same microscope with the cryostat were used for direct observation in linearly polarized light. Due to polarization, all surface features become of higher contrast, because they often cause some rotation of the polarization plane upon reflection and since we work in (almost) crossed polarizer/analyzer configuration. We start with optical characterization of the samples. Figure In our studies, we found that the hydrides tend to grow along principal directions and, therefore elongated shape here is not surprising. The direction, however, would depend on the strain, which is unknown. Figure Next we examine three different cutouts from the SRF cavity. Two are from the inner surface and one from the depth of 1 mm beneath. Figure We will now examine temperature-dependent superfluid density in these samples. This measurement brings information about the superconducting gap structure and possible pair-breaking mechanisms. In addition to crystals and cavity cutouts, we also measured a thin film used in the fabrication of transmons as well as commercial foil -to cover all possible states of niobium samples. Thin films from the same batches were characterized in great detail elsewhere The first set of measurements on two single crystals, Alfa Aesar foil and Rigetti thin film is shown in Fig. The second set of data, shown in Fig. terpretation of these results. Such distinct convex downturn is very unusual for λ (T ) in any (good and uniform) superconductor. The inner cold spot shows saturation behavior consistent with a relatively clean superconducting gap and the surface cold spot shows an intermediate behavior. In principle, such behavior of the single crystals in Fig. Here we present a simple phenomenological analysis where we use a semiclassical connection between London penetration depth and the density of states. The results were verified by Matsubara summation formalism. Being phenomenological does not mean being qualitative. We use self-consistency equation to calculate the order parameter and then the superfluid density, and obtain quantitative prediction for temperature-dependent penetration depth. We follow the semiclassical approach introduced by Chandrasekhar et al. where the order parameter enters the density of states as, The derivative of the Fermi function is, where t = T /T c (note that this is actual superconducting transition temperature that may be lower than the "clean" value that we denote T c0 ) and quasiparticle energy is dimensionless in units of k B T c and we set k B = 1 everywhere. The quantity of interest, the London penetration depth is then obtained from Eq.1 as, where λ 0 is a clean-limit London penetration depth. Therefore, with scattering, this ratio will be greater than 1 even at T = 0. Importantly, this approach does not specify how the order parameter is obtained. In the original papers of the semiclassical approach where very clean superconductors were considered The simplest way to introduce pair-breaking into the density of states is to consider Dynes superconductors. There are several comprehensive works with a detailed analysis of the Dynes model and its applicability to realistic and quite complicated cases. A full set of all thermodynamic and transport parameters was calculated and is available for reference. We follow to extensive coverage of the Dynes model by Gurevich and Kubo Dynes superconductors are gapless. At E = 0, Eq.5 gives N (E) = N n Γ/ √ Γ 2 + ∆ 2 . However, for small rates (usually found in tunneling experiments (actually, in the original paper, AG used ρ without "2" in the denominator), and the T c for Dynes superconductor is obtained from a classical AG formula where t c = T c /T c0 and ψ (x) is digamma function. The transition temperature becomes zero when Γ crit = 0.8819. To calculate the superfluid density, we need to solve the self-consistency equation for the order parameter written in terms of Matsubara sum For each value of Γ and for each temperature, t, Eq.8 yields ∆ (t, Γ). The number of terms, n max depends on the required accuracy and the lower the temperature, the more terms are needed. Here we used n max = 10000. Now we are set to calculate the London penetration depth as function of temperature for different values of Γ and compare with the experiment. One difficulty is that the formulation in form of Eq.1 does not include the effect of pair-conserving scattering, which nevertheless affects the superfluid density. For Dynes superconductor this is solved by calculating superfluid density using Matsubara sum as introduced by Herman and Hlubina where Ω n = ∆ 2 + (Γ + πt(2n + 1)) 2 . Here two scattering parameters are present, the pair-breaking Γ that also enters the original Dynes equation, Eq.5 and pairconserving scattering rate, Γ s . Figure Still, we are not even close to reproducing the downturn. Perhaps, pair-conserving Γ s will help? Figure There is a significant interest in TLS, which are intensely studied theoretically and experimentally. Here we are only interested in their possible effect on the London penetration depth. For that, it is sufficient to model TLS as small peaks deep inside the superconducting energy gap in the density of states. Since the superfluid density is the integral over all energies, we do not think the precise details of the TLS peak may drastically change the outcome. Here we model the TLS density of states as a Lorentzian, E-Ep w 2 + 1 Clearly, this mechanism naturally explains our observations of the downturn in the penetration depth. While the hydrides are clearly not good for applications because they increase overall surface impedance and lead to significant dissipation, the downturn is not their signature. Further research is needed to clarify the nature of TLS which is much more complicated than used here and involved dynamic processes, we believe our measurements and analysis presented a complimentary way to identify TLS in niobium based applications. Dyson pair-breaking Γ changes temperature variation from exponential to the power law, but not faster than quadratic behavior. The pair-conserving Γ s only increases the rate of change, but does not significantly alter the functional form of λ(T ). The two-level systems residing inside the gap have profound effect changing exponential attenuation to sub-linear downward concave curvature of λ(T ). We emphasize that this was a limited study designed to probe a variety of different types of samples. Systematic measurements of each type are needed to identify the actual cause behind the TLS-like behavior.