Vinen's vibrating wire experiment detected quantized vortices in superfluid 4 He, with the anticipated circulation quantum h/m. In addition to this main result, Vinen used his data to propose other properties and behaviors of vortices, which are revisited here. Subsequent work confirmed that non-quantized values occur when vortices cover only part of the wire's length, and that the size of the covered section can change easily. Any motion of the detached portion of the vortex induces changes in the circulation around the wire, which provides a means of tracking the free vortex. Particularly distinctive signatures correspond to a circular motion of the vortex through the cell and to Kelvin waves along the free vortex. Another issue, the lack of stability of multi-quantum states, can also be explained through simple arguments, in which the possibility of a partially detached vortex again plays a key role. Vibrating wire measurements descended from Vinen's continue to probe superfluid flows. More than sixty years ago, Joe Vinen performed a clever experiment that gave evidence for circulation quantization in superfluid helium Vinen's measurement uses a straight, taut wire immersed in superfluid helium, with a constant magnetic field applied perpendicular to the wire. The inset of Figure Vinen assumed that upon rotating the fluid, a vortex of one or more quanta would settle on the wire. If so, then by a standard calculation for the motion of a straight vortex through a fluid Implementing this idea required a great deal of ingenuity. The experiment was by necessity carried out at the relatively high temperature of 1.3 K; many present-day cooling techniques were developed during the following decade. At this temperature the vibrating wire had significant damping from its interaction with the normal component of the helium. As shown in Figure Detecting only the first minimum was problematic for Vinen because of real-world imperfection: even in the absence of circulation, the lowest normal modes of a wire are not exactly degenerate, and their splitting is often comparable to the effect of the circulation. It turns out that the two effects add in quadrature: where ∆ω is the observed beat frequency, ∆ω 0 is the beat arXiv:2306.15528v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 27 Jun 2023 frequency inherent to the wire in the absence of any circulation, and ∆ω κ = ρ s κ/μ is the beat frequency that circulation κ would induce on a perfect wire. Mathematically, it remains simple enough to extract the circulation, as long as ∆ω 0 is known and is not so large that it swamps the contribution of ∆ω κ . Vinen resolved this issue by fastening one end of the vibrating wire to a tube which could be rotated. The ensuing twist of the wire changed the zero-circulation splitting. In principle the highest sensitivity to circulation comes at ∆ω 0 = 0, but there is no way to know that the setup is tuned to this value. With the high damping of the wire, values of ∆ω 0 with no beats in the observable window could nonetheless distort the calculated circulation. Figure Another major difficulty lay in deciphering the results. On measuring a quantized phenomenon, the results would ideally show a clear staircase-like structure. That did not happen. The circulation rarely reached the expected two-quantum level. Worse, the circulation often lay in between two of the calculated quantum levels. Vinen interpreted such values as the result of non-uniform circulation along the wire: a vortex could cover only part of the wire, then continue as a free vortex in the superfluid. He reasoned that such a vortex would be less stable than a vortex covering the entire wire. Hence he monitored the behavior of the measured circulation after a violent excitation of the wire. As anticipated, non-integer circulation nearly always changed significantly, while circulation near the expected one-quantum value tended to remain unperturbed. From this he constructed a histogram of "stable" circulation, with sharp peaks at 0 and h/m (hereafter referred to as N = 1). The 2h/m level (N = 2) was rarely seen and was never stable. Subsequent experiments at lower temperatures, with somewhat altered parameters for the wire, cell, and rotation protocol, found the clean steps Vinen had envisioned Time (s) Vibration amplitude (a.u.) FIG. fluid 3 He, where the fermionic atoms must form Cooper pairs before condensing into a superfluid. Pairing leads to an extra factor of two in the circulation quantum, and the vibrating wire measurement indeed gives a value of h/2m 3 , with m 3 the mass of a 3 He atom As the first measurement with a vibrating wire in superfluid helium, Vinen's circulation work was the forerunner of many subsequent experiments. Most focus on the damping of the wire, which measures viscosity and hence temperature. The first such setup The most direct descendants of Vinen's experiment The precession period also depends on whether the circulation is between N = 2 and N = 1, as in Figure There remains the question of why precession of the free vortex induces oscillations in the circulation measurement. The answer lies in the wire's being slightly displaced from the center of the cylindrical cell. With an off-center wire, the free vortex extending from the wire to the cell wall must change length as it precesses, returning to its original length after one cycle around the cell. An oscillation in the kinetic energy of the fluid flow accompanies the length change. This is possible because the portion of the vortex attached to the wire serves as an energy reservoir: as the free vortex lengthens, the at-tached circulation shrinks, and vice versa. The beat frequency of the wire depends on an effective circulation along its entire length, which increases as a vortex covers a longer segment of the wire. Thus precession of the free vortex translates into an oscillatory signal in the circulation measurements. The attachment point typically moves about ±1 mm along the wire. This does not mean that the wire is 1 mm from the axis of the cell though. The free vortex, with its tiny core size, has several times greater energy per length than the trapped vortex, so small changes in the free vortex length are amplified to larger length effects on the trapped circulation. Even wire displacements of a few tens of microns -all but inevitable when stringing a thin wire in place -give rise to observable oscillations. Although partially attached vortices convincingly explain Vinen's observations of intermediate circulation levels, his own measurements did not detect the oscillations described above. There are several possible reasons. First, the expected period given the dimensions of Vinen's cell is about 6 minutes. For each data point he excited the wire, captured the resulting decay on an oscilloscope, and photographed the screen. His published data suggest one measurement about every two minutes, which would not make a 6-minute oscillation very recognizable. Second, his experiment may not have had enough precision, since he could detect only the first minimum in the decay envelope. The subsequent experiments at lower temperatures fit multiple periods to extract the beat frequency. Third, there may have been no precession to observe in Vinen's setup. A vortex terminating at the wall of a container can "pin" strongly enough that precession ceases. The idea is that the vortex is attracted to bumps on the surface, as expected from hydrodynamic considerations. My group has verified that pinning is more common with rougher cell walls Among the quantized circulation levels, N = 1 is far more stable than higher levels. Vinen found no indication of other stable levels. Zimmermann's group did see higher circulation in similar experiments, but with larger-diameter wires The steadiness of the circulation at N = 2 contrasts sharply with both the fluctuating and precessing regimes, indicating that the double circulation was fully around the wire during that time. A qualitative difference between the energetics of N = 1 and that of higher levels explains the strongly enhanced stability of N = 1. We consider N quanta of circulation around a wire of radius R within a cylinder of radius D. Following Griffiths The velocity at the free vortex leads to a perpendicular Magnus force per unit length f = 2πρ s v s × κ κ κ, where κ κ κ has magnitude κ and is directed along the vortex core. Integrating this force gives the relative energy of different vortex locations At larger r the situation depends on N. For N > 1, the third term, the usual repulsion between parallel vortices, takes over. The first term is much smaller and can be ignored, as long as D is much larger than all the other distances. The crossover location, where the velocity and hence the force vanishes, is at r b = N N-1 R, which validates dropping the first term. The energy barrier to reach this location, for a vortex of unit length, is where a 0 is the free vortex core radius and we assume a 0 << R << D. For r > r b , the force on the free vortex is outward and the energy decreases with r. For N = 1, the second term in Equation 1 always exceeds the third term, with the difference approaching zero for large r. This cancellation means that the first term must be retained. To lowest order, the velocity vanishes at r b = √ RD, and the energy barrier for a vortex to reach this spot from the wire is πρ s κ 2 ln(R/2a). The picture here is that in an unbounded fluid, a free vortex is always attracted to a bare wire. Once inside a finite container, the attraction of the free vortex to the outer wall balances the influence of the wire. In Vinen's experiment, D = 2 mm and R = 25 μm. Table I gives the corresponding energy barriers and the distances from the wire to r b . Considering only the energies, one might expect comparable stability for these different circulation states. However, the distance from the outer edge of the wire to r b is twenty times larger for N = 1 than for N = 2. In fact, as shown in Figure In reality, a vortex separating from the wire will not maintain the vertical symmetry assumed thus far. In this case the exact velocity field can no longer be obtained from image vortices, but the fundamental difference between the onequantum and higher states remains. The energy barrier is smaller for a short vortex segment, making it more plausible that a short piece can detach. However, in this case the free vortex cannot be strictly vertical; it needs to extend outward from the surface of the wire as well, adding to its total length and hence its energy. This extra energy contribution is particularly significant for the N = 1 case because of the much longer horizontal distance required to overcome the attraction to the wire. Another implication of the extra energy term is that the vortex should dislodge near one end of the wire, only one end of the free segment needs to return to the wire. The precession of Figure The experimental observations and above discussion suggest that for N = 2, one quantum of circulation leaves the wire through detachment of a short portion near one end. After the end of the vortex reaches the outer wall of the cell, precession begins with its accompanying energy loss, gradually reducing the circulation to the N = 1 level. This mechanism appears not to act on the N = 1 state, perhaps because of the different shape of the energy barrier. For N = 1, fluid flow or mechanical perturbation can dislodge the vortex from the wire, but the details of these interactions remain unknown. When circulation extends along only part of the wire, the vibrating wire technique provides a unique way to probe the behavior of the resulting free vortex segment. The characteristic oscillations from a precessing vortex are one example. Another is detection of Kelvin waves along the free vortex One question is, why does only the lowest mode appear? The wire's vibration, near 447 Hz, should excite higher waves at least as easily. The next mode, with 3/4 of a wavelength along the free vortex, would have a period near 24 seconds, which could be detected at the sampling rate of Figure Kelvin waves are key to low-temperature superfluid turbulence but also govern other aspects of vortex behavior. For example, Vinen was intrigued with the observation in We are pursuing further investigations and have observed the second Kelvin mode when using very strong excitations. We are now focusing primarily on the Kelvin wave spectrum and on the nonlinearities that cause energy transfer between the modes. A principal advantage of the vibrating wire apparatus is the ability to set up repeatably a well-defined and non-trivial vortex configuration, notably a vortex stretched between the wire and a specific location on the cell wall. The main deficiency is the restriction to low-frequency signals. Combining the wire with a higher-frequency detector may extend Vinen's vibrating wire technique even further.