Next generation microwave communications systems face several challenges, particularly from congested communications frequencies and complex propagation environments. Taking inspiration from the Yagi-Uda antenna, we present, and experimentally test, a framework based on the coupled dipole approximation for designing structures composed of a single simple emitter with a passive disordered scattering structure of rods that is optimised to provide a desired radiation pattern. Our numerical method provides an efficient way to model, and then design and test, otherwise inaccessibly large scattering systems. In recent years metamaterials, man-made materials structured at the sub-wavelength scale, have attracted much interest due to their versatile wave-shaping capabilities. From invisibility cloaks Several methods for designing passive scattering structures to manipulate the radiation from an emitter have been developed over the last decade. Utilising elegantly simple phasebased arguments, structures have been designed In this work, we consider designing disordered arrangements of scatterers (metal rods) around a single emitter to engineer the far-field radiation pattern in a particular plane. One way to illustratively understand this is as a generalised case of the Yagi-Uda antenna Before attempting to design the structures, we will develop an efficient way to model them so that all of the fields of the system can be extracted and analysed efficiently. Modelling a system comprised of a large number of scattering elements around an emitter is generally very challenging. In finite element or finite difference full-wave solvers the length scale separation between the sub-wavelength scattering elements and the tens of wavelengths that make up the whole structure can result in intractably large meshes. To avoid this, we utilise the coupled dipole approximation where α E is the electric polarisability of the scatterer, α H is the magnetic polarisability. These tensors relate the applied electric and magnetic fields, E and H to the polarisation and magnetisation densities P and M . More complicated scattering elements can be described in this framework if one includes additional multipolar terms in the electric and magnetic polarisabilities where is the Dyadic Green's function Inverse design of the system is then facilitated according to the method presented by Capers et al. one can find As our aim is to shape the far-field radiation pattern of the system, we define as our figure of merit the overlap integral in the far-field in the plane of the scatterers where N is a normalisation factor that depends upon both E and E target . This figure of merit ranges from 0 to 1, when the radiation pattern is exactly the same as the target radiation pattern. This can be expanded under small changes of the field with γ being the step size, can be used to iteratively update the positions of the scatterers to increase the figure of merit. In order to use this framework to describe our experimental system, certain properties of the scatterers and the emitter must be extracted numerically. For scatterers, we use metal rods of length 15 mm and diameter 3 mm. These parameters were chosen so that the dipole resonance of the rods would be at ∼ 10 GHz, although any sub-wavelength resonator could be utilised. The polarisability tensors, α E and α H can be found using fullwave simulations following the prescription of Yazdi et al. For the scatterers to be lossy, the polarisability tensor must obey the inequality Im[α E ] ≥ 1k 3 /(6πε) With the polarisability of the scatterers and the emitter characterised, the coupled dipole framework can be used to both model and design a system with a specific radiation pattern. An investigation of how well the coupled dipole framework describes the system is included in the Supplementary Material. The key benefit of our approach is that the numerical complexity of the model depends upon the number of scatterers N , involving the inversion of a matrix of the size 6N × 6N . Conversely, most full-wave solvers must solve linear systems that depend upon the size of the computational domain. For the structures we consider here, this could be a volume of ∼ 1000λ 3 , resulting in hundreds of thousands of mesh elements. Indeed, describing large systems of aperiodic sub-wavelength scatterers in this way currently requires specialist computers, while the coupled dipole framework can run on a modest laptop. Consequently, our approach enables the design of otherwise inaccessible structures. Utilising the modelling and design framework based on the coupled dipole approximation, we have designed several devices that illustrate both the capabilities and limitations of our novel approach. Keeping the scatterers in the plane of the emitter, for simplicity, the design approach outlined in the previous section was employed to design structures of 100 metal rods, driven by a central emitter, that have specified radiation patterns. Once designed and constructed, the structures were experimentally characterised using an Anritsu MS46122B Vector Network Analyser (VNA), and a rotational table controlled by a Thorlabs APT Precision Motion Controller. To determine the far-field radiation pattern, the structure underwent a full 360 • rotation in 1 • increments about the z-axis, parallel to the axis of the source and the rod scatterers, in an anechoic chamber, with response measured by a Narda Standard Gain Horn (Model 642) for frequency range 4.0 GHz to 10.0 GHz in 0.05 GHz increments. A photograph of the experimental setup is given in the Supplementary Material. The first example we present is shown in Figure GHz. Plotting the radiation pattern on a linear scale in Figure In our next example, we design a device that has two beams of defined width at particular angles in the plane of the array. We choose to place one beam at 350 We also consider the bandwidth of our devices. This is calculated by evaluating the overlap integral Eq. 9 between the target distribution and the measured radiation pattern as a function of frequency and is shown in Figure The three beam device, however, exhibits an increase in return loss from |S 11 | = 0.1 to While these experimental results show clear proof-of-concept, experimental and theoretical results do not perfectly align. Many steps in constructing both the experiments and the semi-analytic design framework introduce non-negligible sources of error. Approximating the rods as dipoles is well justified, as the quadrupole moment of them has been calculated to be ∼ 5 orders of magnitude lower than the dipole moment. However, treating them as point dipoles, rather than distributed currents, introduces deviations in the radiation pattern due to near-field effects. Provided that the rods are separated by a distance larger than 5 times the radius, as is the case in all of the designs we have presented, this induces a small but constant error in the far-field radiation pattern. Next, the effect of small errors in the measurement of the permittivity of the foam was considered. An over or under estimation of the permittivity by ∼ 1% was found to have little effect, however once the error reached ∼ 5% large differences in both the main and back lobes were observed. Importantly, the back lobes become larger relative to the main lobes, as we observe in the experimental data. Furthermore, errors in the estimation of the polarisability of the rods can also introduce additional back lobes. A slightly different α E could be caused by small inconsistencies in the lengths of the rods. We find that a 5% difference in the length of the rods can change the polarisability enough to introduce the back lobes observed in the experimental data. One way to remedy this could be to infer α E from experimentally measured radiation patterns. The full data generated for these investigations is given in Supplementary Note 4. We have experimentally demonstrated a new framework for manipulating the radiation from simple sources. To meet the challenges of the next-generation of communications, antenna functionality can be moved into the design of a passive material instead of the antenna itself, so that feeding remains simple but functionality can be complex. The paradigm we have presented here is both simple and versatile. Passive scattering elements and the emitter are characterised by full-wave simulations independently, then the coupled-dipole approximation is used to model the whole system. While this approach introduces some numerical errors, it enables the modelling of otherwise numerically inaccessible systems. Inverse design of the scattering systems has then been performed using gradient descent, with gradients that can be efficiently evaluated as we have derived their analytic form. Several experimental results are presented that illustrate both the utility and limitations of our method. Future work might focus on the design of switchable or time-varying structures, so that antenna functionality can be tuned in real time. While our results have focused on a single polarisation, more exotic polarisation manipulation could be achieved with bianiostropic or chiral passive scatterers. Broadening bandwidth by including multiple species of scatterers supporting resonances at different spectral locations, or of different multipolar nature, would also be of great utility in the context of antennas.