Binary uranium hydrides, UH x (x = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8), with different crystal symmetries are potentially interesting compounds for high-T c superconductivity and as hydrogen storage systems. In this work we have explored the structural, elastic, mechanical, bonding, and thermophysical properties of these systems under uniform pressure via density functional theory based computations. Most of the results disclosed in this work are novel. From the calculations of the cohesive energy and enthalpy of formation, we have found that the titled compounds are chemically stable. The computed elastic constants at different pressures ensure elastic stability. All the binary hydrides are mechanically anisotropic. Pressure induced brittle-ductile transition takes place under high pressure. The compounds are machinable with the cubic α-UH 3 -Pm-3n showing very high value of the machinability index. All the compounds are fairly hard with cubic UH 8 showing superhard character. The Debye temperatures and acoustic velocities of these compounds are high; the highest value is found for the cubic UH 8 . The melting temperature, Grüneisen parameter, minimal phonon thermal conductivity, and the thermal expansion coefficient of these compounds have also been studied at different pressures. All these parameters show excellent correspondence with the estimated Debye temperature, elastic parameters and bonding characteristics. In 1968 Ashcroft predicted theoretically high temperature superconductivity in solid metallic hydride On the other hand, heated uranium reacts with hydrogen and produces uranium hydrides. The uranium-hydrogen binary system has attracted wide attention of scientific community due to its application in the fields of chemical hydrogen storage material and nuclear technology industry Uranium hydrides are novel hydrogen-rich system which contains 5f electrons. Min Liu et al. The superconducting state properties of phonon mediated systems are strongly dependent on the structural and thermophysical properties including the Debye temperature. To address these issues we have selected the UH, UH 2 , UH 3 , UH 5 , UH 6 , UH 7 , UH 8 binary uranium hydrides in this study. Pressure dependent structural, elastic, bonding and thermophysical properties of these compounds are studied in detail in this work employing density functional theory (DFT) based approach. The pressure ranges have been selected following previous studies The subsequent sections of the work have been arranged as follows: Section 2 describes the methodology briefly. Section 3 contains computational results and discussion. Finally, in Section 4, conclusions are drawn. For geometry optimization of the compounds of interest, plane wave pseudopotential Ultrasoft pseudopotential was used for the calculations of electron-ion interactions Convergence of tolerance parameters, energy cut-off and size of k-point grids of UH x (x = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8) used for geometry optimizations were as follows: Quality Ultra-fine Ultra-fine Ultra-fine Ultra-fine Ultra-fine Ultra-fine Ultra-fine Ultra-fine Energy (eV/atom) 5.0×10 -6 5.0×10 -6 5.0×10 -6 5.0×10 -6 5.0×10 -6 5.0×10 -6 5.0×10 -6 The different crystal structures of binary uranium hydrides UH x (x = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8) are shown schematically in Fig. where, is total energy per formula unit of UH x and and are the total energies of single U and H atom in the solid states, respectively, and x is the number of H atoms in formula. From Table Pressure, P (GPa) Lattice parameters (Å) Deviation (%) from earlier study For the orthorhombic structure: For the hexagonal structure: where, = -, = 11, 33, 44, = + , = + For the cubic structure: Our calculated results show that all the UH x (x = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8) compounds with different structures satisfy the elastic stability conditions under pressure. Besides the calculated values of the tetragonal shear moduli are also positive (Table Cauchy pressure (P C ) is defined for different crystal symmetries For orthorhombic symmetry: For hexagonal symmetry: For cubic symmetry: = ( -) The values of P C are negative for covalent materials with brittle nature (i.e. P C < 0). Positive Cauchy pressure, on the other hand, suggests ductility with dominant ionic/metallic bonding where the outer shell electrons are almost delocalized This could be related to increased level of metallicity in the UH x materials with increasing pressure. The value of TSM used to measure the shear stiffness of a crystal i.e. the resistance to shear stress or shear deformation. TSM is also linked with the sound velocity in the solid. Positive values of TSM are indicative of dynamical stability of the structure. The polycrystalline elastic properties, namely the bulk modulus (B), shear modulus (G) and Young's modulus (Y) are given in Table The bulk modulus represents the elastic resistance against uniform volume deformation. Large value of B signifies high incompressibility. Bulk modulus is also an average measure of the strength of interatomic bondings. From Table The machinability index determines the ease with which a solid can be shaped into desired form. It is also an indicator of dry lubricity of solids. High machinability index implies ease in the cutting and low level of frictional loss. For all the compounds under study, the machinability index increases systematically with increasing pressure. For the compound α-UH 3 in the cubic phase, μ m is very high ( Grüneisen parameter is related to the anharmonicity in the lattice dynamics. High value of Grüneisen parameter is indicative of strong electron-phonon interaction in superconductors This is because anharmonic and soft phonon modes contribute strongly to the electron-phonon coupling constant. The pressure dependent values of the Grüneisen parameter, calculated using the Poisson's ratio, are tabulated in Table Study of the elastic anisotropy is important to understand the direction dependent bonding characteristics and mechanical properties of crystalline solids. The shear anisotropy factors Furthermore, A B and A G are the percentage anisotropies in compressibility and shear, respectively, and A U is the universal anisotropy index. The zero values of A B , A G and A U represent elastic isotropy of a crystal and non-zero values represent anisotropy Table The sound velocities in a crystal are useful thermophysical parameter. These velocities are closely related to the crystal stiffness and crystal density, and determine the Debye temperature and thermal conductivity to a large extent Table Space Group Space Group No. Pressure, P (GPa) The calculated values of sound velocities ( , and ) under pressure of UH x compounds are listed in Table In the above equations , and signify the transverse, longitudinal, and the mean sound velocities, respectively. The computed values of sound velocities at different pressures are enlisted in Table Hardness of a solid is used to assess both elastic and plastic behaviors of the material under mechanical stress. This particular parameter determines the average bonding strength and stiffness of a solid. A variety of theoretical methodologies are available to compute the hardness of a solid. In this study, we have calculated the hardness of the UH x (x = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8) compounds at different pressures using the formalisms developed by Teter et al. [50], Chen et al. Nevertheless, the comparisons have been made with extrapolations and therefore, should result in fairly reliable conclusions. Debye temperature: The Debye temperature  D of a system is closely connected to many major physical properties of solids such as the phonon specific heat, melting temperature, thermal conductivity, hardness, elastic constants, bonding strength, and sound velocity. The knowledge of  D provides information about the electron-phonon coupling and Cooper pairing mechanism of superconductivity. The Debye temperature calculated from the elastic constants is considered to be similar to that acquired from the temperature dependent specific heat measurements. Using the average sound velocity, the Debye temperature can be calculated by using the Anderson method where, h is Planck's constant, k B is the Boltzmann's constant,  is the density, N A is the Avogadro number, M is the molecular mass, and v m is the average sound velocity. This particular straightforward approach gives very reliable values of the Debye temperature of solids belonging to diverse categories (insulators, metals, topological compounds, magnetic materials, and superconductors) Minimum thermal conductivity: At temperatures above the thermal conductivity of a solid attains a minimum value known as the minimum thermal conductivity, . The calculated values of the minimum thermal conductivity are derived from the relation given by = ( ) / The Grüneisen parameter is an important thermophysical quantity that links the vibrational properties with the structural ones. It is related to the thermal expansion coefficient, bulk modulus, specific heat, and electron-phonon coupling in solids. The normal thermal expansion of solids due to anharmonicity of interatomic forces is understood from the Grüneisen constant as well. The relation between Grüneisen parameter and Poisson's ratio is as follows: = Melting temperature: Information on the melting temperature of a compound is very important for practical applications of solids at high temperatures. High melting temperature of a compound has lower thermal expansion and high binding energy. We have calculated the melting temperature T m of UH x (x = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8) compounds at different pressures using the following equation The calculated values of melting temperatures are listed in Table The high values of melting temperatures predict excellent thermal study of the UH x (x = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8) compounds. These high values show good correlation with the previously estimated bulk moduli, Debye temperatures, and hardnesses. The melting temperature increases systematically with the increase in the pressure for all the UH x structures considered in our calculations. Table The relation between thermal expansion coefficient and the melting temperature can be also approximated as ≈ 0.02/ . The values of thermal expansion coefficient of UH x (x = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8) compounds under different pressures are also given in Table In this work we have studied the structural, elastic, mechanical and thermophysical properties of Pm-3n 10 351.56 71.07 71.07 351.56 71.07 351.56 55.43 55.43 55.43 [This] 20 416.39 90.17 90.17 416.39 90.17 416.39 34.16 34.16 34.16 UH 5 Hexagonal 10 308.60 147.78 86.45 308.60 86.45 318.64 104.95 104.95 80.41 P6 3 mc 20 369.73 177.98 115.12 369.73 115.12 364.82 109.93 109.93 95.88 [This] 30 426.74 208.46 139.50 426.74 139.50 406.16 111.71 111.71 109.14 B (in %), A G (in %), A U of UH x (x = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8) compounds under different pressures.