The variety and complexity of heterogeneous materials in the engineering practice are continuously increasing, open-cell metal foams filled with phase change materials are typical examples. These are also having an impact on the recent developments in the energy industry. Earlier room temperature heat pulse experiments on macroscale foam samples showed non-Fourier over-diffusive behavior on a particular time scale. Since there is a need to investigate such complex structures on larger spatial scales and extend the one-dimensional analysis on two-, and three-dimensional settings, here we develop a two-dimensional analytical solution for the Guyer-Krumhansl and Jeffreys-type heat equations in cylindrical coordinates to investigate the transient thermal behavior of large bodies. We provide the steady-state and transient temperature and heat flux distributions for a space-dependent heat source. The solutions presented here will be helpful for the thermal characterization of complex materials and for the validation of numerical methods. Numerous experimental and theoretical studies emerged on room-temperature heat conduction beyond Fourier in recent years. On the one hand, the nanoscale effects result in the deviation from Fourier's law, usually with the appearance of ballistic heat conduction The presence of multiple time scales is the most visible by showing experimental data obtained from a heat pulse experiment for an aluminum foam (Figure It is worth noting that recent heat exchanger applications exploit the advantageous properties of a metal foam structure: having large heat transfer surfaces, the matrix material is an excellent heat conductor, therefore such solutions can essentially ease the realization of an effective thermal storage method. One outstanding example is when an open-cell foam structure is filled with phase change material Figure The well-known Fourier law is together with the balance of internal energy (e = c v T ), includes only one time scale, described by the thermal diffusivity α = λ/(ρc v ), where λ, ρ and c v are the thermal conductivity, mass density, and isochoric specific heat, respectively. Furthermore, q and T stand for the heat flux and temperature fields, and q v is an internal heat generation, which could be time and space-dependent. We restrict ourselves to isotropic rigid materials. For a non-Fourier heat conduction model, the constitutive equation, Eq. ( in which τ is the relaxation time; η 1 and η 2 are independent intrinsic length scales, not associated with a propagation mechanism in a continuum model where, instead of introducing further spatial derivatives, two time lags appear similarly to the popular dual-phaselage (DPL) concept In this paper, we choose to study large surface bodies since the typical heterogeneous materials also show strong size-dependent behavior For simplicity and clarity, we start and present our method on the example of the Fourier heat equation. This will provide an insight into the problem setting and the solution method. We will continue with the GK and JE equations, demonstrating how the solution method is applied to more complicated models. Such analytical solutions, especially for the GK equation, cannot be found in the literature. Moreover, as there is also missing a reliable two or three-dimensional numerical method, we offer a good starting point for future studies in this direction. Finally, we will compare the temperature histories to the Fourier equation and investigate whether we find the transient behavior similar (or even the same) compared to the one-dimensional room temperature experiments on small samples. Let us consider a plane wall constantly heated on one the left side in a circular area (r < r h ) with q w such as Figure and thus, the non-Fourier parameters read In the following, we leave the hat notation for simplicity and show the units wherever necessary. Taking account that it is a two-dimensional problem for r and z in a cylindrical coordinate system, the balance of internal energy and the constitutive equations are GK: accompanying the T = 0 initial condition, and q = 0 and T = 0 boundary conditions with respect to Fig. Although the problem seems complicated, there is quite efficient method to handle such a complicated set of partial differential equations. Here is the strategy we follow. First, we exploit that the problem can be separated into two parts, viz., we can solve the homogeneous (q v = 0) transient case (T h (r, z, t)) separately and the inhomogeneous (q v ̸ = 0) steady-state case (T st (r, z)), and we find the solution as their superposition, T (r, z, t) = T st (r, z)+T h (r, z, t). Second, we start with the Fourier heat equation, not merely because we want to compare the non-Fourier solutions to Fourier's, but because we can exploit Fourier's steady-state solution in solving the non-Fourier models. The steady temperature field remains the same for both Fourier and non-Fourier cases. However, the heat flux fields can differ, hence we also include this aspect. In the case of Fourier's heat equation, we can quickly determine the proper eigenfunctions and eigenvalues through the Sturm-Liouville problem. It is worth noting that even the non-Fourier models do not introduce higher-order spatial derivatives for the temperature field beyond the Laplacian. Therefore what eigenfunctions we find can also be applied to the GK and JE models. Third, we solve the non-Fourier models exploiting the ansatz that their solutions can be represented in the same set of eigenfunctions with time-dependent coefficients, this is a sort of Galerkin method. That approach simplifies the complicated system of partial differential equations to a set of ordinary differential equations for the time-dependent coefficients. 3.1. Fourier heat equation. In the case of the Fourier equation, it is easier to start with its T -representation, i.e., and applying the standard separation of variable technique for the homogeneous part (where q v is absent), T h (r, z, t) = φ(t)ξ(r, z), one obtains for time: for space: for r: for z: thus μ 2 + γ 2 = β 2 . Applying the boundary conditions we find the following eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, and hence the solution is Consequently, we can use Eq. ( Substituting Eq. ( Then Eq. ( which holds for any internal heat generation q v (r, z). Due to the separation T (r, z, t) = T st (r, z) + T h (r, z, t), the initial condition for the homogeneous part reads T h (r, z, t = 0) = -T st (r, z) as T (r, z, t = 0) = 0, and thus 3.2. Guyer-Krumhansl heat equation. Although we follow the same technique here, we also separate the homogeneous and inhomogeneous parts, but it is more advantageous to determine the steady-state heat flux field first. Since the steady temperature field T st (r, z) is inherited, we can substitute ∂ r T st (r, z) and ∂ z T st (r, z) into Eqs. ( respecting the corresponding derivatives, too. In that steady-state, we consider that ∂ t q r = ∂ t q z = 0 in Eqs. ( with Since C nm is known from Eq. ( Then the steady-state solution is given by Eqs. ( The transient (homogeneous) solution is constructed similarly, however, the coefficients are now time-dependent, viz., we assume that are still valid. Furthermore, now we need to exploit the energy balance as well to obtain Cnm (t), After following the same procedure, we obtain almost the same set of equations except that the time derivative terms appear. Consequently, the set of PDEs is reduced to a set of ODE, in which the coefficients are inherited from Eq. ( Here, the solution is simpler as the steady-state heat flux field is identical to Fourier's case, hence we do not need to compute it separately. We repeat the ansatz of Eq. ( together with the known coefficients from Fourier's solution, the time evolution for the Jeffreys case is obtained in the form of exp(M nm t). From a practical point of view, it is possible to measure the average local heat flux, usually on a minimal area of 10 × 10 mm 2 up to about 80 × 80 mm 2 . Furthermore, it is known that such sensors can significantly distort the local heat flux field Although these effects are clear and strong for such a parameter interval, the situation of observing them in a steady-state is not that hopeful. Let us consider the flash experiments on rocks and their GK-evaluation with a one-dimensional model 5.1. Fourier's heat equation. Let us recall that we are using the conventional Fourier number for the time scale. The characteristic size could be 1 m as relatively large bodies are considered. Consequently, we must choose small Fourier numbers since those can express relatively large time instants. Figure In fact, it is not easy to find parameters resulting in a remarkably different solution. Figure There is a need for an advanced heat conduction model to overcome the difficulties emerging together with the use of complex heterogeneous materials. Their effective thermal behavior can significantly differ from Fourier's prediction, even though the classical heat equation governs each component. The interaction of parallel heat transfer channels results in a non-Fourier behavior. Two promising extensions of the Fourier equation are the Guyer-Krumhansl and the Jeffreys models. Both describe two heat conduction time scales, even in an isotropic setting. These models are analytically solved for a two-dimensional situation. The analytical solution revealed that there is no need for additional boundary conditions for these GK and JE models, the same set of eigenfunctions can be used. That property notably eases the solution of these more complex models. The resulting ordinary differential equations can be solved easily for the linear situation; thus, unknown time-dependent coefficients are found. Furthermore, we also exploited that the steady-state temperature distribution given by Fourier's law remains the same in the non-Fourier case, therefore, it is advantageous to handle that heat conduction problem as a superposition of the transient and steady distributions. It also makes it more straightforward how to take into account the initial conditions. Studying the time evolution of the surface temperature time histories T (t), we observed similarities compared to the one-dimensional heat pulse experiments, however, these situations are not directly comparable. First, as the surface temperature is the most straightforward to measure, it seems more advantageous if the thermometer is situated further from the heated region to observe the over-diffusive behavior possibly. This can change significantly in space. Second, with such constant heating, no steep transients occur in a large body due to its large heat capacity, thus, it is more challenging to observe the non-Fourier behavior. Based on the analytical solutions, it is clear that both models require unusually large parameters to obtain any observable deviation from Fourier's law. In the future, it would be worth investigating the outcome of periodic heating, especially the effects of the period time, and that could enhance the over-diffusive phenomenon. Third, for the GK equation, while the steady heat flux field differs from Fourier's, it is not practically measurable due to the steep change in the heated region, the available heat flux sensors are too large for such an application. Moreover, as the most significant difference occurs under the heater, it excludes this possibility. However, the analytical calculations also revealed that if such constant heating does not induce notable non-Fourier effects, one could design a measurement method to characterize such objects with Fourier's law remaining valid thermally. 