The effects of different substrates on the off-state leakage current in gallium nitride (GaN) planar diodes are experimentally demonstrated and studied by analyzing temperature-dependent current-voltage characteristics. The two devices exhibit different leakage mechanisms despite being subjected to the same process conditions. The device with a sapphire substrate shows a more intricate leakage mechanism, implying the presence of additional leakage channels compared to the device with free-standing substrates. The electrical leakage characteristics in the planar GaN-on-sapphire device (referred to as utemp-SBD) and GaN substrate device (referred to as usub-SBD) Schottky barrier diodes (SBD) can be described by two distinct processes as the reverse bias gradually increases: device 1. the thermionic emission, variable range hopping (VRH), Frenkel-Poole (FP) emission, and space-charge-limited conduction (SCLC) model; device 2. the thermionic emission (TE), variable range hopping (VRH), and Frenkel-Poole (FP) emission mechanisms. It is noteworthy that in device 1, there is a rapid increase in leakage current within the voltage range of -36 to -40 V, primarily driven by the SCLC mechanism. This effect arises due to the presence of intrinsic traps in GaN grown on a heterogeneous substrate. Additionally, in the voltage range of -7 to -50 V (348 K to 448 K), the leakage mechanism shifts from FP emission to the VRH model, possibly due to variations in the Schottky barrier height. This study provides an in-depth analysis of the leakage mechanisms observed on different substrates and offers valuable insights for the design of planar gate transistors to minimize or avoid the occurrence of leakage channels. As the third generation semiconductor material, gallium nitride material has great performance advantages, including high saturated electron drift velocity, high theoretical breakdown field strength, physical stability, large band-gap width and adjustable bandwidth Gallium nitride-based power devices with high output power, high frequency, excellent thermal management and stable dynamic characteristics have attracted much attention The conduction mechanism of planar GaN SBD leakage current on different substrates has been limited in previous studies. Zhang et al. reported that variable range hopping (VRH) on gallium nitride vertical diodes is the primary reverse leakage mechanism on all Si, sapphire and gallium nitride substrate In this work, we reveal the different reverse bias leakage conduction mechanisms of the planar GaN-on-sapphire (utemp-SBD) and GaN substrate (usub-SBD) Schottky barrier diodes. We provide a systematic and comprehensive explanation of the physical mechanisms underlying the different leakage conduction mechanisms observed on the two substrates. As shown in Fig. Fig. where J, JS, k, T, q, V, A* and φB are the current density, saturation current density, Boltzmann's constant, temperature, electron charge, voltage across Schottky junction, Richardson's constant and SBH, respectively. The extracted Schottky barrier height (SBH) ∅ of the utemp-SBD and usub-SBD are 0.62eV and 0.89eV at a forward current density of 1A/cm 2 , respectively. Under The same process conditions and similar doping concentration, the utemp-SBD shows that lower Schottky barrier height may be related to high dislocation density. Impurity aggregation near the dislocation leads to a higher concentration of donor surface states, the reduced energy level of the localized conduction band is the primary element leading to the observed lower Schottky barrier height Thus, compared to the usub-SBD, the utemp-SBD exhibits stronger temperature-dependent characteristics, indicating greater heterogeneity in barrier distribution When the reverse voltage of the utemp-SBD is between 1.5 V and 12 V (region II, corresponding to an electric field intensity of up to 0.1 MV/cm), the I-V curves measured at various temperatures exhibit excellent agreement with the theoretical fitting results based on the variable range hopping (VRH) model, described by the equation the linear relationship between lnJ and E [Fig. . Meanwhile, the lnJ as a function of 1/T 0.25 obtained from the experimental data under -5 V reverse bias exhibits a linear relationship as shown in Fig. for two devices, which should be attributed to the different electric field intensity. Due to the higher carrier concentration and higher Schottky barrier height (SBH) of the GaN substrate, it transitions into the VRH mechanism (region II) at a reverse bias voltage of 0.5 V, with a higher electric field intensity of 0.04 MV/cm (the utemp-SBD reaches this value at -1.5 V). In region II, as the reverse bias increases, the electric field becomes higher, causing the energy band to steepen. In the low-temperature range (323 K-373 K), when the VR is raised above 7 V (E ~0.08 MV/cm), ln(J/E) becomes linearly proportional to E 1/2 , as depicted in Fig5 (a), implying that FP emission conduction-related leakage dominates the reverse leakage of the usub-SBD However, as the temperature increases (398 K-443 K), the dominant leakage mechanism changes from FP emission to VRH mechanism (Fig. When the reverse voltage is between 12 V and 36 V (region III, E ~0.1-0.17 MV/cm), ln(J/E) ∝ E 1/2 indicates that the leakage mechanism of the utemp-SBD is dominated by FP emission. Compared to the free-standing GaN substrate, the higher defect density in GaN on sapphire enables FP emission to cover the temperature range. As the VR exceeds 36 V (E~0.17 MV/cm) for the utemp-SBD, the leakage current increases more rapidly than the expected value based on the FP emission model as shown in Fig. In particular, the high-density intrinsic defect state of GaN-on-sapphire leads to a wider depletion region in the utemp-SBD (on the same field intensity scale). This promotes the leakage of a large number of acceptor defect ionization trapping carriers in the space charge region, which is in line with the space-charge-limited conduction (SCLC) leakage mechanism. 