Recently, a bulk nickelate superconductor La3Ni2O7 is discovered at pressures with a remarkable high transition temperature Tc ∼ 80K. Here, we study a Hubbard model with tight-binding parameters derived from ab initio calculations of La3Ni2O7, by employing large scale determinant quantum Monte Carlo and cellular dynamical mean-field theory. Our result suggests that the superexchange couplings in this system are comparable to that of cuprates. The system is a charge transfer insulator as hole concentration becomes four per site at large Hubbard U . Upon hole doping, two low-energy spin-singlet bands emerge in the system exhibiting distinct correlation properties: while the one composed of the out-of-plane Ni-d 3z 2 -r 2 and O-pz orbitals demonstrates strong antiferromagnetic correlations and narrow effective bandwidth, the in-plane singlet band consisting of the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 and O-px/py orbitals is in general more itinerant. Over a broad range of hole doping, the doped holes occupy primarily the d x 2 -y 2 and px/py orbitals, whereas the d 3z 2 -r 2 and pz orbitals retain underdoped. We propose an effective t -J model to capture the relevant physics and discuss the implications of our result for comprehending the La3Ni2O7 superconductivity. Since the discovery of cuprate superconductors To address above questions, here we study an 11band Hubbard model that includes four 3d (Color online) The seven hopping terms in our 11-band Hubbard model To fully take into account the superexchange couplings, we consider an 11-band Hubbard model where t i,j,α,β denote hoppings between electrons on sites (i, j) and orbital (α, β)( can be either Ni-d or O-p orbitals). d † α,i,σ (c † α,i,σ ) is the creation operator for electrons on α ∈ 3d (∈ 2p) orbital. ε α is the site-energy of α-orbital. U is the Hubbard interaction between two electrons on the same d-orbital (d x 2 -y 2 or d 3z 2 -r 2 ) and U ′ is for that on two different d-orbitals. U ′ = U -2J H is adopted where J H is the Hund's coupling as following Ref. ), with n 0 d being the occupation number of d-orbitals in the non-interacting limit, n 0 d ≈ 2.16 in our case (see also the Appendix ). We adopt the hopping parameters and site-energies proposed in Ref. For DQMC simulation, we employ two dimensional square lattices with 6 × 6 × 11 = 396 orbitals at most. For CDMFT study, we carry out computations in the normal state, where an effective impurity model with the 2 × 2 × 11 = 44 orbitals is used. For more details on the methods see the Appendix. We first discuss the magnetic exchange couplings in the system. As shown in Fig. over the spin triplet states, where ∆ pd = ε d -ε p , and t pd is the hopping between Ni-d and O-p orbitals. The numbers shown in Fig. Then it comes the intra-layer (IR) nearest-neighboring r 2 exchange is found the weakest among those couplings. In particular, in CDMFT at T = 0.08 and μ = 0 (Fig. We now focus on the metal-insulator transition in the 11-band Hubbard model. Fig. In Fig. There are a few points we would like to emphasize. First, the vertical d 3z 2 -r 2 -p z singlet band can be quite different from a conventional ZRSB. In cuprates, a doped hole at oxygen sites hybridize with a Cu 2+ hole in terms of the superposition of four Op hole states adjacent to the Cu 2+ iron, forming a spin singlet. The spin singlet moves effectively in the antiferromagnetic background of Cu 2+ lattice with an effective bandwidth being (2 ∼ 3)eV Now we focus on the distribution of holes in different orbitals. As discussed above, considering the formation out-of-plane ( in-plane ) spin singlet states, it is judicious to consider the carriers in the d 3z 2 -r 2 and p z ( d x 2 -y 2 and p x /p y ) orbitals as a whole, which are represented by the out-of-plane hole concentration n OP h ( in-plane hole concentration n IP h ) in Fig. counting the number of holes in the out-of-plane orbitals. n h = (n IP h +n OP h )/2. Thus n h -1 is the hole doping from halffilling of the system. Note that as μ h approaches μ h = -2, n h -1 curve becomes flat, indicating the opening of a charge gap at half-filling. and p x /p y orbitals can be seen as pure itinerant orbitals without interaction terms in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 ? We find that in CDMFT at n h ∼ 1.25, the magnetic correlation between intra-layer d x 2 -y 2d x 2 -y 2 orbitals is weak but not vanishing ( see Fig. Based on our study above, we propose a four-band t -J model to describe the low-energy physics of the La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under pressure. The proposed Hamiltonian can be written as H = H 0 +H J , with the non-interacting where T , denoting the annihilation operators of d x 2 -y 2 and d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals in the two NiO 2 layer, while the oxygen degrees of freedom have been integrated out. The H 0 part is taken from the down-folded tight-binding model from Luo et al 's work in Ref. For the interacting part H J , we consider three main magnetic exchanges terms, where J 1 captures the exchange couplings between the on-site inter-layer d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals, J 2 the exchanges between the intra-layer d x 2 -y 2 orbitals on nearest neighboring (NN) sites, and finally J 3 for the intra-layer d x 2 -y 2 -d 3z 2 -r 2 exchanges on NN sites. Considering the superexchange coupling calculated in the atomic limit with U = 7, and the magnetic correlation results compared with LSCO cuprate After the discovery of high-T c superconductivity in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under pressure For DQMC simulation, we use a two dimensional 6 × 6 × 11 = 396 orbitals square lattice with periodic conditions for the 11-band Hubbard model, on which we have verified that the finite size effects are negligible in the parameter regime we study (See SI Appendix, Fig. We note that in our study, due to the fact that n 0 d is close to 2, different DC schemes in fact give similar E dc , hence lead to similar result. For example, at μ = 0, using the Held's E dc we get n h ≈ 1.24, n IP h ≈ 1.43, n OP h ≈ 1.05, while the fully localized or atomic limit (FLL) E dc gives n h ≈ 1.21, n IP h ≈ 1.40, n OP h = 1.02. We have also carefully checked that the DC term we use does not significantly shift the non-interacting Fermi surface. The tight-binding Hamiltonian H 0 of our 11-band Hubbard model is obtained from the Wannier downfolding of the DFT band structure as done in Ref. For the interaction part of the 11-band Hubbard model, the Hund's coupling is adopted following Ref. In Table-I in the main text, we have seen that even fully suppressing the Hund's coupling J H , the result on the distribution of the holes does not significantly change. By diagonalizing the 5-orbital O-p z -Ni-d 3z 2 -r 2 subsystem as shown in Fig. 