Multi-band effects in hybrid structures provide a rich playground for unconventional superconductivity. We combine two complementary approaches based on density-functional theory (DFT) and effective low-energy model theory in order to investigate the proximity effect in a Rashba surface state in contact to an s-wave superconductor. We discuss these synergistic approaches and combine the effective model and DFT analysis at the example of a Au/Al heterostructure. This allows to predict finite-energy superconducting pairing due to the interplay of the Rashba surface state of Au, and hybridization with the electronic structure of superconducting Al. We investigate the nature of the induced superconducting pairing and quantify its mixed singlet-triplet character. Our findings demonstrate general recipes to explore real material systems that exhibit inter-orbital pairing away from the Fermi energy. Materials that exhibit strong spin orbit coupling (SOC) build the foundation for a plethora of physical phenomena In this work, we study the inter-orbital physics inherent to heterostructures consisting of superconductors and Rashba materials. In a novel way, we combine theoretical modelling of two complementary approaches that have their roots in rather disjoint communities focusing on either microscopic or mesoscopic physics. We combine the predictive power of material-specific DFT simulations with the physical insights of an analytically solvable lowenergy model. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) formalism As a prime example experiencing the multi-band physics of a proximitized Rashba state, we identify the interface between aluminium (Al) and gold (Au). This combination allows us to study the proximity effect with Rashba surface states. On the one hand, Al is a wellknown and widely used s-wave superconductor whose valence band electrons are of s -p orbital character. On the other hand, Au is a simple heavy metal where effects of strong SOC are particularly pronounced. In fact, as a consequence of strong SOC, the (111) surface of Au hosts a set of two spin-momentum-locked Rashba surface states This article is structured as follows. In Sec. II, the normal state electronic structure of the Au/Al heterostructure is discussed with DFT and low-energy model approaches. In Sec. III, the DFT and model access to superconducting heterostructures are presented with emphasis on complementary insights. This modelling allows us to study the proximity effects of SOC and superconductivity in multi-band systems at the example of Al/Au interfaces. We conclude in Sec. IV, where we also comment on the feasibility of experimental detection of our predictions. The DFT and model-based approaches described in this article are complementary and uniquely distinct in their methodologies. The DFT-based numerical calcula-tions provide an ab-initio approach to the description of the electronic structure of the normal state, their scope encompasses all electronic degrees of freedom, resulting in a precise and extensive representation applicable to a broad range of materials merely from the knowledge about the crystal structure. Consequently, the intricate band structure generated by this method can be complex, comprising several bands with diverse orbital and spin character. The effective low-energy model aims to simplify the complexity of the electronic structure by describing only a few bands, particularly those close to the Γ-point and the Fermi level. The model-based approach has the distinct advantage of deriving analytical expressions that can be applied to a wide range of material classes. Additionally, the model enables the analysis and inclusion of certain symmetries. For instance, only odd terms in k might appear in certain parts of the model Hamiltonian. To create a model that applies to a real material, it is, however, necessary to determine model parameters by fitting to experimental or DFT data. Our DFT calculations for heterostructures, consisting of thin Al and Au films, are summarized in Figs. 1 and 2(a,b). Both Al and Au have a face-centered cubic (fcc) crystal structure with lattice constants of 4.08Å and 4.05Å, respectively The electronic structure of Au below the Fermi level is dominated by the fully occupied shell of d-electrons around -2 to -8 eV (see App. B for the corresponding DOS). In thin-film heterostructures (called "slabs"), the electrons are confined inside the slab, leading to finitesize quantization and the appearance of two-dimensional quantum-well states manifested as a series of discrete bands in the region where the bulk electronic structure is projected into the surface Brillouin zone. The presence of surfaces and interfaces, and the possible appearance of broken bonds, often leads to additional surface states or surface resonances in the electronic structure. For the Au(111) surface, Rashba surface states appear in surface projection of the bulk L-gap around the Γ point of the surface Brillouin zone. They are are of s-p z orbital character The region around Γ, highlighted by the blue box in Fig. Aluminium is a light metal with negligible intrinsic SOC. The small SOC-induced spin-splitting seen for states 3,4 is merely a result of a proximity-induced SOC from Au to Al, hinting at sizable hybridization of the electronic structure of Al and Au. In Sec. II B, we discuss in detail that, at higher momenta, the parabolas of the Al-derived states and the Rashba surface states intersect and hybridize, resulting in more delocalized states throughout the entire Al-Au heterostructure. This hybridization can be attributed to the compatible orbital character of the Al and Au bands, which both possess s-p z like orbital character. Ultimately, this hybridization leads to the proximity effect of the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) observed in the Al quantum well states. Complementary to our DFT results, we develop an effective four-band model Hamiltonian to evaluate the spectral properties of the heterostructure in an analytical manner. Guided by the insights from our DFT calculation, we construct a model for the proximitized Rashba surface state. We note a hybridization of spin-split Au surface bands and the doubly degenerate Al band near the Fermi energy. Thus, we propose the normal state model Hamiltonian to be where the electron annihilation operator is denoted as c k,ν = (c k,ν,s , c k,ν,-s ) T labeled by the 2D momentum vector k = (k x , k y ) with orbital (ν ∈ {Al, Au}) and spin (s ∈ {↑, ↓}) degrees of freedom. F 0 signifies the hybridization strength between Al and Au bands. Furthermore, ĥAl(Au) (k) denotes the 2 × 2 sector for the Al (Au) segment given by where k ≡ |k| = k 2 x + k 2 y ; α Al(Au) and μ Al(Au) characterize mass term and chemical potential for Al (Au) bands, respectively. First (third) order spin-orbit coupling in the Au sector is parametrized by λ (g) leading to broken inversion symmetry, i.e., ĥAu (-k) ̸ = ĥAu (k). It is worth noting that even though the band spin-splitting of the Rashba surface state is isotropic in Au For simplicity, we focus on the 1D Brillouin zone, i.e., k = (k x , 0), since our model is rotationally symmetric. Therefore, the excitation spectra of the hybrid structure become where s, s ′ ∈ {+, -}. The quadratic band in the Al segment is denoted as E Al = α Al k 2 -μ Al , and the spin-split band in the Au segment as E ± Au = α Au k 2 ±(kλ+gk 3 )-μ Au [Fig. In general, a microscopic theoretical description of the superconducting excitations can be achieved on the basis of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) formalism where Ĥ0 denotes the normal state Hamiltonian and ∆ the superconducting pairing between particle and hole blocks. The BdG method is also key to the extension of DFT for superconductors The central task in the superconducting DFT approach (sketched in Fig. which is a reformulation of the Schrödinger equation (or Dirac equation if relativistic effects are taken into account) in terms of an effective single particle picture. The effective single-particle wavefunctions in Nambu space T describe, respectively, the particle and hole components at excitation energy ε ν (ν is a band index labelling the electronic degrees of freedom). The KS-BdG Hamiltonian can be written in matrix form as where E F is the Fermi energy. The normal state Hamiltonian and the effective superconducting pairing potential ∆ eff appear in the Kohn-Sham formulation (Rydberg atomic units are used where ħ = 1). For ∆ eff = 0, the KS-BdG equation reduces to solving the conventional Kohn-Sham equation of DFT that describes the electronic structure of the normal state. The effective single-particle potentials in Eq. ( where functional derivatives of the exchange correlation functional E xc appear requiring a self-consistent solution of the non-linear KS-BdG equations. The exchange correlation functional can be expressed as It is important to note that the above formulation of the KS-BdG equations assume a simplified form of the superconducting pairing kernel where λ i is a set of effective coupling constants describing the intrinsic superconducting coupling that is allowed to depend on the position i in the unit cell. Finally, the charge density ρ and the anomalous density χ are calculated from the particle (u ν ) and hole com-ponents (v ν ) of the wavefunction where f (ε) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function and the summation over ν includes the full spectrum of the KS-BdG Hamiltonian. For the superconducting state, we assume that only Al has an intrinsic superconducting coupling and set the layer-dependent coupling constant in the KS-BdG calculation to where λ Al is a positive real-valued constant and i is an index counting the atomic layers in the Al/Au heterostructure. While the value of λ Al can be regarded as a fitting parameter in this approach, we stress that only an integral quantity, leading to the overall superconducting gap size in Al, is fitted. Other spectral properties like avoided crossings and proximity effects are in fact predictions of this theory. The results of our KS-BdG simulations and analytical model for the Al/Au heterostructure are summarized in Fig. IOP , where the states with dominant Au orbital character and pseudo-spin-up intersects with the hole states with dominant Al orbital character having pseudo-spindown degrees of freedom. This phenomenon has been referred to as inter-band pairing Similar to the two pairing gaps δ ± Au in the Rashba surface state, the DFT calculation shows that the interorbital pairings δ IOP also decrease at larger momentum, i.e., δ - IOP /δ Al = 0.60 to δ + IOP2 /δ Al = 0.44. Based on these observations, we pose four questions: (Q.1) Is inter-orbital pairing exclusively the result of superconducting order or other mechanisms? (Q.2) What determines the magnitude of the finiteenergy pairing? (Q.3) What is the magnitude of the induced spin-singlet and triplet components of the effective pairing? (Q.4) What specific symmetries are responsible for protecting certain electron-hole band crossings that occur away from the Fermi energy? These questions will be answered in the following sections. Based on an effective low-energy, we can achieve a deeper understanding of the KS-BdG results. The results of our low-energy model are illustrated in Figs. where ∆ denotes the superconducting pairing strength, and the nonvanishing diagonal entry corresponds to swave spin singlet pairing in the Al layer. Since pure Au does not become a superconductor at experimentally relevant temperatures, the pairing strength in the Au layer is put to zero. It is illuminating to represent the BdG Hamiltonian in the eigenbasis of the normal state, given in Eq. ( where the diagonal entries are the normal state dispersion relations ) refer to the upper (lower) spin-split bands which predominantly exhibit Al (Au) orbital character for small momenta, as can be seen in Fig. where Vk is the matrix of eigenvectors associated to the eigenvalue Êk of the normal state Hamiltonian. ∆++ k ( ∆-k ) correspond to the intra-band pairing matrices, specifically pairing between E + k,+ and E + k,-(E - k,+ and E - k,-) with their hole counterparts leading to the superconducting gap for Al, i.e., δ Al , and the proximityinduced pairing gaps labeled by (δ ± Au ) in Fig. where ν = +(-) and In Eq. ( indicates the inter-orbital pairing, i.e., pairing between electron bands E + k,+ and with hole band bands -E - -k,+ and -E - -k,-. This gives rise to the emergence of finite-energy Cooper pairing resulting in avoided crossings at finite excitation energy (δ ± IOP ) in Fig. with where l = {1, 2}. Importantly, the interplay between band hybridization and superconductivity, manifested by ∆F 2 0 in Eq. ( In order to determine the pairing symmetry in the hybrid structure, it is essential to establish an effective formalism that concentrates on either low or finite excitation energies. With this respect, it is necessary to derive a 4 × 4 matrix formalism from the full 8 × 8 BdG Hamiltonian ĤBdG . This can be done by utilizing the downfolding method specified in App. D. The downfolding method yields the effective model that enables us to investigate the superconducting properties within a given set of energy bands. As mentioned above, there are three distinct sets of spin-split bands where pairing occurs. These bands are characterized by ν = ν ′ = +(-), indicating that the pairing takes place at the Fermi energy, where the energy bands possess predominant Al (Au) orbital character. Another set of bands corresponds to the inter-orbital bands, where Al-dominated states intersect with Au-dominated hole states (and vice versa). Thus, the general form for the 4 × 4 effective superconducting Hamiltonian becomes where the diagonal entries ξ1(2) are the energy shifts arsing from multiband effects given by and ω is a constant. In addition, the effective pairing matrix in Eq. ( The effective intra-(inter-)orbital superconducting Hamiltonian, i.e., Ĥ++(+-) , can be obtained by setting ι = +(-) and ν = -(+). Note that Ĥ-k,eff can also be derived by substituting (+) ↔ (-), and setting ι =and ν = + in Eqs. Additionally, the magnitudes of the pseudo-spin-singlet and triplet components corresponding to these spectra are illustrated in Fig. where ν ∈ {+, -}. Note that we have excluded terms proportional to the third order of ∆ in Eqs. ( ). The inter-orbital pairing components take the form Overall, we observe that the pseudo-spin-singlet component is consistently larger in magnitude than the triplet component, see Fig. where the third term effectively accounts for the anisotropy observed in the magnitude of the avoided crossing, as initially demonstrated in the KS-BdG simulation in Figs. = ±{0.124, 0.141, 0.278, 0.308}Å -1 . At the above momenta, we have defined the following quantities , respectively. At these momenta, the pairing anisotropy for Al-dominated states is slightly larger than the energy bands with dominant Au orbital character. Importantly, we observe that the pairing anisotropy disappears at critical momenta k c = 0.368 Å -1 , resulting in identical sizes for the pairing potentials. This occurs because the induced intra-and inter-orbital pairing becomes a purely pseudo-spin-singlet state by eliminating the spin-split nature of the bands, specifically, d ++ kc,z = d -- kc,z = d +- kc,z = 0. The critical momenta can be determined by setting E Al -E ± Au = 0 according to Eqs. ( Note that we do not observe the occurrence of an inter-band pairing between the two dominant Rashba states displaying opposite spin-polarization marked by black and red circles in Figures Our results show the existence of finite-energy pairing due to the complex multi-band effects arising in the proximity effect of heterostructures between s-wave superconductors and heavy metals hosting Rashba surface states. The main ingredients are: (i) s-wave superconductivity, (ii) surface states originating from the normal metal, (iii) Rashba SOC in the normal metal, (iv) significant hybridization between Rashba surface states and electronic structure of the s-wave superconductor. If all these requirements are met finite-energy pairing emerges between discrete states of the superconductor and the Rashba surface states. This unconventional pairing leads to avoided crossings in the BdG band structures. In our case, discrete states in the superconductor are pronounced due to finite-size effects of the thin Al films. Their location relative to the position of the Au surface states can be fine-tuned by appropriate doping or film thickness. This allows us to control at which finite energy the inter-orbital pairing between Al and Au Rashba states occurs. The size of the observable avoided crossings for the Al/Au heterostructure crucially depends on the superconducting gap of the superconductor (summarized in Tabs. A I and A II of the Appendix). Aluminium has a critical temperature of T c ≈ 1 T and a critical magnetic field of H c ≈ 10 mT Suitable materials engineering might further enhance the chances to detect and eventually exploit finite-energy pairings. A strong Rashba effect is typically seen in p-electron materials. Superconductors whose electronic structure close to the Fermi level is dominated by sp-electrons, as it is the case for Al, are therefore well suited to achieve strong hybridization with Rashba materials. Consequently, other superconductors with larger superconducting gaps (e.g. Pb with T c ≈ 7.2 K), that nevertheless have dominating p-electron character responsible for superconductivity, are promising to increase the observable size of the finite-energy pairing. Furthermore, replacing Au by the Bi/Ag(111) surface alloy, which shows a gigantic Rashba effect Albeit the abundance of heterostructures currently under investigation in the context of the search for MZMs or superconducting spintronics, multi-band physics in heterostructures remains largely unexplored. A variety of emergent phenomena can be explored in materials which show strong multi-band effects. For instance, multi-band superconductors can lead to exotic odd-frequency superconductivity In summary, in our combined DFT and low-energy model approach we study the proximity effect in a heterostructure of Au with strong Rashba SOC and the s-wave superconductor Al. We show the existence of finite-energy pairing in the superconducting state and analyze the mixed singlet-triplet character of the proximityinduced pairing. Combining the strengths of predictive DFT simulations with the insights from model calculations, our results pave the way towards a deeper understanding and experimental detection of multi-band effects in superconducting heterostructures. Using the Gram-Schmidt method, we derive orthonormal eigenvectors for the normal state Hamiltonian given in Eq. (1) as where [ V(k)] † V(k) = 1 and we have defined ) The band basis representation for the BdG Hamiltonian can be obtained as follows. The superconducting Hamiltonian is defined by H = k ψ † k Ĥ(k) ψk where the Nambu basis is ψk = ( φ † k , φ †T -k ) T , and the BdG Hamiltonian is given by where Ĥ(k) is the 4 × 4 matrix form of the normal state Hamiltonian. The band basis representation of the superconducting Hamiltonian can be obtained through the similarity transformation and ∆1(4) and ∆2(3) are the pairing matrices projected onto the intra-(inter-)bands. Note that ∆1(4) and ∆2(3) induce full and partial pairing gaps at Fermi energy and finite excitation energies, respectively. Without loss of generality, we change the basis of Ĥ with the unitary transformation Û to let the diagonal sub-blocks contain the electron-hole components with a pairing potential. This can be done with Ĥ′ = Û † Ĥ Û where Û is given by and Ĥ′ becomes In multiband systems, the downfolding method paves the way to obtain the spectral properties of a desired subblock, e.g., M11 , taking into account the perturbative effects of other blocks. To understand the method, we consider the eigenvalue problem for H ′ given by where ( ψA , ψB ) T is the eigenvector associated to eigenenergy E. Equation (D4) is a coupled equation which can be written as where Λ = (ω Î4 -M22 ) -1 , Î4 is the 4 × 4 identity matrix, and ω denotes a constant close to the energy range where the desired pairing happens. Thus, eigenvalues M eff 11 describes the spectral properties of M11 taking into account the effects of other sub-blocks. We now aim to find an expression for Λ-1 . To do so, we define Λ ≡ ε + ∆ where ε ( ∆) is the normal state (pairing) part given by We can find the inverse of Λ using the Neumann series expansion up to second order given by Note that Eq. (D10) converges when the norm of ∆ε -1 is smaller than unity which can be fulfilled in the weak pairing limit. After some algebra, we arrive at an explicit relation for M eff 11 that is where the energy shifts arising from the multiband nature as Additionally, the effective 2 × 2 pairing matrix takes the form According to Eqs. ( Interestingly, M eff 11 can preserve pseudo-spin rotational symmetry. The matrix form for such an operator is defined by where θ is the angle of rotation in the pseudo-spin space. Note that M eff 11 preserves pseudo-spin-π rotational symmetry along the z-axis, i.e., [ M eff 11 , Dnz (π)] = 0, with Representing M eff 11 in the eigenspace of Dnz (π) denoted by Û, we decouple the effective Hamiltonian into two sectors given by where Therefore, the effective superconducting spectra become where the magnitude of the avoided crossing is Appendix E: Effective low-energy theory In this section, we employ the general formalism of the downfolding method, described in App. D, to obtain an effective low(finite)-energy intra(inter)-band superconducting Hamiltonian for the Al/Au model. We first derive the low-energy formalism while the finiteenergy pairing is formulated subsequently. To derive the effective superconducting Hamiltonian at the Fermi energy, we change the basis to an intraband formalism through a unitary transformation The first 4 × 4 block describes the superconducting sector with predominant aluminum orbital character in the normal state for small momenta. Comparing Eq. (E3) with Eq. (D3), we deduce that Substituting the above results into Eq. (D13) and setting ω = 0, we obtain the effective Hamiltonian describing superconducting spectral properties of energy bands with predominant aluminum orbital character in the normal state at the Fermi energy where the energy shifts, arising from the inter-orbital pairing, are The effective low-energy pairing potential for the predominant aluminum bands takes the form Note that the second term is arising from the interplay between inter-orbital pairing with pairing of energy bands with predominant Au character. 2. Band basis label with ν = ν ′ = - The effective superconducting Hamiltonian for the predominant Au sector can be derived through a unitary transformation where Û ′ is given by At the Fermi energy ω = 0, inserting the above relations to Eq. (D13), we explicitly derive the effective superconducting Hamiltonian for the energy bands with predominant Au orbital character in the normal state for small momenta given by where the energy shifts induced by multiband effects are Moreover, the effective low-energy pairing potential for the predominant Au bands in the normal state becomes To obtain an effective inter-orbital superconducting Hamiltonian and study the BdG spectra at finite excitation energies, it is helpful to represent the BdG Hamiltonian in the inter-band basis. This can be done by the unitary transformation Ĥ ′′′ k = Û ′′ † Ĥk Û ′′ with where the unitary matrix Û ′′ is given by 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 In this case, comparing Eq. (E22) with Eq. (D3), we arrive at Since the inter-orbital pairing happens at finite excitation energy, ω is no longer vanishing and becomes finite. Substituting the above relations into Eq. (D13), we find an explicit form for the effective inter-orbital superconducting Hamiltonian where the energy shifts, induced by the intra-band effects, are given by Note that ĤIO k,eff breaks particle-hole symmetry due to the different diagonal entries arising from two different energy bands. Finally, the effective 2 × 2 finite-energy pairing matrix becomes (E31) Note that the second term originates from the interplay between low-energy bands and their corresponding pairings with finite energy pairing. Appendix F: Experimental detection of finite-energy avoided crossings in Au/Al As discussed in the main text, finite-energy Cooper pairing in Au/Al are of size 30-50 μeV to 100-200 μeV. In order to resolve this, an energy resolution of ∆ E ≈ 10 -20 μeV should suffice. If we assuming a thermal broadening of 3.5k B T , we can estimate that experiments need to be performed at T = ∆ E /(3.5k B ) ≈ 30 -60 mK in order to be able to resolve ∆E. With state-of-the-art STM and transport experiments in dilution refrigerators, energy resolutions below 10 μeV at operating temperatures of 10 mK are indeed possible 