Applying a magnetic field to a solid changes its thermal-transport properties. Although such magneto-thermal-transport phenomena are usually small effects, giant magneto-thermal resistance has recently been observed in spintronic materials 1,2 and superconductors 3,4 , opening up new possibilities in thermal management technologies. However, the thermal conductivity conventionally changes only when a magnetic field is applied due to the absence of nonvolatility, which limits potential applications of thermal switching devices 5,6 . Here, we report the observation of nonvolatile thermal switching that changes the thermal conductivity when a magnetic field is applied and retains the value even when the field is turned off. This unconventional magneto-thermal switching, surprisingly, arises in commercial Sn-Pb solders and is realized by phase-separated superconducting states and resultant nonuniform magnetic flux distributions. This result confirms the versatility of the observed phenomenon and aids the development of active solid-state thermal management devices. Thermal switching is a growing and crucial component of thermal management Here, we briefly introduce the magnetic flux trapping in superconductors. Superconductors are mainly categorized into type-I and type-II, based on the difference in their reaction to applied H The most important result of this work is the observation of nonvolatile MTS in Sn-Pb solders. It is widely known that solders are phase-separated composites, but the utilization of unique superconducting states emerging in the phase-separated solders has not attracted much attention. Here, we show the nonvolatile characteristics of MTS at T = 2.5, 3.0, and 4.2 K as examples. The schematic images of the concept of nonvolatile MTS in solders are shown in Fig. We measured the temperature and field dependences of κ for commercial Sn45-Pb55 solders using a four-probe method (Fig. Another reason would be weak superconducting states in the Sn regions achieved by the proximity effects in the initial state at T = 4.2 K. After field experience, Meissner states cannot be achieved due to the presence of trapped fluxes. Comparable MTS characteristics were obtained for an Sn45-Pb55 solder wire in an as-purchased form with a φ1.6 mm cross-section (Extended Data Figure To understand the causes of nonvolatile MTS in solders, the superconducting properties were investigated by measuring the magnetization (M) and specific heat (C). Figures As a fact, we observed the broadening of the temperature dependence of resistivity under magnetic fields (Extended Data Figure To further characterize the magnetic properties, the H dependence of magnetization (4πM) was measured at T = 2.5, 3.0, and 4.2 K (Fig. To prove the assumption above, we measured the temperature dependence of zero-field specific heat (C) after ZFC and FC (under 1500 Oe). The results, including the data measured under a magnetic field (H = 1500 Oe), are summarized in Extended Data Figure To explore the possibility of initializing (ON-to-OFF switching) κ using magnetic field control, we focused on the characteristic point of the B-H loop, as shown in Fig. These structures indicate the uniform presence of magnetic fluxes in the normal conducting states. After decreasing H to 0 Oe, magnetic fluxes are expelled from the Pb regions and trapped in the Sn regions only. In image (iii), we observe blurriness of the structures and the emergence of contrast different from image (ii). By applying negative H, reversed trends are seen. In image (iii), the light parts would be Pb-rich regions, and the dark parts would be Sn-rich regions. Because of the bulk-sensitive mechanism of MO imaging, we just observed the blurriness and the changes in contrast because the Sn regions are inhomogeneously distributed along the thickness direction. If magnetic fluxes are trapped at the grain boundaries, the MO image should show a uniform image in the flux-trapping states. Therefore, the present results can exclude the scenario of trapping at the grain boundaries. To obtain further evidence of the magnetic fluxes in the Sn regions, surface-sensitive techniques are needed to directly observe trapped fluxes in the solders. For future application of this phenomenon, tunability of nonvolatile MTS is preferred. Here, we investigated the Sn-content dependence of nonvolatile MTS (Extended Data Figure Here, we demonstrated that Sn-Pb solders exhibit nonvolatile MTS by utilizing the superconducting states of Pb and flux trapping in the Sn regions. In the solders, the coexistence of two superconducting phases with different Tc, Tc = 7.2 K for Pb and Tc = 3.7 K for Sn, gives rise to nonvolatile MTS. In addition, the trapped fluxes large enough to suppress bulk superconductivity of the Sn regions are essential for this phenomenon; hence, B > Hc for Sn was the preferred condition in the present case. The concept that superconductor composites can work as nonvolatile MTS materials is quite simple and applicable to various pairs of superconductors. For example, using high-Tc superconductors in the nonvolatile MTS composite would increase the working temperature of the nonvolatile MTS phenomena by making composite with metals, alloys, or intermetallic compounds. Optimizing phase-separation conditions should enhance the switching ratio and flexibility of nonvolatile MTS. Furthermore, since the Sn-Pb solder is widely used in electrical wiring, the large nonvolatile thermal switching and magnetic flux trapping in the solders should significantly affect low-temperature transport measurement techniques that were believed to be already established. Therefore, understanding the magneto-transport phenomena in solders is essential for reliable transport measurements at low temperatures under magnetic fields. sample-room space of the TTO stage, the sample was screwed to store inside with four probes, a heater, two thermometers, and thermal base. Typical measurement duration for a single measurement was 30 seconds. The main result (κ-H at 2.5 K) was measured manually (not in a sequence mode) to check the temperature stability and the reliability of the relaxation curves. Magnetization was measured by a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry on Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS3, Quantum Design) with a VSM mode. Specific heat was measured on PPMS by a relaxation mode. The sample was attached on a stage using APIEZON N grease. Electrical resistivity was measured on PPMS by a four-probe method under magnetic fields. For magneto-optical imaging, we used PPMS and an infinity-corrected objective lens inserted into the sample space by the microscope which is set above the PPMS at approximately 1 m from the sample position 