The appearance of van Hove singularities near the Fermi level leads to prominent phenomena, including superconductivity, charge density wave, and ferromagnetism. Here a bilayer Kagome lattice with multiple van Hove singularities is designed and a novel borophene with such lattice (BK-borophene) is proposed by the first-principles calculations. BK-borophene, which is formed via three-center two-electron (3c-2e) σ-type bonds, is predicted to be energetically, dynamically, thermodynamically, and mechanically stable. The electronic structure hosts both conventional and high-order van Hove singularities in one band. The conventional van Hove singularity resulting from the horse saddle is 0.065 eV lower than the Fermi level, while the high-order one resulting from the monkey saddle is 0.385 eV below the Fermi level. Both the singularities lead to the divergence of electronic density of states. Besides, the high-order singularity is just intersected to a Dirac-like cone, where the Fermi velocity can reach 1.34 × 10 6 m/s. The interaction between the two Kagome lattices is critical for the appearance of high-order van Hove singularities. The novel bilayer Kagome borophene with rich and intriguing electronic structure offers an unprecedented 2 platform for studying correlation phenomena in quantum material systems and beyond. Van Hove singularities (VHSs) have important implications in condensed-matter physics, for they directly affect the electronic transitions, and play a prominent role in the electronic and thermal properties of crystalline solids, manifested as pronounced peaks in the absorption or emission spectra. VHSs occur in various lattice structures, Owing to the fascinating physics presented by VHS, the search for novel materials with VHSs near Fermi energy is strongly motivated. Compared to AV3Sb5 with layered structures, twodimensional (2D) materials have the advantage of integration in electronic devices due to the thickness of single or several atomic layers. The change of interlayer coupling in 2D materials is an effective method for VHS implementation, like regulating stacking angle in moiré-pattern graphene. Motivated by the Kagome lattice and rich polymorphism of borophene, we proposed a novel bilayer Kagome borophene with multiple VHSs near the Fermi level in this study. The bottom and top layers of atoms in the structure make up two Kagome lattices, respectively. It has an extremely stable structure and unique bonding characteristics. It owes both VHS and HOVHS in the electronic structure. Besides, it is characterized with various novel properties, such as the Diraclike cone in electronic structure and even higher Fermi velocity than that of graphene. The rich electronic properties of bilayer Kagome borophene make it a promising candidate for various electronic applications like superconductivity, and probably trigger another interesting hotspot. In this study, first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) were performed to investigate the structural and electronic properties. The projected augmented wave (PAW) method Bilayer Kagome lattice Kagome lattice is the 2D lattice with a hexagonal unit cell consisting of three interconnected triangular sublattices. Bilayer Kagome lattice is obtained by the stacking of two Kagome lattices rotated by 60 degrees with respect to each other (Figure where t , could be t or t . t and t are the nearest-neighbor hopping amplitudes in a single Kagome lattice and between the two Kagome lattices, respectively. When only the interaction of the same layer is considered (t = 1, t = 0), two sets of overlapping electronic structure could be obtained (Figure All atoms are six coordinated, forming two absolute planes. The distance between the two planes is 1.46 Å. From another point of view, the structure can also be viewed as combination of octahedron structures, whose unit cell is illustrated by the dashed red lines in Figure The energy of BK-borophene is -6.14 eV per atom, which is much close to that of β12 (-6.25 eV/atom) and χ3 phases (-6.28 eV/atom) in our calculations. The four 2D elastic constants are C = C = 251.69 , C = 32.18 , and C = 109.76 N/m , which satisfy the Born-Huang criteria of the mechanical stability. , and the shear modulus (G) is and Poisson's ratios (v) are given as v [ ] = , and v [ ] = . According to the formulas, the Young's and shear modulus of BK-borophene are smaller than that of graphene but larger than β12 or χ3 phases (Table It is noticed that a two-dimensional metallic boron (2D-B6) constructed by B6 octahedron was already proposed in previous study, VHSs also appears at the energy of 1.202 eV higher than Fermi level in band 3 (in the blue dashed box in Figure VHS would lead to a divergence in the density of states (DOS), showing the pronounced peaks in Figure We have designed a bilayer Kagome lattice and proposed a novel bilayer Kagome borophene with multiple van Hove singularities by the first-principles calculations. The stability of such structure is confirmed through total energy per atom, phonon dispersion, molecular dynamic simulations, as well as elastic constants calculations. There are ten three-center two-electron (3c-2e) σ-type bonds in the unit cell, which allows for the sharing of electron density across the bond, resulting in stabilization of the structure. The electronic structure hosts both conventional and highorder VHS. VHS resulting from the horse saddle is 0.065 eV lower than Fermi level, while HOVHS resulting from the monkey saddle appear about 0.385 eV below the Fermi level. Both VHS and HOVHS lead to the divergence of electronic density of states. Besides, HOVHS is just intersected to a Dirac-like cone, and the spin-orbit coupling effect opens a band gap of about 17 meV. The Fermi velocity can reach 1.34 × 10 6 m/s, even higher than that of graphene (1.10 × 10 6 m/s). All the results showing KB-borophene is a rare example of bilayer Kagome lattice which host VHS, HOVHS, as well as Dirac-like cone around the Fermi level, presenting an opportunity to establish the connection between various phenomena. These features make BK-borophene a promising candidate for applications in electronics, as well as other fields. We hope that this study will stimulate further theoretical and experimental research of correlation phenomena in this system. . Energies per atom (E), and mechanical properties of Young's modulus in the Cartesian