Three-dimensional device integration facilitates the construction of superconducting quantum information processors with more than several tens of qubits by distributing elements such as control wires, qubits, and resonators between multiple layers. The frequencies of resonators and qubits in flip-chip-bonded multi-chip modules depend on the details of their electromagnetic environment defined by the conductors and dielectrics in their vicinity. Accurate frequency targeting therefore requires precise control of the separation between chips and minimization of their relative tilt. Here, we describe a method to control the inter-chip separation by using polymer spacers. Compared to an identical process without spacers, we reduce the measured planarity error by a factor of 3.5, to a mean tilt of (76 ± 35) μrad, and the deviation from the target inter-chip separation by a factor of ten, to a mean of (0.4 ± 0.8) μm. We apply this process to coplanar waveguide resonator samples and observe chip-to-chip resonator frequency variations below 50 MHz (≈ 1 %). We measure internal quality factors of 5×10 5 at the single-photon level, suggesting that the added spacers are compatible with low-loss device fabrication. Quantum computing shows immense promise for enabling simulations of complex many-body quantum systems for materials science and quantum chemistry In flip-chip bonding, two patterned devices are joined face-to-face by bumps of superconducting metal, typically indium due to its ductility and facile cold-welding Relative chip tilt is problematic for 3D-integrated devices since it leads to local changes in the chip-to-chip separation, d, and hence to local frequency shifts of device components. An investigation by Foxen et al. found 500 μrad of tilt for an indium-based flip-chip bonding process, which corresponds to 6 μm of separation difference across a 12 mm chip, a large fraction of the chip separation To avoid the tilt or deviation of the chip separation compared to the target value, Niedzielski et al. and Li et al. have demonstrated hard-stop spacers which mechanically support the chip Here, we present this SU-8 spacer process for indium flip-chip bonding. In Section II, we specify our device architecture and fabrication details. Then, we analyze the impact of the SU-8 spacers on inter-chip spacing and tilt in Section III. Next, we discuss the frequency reproducibility of resonators on devices with spacers in Section IV, before analyzing the quality factors of the resonators as a function of their geometric parameters in Section V and concluding in Section VI. Our multi-chip module [Fig. To comprehensively inspect the inter-chip separation, we use mechanical profilometry, where, as depicted in Fig. In devices without spacers [Fig. For quantitative analysis (and the text values in Fig. Furthermore, to enable comparisons to published results Here we note that SU-8 spacers require some special care since they absorb common solvents used for resist stripping and swell up, necessitating special drying procedures and reducing the height uniformity compared to the heights immediately after spinning, developing, and baking (discussed in Appendix B). Comparing our measured data to literature values, the relative deviations from the target height are similar to those reported for silicon The bowing apparent in Fig. Having shown that the SU-8 spacers improve our chip separation and planarity targeting, we next verify that this results in reproducible parameters for microwave circuits. In particular, we investigate resonator frequencies since they are important for fast, multiplexed readout circuits While standard planar CPWs have electrical properties ideally determined entirely [29] by the permittivity of the substrate and the ratio, w/(w +2s), between the center conductor width, w, and the gap width, s, the electrical properties of 3D-integrated CPWs depend additionally on the layout of conducting and dielectric features on, and the distance, d, to the opposite chip In addition, we can cover the chip opposite the CPW with varying amounts of metal, which will change the boundary conditions for the electric field and hence influence the microwave properties (phase velocity and losses); see Appendix A for concrete examples and discussion of the limiting cases. To our knowledge, the behavior as a function of material facing the CPW has not been investigated to date in this context. Here, we compare resonators on the top chip facing a solid metal film on the bottom chip in the region opposite the CPW (metal facing) and resonators where the metal has been etched away during device fabrication in a 140 μm wide strip centered across from the CPW to expose the dielectric beneath (dielectric facing). For dielectric-facing devices, we leave small strips of metal (≈ 10 μm wide) in this etched region to connect the ground planes and avoid spurious modes; see Fig. We designed samples with two feedlines of eight weakly coupled quarter-wavelength CPW resonators with frequencies staggered in 200 MHz increments from 4.5 GHz to 6.5 GHz and coupling quality factors of approximately 2 × 10 6 . One feedline features metal-facing CPWs while the other has dielectric-facing CPWs, see Fig. We cooled the resonators down to approximately 15 mK in a dilution refrigerator and measured the complex scattering parameters of the resonators with a vector network analyzer (VNA). Additional information about the measurement setup is available in Appendix E. We extracted the resonator frequency at a drive power which provides good signal-to-noise ratio and where the resonator does not show nonlinear behavior using a fitting technique which is robust to impedance mismatches In a first measurement, we verify that the fundamental resonance frequency scales with the physical length of the resonator using a sample (design A) with 5 μmwide CPW center conductors. For the simplest case (the metal-facing resonators), we plot the measured resonance frequencies against the inverse physical length, 1/l, of the resonator in Fig. Furthermore, we analyze the reproducibility of the measured frequencies by comparing the nominally identical resonators on two or three copies of this design. We plot the difference between the measured frequencies and the mean of all measured frequencies of each resonator on the sample in Fig. Next, we investigate the case of CPWs with a 5 μmwide center conductor and dielectric facing the CPW line. We again find frequencies proportional to 1/l [Fig. Combining the results of both metal-and dielectricfacing resonators, we find a mean absolute deviation of the frequency deviations of 12 MHz and a maximum deviation between two nominally identical resonators of 50 MHz (3 MHz mean and 7 MHz maximum difference when excluding sample A-3). Although these data are from a single fabrication round, this frequency spread is at or below the typical wafer-to-wafer frequency variation we observe for planar devices fabricated using similar methods but without spacers or indium bumps [34], indicating that with intact SU-8 spacers, the flip-chip bonding process is not expected to limit the frequency repeatability of weakly coupled CPW resonators. Resonators with larger coupling capacitors may show greater sensitivity to interchip spacing deviations since the spurious capacitances to ground that shift the frequency (see Appendix F) will depend on d. Given good frequency reproducibility, it is useful to model the phase velocity of such resonators to target specific frequencies in future designs. Typical approaches include analytical techniques such as conformal mapping Having analyzed the reproducibility of resonator frequencies and modeled them, we next evaluate the impact of the additional process steps introduced for the 3D-integrated samples on the low-photon number internal quality factors of the CPW resonators. Quality factors at this power are important since this is the regime in which qubits are operated Considering a second sample (design B) where the CPW center conductor width is set to 2.5 μm, 5 μm, 10 μm and 20 μm for different resonators while adapting the gap size to approximately maintain a 50 Ω impedance according to the conformal mapping model (resulting in proportionally larger gaps at large w), we observe that the internal quality factors are strongly affected by CPW size, scaling by a factor of ≈ 5 from w = 2.5 μm to w = 20 μm [Fig. To improve parameter reproducibility of indium flipchip bonded superconducting microwave circuits, we have developed an SU-8 spacer process. We showed that the spacers reduce the mean chip separation error as well as tilt by factors of 10 (to a mean of (0.4 ± 0.8) μm) and 3.5 (to a mean of (76 ± 35) μrad) respectively. Furthermore, we demonstrated the ability of the profilometry technique to characterize the entire bonded area by uncovering bowing which is not visible with SEM measurements of the chip corners or pre-bonding measurements of the spacer heights. Additional investigation of such bowing is required, particularly the impact of additional spacers. SU-8 spacers have advantages due to the simplicity and accessibility of their fabrication process. Based on our measurements, SU-8 spacers perform comparably to silicon and indium spacers. However, further study will be needed to evaluate their qubit compatibility and the best approach, particularly given their propensity for absorbing solvents during standard cleaning steps used in state-of-the-art qubit fabrication. We also verified that the reproducible chip separation results in CPW resonator frequencies with statistical device-to-device frequency deviations at the typical wafer-to-wafer variations, which should enable multiplexed readout circuits including Purcell filters in future work. For 3D-integrated CPWs with a 5 μm-wide center conductor, we found that standard techniques do not model the phase velocities with sufficient precision for ab initio device design and will need to be refined in future studies, particularly by investigating kinetic inductance in these geometries. To directly test the impact of spacer height variations on resonator frequency shifts, we could vary the height of the spacers, which would also help to improve our models. Measurements of the resonator quality factors show that the flip-chip bonding process preserves the low-loss material interfaces of a similar planar fabrication process at the level of quality factors of 5 × 10 5 . Resonators with wider center conductors reached higher internal quality factors in exchange for potentially increased sensitivity to chip separation deviations. We did not find significant differences between metal-and dielectric-facing resonators, indicating that we can use either based on design convenience. In particular, due to their reduced phase velocity sensitivity on chip spacing deviations, dielectricfacing resonators may be preferred at the cost of physically longer resonators due to their lower phase velocity. More work is needed to investigate alternative geometries (microstrip-like) to avoid the quality-factor penalties of narrow CPW lines and preserve separation-independent properties. We thank Stephan Paredes for his generous assistance with the indium evaporations. We also thank the staff of the ETH Zürich FIRST and the Binnig and Rohrer Nanotechnology Center cleanrooms for their assistance in maintaining the facilities used to prepare the devices discussed in this work. The finite-element simulations were performed using the ETH Zürich Euler cluster. The authors acknowledge financial support by the EU Flagship on Quantum Technology H2020-FETFLAG2018-03 project 820363 OpenSuperQ, by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), via the U.S. Army Research Office grant W911NF-16-1-0071, by the National Center of Com-petence in Research Quantum Science and Technology (NCCR QSIT), a research instrument of the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF), by the SNFS R'equip grant 206021-170731, by the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI) under contract number UeM019-11, and by ETH Zürich. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Government. G.J.N., J.-C.B., and C.E. planned the experiments. G.J.N. designed and G.J.N. and M.K. fabricated the devices. G.J.N. and D.P. performed the mechanical measurements. G.J.N. performed the microwave measurements and analyzed all data. L.M. performed the participation-ratio analysis. G.J.N. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors. C.E. and A.W. supervised the work. Since it is challenging to accurately produce a sequence of chips over a large range of target separations, we turn to simulations to numerically explore the influence of chip separation on the frequency of CPW resonators. We consider a center conductor width, w of 10 μm and gaps of 5.5 μm to ground on either side on top of 525 μm of silicon with a relative permittivity, ε = 11.45 The dielectric-facing CPW resonator shifts downwards in frequency with decreasing chip separation due to the increasing electric field participation in the dielectric (increasing the effective permittivity ε eff and lowering v ph ). The metal-facing CPW resonator shifts upwards in frequency with decreasing chip separation due to the increasing electric field participation in the vacuum region between the center trace and the metal film above (increasing v ph ). Decreased chip separation relative to the target value results in larger deviations than increased separation, and metal-facing CPWs experience far larger frequency shifts with changing d than dielectric-facing ones due to the different boundary conditions. In both cases, we see that < 1 μm deviations around the target distance of 10 μm result in frequency deviations below 1 %, but large negative deviations (≈ 5 μm) result in frequency shifts of at least a few percent or hundreds of MHz for resonant frequencies around 5 GHz. We fabricate the devices discussed in this work on 100 mm, (100)-orientation, high-resistivity (> 20 kΩ cm) intrinsic float-zone silicon wafers (Topsil GlobalWafers A/S ). We clean the wafers for 5 min in a 1 : 1 mixture of 25 % ammonium hydroxide (NH 4 OH) and 30 % hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) at 60 • C to remove organic contaminants before stripping the native silicon oxide for 60 s in a 7 % solution of hydrofluoric acid (HF) in water at room temperature and then rinsing with de-ionized (DI) water. Within 20 min, we place the cleaned wafers into the load-lock of an ultra-high-vacuum (base pressure < 1 × 10 -7 Pa) magnetron sputtering system (AJA International Inc.), where we sputter ≈ 125 nm of niobium from a 100 mm niobium target (99.99 %, ACI Alloys, Inc.) in a face-to-face geometry over 300 s with a 25 sccm flow of Ar resulting in a chamber pressure of ≈ 1 Pa. Before venting to the atmosphere, we expose the fresh niobium film to nitrogen gas for 15 min. After unloading the wafer, we clean it with sonication in a 50 • C bath of isopropanol to remove particles before spinning AZ 5214E (EU) photoresist (Microchemicals GmbH ) (45 s of spinning at 4000/min followed by a 60 s bake at 105 • C on a hotplate). We expose the wafers in contact mode with a mask aligner (EV Group, EVG 620NT) at an exposure dose of 60 mJ/cm 2 of an even mix of 365 nm, 405 nm and 420 nm light-emitting-diode (LED) illumination. After exposure, we develop the resist for 60 s in AZ 726 MIF (Microchemicals GmbH ) followed by 60 s of rinsing in DI water and a spin rinse and dry. We etch the now-exposed niobium film in a reactiveion etcher (Oxford Instruments, Plasmalab 80 Plus) using SF 6 chemistry, a chamber pressure of 9 × 10 2 Pa, a flow rate of 5 sccm, and an RF power of 100 W for approximately 240 s using the reflectivity of the surface to a helium-neon laser to determine the end of the etch. We strip the resist for at least 120 min in 80 • C N -Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) followed by 10 min NMP, acetone, and then isopropanol sonication at 50 • C. After stripping, we measure step heights from the niobium surface to the silicon below of approximately 155 nm in the center of the wafer increasing to 185 nm at the edge of the wafer using mechanical profilometry. Using our measured niobium thickness of approximately 125 nm in the center of the wafer, this indicates overetches into the silicon of approximately 30 nm in the center and 60 nm at the edge of the wafer. Before starting the patterning of the SU-8, we clean the wafers for 60 s in a 7 % HF solution at room temperature and then rinse with DI water. We spin SU-8 3010 (Kayaku Advanced Materials, Inc.) for 60 s at 3000/min and then allow the film to rest for 5 min on the spinner before soft baking for 180 s at 95 • C. We expose the SU-8 on a mask aligner (EVG 620NT) in contact mode at an exposure dose of 200 mJ/cm 2 of 365 nm LED illumination and perform post-exposure bakes at 65 • C for 60 s and then 300 s at 95 • C on a vacuum hotplate. We develop for 90 s in mr-Dev 600 and then wash several times in alternating isopropanol and mr-Dev 600 baths until no residues remain. To improve the mechanical resilience of the SU-8 spacers, we next hard bake at 180 • C for 900 s. Finally, we perform mechanical profilometer (Bruker Corp., DektakXT) measurements of the niobium and SU-8 thicknesses. We note that, since the baking temperature of typical electron-beam-lithography (EBL) resists used for Josephson junction fabrication are above the melting temperature of indium (156 • C), EBL needs to be performed prior to indium deposition. Before starting the indium patterning, we clean the wafers for 60 s in a 7 % HF solution at room temperature (45 s for wafers with SU-8) and then rinse with DI water. We start by spinning AZ nLOF 2070 (Microchemicals GmbH ) for 1 s at 3000/min with 1 s ramps on either side before allowing the wafer to rest on the spinner for 300 s with the lid open. Then, we soft bake for 30 s at 100 • C before removing the edge bead with a few mL of propylene glycol methyl ether acetate (PGMEA) while spinning at 500/min and then 30 s at 1500/min once the PGMEA has been applied. We bake for 360 s at 100 • C on a vacuum hotplate and then expose on a mask aligner (EVG 620NT) in contact mode at an exposure dose of 110 mJ/cm 2 of an even mix of 365 nm, 405 nm and 420 nm LED illumination. Next, we perform a post exposure bake at 110 • C for 60 s on a vacuum hotplate before developing in AZ 826 MIF (Microchemicals GmbH ) for 90 s and then rinsing in DI water. We then load the wafer into a thermal evaporator (Plassys Bestek, MEB550S) and perform an in-situ argon ion mill for 300 s at a beam voltage of 500 V, a beam current of 35 mA, and an argon flow of 6 sccm. Without breaking vacuum, we evaporate ≈ 10 μm of indium at 10 nm/s with the wafer temperature held at approximately 4 • C in a water-cooled chuck. To complete the indium deposition, we lift-off the indium on top of the resist film in 50 • C acetone over 120 min. With the indium patterning completed, the individual dies are finished. To prepare for dicing, we spin AZ 4533 (Microchemicals GmbH ) resist for 60 s at 1000/min before baking for 90 s at 80 • C to protect the front surface of the wafer. After dicing, we clean individual chips with isopropanol and acetone to remove the resist followed by 15 min in 80 • C NMP to remove resist residues, then 60 min in 50 • C acetone and bake for at least 12 h in a vacuum oven at 50 • C and 2 × 10 4 Pa to remove the solvents from the SU-8 spacers. Immediately after spinning, exposure, development, and baking, the mean SU-8 3010 spacer height is (10.00± 0.04) μm. However, after immersing in warm solvents (in particular, NMP), the SU-8 spacers increase in thickness up to 25 %, which we counteract with a solventexchange and drying procedure (detailed above). Immediately prior to bonding, the SU-8 spacer height is approximately (10.2 ± 0.2) μm. Then we flip-chip bond the bottom and top chips together in a flip-chip bonder (Smart Equipment Technology Corp. SA, FC150). The bonder uses an autocolli-mator to ensure that the bottom and top chips are parallel prior to bonding and a split-prism microscope inserted between the chips to align them laterally. We calibrate the parallelism of the arm and chuck, align the autocollimator, and finally align the microscope so that it points to the same locations on the chuck and arm. After inserting the chips, we align the bottom and top chips in five axes (lateral position and rotation as well as the two rotation axes for parallelism) and press them together at room temperature with a force between 10 N/mm 2 to 40 N/mm 2 of indium (20 N/mm 2 typical). Unlike Ref. After flip-chip bonding, we glue (GE 7031 Varnish) the module onto an oxygen-free high thermal conductivity (OFHC) copper base with a microwave printed circuit board (PCB) attached. Next, we connect launchers on the PCB and bottom chip using a manual wedge-type wire bonder (West Bond, Inc., 7476E) with 25 μm diameter aluminum wire. Finally, we close the sample package with a 6082 aluminum alloy lid and vacuum bag the sample for transport from the cleanroom to the laboratory where it is installed in a cryostat. We present additional composite micrographs of a copy of the design B with varied CPW center conductor width in Fig. Appendix C: Mechanical Measurements We measure each bonded module in the mechanical profilometer (Bruker Corp., DektakXT) starting from the lower-right corner of the bottom chip. The dektak scans first vertically from bottom to top and then repeats such scans from the right edge of the bonded device until the left edge. We level the data by fitting a plane to bottom chip region in the complete dataset with a leastsquares method and then subtracting this plane from the entire dataset. Next, we mask out individual vertical line scans that are clearly offset from the rest of the measurements to avoid skewing the results. Finally, we subtract the substrate thickness from the measured top-chip heights. We first estimate the thickness of the substrates by accurately measuring the thickness of other wafers from the same batches using a preci-sion micrometer (Mitutoyo Corp., MDH-25MB). We used two different types of wafers for these devices: doubleside polished for the mechanical test samples, and singleside polished for the resonator samples. We find that our double-side polished wafers have a mean thickness of (505.9 ± 1.0) μm and that our single-side polished wafers have a mean thickness of (525.2±0.4) μm. We thus select the data for the top-chip region and subtract the appropriate substrate thickness to arrive at the extracted chip separations. We image the corners of the top chip of a bonded device edge-on with two different detectors in the scanningelectron microscope (SEM) and measure the gaps manually using changes in contrast to detect the bottom-chip and top-chip edges (see Fig. Without spacers, we calculate a mean per-module corner separation of (6.1 ± 0.2) μm and mean per-module worst-case tilt of (450 ± 200) μrad across four bonded modules. This calculation is similar to that of Ref. The signal path (see Fig. Our measurements were performed without pumping the TWPA (i.e. with it off) to avoid saturation effects at high probe powers and frequency-dependent gain that might distort the resonator lineshapes. Here, we analyze an electrical model of a CPW resonator capacitively coupled to a feedline to determine the resonant frequency under this additional loading and to find a model to extract the CPW phase velocity from resonator frequency measurements as a function of resonator length. As shown in Fig. We write out the total impedance of the circuit about the selected node (the blue dot in Fig. where we have substituted ω 0 = v ph /4l for a λ/4 resonator with phase velocity, v ph , and physical length l. Assuming that the capacitive frequency shift is small, so ω r ≈ ω 0 , we can expand the tangent and arrive at a solution for ω r : We fit this model to our measured resonator frequencies using the design lengths (Table Appendix G: Resonator Internal Photon Number We compute the internal photon number of the resonator as a function of applied power using the following formula, which can be easily derived where κ is the coupling rate to the feedline, P app is the power applied at the input port of the sample, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, ω 0 is the resonant frequency, and γ is the internal loss rate. We subtract the input line attenuation measured at room temperature from the power supplied by the VNA to arrive at the power applied to the sample input which results in uncertainty of a few dB. To understand the influence of the CPW geometry on losses, we numerically analyze the electric-field distribution, focusing on the fraction of the electric field energy (the participation ratio) stored in thin layers on the surfaces of the CPW and substrate representing amorphous surface oxides which are believed to host two-level systems (TLS) that induce loss We partition a two-dimensional, side-cut slice of the chosen CPW geometry into metal, substrate, and vacuum bulk regions as well as metal-substrate (MS), metal-vacuum (MV), and substrate-vacuum (SV) interface regions Since the participation ratios in the different lossy interfaces are highly correlated (meaning that they scale together with changes in w or s) 