The direct effect of an axion field on Josephson junctions is analyzed through the consequences on the effective potential barrier that prevents the junction from switching from the superconducting to the finite-voltage state. We describe a method to reliably compute the quasipotential with stochastic simulations, which allows to span the coupling parameter from weakly interacting axion to tight interactions. As a result, we obtain that the axion field induces a change in the potential barrier, therefore determining a significant detectable effect for such a kind of elusive particle. Nowadays, in the search for cold dark matter candidates, among others, axion particles were theoretically predicted, but their detection remains elusive, for the very weak interaction that they are supposed to have with ordinary matter In this paper we further investigate the consequences of a direct interaction between axions and JJ, to show that a certain quantity, namely, the quasipotential The paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 presents the model to describe: the JJ (Sect. 2.1), the axion field (Sect. 2.2), and the interacting axion-JJ system (Sect. 2.3). Sect. 3 defines the quasipotential for this system and computes its behavior as a function of the interaction. Finally, in Sect. 4 conclusions are drawn. In this section we outline the models for the JJ, see Sect. 2.1, the axion, see Sect. 2.2, and their interaction, see Sect. 2.3. We show the potential of the JJ alone -a cosinusoidal washboard potential, see Eq. ( Let us consider the usual model for a superconducting junction, schematically represented in Fig. where Φ 0 = h/(2e) is the flux quantum, with e and h being the electron charge and the Planck constant, respectively, I c is the maximum Josephson current that can flow through the device, and φ is the Josephson phase difference. For a real device, one assumes for instance that the two superconductors have lateral dimensions L and W smaller than the Josephson penetration depth, λ J = Φ 0 /(2πμ 0 t d J c ) (here, t d = λ L,1 + λ L,2 + d is the effective magnetic thickness, with λ L and d being the London penetration depths and the insulating layer thickness, respectively, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, and J c is the critical current area density). The dynamics of the Josephson phase φ for a dissipative, current-biased small JJ can thus be studied within the resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) framework with R and C the normal-state resistance and capacitance of the JJ, respectively, and I N and I b the thermal noise and the bias current, respectively. The corresponding normalized dynamics can be reformulated (for sinusoidal potential of standard tunnel JJ, albeit other shapes are possible where time is normalized to the inverse of the characteristic frequency, that is The normalized potential, U , is the so-called washboard potential, which depends upon the normalized bias current, i b , and the Josephson phase according to The potential can be expressed in physical units defining the Josephson energy E J 0 = (Φ 0 /2π)I c . The resulting activation energy barrier, ∆U(i b ), confines the phase φ in a metastable potential minimum and can be calculated as the difference between the maximum and minimum value of the normalized potential U(φ, i b ), see Fig. In the phase particle picture, the term i b represents the tilting of the potential profile; increasing i b the slope of the washboard increases and the height ∆U (i b ) of the rightward potential barrier reduces, until this activation energy vanishes altogether for i b = 1, that is when the bias current reaches its critical value I c . During the motion, different regimes are governed by the Stewart-McCumber parameter β C . A highly damped (or overdamped) junction corresponds to β C ≪ 1, that is a small capacitance and/or a small resistance. Instead, a junction with β C ≫ 1 has a large capacitance and/or a large resistance, and is weakly damped (or underdamped) The amplitude of the normalized correlation is connected with the physical temperature T through the relation here k B is the Boltzmann constant. We note that, by normalizing time with respect to the characteristic frequency ω c (as we do in our numerical simulations), the normalized noise intensity in Eq. ( If one describes the axion field a in the Friedman-Robertson-Walker metric, the equation of motion of the axion misalignment angle θ and the axion coupling constant f a , namely a = f a θ According to the approach of Refs. where (a 1 , a 2 ) and (b 1 , b 2 ) are the dissipation and frequency parameters, respectively; γ is the coupling constant between the two systems, whose values one wants to infer from the experiments. This model, which succeeds in explaining some experimental anomalies To model the Josephson phase dynamics with a bias current and thermal fluctuations, Eqs. with The ε parameter indicates the ratio between the axion energy and the Josephson plasma energy, hω p , and can be chosen -within the JJ fabrication constraints -to select the most convenient working point for the detection of an axion field interacting with the JJ. Indeed, the Josephson plasma frequency, and therefore the energy ratio ε, can be "adjusted" as needed, because I c can be lowered either by raising the temperature In this work, we trace the change in the escape time (that makes the axion-JJ interaction detectable) back to the change in the effective potential barrier that confines the system to the static zero-voltage configuration. In the following Sect. 3 we discuss how to compute the effective energy. The integration of the stochastic Eqs. ( The non-equilibrium system in Eq. is valid. The hypothesis obviously holds for the "pure" JJ system, i.e, Eq. ( In other words, the slope κ of the relation ( On the other hand the quasipotential offers a practical advantage, because it allows to extrapolate the results to very low values of noise, that is in the region where escape times are prohibitively long and extremely difficult to reach with simulations. It is in fact enough to enter the regime of exponential decay to determine κ, and then to exploit such value for any lower value of the noise intensity D. The effective potential ( For the uncoupled regime, γ = 0, the numerical quasipotential barrier should be equal to the washboard potential barrier. From Fig. It has been shown that if the direct interaction between a solid state superconducting device, i.e., a JJ, and the dark matter candidate named axion is assumed, a modification of the response to noise of the former arises In a nutshell, axion signature can be sketched as follows: the JJ-axion interaction facilitates, in the presence of noise, the escapes of the Josephson phase from the superconducting to the finite-voltage state. This change can be described through the quasipotential, which is an effective energy barrier that summarizes the response in the limit of small noise. The introduction of the quasipotential allows to extrapolate the behavior at very low noise values, at which numerical simulations become prohibitively long. It is thus possible to reconstruct the response at low temperature through simulations performed at relatively high noise intensities, an advantage that has been already exploited in several applications, as for instance the Josephson voltage standard From a practical point of view, a possible detection scheme can follow two different strategies, in line with Ref. A word of caution: the change in potential energy is only one of the ingredients for an accurate calculation of SNR, which requires the estimation of fluctuations for finite sampling, as previously done for Josephson-based single photon detection schemes A further refinement of this approach could be achieved through the principle of minimum available noise energy To conclude, our study aims to provide further insights into the interplay between noise, switching dynamic of the JJ and available signal statistical properties, to enhance the understanding of axion JJ-based detector, and at the same time its robustness and reliability. Through the characterization of the noise-induced effects and the understanding of their implications, we wish to contribute to the development of better detectors and of quantum technology devices with improved performances. With the alternative normalized mentioned before, the under-and overdamped regimes correspond to α ≪ 1 and α ≫ 1, respectively. For out-of-equilibrium systems that do not admit an ordinary potential, it is possible to define a nonequilibrium potential with properties analogous to those of an ordinary potential, as long as there is a single time-independent probability distribution that can be reached from any initial distribution as the weakly stochastic dynamical system approaches its steady state