Catalyst impregnation is one of the most crucial steps for preparing industrial catalysts. The inter-particle variability of the impregnated liquid inside the particles significantly affects the activity and selectivity of the catalyst. Current scale-up practices lead to poor fluid distribution and inhomogeneity in the liquid content. This work aims to understand the dynamic behavior of the particles under the spray nozzle and to develop a scale-up model for dry impregnation processes. We considered five dimensionless numbers in the scaling analysis. We performed Discrete Element Method simulations and experiments of dry impregnation inside porous particles for different vessel sizes. The water content of the particles was compared for other times locations, and the relative standard deviation (RSD) was calculated from the axial water content. Simulation and experimental results show excellent agreement, confirming that the scale-up rules apply to all vessel sizes. In the manufacturing of heterogeneous catalysts, impregnation is the process of a solution containing active metal components being added to the porous catalyst supports Scaling up a batch process has long been a puzzle to all chemical engineers In addition, geometrical and dynamic similarities are required to apply the dimensional analysis Numerous studies have been done on the scaling up of mixing, and coating processes, such as powder blending The discrete element method (DEM) has been applied to investigate particle mixing and segregation It is crucial to be able to reproduce the same quality catalysts at the industrial scale after having knowledge about the impregnation process at the laboratory and pilot scale. However, procedures for catalyst manufacturing are usually developed empirically, and current scale-up practices lead to poor fluid distribution and inhomogeneity in the metal content. In this work, we present a dimensional analysis and the dimensionless numbers used to characterize the scale-up of the impregnation system. Section 3 contains the description of the simulation method. In Section 4, we present the experimental method, which includes experiments in a small and large cylindrical vessel with validated simulations. These experimental results prove that the dimensionless numbers are suitable scale-up parameters. In Section 5, we present further proof that the dimensionless numbers are proper scale-up parameters using simulations on a portion of a cylinder: a cylindrical "slice" of three different sizes. Finally, the conclusions from the scale-up studies are presented in Section 6. We performed a dimensional analysis of the impregnation process. Geometric and dynamic similarities are necessary to apply dimensional analysis. Two systems are considered similar if they are geometrically and dynamically similar. Geometrically similarity is represented by the same shape between different scales and the same ratio of characteristic linear dimensions. Kinematic and dynamic similarity requires that the velocities and forces in all directions have the same ratio. Given the scale-up model, several crucial operation parameters, such as rotation speed and flow rate, can be predetermined to achieve controlled mixing and content uniformity across various scales. Dimensionless numbers are defined, and functional relationships are derived to completely characterize the process. Extensive studies have been conducted on the scaling of rotating drums due to their simple geometry and wide application in the chemical and process industries as mixers, dryers, kilns, and reactors. Ding et al. developed scaling relationships for rotating drums by non-dimensionalizing the differential equations governing the behavior of the solids motion A cylindrical drum is considered our impregnation vessel. A schematic of the vessel with a spraying nozzle is shown in Figure where L is the length of the cylinder, D is the diameter of the cylinder, Awetted is the wetted area of the cylinder, Fr is the Froude Number, CQ is the Flow Rate Number, FL is the fill level, is the particle density, is the packing fraction of the spherical particles, W is the angular velocity (or rotational speed), and Q is the flow rate of spraying solution. Other researchers have designed similar dimensionless numbers. Ban et al. Additionally, the wetted area in their work is a square, but the wetted area, in our case, is circular. The calculation of each dimensionless quantity converts specific operation parameters into a term value, and by keeping the value fixed in all scales, we are able to derive the operation parameters from one scale to another scale. Notice that to have a geometrically similar impregnator, the fill level is also kept constant, and consequently, the mass of the material also scales up as . M is the loading mass, D and L are the diameter and length of the drum, respectively. The Froude number gives a correlation between vessel size and rotational speed of the vessel. Within different Fr regimes, different types of bed motion have been identified The flow rate number (CQ) compares the rate of spray droplets (Q) being deposited onto the particle bed and the rate of particles being refreshed at the bed surface. The latter is correlated with the rotational speed (W) and the vessel diameter (D). In general, smaller spray rates tend to give more homogeneous liquid distribution during and after the total liquid is sprayed. However, the process takes longer. Using more significant spray rates, the spraying can be completed in shorter times, but the particles show more significant inhomogeneity of the fluid content in the particle bed. An optimal value for the Flow Rate number allows the impregnation process to finish in an acceptable time frame and the final product to have a uniform distribution of the metal solution. However, the process conditions may be limited to the equipment settings. Discrete element method (DEM) has been increasingly used to study granular materials and particle systems. In the DEM, the motion of individual particles is computed according to the Newton's second law of motion. The motion of a solid particle is expressed by ma = ∑ F 34/05-0 + ∑ F 6478 ρ p φ = 0.69 particle-particle or particle-boundary collisions. ∑ F 6478 denotes the sum of all body forces due to gravity. DEM simulations in this work were performed using the EDEM commercial software package developed by DEM Solutions, Ltd., based on an original method proposed by Cundall and Strack [2] where k / is the Hertzian normal stiffness coefficient, δ / is the deformation (normal particle overlap), γ / is the normal damping coefficient, and δ ̇/ is the rate of deformation. In the above equation, k / is obtained by: k / = * & E .:: 3 R .:: R .:: is defined as the effective radius of the contacting particles. In case of a particlewall collision, the effective radius is simply the particle radius. While in the case of particle-particle collision, with the two contacting particles having radii R ! and R $ , the effective radius is obtained by: R .:: With knowledge of the normal stiffness coefficient and a chosen coefficient of restitution ε, the normal damping coefficient is calculated as: Following the work of Mindlin and Deresiewicz [7] where k 0 the tangential stiffness coefficient and γ / is the tangential damping coefficient. In the above equation, k 0 is calculated by: k 0 = 8G .::3 R .:: 3δ / The tangential displacement (or overlap) δ 0 is calculated by time-integrating the relative velocity of tangential impact, v 1.A 0 between two colliding entities (either interparticle or particle-wall contact): δ 0 ???⃗ = ∫ v 1.A 0 ???????⃗ dt After contact, the droplets disappear. The fluid spray is modeled as discrete droplets, which are sprayed from a nozzle located above the rotating bed and are absorbed upon contact with the simulated catalyst particles. When the droplet comes into contact with a particle, the fluid droplet essentially disappears while simultaneously transferring its mass to the simulated catalyst support particle, leading to a net increase in the mass. The mass flow rate of the fluid is defined as: where N is the number of fluid droplets, V is the volume, m is the mass and is the density of each droplet. Analogous to the experimental conditions, the particles in this study absorb fluid up to 60% of their weight. After saturation of the catalyst particle occurs, additional fluid allows the support particle to be considered supersaturated, and as a result, transferred excess fluid to any non-saturated particle that it comes into contact with. Our hypothesis in the model is that the amount of fluid transferred between two particles in every contact when one of them is supersaturated, is defined as . In this equation, k is a proportionality constant that reflects the rate of fluid transfer, and mi and mj are the respective mass of each of the particles; for water transfer k is as defined as 0.01. So, the amount of fluid transferred per contact is a function of the difference in the excess of fluid of the contacting particles. When the amount of fluid absorbed is more than the fluid contained in the pore volume, the fluid transfer algorithm allows the excess of fluid on a specific catalyst support particle to be transferred to another adjacent particle at a specific rate. In the simulations, a number of parameters are used to accurately represent the experimental system. The values of these initial parameters are listed in Table vessel of 2 sizes. The rotational speed and spray rate were determined by keeping the Froude number (Fr) and Flow rate number (CQ) constant for the two scales. After the completion of spraying, additional rotations were also performed. Table It is worth noticing that there is not a unique Froude. In our scale-up studies, it is essential to first validate the simulation parameters using experiments and, secondly, verify that the chosen dimensionless numbers are suitable scale-up parameters. This will be presented in the following two sections after describing the experimental setup. Experiments were conducted with the vessel loaded at a fixed fill level of 30% by volume corresponding to 1.7 kg and 13.6 kg of alumina spheres, respectively. 6.2mm γalumina spheres were purchased from Saint-Gobain Norpro (Stow, OH, USA). The granular spheres contained a surface area of 200 m 2 /g and a pore volume of 0.6 cm 3 /g. An impregnator was retrofitted into the system using Swagelok 1⁄4 in. fittings and a 1⁄4 inch NPT nozzle adapter. The flow was controlled using a Cole-Parmer MasterflexTM peristaltic pump retrofitted to the Swagelok fittings. During the impregnation process, samples of approximately 20-25 particles were retrieved every 5 min The samples containing 6.2mm impregnated spheres were removed for analysis at 5 points along the axis of rotation at the top of the bed as indicated in Figure 95% confidence interval. In addition, in general, in the catalysis industry it is widely accepted that a 10% variation in the catalyst quality is a reasonable variability, since other quality factors (surface area, activity, metals dispersion, crush strength, etc.) are often specified to this level of variation. In order to validate the parameters chosen in the DEM model, we performed water impregnation simulations in cylindrical vessels with full length. Two sizes of vessel were considered: a small cylinder (D1=20cm and L1=30cm), and a large cylinder (D2=40cm and L2=60cm). Simulations and experiments have a "one to one" size correspondence (i.e. we kept the exact geometrical dimensions and nozzle configuration as compared to the ones used in experiments). Figure Figure To verify that the two-size cylinders have the same performance in the impregnation process, we measured the Relative Standard Deviation (RSD). RSD is calculated from the amount of water in the axial direction; it is plotted here as a function of time and the number of revolutions, as shown in Figure Experimental RSD for small and large cylinders: (A) as a function of time and (B) as a function of the number of revolutions. To further examine these dimensionless quantities, DEM simulations were performed in three sliced cylinders with different diameters with a width covering the entire spraying area. This geometry represents a portion in a cylindrical blender that includes one nozzle in the system. Note that the cylindrical slices with periodic boundary conditions are used to save computational time. The diameter of cylinder was varied from 10cm to 20cm, and 30cm. For all three sizes, the total number of particles in the system is determined to have the same fill level in the vessel. The rotational speed and spray rate are calculated from the Froude number (Fr) and the Spray Rate number (CQ), respectively. As the vessel size increases, the rotational speed decreases and the spray rate increases. The simulation conditions for different vessel sizes are given in Table This is indicated by the redness across the particle bed. However, a small number of particles might have less than the complete saturation. The RSD is measured from the water content of all the particles in all three cylindrical slices. Firstly the RSD is plotted as a function of time, as shown in Figure In this section, we explored how the impregnation process can be optimized, i.e., how to determine the operation parameters to achieve uniformity in the shortest time possible. The correlation between vessel size and the rotational speed of the vessel is given by the Froude number. For a given vessel size, Fr is proportional to Ω $ . Within different Fr regimes, different types of bed motion have been identified In section 4.2, we performed a validation of the simulation parameters using our experiments performed in a full-length cylinder, which is computationally very costly with all the geometrical parameters and velocities matched 1:1. This allows us to get the constants k for water transfer and verify the other simulation parameters proposed in Table However at higher speeds (50rpm), a cascading regime is observed. Next, we examined the effect of particle size on the scale up performance. DEM simulations were performed in a cylindrical slice of D=10cm for different particle sizes (d= 2.5mm, 5mm, and 10mm). The relative standard deviation is measured from the water content of all the particles in all three cylindrical slices. Figure The critical value for D/d has not been determined in this study, hence more works needs to be done. Notice that we have not used the size of the particles in any of the proposed dimensionless numbers. There should be a ratio D/d for which particle size d has an effect in scale-up and needs to be considered in a dimensionless number. Figure We developed a systematic and general approach to scale up the impregnation process. The defined five dimensionless numbers fully scale up the system. We performed impregnation experiments in both a small and a large cylinder. Our selected Froude number lies within the range of the optimal Froude predicted by the simulations. The five selected dimensionless numbers give excellent scale-up performance since curves overlap, indicating similarity (geometric, kinematic, and dynamic) and hence similar performances for all different sizes. The scale-up method has been validated using both simulations and experiments. The scale-up rules were also applied to different particle sizes in simulations and showed good reproducibility. Our results show that when the diameter of the vessel is large enough concerning the diameter of the particle, the particle size is not relevant in the scale-up of the system. There is a critical size for which particle size does have an effect on scale up and that is when D/d is within a range of values less than 10. The critical value has not been determined in this study. Notice also that our results were obtained from a limited number of process conditions, two sizes of cylindrical vessels, and only one type of material with a unimodal particle size distribution. The final product quality is mainly determined by mixing and dispersion. Issues may be caused when applying the proposed dimensionless quantities to a cohesive material that mixes poorly due to the formation of agglomerates. It would also be interesting to examine different particle size distributions in future work.