This paper presents theoretical and numerical models for the backscattering of 2D Rayleigh waves in single-phase, untextured polycrystalline materials with statistically equiaxed grains. The theoretical model, based on our prior inclusion-induced Rayleigh wave scattering model and the independent scattering approximation, considers single scattering of Rayleigh-to-Rayleigh (R-R) waves. The numerical finite element model is established to accurately simulate the scattering problem and evaluate the theoretical model. Good quantitative agreement is observed between the theoretical model and the finite element results, especially for weakly scattering materials. The agreement decreases with the increase of the anisotropy index, owing to the reduced applicability of the Born approximation. However, the agreement remains generally good when weak multiple scattering is involved. In addition, the R-R backscattering behaviour of 2D Rayleigh waves is similar to the longitudinal-to-longitudinal and transverse-to-transverse backscattering of bulk waves, with the former exhibiting stronger scattering. These findings establish a foundation for using Rayleigh waves in quantitative characterisation of polycrystalline materials. Rayleigh waves, when propagating on the surface of a polycrystalline material, can be scattered by the grain boundaries due to the acoustic impedance contrast caused by different alignments of crystallographic orientations of individual grains In the past decades, there have been several physical quantities, including the figure of merit (FOM) While comprehensive models have been established for the scattering of bulk waves by grains, limited studies have focused on the scattering of Rayleigh waves in polycrystalline materials. Zhang and Weaver studied the singly incoherent scattered field of leaky Rayleigh waves from a fluid/solid surface at the critical Rayleigh angle using the first Born approximation Given Rayleigh waves' capability to quantitatively evaluate the material properties in near-surface regions, we consider it of considerable interest to develop the theory needed to describe Rayleigh wave backscattering behaviour from a polycrystalline material. Lately, we have given an explicit expression for the backward flaw scattering amplitude of R-R scattered by a single inclusion (weak scatterer) based on Born approximation In addition to the theoretical methods, finite element (FE) modelling is another approach which has been widely used to investigate wave scattering behaviours in a polycrystalline material. Similar to the theoretical developments in literature, the related works in this area have also mainly concentrated on bulk wave grain noise, with twodimensional (2D) In comparison to the existing studies, this work sets out to study 2D Rayleigh wave grain backscattering behaviour. To achieve this aim, this work contributes to two aspects. The paper is organised to explain the methodology and highlight the contributions clearly: Section 2 presents the theoretical model to explain the backward scattering behaviours of the Rayleigh wave based on the approximations. Then Sec. 3 gives a brief introduction to an FE model which illustrates the R-R wave responses after being scattered by grains. The comparisons between the theoretical and computational results are shown in Sec. 4, mainly including that the measured single scattering amplitudes are scattered from single grain with different shapes and random orientation, shown in Sec. 4.1; the theoretical model is verified to evaluate the root-mean-square (rms) backward grain noise with different anisotropy index materials in Sec. 4.2. Finally, conclusions are given in Sec. 5. The interest here is studying the Rayleigh wave propagation on the smooth polycrystal plain surface. Usually, the grain can be regarded as a weak scatter with a small elastic constant perturbation. Therefore, the scattering behaviour from the single grain can be simplified to the inclusion scattering. In fact, the theoretical model related to the inclusion scattering of Rayleigh waves has been well established by our previous research with U R (z) = w L 1 exp where k R and c R are the wave number and phase velocity of the incident Rayleigh wave. e in = [1, 0, 0] is the propagation direction of the incident Rayleigh wave. The phase velocity c R can be calculated by where c L and c T are the Voigt-averaged velocities of the longitudinal and shear waves in the host material, which can be obtained by where is the derivative of the 2D Rayleigh wave green function with where r is the propagation distance. P R represents a normalised power per unit width in the travelling wave mode. c g is the group velocity of the Rayleigh wave. e sc = [-1, 0, 0] denotes the propagation direction of the scattered Rayleigh wave. Substituting Eqs. ( where A (ω) is the far-field amplitude of the backscattered Rayleigh wave, expressed as with where the summation of (i, k) in the above equations is over 1 and 3. m, n = 0, 1 and no summation convention for repeated m, n. Before we start with the development of the scattering behaviour of Rayleigh waves on the polycrystalline material, we make the following assumptions that: (1) the polycrystal's statistics are homogeneous and isotropic; (2) there is no orientation correlation between different grains; (3) only R-R wave scattering is considered; (4) multiple scattering phenomena are neglected, i.e., the reflection from one grain is not affected by other grains; (5) total backscattering power is an incoherent sum of the signals scattered by the individual grain in the metal (IS approximation), i.e., the phases of the individual reflection are not correlated. Based on the above-mentioned assumptions, the backscattered power can be given by where ⟨⟩ denotes the ensemble average. The asterisk represents the conjugate. A (ω) denotes the R-R scattering amplitude in the Born approximation, which is given in Eq. 10. Substituting Eq. 10 to Eq. 12, the total backscattered power can be expressed as, where the summation of each σ i over L and T is implied. In the equation, Ψ ( x s , x ) is given by Meanwhile, Λ mnpq ikαγ is defined as, for m, n, p, q = 0, 1 and no summation convention for repeated m, n, p, q. Due to the assumption of statistical homogeneity and macroscopic isotropy of the polycrystalline medium, the covariance can be factorised into tensorial and spatial parts where ⟨ ΔC ijkl ΔC αβγδ ⟩ is elastic covariance, whose detailed information can be found in Ref. In direct contrast to the conventional single exponential form with By applying the following change of variables, with the limit of (the detailed information for the transformation of the integral area in the Appendix), Therefore, the following equation is straightforward, where We want to emphasise that, unlike the uniform bulk wave, there is an exponential energy decay for Rayleigh waves in the z-displacement (thickness direction). Thus, instead of estimating the power per unit area, the backscattered power p (ω), from the grains in the area where is the unit length multiplied by the infinite depth, should be used to assess the backscattering behaviour of Rayleigh waves propagating on the material surface. Based on this, we make a calculation for the integral, which can be followed, After further manipulation, the final equation can be written as, The theoretical prediction of the rms backscattering amplitude of single scattering for multiple grains can be given by, where n g is grain density. Assuming that N is the number of grains in the active volume of a sample. Ω is the active space of the sample. n g = N∕Ω. A rms (ω) is the backscattering amplitude of Rayleigh waves for a single scattering of multiple grains with the area (unit length × infinite depth), which is the most important result in this article. Now, we consider a 2D case where one point on the upper surface (x-surface) transmits a plane Rayleigh wave and receive the backscattered and reflected signals. Then, the normalised backward grain noise N rms in the area with unit length × infinite depth can be defined by the rms of backward amplitude from each grain, given as an approximate expression for the dimensionless ratio where Γ ref (ω) is the Fourier transform of the reference signal at angular frequency ω = 2πf . Γ noise (ω) denotes the Fourier transform of the grain noise signal on the finite time interval indicated in the area with unit length × infinite depth, which is understood to be located away from the reference echoes. In addition to the five assumptions we mentioned in Sec. 2.2, here we apply two more restrictions: (6) No attenuation is considered, which is the direct consequence of assumption (4) above which stipulates that the reflection from one grain is not affected by other grains; As we mentioned in assumption ( considering an echo associated with Rayleigh waves which travel directly from the transmitter to grain at position x i (x i , z i ) and then directly back to the receiver, the discrete Fourier transform component of this echo at frequency f may be approximated by where A i (ω) is the scattering amplitude from this grain, given by Eq. 10. Furthermore, replacing the sum over grains with an integral over the unit volume of the material, Eq. 27 can be given as, where p (ω) is given by Eq. 24. Substitution of Eq. 29 in Eq. 26, the normalised grain noise in the area with unit length × infinite depth can be further obtained as, where A rms (ω) is written as Eq. 25. From Eq. 30, we can figure out that p (ω) is the square of FOM to represent the measurement of the inherent grain noise of the specimen of Rayleigh wave and can be also expressed as the backscattering coefficient, which can be written as FOM 2 ≡ p (ω). We have now completed our theoretical developments for the quantitative predictions of the rms of the backscattering Rayleigh wave in (Eqs. The capability of 2D FE to model the bulk wave scattering in polycrystals has been well proved in recent FE modelling papers Taking the model n20000 in Table The desired Rayleigh wave is generated by applying two sinusoidal time-domain signals of 90 • phase shift to multiple source nodes located on the top surface of the model (yellow points in Fig. First, rms backscattering of single grains with random shapes and orientations is investigated. We know that the theoretical model is developed with independent scattering approximation. Therefore, the FE model, simulating the backscattering of single grains embedded in a homogeneous background material, can avoid the effect of multiple scattering, which makes the FE results represent the theoretical result better. To predict the rms backscattering amplitude of single grain with random shapes and orientations, a number of grains are needed. As we mentioned in Sec. 3, Neper program generates an aggregate of grains ('multi-grain' models) with each having its own geometry. The geometrical schematic of multiple grain aggregate is shown in Fig. The backscattering amplitude A FE (f ) from single grains with different shapes and random orientations will be measured to calculate the incoherent rms averaging A FE rms (f ). Here, a brief overview of the measurement of the backscattering amplitude and rms averaging is introduced. Figure Furthermore, to observe how the agreement changes with anisotropy, the comparisons for the Inconel and lithium materials which have anisotropy indices of 2.83 and 9.14 are also performed, as shown in Figs. In addition, it is shown in Fig. Material In this section, the grain noise generated with plane Rayleigh wave excitation is investigated with the numerical method, which is used to compare with the theoretical model given in Sec. 2.3 (Eq. 30). The models shown in Table The processing results from the backscattered signals are also indicated in Fig. where l 2 is the length corresponding to the selected grain noise. N FE rms (f ) will be used to evaluate the theoretical model result, N rms (ω), in the next. Figure Figure Furthermore, to observe how the agreement changes with anisotropy, the comparisons for the aluminium, A=1.5, and Inconel materials, which have anisotropy indices of 1.24, 1.52, and 2.83 are performed, as shown in Fig. In addition, the theoretical results are always overestimating the grain noise in larger k R d regions. As we mentioned before, the Born approximation always has an underestimation for the backscattering amplitude. Therefore, it is not caused by the Born approximation. In fact, when the Rayleigh waves propagate along the surface, the energy of the coherent wave decreases with the increase of the distance far from the observation point in the FE model due to the effect of the multiple scattering. Moreover, it implies the backscattered wave energy from these grains which are far from the observation point is decreasing. The result is that the backscattered energy in different cross sections in the propagation direction will not be equal, which is not like that assumed in the IS approximation. Meanwhile, it should be emphasised that multiple scattering has a larger effect on the accuracy of the theoretical model compared to the Born approximation. In this section, the rms for single backscattering amplitudes are scattered from single grains with different shapes and random orientations are discussed in Sec. 4.1 and the backward grain noise excited and captured has been predicted with the theoretical model and FE approaches in Sec. 4.2. Results imply a good agreement between the theoretical prediction and the FE result. Born approximation always has an underestimation of the theoretical backscattering amplitude. In addition, the multiple scattering has little influence on the grain noise level as the anisotropy factor is relatively low and backscattering is weak. However, with a relatively high anisotropy level or a larger normalised frequency, discrepancies are observed indicating the occurrence of multiple scattering. Meanwhile, the existence of multiple scattering makes the FE results smaller than that of theory. We note that the ignoring of multiple scattering will result in a larger difference between the theoretical predictions and FE results, compared with the difference caused by the Born approximation. However, the effects of multiple scattering and Born approximation are intertwined, which makes it difficult to quantify how small should k R d be for the theoretical model to be valid. Therefore, only a qualitative discussion related to how these two parameters affect the theoretical model has been made. In this work, we developed a 2D theoretical model for Rayleigh-to-Rayleigh backscattering in untextured polycrystalline materials with equiaxed grains. The model is formulated in the frequency domain based on the Born approximation. A FE model is established to provide relatively accurate reference data for evaluating the approximations of the theoretical model. The comparison of the theoretical and FE results led to various conclusions, mainly including: 1. Good agreement between the FE and theoretical backscattering amplitudes predictions can be seen in the case with only R-R single scattering. With the increase of the anisotropy index, the discrepancy is larger as a result of the use of the Born approximation. 2. The backscattering amplitude is proportional to one and a half power of frequency when the wavelength is comparable to the size of the average grain or much larger than the average grain size, i.e. k R d < 1. The backscattering amplitude is independent of frequency in the case that the wavelength is smaller than the average grain size (k R d > 10 1 ). The quantitative relationship between the normalised frequency and backscattering amplitude is similar to that of 2D bulk wave backscattering behaviour. 3. With the consideration of the weak multiple scattering, the agreement between the theoretical model and FE results is still excellent. The discrepancy seen in the highly scattering case (larger anisotropy index or the wavelength smaller than the average grain size) represents the larger effect of ignoring multiple scattering, rather than the Born approximation, on the backscattering predictions for the theory. 4. FE is attractive in describing the backscattering noise behaviour as it does not involve some of the important simplifying assumptions included in the theoretical model and therefore can capture multiple scattering which is ignored in the theory. Generally speaking, we have demonstrated the applicability of our theoretical model to evaluate the backscattering behaviour of Rayleigh waves on a polycrystalline material with single-phase, untextured, and equiaxed grains. We have employed FE simulations as perfectly controlled experiments, where the material properties and configurations are user-defined and accurate, to successfully validate the theoretical predictions. Future studies will be focused on experimental verification, with the aim of utilising this mathematical model for material characterisation in practice. The potential application areas include developing a Rayleigh wave scattering model for polycrystals with elongated grains, performing the experimental inversion of grain size, evaluating the scattering attenuation of Rayleigh waves and characterising the grain size variation in the depth direction. c (MHz) d x × d z (mm × mm) 3 ) N rms (ω) ≡ √ ⟨ | | | Γ noise (ω) | | | 2 ⟩ / | | | Γ ref (ω) | | | 2