To facilitate the understanding and to quantitatively assess the material transport in fluids, a modern characterisation method has emerged in fluid dynamics in the last decades footed in dynamical systems theory. It allows to examine the most influential material lines which are called Lagrangian Coherent Structures (LCS) and order the material transport into dynamically distinct regions at large scales which resist diffusion or mixing. LCS reveal the robust skeleton of material surfaces and are essential to assess material transport in time-dependent flows quantitatively. Candidates of LCS can be estimated and visualised from finite-time stretching and folding fields by calculating the Finite-Time Lyapunov Exponents (FTLE). In this contribution, we provide an OpenFOAM function object to compute FTLE during CFD simulation. This enables the OpenFOAM community to assess the geometry of the material transport in any flow quantitatively on-the-fly using principally any OpenFOAM flow solver. Material transport and mixing in fluids is enhanced by advection. This advection is usually described mathematically in an Eulerian view by a time-dependent velocity field u(u, t). With this Eulerian description, numerous important fluid mechanical characteristics can be derived and assessed. For instance, a higher Reynolds number (higher velocities) typically will go along with better overall mixing. However, such intuition might be misleading as has been shown for example in That the classical Eulerian view on advection is not optimal for addressing these issues was first noted in oceanography and atmospheric science To obtain the lines that govern material transport in time-dependent flows the Lagrangian Coherent Structures are calculated from the trajectories of particles evaluated in the time-dependent velocity field u = u(x, t). LCS are those material lines and surfaces that separate regions of particles with very different fates or history for the time interval under consideration. Several different approaches to evaluate LCS have been developed during the last years With this contribution we introduce an OpenFOAM function object that calculates the three dimensional Finite Time Lyapunov Exponents (FTLE) on-the-fly based on the general purpose numerical library libcfd2lcs From time-resolved CFD simulations, the time-dependent velocity field u(x, t) is known in space and time. From this information the fluid parcel or passive particle trajectories can be calculated, where x 0 is the starting point of a trajectory in 3D space at a starting time t 0 . Note, that each trajectory is now labelled by its start location in space and time. If a set of initially close passive particles is released at the same time the distances between them change over time due to the fluid motion. Passive particles initially forming a tiny sphere will undergo a linear deformation towards an ellipse for short times as would occur in a solid body under stress before it breaks. Certainly, in a fluid, the deformation will progress, and non-linear higher-order terms will play a role in causing stretching and folding which is crucial for mixing. However, as a first approximation and for short times these higher-order terms are neglected for the analysis of the deformation. If we consider infinitesimal spheres of initially close particles around all mesh cell centres of our simulation starting at the same initial time t 0 , we obtain a set of different ellipsoids. All these ellipsoids have differently stretched and contracted principal axes which point in different directions at a slightly later time t 1 . The principal axes of each ellipse denominate the final directions of maximal stretching (major axis) and maximal contraction (minor axis) of the initially spherical particle blob. The stretching factor S is the length of the major axis of the final ellipse divided by the initial radius of the sphere. If this stretching factor at each initial grid point is plotted, a 3D stretching field results revealing the regions at which stretching and thus particle separation for the time interval of interest [t 0 , t 1 ] is largest due to the local flow conditions. Normally, the scaled logarithm of this stretching factor, defined by is plotted. This scaled logarithmic stretching factor is called the Finite-Time Lyapunov Exponent Connected areas or lines of large FTLE values characterise the fluid transport as these denote the areas or lines along which deformation and thus particle separation is largest. All these geometrical considerations have their mathematical counterparts. The stretching factor as described is the square root of the maximal eigenvalue of the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor C t1 t0 . This tensor can be calculated for every mesh cell as envisioned above for the ellipsoid. As its name reveals it includes all the information about the deformation of the fluid masses at this point for the short time interval t 1 -t 0 , and notably it is an objective tensor such that high stretching values and candidates for LCS derived from it will persist regardless of the motion of the observer (invariant to a time-dependent translation and rotation of the coordinate system of the observer) The governing ordinary differential equation (ODE) for the evolution of a fluid parcel or a passive particle reads ẋ = u(x(t), t) . (3) Therefore, the infinitesimal separation γ = xx * of the passive particle, imagined in the centre of a infinitesimal sphere, to a particle on the surface of the sphere will be governed by the ODE The solution of this ODE is an exponential function, which explains why the FTLE is defined as the logarithm of the stretching factor. To analyse the stretching during short but finite time intervals, particles distributed on a mesh are advected with the flow from an initial time t 0 over the time interval T = |t 1 -t 0 | to t 1 . From the integral version of the governing ODE (Eq. 3) we obtain the definition of the flow map, Φ t1 t0 , which maps all the particles from their initial positions onto their final positions at time t 1 , viz. To obtain the separation of two initially close particles after this time interval a Taylor series around the initial position can be employed. Where DΦ t1 t0 (x 0 , t 0 ) is the gradient (Jacobian) of the flow map with regard to the initial separation and is also the normalised fundamental matrix solution of the equation of variations above (Eq. 4) The right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor is then defined as In this way the Finite-Time Lyapunov Exponent σ t1 t0 for the time interval t 0 to t 1 can now be defined on the basis of this tensor in a more thorough, mathematical way. Therefore, it is now defined by Here λ max is the maximum eigenvalue of the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor and can be calculated using standard solvers. In the picture of the small ellipsoid, the square root of the eigenvalue is just the above stretching rate S. The computation of flow maps within libcfd2lcs is described thoroughly in 3.1. Numerical flow map computation in libcfd2lcs. libcfd2lcs is able to calculate both forwardtime and backward-time FTLE fields. However, it uses two very different approaches for calculating the respective flow maps. The general approach used for the computation of the forward time flow-map Φ t0+T t0 and the resulting forward-time FTLE field is very straightforward. A set of tracer particles is initialised on a grid with spacing ∆x lcs by setting each initial tracer coordinate to the cell centre coordinate of a corresponding mesh cell. Then the flow map at each cell centre is computed by passively advecting these tracers with the flow, which mathematically corresponds to an integration of equation over the time interval T . Numerically this integration is done by utilising Runge-Kutta methods, with step size ∆t lcs . The time and space dependent velocity field u(x, t) results from the specific fluid simulation under consideration and is passed to libcfd2lcs after each simulation time step ∆t sim (see Section 3.2). In order to save the flow map Φ t0+T t0 , the location of each particle after the integration is stored at its initial position. As the evaluation of FTLE fields, indicating LCS candidates, is mainly relevant for time-dependent flows, it is often important to animate their evolution. At first glance, this would mean that a sequence of large particle sets would have to be integrated, requiring a great amount of computation. This problem is solved using a method developed by Brunton and Rowley In practical terms, this means that the particle grid is reinitialised for every new time interval h after which they are advected again with the flow. Then the sub-step flow map is stored and the complete flow map is constructed when all needed sub-step flow maps are available. It is important to note that since a discrete particle grid is used for the sub-step flow map computation, interpolation of the sub-step flow maps is needed in order to match the trajectories at different timelevels when reconstructing the flow map Φ t0+T t0 (see Solving this equation over the time Interval [t 0 , t 0 +T ] in forward time gives Ψ(x, t 0 +T ), which represents the takeoff coordinates of a Lagrangian particle at t 0 reaching x at time t 0 + T . Thus, the backward-time flow map Φ t0 t0+T is equivalent to Ψ(x, t 0 + T ). libcfd2lcs solves equation ( of this procedure being restricted by the CFL condition c cf l < 1 (see is constructed form k sub-step backward-time flow maps. Since a lot of different timescales are relevant in the practical FTLE field computation described above, we try to differentiate and order them in the following, before describing the structure and functionality of the newly developed function object in the next section. The basis of the on-the-fly LCS evaluation is a parallel running simulation that provides the velocity fields. Here, three intervals are of interest (see Fig. In the simplest case, where the simulation mesh is already a static rectlinear mesh, the function object does not need to process the grid and velocity data, but can directly transfer it to libcfd2lcs as basic C++ arrays. This is the preferred method when the flow domain can be represented by a static rectlinear mesh and e.g. immersed boundary methods are used. If a moving mesh, a mesh of general topology or adaptive mesh refinement is used for the simulation a different approach is needed in order to prepare the data for its use in libcfd2lcs. Here, an additional static rectlinear mesh needs to be constructed in the preprocessing step, which can be done e.g. by using the blockMesh utility. This mesh has to contain the region for which the LCS diagnostic should be performed, meaning that it can cover the whole simulation domain as well as only a part of it. However, since libcfd2lcs also requires boundary conditions for the FTLE field calculations, the boundary patches of the additional LCS mesh must be set accordingly. The user can choose between empty, symmetryPlane, wedge, cyclic and the generic patch patch types which the function objects translates into the corresponding libcfd2lcs boundary types. Then, during runtime, the velocity fields are mapped from the simulation mesh of general topology to the static rectlinear LCS mesh, from which the data can again be transferred to libcfd2lcs as basic C++ arrays. Although this implies that interpolation errors are made during the mapping process, the LCS evaluation is hardly affected by this. Haller showed in As libcfd2lcs also uses the domain decomposition approach and MPI for the parallelisation of the computations, the integration within the parallelisation of OpenFOAM is done in a straightforward manner. The local subdomains of the rectlinear LCS mesh and its velocity data are passed to libcfd2lcs together with an offset, which describes the position of the cell data in the globally (i, j, k) structured data array (see Fig. As already mentioned, the data output of the flow-map and FTLE field data is completely handled by libcfd2lcs. This is due to the fact that the data output interval defined by h can differ from the solver write interval ∆t sim write (see section 3.1). Therefore, the results generated by the function object are not stored in corresponding time directories but in a separate folder in the case directory called cfd2lcs output. Additionally, a directory named cfd2lcs temp is created inside of which all the substep data is stored. All data is stored in the Tecplot ASCII data file format (*.dat) and therefore can be visualised in ParaView when opened with its internal Tecplot reader or other common visualisation programs. In addition to this data, the computational overhead generated by the use of the function object with respect to the actual simulation is also output in the solver log file after each simulation time step. This enables the user to examine the computational costs of the LCS evaluation. In this section a few examples are presented which are designed to show the functionality and capabilities of the function object. Therefore, example cases are presented in which only a rectlinear simulation mesh, a separate simulation and LCS mesh and a single oversetMesh are used. In ( The parameters A, B and C can be freely selected and influence the properties of the ABC flow. In order to create comparability with literature values, A = 0.5, B = 0.8, C = 0.8 is chosen. In order to test the newly developed function object on this flow configuration a dedicated ABC flow OpenFOAM solver was written. This solver does not solve the Euler equations in the usual sense, but sets the velocity components on a given computational mesh according to In these results the FTLE ridges, which indicate the LCS candidates in the ABC flow, can be seen very clearly. Furthermore, the results agree very well with the results from Here ψ is defined by This leads to the expressions for two-dimensional velocity components u = -πA sin(πf (x)) cos(πy) As the name double gyre suggests, this model defines the flow of two two-dimensional gyres enclosed in a rectangle which expand and contract periodically along the x-axis. Therefore, the periodic motion is controlled by ε if ε ̸ = 0. Then ε describes approximately how far the line separating the gyres moves to the left or right from its centre position As it has already been shown in the previous examples that the function object can calculate the correct FTLE fields from velocity fields provided by OpenFOAM, this example will focus on how to deal with non-rectlinear simulation meshes. For this purpose, a standard flow problem is selected that is very well suited for an LCS evaluation: the flow around an infinitely long cylinder. The general case setup contains a fluid domain with size Starting with the procedure where an additional rectlinear computational mesh is used for the LCS evaluation, the flow domain is discretised with a simulation mesh consisting of 9200 hexahedra (see upper left mesh in Fig. Since the FTLE ridges only appear in a fraction of the overall domain and the LCS evaluation is computation-wise a quite costly operation, a second LCS mesh is prepared. This second LCS mesh is a lot smaller than the first one and encloses only the fraction of the flow domain where the FTLE ridges are expected to show up (see Fig. The second procedure, which can be used on problems where no single static rectlinear mesh can be constructed, utilises OpenFOAM's oversetMesh functionalities. With regard to the flow problem considered here, an oversetMesh is constructed with the same dimensions as the simulation mesh used previously. It consists of three mesh zones, namely a rectlinear background mesh zone that spans the whole fluid domain, another finer and smaller mesh zone that is used for a finer resolution of the flow and a cylindrical mesh that surrounds the cylinder (see Fig. We provide an OpenFOAM function object based on libcfd2lcs to compute Finite-Time Lyapunov Exponent (FTLE) fields that indicate candidates of Lagrangian Coherent Structures (LCS) and allow to visualise finite-time stretching and folding fields. LCS reveal the robust skeleton of material surfaces and are key to quantitatively assess material transport in time-dependent flows. This enables the OpenFOAM community to assess the geometry of the material transport in any flow quantitatively on-the-fly using principally any OpenFOAM flow solver. Focusing on the practical aspects, we only give a brief overview of the mathematical foundation as well as how the computation is done in practice. We describe the structure and functionality of the newly developed function object. Further focus is laid on how the function object acts as an interface between OpenFOAM and libcfd2lcs, how parallelisation is ensured and what has to be considered for the output of the generated data. From validation of the presented function object using simple benchmark problems, a notable computational overhead has been recognised. However, if LCS evaluations are used for much more complex problems as the ones used here, the computational overhead significantly drops and the LCS evaluation no longer accounts for the largest proportion of the computation time. Nevertheless, the user should be aware that the calculation of FTLE fields is expensive and should therefore think carefully about the size and position of the LCS mesh. In addition, consideration should also be given to whether both forward and backward-time FTLE calculations are required or if one of them is sufficient.