2D materials with high charge carrier mobility and tunable electronic band gaps have attracted intense research effort for their potential use as active components in nanoelectronics. 2Dconjugated polymers (2DCP) constitute a promising sub-class due to the fact that the electronic band structure can be manipulated by varying the molecular building blocks, while at the same time preserving the key features of 2D materials such as Dirac cones and high charge mobility. The major challenge for their use in technological applications is to fabricate mesoscale ordered 2DCP networks since current synthetic routes yield only small domains with a high density of defects. Here we demonstrate the synthesis of a mesoscale ordered 2DCP with semiconducting properties and Dirac cone structures via Ullmann coupling on Au(111). This material has been obtained by combining rigid azatriangulene precursors and a hot dosing approach which favours molecular diffusion and reduces the formation of voids in the network. These results open opportunities for the synthesis of 2DCP Dirac cone materials and their integration into devices. Since the isolation of graphene and the demonstration of its remarkable charge transport properties in 2004, 1 two-dimensional (2D) materials have become a major trending topic in materials science and nanotechnology. Dosing TBTANG onto a Au(111) surface kept above the dehalogenation temperature (180 °C) yields a highly ordered monolayer of large honeycomb networks which extend over the whole surface (Figure The XPS analysis of P 2 TANG/Au(111) shows four well-resolved components and a shake-up feature in the C 1s spectrum (Figure and the intensity ratios of the components in the C 1s spectra are in agreement with the stoichiometry of P 2 TANG, indicating that the TANG backbone remains intact following polymerization. Confirmation of complete polymerization is obtained by comparing the C 1s XPS spectra measured for P 2 TANG and intact TBTANG, obtained on Au(111) at room temperature (RT), showing the disappearance of the peak at 284.8 eV of BE assigned to C-Br when C-C bonds are formed (Figure The ARPES map of P 2 TANG/Au(111) at 30 eV photon energy is presented in Figure The high intensity of the 5d Au bands hinders a detailed study of polymer related bands in the region between 2.5 and 8 eV of BE. P 2 TANG-derived bands are visible outside this region at 2.00 eV, 10.00 eV, 12.28 eV, 14.50 eV and 16.44 eV of BE (black arrows in Figure The ARPES maps of P 2 TANG/Au(111) and Au(111) in the proximity of E F are reported in Figure Their wavelike dispersion does not depend on the photon energy, which is expected for 2D electronic states. The calculated band structure for freestanding P 2 TANG (Figure A band with a cross-like shape, which resembles the Dirac cone predicted by DFT calculations (Figure A linear fit of this Dirac cone yields a band velocity of v F = 0.36•10 6 m/s, which is slightly lower than the band velocity for graphene on the Au(111) surface (v F = 0.8•10 6 m/s) 32 but higher than those calculated for a series of other hexagonal 2D polymers with C atoms as nodes and phenyls, thiophenes, pyrroles or pyrenes as linkers (v F < 0.15•10 6 m/s). The quality of the obtained P 2 TANG network allowed for LEED and ARPES characterization for the first time of a 2DCP despite numerous related investigations. the high rate of surface diffusion relative to C-C coupling Most studies of surface polymer formation using Ullmann coupling follow a two step procedure, where the molecules are first deposited intact on a surface at RT and subsequently annealed to promote C-C bonding. Using this approach for TBTANG on Au(111) produces a high-density self-assembled lamellar structure at RT, By dosing the precursor above the polymerization temperature, surface diffusion is enhanced, the high-density self-assembled phase is not formed, and a highly ordered 2D polymer is directly obtained. All experiments were performed using a low evaporation rate (about one hour to obtain a complete monolayer). This was selected to allow a lower probability of seed formation and the continuous growth of existing domains, as shown by Eichhorn et al. Importantly, hot dosing addresses the problem of hole formation. When the transport of the monomers to the growing polymer is limited to 2D diffusion, the formation of void defects in the network is unavoidable. 39 in a). c-e) LEED patterns of P 2 TANG/Au(111) at various temperatures; the 210 °C experiment in d shows the best result, with long-range ordered polymers. f) TBTANGO molecular structure. g) 60 x 60 nm 2 large scale and h) 6 x 6 nm 2 detail of P 2 TANGO dosed onto a hot surface at 210 °C (i: I t =-0.16 nA, V t =-0.26 V; j: I t = 1.08 nA, V t = 0.15 V). The hot dosing approach was previously explored for other 2D polymeric systems, without yielding long-range ordered structures. The generality of our experimental approach for the realization of long-range ordered 2DCP with tunable electrical and mechanical properties was explored by depositing TBTANGO on Au(111) using the same surface temperature, leading to large area domains of ordered polymer (Figure We have realized mesoscale ordered 2D -conjugated polymers by dosing rigid achiral heterotriangulene molecules on hot (210 C) Au(111) surface. This process minimizes the formation of network defects and favours the growth of highly extended (>100 nm) hexagonal structures. The substrate temperature is found to be a critical parameter as the highly ordered 2DCP could only be obtained within a 30 °C temperature range. The obtained polymer is resistant to annealing up to 400 °C and to air exposure. The unprecedented order allowed for characterization of the 2D polymers using both local (STM) and surface averaging (XPS, LEED and ARPES) techniques, which were supported by DFT calculations and by statistical analysis to evaluate the defect density and morphology. ARPES measurements validate the previously theorized band structure and reveal a Dirac cone feature at the -point below E F and a band velocity of the same order of magnitude of that obtained for graphene on the Au(111) surface. The mesoscale dimensions of the obtained 2DCP, their stability, the ability to grow on expendable Au(111)/mica substrates and the weak polymer/surface interaction, are all important for state-of-the-art device fabrication, thus opening a pathway towards the implementation of -conjugated polymers with semiconducting properties for applications in electronics and photonics. The synthesis procedure for the TBTANG precursor follows that described by Suzuki et al., XPS and ARPES measurements were performed at the VUV Photoemission beamline (Elettra Synchrotron, Trieste, Italy) on samples prepared in situ, using a Scienta R-4000 electron spectrometer at low temperature (50K) with p-polarized light. Between 30 eV and 120 eV photon energy, the energy and angular resolutions were set to 15 meV and 0.3°, respectively. XPS spectra were taken with 450 eV, 500 eV and 650 eV photon energies to collect C 1s, N 1s and O 1s, respectively, with total energy resolution of 30 meV. XPS spectra were analyzed using Voigt lineshape peaks and Shirley backgrounds, while the BE scale was calibrated by using Au 4f 7/2 at 84.00 eV and E F . Theoretical calculations were performed with the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) The zero-damping DFT-D3 method of Grimme, The optimized Au lattice constant of 4.09820 Å was determined with a 12-atom Au(111) supercell and a 13x13x13 k-mesh. Calculations involving the Au substrate used a four-layer slab corresponding to the epitaxy matrix, with a vacuum layer of 16 Å and the bottom two atomic layers fixed. The experimental Au(111) reconstruction was neglected on the basis of the weak polymer-surface interaction. Images of the simulated structures were generated using VMD software. 