Non-destructive testing and medical diagnostic techniques using ultrasound has become indispensable in evaluating the state of materials or imaging the internal human body, respectively 1,2 . To conduct spatially resolved high-quality observations, conventionally, sophisticated phased arrays are used both at the emitting and receiving ends of the setup 3 . In comparison, single-sensor imaging techniques offer significant benefits including compact physical dimensions and reduced manufacturing expenses. However, recent advances such as compressive sensing 4 have shown that this improvement comes at the cost of additional time-consuming dynamic spatial scanning or multi-mode mask switching, which severely hinders the quest for real-time imaging. Consequently, real-time single-sensor imaging, at low cost and simple design, still represents a demanding and largely unresolved challenge till this day. Here, we bestow on ultrasonic metasurface with both disorder and artificial intelligence (AI). The former ensures strong dispersion and highly complex scattering to encode the spatial information into frequency spectra at an arbitrary location, while the latter is used to decode instantaneously the amplitude and spectral component of the sample under investigation. Thus, thanks to this symbiosis, we demonstrate that a single fixed sensor suffices to recognize complex ultrasonic objects through the random scattered field from an unpretentious metasurface, which enables real-time and low-cost imaging, easily extendable to 3D. Owing to its high penetration depth and biocompatibility, imaging using ultrasound remains ubiquitous and pivotal in many areas such as medical ultrasonography and industrial crack and fatigue testing To overcome the above fundamental limitations, here we present a novel mechanism for real-time ultrasonic single-sensor imaging based on marrying an artificial structure Disordered media with waves scattering and interference patterns of uncontrollable complexity, are commonly considered detrimental to imaging. On the contrary, we aim at capitalizing on strong randomness, by extracting a wealth of the associated imaging information through AI. Our approach employs a single fixed transducer emitting a broadband ultrasonic signal, which passes through the object of interest whose scattered waves are further irregularly spread through the disordered metasurface in succession, before received by a single fixed receiver-sensor. Utilizing the rich complexity arising from the random parameter distribution and strong dispersion characteristics, the disordered metasurface can effectively encode the information of the objects' scattered field, by spreading throughout space the amplitudes of its spectral components detected by a single fixed sensor. By harnessing the remarkable learning and feature-extraction abilities of neural networks We conduct underwater ultrasonic experiments to emulate the working conditions in non-destructive testing and medical diagnostics. Our aim is to capitalize on the use of a disordered metasurface by exploiting its complex data encoding attributes, which we employ to recognize a variety of handwritten digits from the known Mixed National Institute of Standards and Technology (MNIST) database Before delineating this approach, we begin by discussing the general setup. As Fig. The distinctive scattered ultrasonic field strongly interacts with the disordered metasurface, whose randomness and dispersion characteristics enables effective signal encoding. Specifically, the randomness of the metasurface facilitates encoding in the spatial domain, while its dispersive response enables multiplexing the wave by its different spectral components. Consequently, the complex ultrasonic information of the scattered waves emanating an object, can be effectively captured, and interpreted via a single sensor at the metsurface's far-side, after which, we employ a neural network to extract the shape information of the object under study from the spectrum of the received signal. Through a series of matrix operations and nonlinear activation functions between layers, the neural network can efficiently construct an operational relationship between the input spectra and the output object shape, without necessitating any prior knowledge of the metasurface, requiring only a limited amount of data for training. Hence, in the absence of sophisticated material design requirements, media with a certain level of disorder, in combination with AI technology, can profoundly mitigate stringent system requisites and enable powerful imaging possibilities. We begin by designing the ultrasonic disordered metasurface used in our imaging approach. The metasurface consists of an agar slab encapsulating randomly distributed steel beads, as shown in Fig. Initially, an agar solution is subject to controlled heating until it reaches its boiling point, followed by a subsequent increase in temperature until a viscous state is attained. Next, a measured quantity of steel beads is blended into the solution, after which a cooling process is initiated, solidifying the material. Devoid of costly precision fabrication and advanced measurement instruments during this process, our metasurface solely requires facile random blending of steel beads. Thus, the metasurface costs much less than one dollar. To verify the randomness of the metasurface, we conducted an experiment where the metasurface is impinged by sinusoidal pulses with a center frequency of 2.5 MHz and a circle number of 2 (see Supplementary information for details). Measurements were taken at five points (green dots in Fig. To prepare the dataset for the neural network training, 700 handwritten digits from the MNIST Database are selected and engraved in metal plates as the objects to be imaged, with 70 samples for each digit from 0 to 9 (see Method and Supplementary information for details). We sequentially measured and recorded the signals received by a single fixed sensor placed behind the metasurface. Among the measurements, 600 samples were allocated for the training set, while 100 samples were designated for the test set, as shown in Fig. Therefore, it can be concluded that the neural network is capable of effectively decoding the encoded information based on the disordered metasurface scattering data and the comprehensive training provided by the training set. It is worth mentioning that once the neural network training has completed, the entire imaging process has completed within tens of microseconds, which can be made even faster by increasing the bandwidth of the emitted signal. This indicates the potential for real-time imaging of dynamic objects, such as a pulsating heart, which holds significant importance in practical medical applications. Figures In conclusion, we have demonstrated an approach that can realize real-time object imaging by a single fixed sensor with the help of an extremely low-cost disordered metasurface and AI technology. As a case example using this technique, we used an ultrasonic setting to experimentally detect and recognize different handwritten digits selected from the MNIST database. Our findings overcome a long-lasting bottleneck comprising a to date unresolved compromise between single-sensor and real-time imaging to ensure high image quality at low fabrication and machining costs. Combining a disordered metasurface and AI is universal and not limited to ultrasound. While we only demonstrated 2D handwritten digit imaging, it is entirely possible to extend it to complex objects in three-dimension (3D) as well and also considering other wave types. Relying only on wave randomness and dispersion, a plethora of artificially structured materials and compounds could be employed beyond the metasurface used in the present experiments. Thus, we anticipate that our approach will provide enough momentum to advance in real-time single-sensor applications for future low-cost devices interesting for industrial and medical applications and beyond.