Biasing a three-terminal Josephson junction (TTJ) with symmetrical voltages 0, V, -V leads to new kinds of DC currents, namely quartet Josephson currents and phase-dependent multiple Andreev reflection (MAR) currents. We study these currents in a system where a normal diffusive metallic node N is connected to three terminals S0,1,2 by barriers of arbitrary transparency. We use the quantum circuit theory to calculate the current in each terminal, including decoherence. In addition to the stationary combination φQ = φ1 + φ2 -2φ0 of the terminal phases φi, the bias voltage V appears as a new and unusual control variable for a DC Josephson current. A general feature is the sign changes of the current-phase characteristics, manifesting in minima of the quartet "critical current". Those sign changes can be triggered by the voltage, by the junction transparency or by decoherence. We study the possible separation of quartet currents from MAR currents in different regimes of parameters, including an "funnel" regime with very asymmetric couplings to S0,1,2. In the regime of low transparency and asymetric couplings, we provide an analytic perturbative expression for the currents which shows an excellent agreement with the full numerical results. The understanding of subgap transport in transparent Superconducting/Normal Metal/Superconducting (SN S) Josephson junctions, either point contact-like, or made of a diffusive metallic region, has reached an advanced state on both experimental and theoretical levels. Multiple Andreev reflections (MARs) allow to describe dissipative quasiparticle motion below the superconducting gap ∆, where transport is assisted by Cooper pairs. Recently, multiterminal structures, made of three or more superconducting terminals contacted by a single normal region, have been considered theoretically, both at equilibrium As a result, a stationary current component can appear as a DC resonance, similar to an equilibrium Josephson current, but also controlled by the voltage V. For V 1 + V 2 = 0 such a current involves two entangled pairs emitted from S 0 crossing simultaneously and transmitted, one in S 1 , the other in S 2 . Those processes have been dubbed as "quartet currents" since the elementary "exchange currency" between one terminal and the two others is made of two Cooper pairs instead of one. Of course, they coexist with the standard AC Josephson current flowing between any pair of terminals. Another striking signature of the voltage commensurability is the presence of phase-dependent "phase-MAR" currents, where quasiparticle transport is accompanied by quartets instead of single pairs like in the two-terminal case. A recent experiment used a four-terminal junction where two of them are grounded and enclose a loop pierced by a flux. Motivated by recent experiments where a sizable normal metal island (rather than a system of quantum dots) separates the superconducting leads, we consider here a short diffusive three-terminal junction (TTJ) (Fig. This motivates the study of an asymmetric "funnel" TTJ where the biased terminals are much more weakly coupled than the unbiased one (Fig. The other focus of the paper is the balance between quartet and MAR currents, important in view of obtaining unambiguous signatures of quartet current in experiments. As expected, even at low voltages, both have the same order of magnitude for a symmetric TTJ corresponding to a fully resonant cavity making the junction. On the contrary, in the funnel case, the phase-dependent MAR component becomes negligible at low voltages. Yet the phase-independent MAR remains strong if the junction formed by the two biased terminals (at V, -V ) is symmetric. Only in a completely asymmetric TTJ, all MAR processes can be made smaller than quartets at low voltage. Finally, owing to the odd (for quartets) and even (for MARs) symmetries in phase, the DC current in all branches, which combines quartet and MAR contributions, yields a phase shift in the current-phase relationship and therefore makes TTJs a new source of tunable "φ-junction". The paper is structured as follows. The model and basic equations are presented in Section II. Section III discusses how the symmetry with respect to voltage inversion allows a practical definition of quartet and MAR currents for a junction with general asymmetry of the contacts. Section IV addresses a perturbative expansion when the contacts are strongly asymmetric, in the "funnel" case. Section V provides results on the spectral currents, that can be compared to the NDOS structure. Section VI describes the phase and voltage dependence of the quartet currents, for a symmetric and then for an asymmetric TTJ. Section VII discusses MAR currents and compares them to quartet currents. Section VIII provides a conclusion and perspectives. Let us consider a three-terminal junction formed by connecting three superconductors with a normal diffusive metallic region (Fig. where ĜR,A,K correspond to the retarded, advanced and Keldysh components respectively. In addition to Keldysh-Nambu space (to be denoted with a check hat, Ǧ), the quasiclassical Green's function generally depends on two times (or energies) and on spatial coordinates, Ǧ(E, x). The diffusive equation for the corresponding Green's function is also known as the Usadel equation (see also Ref. 39). Here the products should be understood as a matrix product in Nambu-Keldysh space along with a convolution in the double time (or energy) representation. The Pauli matrices in Nambu space are here denoted with a hat by ⃗ σ = σx , σy , σz , and D(x) denotes the diffusion coefficient. The Usadel equation can be seen as a conservation of the quasiparticle current density, ǰ(x). Here, ν is the electronic density of states and σ(x) is the conductivity. The two quantities are related by σ = e 2 Dν. Here we employ a discretized version of the quasiclassical equations, the so-called quantum circuit theory. where complex energies have been introduced as ε = E + i0 + and ξ = ε 2 -|∆| 2 . Here ∆ i = |∆|e iφi . The positive vanishing complex part of ε is essential in view of the branch cut of the square root function in the complex plane. The advanced and retarded Green's functions are related by ĜA σz and the Keldysh Green's In the present work, terminals S 0,1,2 are respectively set to voltages Here the reference phase φ 0 is set to zero. While the Green's function of terminal S 0 is given by Eqs. ( where Ǧi (t 1 -t 2 ) corresponds to the equilibrium Green's function given by Eqs. ( Due to the time-dependence in the Hamiltonian, and periodicity with a single Josephson frequency ω 0 = 2eV h , one can use double-time Fourier transform and represent the Green's functions in terms of a single energy variable (within the interval [-ω0 2 , ω0 2 ]) along with two harmonic indices, Ǧ(E Let us now write the circuit theory equations. The node is separated from each terminal by a connector. Those express the conservation of the Keldysh matrix current, as a discretized version of Eq. ( where the T (i) n are the transmission coefficients of channel n across each connector. Note that since Ǧ2 = 1, both matrices Ǧi and Ǧc commute with { Ǧi , Ǧc }. This explains the notation using the fraction for matrix inversion in Eq. (7). To simplify, one can formally take N equivalent channels and define where T is a scaling transparency factor for all contacts, and the factors Γ i are used to describe contact asymmetries. The physical DC current I i in terminal i (index c is omitted), as measured in an experiment, is then given by the Nambu trace of the Keldysh component of the matrix current ÎK ic as The circuit theory formulation allows to take into account the dephasing which takes place in a normal metal diffusive conductor. In the single node model the only source of coherence loss is due to the difference in wavevectors of electrons and holes at the same energy. The loss of coherence is taken into account by connecting a fictitious terminal to the node. The current to this terminal is given by, where σz is the Pauli matrix in Nambu space, and τ d is the dwell time of quasiparticles in the node, including the connectors. Notice that no physical current flows towards this fictitious terminal. The basic equation of circuit theory which determines Ǧc stems from the law of current conservation: The same equation can be re-written as a commutation relation between the Green's function of the central node and a matrix M that depends both on the Green's functions of the terminals and that of the central node: The so-called "tunnel" approximation to Eq. ( n in the denominator, yielding: This approximation requires that T ≪ 1. The solution for the node Green's function is in this case: One must stress that this approximation is much more than a simple perturbative calculation in the tunneling transmissions. Indeed, the circuit theory entails multiple scattering within the node. For instance, in the absence of decoherence, τ d = 0, and for a symmetric junction with two terminals, the tunneling approximation turns out to be exact whatever the In practice, the Green's functions and matrix currents are expressed in Nambu-Keldysh-harmonics space and thus have dimension 4(2N m + 1) where N m is the maximum number of harmonics of the Josephson frequency retained in the calculation. Satisfactory convergence is obtained by using N m = 2∆ eV as the matrix entries decay quickly at large harmonics value. The procedure to solve for Ǧc in the linear approximation, for each energy, is the following : M is diagonalized, its diagonal form is then normalized, so as to contain only ±1 eigenvalues, then the transfer matrix is applied back to obtain Ǧc . In the general case, the nonlinear Eq. ( The three-terminal setup allows two distinct kinds of DC currents to flow within the structure. First, dissipative currents generalize corresponding respectively to the quartets and MAR contributions. The MAR current can be further split as where ǏavMAR,i is the "ordinary" MAR current, obtained by averaging ǏMAR on the quartet phase, while ǏphMAR,i corresponds to the phase-dependent part. For a symmetric TTJ, such as Γ 1 = Γ 2 , the MAR current components flowing in terminals S 1 and S 2 are opposite, so that no MAR current flows through terminal S 0 , whose current is only due to quartets. For this reason, we sometimes refer to I Q as the quartet current from S 0 in the symmetric case. In this case, the components I Q and I M AR are obtained by integrating over frequency [see Eq. ( where the products entail matrix products of the Ǧα,β i,c (E, n, m) with α, β running on the Nambu indices 1 (for electrons) and 2 (for holes), and n, m running as integers. In the general case of asymmetric contacts, one can no longer access a simple self-contained expression for the various components of the current. Instead, one may rely on the symmetries of the physical (energy integrated) current. Indeed, to separate the total current in its quartet and MAR components in the general case of asymmetric contacts, one may use the symmetries with respect to V and φ Q . Time-reversal symmetry actually imposes that the total current is odd under a change of sign of both voltage and phases. First, as any dissipative current, the MAR components are odd in voltage thus even in φ Q . On the contrary, the quartet current is even in voltage and odd in φ Q . Therefore one has for the DC currents: , This suggests to use symmetrization with respect to V as a definition of MAR and quartet currents in each contact: A word of caution is needed about those definitions, if used in the biased terminals. In fact, as found numerically and can be shown by symmetry considerations, in the symmetric TTJ case Γ 1 = Γ 2 , one ob- This corresponds to the intuition that a quartet current splits equally into S 1 and S 2 . Conversely, in the general case Γ 1 ̸ = Γ 2 , one still finds , except for low transparency, as shown by a perturbative expansion of the circuit theory equations (see next Section). This means that high order multiple Andreev reflections entangle different kind of processes, and the symmetrizing procedure is merely a convenient definition separating dissipative and nondissipative current components. Yet this definition is unambiguous in terminal S 0 : for arbitrary couplings Γ i , symmetrization in V allows to isolate the quartet current. Let us remark that this procedure is convenient in calculations, but less in experiments where extrinsic causes can perturb the symmetry between V > 0 and V < 0. Circuit theory is nonlinear, which manifests both in the normalization of the node Green's function and in its selfconsistent definition through Eq. (11). It is nevertheless possible to find a perturbative solution when some of the three contacts are more weakly coupled than others. This is especially useful in the case where the weaker couplings are with the biased contacts, that we call a "funnel" TTJ (Fig. Let us consider a TTJ with couplings Γ i between the node and the three terminals at voltages 0, V, -V . The contact transparencies are T i = T Γ i where T denotes the overall transparency of the TTJ. When T ≪ 1, which is assumed here, the equations for the node Green's function Ǧc (in Nambu-Keldysh-harmonics space) and the currents take the form: Ǧc , M = 0 (26) This leaves the couplings Γ i and the decoherence parameter τ d (see previous paper) as the only parameters of the problem. We first take Ǧf = 0 (no decoherence). Since we are focusing on the case of a funnel TTJ, let us define Γ 0 = γ 0 (= 1 by definition if unspecified), Γ 1,2 = εγ 1,2 (γ 1,2 ∼ γ 0 ) where ε ≪ 1 is an expansion parameter. We know a priori that to obtain the quartet current we need at least a "trajectory" (in terms of products of Green's functions) passing twice through terminal 0 and once through both terminals 1, 2, thus second order in ε is required. Let us write: and solve at order 2 for Eqs. (1-3). Defining Ǧ12 = γ 1 Ǧ1 + γ 2 Ǧ2 , this yields: Owing to the constraint Ǧ2 0 = 1, a solution for Eq. ( where Ž is an arbitrary matrix. Inserting in the other equations and solving finally gives: The current in terminal 0 is obtained as an expansion in ε, starting at first order: Ǐ( Ǐ( The first order term contains components involving terminal 0 and one of terminals (1, 2), i.e. quasiparticle currents like two-terminal MARs. One verifies that the quartet current is contained in the second-order terms that involve all three terminals. This yields a simple expansion for the second order (quartet) current component: Let us show that, in a second order expansion, the quartet current components in S 1 and S 2 , obtained by symmetrization in V , are equal. One indeed shows easily that they are given by: Ǐ(2) Replacing V by -V amounts to exchanging Ǧ1 and Ǧ2 , as well as the phases φ 1 , φ 2 . Since the DC current is a function of φ 1 + φ 2 only, one sees that it also amounts to exchanging Ǐ(2) 2 , once integration on energy is performed. Therefore, symmetrization in V yields the same quartet component in S 1 and S 2 , equal to half of that in S 0 given by Eq. ( Taking into account decoherence, if Ǧf is nonzero, the zeroth order in ε for the node Green's function is obtained by solving: This yields the same formal solution as in the coherent case, replacing Ǧ0 by Ǧ(0) c : and the current in terminal 0: which does not simplify like in Eq. ( In this Section, we discuss the spectral structure of the current components in a symmetric TTJ (Γ 1 = Γ 2 ) biased at (0, V, -V ), calculated in the full energy interval, in units of e 2 h . They are given by I ic (E) = R( Ǐ24 ic (E, 0, 0) -Ǐ13 ic (E, 0, 0)), and they are compared to the spectral density (NDOS) N c (E) = R( Ǧ11 c (E, 0, 0) -Ǧ22 c (E, 0, 0)), as calculated in Ref. 32. As a benchmark, Fig. Let us now consider a "funnel" TTJ out of equilibrium (biased at voltages V, -V ) with ε ≪ 1 and T ≪ 1 (see Section IV). Fig. Let us now consider a fully symmetric TTJ, γ 1 = γ 2 = γ 0 . For low transparency T ≪ 1, the density of states displays sharp BCS-like structures centered at energy values corresponding to the six gap edges, e.g. given by E = ±∆, ±(∆ + V ), ±(∆ -V ). THE QUARTET CURRENTS. The quartet phase φ Q is stationary for any bias voltage V . Therefore the voltage appears as a novel control parameter for a DC Josephson current, in contrast with two-terminal junctions. As shown below and in next Section, the dependence of the quartet and the phase-MAR currents with V is highly nontrivial and reflects the resonant dynamics of a driven quantum system. Here the quartet current I Q is calculated in terminal S 0 for a TTJ such that Γ 1 = Γ 2 , but with the ratio Γ 1 /Γ 0 = ε taking any value. A. Fully symmetric TTJ, ε ≃ 1 Let us first consider the situation of a fully symmetric TTJ (see Fig. The quartet current vanishes at high voltages (Figs. Changing the transparency does not affect "much" the overall shape of the quartet current -voltage characteristics: the voltage at which the current changes sign then depends on the transparency T , especially in the presence of decoherence (Figs. Let us emphasize that the occurrence of a new control parameter V for the quartet current offers the following possibility : by changing the overall transparency of the TTJ, or that of one or two contacts only, one can change the sign of the current, provided the voltage V is suitably chosen. This extends the range of phenomena causing sign changes in a Josephson current. This might be useful in devices where commuting a junction from "π" to "0" is required. Let us now consider a "funnel" TTJ with ε ≪ 1 (Fig. Conversely, with moderate decoherence, the agreement with the perturbative treatment in ε is less good, especially for intermediate voltages (Fig. Let us end this Section by proposing an indirect experimental detection of the sign changes, when a phasesensitive experiment is not possible. Fig. We first consider a junction which is symmetric in terminals 1, 2, i.e. Γ 1 = Γ 2 . The full MAR current is defined as I M AR = e 2 2h T Γ 1 (I 1 -I 2 ), and there is no MAR current in terminal S 0 . The phase-dependent part of the MAR current I i phM AR is defined by subtracting from the full MAR current its average on the quartet phase φ Q : The phase-MAR current is represented as a function of the phase φ Q on Fig. Owing to the different symmetries of quartet and phase-MAR currents with respect to the quartet phase, their superposition yields a phase shift, that makes a TTJ a tunable "φ-junction": the phase shift indeed depends on the parameters of the TTJ : bias voltage V , transparency, decoherence, and also on the two relevant asymmetries: that comparing contact 0 to contacts (1, 2) (see the "funnel" case), and that mutually comparing contacts 1, 2. This is illustrated by two examples: first, within (S 1 , S 2 ) symmetry, the current in terminal S 1 superimposes quartet and MAR components thus displays a phase shift, which in Figure In a non phase-sensitive transport experiment, and in the case where MARs are observed in the full (V 1 , V 2 ) conductance map, care must be taken in interpreting the V -I anomaly observed on the "quartet line" For a rather symmetric TTJ one finds that I Q and I phM AR have comparable magnitudes, even at low voltage (Fig. As shown above, a funnel asymmetry is sufficient to make phase-MAR very small. This is because those processes involve coherently all three contacts and taking ε ≪ 1 suppresses multiple Andreev reflections between S 0 and both (S 1 , S 2 ). It also trivially hampers two-terminal MARs occurring either between S 0 and S 1 , or between S 0 and S 2 , which participate to the phaseindependent MAR current. Nevertheless, if couplings between the node and the leads S 1 , S 2 are comparable albeit small, MARs between those contacts (with voltage difference 2V ) become resonant and can overcome quartets. Fig. In this work we have studied in detail the voltage and phase dependence of the two DC current components involving quartets in a three-terminal Josephson junction biased with opposite voltages : quartet current and phase-MAR current. The salient feature is the sign changes occurring as the voltage is varied. The quartet current switches from a π to a 0 junction. These sign changes are absent at low voltage when the junction is strongly asymmetric in terms of the coupling to the unbiased "source" terminal compared to the two others ("funnel junction"). This, and the agreement between a perturbative and the exact calculation, points towards non-adiabatic effects as being responsible for such sign changes. This is similar to the behavior reported in quantum dot junctions. Probing the sign changes of the quartet current, more generally the φ-TTJ, requires a full quartet SQUID geometry. Potential extensions of this work include the computation of the noise characteristics of the TTJ within the circuit theory framework. In previous works where the diffusive node between the superconducting leads is re-placed by a system of quantum dots 