HoFe1-xMnxO3 (0 < x < 1) single crystals have been grown by the optical floating zone technique. A structural transition from the orthorhombic to hexagonal modification has been established in the crystals in the concentration range of 0.7-0.8, which has been confirmed by the X-ray diffraction data. For a series of the rhombic crystals, the room-temperature Mössbauer study and magnetic measurements in the temperature range of 4.2-1000 K have been carried out. It has been observed that, with an increase in the manganese content in the samples, the temperature of the spin-reorientation transition increases significantly: from 60 K in the HoFeO3 compound to room temperature in HoFe0.6Mn0.4O3. The magnetic measurements have shown that, upon substitution of manganese for iron, the magnetic orientational type transition changes from a second-order transition (AxFyGz → CxGyFz) to first-order one (AxFyGz → GxCyAz) with a weak ferromagnetic moment only in the b direction (for Pnma notation). The growth of the spin-reorientation transition temperature has been attributed to the change in the value of the indirect exchange in the iron subsystem under the action of manganese, which has been found when studying the Mössbauer effect in the HoFe1-xMnxO3 (x < 0.4) compound. Oxide materials containing transition and rare-earth ions exhibit many intriguing effects caused by the complex interplay of two magnetic subsystems. Orthoferrites with the general formula RFeO 3 Rare-earth orthoferrites represent a family with the extraordinary magnetic phenomena. The unique magnetic properties of these materials result from the complex interplay of the moments of 3d and 4f electrons. It is known well A way of controlling the temperature of the spinreorientation transition is isovalent substitution in the RFe 1-x M x O 3 (M = Cr, Mn, Co, Ni) iron subsystem. In this case, it becomes possible to smoothly change the magnetic properties in such systems and set the desired temperature T SR , for example, at the ultrafast magnetization switching in domain walls It should be noted that the majority of studies have been carried out on polycrystalline samples. Meanwhile, in terms of the potential of the discussed orthoferrites for microelectronic applications, it is desirable to explore their single-crystal samples. We can distinguish studies Concerning the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 compound, in The aim of this study was to grow and investigate single-crystal HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 samples with a manganese content of up to its maximum value at which this solid solution remains stable in the orthorhombic phase. At the first stage, to obtain the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 (x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, and 0.8) samples, the initial Ho 2 O 3 , Fe 2 O 3 , and MnO 2 powders (99.9%, Alfa Aesar) were mixed in required proportions and subjected to annealing at a temperature of 925 °C for 18 h. The annealed powders were poured into a rubber mold and pressed in a hydrostatic press at a pressure of ∼ 100 MPa. The resulting cylindrical samples were then annealed in a vertical furnace at 1400 °C for 16 h. After that, the synthesized polycrystalline HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 samples were placed in an FZ-T-4000-H-VIII-VPO-PC optical floating zone furnace (Crystal Systems Corp.) to grow single crystals. The crystal growth occurred in air at a normal pressure and a relative rod rotation speed of 30 rpm. The growth rates varied from 3 to 1 mm/h, depending on the ratio between iron and manganese in the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 composition. It should be noted that we attempted to grow the HoFe 1-x Co x O 3 , HoFe 1-x Cr x O 3 , and HoFe 1-x Ni x O 3 single crystals with x = 0.05; however, substitution of even 5% of chromium or nickel for iron led to incongruent melting and did not allow us to obtain high-quality single crystals. The change in pressure (up to 10 atm) and a gaseous medium (O 2 , Ar-O 2 , or Ar-H 2 ) did not improve the growth conditions in this case. It also seemed that the HoFe 0.95 Co 0.05 O 3 single crystal was successfully grown, but the measured temperature dependences of the magnetization were found to be the same as for the HoFeO 3 crystal, which showed that cobalt was not substituted for iron during the growth. To solve the crystal structure and determine the phase purity of the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 compound, a Bruker SMART APEX II single-crystal X-ray diffractometer was used. The measurements were performed at room temperature. The crystallographic orientations of all the single crystals were determined on a Photonic Science Laue Crystal Orientation System by the back reflection method. Mössbauer spectra for the investigated samples were obtained on an MS-1104Em spectrometer in the transmission geometry with a 57 Co(Rh) radioactive source at a temperature of 300 K. Temperature and field dependences of the magnetization of the grown single crystals were obtained on a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS-6000) in the temperature range of 4.2-350 K. The high-temperature (350-1000 K) magnetization measurements were performed on a Lake Shore Cryotronics VSM-8604 vibrating sample magnetometer. After temperature cycling up to 1000 K, the repeatability of the characteristic (Néel and spin-reorientation) temperatures and the magnetization values were checked. All the measurements were found to be fully repeatable. To check the quality of all the grown HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 single crystals and their orientations along the three crystallographic axes, the Laue method was used. As an example, Fig. It was established from the single-crystal X-ray diffrac- tion data that the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 (x < 0.7) single crystals are orthorhombic with the sp. gr. Pnma. Their lattice parameters are given in Table It can be seen from Table Where V zz is the EFG in the direction of the principal axis of the oxygen octahedron, θ is the angle between this axis and the direction to the neighboring oxygen ion, e is the elementary charge, and r is the metal-oxygen distance. In the calculation, all possible directions of the EFG axis in the local environment of the cation are checked, after which the main component of the EFG tensor is selected according to the condition|V The results of the calculation in all possible directions for all the samples are given in Table Samples for the Mössbauer spectroscopy study were prepared by grinding the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 (0 < x < 0.4) single crystals to a powder. The powder sample with a weight of 5-10 g/cm 2 according to the iron content was pressed in aluminum foil 20 mm in diameter. The processing occurred in two stages. At the first stage, possible nonequivalent positions of iron in the samples were determined by calculating the hyperfine field probability distributions. Basing on the results obtained, a preliminary model spectrum was formed. At the next stage, the model spectrum was fitted to the experimental spectrum by varying the entire set of hyperfine parameters using the least squares method in the linear approximation. The spectra obtained are shown in Fig. Let us focus on the dependence of quadrupole shift △ of the main sextet on the manganese content in the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 single crystal (Fig. Here, γ ∞ = -9.44 is the Sternheimer antiscreening factor for a spherically symmetric Fe 3+ cation In our case, the change in local distortions upon substitution is taken into account in the V zz value calculated from the X-ray diffraction data. It should be noted that the approach used ignores the covalent contribution of chemical bond electrons to the quadrupole splitting. In our case, however, this contribution for the Fe 3+ cation can be neglected. The calculated data are shown by spheres in Fig. To elucidate the effect of manganese substitution on the magnetic properties of the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 compounds, the temperature and field dependences of the magnetization M were measured. Figure In addition, with an increase in the manganese content, the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 Néel temperature decreases monotonically from T N = 672 K for the HoFeO 3 compound to T N = 125 K for the composition with x = 0.7 (Figs. where k ′ is a positive constant related to the second-order anisotropy fields in the b-a, b-c, c-a planes. x c characterizes a critical doping concentration from a hypothesis that at x = x c . In this study, the change in the second-order anisotropy constants responsible for the temperature of the spin-reorientation transition upon variation in the cobalt concentration in erbium, holmium, and dysprosium orthoferrites was investigated. In our opinion, this formalism It is known well that, during the spin-reorientation transition in the unsubstituted HoFeO 3 compound, the weak ferromagnetic moment rotates spontaneously by 90°f rom the b to c direction in the crystal (Pnma) from the A x F y G z to C x G y F z phase (Fig. First, as can be seen from the M (T ) dependences measured in the heating mode (Figs. Figure Figure11 shows the M (H) dependences measured at T = 300 K for all the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 samples and the remanent magnetizations at H = 0 Oe and coercivities (switching fields) H sw . The magnetization switching from the lower to upper branch occurs in a negligibly narrow field range, which means that the sample includes a single magnetic domain. In all the substituted samples at T = 300 K, the ferromagnetic magnetization component only exists along the b direction. Therefore, by changing the Mn content in the samples, one can smoothly change both the magnetization and coercivity value, which can be promising for use of this series of single crystals at room temperatures. It can be concluded from the analysis of the M (T ) dependences that, in manganese-substituted holmium orthoferrites, the spin-reorientation transition is a firstorder phase transition was observed in the TbFe 1-x Mn x O 3 compound in Until now, no attention has been paid to the origin and mechanism of the significant growth of the temperature of the magnetic spin-reorientation transition in the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 system. The reasons for this phenomenon can be analyzed using the Mössbauer spectroscopy data. Since the replacement of a part of iron cations results in a change in the orbital momentum at the sites, the substitution will also change the spin-orbit coupling value. As a result, the magnetic moment direction will deviate from the quantization axis. This will lead to a change in the mutual orientation of the EFG (V zz ) vector and the hyperfine field vector (H hf ) on iron nuclei. In the case of the axial symmetry, this change is described by the dependence of the quadrupole shift Here, Q is the quadrupole moment of a nucleus (+0.21 • 10 -24 sm -2 ), V zz is the main component of the EFG tensor, θ is the angle between the EFG direction and the hyperfine field, and e is the elementary charge. It is reliably demonstrated by the magnetic measurement data that the temperature of the spin-reorientation transition in the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 compound depends strongly on the degree of substitution. Since the crystal structure is preserved in this case, it can be assumed that the quadrupole moment of a nucleus does not change. This allows us to estimate the concentration dependence of the angle θ upon substitution using the Mössbauer spectroscopy data and Eq. 3. Thus, taking into account the V zz values obtained by X-ray diffraction, we can estimate the change in the mutual orientation of the vectors V zz and H hf under the substitution (Fig. In this study, a series of HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 single crystals over the entire substitute (Mn) concentration range was synthesized by the optical floating zone technique. It was found that, in the concentration range of 0.7 < x < 0.8, the HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 compound undergoes a structural transition from the rhombic (x < 0.7) to hexagonal modification. For the rhombic HoFe 1-x Mn x O 3 modification, the magnetic measurements were performed, which showed that the spin-reorientation transition temperature T SR increases significantly as the manganese content grows and, in the sample with x = 0.4, attains room temperature, which is important for application of the substituted orthoferrites. It was found from the analysis of the magnetic measurement data that in all the substituted samples, the spin-reorientation transition is a first-order phase transition from the A x F y G z → G x C y A z phase with decreasing temperature, whereas in the initial HoFeO 3 sample, this is a second-order transition from the A x F y G z → C x G y F z phase. An increase in the temperature of the spin-reorientation transition was attributed to a decrease in the value of the indirect Fe-O-Fe exchange under substitution of manganese for iron, which was established in the Mössbauer spectroscopy experiments. x M -O1(4c) M -O2(8d) M -O2(8d) FIG. 3. EFG tensor components vs Mn content in the HoFe1-xMnxO3 compound. The inset shows the directions of all the components of the EFG vector relative to the crystallographic axes. FIG. 5. Concentration dependence of the average hyperfine field on iron nuclei in the HoFe1-xMnxO3 compound.