The Berry phase is an important concept in solids, correlated to the band topology, axion electrodynamics and potential applications of topological materials. Here, we investigate the magnetotransport and Berry phase of rare earth element Gd doped Bi2Se3 (Gd:Bi2Se3) topological insulator at low temperatures and high magnetic fields. Gd:Bi2Se3 single crystals show Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillations with nontrivial Berry phase while Bi2Se3 single crystals show zero Berry phase in SdH oscillations. The temperature dependent magnetization curves can be well fitted with the Curie-Weiss law in 3-300 K region, indicating no magnetic ordering in Gd:Bi2Se3 crystals. Moreover, Gd doping has limited influence on the quantum oscillation parameters (e.g., frequency of oscillations, the area of the Fermi surface, effective electron mass, Fermi wave vectors etc.), but has an impact on the Hall mobility, carrier density, and band topology. Our results demonstrate that Gd doping can tune the Berry phase of topological insulators effectively, which may pave a way for the future realization of many predicted exotic transport phenomena of topological origin. The Berry phase, an important concept in many fields of physics, was proposed by Berry in 1984 The quantum oscillation behaviors are normally observed in metallic materials. However, recent reports broaden this knowledge in various insulating materials with special bulk-band symmetries and metallic surface states, e.g., SmB6 Another effective tunning of the Berry phase in a 3D TIs is the magnetic ion doping. Upon doping, the spin texture of topological surface state changes to a hedgehog-like spin texture, e.g., in a magnetic ion doped Bi2Se3, the surface state was gapped due to the ferromagnetic ordering, and the spin texture was turned to hedgehog like A modified Bridgeman method was employed to grow the topological insulator single crystals (Bi2Se3 and Gd:Bi2Se3). Briefly, high-purity Gd (99.9%), Bi (99.99%), and Se (99.99%) powders (~10 g) in the stoichiometric ratio were mixed and sealed in a quartz tube as starting materials. For the Gd doped sample, the starting nominate ratio is Gd0.1Bi1.9Se3. The crystal growth was carried out using the following procedure: i) Heating the mixed powders to 1100 C in 1 o C/min to completely melt them; ii) Maintaining at this temperature for 24 h to ensure uniform mixture of Gd, Bi, and Te atoms; and iii) Slowly cooling down to 500 C at 2 o C/h to crystallize the sample; iv) naturally cooling to room temperature. Since the Gd dopants possess a high melting point, we set the melting temperature at 1100 C in step i) and ii) to ensure full interaction among the molten elements in the liquid state. After the growth process, singlecrystal flakes with a typical size of 5 × 5 × 0.2 mm 3 can be mechanically exfoliated from the ingot. The single crystals prefer to naturally cleave along the (001) planes, resulting in c-axis being the normal direction of the flakes as is commonly the case in this family of materials. The dopant distribution of Gd:Bi2Se3 flakes was confirmed using X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) coupled to a scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In the present work, we employ the EDS results as the final composition, which is determined to be Gd0.02Bi1.98Se3. The electronic transport properties were measured using a physical properties measurement system (PPMS, Dynacool-14T, Quantum Design). Hall measurements were performed on a freshly cleaved ab plane, using room-temperature cured silver paste. The electric current was parallel to the ab plane while the magnetic field was perpendicular to the ab plane. The angle dependence of the magnetoresistance (MR) was measured using a horizontal rotational rig mounted on the PPMS. Before rotation, the sample alignment was designed to make sure that the magnetic field was always perpendicular to the electric current. The magnetic measurements were conducted using the vibration sample magnetometer (VSM) equipped on PPMS. During temperature dependent magnetization (MT) measurements, the samples were cooled to 3 K with 500 Oe magnetic field (FC mode) and zero magnetic field (ZFC mode), respectively, after which the magnetization data were collected in the heating process, with applied magnetic field of 500 Oe. Magnetic hysteresis (MH) curves were obtained by scanning the magnetic field between 5 T and -5 T at certain temperatures. Before we conduct electronic transport measurements, EDS measurements were performed on freshly cleaved surface of crystals to analyze the distribution of Gd dopants. A relatively large area (500670 m 2 ) was selected to conduct the measurements to ensure the accuracy of element ratio in the crystal, as shown in Fig. Before conducting electronic transport measurements on Gd:Bi2Se3 single crystals, we first revisit the electronic properties of Bi2Se3 single crystals grown with the same condition as that for Gd:Bi2Se3 crystals. The Bi2Se3 crystals possess a metallic ground state due to the Se vacancies. MR (MR = [R(B) -R(0)]/R(0)] in the 3-300 K and 0-14 T region are shown in Fig. Where 2(e). The angular dependent SdH oscillations show 2D-like behavior, which is probably contributed by some 2D-like trivial bands. Therefore, we deduce that the Fermi level is sitting on the edge of bulk conduction band, where the near-edge two-dimensional electron gas contributes mainly to the quantum oscillations Similarly, a freshly cleaved Gd:Bi2Se3 single crystal is employed to conduct MR measurements at various fixed temperatures, with applied external magnetic fields up to 14 T, as shown in Fig. According to the LK formula, the effective mass of carriers contributing to the SdH effect can be obtained through fitting the temperature dependence of the oscillation amplitude to the thermal damping factor R T , which is shown in Fig. We employed a modified Bridgeman method to grow Gd-doped Bi2Se3 single-crystal topological insulators. The Gd dopant distributes uniformly in the crystals, in which the doping level is ~1 atom% in Bi sites, as verified by EDS. The magnetic measurements show that no The FFT spectra of oscillatory patterns. (f) Magnetic hysteresis loops at T=3, 30, and 300 K. 