Thermal rectifiers are devices that have different thermal conductivities in opposing directions of heat flow. The realization of practical thermal rectifiers relies significantly on a sound understanding of the underlying mechanisms of asymmetric heat transport, and two-dimensional materials offer a promising opportunity in this regard owing to their simplistic structures together with a vast possibility of tunable imperfections. However, the in-plane thermal rectification mechanisms in 2D materials like graphene having directional gradients of grain sizes have remained elusive. In fact, understanding the heat transport mechanisms in polycrystalline graphene, which are more practical to synthesize than large-scale singlecrystal graphene, could potentially allow a unique opportunity, in principle, to combine with other defects and designs for effective optimization of thermal rectification. In this work, we investigate the thermal rectification behavior in periodic atomistic models of polycrystalline graphene whose grain arrangements were generated semi-stochastically to have different gradient grain-density distributions along the in-plane heat flow direction. We employ the centroidal Voronoi tessellation technique to generate realistic grain boundary structures for graphene, and the non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations method is used to calculate the thermal conductivities and rectification values. Additionally, detailed phonon characteristics and propagating phonon spatial energy densities are analyzed based on the fluctuationdissipation theory to elucidate the competitive interplay between two underlying mechanisms, namely, (i) propagating phonon coupling and (ii) temperature-dependence of thermal conductivity that determines the degree of asymmetric heat flow in graded polycrystalline graphene. Developing technologies that can improve energy sustainability is a major priority for our society in the current times. New and efficient thermal devices can play a central role in this regard in a variety of applications. A thermal rectifier is one such thermal nanodevice that preferentially conducts heat in one direction, analogous to its electronic counterpart, and can potentially open up novel technological frontiers of applications such as continuous thermoelectric renewable-power generation, thermal logic circuits, and thermal management systems for atomic clocks if adequate efficiencies can be achieved In our earlier work, we found a cross-plane thermal rectification mechanism in out-of-plane gradient hydrogen-functionalized multilayer graphene (G-MLG), which was attributed to the phonon density of states (PDOS) mismatch between the heat source and sink While the majority of research focus in this field has so far been on engineering single crystalline 2D rectifiers, it is important to elucidate the effects of polycrystalline structures on the rectification mechanisms in order to realize practical 2D thermal rectifiers at length scales beyond several micrometres, owing to the difficulty associated with producing and processing pristine, large area, single crystalline 2D materials. Though a recent study using non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations (NEMD) In order to obtain realistic atomistic models of polycrystalline 2D materials, the central Voronoi tessellation (CVT) algorithm where m i and v i are the mass and velocity of the atom i and k B is the Boltzmann constant. The simulation starts by repeated minimization with in-plane relaxation and MD equilibration runs in a canonical ensemble (NVT) until the pressure and potential energy of the system upon (Gaussian) randomized velocity initiation fall below a set threshold. This is followed by gradual heating and cooling of the respective heat baths for 500 ps, and then maintaining the set bath temperatures for the rest of simulation, where the atoms outside the heat baths are in a microcanonical (NVE) ensemble. Once steady state has been reached the calculation of the average temperature profiles and the heat flow rate is done by averaging over at least 1.3 ns or more, depending on the nature of the simulation, which is used to calculate the thermal conductivities based on the temperature difference between the heat source and the heat sink in the structure, ∆T 11 , using the following relationship: Where Q/A is the steady state heat flux, and L is the distance between the heat source and the heat sink. The value of ∆T ≈ 1.35 × L is used to maintain good signal to noise ratio and the linear transport regime, where temperature and length units are K and nm, respectively. The atoms in two narrow 0.5 nm edges at the two ends along the direction of heat flow are kept fixed during the heat transfer simulation. A timestep of 0.2 fs is used for the simulations to have sufficient accuracy. The Langevin thermostat, shown not to cause any unphysical phonon density of states characteristics, was used to model the heat source and sink in the simulations The optimized Tersoff forcefield developed by Kinaci et al. has been used to describe the graphene inter-atomic interactions where ε iα,λ is the αth eigenvector component of the phonon mode λ with frequency ω λ for the ith atom and N is the total number of atoms. The ε iα,λ and ω λ can be calculated by diagonalizing the dynamical matrix ) ħωε iα,λ * ε iα,λ δ(ω -ω λ ) α λ ω (5) where n is the phonon occupation number given by the Bose-Einstein distribution, and λ spans all the long range phonons with P λ greater than a set threshold We first designed a protocol to create the atomistic structures of GPG having realistic and randomized distributions of grain shapes and orientations across the devise, while also possessing an average arrangement of grain densities across the GPG structure that resembled any arbitrary user-defined design, or layout. We started with an arbitrary layout of grain densities at different points along the length of the structure, which will guide the creation of grains that follow any desired distribution, including a uniform or a monotonically increasing/decreasing grain number density, along the length of the structure. This layout is then mirrored to represent a periodic distribution in the 2D space. Then a set of regular points is generated based on the layout of number densities from the previous step that are distributed in a rectangular region representing the size of the final periodic atomistic GPG structure. Following this step, random perturbations are introduced to the set of regular points in the form of vectorial displacements for each point that follow a Gaussian distribution with the mean at 0 the standard deviation being scaled to 1/8 th of the inter-point distance based on the corresponding number density that was used to create the given point. Thus, the degree of perturbations in this step can be changed, which affects the statistical deviations of the final atomistic polycrystalline graphene structure versus a regular arrangement of grains that very closely follows the prescribed grain density distribution layout without sufficient realistic randomness in grain shapes and orientations. Then the points are used as the generators to create a Voronoi tessellation whose edges represent the grain boundary regions and each polygon in the tessellation is used to generate a graphene lattice having 0.246 nm lattice constant Semi-stochastic atomistic modeling scheme for graded polycrystalline graphene. The initial layout is mirrored and added to create a periodic layout which is used to define the regular grain generator positions. The dotted line at the middle of the periodic atomistic polycrystalline graphene model shows the location at which the model is split to generate two structures each having a monotonic change in average grain density along its length. Subsequently, we define a new parameter to characterize the key aspect of the degree of the variation of grain density across the length of the structures, denoted as the grain density gradient parameter, which is calculated as the difference between the maximum and minimum values of grain densities divided by the distance between the respective regions in the unit GPG structure as described above. In this study, all the GPG structure have a linear variation of the number of grains per unit width across the length of the structure. Once the periodic GPG models are created, it is divided exactly in half and each half, which has the maximum and minimum grain densities at its two ends, is used as a separate model for the atomistic conductivity simulations as shown in Fig. Next, we try to understand the underlying mechanism of TR in GPG by focusing on the phonon characteristics in polycrystalline graphene at any arbitrary temperature. Fig. This study provides the first evidence of the competing dual mechanisms that dictate the thermal rectification behavior in polycrystalline graphene, viz., asymmetric (i) propagating phonon coupling and (ii) temperature-dependence of thermal conductivity based on large-scale atomistic simulations and phonon calculations. This understanding can be vital in future efforts to manipulate the TR in practical polycrystalline graphene structures for more efficient 2D thermal rectifiers. Specifically, we expect engineered graded polycrystalline structures with a combination of greater length and larger difference between terminal grain densities to be promising candidates for efficient thermal rectifiers. Indeed, further structural modifications such as gradations in functionalization and defects can further enhance the rectification observed in similar graphene samples synergistically.