Understanding the properties of supercooled fluids in equilibrium, even below the calorimetric glass transition Tg, is an elusive challenge. This is even more true for the properties of the ideal glass, defined as the minimum of the potential energy landscape (PEL) in the non-crystalline regime. Although its existence is a mathematical necessity due to the finite range of energies, its properties, and physical relevance are still undecided. Here we combine the million-fold acceleration of Swap Monte Carlo with PEL analysis to study a non-network 2D model glass former in equilibrium for a wide range of system sizes and temperatures. We observe the transition from fragile to strong behavior and provide a generic perspective to such observations in many experimental non-network glass formers, or the saturation of structural disorder upon cooling. Furthermore, we can identify a particular system size that shows quantitative agreement with the macroscopic limit, while allowing a complete characterization of the potential energy landscape (PEL) down to its global minimum. This implies the availability of configurational entropy down to the zero temperature limit without the detour via liquid entropy, thereby quantifying the putative entropy crisis. Through appropriate system size analysis, we can identify a low-energy depletion regime, including the ideal glass, and reveal its physical relevance for equilibrium properties over a wide temperature range, including below Tg. Introduction-Glass, a disordered material, has remained ubiquitous in human civilization for millennia. Furthermore, the intriguing and elusive problem of the nature of glasses, emerging upon cooling a supercooled liquid, persists as an unsolved and notorious enigma in the realm of condensed matter physics Thermodynamics-wise, a relation between dynamics and entropy has been formulated in well-known approaches such as Adam-Gibbs The potential energy landscape (PEL), as a general approach, one studies the distribution of the inherent structures (IS), i.e., local energy minima (denoted IS-density), and their topology. This information helps to elucidate the underlying nature of thermodynamic and dynamical properties A PEL study requires the use of relatively small system sizes because for large systems, the information content is reduced due to the presence of many uncorrelated subsystems Here we study a 2D non-network glass former via the swap Monte Carlo technique Specifically, we analyze a discrete-polydisperse mixture of purely repulsive spheres with 10 particle types in two dimensions. The composition is kept strictly the same for all system sizes, ensuring consistency in the study; see the Methods section for details Quantifying finite-size effects-We start by evaluating the size dependence of the standard deviation and the average energy of the IS-density at two different temperatures. In the large system size limit, one expects that a system of size 2N can be considered as an independent superposition of two systems with size N . This superposition hypothesis implies that the standard deviation of the energy distribution (per particle) scales like N -1/2 as indeed observed for all N, see Fig. The energy distribution-A meticulous analysis of the energy distribution across various system sizes, temperatures, and energy levels yields further insights and understanding. First, we report the Boltzmann distribution P (E IS , T ) of IS energies, determined at different temperatures, as well as its first moment for N = 33 and N = 66, see Fig. One might conclude that the different temperatures, required for the identification of the bottom of the PEL, is related to the different energies (per particle) at the bottom. However, as argued in SI (VI), this effect would also be present if the superposition hypothesis is strictly valid, implying identical bottom energies. This is also the reason why it is not possible to find the bottom of the PEL for N = 132 (estimated required temperature: 0.02). The Boltzmann distributions P (E IS , T ) can be further explored to check the superposition hypothesis, see Fig. A more profound picture of the PEL can be obtained from knowledge of the IS-density, written as G(E IS ). It is defined such that the equilibrium probability is given by P (E IS , T ) ∝ G(E IS ) exp(-βE IS ) with β = 1/k B T . Thus, G(E IS ) can be obtained by reweighting the transition N = 33 → N = 66 close to the bottom of the PEL. It cannot be excluded that the superposition hypothesis is also violated for larger N in the range of very low energies. However, these differences would, if at all, only be visible for T < T g /2, and thus not relevant for experiments. Note that the non-Gaussian energy regime becomes much more dominant for large system sizes simply because of the superposition effect, i.e., the underlying convolution of the energy distributions. In contrast, for N = 33, the non-Gaussian regime is quite small. Note that even the N = 33 system can be viewed as a superposition of even smaller entities, as evidenced by much smaller values of the participation ratio (see SI (V)). Thus, the non-Gaussian regime even for the N = 33 system can be seen as a consequence of the finite en-ergy range of the PEL. We have reported that the onset temperature of the FSC appears when the depletion of low-energy states and thus non-Gaussian effects become relevant. Based on our observations, this suggests that the FSC is influenced by the presence of the bottom of the PEL of small-scale units. As already discussed exclusively for network formers, the presence of a low-energy bottom generally leads to low-T Arrhenius behavior Of utmost relevance for the discussion of the properties of glass-forming systems is the configurational entropy, defined via the Shannon description as S c (T ) = i P (E i,IS , T ) ln P (E i,IS , T ) where the sum is over all the IS. Since P (E i,IS , T ) ∝ Y i exp(-βE i,IS ), the configurational entropy can be rewritten as (see SI (IX)) S c = -⟨logY i ⟩ + β⟨E i,IS ⟩ + ln( i Y i exp(-βE i,IS )). Whereas the first two terms are thermodynamic averages, the last term requires knowledge about the absolute number of IS, which is available for N = 33 and N = N c = 66. Thus, the complete knowledge of the PEL for both systems unveils a unique prospect for evaluating the configurational entropy for all temperature ranges without resorting to the liquid entropy. For larger N , where the ground state is unknown, the entropy can be directly obtained apart from a temperature-independent shift factor and can be calculated for the temperature range, for which equilibrium simulations are available. Fig. One might have expected that the entropy for N = 33 only differs for low temperatures because of the lack of low-energy states as seen, e.g., in Fig. Lowest state and structure-To quantitatively characterize the low-energy state, Fig. Inspired by the network-forming liquids, the structural features of the IS are expected to characterize the system's disorder, depending on their energy Another structural property is a possible correlation of the diameters of adjacent particles. For this purpose, we report the mean diameter of the Voronoi neighbors for particles with σ ≥ 1.4 for system sizes between N = 33 and N = 1056, see Fig. Experimental system-The study by Hecksher et al. Discussion-The study accentuates a central issue regarding the relaxation dynamics of supercooled liquids near the experimental glass transition and beyond. Combining the idea of the study of relatively small systems with the swap simulation, we can investigate the energy landscape for an equilibrium relaxation time span of astronomical scale, thus achieving a view of the complete energy landscape. The non-Gaussian nature of PEL appears to be a general characteristic of glasses and not a special feature of network formers. Consequently, the crossover to Arrhenius behavior can be seen as a general glassy feature, avoiding any finite-T divergence. It also contextualizes the recent observations of low-T Arrhenius behavior, reported in other independent simulation studies The novel finding of crossover for the PEL and dynam-ics may represent a mechanism that can follow Kauzmann's scenario for the glassy state, providing valuable insights into the fundamental nature of glass. The corresponding depletion of low-energy states is mainly a consequence of the energy cutoff, seen for the smallest studied system. Additionally, this supports the idea that systems cannot be aged without crystallizing to arbitrarily deep energies; such observation could be crucial for modeling energy landscapes and mesoscale modeling of glass. Finally, our investigation paves the way for new studies for experimental and model glass formers within the context of PEL and understanding the dynamics around and below T g and possibly also about the impact of the dimensionality on the low-energy and thus low-temperature properties. Glass forming in-silico model-We study a discrete-polydisperse mixture of N purely repulsive particles, consisting of M species of equal mass m, pairwise interacting via power-law potential. The purely repulsive interaction potential for particles i and j, at the distance r ij is defined as with interaction range r ij /σ ij (= r c,ij ) ≤ 1.25. The fourth-order polynomial ensures that the potential, force, and second-order derivatives are continuous at the cutoff. We use ε as the unit of energy and temperature and average particle diameter ⟨σ⟩ as the unit of length. The molecular dynamics time is measured in reduced units of m ⟨σ⟩ 2 /ε, while the Monte Carlo time is reported as the MC steps performed. We study the system sizes ranging from N=33 to 1056, consists of M = 10 species, following the diameter-distribution P (σ) ∝ σ -3 A system with N particles inside a square cell of area V is simulated under periodic boundary conditions with a number density of ρ = N/V = 1. Sample preparation and dynamics-We perform swap Monte Carlo simulations to achieve equilibrated samples in a deeply supercooled regime. One swap Monte Carlo step is consistent with 80% translation moves(local), and the rest are swap (nonlocal) For local dynamics, we perform molecular dynamics simulations. Well-equilibrated samples from swap Monte Carlo simulations are subjected to constant temperature (NVT) simulations using the Nośe-Hoover thermostat in the temperature range of [0.5000, 0.0690]. Simulations have been carried out for the system sizes N ∈ Dynamical observable and time scales-The long-wavelength Mermin-Wagner fluctuations can mask the particle motions relevant to the relaxation, nonetheless irrelevant to the structure and cage-escape process where the angular bracket represents the averaging over the independent samples. For dynamics, we use diffusivity(D), computed from the long time limit of the MSD ∆(t) = lim t→∞ 4Dt. At the high temperature, the system acts as a simple liquid, and the dynamics expressed in the Arrhenius manner, where D ∞ and A are infinite temperature diffusion and the activation energy, respectively. For the high temperature, a departure from Arrhenius nature marks the onset temperature, T onset =0.25. The mode coupling temperature, T M CT = 0.105, is marked by fitting the power-law form-D -1 (T ) ∝ |T -T M CT | -γ , with exponent γ = 2.5, in the first two decades of supercooled dynamics. The system's dynamical nature is also studied with the parabolic and Vogel-Fulcher-Tammann's depiction in the first three decades of the glassy dynamics. Such projection describes the growth of the dynamics only within the first three decades of the supercooling; which systemically overestimates at the low temperature. While the initial supercooled liquid is fragile, the four(five)-decades of diffusion(relaxation) at extreme super-cooling (T≲0.1) adequately describes the strong behavior(further details see SI(VI)). The experimental glass transition temperature, T g = 0.0555, corresponds to the first 12-decade of glassy relaxation. The present study advances the equilibrium description of dynamics nearer to the glass transition till 1.24T g . The seven decades of glassy relaxation provide the mili-second narration of the dynamics approaching the glass transition. With the advantage of swap-MC, studying the potential energy landscape extends to much lower temperatures exceeding the billions of years for relaxation in the ultrastable limit. The potential energy landscape(PEL)-To accurately assess the PEL, we analyze the energy of the inherent structures (E IS ). An equilibrated sample is subjected to the conjugate gradient minimization up to machine precision using LAMMPS The probability distribution for inherent structure P (E IS , T ) can be re-weighted to estimate the energy distribution of the PEL from P W (E IS , T ) ∝ P (E IS , T ) exp(βE IS ). (4) For reliable construction of the probability distribution(G(E IS )) of PEL, the reweighted distributions glued with the average value for the range ⟨E IS ⟩ ± 1.2σ, with σ is the variance of the E IS . We focus on the supercooled regime below the onset temperature, and the Gaussian nature of the PEL can be marked in T ∈ [0.105, 0.25]. The equilibrium sampling is ensured with stringent assessments-(i) the particle size autocorrelation similar to the structural correlation, (ii) the system is not aging, (iii) and the energy-wise ratio of the weighted distribution for different temperatures (T i ,T j ) remains constant, i.e., P W (E IS , T i )/P W (E IS , T j )=constant, see also SI, section II. The study of the smaller system is also extended to describe the bulk system. A bulk system of N particles and energy E IS , can be considered as two coupled subsystems i(and j) of a microcanonical ensemble of size N i (N j ) and energy E i,IS (E j,IS ). Therefore, the total probability for the compound system can be expressed as P (E IS ; N ) = dE i P (E i,IS , N i ) • P (E -E i,IS , N -N i ), The disorder-The structural disorder, Θ, measures the deviation of compactness from the steric arrangements where θ j,k and θ o j,k represents the angle between i and ⟨j, k⟩ while the position of particle for inherent structure and all the particles in contact with each other, respectively. The N i is the number of pairs of neighbors next to each other. For our model, the system's mean disorder captures the pairs-wise energetic contribution and an excellent structural descriptor similar to energy.