We demonstrate non-volatile optical functionality by embedding multi-layer HfO2/Al2O3 memristors with III-V/Si photonics. The wafer-bonded III-V/Si memristor facilitates non-volatile optical functionality for a variety of devices such as Mach-Zehnder Interferometers (MZIs), and (de-)interleaver filters. The MZI optical memristor exhibits non-volatile optical phase shifts > π (Δng III-V/Si = 2.70 × 10 -3 ) with ~ 30 dB extinction ratio while consuming 0 electrical power consumption in a true "set-and-forget" operation. We demonstrate 6 non-volatile states with each state capable of 4 Gbps modulation. III-V/Si (de-)interleavers were also demonstrated to exhibit memristive non-volatile passband transformation with full set/reset states. Time duration tests were performed on all devices and indicated non-volatility up to 24 hours and most likely beyond. To the best of our knowledge, we have demonstrated for the first time, non-volatile III-V/Si optical memristors with the largest electric-field driven phase shifts and reconfigurable filters with the lowest power consumption. Over the past few decades, processor performance has scaled accordingly to Moore's Law, however, there remains a fundamental limit in current computer architectures: the von-Neumann bottleneck The III-V/Si SISCAP memristor (Fig. The variables β1,si, β2,si, β1,iii-v/si, represent the propagation constants of the top arm silicon, bottom arm silicon, and top arm III-V/Si memristor waveguide respectively. α1,si, α2,si, α1,iii-v/si represent the optical losses in the top arm, bottom arm, and top arm III-V memristor waveguide respectively. L1,si, L2,si, L1,iii-v/si represent the corresponding lengths. Based on the transfer-matrix model, the two directional couplers have a power transfer coefficient of 49 % assuming they are identical during fabrication. The measured spectrum indicates a free spectral range (FSR) of ~ 20.13 nm with an extinction ratio (ER) of ~ 31.1 dB near 1310 nm. The III-V/Si memristor region is located on the upper arm with a length of L1,III-V/Si = 350 μm. The pdoping is defined 2.0 μm away from the edge of the silicon waveguide and test structures indicated little to no effect on optical losses. The n-GaAs has a 200 nm overhang to the edge of the silicon waveguide such that III-V/Si bonding remains intact while avoiding contact with silicon pillars as shown in Fig. In order to test the reliability of the non-volatile states, time duration tests were performed by biasing the MZI memristor into multiple non-volatile states and the optical response was recorded for 24 hours every 5 minutes. In Fig. They also find use as linearized transfer functions for improved bit resolution in optical neural networks The AMZI bar and cross port transmission are respectively defined similarly for the MZI filter with the addition that the κr is the ring coupling coefficient. The FSR is defined by the ring circumference such that the FSR = c/ng/L. Therefore, a channel spacing of 65 GHz for the 1-ring AMZI requires Lring = 1200 μm for a calculated group index of ng = 3.78. The ideal ring resonator coupling for a 1-RAMZI occurs at κr = 0.89. Details of this device under volatile SISCAP phase shift operation can be found in x 1 x 2 x 3 x 4 a 1 [1] a 2 [1] a 3 [1] a 4 [1] a Over the past few decades, processor performance has scaled accordingly to Moore's Law, however, there remains a fundamental limit in current computer architectures: the von-Neumann bottleneck. This inherently results in the need to transfer massive data between processor and memory with an intrinsic limit on bandwidth × distance plus increasing interconnect power consumption. As a major step towards breaking this bottleneck (especially for photonic neuromorphic computing), the work described here enables volatile operation for low-power, high-speed, on-chip training and non-volatile memristive optical memory for inference. This is all done on a heterogeneous III-V/Si platform capable of integrating all the necessary components needed for next generation applications such as: neuromorphic/brain inspired optical networks The III-V/Si (de-)interleaver memristor were also demonstrated to exhibit memristive non-volatile passband transformation with full set/reset states for 1-RAMZI and 2 nd order AMZI architectures. Time duration tests were performed on all devices and indicated non-volatility up to 24 hours and most likely beyond. In addition, the memristive optical non-volatility allows for post-fabrication error correction of phase sensitive silicon photonic devices while consuming zero power as shown in the supplementary section. This equation is valid for a wavelength λ = 1310 nm and is used throughout the manuscript. Next, this spatial refractive index change Δn(x,y) is exported into a 2D-FDE optical mode solver (Lumerical) and the non-volatile change in effective index (Δneff,non-volatile) is calculated. This change can then be used to calculate non-volatile phase shifts on photonic devices such as ring resonators, Mach-Zehnder interferometers, filters, etc. The figure below illustrates the simulation procedure: An alternative use of the non-volatile III-V/Si memristor cell is the role it can play in post-fabrication trimming or permanent phase error correction without consuming static electrical power. Inherent to the high index contrast of the silicon photonic material system, phase sensitive devices such as arrayed waveguide gratings (AWGs), lattice filters, and (de-)interleavers are sensitive to phase errors and are dependent on waveguide width, thickness, and refractive index non-homogeneity. In this case, the ability to use non-volatile phase tuning to correct the aforementioned errors is essential to minimizing power consumption. Changes in resonant the resonant wavelength can be described by the following equation In-house device fabrications starts with a 100 mm SOI wafer which consists of a 350 nm thick top silicon layer and a 2 μm buried oxide (BOX) layer. The top silicon is thinned down to 300 nm by thermal oxidation and buffered hydrofluoric (HF) acid etching, thus leaving a clean silicon surface. Silicon waveguides are defined by a deep-UV (248 nm) lithography stepper and boron is implanted to create p ++ silicon contacts. Grating couplers, silicon rib waveguides, and vertical out-gassing channels (VOCs) are respectively patterned using the same deep-UV stepper and then subsequently etched 170 nm with Cl2-based gas chemistry. Next, the silicon wafer goes through a Piranha clean followed by buffered hydrofluoric (HF) acid etching to remove any hard masks. Next, an oxygen plasma clean is performed followed by a SC1 and SC2 clean. The III-V wafer goes through a solvent clean consisting of acetone, methanol, and IPA, followed by oxygen plasma cleaning and a NH4OH:H2O (1:10) dip for 1 minute. Next a dielectric of Al2O3 is deposited onto both GaAs and Si wafers via atomic layer deposition (ALD) by using 5 cycles of (TMA) + H2O with a target thickness of 0.5 nm on each side. All ALD deposition temperatures are performed at 300 °C. Next, a thickness target of 3 nm HfO2 is deposited on each sample via 30 cycles of tetrakis (ethylmethylamino) hafnium (TEMAH) + H2O. Finally, a thickness target of 1 nm Al2O3 is deposited on each sample via 10 cycles of TMA + H2O. The two samples are then mated manually at room temperature and then wafer-bonded under pressure for 250 °C (2 hour ramp) for a total of 15 hours. After wafer-bonding, the backside of the III-V is mechanically lapped until ~ 100 μm of III-V is left. An Al0.20Ga0.80As etch stop layer allows selective removal of the remaining GaAs substrate via wet etching (H2O2:NH4OH (30:1)). The Al0.20Ga0.80As is finally removed in buffered hydrofluoric acid (BHF), thus leaving a 150 nm-thick n-GaAs thin film on top of the SOI substrate. A combination of Ge/Au/Ni/Au/Pd/Ti (400/400/240/4000/200/200 Å) is deposited onto the n-GaAs as an n-contact layer. Next, the III-V film is defined and dry etched for device regions that require the use of phase tuning. Metal contact with the p-Si consists of Ni/Ge/Au/Ni/Au/Ti (50/300/300/200/5000/200 Å). Next, a plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) SiO2 cladding is deposited and the vias are defined and etched. Finally, Ti/Au metal probe pads are defined to make contact with n-GaAs and p-Si layers. The relevant fabricated devices can be seen in Fig. 