Algorithms that calculate the current-voltage (I-V) characteristics of a solar cell play an important role in processes that aim to improve the efficiency of a solar cell. I-V characteristics can be obtained from different models used to represent the solar cell, and the single diode model is a simple yet accurate model for common field implementations. However, the I-V characteristics are obtained by solving implicit equations, which involve repeated iterations and inherent errors associated with numerical methods used. Some methods use the Lambert W function to get an exact explicit formula, but often causes numerical overflow problems. The present work discusses an algorithm to calculate I-V characteristics using the LogWright function, a transformation of the Lambert W function, which addresses the problem of arithmetic overflow that occurs in the Lambert W implementation. An implementation of this algorithm is presented and compared against other algorithms in the literature. It is observed that in addition to addressing the numerical overflow problem, the algorithm based on the LogWright function offers speed benefits while retaining high precision. S OLAR cells have been extensively used for decades to convert light energy into electricity through the photovoltaic effect. They are one of the major sustainable options for generating electricity, owing to its benefits like long equipment lifespan and absence of harmful emissions. Solar cells find their applications in electric cars, waterheating, lighting systems, telecommunication towers and so on. A solar panel comprises many solar cells arranged in series and parallel configurations. The output of the individual cells may vary due to shading in the panel, or due to failure or poor performance of some cells due to aging. A defect in a string (series) of cells can cause loss of current through the whole string. This can be due to a shadow, not just a semi-permanent characteristic of the cell. For instance, a building chimney can shade a part of a roof panel, with the shadow moving slowly across the panel during the day. Shading can change even faster in case of a car with a panel on its roof being driven along a tree-lined avenue. Dust in the air, swirling sand deposited on a roof panel, can cause even more rapid changes in shading. Some parts of the panel receive full sunlight and keep pumping out energy which must go somewhere. When not provided with a path to flow, that energy gets dissipated as heat, possibly damaging the cells. This brings the need to perform real-time load balancing in order to minimize losses. To perform such calculations, it is essential to develop mathematical models and simulate the behavior of solar cells using the same. Solar cells are modeled in different ways based on the diode configuration. The single diode model is extensively used to represent solar cells, owing to its simplicity and accuracy in many cases. The single diode model is described by an implicit equation which relates the current I and the voltage V in terms of the cell parameters as described in literature However, existing literature reports arithmetic overflow exceptions when using the Lambert W function to evaluate I-V characteristics. For instance, at higher shunt resistance (used for enhancing the efficiency of solar cells), for a current I = 0 (open-circuit), the argument of the W-function can be 4.59 × 10 1141 . However, the maximum representable magnitude in IEEE-754-2008 compliant double precision is only about 10 323 [7]! This makes it difficult for this formula to be used in hardware implementations of load balancing algorithms. To get around this issue, Batzelis et al. Hence, it is desirable to replace the equation of Jain and Kapoor with an equation that: (i) is exact, analytic, explicit; (ii) is robust when used in calculations; (iii) does not pose a risk of arithmetic overflow; (iv) is desirable for lab studies, industrial applications, and field installations (load balancing); (v) is suitable for programming in Fortran or C or for microcontrollers; and (vi) reduces possible cancellations which cause loss of significant digits. A method proposed by Roberts and Valluri In this paper, an approach to calculate the I-V characteristics of a solar cell using the LogWright function is discussed and compared with other methods proposed in the literature that use the Lambert W function. In section II, the single diode model is described and both the implicit and explicit equations that relate the output current and voltage are presented. In section III, the LogWright function is introduced and the SDM equations in terms of the LogWright function are obtained. An algorithm to evaluate the LogWright function, which was proposed by Roberts The Single Diode Model (SDM) represents a solar cell using a constant current source, a diode, a series and a bypass resistor, and it approximates an inorganic solar cell quite well. The schematic of the SDM is shown in fig. A solar panel with a string of N s cells is modelled using the SDM, and the case of a single cell is handled as N s = 1. In either situation, the output current of the solar cell I is given by eq. ( where V is the output voltage of the solar panel, I ph is the photocurrent of the panel, I sat is the saturation current of the diode in the SDM and a is a constant defined as a = ηN s V T h . Here, η is the ideality factor of the diode, and V T h = kT q is the thermal voltage (k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature and q is the charge of an electron). One can obtain an explicit expression for I using the Lambert W function Similarly, an explicit expression can be obtained for the output current V as well. Either of eq. ( The LogWright function, also called the g-function Note that log denotes the natural logarithm (to base e). The LogWright function can be obtained from the Lambert W function by taking the logarithm of the function parameters. However, a more efficient way to compute the LogWright function is discussed in section III-A. This logarithmic transformation prevents extremely large numbers from occurring during intermediate calculations. The Lambert W ladder Eq. 2 can be rewritten in terms of the LogWright function as where u(V ) is (6) Similarly eq. ( where v(I) is Note that certain terms in eqs. ( The LogWright function is evaluated using the following 3step process, as proposed by Roberts and Valluri 1) Make an initial (crude) estimate of y 0 in the following manner: • If x ≤ -e, take y 0 = x. • If x ≥ e, take y 0 = log x. • If -e ≤ x ≤ e, take y 0 = -e + 1+e 2e (x + e) (linear interpolation between points (-e,-e) and (e,1)). 2) Refine the estimate y 0 by calculating This iteration formula is referred to as Halley's method and has cubic convergence (Note that the Newton Raphson method was used in 3) Perform additional iterations to get a better approximation y n = y n-1 -2(y n-1 + e yn-1 -x)(1 + e yn-1 ) 2(1 + e yn-1 ) 2 -(y n-1 + e yn-1 -x)e yn-1 In the interest of computational efficiency, it is desirable to calculate e y0 in step 2 and e yn-1 in step 3 only once and reuse the calculated values. This prevents repeated calls to the exponential function and speeds up the algorithm. Also, one can avoid unnecessary iterations with careful design in order to improve efficiency. In most practical application situations, only one iteration of step 3 is needed as y 2 is accurate to about 8 significant digits. This depends upon the voltage levels present in the equipment. One can obtain the I-V characteristics of a single diode model using the LogWright function by following one of the two approaches: 1) I-approach: Solve for current by using eq. ( • The SciPy All the performance analysis of the algorithms in terms of mean time, median time and RMSE is summarized in tables II and III. Table II contains the metrics obtained when the I-approach is used to calculate the I-V characteristics for SDMs with parameter sets 1-6 taken from table I, whereas table III contains the metrics when the V-approach is used for the same. As the Lambert W method encounters numerical overflow when calculating the I-V characteristics for models with parameters sets 3-6 using the V-approach, we neither include Lambert W in the results nor calculate the RMSE for any of the algorithms for those parameter sets. From the tables, one can observe that the Hybrid algorithm take the least amount of time to run, in both the I-approach and the V-approach, closely followed by the LogWright method. However, the LogWright method gives an exact solution to the characteristic equation whereas the Hybrid method gives an approximate solution with error of the order 10 -3 . We also observe that I-approach is faster than the V-approach when working with parameter sets 1, 2, and 5, whereas V-approach seems to be faster than the I-approach when working with parameter sets 3, 4 and 6. No algorithm encounters numerical overflow when using the I-approach on any of the parameter sets. However, there are exceptions to the above observation, specifically in the cases of Hybrid method on parameter set 2 and Logwright method on parameter set 4. The values of arguments of the Lambert W function and the LogWright function that are obtained when calculating the I-V characteristics of a SDM (with parameters from set 1 of table I) using the I-approach and V-approach are plotted in fig. The present work implements an effective method to obtain the current-voltage (I-V) characteristics of a solar cell represented using the single diode model and the LogWright function. This implementation based on the LogWright function, a logarithmic transformation of the Lambert W, solves the numerical overflow problems that one could encounter when using the Lambert W function to solve for the I-V characteristics. It also possesses properties which makes it desirable for field applications such as active load balancing. This implementation is compared with other methods that achieve the same purpose and is shown to be the fastest among the methods that give an exact solution, making it very useful for deployment in field installations. There is a lot of potential for future work in exploring the relationship between solar cells and the LogWright function. Using the LogWright function can prevent numerical overflow issues wherever the argument given to the Lambert W function is of the form x = ae b . One can study the usage of LogWright function in two-diode models and three-diode models, and also potential applications in modeling organic solar cells by studying Note: A preliminary version of this research was presented at the Canadian Association of Physics June-2022 annual conference, under the title "Solar Cells and the Lambert W Function", presented by S. R. Valluri on behalf of all co-authors.