Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) show great promise as absorber materials in high-specific-power (i.e. high-power-per-weight) solar cells, due to their high optical absorption, desirable band gaps, and self-passivated surfaces. However, the ultimate performance limits of TMD solar cells remain unknown today. Here, we establish the efficiency limits of multilayer MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 solar cells under AM 1.5 G illumination as a function of TMD film thickness and material quality. We use an extended version of the detailed balance method which includes Auger and defect-assisted Shockley-Reed-Hall recombination mechanisms in addition to radiative losses, calculated from measured optical absorption spectra. We demonstrate that single-junction solar cells with TMD films as thin as 50 nm could in practice achieve up to 25% power conversion efficiency with the currently available material quality, making them an excellent choice for high-specificpower photovoltaics. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have recently received growing interest in high-specific-power (i.e. high-power-per-weight) photovoltaics where light weight and high power conversion efficiency are strongly desired In this work, we establish the fundamental performance limits of single-junction solar cells made of multilayer (bulk) MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 absorber films with a realistic analysis based on the Tiedje-Yablonovitch model originally developed for silicon solar cells The extended detailed balance method developed by Tiedje et al. (known as the Tiedje-Yablonovitch model) is used as the basis for this study To mimic optimal light trapping, a rectangular slab of semiconducting TMD (MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2) with perfect anti-reflection (zero reflection) at the front surface and perfect (unity) reflection at the back surface is considered (Fig. To highlight the unusually high light absorption in thin TMD films, we calculate the spectral absorptance of multilayer MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 at 5, 10, 20, 50, 100 and 1000 nm film thickness (Fig. However, as evident in Fig. We also note a change in slope of the JSC trends in Fig. One can observe that reabsorption is almost equally probable as external emission in MoS2. Moreover, the radiative loss is primarily from the low-energy photons, which have higher absorption depth and therefore lower probability of being reabsorbed into the TMD film. A similar behavior is observed in MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2, with external emission occurring at longer wavelengths (higher energy photons) and reabsorption taking place at shorter wavelengths (lower energy photons). The magnitude of emission rates varies among the four TMDs due to the difference in their absorption coefficients and refractive indices. As detailed in Supplementary Note 2, at equilibrium, the internal emission rate is proportional to the absorption coefficient and the square of refractive index. For example, MoSe2 has noticeably higher absorption coefficient than other TMDs in the 1-1.3 eV range due to of its smaller band gap (1.16 eV), leading to the highest internal emission rates. The opposite holds true for WS2, which has the largest band gap (1.36 eV) and smallest absorption coefficient in the entire 1-1.6 eV range (Supplementary Fig. Open-circuit voltage (V) Open-circuit voltage (V) Open-circuit voltage (V) investigated here. Incidentally, an SRH lifetime up to ~611 ns has also been reported 3 for multilayer WS2, although lifetimes for this and other TMDs are all expected to increase as the material quality improves. Applied to the materials studied here, such an SRH lifetime would lead to a VOC limit between 0.8 to 1 V in 100 nm-thick TMD solar cells. We note that for thin TMD films, our model estimates a larger VOC limit than the simpler Shockley-Queisser model for τSRH larger than 1 μs. This is due to our inclusion of measured optical absorption spectra. As can be seen in Fig. Going beyond the Tiedje-Yablonovitch model, we introduce non-negligible SRH recombination (i.e. reduced τSRH, corresponding to reduced material quality), observing how the efficiency drops in Fig. Another way to visualize the effect of material quality (τSRH) on the solar cell performance is to look at current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics for a fixed thickness, for example 100 nm (Supplementary Fig. The relative efficiencies of the four TMDs can be explained by their relative JSC, VOC, and fill factors. In the 100 ns-1 μs SRH lifetime regime, WSe2 solar cells demonstrate the highest efficiency, followed by MoS2, WS2 and MoSe2 solar cells. To date, SRH lifetimes up to 611 ns are reported in the literature for multilayer TMDs 3 , corresponding to approximately 20-25% power conversion efficiency for the TMD solar cells examined here with ultrathin films of 20 to 100 nm thickness (Fig. Finally, Fig. We have examined the efficiency limits of multilayer TMD solar cells (MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2) as a function of TMD film thickness and material quality, going beyond the Tiedje-Yablonovitch and Shockley-Queisser models by including experimental optical absorption spectra, as well as radiative, Auger and SRH recombination. We find that ultrathin TMD solar cells (as thin as 50 nm) can realistically achieve up to 25% power conversion efficiency even with today's material quality. This makes them an excellent choice for high-specific-power photovoltaics (i.e. with high power per weight), achieving up to 10 times higher specific power than existing technologies. Such ultralight solar cells could transform energy harvesting across various industries including autonomous drones, electric vehicles, wearable electrons, and the Internet of Things. Future efforts must be dedicated to optimizing the electronic and optical TMD solar cell designs, to unlock their potential for high power conversion efficiency and specific power at large, industrial scale. For any recombination mechanism, associated carrier lifetimes, τ / and τ 0 , for electrons and holes, can be defined as: where ΔN and ΔP are the disturbances of the electrons and holes, respectively, from their equilibrium values N 1 and P 1 . U is the recombination rate. For an intrinsic or lightly-doped absorber film under illumination: Therefore the SRH recombination rate can be written as: Combining Equations ( Equation ( where N 2 is the intrinsic carrier density and J 1 is defined as: Note that all terms in Equation (12), i.e., external emission, Auger recombination, SRH recombination, incoming sunlight and extracted electricity (going from left to right), are all expressed in the form of current density, and are plotted in Fig. sponding to output current density (J) of zero to J () -and the output voltage (V) is subsequently determined by solving Equation ( J ,4 = J(V = 0) where V 34 is the open-circuit voltage, J ,4 is the short-circuit current density, P 566 is power density at maximum power point (MPP), FF is the fill factor, P 2& is the input solar power density, and PCE is power conversion efficiency of the solar cell. The figure shows that two orders of magnitude higher or smaller CAuger lead to at most 1-2% decrease or increase in the power conversion efficiency limit. 