We study the influence of mechanical deformations on the Zeeman and Rashba effects in synthesized transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) nanotubes and their Janus variants from first principles. In particular, we perform symmetry-adapted density functional theory simulations with spin-orbit coupling to determine the variation in the Zeeman and Rashba splittings with axial and torsional deformations. We find significant splitting in molybdenum and tungsten nanotubes, for which the Zeeman splitting decreases with increase in strain, going to zero for large enough tensile/shear strains, while the Rashba splitting coefficient increases linearly with shear strain, while being zero for all tensile strains, a consequence of the inversion symmetry remaining unbroken. In addition, the Zeeman splitting is relatively unaffected by nanotube diameter, whereas the Rashba coefficient decreases with increase in diameter. Overall, mechanical deformations represent a powerful tool for spintronics in TMD nanotubes as well as their Janus variants. Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) nanotubes are 1D materials of the form MX 2 , where M and X represent a transition metal and chalcogen, respectively 1 . They represent the most diverse group of nanotubes, there being 38 transition metals and 3 chalcogens, resulting in a total of 114 possible combinations. Of these, around 12 have already been synthesized, which represents a significant fraction of the total number of experimentally realized nanotubes, and the most in any group Spintronics or spin electronics refers to the exploitation of both spin and the electronic charge in solid state devices In addition, the effect of strain on the Zeeman and Rashba splittings has been studied in Janus TMD bilayers In this work, we study the influence of mechanical deformations on the Zeeman and Rashba effects in the synthesized TMD nanotubes and their Janus variants using Kohn-Sham DFT calculations. In particular, we perform symmetry-adapted DFT simulations with SOC to determine the variation in the Zeeman and Rashba splittings with axial and torsional deformations. We find significant splitting for the nanotubes having the transition metal as either molybdenum or tungsten. In particular, axial and torsional deformations can be used to vary the Zeeman splitting, while torsional deformations can be used to introduce and vary the Rashba splitting, making the nanotubes particularly well-suited for spintronics applications. The remainder of this manuscript is organized as follows. In Section II, we list the standard and Janus TMD nanotubes studied and describe the symmetry-adapted Kohn-Sham DFT simulations for the calculation of the Zeeman and Rashba splittings. Next, we present and discuss the results of the simulations in Section III. Finally, we provide concluding remarks in Section IV. We start by considering the TMD nanotubes that have been synthesized 1-3 : {MoS 2 , MoSe 2 , MoTe 2 , WS 2 , WSe 2 , WTe 2 , NbS 2 , NbSe 2 , TaS 2 , TiS 2 , TiSe 2 , HfS 2 , and ZrS 2 }. Since we have found that spin-orbit coupling (SOC) does not cause any splitting in the nanotubes: {NbS 2 , NbSe 2 , TaS 2 , TiS 2 , TiSe 2 , HfS 2 , and ZrS 2 }, we henceforth consider the remaining TMD nanotubes: {MoS 2 , MoSe 2 , MoTe 2 , WS 2 , WSe 2 , WTe 2 }, as well as their Janus variants with the heavier chalcogen on the outside: {MoSSe, MoSTe, MoSeTe, WSSe, WSTe, WSeTe}, all with 2H-t symmetry. We consider their armchair configurations, since the results remain unchanged for the zigzag configuration, in agreement with previous observations for SOC in the MoS 2 nanotube 50 . The diameters of the TMD nanotubes are chosen to be commensurate with those synthesized, and the diameters of the Janus TMD nanotubes are set to DFT-calculated equilibrium values (Table Table In all simulations, we employ the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) We now use the aforedescribed framework to study the effect of axial and torsional deformations on the Zeeman and Rashba splittings in the molybdenum and tungsten TMD nanotubes and their Janus variants. In the results presented here, the axial strain (ε) is defined as the change in nanotube length divided by its original length; the shear strain (γ) is defined as the product of the nanotube radius with the applied twist per unit length; the Zeeman splitting (λ VBM ) corresponds to the valence band maximum (VBM), where the effect is significantly more pronounced (∼5x larger) than the conduction band minimum (CBM) (Supplementary Material); and the Rashba splitting coefficient (α) corresponds to the VBM, calculated at the zero wavevector in the axial direction. All the data can be found in the Supplementary Material. In Fig. We observe that the Zeeman splitting in the undeformed state is significant, being comparable to the monolayer counterparts In Fig To understand the effect of the nanotube diameter on the results obtained, we now consider the nanotubes that demonstrate the largest Zeeman and Rashba effects, i.e., WSe 2 , WSeTe, and WTe 2 , with diameters spanning the range ∼ 2 -10 nm. In Fig. In addition, the Rashba coefficient decreases significantly with increase in diameter, e.g., the value for WTe 2 reduces from α = 0.83 eV Å at a diameter of 2 nm to α = 0.73 eV Å at a diameter of 9 nm, expectedly heading towards the zero value for the flat sheet configuration. The results presented here clearly demonstrate that mechanical deformations can be used to engineer the Zeeman and Rashba splittings in molybdenum and tungsten TMD nanotubes as well as their Janus variants, making them a powerful tool for spintronics applications. In particular, the Zeeman effect is especially significant for the undeformed nanotubes, becoming progressively smaller and even disappearing with increase in axial/shear strains, and the Rashba effect can be introduced through torsional deformations -break the inversion symmetry of the system -becoming especially significant as the shear strain increases. In this work, we have studied the strain engineering of Zeeman and Rashba effects in synthesized TMD nanotubes and their Janus variants using first principles DFT simulations. In particular, we have performed symmetry-adapted Kohn-Sham calculations with spin-orbit coupling to determine the effect of axial and torsional deformations on the Zeeman and Rashba splittings in the electronic band structure. We have found that there is significant splitting in the molybdenum and tungsten nanotubes, for which the Zeeman splitting decreases with increase in tensile/shear strain, reaching zero for large enough strains, while the Rashba splitting coefficient increases linearly with shear strain, while being zero for all axial deformations, a consequence of the inversion symmetry remaining unbroken. In addition, the Zeeman splitting is relatively unaffected by the nanotube diameter, whereas the Rashba coefficient decreases with increase in diameter. Though the current study has been restricted to TMD nanotubes and their Janus variants, other nanotubes are expected to demonstrate similar behavior, particularly those with heavy chemical elements. Overall, mechanical deformations represent a powerful tool for spintronics applications using nanotubes.