Releasing the epitaxial oxide heterostructures from substrate constraints leads to the emergence of various correlated electronic phases and paves the way for integrations with advanced semiconductor technologies. Identifying a suitable water-soluble sacrificial layer, compatible with the high-quality epitaxial growth of oxide heterostructures, is currently the key to the development of large-scale freestanding oxide membranes. In this study, we unveil the "super-tetragonal" Sr 4 Al 2 O 7 (SAO T ) as a promising water-soluble sacrificial layer. The distinct low-symmetric crystal structure of SAO T enables a superior capability to sustain epitaxial strain, thus allowing for broad tunability in lattice constants. The resultant structural coherency and defect-free interface in perovskite ABO 3 /SAO T heterostructures effectively restrain crack formations during the water-assisted release of freestanding oxide membranes. For a variety of non-ferroelectric oxide membranes, the crack-free areas can span up to a few millimeters in length scale. These compelling features, combined with the inherent high-water solubility, make SAO T a versatile and feasible sacrificial layer for producing high-quality freestanding oxide membranes, thereby boosting their potential for innovative oxide electronics and flexible device designs. Transition-metal oxide-based heterostructures are characterized by a vast of emergent interfacial phenomena, stimulated by the coupling of spin, charge, orbital, and lattice degrees of freedom at the heterointerfaces In recent years, freestanding oxide membrane exfoliating and transferring technologies developed rapidly Millimeter-sized crack-free membranes were rarely achieved In this work, we systematically explored the growth phase diagram of SAO C films and discovered a new Sr 4 Al 2 O 7 phase (denoted as SAO T ). The biaxial-strained SAO T film has a tetragonal structural symmetry and Sr-rich stoichiometry, distinct from the well-recognized cubic SAO C phase. Such a low-symmetric crystal structure of SAO T enables superior flexibility under epitaxial strain and thus a wide-range tunability of in-plane lattice constants. The resultant coherent growth of high-quality ABO 3 /SAO T epitaxial heterostructures considerably improves the crystallinity and integrity of water-released freestanding oxide membranes. For the widely-investigated non-FE nickelates, manganites, titanates, ruthenates, and stannates with a broad lattice constant range (3.85~4.04 Å), the crack-free areas of the membranes released from SAO T can span up to a few millimeters in scale. The corresponding functionalities can be comparable to the epitaxial counterparts. Moreover, the unique atomic structure of SAO T lead to an inherent high water-solubility, thus ensuring an effective water-assisted exfoliation process. These compelling advantages make SAO T film a versatile and viable water-soluble sacrificial layer for fabricating a broad array of high-quality freestanding oxide membranes, which offer fertile grounds for the development of innovative electronic devices. The strontium aluminate (SAO, including SAO C and SAO T ) thin films and ABO 3 /SAO multilayer heterostructures were epitaxially grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD). We first grow the SAO films by laser ablation of a polycrystalline stoichiometric SAO C target (the molar ratio Sr:Al:O = 3:2:6) on (001)-oriented (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 -(SrAl 0.5 Ta 0.5 O 3 ) 0.7 [LSAT(001)] single crystalline substrates (see Methods Section for details). The epitaxial quality and stoichiometry of the SAO films predominantly depend on two parameters: oxygen partial pressure (P O2 ) and laser fluence (F L ). During the growth of a series of SAO films, we altered the P O2 from 10 -4 to 20 Pa and adjusted the F L from 2.5 to 1.0 J/cm 2 . A full set of x-ray diffraction (XRD) 2θ-ω scans of SAO/LSAT(001) films near the LSAT(002) diffraction are shown in Supplementary Fig. The large deviation in chemical stoichiometry between the SAO T film and SAO C (Sr:Al ~ 1.51) target should relate to the kinetic processes during the laser ablation and deposition in such a narrow L F -P O2 window (see Supplementary Section 1 for detailed discussions). Accordingly, we refined the film deposition using a Sr 4 Al 2 O 7 target and substantially expanded the growth window of high-quality SAO T film (Fig. We further characterized the epitaxial strain states of the SAO C and SAO T films through the reciprocal space mappings (RSMs). For the SAO C /LSAT(001) film, (Fig. The ability to sustain epitaxial strain seems to be the most prominent feature of the newly discovered SAO T phase. For the SAO T /LSAT(001) films, the coherent strain state can be maintained up to 100 nm thick (Supplementary Fig. After identifying the compelling structural flexibility of SAO T , we turn to probe its structural differences with SAO C at the atomic scale using cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). As shown in Fig. We now determine the atomic structure of the SAO T phase based on the STEM images and density-functional-theory (DFT) calculations. To the best of our knowledge, none of the reported strontium aluminates can match the STEM and XRD results. We searched numerous possible structure candidates and eventually found that the SAO T could share a similar atomic structure and orthorhombic symmetry as the The unique atomic structure of SAO T also plays a deterministic role in enabling the coherent epitaxial strain at ABO 3 /SAO T interfaces. To address this point, we first performed DFT calculations on the relative energy changes (ΔE) of SAO C and SAO T unit-cells under manually-imposed bi-axial and anisotropic strain (See Methods Section for details). As shown in Fig. Namely, the low-symmetry SAO T unit-cell is more flexible to accommodate the misfit strain imposed by either cubic or orthorhombic substrates, while the cubic SAO C unit-cell could be more rigid against strain-induced lattice distortion. Moreover, we also constructed SAO C /STO(001) and SAO T /STO(001) heterostructures as model systems (Supplementary Fig. We now examine the potential of SAO T as a water-soluble sacrificial layer. An "optimal" water-soluble sacrificial layer must satisfy three key requirements. Firstly, it must enable the successful growth of target oxide films. The high crystallinity and integrity should be maintained in the freestanding membranes after the lift-off and transfer processes. Secondly, the representative functionalities of the exfoliated freestanding oxide membranes should be comparable to those grown epitaxially on single-crystalline substrates. Lastly, it should dissolve easily in water, allowing efficient membrane exfoliation within reasonable durations. To evaluate these criteria for the SAO T film, we correspondingly grow several typical perovskite oxide films on both SAO T and SAO C epitaxial films, and then conduct comparative studies on the integrity, crystallinity, functionalities, and exfoliation speed of the freestanding membranes. We first performed comparative characterizations on the integrity and crystallinity of various perovskite oxide membranes released from both SAO C and SAO T . As summarized in Supplementary Table To quantify the SAO T -induced integrity improvements in oxide membranes, we calculated the average equivalent diameters (D E ) of the uncracked areas in the freestanding membranes. The D E versus a p curves are summarized in Fig. The strong correlation between the high integrity/crystallinity of oxide membranes and the coherent strain state at the ABO 3 /SAO interface can be understood by a simple scenario as depicted in Fig. The correlation between lattice mismatch and membrane integrity is further implied by the steep slope-like line shape of the D E -a p curve. For the ABO 3 /SAO T heterostructures, on the contrary, the inherent structural flexibility of SAO T and strong interfacial bonding enable a coherent strain state. The resultant sharp and dislocation-free ABO 3 /SAO T interface should effectively hinder crack formation during exfoliation. And the release of compressive strain could be the main driving force of the wrinkling microstructure. Secondly, we characterized the evolutions of physical properties in various oxide membranes released from SAO C and SAO T . For the ferromagnetic metal LCMO/SAO T /LSAT(001) film and corresponding membrane, the temperature-dependent magnetization (M-T) and resistivity (ρ-T) curves reveal a sharp paramagnetic-insulator (PMI) to ferromagnetic-metal (FMM) transition (Fig. These degradations in ferromagnetism and metallicity can be attributed to the residual tensile strain at the LCMO/SAO C interface and the high-density cracks formed during exfoliation (Fig. Namely, SAO T can universally ensure both the high integrity and epitaxial-film-like functionalities of oxide membranes. Lastly, we examined the exfoliation efficiency of oxide membranes from SAO T . To perform an equitable comparison between SAO C and SAO T , we opted to exfoliate the 50 nm thick BTO membranes. Due to intrinsic superelasticity, the exfoliation speed of BTO membranes should not be influenced by crack formation and associated extrinsic water penetration. According to the in-situ monitoring by optical microscope (Supplementary Movies 1,2), the water-assisted exfoliation speed of BTO membranes released from SAO T is approximately one order of magnitude faster than that released from SAO C . The trend of faster exfoliation speed is universally applicable for all the other oxide membranes we grew (Supplementary Fig. By exploring the phase diagram of SAO film growth, we identified the super-tetragonal SAO T as a promising water-soluble sacrificial layer with several compelling advantages. Firstly, SAO T showcases remarkable structural flexibility to adapt the epitaxial strain imposed by various perovskite substrates, providing wide-range tunability of in-plane lattice constant. Such inherent structural flexibility further ensures high-quality epitaxy of a broad spectrum of ABO 3 /SAO T heterostructures with coherent strain states and dislocation-free interfaces, which restrain crack formation during water-assisted exfoliation. For various non-FE oxide membranes with lattice constants ranging from 3.81 to 4.04 Å, the crack-free areas can spans up to few millimeters in scale. Moreover, the strain-tunability of SAO T persists with Ba/Ca doping and (110)-oriented epitaxial growth, broadening its potential in developing novel freestanding oxides beyond traditional perovskites. Next, the SAO T has a wide and stable growth window, accessible for standard PLD techniques and compatible with the growth of most perovskite oxides. Lastly, its high water-solubility streamlines the membrane exfoliation process. With these attributes, SAO T sacrificial layer offers a versatile and feasible experimental approach to producing large-scale, crack-free freestanding oxide membranes, of which crystallinity and functionalities are comparable to the epitaxial films. The discovery of SAO T introduces a pivotal complement to the widely-used SAO C sacrificial layer, which may substantially promote the potential of freestanding oxide membranes for innovative, low-dimensional, and flexible device applications Epitaxial film growth. We prepared the Sr 3 Al 2 O 6 (SAO C ) and Sr 4 Al 2 O 7 (SAO T ) polycrystalline targets by first sintering a mixture of stoichiometric amounts of SrCO 3 and Al 2 O 3 at 1350 °C for 24 h, and then immediately grinding and pressing into pellets. We also prepare the NdNiO 3 (NNO), LaNiO 3 (LNO), La 0.7 Ca 0.3 MnO 3 (LCMO), SrTiO 3 (STO), SrRuO 3 (SRO), SrSnO 3 (SSO), and BaTiO 3 (BTO) targets using similar procedures. Using these oxide targets, we grow the epitaxial thin films on single-crystalline substrates through a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) system with a KrF excimer laser (248 nm). During the growth of strontium aluminate (SAO, including SAO C and SAO T ) films, we maintained the laser spot size, repetition rate, substrate temperature, and target-substrate distance at 4 mm 2 , 3 Hz, 750 °C, and 55 mm, respectively. And we varied the laser fluence (F L ) from 1.0 to 3.0 J/cm 2 by inserting attenuators and altered the oxygen partial pressure (P O2 ) from 10 -4 to 30 Pa. We controlled the film thickness (t SAO-C or t SAO-T ) by the laser ablation duration. We selected (001)-oriented (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 -(SrAl 0.5 Ta 0.5 O 3 ) 0.7 [LSAT(001)] substrate to deposit SAO films and explore the growth phase diagram. The thermal stability of LSAT(001) substrates in a reduced environment (e.g. high vacuum) at high temperature (> 650 o C) surpasses that of the widely used STO(001) substrate. The other oxides (NNO, LNO, LCMO, STO, SRO, SSO, and BTO) were subsequently deposited at their optimal conditions according to previous publications. The thickness of all the non-ferroelectric films is kept at 35 nm, and the thickness of the BTO films is 50 nm. Release of freestanding membranes. Before the exfoliation, we attached the surfaces of ABO 3 /SAO heterostructures onto 0.5 mm-thick polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) films. We then immersed the entire sample in deionized water at room temperature until the sacrificial layer was completely dissolved, thus lifting off the oxide membranes from the substrate. To conduct the characterizations on structure and functionalities, the freestanding oxide membranes were transferred and attached to atomically-flat sapphire glass slides. It is worth noting that PDMS is an elastomer. Compared to other widely used adhesive materials (e.g. epoxy), it can minimize the support and constraint to the freestanding oxide films to the maximum extent. Nevertheless, its elastic nature also easily causes the formation of cracks. The crystallographic analysis of the epitaxial films and freestanding membranes were examined by a high-resolution X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical Empyrean X-ray diffractometer, Cu Kα1 radiation) with both the 2θ-ω linear scan and off-specular reciprocal space mapping (RSM) mode. The thicknesses of SAO and other oxide layers were obtained by fitting Laue fringes. The growth rate of each layer was calculated and controlled precisely by counting the number of laser pulses. The atomic structure of as-grown SAO C and SAO T films was characterized at room temperature using an ARM-200CF transmission electron microscope, operated at 200 keV and equipped with double spherical aberration (Cs) correctors. The HAADF images were measured in the scanning mode. Cross-sectional TEM specimens of STO/SAO T /LSAT(001) and STO/SAO T /LSAT(001) heterostructures were prepared using Ga + ion milling after the mechanical thinning down to ~20 μm. Magnetism and electrical transport measurements. Temperature-dependent magnetization (M-T) curves were measured via a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM, Quantum Design MPMS3). The external H was applied perpendicular or parallel to the film plane. The T-dependent resistivity (ρ-T) curves were characterized by a Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design). Before measurements, the stripe-like Pt electrodes were patterned onto the membrane/thin film surface by photolithography. Density-functional theory calculations. DFT-level structural relaxations and electronic structure computations for both SAO C and SAO T phases are performed using WIEN2K and VASP codes with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof version for solids of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA-PBESol) on a dense momentum grid with 200 k-points To evaluate the structural flexibility of SAO C and SAO T unit-cells, we calculated the energy changes of these unit-cells under both biaxial and anisotropic strains. We first calculate the total energy (E total ) of SAO C and SAO T unit-cells with fully relaxed lattices. Then we manually altered the in-plane lattice constants a SAO and b SAO to impose biaxial/anisotropic strain, relaxed the lattice along the c SAO axis, and calculated the E total of the biaxially or anisotropically strained SAO C and SAO T unit-cells. The differences in E total between the strained and strain-free cases are defined as ΔE. To directly compare the SAO C and SAO T unit-cells, the energy changes (ΔE) are normalized by the E total in the strain-free case. To impose biaxial strain, we impose a constraint of a SAO = b SAO , and alter the a SAO by ±1~3%. To impose biaxial strain, we impose a constraint of a SAO ×b SAO = constant and alter the orthorhombicity b SAO /a SAO from 0.9 to 1.1. To investigate the bonding strength at SAO/ABO 3 interfaces, we construct three (001)-oriented heterostructure supercells: 1) SAO C (1 unit-cell)/STO(3 unit-cells), 2) SAO T (1 unit-cell)/STO(3 unit-cells), and 3) LaAlO 3 (3 unit-cells)/STO(3 unit-cells) (LAO/STO). The LAO/STO supercell is a control group for evaluating the interfacial bonding strength at SAO/STO interfaces. The interfacial bonding energies are calculated by the following formula: The E SAO-STO is the total energy of the constructed SAO/STO heterostructure supercell; E slabs-SAO and E slabs-STO are the total energy values of SAO (SAO C or SAO T ) and 3-unit-cell-thick STO slabs; The obtained value of E bond reflects the bonding strength between the surface of SAO and STO slabs. The E bond value should be divided by 2 as there are two interfaces in the computational models; To directly compare the bonding strengths at SAO T /STO and SAO C /STO interfaces, the E bond should be further normalized by the n STO , which is the number of STO unit-cells bonded to the interface. Note that we intentionally add a negative sign in front of formula (1). Hence, if E bond is positive (negative), the SAO and STO tend to form stable (unstable) chemical bonds at the interfaces. For comparison, we also calculated the E bond at the LAO/STO interface. The corresponding results are included in Supplementary Section 2 and discussed in the main text. In (e), the in-plane reciprocal space vector (Q x ) value of LCMO(116) spans between the corresponding ones of LSAT and SAO C , indicating that the LCMO/SAO C bilayer undergoes a partial strain-relaxation. In (f), the Q x values of LCMO(116) and SAO T (4018) align with the one of LSAT(103) substrate, indicating that the LCMO/SAO T bilayer is coherently strained to the LSAT(001) substrate. g, Schematics elucidating the crack and wrinkle formations in freestanding oxide membranes. The perovskite oxide epitaxial films and freestanding membranes are marked as ABO 3 -Epi. and ABO 3 -Free., respectively. In this Section, we first focus on determining the PLD growth window of SAO C and SAO T films. We then discuss the underlying mechanisms of the wide (narrow) growth window for the SAO C (SAO T ) films. In the last part, we will also evaluate the ability of SAO T films to sustain epitaxial strain. We first investigate the PLD growth window of SAO films using Sr 3 Al 2 O 6 target. As mentioned in the Materials and Methods section, we grew a series of SAO films under various P O2 ranging from 10 -4 to 30 Pa and various F L ranging from 1.0 to 2.5 J•cm -2 . Here, the STO capping layer of 3 nm is utilized to protect SAO film from moisture in the ambient for subsequent characterization. The full set of XRD 2θ-ω linear scans is included in Supplementary Fig. According to the constructed SAO growth phase diagram, we selected three representative growth conditions to grow SAO epitaxial film samples (Sample A: 1.3 J•cm -2 , 10 Pa; Sample B: 2.5 J•cm -2 , 10 -4 Pa; and Sample C: 1.0 J•cm -2 , 5 Pa.) and further characterized their surface topography and crystallinity. As shown in Supplementary Fig. To further clarify the differences in PLD growth windows between SAO C and SAO T phases, we experimentally determined the chemical stoichiometry of the SAO C and SAO T phases by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) with an Oxford Instruments EDS (Ultim Max65) spectrometer, equipped with a field-emission scanning electron microscope (Zeiss Gemini 450). We also performed EDS measurements on SAO C as a reference. The typical EDS spectra are shown in Supplementary Fig. Since the SAO T phase turns out to be a Sr 4 Al 2 O 7 compound, replacing the Sr 3 Al 2 O 6 target with a Sr 4 Al 2 O 7 target may broaden the PLD growth window of high-quality SAO T films. Based on this consideration, we grew a series of SAO films by laser ablating a Sr 4 Al 2 O 7 target. During the growth, we also varied the P O2 ranging from 10 -4 to 30 Pa and F L from 1.0 to 3.0 J•cm -2 . Here, the STO capping layer of 3 nm is utilized to protect SAO film from moisture in the ambient for subsequent characterization. The full set of XRD 2θ-ω linear scans is included in Supplementary Fig. According to Fig. Intuitively, PLD can effectively transfer the cation stoichiometry from the target to the film. Thus, laser ablating the Sr 3 Al 2 O 6 and Sr 4 Al 2 O 7 targets should result in the SAO C and SAO T films, respectively. Following this scenario, it is elusive why the SAO T film can be grown using the Sr 3 Al 2 O 6 target in a narrow growth window. In the following part, we will provide a phenomenological picture to explain the large deviation in chemical stoichiometry between the SAO T film and SAO C target (Sr:Al ~ 1.5). During the PLD process, the photon energy from the excimer laser is absorbed by the target within a shallow surface layer, resulting in rapid heating up to several thousand Kelvins and subsequent material removal from the target. The kinetic energy of the ablated atoms/ions is in the range of tens of eV, and the velocity is in the range of 10 5 ~10 6 cm/s. As these ablated specimens travel from the target to the substrate surface, they are scattered by the O 2 molecules in the PLD chamber. Upon reaching the substrate surface, a supersaturation-dominated vaporsolid phase transition occurs, leading to film growth 1 . According to earlier studies We can categorize the SAO growth phase diagram into two regions based on F L . In the first region, where F L ≥ 1.3 J/cm 2 , the phase diagram displays the SAO C phase only. In this region, the SAO C film can grow well for P O2 ≤ 10 -2 Pa, while the SAO C (008) peak position shifts (signature of off-stoichiometry) and peak intensity decreases (signature of film quality degradation) occur as P O2 increases further. The film quality is sensitive to the aforementioned vapor-solid transition at the film surface 2 . When the substrate temperature is constant, supersaturation increases with P O2 and F L . Namely, higher P O2 and F L values result in a larger chemical potential difference of adatoms transitioning from their quasi-vapor phase (mobile adatoms on the surface and background oxygen in the gas phase) to their solid phase on the substrate In the second region of the phase diagram, where F L ≤ 1.0 J/cm, the SAO T phase appears in the P O2 range from 3 to 7 Pa. In this low F L region, the scattering-mediated Sr-rich atomic composition persists. Additionally, according to Dam et al. In this section, we focus on probing the crystal structure of the SAO T film. We first determined the structural symmetry of the SAO T phase and then investigated its epitaxial strain states by structural characterizations. Next, we probe its atomic structure by detailed analyses of the scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) results. Lastly, we performed additional first-principles calculations to determine the crystal structure of the SAO T phase and further understand the capability of SAO T in sustaining epitaxial strain We first measured the reciprocal space maps (RSMs) near the four LSAT{103} diffractions to investigate the structural symmetry of the SAO T phases (Supplementary Fig. By taking a close look at the RSMs in Supplementary Fig. The ability to sustain epitaxial strain is one of the most prominent features of the SAO T phase. For the SAO T films grown on LSAT(001), the strain coherency can be maintained up to 100 nm thick (Supplementary Fig. The detailed atomic structure of the SAO T phase is examined by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) in cross-sectional high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) mode. As shown in Supplementary Fig. We now try to determine the atomic structure of the SAO T phase by DFT calculation. To the best of our knowledge, none of the reported strontium aluminates can match the STEM and XRD results. We then searched numerous possible structure candidates, including Ba As summarized in Supplementary Table Note that the simulated and fully-relaxed SAO T unit-cell should have orthorhombic symmetry, consistent with the two-fold symmetric in-plane atomic structure shown in Supplementary Fig. After determining the atomic structure of SAO T , we can further understand the observed coherent strain state in the ABO 3 /SAO T heterostructures by additional DFT calculations. The ABO 3 /SAO T structure coherency is intuitively dominated by two factors: 1) the ability of SAO T to sustain strain and 2) the bonding strength at ABO 3 /SAO T interface. We will evaluate both factors using DFT calculations. First, to evaluate the ability of SAO T to sustain epitaxial strain, we calculated the energy changes of SAO T and SAO C unit-cells under strain. Since the commonly used ABO 3 (001) perovskite substrates have either cubic or orthorhombic symmetry, we considered both biaxial and anisotropic strain cases. As mentioned in the Materials and Methods section, we manually altered the in-plane lattice constants a SAO and b SAO to impose biaxial/anisotropic strain, relaxed the lattice along the c SAO axis, and calculated the normalized energy change ΔE. The results are summarized in Supplementary Fig. 19 and Fig. In the biaxial strain case, the relative change in lattice constant (ε = Δa SAO / a SAO ) or pseudocubic lattice constant (a * SAO ) serves as the control parameters. The ΔE -ε curves are shown in Fig. In the anisotropic strain case, the control parameter is the orthorhombicity (γ = b SAO /a SAO ). As shown in Supplementary Fig. The above DFT calculations demonstrate that the low-symmetry SAO T unit-cell could have more structural degrees of freedom to deform and accommodate the ABO 3 perovskite substrateinduced bi-axial and anisotropic strain, whereas the high-symmetry cubic SAO C unit-cell could be more rigid under stress. Second, to evaluate the ABO 3 /SAO T interfacial bonding strength, we constructed SAO T /STO(001) heterostructure supercells and calculated the interfacial bonding energy (E bond ). For comparison, we also calculated the E bond of an SAO C /STO(001) supercell and an LAO/STO supercell. Given that the surface layers of SAO C and SAO T are Sr-rich, we speculate that the TiO 2 -terminated SAO/STO interface should be energetically more favorable. Thus, we set the STO surface of these supercells to be TiO 2 -terminated (Supplementary Fig. In brief, the DFT calculations revealed two unique features of SAO T , which the SAO C phase does not process. First, the SAO T unit-cell can easily deform under both the biaxial and anisotropic strain. Second, the ABO 3 /SAO T interface has strong bonding strength. Both effects work cooperatively and ensure the coherent strain states observed in various ABO 3 /SAO T heterostructures shown in Fig. Note that while the ΔE values calculated from SAO T at γ < 1 are higher than those calculated from SAO C , they do not have practical significance. When epitaxially grown on orthorhombic substrates, the SAO T films always follow the most lattice-matched epitaxial relationship (e.g., SAO T [100]//NGO[100] and SAO T [010]//NGO[010] due to b NGO > a NGO ). Accordingly, the experimental γ values should be always equal or exceed 1. For clearer presentation, we omitted the ΔE data at γ < 1 range in Fig. To further evaluate the feasibility of SAO T film as a versatile sacrificial layer, we have performed comparative studies on the perovskite-structured functional oxides grown on SAO T and SAO C films. As summarized in Supplementary Table We first characterized the epitaxial quality and strain state of BTO (50 nm) films grown on SAO C and SAO T . In this ferroelectric (FE) oxide, the ferroelastic domain transformation-induced superelasticity inherently accommodates stress and deformations generated during the lift-off process. For BTO film epitaxially grown on SAO C , both the XRD 2θ-ω scans and RSMs (Supplementary Fig. The second oxide we tested is the rare-earth-doped manganite LCMO. As a typical strongly-correlated ferromagnetic metal, the physical properties of LCMO epitaxial films are sensitive to the strain states We then characterized the electrical transport and magnetic properties of SRO membranes, which shows a similar trend observed in freestanding LCMO membranes. For the SRO membrane exfoliated from SAO T , the M-T curves reveal a sharp FMM transition at ~150 K (T C ), accompanied by a strong perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (MA), which is dominated by the intrinsic magnetocrystalline anisotropy in SRO. The ρ-T curve shows a clear Fermi-liquid to non-Fermi-liquid transition near T C , and the residual resistance ratio (RRR) value is up to 4.83. Both the magnetic and electrical transport properties are comparable with high-quality SRO/STO(001) epitaxial films. In contrast, for the SRO membrane exfoliated from SAO C , the M-T curves show a demagnetization-dominated in-plane MA, which can be attributed to the degradation of crystallinity and the associated weak magnetocrystalline anisotropy. The residual resistance ratio (RRR) value reduces to 1.93, probably due to the high-density cracks. These results are shown in Fig. STO is well-known as the "silicon in oxides", which is widely used as a substrate material and also consists of various intriguing functionalities LNO and NNO are typical perovskite-structured nickelates. LNO is metallic, while NNO is a typical charge-transfer insulator, which exhibits a metal-insulator transition (MIT) upon cooling The XRD 2θ-ω scans and optical microscopic images measured from NNO/SAO C /LSAT(001) and NNO/SAO T /LSAT(001) epitaxial films are shown in Supplementary Fig. We also characterized the electrical transport of the freestanding LNO and NNO membranes. For the LNO/SAO C /LSAT(001) epitaxial film, the temperature-dependent resistivity (ρ-T) curve shows an upturn at ~90 K (Supplementary Fig. For the NNO/SAO C /LSAT(001) epitaxial film, the ρ-T curve reveals a rather slanted MIT at ~180 K, accompanied by a small thermal hysteresis (Supplementary Fig. SSO is a typical perovskite-structured wide-band-gap semiconductors. By introducing La doping, it can become perovskite-structured transparent conductive oxide layers the higher water solubility of SAO T , and it also provides another independent parameter for controlling the dissolution speed and further optimizing the freestanding membrane quality. The high water-solubility of SAO T can be understood based on its unique atomic structure. As illustrated in Supplementary Fig. We then turn to check the stability of SAO T and SAO C films against moisture in the ambient. As shown in Supplementary Fig. In brief, compared to the SAO C phase, the new SAO T phase shows higher water-solubility, which enables a more efficient exfoliation of freestanding oxide membranes in water. Moreover, the high epitaxial qualities of ABO 3 /SAO T heterostructures also promote the structure and chemical stabilities against moisture in the ambient. These appealing features further suggest that the SAO T film could be a more suitable water-soluble sacrificial layer for perovskite oxide membranes. Supplementary Table (EDS) results. We choose to grow the thick films on NGO(001) substrate to exclude the influence of Sr and Al elements in the substrate [e.g. STO(001) or LSAT(001)] on the EDS results. To further ensure the reliability of EDS results, we repeated the measurements at five different regions in both samples.