Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) and black phosphorus (bP) are crystalline materials that can be seen as ordered stackings of two-dimensional layers, which lead to outstanding anisotropic physical properties. The knowledge of the thermal equations of state of hBN and bP is of great interest in the field of 2D materials for a better understanding of the anisotropic thermo-mechanical properties and exfoliation mechanism of these materials. Despite several theoretical and experimental studies, important uncertainties remain in the determination of the thermoelastic parameters of hBN and bP. Here, we report accurate thermal expansion and compressibility measurements along the individual crystallographic axes, using in situ high-temperature and highpressure high-resolution synchrotron X-ray diffraction. In particular, we have quantitatively determined the subtle variations of the in-plane thermo-mechanical parameters by subjecting these materials to hydrostatic pressure conditions and collecting a large number of data points in small pressure and temperature increments. Based on the anisotropic behavior of bP, we propose the use of this material as sensor for the simultaneous determination of pressure and temperature in the range 0-5 GPa, 298-1700 K. Thermal equations of state (EOS) are fundamental properties of condensed matter HBN is also known for its chemical inertness Black phosphorus (bP) is the most stable allotrope of phosphorus at ambient conditions of pressure and temperature Here we report accurate directional thermal EOS of hBN and bP using in situ high-resolution synchrotron x-ray diffraction performed under perfect hydrostatic conditions using liquid He as pressure transmitting medium. Besides providing an accurate description of the effects of pressure and temperature on the lattice parameters and volume of these two materials, our findings allowed to highlight a new pressure-temperature metrology based on the exceptional anisotropic properties of bP, which can be simultaneously used as pressure and temperature sensor during XRD experiments in an extended P-T domain. High purity powders of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) purchased from the company Goodfellow (product code: B-60-RD-000105), and black phosphorus (bP, 99.999+% purity) synthesized at ICCOM-CNR (Florence, Italy) from red phosphorus as described in reference Three independent experimental runs (run 1 to 3) were carried out to determine precisely the thermal equations of state (EOS) of hBN and bP using in situ monochromatic X-ray diffraction. Run 1 and 2 were devoted to the determination of the ambient pressure thermal expansion coefficients of hBN and bP, while run 3 was focused on the low pressure (P<10 GPa) room temperature EOS of these materials. All the experimental work has been conducted at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF, Grenoble, France). Run 1 and 3 have been performed at the high-pressure XRD beamline ID27 This high-temperature run was carried-out by increasing the temperature at ambient pressure using the resistive heating device of a Paris-Edinburgh (PE) press The temperature was increased from room T to 760 K by small T increments of 10 K up to 470 K, and slightly larger ones (15 K) at higher T. In order to cross-check the results obtained in run 1 for bP, run 2 has been performed using a different experimental set up. This high-T run 2 has been carried out at the high-resolution powder diffraction beamline ID22 (ESRF) using a heating device consisting of a hot gas blower from the company Cyberstar positioned at an optimum distance (∼5 mm) from the sample. This device generates a smooth laminar flow of hot air that results in a homogeneous temperature distribution over a large volume of more than 10 mm 3 . This homogeneously heated volume is much larger than the sample (∼1 mm 3 ) ensuring very small temperature gradients. BP was contained in a 0.5 mm inner diameter quartz capillary. The incident energy was set to 35 keV (λ=0.3543 Å). The temperature interval covered in this run was from 298 to 715 K as it has been previously reported that bP starts to decompose at higher T The temperature dependence of the unit-cell parameters and volume of hBN obtained in run 1 is presented in Fig. The c lattice parameter presents, within experimental error, a standard linear and positive temperature evolution up to 1280 K, the maximum temperature reached in this run (see Fig. A linear regression of the data gives: where c0 is the c lattice parameter at 300 K, αc the corresponding linear thermal expansion coefficient, and T the temperature. Here and throughout the manuscript, the error bars refer to the standard deviation of the parameters as obtained from the mathematical refinement of the experimental data. As previously reported Due to the weak effect along the a-axis, the evolution of the unit-cell volume of hBN is dominated by the temperature effect on the c lattice parameter and evolves linearly with T over the probed temperature range as expressed by: where V0 is volume at 300 K, αV the corresponding volumetric thermal expansion coefficient and T the temperature (Fig The large contrast between the directional thermal expansion coefficients corresponding to the a and c lattice parameters is explained by the anisotropic structure of hBN, particularly by the striking difference in nature between the chemical bonds in the ab plane and along the c axis of the hexagonal lattice. As shown in Fig. The relative temperature dependence of the unit-cell parameters and volume of bP obtained from Le Bail fitting The pressure dependence of unit-cell parameters and volume of hBN from run 3 and literature are shown in Fig. Fig. As presented in Fig. By contrast, we have measured a much larger variation of 14% along the c axis in the same pressure interval (Fig. where P is the pressure, V and V are the unit-cell volumes at ambient pressure and at pressure P, K and K are the bulk modulus and its first derivative at ambient pressure, respectively. The fitted EOS parameters are listed in Table Moreover, in these works, a non-hydrostatic solid medium was used, which could potentially induce large pressure gradients. These in turn can lead to unprecise pressure and cell parameters determination. In the current study, helium was employed as pressure-transmitting medium, thus ensuring perfect hydrostatic conditions. Along the c-axis, as the variations with pressure are much larger (14%), the relative difference between our data and those of the two literature studies is less pronounced. The pressure variation of the relative lattice parameters and unit-cell volume of bP at ambient temperature are presented together with literature data in Fig. [41] proposed an explanation for this mechanical behavior. Indeed, they showed that the elastic constant C11 is much larger than the C22 and C33 ones (see ref. Exp P range (GPa) The volumetric EOS and directional 3 rd order polynomial parameters of bP are listed in Table c. A7 phase of phosphorus BP displays a series of pressure-induced first-order phase transitions Eq. 5 Where a and a0 are the values of the a lattice parameter at a given pressure and temperature, and at ambient condition, respectively and αa is the directional thermal expansion coefficient of bP along a (Fig. The pressure can then be derived from the third-order Birch-Murnaghan equation of state An example of application which aimed at determining a melting point of bP under pressure using the Paris-Edinburgh (PE) press In this study, we employed in situ high-resolution x-ray diffraction to accurately determine the equations of state parameters, as well as the volumetric and linear thermal expansion coefficients, of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) and black phosphorus (bP). Our investigation focused on the precise characterization of the non-linear variations of the unit-cell parameters of these 2D materials under different temperatures and pressures. In particular, the small in-plane P and T unit cell variations were determined with unparalleled accuracy. These materials possess anisotropic properties due to their layered structure, making them relevant for various energy and technology applications. Our findings offer detailed insights into the structural behavior of hBN and bP at the nanoscale level under high-pressure and temperature conditions achievable with current industrial technology. Consequently, this information contributes to a better understanding and enhancement of the synthesis, stability, and application of these 2D nanostructured materials. Moreover, our data serve as a valuable experimental reference to refine theoretical calculations and gain a deeper understanding of the two-dimensional interactions present in these materials. Lastly, we propose a novel method for high-pressure and high-temperature metrology, utilizing the highly anisotropic directional thermoelastic properties of bP. This innovative approach could be advantageous for large volume press or diamond anvil cell experiments conducted within the low-pressure, hightemperature regime. The exceptional characteristics of bP enable its utilization as a single sensor for simultaneous determination of pressure and temperature through XRD analysis. Volumetric (V) linear (c) and non-linear (a) thermal expansion coefficients of hBN at ambient pressure from this work and the literature.