UV and visible photonics enable applications ranging from spectroscopic sensing to communication and quantum information processing. Photonics structures in these wavelength regimes, however, tend to experience higher loss than their IR counterpart. Particularly in the near-UV band, on-chip optical microresonators have not yet achieved a quality factor beyond 1 million. Here, we report ultra-low-loss photonic waveguides and resonators patterned from alumina thin films prepared by a highly scalable atomic layer deposition process. We demonstrate ultra high Q factor of 1.5 × 10 6 at 390 nm, a record value at UV bands, and 1.9 × 10 6 at 488.5 nm. UV and visible band integrated photonics has witnessed rapid progress in recent years. Applications such as atomic clocks An alternative to AlN for short-wavelength passive photonic integrated platforms is amorphous alumina. Recent progresses in deposition methods have greatly improved the quality of amorphous alumina films, which now demonstrate a band gap that is comparable to bulk sapphire (7.0 -8.3 eV of ALD alumina In this letter, we leverage an industrial ALD process to grow alumina as the waveguide core. This highly scalable process is capable of providing uniform growth coverage to substrates over 20" in diameter and can coat hundreds of 4" wafers in a single batch. Because the absorption of UV and blue light is low in alumina, the propagation mode can be fully supported in the waveguide core, minimizing the scattering loss at top and bottom surfaces of the alumina film. With new waveguide core material and corresponding design principles, our resonators demonstrated ultra high Q of 1.5 × 10 6 at 390 nm and 1.9 × 10 6 at 488.5 nm. Those are the highest quality factors reported at corresponding wavelengths for resonators featuring high confinement design, including previously demonstrated alumina resonator We employ a shallow etch geometry to minimize sidewall scattering loss. The resonators are air-cladded to promote refractive index contrast with the alumina core, reducing the etch depth needed for confinement.The etch depth is optimized by simulating the radiation loss of waveguides subject to different etch depths in Lumerical. For ring resonators with 400 μm radius, it was found that radiation loss can be suppressed to less than 0.06 dB/cm at 488.5 nm and less than 0.001 dB/cm at 390 nm when the etch depth is greater than 80 nm out of 400 nm thick alumina film. During fabrication, the etch depth is targeted at 100 nm, deep enough so that the resonators are not radiation loss limited. The width of the waveguide is set to 4.5 μm so that the outer sidewall provides most of the confinement for the propagation mode, and the overlapping between propagation mode, particularly TE00 mode, and the inner sidewall is minimal, further reducing scattering loss. It should be noted that this wide waveguide allows for propagation of multiple propagation modes, however, as Fig. We utilized an under-coupled point-coupling design to reduce coupling-induced loss and probe the intrinsic alumina resonator loss. The coupling geometry between straight bus waveguide and ring resonator is optimized by varying the bus waveguide width and the gap between the bus waveguide and the ring resonator. We use a combination of simulations with FIMMWAVE software and experimental data to optimize the parameters. The optimal coupling condition for 390 nm light is 0.65 μm wide bus waveguide and 1 μm gap between bus waveguide and ring resonator. For 488.5 nm light, the optimum coupling condition is 0.75 μm wide bus waveguide and 1.1 μm gap. We also fabricated and measured microrings with smaller gaps, which provide stronger coupling. The fabrication started with 4 μm of wet thermal oxide grown on silicon wafers. The test wafers were then coated at Entegris by applying a blanket layer of atomic layer deposition (ALD) amorphous alumina. The ALD deposition of alumina coating was performed by sequentially cycling of TMA / H 2 O with pulsing times between 0.05 s and 0.15 s and nitrogen purge times between 18 s and 20 s at temperatures between 180 • C and 250 • C, using a 20" diameter crossflow thermal ALD coatings system custom-built at Entegris in a class 10,000 clean room. The growth rate of this deposition recipe is approximately 1.1 Å / cycle. The thickness of the alumina coatings was measured to be a nominal 420 nm, determined by spectroscopic reflectometry using an Angstrom Sun SR300 system. The ring resonators and associated bus waveguides were defined with a 100kV electron-beam lithography system (Raith EBPG 5200+) with a negative FOx-16 resist. To mitigate electron charging effects due to the highly insulating alumina and silica layers, 200 nm of poly(4-styrene sulfonic acid) (PSSA) was spun on top of FOx-16 resist before 10 nm of gold was sputtered to provide grounding for stray electrons. The PSSA is water soluble to help the removal of gold after e-beam lithography. After the removal of gold by dipping in water, the chip was developed in 25 percent tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) developer. The pattern was then transferred to the alumina layer using an Oxford PlasmaPro 100 Cobra Inductively Coupled Plasma Reactive Ion Etching (ICP-RIE) system with a BCl 3 based etching recipe. Leftover FOx-16 resist was then removed from the chip by dipping the chip in 10:1 buffered oxide etch for 10 seconds. To further reduce the absorptive loss in alumina waveguide, the chip was annealed in the atmosphere at 500 • C (for 390nm chip) and 600 • C (for 488.5nm chip) for 5 hours to achieve the lowest loss and while avoiding crystallization, which has been reported to take place above 800 • C To characterize the ring resonators, we construct a sweeping blue/UV laser by frequency doubling a Ti-Sapphire laser (M2 SolsTiS, 700-1000 nm) to 390 nm and 488.5 nm. The Ti-Sapphire laser is locked to an external cavity, ensuring <50kHz linewidth and the wavelength of the laser is precisely determined by a 0.1 pm resolution wavemeter, or 0.05 pm resolution after frequency doubling. To create a sweeping ∼390 nm laser, the ∼780 nm pump laser from Ti:Sapphire laser is coupled to a lithium triborate (LBO) doubling crystal in a resonant cavity (M2 ECD-X). To create a sweeping ∼488.5 nm laser, ∼977 nm pump laser from Ti:Sapphire laser is sent through a Magnesium-doped Periodically Poled Lithium Niobate (MgO:PPLN, Covesion MSHG 976-0.5-30) crystal to frequency double to 488.5 nm. The MgO:PPLN crystal is put in an oven, whose temperature is adjusted as the frequency of the pump laser is scanned to maintained phase matching condition of the MgO:PPLN crystal for maximal frequency doubling efficiency. It should be noted that the output power from the Ti:Sapphire laser is wavelength dependent as the spacing of the étalon in the resonant cavity is being continuously tuned. The extended transmittance spectrum covering two FSRs is therefore stitched from four continuous scans around 390 nm (five around 488nm), with the étalon spacing being retuned for maximum power output at the beginning of each piecewise scan. Fig. The current Q of our device is likely limited by the residual absorption of alumina and the scattering of the remaining alumina sidewall roughness as the radiation loss limited Q for the resonator is calculated to be beyond 10 10 for both TE00 and TE10 modes at wavelengths shorter than 500 nm. Since the modal absorption for TE00 and TE10 mode is the same, the Q difference between the two sets of resonances can be attributed to coupling loss and scattering loss. The waveguide is also capable of transmitting TM modes, however, the confinement of bus waveguide is weak for TM modes and the radiation loss limited Q for TM modes of ring resonator is calculated to be <10 M. Thus, we did not perform any further measurements of TM mode transmittance. In Fig. From the Q measurements, the propagation loss of the current ring resonator can be derived to be 0.84 dB/cm at 390 nm and 0.51 dB/cm at 488.5 nm based on the expression α = 4.343 × 2 πn g Q int λ , where n g is the group refractive index obtained through n g = c 2 πR ring * FSR . The superior performance of the ring resonator in this paper can be attributed to the implementation of low-loss amorphous alumina as the waveguide's core material, as well as the ring geometry, which utilizes shallow etching to reduce the scattering loss. In conclusion, we demonstrate ultra-high-Q UV and blue band ring resonators featuring low loss ALD alumina as the waveguide core, and optimized geometry which sees propagation mode strongly confined within the alumina waveguide core. This work pushes the intrinsic Q record of high confinement ring resonators to 1.5 M at 390 nm and 1.9 M at 488.5 nm, corresponding to a propagation loss of only 0.84 dB/cm and 0.51 dB/cm respectively. Our results present an important solution in terms of material choice and waveguide design to achieve low-loss integrated photonics in UV and blue band. Polycrystalline AlN [25, 26, 27] Single-crystalline AlN [14, 28] Thin Si3N4 [9, 11] Al2O3 [18, 23] Fig. 