Acoustic metamaterials and phononic crystals represent a promising platform for the development of noise-insulating systems characterized by a low weight and small thickness. Nevertheless, the operational spectral range of these structures is usually quite narrow, limiting their application as substitutions of conventional noise-insulating systems. In this work, the problem is tackled by demonstration of several ways for the improvement of noise-insulating properties of the periodic structures based on coupled Helmholtz resonators. It is shown that tuning of local coupling between the resonators leads to the formation of ultra-broad stop-bands in the transmission spectra. This property is linked to band structures of the equivalent infinitely periodic systems and is discussed in terms of band-gap engineering. The local coupling strength is varied via several means, including introduction of the so-called chirped structures and lossy resonators with porous inserts. The stop-band engineering procedure is supported by genetic algorithm optimization and the numerical calculations are verified by experimental measurements. One of the global challenges of the modern world is noise pollution, the level of which steadily increases every year In this work, we assume that since chirping may result in the broadening of band-gaps the associated noise-insulating properties of acoustic structures may be enhanced as a result. In order to stick to a particular design, we consider periodic structure based on strongly coupled Helmholtz resonators demonstrated in Ref. The considered structures are made of coupled Helmholtz resonators representing pipes with slits carved along their rotation axes as shown in Figure To form a periodic structure the resonators are arranged in pairs as it allows to broaden bang-gaps due to the strong local coupling The other types of the structures imply modification of the resonators via variation of slit widths or introduction of porous inserts for control of intrinsic losses. Though they might seem to be different, all of these configurations basically allow to modify the local coupling of the resonators extending the possibilities for bang-gap engineering and tuning of noise-insulating properties. One of the major factors affecting the noise-insulation properties is the local coupling between the resonators as the variation of other parameters do not result in the suppression of undesired resonances in the transmission spectra (see Supplementary Information). The coupling coefficient is mostly affected by the distance of the resonators and their slit widths. For simplicity, the investigation starts from the case when only one resonator is displaced and the number of pairs is reduced to 2. More complicated structures are considered in the Supplementary Information. To consider a particular example we choose the design with d 1 = 360 mm and d 2 = 120 mm [see Figure As it is shown in Figure To develop the idea further, it should be noted that variation of the distances is not the only way to alternate the coupling between the resonators and it also can be done via the variation of slit widths. The last case might be more beneficial as the alternation of the slit widths results in a shift of individual Helmholtz resonances which provides an additional degree of freedom for tuning of the band structures. The schematics of the considered structure in which the slit width within each pairs are different is shown in Figure For the above results variation of local coupling strength was performed via geometrical changes of the resonators or their positioning in the structures. However, no mechanisms of intrinsic losses were considered so far. In this section, we briefly discuss the case of lossy resonators formed via the addition of porous materials in their volume [see Figure The stop-band in this case is also nearly flat and actually wider than in the previous cases which is the merit of the porous inserts. It should be noted that the differences between the calculated and measured spectra might result from the mismatch between the parameters of porous materials used for simulations and experiment, since the flow resistivity of the used foam rubber is unknown. The presented results are summarized in Figure 3 Methods All numerical calculations are performed with in COMSOL Multiphysics via the Pressure Acoustics, Frequency Domain module. The schematic of the model is shown in Fig. where p tr is a root mean square of pressure amplitudes evaluated at several arbitrary sampling points located behind the structure and p ref is the corresponding root mean square of the incident pressure amplitude. Despite the fact that the experimental results are reliable only within the range from 200 to 2100 Hz, as explained below, numerical computations are provided for a bit wider range 150 -2500 Hz in order to better understand the results of the optimization procedures. All graphs with transmission spectra are also substituted by the normalized frequency scale as the considered systems are scalable. For better visualization of the spectra, all of them are slightly smoothed via the Savitzky-Golay filter of order 2 and with widow width 11. It is also should be noted that thermo-viscous losses are not accounted for during the calculations which might be a reason for some discrepancies between the numerical and experimental results. All measurements were conducted inside a waveguide with square cross-section as shown schematically in Fig. The sound hard boundary condition allowed us to imitate periodicity along the directions perpendicular to the waveguide axis (direction of the incident wave propagation). The imperfectness of this assumption may be the main reason for the small discrepancies between the numerical and the experimental results. The operational spectral range 200 -2100 Hz was selected in such a way that the cross-section side is smaller than half of the wavelength, which allows to preserve the symmetry of the unit cell and imitates infinite periodicity. The symmetry of the considered structures also allowed using halved resonators instead of the full ones, which helped to adjust the system to the considered spectral range. The samples were manufactured by 3D printing (PLA filament) [see Fig. For each measurement, the chirped signal was generated several times and the obtained transmission spectra were averaged in Fourier space. The sampling frequency was set to 44100 Hz. The transmission coefficient is defined in a similar way as for numerical calculations [see eq. ( The optimization procedure was developed on the basis of classical genetic algorithms where a 1-3 are weights adjusted during the optimization procedure. In this case, it is possible not only to achieve low averaged transmission but also to avoid undesired resonances and achieve flat stop-bands. An extensive discussion of the objective functions and their suitability can be found, for instance, in Ref. The algorithm parameters were selected arbitrarily. For each case, the population size was fixed at 20 and the selection procedure was performed via the roulette wheel method with the selection pressure 0.1. Implementation of the crossover implied random usage of the single point, double point or uniform crossover operators, with the probabilities of choice 0.2, 0.2 and 0.6, respectively. The mutation rate was set to 0.1 and for the real coded algorithm, the normal distribution with standard deviation 0.1 was used. For the case of the slit width variation, the values were bounded by 1 and 26.5 mm (or R/2). The distances between the resonators within a pair were limited by 106 and 720 mm. As for the structures with supercells, the binary genetic algorithm was used in this case. Each resonator was labelled by (x, y), such that x defines the presence of a resonator which is either present (1) or removed (0). Then, y defines whether the resonator is rotated by 180 degrees We demonstrated that the noise-insulating properties of periodic structures based on Helmholtz resonators can be tuned via variation of local coupling between the resonators. In particular, such tuning can be done via chirping of parameters, such as the distance between the resonators or their slit width. Also, the local coupling can be altered via introduction of porous inserts into the bodies of the resonators allowing control of the intrinsic losses. As a result, the presented tuning methods allow merging of the stop-bands associated with the overlap of band-gaps and eigenmodes of the equivalent infinite structures. This leads to wide stop-bands, with low average transmission, and without any strong resonant transmission peaks. The variation of the averaged transmission coefficient in this case is rather insignificant and the difference between the largest and the smallest values is less than 7 dB. It is also can be mentioned that all transmission spectra are characterized by a resonance near 1100 Hz similar to the examples shown in Fig. It should be noted that position of this eigenmode is rather stable against the variation of the unit cell parameters. For instance, increase of the unit cell height [see Fig. As one of the parameters affectin the local coupling is the distance within the pair of the resonators, it is reasonable to start from the tuning of this parameter. To begin with a most simple case, the number of the pairs was reduced to 2, such that the distance between the resonators of the first pair d 1 is varied while the distance within the second pair is fixed at 120 mm, as previously. Again, the resonance near 1100 Hz is always present however in this case it is not pronounced except the regions of overlapping with other modes. The fact that such an intersection occurs at d 1 = 120 mm is the reason why changes of l 1 and l 2 do not result in the deformation of the resonance. Another important remark should be made about the region in-between 400 and 700 Hz. The modes in this region correspond to the in-phase and out-of-phase excitation of Helmholtz resonators. The mode labeled as A-B-C in Fig. where x is the coordinate of the i-th resonator, d 1 is the distance between the resonators within the first pair and α is a chirp parameter [see Fig. In general, the presented approach implies a combination of different unit cells in a manner allowing the overlap of band-gaps with eigenmodes. The presented results so far imply modification of geometric parameters without changes of the unit cell type, which also might be a beneficial strategy. For that elements in the unit cells can be changed. However, in order to not move too far away from the initial structure, we form new unit cells using simple operations of removal of a resonator or its inversion (rotation by 180 degrees). The arbitrary angle of rotation is not considered solely for the sake of simplicity and reduction of the number of calculations. In this case, a row of 3 pairs of the resonators can be con- sidered as a single super-cell, which is modified by the mentioned operations. Basically, the mentioned operations allow a change in the coupling coefficient via the transformation of a unit cell with a pair of resonators to a unit cell with a single resonator or via change of the distance between the resonators. Obviously, much more complicated designs of super-cells are possible, but they are not considered in this work, though might be even more beneficial. Figure In the main text it is stated that variation of slit widths also can lead to the enhancement of the noiseinsulating properties due to the merging of the stop-bands. As Fig. In the main text it is also stated that Helmholtz resonance is suppressed due to the losses related to poroacoustic inserts. This statement can be supported via consideration of a single and a pair of resonators in open space. Figure Inlet 