We classify the pairing symmetries of three-dimensional superconductivity in the zinc-blende structure which can support an electronic environment to host unconventional high temperature superconductivity, and calculate the pairing symmetry in the presence of strong electron-electron correlation by the slave boson mean-field approach. We find that the d 2z 2 -x 2 -y 2 ± id x 2 -y 2 pairing state, a three dimensional analogy of the d ± id pairing in a two dimensional square lattice, is ubiquitously favored near half filling upon hole doping in both single-orbital and three-orbital models. However, unlike the two dimensional counterpart, the Bogoliubov quasiparticle spectrum of the three dimensional state upholds the full T d point group symmetry and encompasses point nodes along certain high symmetric lines. We recently proposed a new family of unconventional high-temperature superconductors in the zincblende structure, guided by the "gene" concept of hightemperature superconductors The zinc-blende structure possesses a space group of F 43m(N o.216) and a corresponding point group of T d . The crystal field splitting effect results in the upward displacement of the three t 2g -orbitals, namely d xy , d yz , and d zx . Consequently, these orbitals exhibit strong hopping interactions in three spatial directions. In the vicinity of half filling (with an electronic configuration approximating d 7 ), this system acts as an unconventional threedimensional high-temperature superconductor. Given the system's high symmetry, the investigation of the superconducting states and their corresponding symmetries in this structure holds great interest. The investigation of pairing symmetries constrained by lattice symmetries has been a topic of inquiry for a long time We present the character table and real-space basis functions f i (r) for the T d group in Table where a j are the 12 NN lattice vectors. We omit the normalized constant and note that the basis lattice vectors are a 1 = (1, 1, 0)/2, a 2 = (1, 0, 1)/2, and a 3 = (0, 1, 1)/2. Among the representation harmonics, we identify that the basis functions t 1i and t o 2i possess spatial parity oddness, and the imaginary factor with the odd parity ensures the time reversal symmetry of the basis functions. The A 2 representation cannot be expressed within the NN harmonics. We can obtain further neighbor cubic harmonics similarly. Specifically, the second NN only has the a 1 (k) and e i (k) forms as given in Table We also tabulate the product of the T d group representations in Table Energy (ev) A. Single-orbital model For clarity, we start with a single-orbital model. The cation atoms form a face-centered cubic (FCC) structure, which is illustrated in Fig. ( Here structure and the single-orbital tight binding model's dispersion along high-symmetry lines are demonstrated in Fig. The pairing function belongs to a particular representation of the corresponding group. It is expressed as a linear combination of the cubic harmonics listed in Table.I. In our previous work According to Landau's phase transition theory, symmetries are broken at the critical temperature. In conventional superconductivity, only the U (1) symmetry is broken, while unconventional pairing states can spontaneously break additional symmetries such as time reversal, spin rotation, and point group symmetry. The pairing form can be obtained by solving the mean-field selfconsistent equation, which involves an eigenvalue problem with the gap function representing the corresponding eigenfunction. Pairings belonging to different representations have different transition temperatures. Therefore, each pairing form carries a specific representation and can be expressed as a linear combination of wavefunctions Γ i , corresponding to that representation, with coefficients δ i . At high temperature, these coefficients are zero to fulfill the complete symmetry, while at temperature lower than the critical temperature, their non-zero values break some symmetries. As a function of the wave-functions, the free energy respects all the symmetries including point group, time reversal, U (1) symmetry and spin rotational SU (2) symmetry. To maintain the U (1) and time reversal symmetries, only real even-order products of δ i 's are allowed, with the second-order term being α i |δ i | 2 . To obtain the fourth-order terms, we extract terms belonging to A 1 representation from Γ⊗Γ * ⊗Γ⊗Γ * . Since this process for A 1 representation is trivial, the E and T 2 representations are considered below. In the E representation, the pairing form is given by ∆(k) = 2 i=1,2 δ i e i (k). Referring to Table The third term is not independent, thus the fourth-order term in the free energy is given by: We can substitute the pairing parameters (δ 1 , δ 2 ) = δ 0 (cos γ, sin γe iθ ) to rewrite the fourth-order terms in the free energy, which are given by: In two different cases, the minimum of the free energy corresponds to two stable phases, which are e 1 (k), e 2 (k), or e 1 (k) + ce 2 (k) (c ∈ R) when β 2 < 0, and e 1 (k) ± ie 2 (k) when β 2 > 0 and β 1 -β 2 > 0. Considering only fourth-order terms in the phenomenological theory results in degeneracy between the e 1 state and the e 2 state. This degeneracy can be eliminated by introducing six-order terms in the free energy or through the slave-boson mean field calculation. Additionally, in the case of the T d group, the e 1 /e 2 basis can cyclically rotate among x, y, and z due to the C 3 rotation, leading to a three-fold degeneracy and D 2d subgroup symmetry of the quasiparticle excitation in this state, as shown in Table For the T 2 representation with ∆(k) = 4 i=1-3 δ i t e 2i (k), we can similarly obtain the terms belonging to A 1 representation from the four-representation product Γ ⊗ Γ * ⊗ Γ ⊗ Γ * . These terms are shown below: They are essentially the polynomial invariants that result from projecting |δ 1 + δ 2 + δ 3 | 4 onto the basis functions. There are three independent terms. Therefore, The stable phases from Landau theory for T2 representation. The circled numbers denote the time reversal invariant, time reversal broken/chiral, polarized and planar phases, respectively. the fourth-order terms in free energy can be expressed as follows with some rephrasing: By normalizing (|δ , the minimum of the free energy yields the four stable phases depicted in Fig. The degeneracy of each of the four stable phases is 4,8,3,and 6 respectively. Both the time reversal invariant (TRI) and chiral phases have equal on-bond-pairing amplitudes. The point group symmetry is always broken in the quasiparticle spectra of all these pairing forms in the T 2 representation. These parameters β i can be affected by the spinfluctuation-feedback effect We will start by analyzing the symmetry of the three orbitals that form the T 2 basis of the point group before considering pairing forms. The Hamiltonian consists of the kinetic energy and mean field pairing terms, which are bilinear forms of the orbital operators. Thus, they form without the spin and momentum indices, as they respond similarly to the real space basis (x, ŷ, ẑ) under the operations belonging to the point group. Therefore, we can express the representations explicitly in terms of the orbital part: Γi = αβ ψ † α Γ i,αβ ψ β . The matrix forms of the representations are presented in Table where h 1-4 are real NN hopping parameters and μ is the chemical potential. The first two matrix elements are obtained as follow: Other terms can be obtained by a cyclical permutation of x, y, z. Here, 4(t to match the real space NN hopping parameters. For example, in a 1 direction, the hopping matrix T (a 1 ) is given by The matrix T (a 1 ) is invariant under the mirror on the plane ( 110), two-fold rotation along the z-axis, and time reversal. From the tight-binding model, we can analytically determine the band splitting at high-symmetry momenta: Γ, X, W , K, and L. These splittings can aid in fitting the four hopping parameters, h i . At the Γ point, the energy is always threefold degenerate at 12h 1 . The band splitting at each momenta is as follows: δ X = -48h 2 , δ W = -24h 2 ± 8h 4 , and δ L = -12h 3 . Figure The second NN hopping terms are relatively simple since their harmonics only exhibit A 1 and E representations, contributing solely to the intra-orbital hoppings. This can be expressed as: The variables are defined as a 1,2 = μ cos(k μ ), e 1,2 = 2 cos(k z ) -cos k x -cos k y , and e 2,2 = cos(k x ) -cos(k y ). The third NN hopping terms are similar to the NN bonds since they share the same symmetries. The only difference is that we should modify the k-dependence of the harmonics, which is obtained by replacing kμ 2 with k μ . The method of classifying the pairing component is similar to that of the tight-binding model discussed earlier. The overall representation of pairing consists of cubic harmonics and orbital bilinear forms, which is represented by Γ(k) ⊗ Γ. In the pairing channels, the operator can be expressed as Γi = αβ ψ † α Γ i,αβ ψ † β , and the matrix form Γ i,αβ is identical to that of the kinetic component because the annihilator and creator transform identically under the point group. Similar to the Hermitian condition of H † t (k) = H t (k) and the time reversal symmetric condition of H * t (k) = H t (-k) for the kinetic component, the pairing term must satisfy the spin-singlet condition of ∆ T (k) = ∆(-k) because our focus is primarily on the antiferromagnetic(AFM)-induced spin-singlet pairing. Here, ∆(k) denotes the pairing matrix in the ψ † k basis. Therefore, only the basis functions with odd parity, such as t o 2i (k) and t 1i (k) listed in Table Table V presents the complete representation decomposition of the nearest-neighbor (NN) singlet pairing. The A 1 channel is the same as that of the tight-binding part, where the hopping parameters h i are replaced by pairing parameters δ A1 i . The entire E pairing channel comprises six parameters, namely δ E i . These include three intra-orbital pairing forms and three inter-orbital forms. The T 2 representation pairing channel involves seven free parameters δ T2 i , including two intra-orbital forms. Notably, due to the combination of orbital bilinear forms and cubic harmonics, the three-orbital model also contains A 2 and T 1 pairing forms. In Sec.III B, we listed the stable phases of different representations in the one-orbital model. These phases remain the same in the three-orbital model as we consider the representation under the group theory, except for the additional pairing representations of A 2 and T 1 . The A 2 representation is one-dimensional, resulting in a unique stable phase, while the T 1 representation shares the stable phases of T 2 due to the same phenomenological Landau theory. The stable e ± ie states are enumerated as ∆ E± (k) = j δ E j ( Ê1,j ± i Ê2,j ), with Êi,j representing the i-th basis function of the j-th E-representation basis in Table V. To provide clarity, we present an example: Ê1,4 = 2t 13 T13 -t 11 T11 -t 12 T12 , (13) Ê2,4 = √ 3(t 11 T11 -t 12 T12 ). ( We employed a single-orbital t-J model The multi-component superconductivity generally exhibits lower ground state energy in the time reversal symmetry breaking states. In the E representation, the d±id wave has the lowest ground state energy. The states from the T 2 representation have nearly indistinguishable energy at a weak exchange interaction of J/t = 0.3, as shown in (c). However, with stronger antiferromagnetic (AFM) exchange interaction in (d), the chiral states T 2,2 have the lowest ground state energy. Notably, the d ± id wave from the E representation maintains the lowest ground state energy upon hole doping, as indicated in (e,f). In the three-orbital model, there are multiple pairing parameters in different channels. However, since the inter-orbital pairs generally require more energy to condense, we consider only the pairing with the matrix forms of Â1 and Ê, which refer to intra-orbital channels. In particular, Â1 signifies the isotropic pairing in the orbital space, which dominates the pairing state. Figure 2 , and δ E3 3 , which correspond to e 1 Ê1 + e 2 Ê2 , (a 1 Ê), (e 1 Ê1 -e 2 Ê2 , e 1 Ê2 +e 2 Ê1 ), and (t e 21 ( Ê1 -√ 3 Ê2 ), t e 22 ( Ê1 + √ 3 Ê2 ), 2t e 23 Ê1 ), respectively. The pairing amplitudes of these anisotropic intra-orbital pairing channels from different representations attenuate rapidly around halffilling upon hole doping. Thus, for the A 1 , E, and T 2 representations, we focus only on the isotropic intra-orbital pairing channels. The notations of the pairing channels used in single orbital (Table The AFM exchange interaction was set at J = 0.1 eV, approximately half of the hopping strength and 1/24 of the bandwidth. In Figure For the single-orbital pairing channel, the quasiparticle spectra are simply ± H 2 1t (k) + |∆(k)| 2 , where H 1t (k) is the single-orbital normal state dispersion function that is proportional to A 1 representation, and invariant under all point group transformations. Therefore, the symmetry of |∆(k)| 2 governs the quasiparticle spectra, as listed in Table In summary, we classified the spin-singlet pairing superconductivity in the zinc-blende structure. The d 2z 2 -x 2 -y 2 ± id x 2 -y 2 pairing state, as the threedimensional analogy of the d ± id pairing in a two dimensional square lattice, was found to be the most stable superconducting phase near half-filling upon holedoping for both single-and three-orbital models through the slave-boson mean field method. Nonetheless, d ± id pairings in three dimensions possess line zeroes along the four bulk diagonal lines of a cube, leading to point nodes in quasiparticle spectra. We analyzed the symmetries of quasiparticle spectra belonging to various representations. We found that the quasiparticle spectra of the TRSB d ± id(E 3 ) pairing in the single-orbital case and the isotropic intra-orbital d ± id (e Â1 ) pairing in the three-orbital case maintain the full pointgroup symmetry. The signal of the time-reversal symmetry breaking in this three-dimensional superconductivity can be detected by muon spin relaxation (μSR) measurements 