The nonreciprocal magnetoelectric effect, also known as the Tellegen effect, promises a number of groundbreaking phenomena connected to fundamental (e.g., electrodynamics of axion and relativistic matter) and applied physics (e.g., magnetless isolators). We propose a three-dimensional metamaterial with an isotropic and resonant Tellegen response in the visible frequency range. The metamaterial is formed by randomly oriented bi-material nanocylinders in a host medium. Each nanocylinder consists of a ferromagnet in a single-domain magnetic state and a high-permittivity dielectric operating near the magnetic Mie-type resonance. The proposed metamaterial requires no external magnetic bias and operates on the spontaneous magnetization of the nanocylinders. By leveraging the emerging magnetic Weyl semimetals, we further show how a giant bulk effective magnetoelectric effect can be achieved in a proposed metamaterial, exceeding that of natural materials by almost four orders of magnitude. Most materials interact with light in the optical spectral range through electric polarization and are characterized by permittivity ε. The effect of magnetization in such materials, described by permeability μ, at optical frequencies is negligible, however, it can be enhanced using the metamaterial paradigm The existence of the ME effect was first conceived conceptually by B. Tellegen in a composite formed by particles bearing parallel or anti-parallel static electric and magnetic dipoles sive research on ME materials and multiferroics (ferroelectric ferromagnets) Since the late 1990-s, several attempts to move from natural ME materials towards artificial ME composites were made using metamaterials approach. However, meta-atoms designs were still limited to the microwave frequency range The observed ME phenomena at optical frequencies in known materials are negligible and thus remain elusive for realistic applications The possibility of an isotropic ME effect has particular importance for fundamental physics. It was pointed out in seminal works Here we theoretically propose a three-dimensional metamaterial with an isotropic ME effect in the visible spectral range. Its meta-atom is a nanocylinder with a ferromagnetic nanodisk in a single-domain magnetic state and a high-permittivity dielectric nanodisk supporting the magnetic Mie-type resonance. The 3D metamaterial is formed by randomly distributing (positionand orientation-wise) the nanocylinders in a host medium such as water or polymer. Due to the optimized magnetic shape anisotropy the ferromagnetic nanodisks exhibit spontaneous magnetization and the ME effect (without the need for an external magnetic bias). Random orientation of the nanocylinders in metamaterial ensures the disappearance of other types of bulk bianisotropic effects while preserving the bulk Tellegen effect, enhanced by the Lorenz-Mie-type resonances In the approximation of linear response and weak spatial dispersion, the most general isotropic materials are characterized by the following constitutive relations that relate the displacement fields D and B to the electric and magnetic fields E and H Here, c stands for the speed of light, ε, μ, κ, and χ are the scalar permittivity, permeability, chirality parameter, and Tellegen parameter of a continuous medium, respectively. In the case of a metamaterial, ε, μ, κ, and χ in eqs. (1) are the effective material parameters. In what follows, we assume time-harmonic oscillations in the form e +iωt . Among the four scalar material parameters, only one, namely, the Tellegen parameter, corresponds to a nonreciprocal effect, that is an effect where the Lorentz reciprocity is broken We devise the Tellegen metamaterial by designing a single meta-atom, analyzing its response inside a bulk composite of equivalent meta-atoms and finding the effective material parameters of the composite. We assume a random orientation and arrangement of the meta-atoms in the metamaterial. While this eases up the future large-scale nanofabrication, it also prompts exploiting anisotropic meta-atoms providing more design degrees of freedom. Indeed, a collection of randomly oriented anisotropic meta-atoms produces an isotropic metamaterial since any anisotropic electromagnetic effects in the individual meta-atoms will be compensated in such metamaterial (1) p (1) p (1) p (2) p (2) E b (1) m (2) m (2) m (2) m (1) m (1) m (1) be expressed as where I is the two-dimensional unit matrix and J is the antisymmetric two-dimensional (skew-symmetric) matrix with only nonzero components J yx = -J xy = 1. We limit our discussion to the dipolar moments since the higher-order multipoles in individual meta-atoms do not contribute to the bulk magnetoelectric effect when they are randomized in a metamaterial. Since the isotropic Tellegen and the other three mentioned effects, described by α ge , α gm , and α κs , show up only in the cross-polarized scattered fields, we analyze separately their characteristic signatures. Using eqs. (2), we qualitatively illustrate in Fig. Chirality in a meta-atom is responsible for reciprocal cross-polarization conversion in transmission (Fig. Finally, a uniaxial meta-atom with the Tellegen response behaves somewhat oppositely to a chiral metaatom: regardless of the illumination direction, the induced dipole moments do not scatter light in the forward direction (Fig. By comparing eqs. ( The challenge to reach an isotropic Tellegen metamaterial is to produce a space-inhomogeneous external magnetization (i.e., each meta-atom should be magnetized externally) with a sufficiently strong field amplitude. This is a bottleneck of all the known microwave designs of Tellegen meta-atoms In order to address both challenges, we propose a metaatom with the geometry shown in Fig. The ferromagnetic nanocylinder in a single-domain state possesses permanent static magnetization close to the saturation magnetization of cobalt M s = 1.44 × 10 6 A/m. The magnetization direction (up or down) determines the sign of the effective Tellegen polarizability α χs . It can be defined upon the fabrication. Fixed magnetization along the nanocylinder axis can be obtained through the magnetocrystalline, shape, and/or the perpendicular magnetic anisotropies of the nanocylinder [55, Sec. 7], To provide a qualitative picture of the magnetoelectric effect in the meta-atom, we excite it by a standing wave with the electric field polarized along the y-axis and with the node of the magnetic field located at the center of the meta-atom (Fig. The semiconductor nanocylinder of the meta-atom has the additional role of breaking the parity symmetry that a pure cobalt nanocylinder would have. The magnetic point group of the meta-atom C ∞v (C ∞ ) By using the full-wave simulations, we calculate the traces of the electric, magnetic, and magnetoelectric polarizability tensors. Next, we use the Maxwell Garnett mixing rule to determine the macroscopic effectivemedium parameters of a bulk Tellegen metamaterial (Fig. Although the cobalt-based Tellegen metamaterial (Fig. We consider the topological semimetal EuCd 2 As 2 experimentally characterized in To demonstrate one of the implications of the giant Tellegen response, we consider the magneto-optical Kerr effect for plane waves incident on the planar interface between air and designed Weyl-based metamaterial Next, we analyze the contribution of the Tellegen and gyrotropic effects in the optical Tellegen metamaterial and visualize how different structural blocks in the designed meta-atom affect the Tellegen response. We do this on the example of Weyl-based Tellegen meta-atoms (Fig. xy , while the Tellegen reflection parameter is given by R xy . Here, R xy and R xy stand for complex-valued cross-polarized reflection coefficients from the array of meta-atoms (the reference plane is located at the geometric center of the array, i.e. at z = 0) when the incident wave propagates along the -z-and +z-directions, respectively. First, the four meta-atoms are all oriented along the z axis (Fig. Next, we check how the metamaterial behaves if the magnetization in each meta-atom is independent of its orientation, i.e. equal for all Tellegen meta-atoms. This occurs when the meta-atom is not in the single-domain magnetic state and the magnetization can be viewed as global (Fig. We proposed a three-dimensional (bulk) Tellegen (ME) metamaterial with an isotropic ME effect in the optical regime. The individual meta-atoms exhibit spontaneous magnetization and, therefore, do not require an external bias field. We further demonstrate that using an emerging class of magnetic Weyl semimetals, the effective ME response can reach values on par with those of permittivity and permeability. Realized experimentally, such a giant ME response would enable developments and applications in the field that so far has remained purely theoretical We calculate the polarizabilities of the Tellegen metaatoms depicted in Figs. 2a and 3a using the full-wave simulations. The frequency dispersions for cobalt (diagonal and off-diagonal components) and crystalline silicon are taken from the experimental data in The responses of the two-dimensional arrays of Tellegen meta-atoms in Fig. 