As a two-dimensional planar material with low depth profile, a metasurface can generate non-classical phase distributions for the transmitted and reflected electromagnetic waves at its interface. Thus, it offers more flexibility to control the wave front. A traditional metasurface design process mainly adopts the forward prediction algorithm, such as Finite Difference Time Domain, combined with manual parameter optimization. However, such methods are timeconsuming, and it is difficult to keep the practical meta-atom spectrum being consistent with the ideal one. In addition, since the periodic boundary condition is used in the meta-atom design process, while the aperiodic condition is used in the array simulation, the coupling between neighboring meta-atoms leads to inevitable inaccuracy. In this review, representative intelligent methods for metasurface design are introduced and discussed, including machine learning, physics-information neural network, and topology optimization method. We elaborate on the principle of each approach, analyze their advantages and limitations, and discuss their potential applications. We also summarise recent advances in enabled metasurfaces for quantum optics applications. In short, this paper highlights a promising direction for intelligent metasurface designs and applications for future quantum optics research and serves as an up-to-date reference for researchers in the metasurface and metamaterial fields. Electromagnetic (EM) wave front modulation has important significance in both scientific researches and industrial applications. It is highly demanded in classical information processing In recent years, two-dimensional (2D) planar materials, known as metasurfaces, have solved challenging problems encountered by traditional optical devices. Metasurfaces have artificially tunable EM responses. The modulation of EM waves is achieved by arranging meta-atoms (pixel unit cells of a metasurface) in a predefined order Before we discuss the intelligent optimization techniques for metasurface designs, the traditional methods derived from fundamental laws of physics are introduced in detail as following, which is understandable by logic. The general design process for a metasurface device consists of two steps. The first step is the metasurface unit cell design. Afterwards, one fills in the discrete metasurface pixels by unit cells with different response including phase, amplitude or other EM properties of a wave , where Z0 is the wave impedance in free space. By derivation, Ze and Zm can be characterized by R and T, , and . We assume the metasurface is lossless. If the transmission amplitude is 1, we derive R=0, and T=e iφ . . Then, the condition of a high transmission for Huygens' Metasurface is determined by , where Z0 is wave impedance of free space. For a refracted wave, refraction angle θt is determined by sin arcsin( ) Then, the previous isotropic dielectric is changed into anisotropic dielectric with permittivity εpe=εd (perpendicular to refraction direction), and εpa (parallel to refraction direction). In this case, the refraction and reflection phenomena remain the same as before. However, if we switch the incident wave from left side of normal (θi>0) to right side of normal (θi<0), according to the reciprocity principle, the reflection is the same as before, which is determined by Rs. While the refraction angle is not only dominated by εpe, but also εpa. This interesting phenomenon is called Anomalous Generalized Brewster Effect (AGBE). By carefully designing Rs of a metasurface and permittivity of dielectric, we can control Brewster's and refraction angle. Another metasurface proposed by Chu et al. is the random-flip metasurface Dioxide are often used because of their low loss at those wavelengths compared with metals. For mid-to far-infrared applications, gold and silver are usually used because of their strong resonant property. In microwave applications, metal, such as copper, and high refractive index dielectric materials are normally used because the loss of metal is quite low in microwave band. In other words, the choice of materials for a metasurface depends on different wavelength applications and should keep a balance between material properties such as conductivity, permittivity, and loss. In a metasurface intelligent design, a commonly used method is the genetic algorithm Alternatively, an intelligent metasurface design combining with forward and reverse algorithms offers a solution to overcome the above-mentioned problems encountered by traditional metasurfaces In general, to improve the precision of network predictions, machine learning is often applied to simple and fixed metasurface structures, where certain structural parameters are treated as variables [72], The computational time consumed by machine learning is primarily determined by the size of the data set, the complexity of the metasurface structure, and the number of optimization parameters Therefore, compared to the two previous methods, this one can more quickly approach the optimum. Additionally, this method allows for arbitrary arrangements in space, resulting in the highest degree of freedom in structure design. We give mainly the qualitative comparison here. For further work in this field in the future, specific numerical comparison among these methods needs to be discussed in detail. The methods discussed above have significantly expanded the possibilities for metasurface designs and have led to notable improvements in performance. A flowchart of the metasurface design process, including principles, fabrication, experimental conditions, and applications, is illustrated in Figure In this section, we address various approaches and case studies pertaining to the optimization of techniques for designing metasurface-based optical devices. We analyze their underlying principles and methods, and classify them into three main categories, which will be discussed in the subsequent sections. The basic principle flowchart of machine learning approach for metasurface design is illustrated in Figure [73]- Figure In 2019, An et al. proposed a deep learning method for optimizing the optical response of metasurface structures. This method was found to be more accurate and efficient than conventional techniques Therefore, further researches are needed to establish its validity. In the same year, Zhang et al. proposed a binary coded metasurface structure optimized by machine learning Consequently, the network exhibits a high phase response accuracy and rapid optimization speed. The authors Furthermore, while the sample works in the microwave band, which allows for easy fabrication of binary coding structures, conversion to the optical band would be hindered by limitations in manufacturing accuracy, making experimental implementation of this method challenging. Later, in 2021, Jiang et al. demonstrated that deep neural networks can predict not only phase, but also group delay for meta-atoms operating in the visible light band For example, electron-beam lithography can define highly complex resonator shape, which ensures high precision of the structure. The coupling between neighboring meta-atoms limits the number of the functions because it causes interference between different resonators, which has influence on the functions. Metasurfaces are usually made of metal or dielectric materials with a high refractive index, which can cause large absorption or scattering loss. This factor also influences the functions. The design process is illustrated in Figure The strategy to apply machine learning for metasurface design involves the initial creation of a large "library" of potential metasurface designs, followed by the simulation of each design's response using a numerical solver. Subsequently, classical search methods are employed to traverse the library and identify the desired metasurface parameters. This traditional approach is inefficient as well as time-consuming. The machine learning techniques discussed in this section still necessitate the use of a numerical solver to generate training data, but this represents a one-time cost. Once trained, the networks can predict metasurface parameters without the need for further utilization of a numerical solver. A prevalent issue in the application of general neural network frameworks to metasurface design is the lack of rigor in enforcing the correctness of physics solutions or the manufacturability of discovered parameters. As demonstrated in The basic principle for physics-informed neural networks is to add information on the physics laws, such as Maxwell's equations or some other partial differential equation (PDE), into neural networks. The operation can be realized by incorporating PDE governing data set into a loss function of framework. Detailed information and theory are referred to the second paragraph of section 2 (Physics-informed neural networks) in In 2020, Chen et al. utilized a combination of neural networks and partial differential equations, specifically the Helmholtz equation, for metasurface design, the method of which is referred as Physics-Informed Neural Networks In 2022, Tang et al. proposed an approach of incorporating physical guidance and explanation within recurrent neural networks for time response of optical resonances Physics-guided and physics-explainable neural networks are a type of neural network framework that is designed to include physical principles or knowledge into the framework and training process. This method can improve the output accuracy and interpretability because it is consistent with known physics laws or principles. In the first column of Later, Chen et al. updated their physics-informed neural networks with Maxwell equations Copyright © 2022, Chen, Y. Y. This article is distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. The previous discussions demonstrate that physics-informed neural networks possess a high speed, accuracy, and degree of freedom, and overcome limitations imposed by training data. Additionally, this framework is readily applicable to the problem of recovering geometrical parameters of metasurfaces for a desired EM response. However, it is important to note that a disadvantage of this framework is that a single trained physics-informed neural network cannot be applied to multiple similar inverse problems, requiring retraining for each individual case. Nevertheless, alternative methods that may be equally effective and more efficient without the use of machine learning techniques will be discussed in the following section. A flowchart of the topology optimization process for metasurface design is illustrated in Figure The final output is the optimized set of parameters xi for the desired structure. Figure In 2019, Lin et al. proposed the use of RCWA method for topology optimization of multi-layer metasurface structures Additionally, the use of parallel calculation on GPUs further increases the speed compared to the adjoint method. An example of designing a lens with several elliptical resonator meta-atoms is shown in the first column of Figure As the iteration number increases, the learning curve of focus efficiency improves, as depicted in the second column of Figure Based on the previously discussed works, it is evident that in recent years the most effective strategy for metasurface optimization has been through the use of topology optimization methods, which leverage advanced AD formulations or apply high-performance computing techniques. These methods are highly flexible, performant, accurate, fast, and offer a large degree of freedom. The choice of strategy is largely dependent on a specific application. In conclusion, to effectively handle highly complex metasurfaces, a physics-informed neural network can be employed by incorporating elements from these topological optimization approaches, such as the use of the efficient RCWA method, or the implementation of high-performance parallel architecture for training. Since the introduction of metasurface concepts, various devices and applications have emerged rapidly, including metasurface antennas In 2018, Wang et al. proposed the use of flat metasurfaces as a replacement for conventional bulk components to achieve non-classical multiphoton interference In this review, multiple important methods on intelligent design for metasurfaces are elaborated. These methods will become the effective methods for metasurface and metamaterial design in the future and have obvious advantages in physical accuracy and computational time. We give a comparison between forward and backward inverse designs of a metasurface in detail in Table Table Forward Design Strategy Only forward solver is difficult to achieve results consistent with ideal optical expectations. Artificial design and optimization is timeconsuming. Machine Learning The cost is derived from the training and depends on the training data size, which is one-time cost. Physics-Informed Neural Networks The existence of solution cannot be presupposed and depends on physical problem. Less cost, since physical laws restrict the space of admissible solutions to a manageable size. Topology Optimization The fastest of one iteration of gradient descent is less than others, so the cost is the least. Besides academic interests, metasurfaces have emerged as a promising technology with diverse potential applications in industry. Metamaterials have shown remarkable properties such as anomalous reflection, wavefront manipulation, and polarization control. These unique features enable metasurfaces to revolutionize conventional optics and provide innovative solutions for a wide range of industrial applications . In other words, as long as one carefully designs Ze and Zm of the metasurface, full transmission can be realized