We report on the geometrically frustrated two-dimensional triangular-lattice magnets A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 (A = Sr, Ba) studied mostly by means of neutron powder diffraction (NPD) and muon-spin rotation and relaxation (μSR) techniques. The chemical pressure induced by the Ba-for-Sr substitution suppresses the ferromagnetic (FM) transition from 6.3 K in the Ba-compound to 4.8 K in the Sr-compound. We find that the R 3 space group reproduces the NPD patterns better than the previously reported R 3m space group. Both compounds adopt the same magnetic structure with a propagation vector k = (0, 0, 0), in which the Ni 2+ magnetic moments are aligned ferromagnetically along the c-axis. The zero-field μSR results reveal two distinct internal fields (0.31 and 0.10 T), caused by the long-range ferromagnetic order. The small transverse muon-spin relaxation rates reflect the homogeneous internal field distribution in the ordered phase and, thus, further support the simple FM arrangement of the Ni 2+ moments. The small longitudinal muon-spin relaxation rates, in both the ferromagnetic-and paramagnetic states of A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 , indicate that spin fluctuations are rather weak. Our results demonstrate that chemical pressure indeed changes the superexchange interactions in A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 compounds, with the FM interactions being dominant. Geometric frustration occurs when a system of interacting spins is unable to find its lowest energy state because of how the spins are arranged. This property plays an important role at microscopic scales in solids. In particular, in certain cases, such as in spin glasses, spin ice, and spin liquids A two-dimensional triangular lattice with antiferromagnetic interactions provides one of the prototypes of magnetic frustration To date, different magnetic ground states have been found to occur in the A 4 B'B 2 O 12 family To clarify the above issues, in this paper, we synthesized polycrystalline samples of A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 (A = Sr, Ba) and studied their magnetic properties by means of magnetization-, specific heat-, neutron scattering-, and muonspin rotation and relaxation (μSR) measurements. The chemical pressure is introduced by substituting Ba with Sr, which suppresses the FM transition temperature from 6.3 down to 4.8 K, while the magnetic moments of the Ni 2+ ions are ferromagnetically aligned along the c-axis in both compounds. Our results suggest that the chemical pressure indeed changes the superexchange interactions in substitution on the Ni site may further tune the magnetic interactions and lead to magnetic frustration. The A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 (A = Sr, Ba) polycrystalline samples were prepared by the solid-state reaction method. Stoichiometric amounts of La 2 O 3 , BaCO 3 , SrCO 3 , NiO, and WO 3 powders were used to prepare the materials. The La 2 O 3 rareearth oxide was annealed for 15 hours in atmosphere to remove moisture. The powders were then mixed, ground, and sintered at 1200 • C for 24 hours. After grinding the samples again, the powders were pressed into pellets and sintered at 1200 • C for extra 48 hours. The magnetic-susceptibility and heat-capacity measurements were performed on a Quantum Design magnetic property measurement system (MPMS) and physical property measurement system (PPMS), respectively. Neutron powder diffraction (NPD) measurements were carried out at the Swiss Neutron Source SINQ of the Paul Scherrer Institute in Villigen, Switzerland. The A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 powder samples were introduced in cylindrical vanadium cans (8 mm in diameter and 50 mm high) and mounted on a helium cryostat stick (2-300 K). Highresolution room-temperature NPD patterns were recorded at the powder diffractometer HRPT [Ge (822), λ = 1.154 Å]. To discern the magnetic diffraction peaks, high-intensity NPD patterns were collected at 1.7 K on the DMC diffractometer using a longer wavelength [pyrolitic graphite (002), λ = 2.458 Å]. The collected NPD patterns were analyzed using the Rietveld package of the FullProf suite The bulk μSR measurements were carried out at the general-purpose surface-muon instrument (GPS) of the Swiss muon source at Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland. In this study, we performed two types of experiments: zerofield (ZF)-, and longitudinal-field (LF) μSR measurements. In both cases, we aimed at studying the temperature evolution of the magnetically ordered phase and the spin fluctuations. The μSR spectra were collected upon sample heating and then analyzed by the musrfit software package The A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 samples were first characterized by magnetic-susceptibility measurements. Figures We measured the zero-field heat-capacity of A 2 La 2 NiW 2 -O 12 from 2 to 300 K. The low-T heat-capacity data were also collected under various external fields, up to 9 T. As shown in Fig. ) - respectively. Upon increasing the magnetic field, the peak at T c becomes broader and moves to higher temperatures, once more confirming the FM nature of the magnetic transition in both materials. The zero-field magnetic entropy S m (T ) obtained by integrating C m (T )/T is shown in Fig. To determine the crystal-and magnetic structures of A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 , neutron powder diffraction patterns were collected at both the paramagnetic (300 K)-and ferromagnetic states (1.7 K). The room-temperature patterns were first analyzed by using the space group R 3m (No. 166), as reported in previous studies ) ) positions. Figures To clarify the magnetic structure of Ba 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 and Sr 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 , the NPD patterns were also collected in the magnetically ordered state (i.e., 1.7 K) using long wavelength neutrons (λ = 2.458 Å). The LeBail fits of the magnetic diffraction patterns reveal a commensurate magnetic structure with a propagation vector k = (0, 0, 0) for A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 compounds. For such a magnetic vector, the little group G k is identical to the space group R 3 and it includes the symmetry elements 1, 3 + , 3 -, 1, 3+ , and 3- The magnetic unit cell of A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 possesses a single orbit with only one site located at the Ni (0, 0, 0) position. For k = (0, 0, 0), G k has six different irreducible representations (irreps) τ1, τ2, τ3, τ4, τ5, and τ6, among which only τ1, τ3, and τ5 allow for a long-range magnetic order at the Ni site. Table Site τ1 τ3 τ5 Ni (0, 0, 1) (1, 0, 0) (1, 0, 0) (0, 0, 0) (-0.58, -1.15, 0) (0.58, 1.15, 0) The large gyromagnetic ratio of muons, combined with their availability as 100% spin-polarized beams, makes ZF-μSR a very sensitive probe for investigating magnetic materials. Here, to study the magnetic properties of A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 at a local level, we collected a series of ZF-μSR spectra at temperatures covering both the paramagnetic-and ferro-magnetic states. Since neutron diffraction data suggest FM ground states for both Ba 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 and Sr 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 (with the Ni 2+ moments aligned along the c-axis), for our μSR measurements we focused on Ba 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 due to its slightly higher T c value. In a magnetic material with a longrange order, the time evolution of ZF-μSR asymmetry, A ZF (t), encodes both the intrinsic magnetic fields and their distribution at the muon-stopping site Here, λ L i represent the longitudinal muon-spin relaxation rates, while A i are the asymmetries of the two nonequivalent muon-stopping sites. In the FM state (T < T c ), the ZF-μSR spectra are characterized by highly-damped oscillations, typical of long-range magnetic order. These are clearly visible in Fig. Here, α and 1-α are the oscillating (i.e., transverse) and nonoscillating (i.e., longitudinal) fractions of the μSR signal, respectively, whose initial total asymmetry is equal to A 1 and A 2 . In polycrystalline materials with a long-range magnetic order, one expects α = 2/3, since statistically one third of the muon spins are aligned parallel to the local field direction (i.e., S μ ∥ B int ) and, hence, do not precess; ω i (= γ μ B int i ) represents the muon-spin precession frequency, with γ μ = 2π×135.5 MHz/T the muon gyromagnetic ratio and B int i the local field sensed by muons; λ T i are the transverse muon-spin relaxation rates, reflecting the internal field distributions; φ is a shared initial phase. The derived fitting parameters are summarized in Fig. where B int i (0) is the zero-temperature internal field, while γ and δ represent two empirical parameters. As shown by solid lines in Fig. ) The transverse muon-spin relaxation rate λ T reflects the static magnetic field distribution at the muon-stopping site and is also affected by dynamical effects such as spin fluctuations, while its longitudinal counterpart λ T is solely determined by spin fluctuations. The λ T i (T ) of Ba 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 exhibits the typical behavior of magnetic materials with a long-range order Although our comprehensive set of measurements suggest that both Ba 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 and Sr 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 have FM ground states, the magnetic susceptibility and neutron diffraction results indicate that the competition between FM-and AFM couplings is indeed tuned by the chemical pressure induced by the substitution of Ba-with the smaller Sr ions. To understand this, we examine the crystal-structure parameters of A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 (see details in Table To summarize, we studied the effects of chemical pressure on the magnetic triangular-lattice compounds A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 (A = Sr, Ba). Their magnetic properties (due to the Ni 2+ ions) were investigated by means of magnetic susceptibility, specific heat, neutron diffraction, and μSR spectroscopy. When replacing Ba with Sr, chemical pressure is introduced which can tune the competition between the FM-and AFM superexchange interactions. While the Curie temperature T c is suppressed from 6.3 K to 4.8 K, the FM interactions still persist in Sr 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 . According to the refinements of neutron diffraction patterns, in both compounds, the magnetic moments of Ni atoms are aligned along the c-axis, with a propagation vector k = (0, 0, 0). By using ZF-μSR measurements, we could follow the temperature evolution of the spin fluctuations and of the local magnetic fields. The estimated internal fields at zero temperature for the two different muon-stopping sites are 0.31 and 0.1 T. The smooth transverse muon-spin relaxation rates λ T in the ordered phase confirm the simple FM structure of A 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 . In both materials, spin fluctuations are rather weak, reflected in a small longitudinal muon-spin relaxation rate in both the ferromagnetic-and paramagnetic states. In the future, it could be interesting to check if the combined physical pressure and chemical substitution on the A and B' sites can further tune the magnetic competitions in Sr 2 La 2 NiW 2 O 12 , and eventually lead to magnetic frustration or to a quantum spin-liquid state. p = 5.53/5.90 %, R wp = 7.13/6.42 %, χ 2 r = 2.53/1.97 • Bond angle: ∠O2-W-O2: 84.51(3) • /84.53(2) •