We introduce a practical and efficient approach for calculating the all-electron full potential bandstructure in real space, employing a finite element basis. As an alternative to the k-space method, the method involves the selfconsistent solution of the Kohn-Sham equation within a larger finite system that encloses the unit-cell. It is based on the fact that the net potential of the unit-cell converges at a certain radius point. Bandstructure results are then obtained by performing non-self-consistent calculations in the Brillouin zone. Numerous numerical experiments demonstrate that the obtained valence and conduction bands are in excellent agreement with the pseudopotential k-space method. Moreover, we successfully observe the band bending of core electrons. In solid state physics and electronics, it is crucial to address the issue of obtaining accurate band structure calculations for materials. One of the earliest band structure calculations was proposed by Cohen in 1960s In the context of finite sized atomistic systems, real-space mesh techniques offer a suitable alternative option to atomic orbitals and plane-wave schemes to discretize the problem (see Our starting point is the Density Functional Theory (DFT) and Kohn-Sham one-electron equation described by v-representability to project in real space the one-electron wavefunction as follows where V KS is the Kohn-Sham potential that contains Hartree, Exchange and Correlation terms which are all functionals of electron density (for clarity, we omit the density functional variable in the Kohn-Sham potential). The nuclear potential V nuclei (r) is composed of an infinitely large number of potentials V nuclei (R j -r) associated with atom j at position R j . One possible way of setting up this Hamiltonian consists of filling up the entire space with the nucleus potentials first, and then overlays the electron's interaction potential upon it. However, this approach leads to the embarrassment of non-convergence of infinite potential energy since the summation of infinite number of long-range Coulomb potentials is divergent. In the reciprocal k-space space, when using Poisson equation to solve the Hartree and the nucleus potential, the term k=0 must be set to 0 to avoid diverging. In fact, physically, this is equivalent to treating the unit-cell of a lattice as an electrically neutral one In the actual process of crystal formation, two atoms are first combined, and then these two atoms combine with another one to form a three-atom structure, and so on. As atoms are gradually joined together to form a crystal, the potential energy experienced by an electron within atomic arrangements remains finite due to its ongoing state of dynamic equilibrium. Consequently, Electrons are never really experiencing the effect of long-range infinite nuclei potentials, and the potential energy felt by one electron can be better expressed by combining V nuclei and V KS in equation ( where m, n correspond to the mth unit-cell, and the nth atom in that unit-cell, respectively. The potentials V n nuclei and V n KS are associated with the nuclei and KS potential within an unit-cell (in general, the KS potential can be made non-local with the density within the unit-cell). In equation ( Figure (3) While expressing Equation (3) in the finite domain Ω that contains at least one unit-cell (Ω 0 domain) and a few layers of adjacent atoms (see Figure where the total V KS potential in (1) has been replaced by the Hartree V H (r), Exchange V X (r) and Correlation V C (r) potentials in Ω. Since Ω 0 ⊂ Ω, we can extract the converged potentials V H (r), V X (r), V C (r) within the unit-cell Ω 0 . At this point and from the result of the discussion above, the unit-cell potential and electron density should be fully determined and the bandstructure of the lattice can be retrieved by solving a non-self-consistent Bloch periodic Schrödinger equation in Ω 0 . Denoting a the 3D primitive vector for the lattice unit-cell, the wavefunction can be written as: where u(r) is solution of the following Schrödinger equation in Ω 0 using pure periodic boundary conditions: Equation ( The latest released version of our all-electron finite element NESSIE software • The PPP unit cell contains 6 carbon and 4 hydrogen atoms, and it is linked with other unit-cells at the edges to form a 1D periodic chain structure. The bond lengths are: 1.396 Å between carbons inside unit cell, 1.1 Å between carbon and hydrogen, 1.478 Å between carbons connecting unit cells. Angle between carbon-carbon bond and carbonhydrogen bond is 120 • . We use the 3-PPP unit-cells structure passivated using two hydrogen atoms at the edges, as a suitable choice for the finite system to guarantee the convergence of the net potential in the unit-cell (see Fig. • For 2D periodic structure, we choose graphene as a test material (using 1.42 Å for C-C bond length). Our finite isolated structure contains 16 carbon atoms and 10 hydrogen atoms used for passivation (passivation is necessary to guarantee convergence of the Kohn-Sham self-consistent systems (4)). A parallelogram including 2 atoms unit-cells (primitive cell) is then used to calculate the bandstructure. Fig. • Diamond is now used for testing 3D periodic features (using 1.542 Å for C-C bond length). The finite system includes 26 carbon atoms with 42 hydrogen atoms for passivation, while 2 atoms are used to form a rhombic dodecahedron unit-cell (primitive cell). Fig. Our third set of numerical experiment is concerned with the 3D polar materials LiH and NaCl. As discussed in Fig. All electron full potential bandstructure was calculated in real space by taking advantage of the neutrality of atoms in lattice structure. The action of combining nuclei and electron-electron interaction potential eliminates the divergence of the long-range effect, which enables to extract the converged net potential in the unit-cell. Bandstructure calculations can then be performed non-self-consistently using Bloch-periodic boundary conditions within the unit-cell to obtain core, valence and conduction bands. Examples with comparisons were presented for both polar and non-polar materials and multi-dimensional systems. The approach allows to generalize the domain of applicability of real-space mesh techniques from finite domain to periodic systems, and it can be seen as a post-processing procedure for the NESSIE software 