Conventional superconductors naturally disfavor ferromagnetism because the supercurrent-carrying electrons are paired into anti-parallel spin singlets. In superconductors with strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling, impurity magnetic moments induce supercurrents through the spin-galvanic effect. As a result, long-range ferromagnetic interaction among the impurity moments may be mediated through such anomalous supercurrents in a similar fashion as in itinerant ferromagnets. Fe(Se,Te) is such a superconductor with topological surface bands, previously shown to exhibit quantum anomalous vortices around impurity spins. Here, we take advantage of the flux sensitivity of scanning superconducting quantum interference devices to investigate superconducting Fe(Se,Te) in the regime where supercurrents around impurities overlap. We find homogeneous remanent flux patterns after applying a supercurrent through the sample. The patterns are consistent with anomalous edge and bulk supercurrents generated by in-plane magnetization, which occur above a current threshold and follow hysteresis loops reminiscent of those of a ferromagnet. Similar long-range magnetic orders can be generated by Meissner current under a small out-ofplane magnetic field. The magnetization weakens with increasing temperature and disappears after thermal cycling to above superconducting critical temperature; further suggesting superconductivity is central to establishing and maintaining the magnetic order. These observations demonstrate surface anomalous supercurrents as a mediator for ferromagnetism in a spin-orbit coupled superconductor, which may potentially be utilized for low-power cryogenic memory. Charge carriers in a solid material are capable of mediating spin correlation between localized magnetic moments. Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) In Rashba superconductors and in superconductors with surfaces supporting a Dirac band, the symmetry allows for a term in the Ginzburg-Landau free energy of the form of Lifshitz invariant F ! = κ(n × B) • ħ∇φ The inverse effect, in analogy with the spin-galvanic effect in SOC metals, is that a local magnetic moment polarizes the condensate and generates anomalous supercurrents J a ∝ n × S at the center of the impurity Just like in a ferromagnet, where an external magnetic field is necessary to align magnetic domains, a long-range ferromagnetic order across the sample needs to be facilitated by applying a global supercurrent. In magnetic heterostructures with Rashba SOC, the magnetization follows hysteretic switching under external current The detection of current-induced magnetization in magnetic heterostructures typically relies on Hall resistance, which is regarded as proportional to the magnetization. Such a Hall response does not occur in a superconductor due to the vanishing resistance. Therefore, a technique directly sensitive to the magnetic induction from the magnetization and anomalous supercurrents is essential for detecting long-range magnetization in Rashba superconductors. In this work, we use scanning superconducting quantum interference device (sSQUID) microscopy Fe-chalcogenide superconductor Fe(Se,Te) has exhibited strong spin-orbit coupling, which leads to superconducting topological surface states A high interstitial Fe concentration will completely suppress superconductivity We image the flux response of Fe(Se,Te) under a bias current (I % ) at the base temperature of 1.5 K. There is no flux contrast after cooling the sample under zero-field (Fig. We have observed such remanent flux in all the superconducting Fe(Se,Te) samples with a modest amount of Fe impurities (Fig. In order to understand how the remanent flux appears with the bias, we park the nano-SQUID over the lower-right domain (Fig. Since we notice an enhanced current density along the sample edge under a high bias (Figs. As discussed in the introduction, there are potentially two main sources that may contribute to the remanent flux signal in a Rashba superconductor. Besides the anomalous supercurrents J a , the magnetization M J mediated by the supercurrent also produces magnetic induction (Figs. Using the above vectorial relations between magnetization and supercurrent, we can now understand the hysteretic magnetic behavior of Fe(Se,Te) with current bias. Under a current bias applied through the sample, a unidirectional supercurrent J S is established (Fig. The ferromagnetic coupling mediated by the anomalous supercurrents between impurity moments is particularly sensitive to the loss of superconducting condensate. To show this, we again first generate the remanent flux by applying and then removing I % = -200 μA at the base temperature. We then increase the sample to a specific temperature T ) and then cool it back to the base temperature for imaging (Fig. The ferromagnetic coupling between impurity moments can not only be mediated by a bias current but also by a circulating supercurrent from the Meissner effect. After zero-field cooling (Fig. The remanent flux contrast induced by the Meissner current appears similar to that induced by the bias current. This is the case only because of the specific current leads used in the bias experiment. When we use electrodes located on the same side of the sample, a large part of the supercurrent circles around the sample (Figs. Recent theory At last, we compare ferromagnetism in Rashba superconductors and conventional magnetic heterostructures with Rashba-type SOC with regard to potential applications. In both cases, the basic mechanism for switching is current-induced spin-orbit-torques In conclusion, we use sSQUID microscopy to uncover the anomalous supercurrentmediated ferromagnetic coupling between magnetic impurity moments in Fe(Se,Te). Supercurrent, whether it is applied through external bias or generated through the Meissner effect under a small out-of-plane magnetic field, polarizes impurity moments to form long-range surface magnetization. An anomalous edge supercurrent appears above a bias current threshold and remains after the bias is removed, which manifests the interaction mechanism. The temperature dependence of the remanent magnetization shows that the superconducting condensate is essential for the ferromagnetic interaction. These experimental results support a general mechanism in superconductors with Rashba SOC or Dirac surface states to mediate ferromagnetic coupling between localized magnetic moments through the condensate. The switchable and non-volatile magnetization state may serve as a cryogenic memory that can be interfaced with ferromagnets to facilitate the dissipationless conversion between spin and charge currents for applications in superconducting spintronics. 