Properties of superconducting devices depend sensitively on the parity (even or odd) of the quasiparticles they contain. Encoding quantum information in the parity degree of freedom is central in several emerging solid-state qubit architectures. Yet, accurate, non-destructive, and time-resolved parity measurement is a challenging and long-standing issue. Here we report on control and realtime parity measurement in a superconducting island embedded in a superconducting loop and realized in a hybrid two-dimensional heterostructure using a microwave resonator. Device and readout resonator are located on separate chips, connected via flip-chip bonding, and couple inductively through vacuum. The superconducting resonator detects the parity-dependent circuit inductance, allowing for fast and non-destructive parity readout. We resolved even and odd parity states with signal-to-noise ratio SNR ≈ 3 with an integration time of 20 μs and detection fidelity exceeding 98 %. Real-time parity measurement showed state lifetime extending into millisecond range. Our approach will lead to better understanding of coherence-limiting mechanisms in superconducting quantum hardware and provide novel readout schemes for hybrid qubits. Control and measurement of isolated quantum systems is a crucial task for the realization of practical quantum devices Investigating effects related to parity in superconductor-semiconductor hybrid systems is a subject of intense research In this Article, we present a novel approach to parity readout in a confined superconducting system. A planar superconducting island is embedded in a superconducting loop, which is inductively coupled to a high Q factor microwave resonator using a flip-chip approach. Parity in the superconducting island directly maps into the direction of the circulating supercurrent in the loop, allowing for fast, absolute and non-destructive parity readout. The parity effect in the island is observed at zero magnetic field concomitantly with the presence of a lowenergy bound state in the island. We demonstrate parity detection with signal-to noise ratio SNR ≈ 3 for an integration time of 20 μs with detection fidelity for both parity states above 98 %. By continuously monitoring the state of the island, parity switching events are observed, enabling the estimation of parity lifetime approaching millisecond timescales, with no measurable parity transitions within the parity-blockade regime. Combination of inductive readout technology, flip-chip approach and scalable planar heterostructure will pave a path towards coherent addressing and manipulation of large scale hybrid devices. Figure Microwave measurements relied on the flip-chip approach that was recently pioneered in hybrid materials using nanowire-based We first discuss the response of the resonator as a function of gate voltage V P , when V L and V R were set negative enough to result in a finite charging energy, but still allowed for a supercurrent to flow in the loop. Furthermore, the system was tuned to a regime with strong parity effect. Figure The energy diagram of a confined superconducting island in the absence of low energy excitations is shown in Fig. A significantly different situation is obtained when an excitation with energy δ < E C is present in the spectrum (see Fig. Figure More quantitative insights are gained by performing two-tone spectroscopy measurements, as shown in Fig. Fast and continuous monitoring of charge parity provides access to the fast dynamics of the system. The performance of our approach is quantified by the signalto-noise ratio (SNR) and the measurement fidelity F . First, we acquired in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q) components of the resonator response at fixed readout frequency f r = 6.36206 GHz and calculated the transmission response magnitude R = I 2 + Q 2 as a function of V P for variable data integration times τ int . An exemplary R trace measured with τ int = 50 μs is depicted in Fig. are associated with even and odd parity states. Higher order transport processes mentioned above are also visible as a dip in R centered at V P = -1.6955 V. The I and Q quadrature map of Fig. To calculate the fidelity F of the parity-state assignment, we first project the histogram data along the axis connecting the centers of the two Gaussians to recover a 1D histogram of state distribution. Following this, the fidelities for the even and odd states are defined as The extraction procedure for SNR and V max is repeated for multiple τ int values and summarized in Fig. Both SNR and V max increase with increasing τ int . The SNR trace in Fig. This allowed the estimation of integration time τ min = 2.4 μs for which SNR = 1 and parity sensitivity S = e √ τ min = 1.5 × 10 -3 e/ √ Hz. The measurement fidelities were found to vary from 85% at τ int = 10 μs reaching 99.99999% (seven nines) at τ int = 100 μs. The values obtained here for SNR, fidelity and visibility are comparable to previously reported charge and parity detection studies in hybrid materials Finally, Fig. After assessing good parity sensitivity and detection fidelity, we now study the time-resolved dynamics in the planar island. To detect parity transition events, the resonator response magnitude R was monitored for a time window of 900 ms with τ int = 30 μs for multiple values of V L . The results are summarized in Fig. The average transition rates in such a two-level system is quantified in the spectral domain using power spectral density (PSD) analysis The parity switching rate extraction procedure was repeated at several V L values from Fig. We have reported on a flip-chip-based inductive detection scheme of the charge parity in a planar superconducting island. Our method combined the advantages of high-bandwidth readout technology with planar gate-tunable superconductor-semiconductor materials to achieve a high signal-to-noise ratio for non-destructive readout of parity. While the parity effect in our devices was enabled by the low energy excitation in the island, the readout technique is general and does not depend on the presence of such states. The combination of flipchip approach and inductive readout offers significant improvements whenever the experimental implementation involves circulating currents. Our results open interesting avenues for the realization of theoretical proposals in the field of Andreev spin and topological qubits. Furthermore, it will facilitate the long-range coupling of different qubit subsystems, especially when large-scale devices become available using planar device technology. The long measured parity lifetimes constitute an important advantage in the context of hybrid qubits, where large numbers of gate operations could be performed before the parity information is lost. Additionally, the availability of parity lifetime measurements will allow to constrain theoretical proposals for hybrid and protected qubit designs based on hybrid planar materials. Superconducting islands were fabricated from an InAs/Al heterostructure grown on an InP substrate using electron beam lithography techniques. The semiconductor was etched in a solution of H 2 O : C 6 H 8 O 7 : H 3 PO 4 : H 2 O 2 with composition 220 : 55 : 3 : 3. The epitaxial Al was etched with a short dip into 50 • C Transene D to define the island and the superconducting loop. Underbump metallization was evaporated on the device contacts The readout resonators were fabricated on a highresistivity Si wafer. First, 200 nm of Nb was sputtered over the entire chip, followed by deposition of a 57 nm AlO 2 hard mask by plasma ALD. Resonator features were defined by RIE in the hard mask. After resist removal in hot DMSO, ICP etching with Cl 2 and Ar was used to pattern the Nb layer. Subsequently, the hard mask was removed with BHF 7:1. Next, the In bumps for flip-chip bonding were patterned by optical lithography and In evaporation. Finally, the wafer was diced into 6 mm by 9 mm chips. The resonator chip is identical to that shown in Fig. After fabrication of the devices and resonators on separate chips, the two chips were coupled via flip-chip bonding using indium bumps. These bumps provided connections from wire bonding pads on the Si chip to the DC control lines of the gate electrodes and ground of the devices on the InP chip. Furthermore, several more In bumps were included in the final chip to ensure mechanical stability of the structure. The devices were carefully aligned with the shorted ends of the λ/4 resonators and with the drive lines in order to ensure good coupling. The separation between the two chips was 5 μm, and was controlled by the size of the In bumps as well as the temperature and force used during the flip-chip bonding. To minimize dielectric losses, the device chip was considerably smaller than the resonator chip and was positioned to minimize its overlap with the resonators. Measurements were performed in a BlueFors cryogenfree dilution refrigerator with a mixing chamber base temperature of 9 mK. The wiring of the dilution refrigerator is illustrated in Extended Data Fig. For each device, the superconducting island was electrically defined by tuning the left and right island barrier gates with voltages V L and V R , respectively as well as the plunger gate with voltage V P . Extended Data Fig. Measurements in Figs. For the signal-to-noise (SNR) calculation, the in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q) components of the readout resonator was recorded as a function of the plunger gate voltage V P with different integration times τ int per data point, ranging from 10 to 100 μs. The readout frequency was fixed at f r = 6.36206 GHz and the power at P in = -44 dBm. At each value of the plunger gate voltage, 5000 measurements of I and Q were acquired (10,000 for τ int = 10 μs). Plotting the response magnitude R = I 2 + Q 2 (see Fig. where A i is the height of the Gaussian, b Ii (b Qi ) the center point and c Ii (c Qi ) the width of the Gaussian on the I-axis (Q-axis), for i = 1, 2. The distance between the center points of the two Gaussians defined the strength of the signal S, whereas the quadratic sum of the average widths of the Gaussians, projected along S and perpendicular to S using the polar form of ellipse equation, defined the noise N . SNR was then defined as S/N and is given by Eq. 2 where c ∥Si and c ⊥Si are the widths of the Gaussian along and perpendicular to S for i = 1, 2. The SNR for all integration times is plotted in Fig. Readout visibility is defined as V = F e + F o -1, where F e (F o ) is the fidelity of the even (odd) state, respectively. These fidelities are defined as F e = 1 - VT n e (V )dV and where n e (n o ) is the probability density of the even (odd) state where A i is the height of the Gaussian, b i the center point and c i the width of the Gaussian for i = 1, 2. The integral in F e (F o ) was found through numerical integration of the corresponding 1D Gaussian with the composite trapezoidal rule using the python function numpy.trapz. We started (stopped) the integral by the threshold voltage V T . Finally, the integral was normalized because the histogram data was normalized to the sum of both 1D Gaussians, resulting in Eq. 4 Fidelities and visibility as a function of V T are plotted in Fig. To estimate the parity switching rate we acquired the time trace of the transmission response magnitude R for different left barrier gate voltages V L , while the other gate voltages were fixed at V R = -1.59800 V and V P = -1.69219 V. The readout frequency was f r = 6.36206 GHz and the power was P in = -40.5 dBm. At each value of V L , 30001 data points were recorded. The integration time was set to 30 μs, resulting in a 900 ms long time trace (neglecting the sampling rate of 0.5 ns). The data of the time trace at V L = -1.7277 V (blue time trace in Fig. Subsequently, the time traces were used to calculate the Welch power spectral density (PSD). The calculation was done using the python function scipy.signal.welch with sampling frequency f s = 1/(30 μs) and with segment length 5001. The resulting PSD was fitted to an asymmetric random telegraph noise model including 1/f noise in the system using Eq. 5 to estimate the transition rates from the even to odd Γ e→o and from the odd to even Γ o→e parity state where B represents the influence of 1/f noise in the system and C is a constant describing the detection limit. The detection limit is given by the SNR, and we start to approach it using 30 μs integration time, which can be seen by the flattening PSD curve at high frequencies. Therefore, C was determined as the average of the PSD for the highest 100 frequency points. Since 1/f noise influences the slope of the PSD curve, the parameter B was estimated empirically for every time trace with 2 • 10 -6 times its PSD range. The transition rates Γ e→o and Γ o→e were used as free fit parameters. Since Eq. 5 is symmetric with respect to Γ e→o and Γ o→e , the initial guess determined which of the two quantities was larger. The maximum and minimum detectable transition rates were set by the total time of the time trace and the integration time, respectively. Therefore, the lower bound of the rates is 1/(900 ms) (total measurement time) and the upper bound is 1/(30 μs) (integration time). For resonator response levels that were stable within the measured time, as the purple time trace in Fig. Extended Data Fig. The barrier gates put the system in a state where there are isolated Andreev bound states (ABSs), but the island is still strongly coupled to the leads. The energy of these bound states is tuned by VP, leading to anti-crossings when the energy of the ABSs decreases below the resonator frequency consistent with a transmission close to one. b, Same as a but at VL = -1.56 V and VL = -1.72 V. The weaker coupling of the island to the leads gives sharp transitions in the regime where ABS energies are below the frequency. We assign these sharp lines to Coulomb transitions between even and odd parity states. Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. where ∆ is the induced superconducting gap of the Al, τ is the transmission of the ABS and φ ≈ 2πΦ/Φ 0 is the phase difference across the two superconducting leads with h Planck's constant and z = πM 2 ω 2 R /(Z R R Q ) a constant coupling parameter, where M ≈ 14.7 pH is the calculated mutual inductance between resonator and device loop, ω R /(2π) = 6.362 GHz is the measured resonator frequency, Z R ≈ 56 Ω is the characteristic resonator impedance and R Q = h/(4e 2 ). The coupling g peaks around π-phase and broadens with lower τ (see Fig. We observe two isolated bound states, one on the left side and one in the upper right area of the gate-voltage map, which were relevant and tunable with VL and VR, respectively. When at the same gate voltages the energy of both bound states is lower than EC, i.e. VL = -1.495 V and VR = -1.095 V, the even-odd regime becomes 1e periodic.