We present a series of detailed images of the distribution of kinetic energy among frequencies and wavevectors in the bulk of an MgO crystal as it is heated slowly until it melts. These spectra, which are Fourier transforms of mass-weighted velocity-velocity correlation functions calculated from accurate molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, provide a valuable perspective on the growth of thermal disorder in ionic crystals. We use them to explain why the most striking and rapidlyprogressing departures from a band structure occur among longitudinal optical (LO) modes, which would be the least active modes at low temperature (T ) if phonons did not interact. The degradation of the LO band begins, at low T , as an anomalously-large broadening of modes near the center of the Brillouin zone (BZ), which gradually spreads towards the BZ boundary. The LO band all but vanishes before the crystal melts, and transverse optical (TO) modes' spectral peaks become so broad that the TO branches no longer appear band-like. Acoustic bands remain relatively well defined until melting of the crystal manifests in the spectra as their sudden disappearance. We argue that, even at high T , the long wavelength acoustic (LWA) phonons of an ionic crystal can remain partially immune to disorder generated by its LO phonons; whereas, even at low T , its LO phonons can be strongly affected by LWA phonons. This is because LO displacements average out in much less than the period of an LWA phonon; whereas during each period of an LO phonon an LWA phonon appears as a quasistatic perturbation of the crystal, which warps the LO mode's intrinsic electric field. LO phonons are highly sensitive to acoustic warping of their intrinsic fields because their frequencies depend strongly on them: They cause the large frequency difference between LO and TO bands known as LO-TO splitting. We calculate vibrational spectra from MD trajectories using a method that we show to be classically exact and therefore applicable, with equal validity, to any solid or liquid in any thermal or nonthermal state. By demonstrating its power and generality we show that it has become possible to go far beyond the reach of perturbation theories and mean-field theories in the study of vibrations in materials. Band theories are theories of elementary excitations in crystals that are derived under the simplifying assumption that the elementary excitations are approximately independent of one another Similarly, the band theory of phonons assumes that the vibrational energy of a crystal can be approximated well by a sum of energies of individual phonons, or phonon quasiparticles, which are lattice waves with well defined frequencies and wavevectors. Phonon band theory breaks down when strong interactions between phonons with very different frequencies and/or wavevectors strongly correlate their motions, resulting in motion that cannot be characterized by a single wavevector and a single frequency, or even by a narrow range of wavevectors and a narrow range of frequencies. Although strong electronic correlation has been the subject of intense study for decades, there have been few fundamental direct studies of strong phononic correlation In this work we use atomistic simulations to study how the vibrational spectrum of MgO changes as its temperature (T ) increases from T = 100 K, where band the-FIG. ory is accurate, to T = 3800 K, where the crystal has melted and the spectrum has lost every semblance of a band structure. At each T we calculate the distribution, ÊK (k, ω), of kinetic energy in (k, ω)-space, or reciprocal spacetime, which are the terms we use to refer to the space of all wavevectors and frequencies. We present these spectra in Fig. Just as perturbation theories and mean-field approximations (e.g., Hartree-Fock) cannot accurately describe strongly-correlated electrons, mean-field approximations for phonons (so-called self-consistent phonon approxima-tions Each distribution ÊK (k, ω) is the Fourier transform (FT), with respect to both space and time, of a mass-weighted velocity-velocity correlation function (VVCF) calculated from a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation at a different T . The MD simulations were performed with a polarizable-ion force field whose parameters have been fit closely to the density functional theory (DFT) potential energy surface It is common to Fourier transform velocity autocorrelation functions (VACFs) with respect to time to produce frequency-resolved spectra, such as those along the righthand vertical edge of each panel in Fig. Force fields whose mathematical forms can mimic the electronic response to nuclear motion, and whose parameters are fit to enormous datasets calculated ab initio, provide a very useful balance of speed and accuracy The primary purpose of this work is to study strong phononic correlation. To this end, we have undertaken a systematic study of the strengthening of phononic correlation, and the consequent breakdown of band theory, as a crystal is heated. We chose MgO for our study because it is a material whose vibrational properties are important in many contexts, from studies of seismic waves travelling through the Earth's lower mantle, to its use as a thermal or electrical insulator, as a substrate for growing superconducting or ferroelectric perovskites, and in countless other important applications Calculations of detailed accurate spectra like those presented in Fig. Lahnsteiner and Bokdam are among those who state that ÊK (k, ω) (our notation) is the wavevector-resolved VDOS, and they support this statement by citing Refs. 9, 24, 42, and 43. This interpretation of ÊK (k, ω), which can also be found in many other works For example, it could be used to calculate the spectra of solids or liquids while they are being resonantly excited by THz radiation; or to study how spectra change during order-disorder phase transitions; or to investigate the relationships between structure, energetics, and diffusion in liquids. Using it may deepen our understanding of strongly correlated electronic systems, which are much harder to study computationally, by providing insight into aspects of strong correlation that are common to both phononic and electronic systems. It can also be used to assess the accuracies of approximate methods, such those based on perturbation theory, self-consistent meanfield methods, and methods that assume thermal equilibrium. As it is the only method that provides the exact classical spectrum, it is the method against which the accuracies of all other methods should be judged. A secondary purpose of this work is to demonstrate the power of this theoretical result and computational method. By applying it to MgO we uncover a simple, strong, and general non-resonant mechanism by which the highest frequency optical modes of an ionic crystal can be disrupted by the lowest frequency acoustic modes, leading to the disintegration, or melting, of the optical bands. We call this mechanism acoustic warping of optical phonon fields. We also explain why, despite this mechanism causing longitudinal optical (LO) bands to melt, the acoustic bands responsible for their melting remain intact: It is because acoustic bands are adiabatically decoupled from LO phonons in the same way that heavy nuclei are adiabatically decoupled from electrons, despite pushing the electron density around as they move. Among many other analyses of the results presented in Fig. In the next section we discuss the effects of T on phonon band structures in general terms. In Sec. III we explain our notation and some aspects of phonon theory that can be different when phonons are strongly correlated than they are at low T where perturbation theories are applicable. For example, at high T each mode is not Lorentzian, in general, and so the Lorentzian width is not a good measure of the degree to which T has broadened it. In Sec. IV we explain how we performed our simulations. We begin Sec. V by discussing the most important limitations of our simulations. Then we begin discussing and numerically-analysing the spectra presented in Fig. We summarize our conclusions in Sec. VI. In this section we discuss the qualitative effects of temperature on vibrational spectra. We begin with an illustration of a pertinent mathematical point. Figure It is well known that the more localized a smooth function is, the more delocalized its Fourier transform is A. Normal mode vibrations, phonon quasiparticles, and strong phononic correlation Classically, and in the T → 0 limit, the term phonon refers to an oscillation of one of a crystal's normal modes of vibration, which are standing waves of the lattice that all of the crystal's atoms participate in. Each normal mode is characterized by a single frequency (ω) and a single wavevector (k) The amplitudes of NMVs vanish in the T → 0 limit, making them perfectly harmonic and mutually noninteracting. Therefore the energy of each one is delocalized in spacetime. It is delocalized in space because every atom in the crystal participates in it and shares its energy. It is 'delocalized' in time in the sense that it is not transient: NMVs last forever in the T → 0 limit because, without interactions, they cannot dissipate their energies; and they cannot disperse because each one is characterized by a single frequency and a single wavevector. As well as being the limit in which kinetic energy is delocalized in spacetime and localized at a point in reciprocal spacetime, the T → 0 limit is the limit in which atoms are strongly correlated and the limit in which phonons are uncorrelated: Each contribution to the atoms' kinetic energy is a collective motion of all atoms, whereas each phonon possesses its own kinetic energy, which is independent of the energies of other phonons. At finite T , phonons' amplitudes are finite, and they interact to some degree. When they interact, their motions become correlated and each one is no longer characterized by a single frequency and wavevector: it has become a superposition of NMVs with different frequencies and wavevectors. This interaction-induced mixing of frequencies and wavevectors is analogous to what happens when a pair of harmonic oscillators with frequencies ω 1 and ω 2 are coupled: The motion of each one becomes characterized by both frequencies; or equivalently, each one becomes an oscillation at frequency 1 2 (ω 1 + ω 2 ) whose amplitude is modulated by an oscillation at frequency 1 2 |ω 1 -ω 2 |. When many oscillators are coupled strongly, the motion of each one becomes a superposition of oscillations at many different frequencies. Similarly, interac-tions cause each phonon's energy to be distributed among the frequencies and wavevectors of all lattice waves contributing to its motion. At low finite T each phonon is still mostly composed of a single NMV, but it contains small contributions to its motion from the other NMVs with which it interacts At low T the vibrational spectrum remains sharply peaked near the frequencies and wavevectors of the normal modes, but the peaks have finite widths. This means that each phonon contributing to each peak is a QP, i.e., a superposition of NMVs with very similar wavevectors and frequencies. Phonon QPs can dissipate their energies and disperse: their average lifetime is inversely proportional to the width of their spectral peak Interactions make the average frequency and wavevector of the QPs T -dependent, and cause their spatial coherence (size) and temporal coherence (lifetime) to reduce as T increases. The reduction in their sizes means that they are no longer collective motions of all atoms in the crystal. Therefore they are no longer standing waves, but travelling wave packets. The kinetic energy spectrum, ÊK (k, ω), is called a band structure at low T because the set of points at which there are spectral peaks forms a set of three dimensional surfaces, or bands, in four-dimensional reciprocal spacetime. As each phonon becomes a mix of NMVs, these spectral peaks broaden and move, which causes the bands to blur, lose definition, and shift in frequency. In quantum mechanics, the energies of NMVs and QPs are quantized and it is the quanta that are known as phonons. However, because most of our simulations and analyses are classical, we use the term phonon to refer to NMVs, in the T → 0 limit, and to phonon QPs, at finite T . A classical phonon is simply a vibration of the crystal whose wavevector and frequency are reasonably well defined, meaning that the distribution of its energy in reciprocal spacetime is sharply peaked, and most of its energy is localized in a small neighbourhood of its peak. As T increases further, sooner or later the T -induced changes to the spectrum become more complex than a gradual shifting and symmetric broadening of QP peaks. Peaks may broaden so much that they vanish; one peak may become two peaks at very different frequencies and wavevectors; or the spectrum may deviate from a superposition of well-defined QP peaks in other ways, depending on the natures and strengths of the interactions. When the spectrum can no longer be approximated by a sum of reasonably-localized QP peaks, the quasiparticle approximation has broken down and the system can be regarded as strongly correlated. When interactions between phonons are strong enough that the QP approximation has broken down, band theory also breaks down, because kinetic energy is so delocalized in reciprocal spacetime that it no longer forms bands. For example, the energy of each oscillation in a liquid is localized in spacetime and delocalized in reciprocal spacetime. Oscillations are localized in space because spatial correlations are very short-ranged, which implies that only a small cluster of atoms participates in each one. They are localized in time because their strong coupling to other oscillatory and translational motions makes them transient: they have short lifetimes because they quickly disperse and/or dissipate their energies. Their short lifetimes can also be viewed as them morphing into other forms of motion, namely, diffusive motion or oscillations of different frequencies. For example, we can view the short lifetime of an oscillation of an atom as a consequence of the potential well in which it oscillates changing shape as neighbouring atoms move. The eventual failure of band theory as T increases is inevitable for every material because temperature generates disorder and because each point on a band represents a phonon with a different characteristic pattern of atomic displacements, or eigenvector, and with periodicities λ ≡ 2π/|k| and τ ≡ 2π/ω in space and time, respectively. When such a vibration exists, it causes correlation between the velocity of an atom at time t and the velocity of another atom, which is displaced from it by λ in the direction of k, at time t + τ . Therefore, when there is a T -induced reduction of the correlation length to less than λ, or of the correlation time to less than τ , the spectral intensity at point (k, ω) almost vanishes. When a particular mode or band loses all or most of its intensity in this way, we say that it has melted. Band melting occurs gradually at most temperatures; and, as Fig. In this section we present some elements of phonon theory that we will use in this work. A more complete account of this theory can be found in Ref. A. Notation and definitions of key quantities We use N to denote the number of atoms in each primitive cell, which is two in this case, and we denote the number of primitive cells in the crystal's bulk by N c . We denote the primitive lattice vectors by {a 1 , a 2 , a 3 } and we identify primitive cells by their positions, R, relative to an origin in the bulk of the crystal. These positions are lattice vectors, i.e., R = We use the compound index Rj to identify the j th atom in primitive cell R and we use Rjα to identify its α th lattice coordinate. We denote its displacement, at time t, from its T → 0 equilibrium position as u Rj (t) ≡ α u Rjα (t) a α . However, it is not very convenient to use N vectors u Rj ∈ R 3 to specify the internal structure of each primitive cell. Instead, we specify it with a single vector |ψ R ⟩ ≡ jα ψ Rjα |jα⟩ ∈ R 3N , where ψ Rjα ≡ √ m j u Rjα , m j is the mass of the j th atom, and the set {|jα⟩ For simplicity, and despite its √ mass weighting, we will often refer to the vector |ψ R (t)⟩ and its time derivative ψR (t) as the displacement and velocity, respectively, of primitive cell R. The kinetic energy of cell R is The mass-weighted velocity-velocity correlation function (VVCF) is where the average is performed over bulk cells, R 0 , and over times, t 0 . It is shown in Ref. where K is the total kinetic energy of all bulk cells; ⟨K⟩ is its time average; and ÊK (k, ω) is the discrete Fourier transform of C(R, t) with respect to both R and t. ÊK (k, ω) is the distribution, in reciprocal spacetime, of the time-average of the crystal's kinetic energy per bulk primitive cell. As discussed in Sec. I, Eq. 2 is an exact expression, which is proved for the case of a vibrating string in Appendix A, and for a crystal in Ref. The first sum in Eq. 2 is over the set ˆ Ω of all wavevectors k within the first Brillouin zone, Ω , that are compatible with the boundary conditions of the crystal. Within our treatment of the theory, wavevectors that differ by a reciprocal lattice vector, G, are regarded as equivalent to the same wavevector in the first Brillouin zone, Ω . If we wanted to distinguish between them, the right hand side of Eq. 2 would have the form k ω>0 ( G F (k + G, ω)), where F is a function whose domain is the set of all wavevectors. However we are choosing to define ÊK (k, ω) ≡ G F (k + G, ω) and to restrict our attention to the finite set of wavevectors ˆ Ω . This means that we do not explicitly distinguish between so-called Umklapp phonon interactions and normal interactions. This distinction is commonly made when treating interactions as scattering events, but in this work we emphasize the wave natures of phonons: Both in our classical simulations and, when T is high enough, in a real crystal, phonons exchange energy with one another quasi-continuously. The second sum in Eq. 2 is over all possible frequencies. This set is countable because if the total time for which a crystal is observed or simulated is T , complete oscillations whose periods are longer than T are not observed or simulated. Therefore oscillations with frequencies smaller than 2π/T cannot contribute to C(R, t). Furthermore, any two frequencies that do contribute to C(R, t) are only observably different if they differ by more than 2π/T In a crystal, the T → 0 limit of ÊK (k, ω) is a band structure. Therefore, when studying the breakdown of band theory, it is useful to decompose it into contributions from motions along each of the crystal's normal mode eigenvectors. In Ref. For any wavevector k, we can express the identity in R 3N as 3N μ=1 |ε kμ ⟩⟨ε kμ | and insert it into Eq. 1, to define the set of mode-projected correlation functions at wavevector k, . From this definition, and Eqs. 1 and 2, it follows that , where ÊK μ (k, ω) denotes the discrete Fourier transform of C kμ (R, t) with respect to R and t. In Sec. V we will pay particular attention to the LO mode and we will denote its cell eigenvector and mode-projected correlation function at k by ε LO k and C LO k (R, t), respectively. When studying individual modes, we will make use of the normalized mode spectrum or mode distribution of mode kμ, defined as This function is the distribution among frequencies ω of the energy of oscillatory motion in the bulk of the crystal along the eigenvector of normal mode kμ. When studying the spectrum as a whole, calculating for each mode kμ and summing over all modes. Therefore, the spectra plotted in Fig. At thermal equilibrium, the equipartition theorem states that the expectation value of the kinetic energy of each mode kμ is 1 2 k B T . Therefore, if the spectra plotted in Fig. The displacement of the crystal from equilibrium can be expessed as a sum of displacements along its 3N N c normal mode eigenvectors. We denote the frequency of mode kμ by ω kμ , and the projection of the crystal's displacement from equilibrium at time t onto its normalized eigenvector by Q kμ (t), which we refer to as its mode coordinate. The total energy of the crystal, as a function of the mode coordinates and their time derivatives, can be expressed as where H 0 is the potential energy of the static lattice in the T → 0 limit (excluding zero point energy); H 1 vanishes because the first partial derivatives of the potential energy vanish at equilibrium; the kinetic energy is the harmonic term of the potential , and H p , where p > 2, denotes an anharmonic term of order Q p . As discussed in Sec. I, ÊK (k, ω) is usually interpreted as being proportional to the VDOS at low T Therefore, let us assume that one of the defining characteristics of each 'state' that contributes to the VDOS is that it is independent, or approximately independent in the temperature range of interest, of the amount of kinetic energy that 'occupies' it. Then, the only viable definition of the set of all states is this one: at every point (k, ω), there are exactly as many occupiable vibrational states as there are degrees of freedom in a primitive unit cell. For example, in our MD simulations, there could be kinetic energy at any point on a four-dimensional lattice in reciprocal spacetime whose lattice spacing along the frequency axis is inversely proportional to the total simulation time and whose lattice spacings along the three wavevector axes are inversely proportional to the linear dimensions of the simulation supercell. Therefore the VDOS of the simulated system is a uniform distribution with exactly 3N = 6 states per point (k, ω) of the lattice that our simulation samples. To illustrate that this is the case, note that each spectrum in Fig. In the bottom right panel of Fig. In the HA, all cubic and higher-order anharmonic terms in the potential energy are discarded, which is tantamount to assuming that there is no interaction between different modes, and the Helmholtz free energy, F(V, T ), can be approximated as where k B is the Boltzmann constant, and the 'H' subscript on F H indicates that it is the free energy within the harmonic approximation, H ≈ H 0 + K + H 2 . Notice that F H only depends on T via the second term in the summation over modes, but that it depends on V via the cohesive energy, H 0 (V ), and the T → 0 mode frequencies, ω kμ (V ). When the third term vanishes in the T → 0 limit, it be- 2 ħω kμ . However, if phonons are treated classically, as in our MD simulations, the zero-point energy term does not exist and we simply have lim T →0 F H (V, T ) = H 0 (V ). Therefore the T → 0 limits of the mode frequencies calculated within the QHA and the QPA are different. They are the harmonic frequencies calculated at the volumes that minimise H 0 (V ) + kμ 1 2 ħω kμ (V ) and H 0 (V ), respectively. One of the most important ways in which the vibrational spectra of materials change with T is via thermal expansion: Lengthened bonds tend to be weakened bonds, and weakened bonds vibrate with lower frequencies. Therefore thermal expansion tends to lower phonon frequencies, on average. Within perturbation theory, this effect is often modelled using the QHA, which entails calculating the normal mode frequencies at a range of volumes and using them in Eq. 6 to calculate F H (V, T ). The volume V min (T ) that minimizes F H (V, T ) is then found and treated as the equilibrium volume at temperature T , and the normal mode frequencies at this volume are used to calculate thermodynamic properties from F H (V min , T ). In the most commonly used form of the QHA The QHA approximates the shift of phonon frequencies by thermal expansion, which is often the largest effect of anharmonicity on vibrational spectra at low T . However it does not explicitly describe any phonon-phonon interactions and therefore cannot describe other important effects of anharmonicity, such as the broadening of peaks in the mode spectra, f kμ , as T increases. At very high T , such as in the liquid, each mode spectrum f kμ is not strongly peaked at any particular frequency. However, in the T → 0 limit, it becomes the delta function f kμ (ω) = δ(ω -ω kμ ) and at small finite values of T it is a sharply-peaked distribution of finite width. We denote the peak position of mode distribution f kμ at temperature T and volume V by where ω kμ (V ) is the harmonic frequency in the T → 0 limit at volume V and ∆ω kμ (T ) is a finite-T correction, which does not depend on V to leading order in anharmonicity As discussed, f kμ is a delta function in the T → 0 limit and, as T increases from this limit, its first effects on f kμ (ω) are to broaden it and to shift it in frequency. If phonons were independent entities that are created and annihilated in sudden random occurrences, which might be described as collisions or scattering events, then, at thermal equilibrium, the average rate at which phonons of each mode kμ were created would be equal to the rate at which they were annihilated; and annihilation events would be Poisson distributed. It follows that phonon lifetimes would be exponentially distributed and that each mode correlation function C kμ (R, t) would decay exponentially as a function of time In the T → 0 limit, C kμ (R, t) is sinusoidal in both R and t. Therefore, when annihilation events are Poisson distributed at finite T , it becomes an exponentially-decaying sinusoid, C kμ (R, t) ∼ e -γ kμ t cos (ω kμ t), and its Fourier transform, Êμ (k, ω), is Lorentzian. Therefore f kμ (ω) is also Lorentzian, i.e., where A kμ is a constant, ωkμ is the QP frequency, 2γ kμ is the full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of the Lorentzian and γ kμ is the rate of exponential decay of the energy of a phonon QP of mode kμ. Therefore, when f kμ can be fit closely by a Lorentzian, γ kμ quantifies the degree to which it has been broadened by temperature. On the other hand, when phonons are treated as lattice waves that continuously exchange energy, each Tbroadened spectrum, f kμ (ω), is only Lorentzian at very low T when it is a very narrow peak. At higher T , its shape is determined by the relative strengths of its couplings to other modes. At any finite T , if ∆ω > 0 is sufficiently small we can interpret f kμ (ω)∆ω as the probability that the frequency of the oscillation along the eigenvector of mode kμ at a randomly chosen time is between ω -1 2 ∆ω and ω + 1 2 ∆ω. We could also interpret it as the probability that the duration of the complete oscillation that begins at a randomly chosen time is between 2π/(ω + 1 2 ∆ω) and 2π/(ω -1 2 ∆ω). Therefore we can use Shannon's theorem to quantify the effects of T on mode kμ by quantifying the degree of uncertainty in its frequency. As Shannon demonstrated in the context of signal processing For a given variance of f kμ , the shape that maximises S kμ is a Gaussian. Although using the mode entropy, S kμ , to quantify the degree of broadening is both more general, and better justified theoretically, than fitting to a Lorentzian, the latter is more common in the experimental literature. Therefore we calculated both S kμ and γ kμ . Phonon-phonon interactions can be considered explicitly in perturbation theory by including cubic and higherorder terms in the truncated Taylor expansion of the potential energy. However, at any chosen order, phonon perturbation theory fails when T is high enough. Furthermore, although in the T → 0 limit each individual term of order Q m contributing to H m in Eq. 5 is larger than each individual term of a higher order Q p contributing to H p , there are more nonvanishing Q p terms than Q m terms, in general. For example, as Ashcroft and Mermin The fact that |H m | is not necessarily greater than |H p | when p > m makes truncation of Eq. 5, which is a necessary step in any application of perturbation theory to real materials at finite T , formally unjustified. The method based on correlation functions that we use is free of such complications. Therefore it is a useful tool for checking when/whether perturbation theories are applicable and for assessing their accuracies. A related limitation of perturbation theory is that it is often necessary to calculate and analyse so many phonon interaction terms that the underlying physics can become lost in the clutter. For example, the anomalous broadening of the longitudinal optical (LO) mode near the BZ center evident in Fig. This is an important observation, which is likely to be part of a complete explanation, but on its own it is not a complete and satisfactory explanation. Explaining one feature of a spectrum as being a consequence of its other features is not satisfactory because the spectrum as a whole is not self-determined: It is determined by interactions between waves passing through a lattice of ions. A more complete explanation of a spectral feature would explain it in terms of the motions of waves and ions. It is also important to note that, when treating phonon kμ at finite T as a QP whose dynamics are damped with a decay constant γ kμ , the contribution of modes qν 1 and k + q ν 2 to the value of γ kμ could be negligible despite the magnitude of the term in H 3 proportional to Q kμ Q qν1 Qk +q ν2 being very large. It is not enough that modes qν 1 and k + q ν 2 exchange a lot of energy with mode kμ: they must do so irreversibly. This means that if they absorb some of mode kμ's energy, they must dissipate it, by coupling to more modes, before it has time to return to mode kμ. For example, when two harmonic oscillators are coupled, their combined energy oscillates back and forth between them. There are times when one of them has all of the energy and times when the other has it all. Therefore, in a thermal population of phonons, it is not necessarily possible to calculate decay constants accurately as sums of few-phonon contributions. Reference Irreversible dissipation of energy always requires the participation of very large numbers of modes. Therefore because, in practice, perturbation theories are limited to considering few-phonon processes, they have a fundamental limitation that the MD-based method used here and in Ref. The purpose of this section is not to denigrate phonon perturbation theories. It is to point out that both perturbation theories and the correlation function approach to calculating spectra are limited, but in different ways; therefore they complement one another. We have used harmonic phonon theory extensively to analyse our spectra, and it is likely that we would have learned much more with the help of anharmonic terms. In Sec. V B 3 we provide a simple explanation of the anomalous LO broadening, in terms of ions and waves, and without referring to any other feature specific to the vibrational spectrum of MgO and the other similar materials in which anomalous LO broadening has also been observed We suggest that the acoustic warping mechanism we propose in Sec. V B 3 modulates the frequencies of LO modes, and therefore the expectation values of their occupation numbers. At thermal equilibrium, a mode whose frequency is fixed exchanges energy with other modes equitably: its net rate of energy exchange with other modes vanishes. However, because the LO mode's frequency ω LO is changing, the expectation value, exp ħω LO (t)/k B T -1 -1 , of its occupation number is changing, and this might make its net rate of energy exchange with other modes finite. This net exchange of energy may happen quickly (e.g., for the reasons explained by Giura et al. Atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) and lattice dynamics (LD) simulations were performed using a polarizableion potential of the form described in Refs. Our method of force field construction Our force field's parameters were fit to an effectivelyinfinite dataset of forces, energy differences and stress tensors from density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the PBEsol functional The mathematical form of the potential and the values of the parameters used are quoted in Appendix B. In brief, it is the sum of a pairwise interaction, comprising a Morse potential and a 1/r Coulomb interaction, and the Coulomb interactions between dipoles induced on oxygen anions and the charges and induced dipoles of other ions. The dipole moment of the i th oxygen anion is expressed as p i = p SR i + p LR i , where p SR i is a short-range (SR) contribution caused by asymmetry of the space in which its electron cloud is confined by its six cation neighbours, and p LR i is the dipole moment induced by the local electric field (E i ) from the charges and dipole moments of all other ions. At each step of the MD simulation, we first use the method of Wilson and Madden to calcu-late p SR i We simulate under periodic boundary conditions and our supercell is a 10 × 10 × 10 repetition of the two-atom rhombohedral primitive unit cell. We use velocity rescaling, followed by ≈ 10 ps of equilibration in the N V E ensemble, to prepare for production runs at each temperature, T . Our production runs of T ≈ 100 ps are also performed in the N V E ensemble and the reported values of T are calculated from the average kinetic energy of the production run. We use a time step of 0.725 fs and sample positions and velocities every ten steps for later analysis. We chose to perform our MD simulations at constant volume, but with P ≈ 0, instead of at a fixed average pressure and a variable volume. Although the magnitudes of the fluctuations of each primitive cell's volume would be reduced, to some degree, by simulating with the supercell volume fixed, this was deemed preferable to polluting our spectra with unphysical artefacts of an MD barostat. We performed one set of simulations with the volume V (T ) at each T chosen such that the average pressure (P ) in the crystal at that T is close to zero. The averages of (P, T ) in these simulations were (100 K, 0.01 GPa), (301 K, -0.01 GPa), (502 K, -0.02 GPa), (1004 K, 0.16 GPa), (1995 K, 0.10 GPa), (2998 K, -0.06 GPa), (3521 K, 0.16 GPa), and (3813 K, 6.7 GPa). The pressure is large in the highest temperature simulation because the crystal has melted and we did not repeat the simulation with the volume adjusted for the liquid phase. At all lower temperatures the simulation cell is crystalline and the maximum estimated percentage error in the simulated volume is |∆V /V | = ∆P/B ≈ 0.1%, where B ≈ 160 GPa is its bulk modulus under ambient conditions Another set of MD simulations at approximately the same values of T was performed with the volume fixed at its value in the low temperature limit, i.e., at the value obtained by minimizing the enthalpy with respect to atomic positions and the lattice parameter. The averages of (P, T ) in this set of simulations were (100 K, 1.1 GPa), (301 K, 2.4 GPa), (506 K, 3.8 GPa), (1008 K, 6.9 GPa), (1982 K, 12.8 GPa), (2986 K, 18.6 GPa), and (3458 K, 21.3 GPa). We used fast Fourier transforms (FFTs) to compute vibrational spectra from correlation functions. We calculated spatial correlations up to the maximum distance possible with our supercell, which is L = 5a, where a is the primitive lattice parameter. We used the entire production run trajectory of length T to calculate temporal correlations. The resolutions, 2π/L and 1/T , with which spectra can be calculated as functions of wavevector (k) and frequency (f ), respectively, are determined by the sizes of the domains in space (L) and time (T ), respectively, on which the correlation functions are calculated. With our supercell we are able to sample five commensurate k-points between Γ ([0, 0, 0]) and X ([0.5, 0, 0.5]), where k is a commensurate k-point if waves with wavevector k respect the periodic boundary conditions, i.e., if where each m i is an integer, k i is parallel to the i th supercell lattice vector, and if the length of that lattice vector is an integer multiple of λ = 2π/|k i |. The frequency resolution of our raw spectra is 0.01 THz, but we smooth them along the frequency axis by convolving them with Gaussians of standard deviation 0.05 THz, for the spectra at T ≲ 1000 K, and 0.1 THz for the spectra at T ≳ 2000 K. To calculate the phonon band structure within the harmonic approximation, we find the equilibrium (T → 0) structure of the supercell and then calculate the dynamical matrix from finite differences of forces after displacing atoms slightly from equilibrium. To avoid artefacts of interpolation, we only plot the frequencies at commensurate k-points, but we increase their density in reciprocal space by calculating phonon spectra on M × M × M supercells for M ∈ {6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11}. As discussed in Sec. III D 1, the QHA simply amounts to calculating the phonon band structure at the equilibrium volume for the given temperature, T ′ , rather than at the equilibrium volume of the T → 0 limit. The equilibrium volume at temperature T ′ is the volume that minimizes the free energy; but we cannot calculate the free energy easily, precisely, or accurately due to important contributions to it from improbable microstates. Improbable microstates are unlikely to be sampled in an MD simulation and if, by chance, they did occur, they would be oversampled. However we can calculate the free energy under the simplistic assumptions that phonons do not interact with one another and that the vibrational energy is distributed among the phonon bands according to the Bose-Einstein distribution. Therefore, when we apply the QHA we assume that band theory is a good approximation and we calculate the phonon bands as a function of volume. We use these frequencies in Eq. 6, which is exact in the T → 0 limit where band theory is exact, to find the volume that minimizes F (V, T ) T =T ′ . We calculated F (V, T ) T =T ′ for a range of volumes corresponding to a set of lattice parameters with uniform spacing 0.02 Å, and we interpolated between these values with cubic splines. To calculate the phonon frequencies at each volume we use a 10 × 10 × 10 supercell to calculate the dynamical matrix at each k in the 10 × 10 × 10 commensurate set from finite differences of forces. When calculating F (V, T ) T =T ′ from Eq. 6, the sum over k is a sum over the set of commensurate k-points. We presented the central result of this work in Fig. The first limitation is our use of approximate interatomic forces. The accuracy with which our force field calculates phonon frequencies at 300 K is evident in the bottomright panel of Fig. The accuracy with which our force field describes thermal expansion is evident in Table To parameterize the force field used in this work we fit to DFT data calculated with the PBEsol functional MgO, whereas those used in Refs. 22 and 23 were required to describe MgO in both molten and crystalline forms, which meant compromising on the accuracy with which each phase was described. Based on the tests performed here and in those previous works we suggest that, at worst, our force field should be regarded as describing an MgO-like material. We further suggest that some of the gross features of the T -dependence of the spectra calculated with it, including those that we have selected for discussion below, are caused by simple physical mechanisms that would occur in other ionic crystals and therefore might manifest in their vibrational spectra. A second limitation of our calculations is that our MD simulations are classical simulations. Therefore their accuracy at low T is questionable. However, when T is comparable to, or greater than, the Debye temperature (T D ∼ 1000 K), which is the range of most interest for studying the breakdown of band theory, this approximation should not affect our results significantly. Furthermore, we will show in Sec. V C that the heat capacities calculated from the quasiparticle energies extracted from MD simulations are in very good agreement with measurements at all values of T between 300 K and 1800 K. We regard our use of a supercell of finite size in our MD simulations as by far the most important source of inaccuracy and imprecision in the kinetic energy spectra presented. It means that the only lattice waves present our MD simulations were those whose wavevectors are commensurate with the supercell. Our use of a 10 × 10 × 10 supercell means that the longest finite wavelength among the phonons in our simulation was only ten times the length of a primitive lattice vector. To make clear that we only calculate spectra at a finite number of points in (k, ω)-space, we have pixelated the spectra, with one pixel centered at each commensurate k-point. However, the absence of any vibrations at incommensurate (k, ω)points would change how energy is distributed among the commensurate set of points. For example, in a real crystal there would be far more channels (modes) through which energy and momenta could be exchanged. Let us now begin discussing Fig. As mentioned in Sec. III A 2, the equipartition theorem implies that if the spectra were converged fully with respect to simulation time, this normalization would be equivalent to dividing each one by the same constant and by T . Regions of high and low energy density are coloured dark blue and white, respectively, with the same colour scale used at each T . For comparison, the T → 0 band structure and the finite-T QHA band structures are plotted over the full spectrum with red and green triangles, respectively. The spectra show a progressive transition between two limits of T : Phonon bands are well defined at low T , whereas at very high T they are much less well defined or not defined. At 300 K the phonon dispersions do not differ substantially from the T → 0 bands calculated within the HA: All of the vibrational energy is localized near the normal mode points, (k, ω kμ ), and the widths of the peaks at these points are small. At 3800 K, on the other hand, the phonon bands have vanished and the spectrum is much more uniform and has little observable structure. This is because the crystal has melted and because spatial and temporal correlations are very short in a liquid. Therefore the phonon assumption of atoms moving collectively as waves has broken down completely. The spectra at other T s show various stages of the progression between the low-T limit, in which atoms move as lattice waves with well defined frequencies and wavevectors, and the liquid, in which each atom moves independently of all other atoms, except those closest to it. Note that MgO melts at T m ≲ 3100 K There is a lot of complexity in the T -dependence of the full spectrum (Fig. The first gross feature is that all phonons shift to lower frequencies as T increases. Most of this softening can be attributed to the weakening of bonds by thermal expansion. We will discuss this in more detail in Sec. V C. The second gross feature is that optical bands, and particularly LO bands, lose definition much more rapidly with increasing T than acoustic bands; and zone center modes (k → 0, λ → ∞) lose definition much more rapidly than zone boundary modes. Much of the intensity seen at high frequencies and small wavevectors at low T gradually moves towards lower frequencies and larger wavevectors as T increases. This is easiest to see along the wavevector paths Γ → X and Γ → L, which are straight line segments connecting the zone center (Γ) to the high symmetry points X and L on the zone boundary. We will denote the wavevectors at X and L by k X and k L , respectively. When analysing spectra, we will ignore the point itself, which does not represent the limit k → 0, but the point k = 0: The intensity at Γ in Fig. While this is happening to optical bands at small wavevectors, the acoustic branches of the spectrum remain relatively robust. Melting manifests in the spectra as the sudden total loss of definition and integrity of the acoustic bands between T = 3500 K and T = 3800 K. The broadening of bands does not necessarily mean that the waves contributing to the band are less coherent. A band of finite width can broaden further without the phonons' coherence lengths and lifetimes reducing further if the broadening is caused by a very slow modulation of the properties of the underlying lattice. As we discuss further below, the frequency and/or wavevector of an optical mode could be modulated by an acoustic phonon whose period and wavelength are much larger than the optical phonons' coherence length and lifetime, respectively. The specific striking feature of the spectra that we have chosen to discuss is that the loss of definition of the optical modes appears to begin with an anomalously-large broadening of the LO modes nearest to Γ, and to spread out from these (k, ω)-points as T increases. The broadening of these modes is even visible at 100 K, which is the lowest T at which we calculated the full spectrum, and it occurs for the LO phonons at all wavevectors k near Γ, regardless of their directions. We are not the first to observe the anomalous LO linewidth at low T in MgO Because the LO band melts gradually and systematically from its apparent origin, at low T , as a localized anomaly near the BZ center, and because similar anomalies have been observed in other materials, we believe that its primary cause is a simple and general physical mechanism, which we refer to as acoustic warping of optical phonon fields. The effects of this mechanism on vibrational spectra would be particular pronounced in crystals with large LO-TO splittings, such as strongly ionic materials with the rocksalt crystal structure. We explain it in the sections that follow. We begin by suggesting an explanation for why strong coupling between low frequency acoustic phonons and optical phonons would melt optical bands much faster than acoustic bands. Then we explain the acoustic warping mechanism, why it would cause LO bands to melt, and why this melting would begin near the BZ center before gradually progressing outwards, until the only LO modes that remain are those at the BZ boundary. The acoustic branches can be thought of as a skeleton on which the optical branches 'hang', because spatially-coherent countermotion of cations and anions about a reference structure would not happen unless the reference structure was itself spatially coherent. For example, consider the projection, ε LO k ψ R of the displacement of cell R onto the cell eigenvector of the LO mode at k. When regarded as a function of R, this projection is very unlikely to have order on length scale λ if the crystal does not have order on length scale λ. Crystalline order is gradually lost as T increases, and this manifests as a gradual reduction of the correlation lengths and times of this projection, i.e., as an increase in the rate of decay of C LO k (R, t) as a function of R at fixed t and as a function of t at fixed finite R. The energy cost of acoustic distortions protects long range order in the time average of the crystal's structure. However, if |k| is small, the crystal having long range order when averaged over several periods of a longwavelength acoustic (LWA) mode is not sufficient to protect long range order in ε LO k ψ R . It is insufficient because the periods (frequencies) of zone center LO modes are much shorter (higher) than those of LWA modes. Therefore long range order of ε LO k ψ R as a function of R relies, not on the degree to which the time average of LWA mode displacements preserve crystalline order (i.e., vanish), but on the degree to which they preserve it on timescales much shorter than LWA mode periods. Long range order of the optical branches requires the amplitudes of LWA modes to be small, not their time-averaged displacements. The converse is not true and, in either the limit of large LO frequency, ω LO k , or the limit of small LWA frequency, ω LWA k , the coupling between LWA and LO modes is almost unidirectional: LO vibrations are highly sensitive to LWA mode displacements, whereas LWA vibrations are much less sensitive to LO mode displacements. The reason for the high sensitivity of LO phonons to LWA phonons will be discussed in Sec. V B 3. LWA phonons are relatively insensitive to LO phonons because an LO mode's period, 2π/ω LO k , is so short that LO displacements average to zero in much less than the period, 2π/ω LWA k , of an LWA phonon. Therefore the forces they exert on an LWA mode cancel one another before the LWA mode has had time to respond to them. On the length and time scales relevant to the lowestfrequency LWA modes of a macroscopic crystal, the crystal is a continuum and the LWA modes do not see optical mode disorder directly, but experience its effects indirectly through the T -dependence of the crystal's elastic constants. This partial decoupling of a slow-moving degree of freedom from a much faster one is known as adiabatic decoupling Adiabatic decoupling does not mean that the LWA modes do not exchange energy with the optical modes. It means that their energy exchange is so rapid that they barely notice. The net energy exchange in a time τ can be very large if τ < 2π/ω LO k , but is likely to be negligible if 2π/ω LO k ≪ τ ≪ 2π/ω LWA k , because its average over one complete LO period is small and its average over many complete periods is even smaller. Optical mode disorder changes so quickly that every complete LWA oscillation occurs in the presence of an almost equivalent background of optical displacements, whereas LWA disorder changes so slowly that every complete LO oscillation occurs in the presence of a unique and inequivalent background of LWA displacements. Therefore it is approximately true that LWA phonons only experience the many rapidly-changing LO displacements as a slight dressing, which changes their frequencies very little. Nevertheless, and at the same time, if there exists an effective LWA-LO coupling mechanism, the frequencies and coherence lengths and times of LO phonons are strongly influenced by whatever LWA displacements exist during their lifetimes. Of course, the adiabatic decoupling picture, in which optical modes see 'frozen' acoustic modes and acoustic modes do not see optical modes because the time averages of their displacements vanish, is very much an idealized limiting case. Adiabatic decoupling of acoustic modes from optical modes becomes a perfect decoupling in the k → 0 limit, but is likely to be far from perfect at the smallest finite wavevectors present in our simulations. Clearly this picture would not apply to the transverse acoustic (TA) and TO modes in the regions of the BZ where they occupy the same small frequency window between about 10 THz and 15 THz. However, it does seem to explain why the lowest-frequency acoustic modes are broadened less than the highest-frequency optical modes. As T increases from the T → 0 limit, it is the LWA modes that are first to become active, because they are lowest in energy. Therefore, there may be a common explanation for why the LO band is the first to melt, or partially melt, for why zone center modes melt before zone boundary modes, and for why acoustic bands are degraded less at the highest T 's than optical bands: Acoustic modes are degraded less because of the partial immunity to optical disorder that adiabatic decoupling affords them. LO modes are not protected by adiabatic decoupling and, as we now explain, there is a very simple and effective mechanism by which they can be disrupted, and their frequencies changed, by acoustic disorder; or even by a single quasistatic acoustic perturbation of the crystal. By modulating the relative displacements of cations and anions, an LO wave of wavevector k creates regions of excess charge at its nodes, from which emanates an electric field, E LO k , of the same wavelength, λ LO k ≡ 2π/|k|. This field, which we referred to as the LO mode's intrinsic field above, opposes the LO wave's motion, thereby increasing its frequency, ω LO k In planes perpendicular to k, the part of the crystal that a phonon with wavevector k perturbs is finite in size at any finite T . If the LO wave's lateral extent was smaller than λ LO k , a transverse relative displacement of ρ LO b,k 's oppositely-charged antinodes would change the direction of E LO k locally. This would reduce the magnitude of its component along k, thereby reducing ω LO k . An LA perturbation, on the other hand, would modulate the magnitude of E LO k along k. If, at a given moment, the positive antinodes of ρ LO b,k were compressed (expanded) by an LA wave of wavevector k, its negative antinodes would be expanded (compressed) at that moment. However the phase velocities of LO and acoustic waves are different, in general, which means that the antinodes of an acoustic wave would be moving relative to those of ρ LO b,k , making it a time-dependent perturbation of the LO wave. A third mechanism is that a quasistatic acoustic perturbation of the crystal would create regions in which the crystal is compressed and regions in which it is expanded. Compressing an ionic crystal increases its Madelung energy and the magnitudes of local electric fields. In MgO this results in the electronic band gap widening under pressure The acoustic-LO coupling mechanisms discussed above suggest that, as soon as acoustic modes become active, we should see a range of LO frequencies corresponding to LO vibrations occurring in the presence of different backgrounds of acoustic deformations of the crystal. Let us now examine the spectra presented in Fig. As T increases, the earliest deviations from a perfect band structure occur close to Γ along both paths (and also along other paths, which we do not discuss). For example, at 300 K and 500 K the LO modes at 1 5 k X and 1 5 k L have broadened noticeably in frequency. Along Γ → X the LO broadening is accompanied by a noticeable broadening of the LA modes, whereas along Γ → L it is accompanied by a noticeable broadening of the TA modes. In the latter case the broadening of the TA mode is smaller at k = 1 5 k L than it is further away from Γ, despite the largest broadening of the LO mode being at k = 1 5 k L . However, 1 5 k L is the wavevector at which the difference between LO and TA frequencies is greatest, which means that it is the wavevector at which the adiabatic decoupling of acoustic modes from optical modes discussed in Sec. V B 2 would be most effective. Therefore, the low-T broadening of the LO modes near Γ, its progression to larger wavevectors as T increases, and the broadening of acoustic modes that accompanies it, all appear to be consistent with acoustic modes changing ω LO k and making LO waves less coherent by warping E LO k . The main point of this section (V B 3) is that there exists a mechanism for strong coupling between the acoustic and LO modes of an ionic crystal, which would degrade its LO bands but degrade its acoustic bands to a much lesser degree. We have provided simple physical reasons why we should see anomalous broadening of the LO mode in our spectra and, as we analyze the spectra of individual modes in more detail in Sec. V D, we will provide further indirect evidence that the mechanism we proposed is responsible for the observed broadening. We end this section by summarizing our physical reasoning. It is well known As T increases, the first manifestation of this effect in the spectra would be the LO band near the BZ center beginning to broaden and melt. As T continues to increase, causing significant activity among higher-energy and larger-wavevector acoustic modes, we should expect to see the melting of the LO band spread from BZ's center towards its boundary. All of this is consistent with what is observed in Fig. To disentangle the effects of thermal expansion from other mechanisms by which T changes the spectra, let us turn our attention to Fig. The comparison between Figs. The other features of the spectra that we have chosen to discuss, namely, that melting of the band structure begins with the LO mode near Γ, before spreading to the BZ boundary and to other modes, are present in both Fig. The QHA provides a reasonably accurate approximation to the phonon band structure up to at least 500 K, albeit one that is not noticeably closer to the MD band structure than the HA. However, its overestimation of the softening of TO frequencies is quite dramatic at T = 1000 K and T = 2000 K. Referring to Table Karki et al. the degrees to which they were overestimated increasing with T . Therefore, to investigate whether or not this is a failure of the quasi-independent phonon assumption we have calculated the heat capacity within the QPA The comparison between our QPA calculation, the QHA calculations of Karki et al., and the measurements of Isaak, Anderson, and Goto are presented in Fig. In Sec. V B we suggested some mechanisms by which LO bands can be broadened and shifted in frequency by acoustic modes, without acoustic bands degrading to the same degree. In Sec. V C we showed that thermal expansion causes most bands to shift to lower frequencies as T increases, but is not the cause of the anomalous broadening of the LO band. In this section we take a closer look at thermal broadening of bands. Fig. Overall, it is less easy to see firm trends in the data presented in Fig. The QHA's overestimation of the rates of decrease of optical mode frequencies with respect to T is very clear in Fig. Figure Notice that, at k X and k L , where acoustic frequencies are as large as optical frequencies, the entropies of acoustic and optical modes have similar magnitudes. However near Γ the entropies of acoustic modes, and particularly the TA modes, are much smaller than those of optical modes. Near Γ is where acoustic frequencies are small enough that adiabatic decoupling is likely to provide acoustic modes with the most protection from disorder generated by the optical modes. Also notice that, at all values of T , the LA mode's entropy is significantly greater than the TA mode's entropy at k = 1 5 k X ; whereas at k = 1 5 k L it is the TA mode whose entropy is larger at low T ; and at T ≥ 1000 K the LA and TA modes have similar entropies. Entropy quantifies uncertainty, which increases with a mode distribution's width. Therefore, Fig. Figure We will not speculate further about why most mode spectra have positive skewnesses. However in Sec. V B 3 we suggested a mechanism that might contribute negatively to the skewness of only one of the six modes: An acoustic perturbation that warps E LO k is likely to reduce its magnitude, thereby lowering ω LO k . Therefore a thermal distribution of acoustic perturbations might contribute low-frequency tails to LO mode spectra. This might explain why the LO mode has a skewness that is smaller in magnitude than other modes when it is positive, why it is the only mode whose skewness is negative at some wavevectors, and why the skewness changes from negative to positive between the BZ center and its boundary. Now let us examine the plots of entropy in Fig. If a mode was damped by many weak interactions, its entropy would increase gradually and monotonically as either the number of interactions or their strengths increased gradually. However, sudden reductions of entropy occur to the LA mode and the TA modes along Γ → X; and there is a less dramatic reduction of the TA modes' entropies along Γ → L. After increasing monotonically between k = 1 5 k X and k = 4 5 k X , the entropies of the LA band and the higher-entropy TA mode drop abruptly at k = k X . In the right-hand plot the entropies of both TA bands suddenly begin to decrease at k = 4 5 k L . These kinks in the entropy as a function of k are interesting because they suggest the existence of strong interactions between modes, which contribute sizeable fractions of their total entropies. If a mode's entropy only had contributions from weak interactions, a sudden decrease would require many interactions to weaken or vanish simultaneously (at the same wavevector). This is improbable. Each kink is much more likely to be explained by the disappearance or weakening of few very strong interactions, than by many weak ones. Therefore a kink in a band's entropy is likely to mean that, on the higherentropy side of the kink, the mode is involved in at least one particularly-strong interaction. The fact that the entropy of the LA mode at k = 1 5 k X is so high adds to the suspicion that it is caused by coupling to the LO mode, because ω LA k is so low that only TA modes have similar frequencies. However, the TA modes' entropies are smaller, suggesting that they do not interact with other modes as strongly as the LA mode does. Furthermore, if the high entropy of the LA band was caused by almost-resonant coupling between LA and TA modes, it should decrease with increasing |k|, because ω LA k and ω TA k rapidly diverge. For a similar reason, the fact that the TO modes' entropies remain relatively constant as ω LA k approaches ω TO k makes it unlikely that the LA entropy has a large contribution from LA-TO coupling. The LA-TO interaction should strengthen as their frequencies get closer, which would increase the TO entropy. However, if the LA entropy was high due to LA-LO coupling, we would not necessarily see the LO mode entropy increase as ω LA k increased. If the high LO entropy was caused by the LA mode warping E LO k , the effects of this disruption on the LO band would not necessarily increase as ω LA k drew closer to ω LO k , because the strength of this coupling mechanism does not rely on the coupled modes having similar frequencies. Furthermore, the degree to which E LO k shifts ω LO k upwards decreases with increasing wavevector. Therefore, if the high LO entropy was caused by warping of E LO k , it should decrease with increasing |k|, as it can be seen to do in Fig. An obvious question to address is why the entropy of one of the TA bands increases more than the other, before also dropping suddenly at k = k X . The entropy of this band increases much more rapidly than the entropy of the other TA band, despite their mean frequencies remaining equal. However, it is important to note that the eigenvectors of two degenerate modes can be rotated in the two-dimensional space that they span, without changing their frequencies. For this reason, the two TA bands do not have independent identities and, for some rotations of TA eigenvectors within the subspace that they span, the entropies of the bands would be equal. Therefore we should not refer to entropies of the two TA bands individually; we should say that the combined entropy of the TA modes increases with increasing wavevector along Γ → X, before suddenly decreasing at k = k X . This means that the results plotted in the left-hand panels of Fig. The sudden decrease of the TA entropy at k = k X is difficult to explain if its increase between k = 1 5 k X and k = 4 5 k X is caused by coupling to the TO modes. The data plotted in the bottom left panel of Fig. At k = k X the polarization vectors of the LA and LO modes are identical, by symmetry. Mathematically, the difference in their frequencies can be viewed as a consequence of their normalized eigenvectors being different scalar multiples of the same polarization vector. The LO and LA eigenvectors are the polarization vector multi-plied by the square roots of the O and Mg masses, respectively. It is well known that when two modes couple strongly enough, they tend to hybridize: each one's eigenvector becomes a mix of both eigenvectors, such that the modes described by the hybrid eigenvectors interact much more weakly. This is what causes avoided crossings in band structures. The LO-LA hybridization does not tell us anything directly about TO-TA coupling, but the bottom left plot of Fig. There are also some strong hints that acoustic modes are disrupting E LO k along Γ → L. Firstly, the LO mode has the highest entropy, despite being the least active mode at low T . Secondly, the LO mode has a negative skewness until E LO k vanishes at k = k L , which is consistent with the acoustic warping of E LO k giving it a lowfrequency tail. Thirdly, the variation of the skewness with k appears to mirror the variation of the mean frequency: As one increases the other decreases. This is consistent with the negative LO skewness being caused by this mechanism because it is the increasing strength of E LO k that causes ω LO k to increase between L and Γ. As the field's contribution to ω LO k increases in magnitude, ω LO k becomes more vulnerable to being lowered by acoustic perturbations. All of the acoustic-LO coupling might be LA-LO coupling, but it is also possible that the TA mode is involved. However, near the BZ center, strong TA-LO coupling via TA disruption of E LO k requires the lateral extent of the LO phonon to be not much greater than its wavelength. This is because, if we approximately describe ρ LO b,k as a stack of parallel uniformly-charged infinite planes, a transverse displacement of each plane would not alter the constant field emanating from it. At finite T the region perturbed by an LO phonon in a plane perpendicular to k has a finite area. Therefore transverse displacements would change E LO k near the boundary of this region and, if a large enough fraction of the atoms participating in the LO motion were affected by this change, a TA phonon could couple significantly to it by this mechanism. When the LO wavelength is small, on the other hand, the crystal planes displaced laterally by a TA phonon cannot be treated as uniformly charged; their atomistic structures have a significant influence on the value of E LO k . Therefore, near the BZ boundary there could be strong TA-LO coupling for LO phonons whose lateral extents are much larger than their wavelengths. In this work we have studied strong phononic correlation in crystalline MgO with a method of calculating vibrational spectra that does not suffer from the limitations of perturbation theories or mean-field theories, and which can produce accurate wavevector-resolved spectra with enough detail to observe bandstructures. These calculations, and recent similar calculations by Lahnsteiner and Bokhdam As shown in Appendix A and Ref. For example, it should help with the development of materials that are either transparent or opaque to THz radiation in a particular frequency window. In other words, it should help to guide us in the rational design of materials that behave as THz bandpass filters for use as active or passive components of THz devices. Another application is in the study of order-disorder transitions between crystalline phases, which occur when a single phonon band melts but the other bands do not, causing displacements and velocities along the eigenvectors of the melted band's modes to become disordered. This critical weakening of correlations causes both the time average and the spatial average of the displacements to vanish. As a result, when the crystal is observed at either a low spatial resolution or a low temporal resolution, its symmetry appears to have increased. The ability to see how the vibrational spectrum changes as T crosses the transition temperature may lead to step changes in our understandings of these transitions, or even to a step change in our understanding of this class of transitions. A third application is in the study of materials at very high T , such as thermal barrier coatings, where there are high densities of defects, and therefore high densities of vibrations that are localized in spacetime and delocalized in reciprocal spacetime. A fourth application, which is related to the third, is in the identification or design of materials with reduced or enhanced thermal conductivities. For example, the thermal conductivities of materials with low-frequency localized rattler modes However the generality of this method means that one of the most important applications of it may be to study general properties of strong phononic correlation. The simplest and most obvious first step is to study the strengthening of phononic correlation in a simple prototype crystal as it is heated. This has been the purpose of this work. We have found that, despite the apparent banality of crystalline MgO at thermal equilibrium, there is so much to be learned from the spectra presented herein that we have been forced to focus most of our analyses of them on a few of their gross features. We provide our raw V (T ) spectra, in the form of tabulations of ÊK (k, ω) at each value of T , as supplementary material in case others wish to analyse it further or differently By calculating spectra at both constant volume and constant pressure, we have been able to show conclusively that some features of the spectrum's T dependence, such as the tendency of bands to soften as T increases, are consequences of thermal expansion; and that others, such as the rapid degradation of the LO band, are not. We have shed substantial light on the strengths and limitations of the quasiharmonic approximation and we have shown that some of its weaknesses are rectified by the quasiparticle approximation. Most importantly, we have identified, and discussed in some detail, two physical considerations that are likely to have observable consequences for many or most crystals. The first is that LO phonons are highly sensitive to the amplitudes of acoustic phonons because a large fraction (∼ 1 2 for MgO) of ω LO k is contributed by the LO mode's intrinsic field, which acoustic phonons warp. This simple mechanism must occur, to some degree, in every partially-ionic crystal, because every LO phonon has an intrinsic field that opposes its motion and increases its frequency. The second consideration is that, despite this strong acoustic-LO coupling, long wavelength acoustic phonons are adiabatically decoupled from LO modes: they strongly modulate the energies and frequencies of LO modes, while maintaining approximatelyconstant energies and frequencies themselves. The feature of the spectrum's T -dependence that led us to these ideas and explanations is very similar to features that have been observed experimentally in the spectra of other ionic crystals since the 1960s define the Morse potential and, along with the charges, are among the parameters that are fit to reproduce forces, stress tensors, and energy differences calculated ab initio with density functional theory. A list of all potential parameters and their values are provide in Table In addition to the pairwise part of the potential, the oxygen anion is assigned a polarizability, α, which is used to assign a dipole moment p i to each anion as follows: where the second term on the right hand side is the dipole moment induced on ion i by the local electric field from the charges and dipole moments of all other ions, and where is a short range contribution to the dipole from an anion's electron cloud changing shape as its neighbouring ions move. Since each dipole moment depends on the values of all others, the set of all dipole moments is calculated, at each set of ionic positions, by iterating them to selfconsistency Correlation functions and their Fourier transforms