The synthesis of thin films of magnetic topological materials is necessary to achieve novel quantized Hall effects and electrodynamic responses. EuIn2As2 is a recently predicted topological axion insulator that has an antiferromagnetic ground state and an inverted band structure, but that has only been synthesized and studied as a single crystal. We report on the synthesis of c-axis oriented EuIn2As2 films on sapphire substrates by molecular beam epitaxy. By carefully tuning the substrate temperature during growth, we stabilize the Zintl phase of EuIn2As2 expected to be topologically non-trivial. The magnetic properties of these films reproduce those seen in single crystals, but their resistivity is enhanced when grown at lower temperatures. We additionally find that the magnetoresistance of EuIn2As2 is negative even up to fields as high as 31T. while it is highly anisotropic at low fields, it becomes nearly isotropic at high magnetic fields above 5T. Overall, the transport characteristics of EuIn2As2 appear similar to those of chalcogenide topological insulators, motivating the development of devices to gate tune the Fermi energy and reveal topological features in quantum transport. Introduction. Magnetic topological insulators with a ferromagnetic ground state are behind the recent discovery of the quantized Hall effect at zero magnetic field. In this work, we overcome this challenge and successfully identify a temperature region in the MBE growth scheme at which the Zintl phase becomes thermodynamically favorable, yielding a layered EuIn2As2 structure. The onset of this phase occurs at a substrate temperature of 680°C, well above the ideal growth window of InAs. Using this developed growth scheme, we achieve EuIn2As2 films on (0001)-oriented Al2O3, which are close to 45-100nm thick, and reproduce the magnetic properties seen in bulk single crystals. The resistivity in our samples is likely controlled by film morphology as it is consistently larger than the resistivity in single crystals. We also observe a negative magnetoresistance consistent with the magnetic polaron picture, resulting from scattering due to magnetic fluctuations. Its anisotropy follows the magnetic anisotropy of the crystal at low magnetic fields but is suppressed at high magnetic fields despite remaining negative all the way up to 31T. FIG 1 . (a) Crystal structure of EuIn2As2. (b) X-ray diffraction patterns measured on a series of Eu-In-As films grown on sapphire between 640°C and 740°C. The (0 0 2n) Bragg series of EuIn2As2 is highlighted by red arrows. The (111) Bragg peak of the zincblende structure is labeled zb, and is seen clearly in the sample grown at 640°C. The * symbol marks the Bragg peaks of the sapphire substrate and instrument artifacts. The blue arrow denotes the position of the (102) Bragg peak of EuIn2As2. (c) High-angle annular dark-field scanning TEM image of a sample grown at 740°C. The films grown at 740°C and 680°C are 45nm thick, the one grown at 700°C is 75nm. MBE of EuIn2As2 films is carried out on (0001) -oriented sapphire substrates. We chose sapphire (a=4.758Å) because of its ability to withstand high substrate temperatures, despite its lattice mismatch with EuIn2As2 (a=4.21Å). The temperatures of elemental sources are tuned to ensure beam equivalent pressures (BEPs) that maintain As-rich conditions through the growth. The As:Eu BEP ratio is between 20:1 and 29:1, while the As:In BEP ratio is kept close to 10:1. In, As (both 99.9999% pure) and Eu (99.99% pure) are evaporated from standard Knudsen-cells. The base pressure in the MBE is 5 × 10 -9 torr. The substrate temperature Tsub is varied between 640° and 740°C. As we shall show next, as Tsub approaches the Indium cell temperature, exceeding that of Eu and As, the nucleation of elemental layers and zincblende phases is suppressed. Under these conditions, the Zintl phase is formed. Also, it is worth highlighting that Tsub is significantly higher than what is commonly used for III-V zincblende materials. This requirement also motivates our substrate choice, since sapphire is known to remain structurally stable at these temperatures, unlike III-V semiconductor wafers. Cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy images were acquired using a double tilt holder and probe-corrected Spectra 30-300 transmission electron microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) equipped with a field emission gun operated at 300 kV. The TEM image in Fig. Superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry measurements are performed next using a Quantum Design MPMS-5 system. They reveal properties expected for EuIn2As2 and are consistent with previous studies on single crystals. Fig. Table The anisotropy (H A ) and exchange magnetic fields (H E ) can be determined by comparing the in-plane (B sat IP = 1.3) and out-of-plane (B sat OOP = 2.3T) saturation fields (Fig. We find μ 0 H E ≈ 0.9T and μ 0 H A ≈ 0.5T. From that we can determine μ 0 H sf ≈ 0.8T, which is inconsistent with experimental findings as also seen in Magnetotransport measurements are carried out using a Quantum Design MPMS5 on the film exhibiting the Zintl phase and grown at 740°C. A magnetic field up to 7T is applied along the c-axis, and the measurements are carried out down to 4K. The measured sample is rectangular and is connected in a Hall configuration. The Hall resistance is first shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of the resistivity is shown in Fig. Here, k f is the Fermi wavevector and n = k f 3 3π 2 is the charge carrier density. The expression of n in terms of k f assumes a spherical Fermi surface. The three-dimensional shape of the Fermi surface of EuIn2As2 is unknown, so our assumption only gives an effective k f . In the diffusive regime, this choice of effective kf is more suitable than the assumption that k || = k f . The negative MR persists at low temperature, well below the Neel temperature. Its anisotropy further correlates with the behavior of the magnetization below the Neel temperature. We have measured its angular dependence up to 31T at 1.6K. This data is shown in Fig. The transport characteristics of our films are compared to those found in previous studies on single crystals in Atomic force microscopy measurements shown in Fig. Carrier density [cm -3 ] Resistivity [m cm] MR (%) at 3T, 10K This work (t=45nm, 740°C) p=7.5×10 19 1.19 -12.8% We have thus successfully synthesized the Zintl phase of EuIn2As2 by MBE on sapphire. Our choice of substrate is primarily motivated by its ability to withstand a high substrate temperature during growth, which we found essential to stabilize the Zintl phase of EuIn2As2. The synthesis of EuIn2As2 on a lattice matched substrate should be developed next to enhance the mobility further and reduce layer roughness. The films grown on sapphire reproduce the magnetic properties of bulk single crystals but yield a broadened spin-flop transition. The realization of thin films enables the application of a gate voltage to tune the Fermi level of EuIn2As2. It also opens the door to magnetooptical measurements at long wavelengths in the infrared, THz and mm-wave parts of the spectrum. 