Since the discovery of superconductivity in mercury at ~4 K in 1911, searching for materials with superconductivity at higher temperatures towards practical conditions has been a primary enduring goal. The recent report of room-temperature superconductivity at near-ambient pressure in nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride (Lu-H-N) by Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. We develop a reliable protocol to minimize the extensively concerned possible extrinsic influences of the sample The temperature dependence of resistance of the reacted sample below ~230 K is linear and basically parallel to that of the initial Lu metal. Therefore, it is not justified to treat the low-temperature linear part as an extra meaningless system background, as did by the authors in Ref. In addition, the sample color change from blue to pink was claimed in Ref. In summary, by taking the approach of in situ resistance measurements of pure Lu foil during its reaction with H2/N2 gas mixture at broader pressure and temperature space, we confirmed that the abrupt resistance transition near room temperature could be reproduced in the dark blue Lu-H-N sample but not at the experimental conditions provided in Ref. Sample synthesis and characterization. The Lu-H-N sample was prepared by a reaction between pure Lu foil and H 2 /N 2 gas mixture at a certain temperature and pressure. A high-purity block of Lu (99.9%, Alfa Aesar) and H 2 /N 2 gas mixture (volume ratio is 99:1) were used as the raw materials for the synthesis of Lu-H-N. Lu foil with a thickness of ~10 μm was obtained from the block of metal Lu by cutting and forging. Then, square samples with the side length of ~80 μm were cut from the thin foil. High-pressure chemical reactions and resistance measurements were conducted in a customized beryllium-copper (Be-Cu) alloy DAC using a non-magnetic rhenium gasket. The diamond anvil culet size is ~300 μm. Cubic boron nitride with epoxy resin was filled in laser-drilled holes of a pre-indented rhenium gasket with a diameter of ~300 μm and a thickness of ~30 μm as an insulating material for electrical measurements. Ruby balls are loaded along the Lu sample as a pressure calibrant. Four platinum electrodes were arranged symmetrically on the Lu sample to monitor the resistance variation during the chemical reaction. H2/N2 gas mixture was then loaded into the Be-Cu DAC using a gas loading system, which was vacuumed and pre-purged twice with the H 2 /N 2 gas mixture. The Be-Cu DAC with four platinum electrodes were connected to the PPMS instrument for in situ resistance measurements on the sample during reaction at different target pressure and temperature conditions. 