Antiferromagnetic Weyl semimetals with spin chirality offer excellent platforms to address the Berry phase physics, which manifests prominently in several of their electro-optical and electromagnetic responses including as a large anomalous Hall effect (AHE) and spin Hall conductivity. The Mn3Sn and Mn3Ge compounds, where the Mn spins arrange in a Kagome lattice, are examples of this class of materials. Here, we report measurements of magneto-transport in c-axis textured Mn3Sn thin films grown on the [111] plane of single crystal MgO by dc magnetron sputtering. At room temperature, these films display a weak uncompensated magnetic moment of  0.12 μB/f.u. in the basal plane and a longitudinal resistivity (xx) close to ≈ 3.8 μ.m, which matches well with the bulk value. A residual resistivity ration (xx (300 K)/xx (2 K)) of  3.92 further indicates the high quality of the films. While at 300 K a weak AHE together with field-linear Hall resistivity (xy) is observed in magnetic fields (H) applied perpendicular to the Kagome planes, the temperature (T) dependence of xy shows prominent signatures of three magnetic phases in the temperature regime of 2 to 300 K. The xy also derives a non-trivial topological contribution (ρTHE ~ 1n.m) in the spin glass phase which appears at T ≤ 100 K. The origin of the THE is attributed to spin textures which may be appearing in a frustrated chiral spin order. Our measurements of anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) and planar Hall effect (PHE) over a wide H-T phase space reveal the hitherto unseen effects in the three magnetic phases of Mn3Sn. While the AMR and PHE are negative in the inverse triangular spin phase (250 K ≤ T ≤ TN), the helical phase (100 ≤ T ≤ 250 K) is devoid of anisotropic in-plane resistivity, and the spin glass phase shows a sign reversal of AMR with the increasing magnetic field. The origin of this sign change in AMR/PHE is attributed to the emergence of topologically protected spin textures like skyrmions where the fictitious effective magnetic field is estimated to be  4.4 tesla. Antiferromagnets (AFMs) are considered as the next generation spintronic materials over conventional ferromagnets (FMs) owing to their fast-switching speed, zero stray fields and stability against field-induced distortions of spin arrangements Mn3Sn is an AFM with the Mn spins arranged in a Kagome type inverse triangular structure stabilized due to geometric frustration and the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) In this work, we present an extended study in c-axis textured Mn3Sn thin films grown on [111] surface of MgO. The temperature dependent magneto-transport measurements in a Hall bar geometry reveal the appearance of three magnetic phases over a temperature regime of 2 to 300 K with their distinctive signatures in AHE, AMR and PHE. The exotic topological phase in the spin glass state is also characterized by a sign reversal of AMR and PHE with the increasing magnetic field and a topological contribution to the AHE. Thin film with stack structure of [111] MgO/Mn3Sn (100 nm)/Nb (2 nm) were deposited by DC magnetron sputtering of Mn75Sn25 (99.99%) and Nb (99.995%) targets in a load-lock multi-target high vacuum system with a base pressure of 8x10 -9 Torr. First, the MgO substrates were preheated to 700 0 C for 20 mins in high vacuum to remove any organic contaminants adsorbed on the surface. Since MgO is prone to adsorption of moisture, this heat treatment also allows removal of OH - radicals from its surface. After this step, the substrates were cooled to ambient temperature and Mn3Sn films were deposited at the rate of 0.073 nm/s in 5 milli-Torr of ultrahigh purity (99.9999%) argon gas. The deposited films were annealed insitu at 500 0 C for 20 minutes. Finally, a thin (≈ 2 nm thick) layer of niobium was deposited on top of the Mn3Sn films at room temperature for protection against oxidation. The crystallographic structure and mosaicity of the films were measured with X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Bruker D-8 Advance X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα1 radiation. The Hall resistivity and anisotropic magnetoresistance of these films were measured down to 2 K in a physical property measurement system equipped with a 9-tesla superconducting magnet. Mn3Sn crystallizes in a hexagonal DO19 type structure with space group P63/mmc The non-collinear AFMs like Mn3Sn are known to display a giant AHE which could be used to identify different magnetic phase transitions in the material A strikingly different Hall response is seen at T ≤ 100 K. The zero-field xy is now very small, and at higher fields it is linear with a negative slope. However, the zero-field value of xy remains positive albeit very small, as shown in the inset of Fig. Consequently, the net Hall resistivity of our chiral magnet at T < 100 K may be expressed as where the first term accounts for the ordinary Hall effect and the second term is the anomalous Hall which derives contributions from scattering and band structure effects such as anomalous velocity and Berry curvature Electronic band structure calculations show that Mn3Sn is a magnetic Weyl semimetal Together with the observation of a large zero-field anomalous Hall resistivity, the presence of a strong anisotropic backscattering of charge carriers in this material is an indicator of a time reversal symmetry broken Weyl semi-metallic. Here, we report, for the first time, the behavior of AMR and PHE in the Mn3Sn epitaxial films whose Hall and outof -plane magnetoresistance data are reported in the earlier section. Unlike the AHE, AMR and PHE are even magneto-transport effects, and thus, symmetric under magnetic field reversal. Figure In a typical 3d ferromagnet like permalloy, the  dependence of xx and xy for in-plane field is expressed as (2) xy(Φ) = (|| -⊥). cos(Φ). sin(Φ) (3) , and the difference (|| -⊥) defines the AMR. The physical origin of AMR has been attributed to anisotropic s-d backscattering of conduction electrons due to high spin orbit coupling of 3d orbitals In Fig. However, unlike the case of the spin glass state, the AMR and PHE remain negative over the entire field range. Figure The sign change in the 2 K data presumably reflects a crossover from the classical regime to the chirality dominated transport. The magnetic phases of Mn3Sn are emphasized better by the temperature dependence of PHE measured at 0.5 and 9.0 tesla, as shown in Fig. A sign change in AMR/PHE driven by temperature and magnetic field has been observed earlier in various systems We now address the sign change of PHE in the spin glass state of Mn3Sn at a field of  4.5 tesla in the framework of topological spin textures by expressing the THE as where P is the local spin polarization of conduction electrons, R0 is the normal Hall coefficient and Heff is the fictitious effective field arising from the Berry phase which orients opposite to the applied field In summary, we have conducted detailed measurements of anisotropic in-plane magneto-transport and anomalous Hall effect in c-axis oriented thin films of chiral antiferromagnet Mn3Sn over a wide H-T phase space. These films were deposited on the [111] surface of MgO crystals using ultrahigh vacuum magnetron sputtering. The magnetic hysteresis loops of the films measured at 300 K reveal a weak magnetic moment arising due to the canting of Mn spins towards the c-axis. We have established the presence of three distinct magnetic phases in this chiral magnet through the measurements of AHE, AMR and PHE over a temperature range of 2 to 300 K. While the helical phase stabilized between  100 to 250 K is devoid of anisotropic in-plane transport, the spin glass phase formed at T < 100 K is characterized by a magnetic field dependent sign reversal of AHE and PHE and a topological contribution to the Hall voltage which presumably comes from the non-trivial spin textures of the spin glass phase. Notably, no such sign change of AHE/PHE is seen in the inverse triangular spin state of the system which occurs above  250 K. Direct imaging of the spin textures with Lorentz transmission electron microscopy in spin glass phase would be highly desirable direction for further studies.