Disordered thin films are a common choice of material for superconducting, high impedance circuits used in quantum information or particle detector physics. A wide selection of materials with different levels of granularity are available, but, despite low microwave losses being reported for some, the high degree of disorder always implies the presence of intrinsic defects. Prominently, quantum circuits are prone to interact with two-level systems (TLS), typically originating from solid state defects in the dielectric parts of the circuit, like surface oxides or tunneling barriers. We present an experimental investigation of TLS in granular aluminum thin films under applied mechanical strain and electric fields. The analysis reveals a class of strongly coupled TLS having electric dipole moments up to 30 e Å, an order of magnitude larger than dipole moments commonly reported for solid state defects. Notably, these large dipole moments appear more often in films with a higher resistivity. Our observations shed new light on granular superconductors and may have implications for their usage as a quantum circuit material. Originally studied with regard to their enhanced critical temperature The disordered structure of the material also favors the presence of defects throughout the entire film. In particular, defects forming coherent two-level systems (TLS) are known to exist in the amorphous surface oxides of superconducting films. Via their electric dipole moment, such TLS can couple to the AC fields of quantum circuits, causing energy relaxation and dephasing In this letter, we report on experiments with compact microwave resonators fabricated from granular aluminum thin films. The material consists of pure aluminum grains with a diameter of about 4 nm embedded in a matrix of amorphous aluminum oxide, which self-assembles during the deposition of aluminum in an oxygen atmosphere For this study, we have patterned five different films (chips A-E, see Tab. S1 for details) into a total of thirteen λ/2 microstrip resonators. Depending on the sheet inductance, the resonator length was varied up to 500 μm at a constant width of 2 μm. On chip D and E, the resonators were covered by an additional, insulating layer of granular aluminum (R n ≫ R q ), in order to compare the contributions of different film surfaces to the dielectric loss. Figure For low applied microwave power (few photon regime), the transmission spectrum reveals numerous anticrossings over a wide range of electric fields, see Fig. ). There, the electric field values E i z , at which the anti-crossings occur, fluctuate noticeably. We identify a telegraphic-like switching pattern between two E i z values as well as sudden jumps to a different E i z . Overall, the strain and electric field experiments show a similar qualitative picture (see Fig. Under the assumption that the measured anti-crossings stem from the coherent interaction of the resonator with TLS While the TLS type (1) generates more pronounced anticrossings, the TLS of type (2) actually make up most of the total anti-crossings count (SM II+III). Due to their typically low lifetimes An evaluation of data from all resonators yields an average density of 1/30 GHz for all observable TLS. An independent analysis of the resonator loss tangent tan(δ 0 ) ∝ κ(n → 0), however, suggests that these TLS are not solely responsible for the entire dielectric loss, which is more likely to be dominated by a bath of weakly coupled TLS which are not directly observable in our measurements (SM VI). The quantum mechanical model of a TLS (a tunneling particle in an asymmetric double well potential Here, ∆ and ε are the tunnelling and asymmetry energies of the unperturbed TLS, γ * is the effective coupling strength to the strain field ξ z = | ⃗ ξ| and d is the component of the TLS' electric dipole moment that is parallel to the maximum expected field strength E z . Therefore, d is a lower bound for the TLS dipole moment | ⃗ d|. Because of the quadratic terms in Eq. ( We now take a closer look at the pronounced anticrossings in our spectra. Following Sarabi et al. Here, κ and γ T LS are the linewidths of resonator and TLS. The external loss rate of the resonator κ c has a complex component due to the non-ideal transmission line The extracted values for the coupling strength g and dipole moment d are shown in Fig. Here, E rms ∝ √ Z r is the maximum single-mode resonator field at the film surface (SM IV), which is enhanced by the high characteristic impedance of the resonator Z r . Interestingly, TLS with a coupling strength of g/2π > 2 MHz are only observed on samples B and C. This supports the assumption that for the two-layer samples (D+E), most strongly coupled TLS reside in the insulating top layer, while the resonator currents flow only in the lower, superconducting layer. Then, screening effects partially reduce E rms for these TLS, while E z remains comparable for all samples. The bottom inset in Fig. Using atomic force microscopy, we measure a rather low surface roughness of S q ≤ 1 nm for the granular aluminum film, which is comparable with the surface roughness of pure aluminum S q ≥ 1 nm. This supports the assumption that the electric fields at the resonator film edge do not experience a substantial enhancement due to the granularity of the film (see also SM IV). Consequently, the observation of dipole moments far exceeding 2 e Å points towards the existence of TLS having a previously unknown microscopic origin. Possible candidates are illustrated in Fig. In a recent publication, dipole moments of similar size have been observed by studying the dielectric loss of amorphous silicon under a swept electric field For the above mechanism to be effective, such TLS have to sit at the grain boundaries rather than the surface oxide of the film. They could, for instance, be formed by tunneling nanoclusters (TNC) with up to hundreds of participating atoms The prevalence of strongly coupled TLS in films with higher sheet resistance (inset Fig. A potential TLS candidate that becomes more likely as the film resistance increases are quasiparticles (QP) localized due to spatial variations of the superconducting gap δ∆ sc . This hypothesis has recently been reported as a novel type of TLS in disordered NbN films Historically, a popular concept to explain strongly coupled TLS are tunneling charges (TC), for which evi-dence has been found in Josephson junctions The localization of charges near the SIT is accompanied by local fluctuations of the superconducting phase In conclusion, we have characterized two-level systems in oxidized granular aluminum films using electric field and strain tuning experiments. In addition to TLS with conventional properties, we observe a strongly coupled variety of TLS with orders of magnitude larger dipole moments. These TLS are found more frequently in samples with higher sheet resistances. Due to their pronounced frequency fluctuations and low lifetimes, they can be a severe source of noise and dissipation. Since the microscopic mechanism forming these large dipoles remains unknown, we are calling for additional experiments to uncover their nature. Possible pathways include lumped-element resonator geometries A schematic of the measurement setup is depicted in Fig. Resonator-TLS interaction and reference measurement While strongly coupled TLS (g ≈ κ ≈ 1 MHz) are the focus of the analysis presented in the main text, they only make up for ∼ 1% of all observed TLS (see Table Such a TLS-resonator interaction is shown in Figure Figure All samples are fabricated from a total of five granular aluminum films, A to E, each sputter-deposited on a 430 μm thick sapphire waver using an aluminum target and an argon plasma. These films predominantly differ in their normal state sheet resistance R n , which is tuned by the oxygen partial pressure during the sputtering process (see Ref. Using conventional optical lithography techniques, the films are structured into microstrip microwave circuit with a layout as sketched in Fig. Here, i is the index over all observed TLS and d * i is their individual slope with respect to the electric field, estimated from the measurement data. The corresponding values are given in Tab. S1. The average spectral density of the strongly coupled TLS is D ω,g ≈ 0.01 GHz -1 . Note that counting of moderately coupled TLS was not possible on resonators C1-C3, where most anti-crossings are small compared to the pronounced resonance frequency fluctuations measured on this chip The experimentally relevant properties of the measured two dimensional (ξ ≈ 10 nm ∼ t An estimate of the penetration depth of the DC electric fields is challenged by the heterogeneous granular structure of the film, which consists of both metallic and dielectric parts. However, a lower limit can be stated by calculating the Thomas-Fermi length of a clean superconductor with similar properties. This yields TAB. S1. Characteristics of the measured resonators, including their resonance frequencies ωr, linewidths κ (n = 100), sheet resistances Rn and kinetic sheet inductances L kin = 0.18ħRn/(TckB) Reso. ωr/2π (GHz) κ/2π (MHz) l (μm) t (nm) Rn (kΩ) L kin (nH) DE (TLS/kV) Dω (TLS/GHz) DE,g (gTLS/kV) a Average value from two measurements performed over two independent cooldowns (∆Ez,tot = 2 × 1258 kV/m). In order to estimate the TLS dipole moment from the slope of the fitted anticrossings p * , knowledge of the electric field generated by the DC electrode (E elec (U elec , x)) at x, the position of the TLS, is necessary. Therefore, simulations with an electrostatic finite element solver (ANSYS Maxwell) were performed. Figure This formula is used to calculated the lower bounds to the TLS dipole moments discussed in the main text. Here, we show an alternative approach for determining the TLS dipole moment, which makes use of the measured coupling rates g between the TLS and the resonator modes. There, we are only interested in the fundamental mode, corresponding to half a wavelenght (λ/2) for our resonator geometry (see Fig. ) In Eq. (S4) we assume ∆ ≫ ε for the TLS energies, since all TLS are evaluated near the symmetry point. Because the position of each individual TLS x r is not known, these equations are generally not applicable. However, it is reasonable to assume that E rms ∥ E elec at the film surface, which means d g (x r ) and d p * (x r ) should generally be identical. Thus, one can explicitly solve this set of equations for x r by minimizing min Figure Figure . S4(h) compares d p * to the distirbution obtained from Eq. S2, which have an reasonable overlap of 74,7%. Like Fig. For the quantitative analysis of the measurement data, it is sufficient to consider a resonator coupled to a single TLS with strength g and to a transmission line with strength Ω. The transmission line is terminated by impedance mismatched bonding wires on both ends, and therefore best modeled as an additional cavity The fitting routine is as follows: First, a reduced model |S 21 (ω, g = 0)| is fitted to the bare transmission data to extract the parameters of a given resonator (a, α, κ c , φ, κ, ω r ). These parameters as treated as constants in the second step, where the full model |S 21 (ω, E elec )| is separately fitted to each pronounced anti-crossing observed in that resonator, extracting the corresponding TLS parameters (g, γ T LS , ∆, ε, d). Two examples illustrating the results of this fitting routine are shown in Fig. To investigate whether the main loss channel of our resonators originates from a large ensemble of weakly coupled TLS, we measure the loss rate κ as a function of the the average circulating photon number n. In the scope of the standard tunneling model for TLS where n c is the critical photon number above which resonant TLS start to saturate and F tan(δ 0 ) is the dielectric loss tangent of our film dressed by a filling factor F. The measured data for resonator C3 and a fit to Eq. (S8) is shown in Fig. The fitted loss tangents of all resonators are plotted in Fig. a Sample is fabricated from a bilayer, which consists of a superconducting (bottom) and insulating (top) granular aluminum film.