Solution-processed few-layers graphene flakes, dispensed to rotating and sliding contacts via liquid dispersions, are gaining increasing attention as friction modifiers to achieve low friction and wear at technologicallyrelevant interfaces. Vanishing friction states, i.e. superlubricity, have been documented for nearly-ideal nanoscale contacts lubricated by individual graphene flakes; there is however no clear understanding if superlubricity might persist for larger and morphologically-disordered contacts, as those typically obtained by graphene wet transfer from a liquid dispersion. In this study we address the friction performance of solution-processed graphene flakes by means of colloidal probe Atomic Force Microscopy. We use an additive-free aqueous dispersion to coat micrometric silica beads, which are then sled under ambient conditions against prototypical material substrates, namely graphite and the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and . High resolution microscopy proves that the random assembly of the wet-transferred flakes over the silica probes results into an inhomogeneous coating, formed by graphene patches that control contact mechanics through tens-of-nanometers tall protrusions. Atomic-scale friction force spectroscopy reveals that dissipation proceeds via stick-slip instabilities. Load-controlled transitions from dissipative stick-slip to superlubric continuous sliding may occur for the graphene-graphite homojunctions, whereas single-and multiple-slips dissipative dynamics characterizes the graphene-TMD heterojunctions. Systematic numerical simulations demonstrate that the thermally-activated single-asperity Prandtl-Tomlinson model comprehensively describes friction experiments involving different graphene-coated colloidal probes, material substrates and sliding regimes. Our work establishes experimental procedures and key concepts that enable mesoscale superlubricity by wet-transferred liquid-processed graphene flakes. The proposed methodology is suitable to explore the friction response of other layered nanomaterials prepared by scalable production routes. Solution-processed single-layer/few-layers graphene (SLG/FLG) flakes, supplied to macroscale rotating and sliding contacts via liquid dispersions, are gaining increasing attention as friction modifiers in practical applications. Whereas the flakes quality strictly depends on the production method, In this study we explore in detail the friction response of mesoscale sliding junctions formed by contacting atomically-smooth model substrates, namely graphite and the TMDs and , with graphene-coated colloidal AFM probes. The use of a highquality, thermodynamically-stable and surfactant-free aqueous dispersion of SLG/FLG flakes allows us to obtain lubricious wettransferred coatings, without the need to implement high-temperature ( ) annealing steps to recover the flakes' intrinsic properties. A commercially-available additive-free aqueous dispersion of graphene was used for experiments (named Post-treated 'Eau de Graphène' EdG from Carbon Waters, France). This is a homogeneous stable mixture of single-layer and FLG flakes (typical layers number ; broad lateral-size distribution from tens of nanometers up to a few micrometers; ) with concentration and a shelf life of 3 months at (graphene precipitation is slowly taking place for longer periods). To obtain the dispersion, potassium graphite is first exfoliated down to SLG and FLG flakes in tetrahydrophuran THF to yield a thermodynamically stable graphenide (negatively charged graphene) solution. Graphenide ions are then oxidized back to graphene by air exposure, and immediately transferred to degassed water to achieve a remarkably stable solution. After a sedimentation and drying in ambient conditions, graphene deposits were rinsed with a few drops of DI water (to minimize the residues at the sample surface) and dried with N 2 on a hot plate for a few minutes. Some samples were also prepared by drop casting graphene on Si wafers preliminarily treated by oxygen plasma (30W, 30s, working pressure ). Samples were characterized by optical microscopy, AFM and Raman spectroscopy. The morphological AFM imaging was accomplished in contact-mode or tapping-mode (AFM Solver P47-PRO by NT-MDT, Russia equipped with probes CSC37/Al-BS by MikroMasch or OTESPA-R3 by Bruker respectively). Raman spectra were collected with a commercial spectrometer (NRS-4100 by JASCO, Japan), using the 532nm (2.33eV) laser excitation wavelength and or objectives. The laser power incident on the samples was . The spectrometer was calibrated with the G band of HOPG at . Raman spectra were collected on several spots of the same sample. All peaks were fitted with Lorentzian functions. In order to identify an effective strategy to deposit FLG flakes from the aqueous solution to the AFM probes, we initially considered deposition on both commercial nanoprobes (Si probes HQ:CSC38/Al-BS and HQ:CSC37/Al-BS by MikroMasch; OTESPA-R3 by Bruker; Pt-coated probes HQ:NSC35/Pt by MikroMasch; custom Au-coated probes OMCL-AC160TS by Olympus) and custom-made colloidal probes (with silica beads of diameter , prepared as in ref. Normal force and friction force spectroscopies were carried out in contact-mode under ambient conditions. Graphene-coated AFM probes were placed in contact with the freshly-cleaved surfaces of HOPG (grade ZYB by MikroMasch), or crystals (from HQ Graphene) respectively. For the calibration of the elastic constant of each probe , and of the normal force and lateral force , see our previous publication. Friction maps were analyzed in LabView (National Instruments) and they were displayed using the WSXM software. 41 We analyzed atomic friction maps by means of the one-dimensional Prandtl-Tomlinson (PT) model where , a and are the highest local force maxima, the slip distance, and the lateral force slope respectively. To designate the highest force maxima along any selected force trace, we ordered the jumps of slip distance a in terms of decreasing force amplitude and we conventionally assumed to correspond to the tail of the highest jumps. For each normal load value , the mean values of , k and were obtained by averaging over an ensemble of several slip jumps ( ). Theoretically, we calculated friction force vs displacement profiles by integrating the underdamped Langevin equation: ( where the potential energy reads: ( A 4th-order Runge-Kutta algorithm was used to this end. The instantaneous lateral force trace was evaluated as: For the tip mass we used . The Langevin damping was chosen to reproduce experimental force traces. The thermal noise term satisfies the fluctuation-dissipation theorem: . A sliding velocity and a temperature were chosen to mimic experimental conditions. The simulated force traces were computed as averages over tens of stick-slip events in the steady state regime. To reproduce the experimental variation of the tip and sample, simulated forces were obtained as an average over 16 values of in the range and 5 independent realization of the thermal noise. The standard deviation over this average is used as a confidence level in the comparison with experimental data. Drop-casted deposits of FLG flakes on showed a discontinuous coverage of graphene patches, as readily appears from the top-view optical micrograph of Figure The latter provide the major contribution, being likely related to some functionalization of the flakes withandgroups. This is consistent with the evidence that the and ratios decrease significantly ( , ) when defects are cured by annealing the thin films at 800°C. We fabricated graphene-coated AFM probes as described in Figure Here, the surface morphology of an ideally-smooth silica bead was systematically characterized by AFM in the course of four successive 'deposition runs' (Figure Thus the adhesion between the colloidal bead and HOPG is controlled by direct contact and turns out to be comparable to the pristine case, i.e. . However, an adhesion breakdown to takes place after 'deposition run' 4, as in this case the newly deposited FLG flakes do contribute to form the topographically highest contact asperity (Figure This phenomenology is well documented in colloidal probe AFM experiments involving nominally rigid interfaces. Several concurrent factors might contribute to this response. In fact, the flakes do not necessarily stack to form a compact overlayer and load-induced deformations of the graphene coating might take place at low loads. A similar effect was previously observed for graphene-coated sharp AFM probes prepared by dip coating, The elementary dissipation mechanisms were explored through load-dependent atomic-scale friction force spectroscopy. Representative lateral force maps acquired respectively on HOPG, and by means of the 'coated probe 1' (see section 3.2) are shown in Figure The weak dependence of on results in ultrasmall friction coefficients ( ) for and , and a slightly higher value ( ) for HOPG. However, a condition of nearly vanishing friction strictly occurred only for the homojunction under the lowest (tensile) loads, i.e. . This was in fact clearly signaled by the evolution of the lateral force loops, from (dissipative) stick-slip to continuous (superlubric) sliding, on reducing the load (Figure For the homojunction, however, nearly continuous superlubric sliding is possible since, for such interface, assumes the smaller values ( ) and the contact may transition from stick-slip to continuous superlubric sliding thanks to a loadcontrolled reduction of . Note that the working temperature of the experiments allows the transition to be observed around (thermolubricity), rather than at as predicted by the athermal ( ) PT model. On the other hand, at the contact heterojunctions enter a multi-slip regime. The phenomenology depicted above shares several similarities with the case of colloidal AFM probes coated by triboinduced graphitic transfer layers. The tight correspondence between the two systems thus points to the ubiquitous role of interfacial graphitic nanoasperities as key players for solid lubrication in the explored friction regime. The widespread applicability of our results is related to the fact that nanoroughness not only characterizes the wet-transferred graphene flakes prepared in this work, but also the morphology of 2D flakes transferred on solid supports by means of other protocols. In fact, wet-transferred flakes commonly display heterogeneous stacking, as well as folds, cracks and wrinkles. In summary, we addressed the nature of the elementary energy dissipation mechanisms, together with the appearance of superlubricity, in sliding contacts lubricated by wet-transferred graphene flakes. Our tribological system comprises graphenecoated colloidal AFM probes sled against graphite, or single-crystal substrates under ambient conditions. We show that the random stacking of the wet-transferred FLG flakes gives sizeable differences in the load-bearing capacity from probe to probe, albeit a prominent reduction of interfacial adhesion is always observed for all the coated probes. This naturally arises from the coating nanoroughness, that reduces the effective contact area between the coated probe and the substrates from meso-to nanoscale. We also demonstrate that energy dissipation occurs via atomic-scale stick-slip instabilities, likely governed by the potential energy landscape experienced by one dominant graphitic nanocontact. Nearly continuous superlubric sliding is observed under low loads for graphitic homojunctions, indicating that in such case interfacial pinning phenomena may disappear in favor of structural lubricity effects. This description shares relevant similarities with the superlubricity machanism recently elucidated for graphenecoated probes prepared by triboinduced material transfer, thus contributing to define a general framework for solid lubrication by FLG flakes. The thermally-activated single-asperity PT model is shown to provide a comprehensive description of the main experimental results. Our work establishes experimental procedures and key concepts that enable superlubricity by wet-transferred liquid-processed graphene flakes. The proposed methodology is suitable to address the friction performance of other nanomaterials prepared by scalable production routes targeting hi-tech mechanical applications. The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/XXXXXXXX SEM micrographs of AFM probes prepared by dip coating (Figure 