residual stresses, and also in the use of silica substrates. nanoindentation, where ES is the substrate Young's modulus, S is the substrate Poisson's ratio, hS is the substrate thickness, h is the film thickness, and RO and RC are measured radii of curvature before and after thin-film deposition, respectively. The equi-biaxial tensile R is estimated at 34.6±11.5 MPa (average and standard deviation of six specimens). This average R are put into the following XRD sin 2  relation to calculate EF of the thin film: 16 where n is the slope of fitted line to the interplanar d-spacing vs. sin 2  data, and dO is the yintercept. Figure However, the MOSS and the XRD sin 2  measurements were for thin films on Si and glass substrates, respectively. Also, no effort was made to measure E from those data in that paper.) According to Eqn. 1, the predicted R in MAPbI3 thin film, with a CTE of ~5010 -6 °C-1 (ref. 17) on Si, with a CTE of ~2.610 To study the possible relaxation of the MAPbI3 thin films at room temperature, timedependent R and R measurements using MOSS and XRD sin 2 , respectively, were performed, as described in the SI. Figure Methylammonium Lead Perovskites Using X-ray Diffraction. Inorg. Chem. 54, 10678 (2015). 18. Bartl, G.; Elster, C.; Martin, J.; Schödel, R.; Voigt, M.; Walkov, A.: Thermal Expansion and Compressibility of Single-Crystal Silicon Between 285 K and 320 K. Measur. Sci. Technol. 31, 065013 (2020). MAPbI3 precursor solution was prepared by dissolving methylammonium iodide (MAI; Greatcell, Australia) and Pb(II) iodide (PbI2; 99.99%, TCI) in stoichiometric (1:1) ratio in a mixed solvent of 9:1 volume ratio of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF; 99.8%, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; 99.7%, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in a N2-filled glovebox. Double-side polished Si <100> wafers with 0.2 mm thickness and 25.4 mm diameter (University Wafer, USA) were used as substrates. The polished surfaces had thermally grown oxide (~300 nm thickness) on each side. The substrates were cleaned sequentially in ultrasonic baths of detergent solution, DI water, acetone, and isopropanol. They were subsequently UV-ozone treated for 20 min before thinfilm deposition. The MAPbI3 thin films (475-500 nm thickness) were deposited on the pre-cleaned substrates by spin-coating the precursor solution at 4,000 rpm for 20 s. Diethyl ether (Sigma Aldrich, USA) antisolvent (250 μL) was dripped at the center of the film after 10 s of spinning. The as-deposited films were then annealed at 100 °C for 10 min on a hot-plate. All the thin films were prepared in a humidity controlled dry-box (11% RH). The top-surfaces of the MAPbI3 thin films were observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM; Quattro ESEM, ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). The linear-intercept method was used on representative SEM micrographs to determine the grain sizes of the MAPbI3 thin films. The naturally formed grooves between grains were assumed to represent the grain boundaries. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed to confirm the phase purity of all the MAPbI3 thin using a 2D diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation; Discovery D8, Bruker, Germany) in air. XRD sin 2 ψ: Using the well-established and internally-consistent XRD sin 2 ψ method the equi-biaxial tensile strains (R) in the MAPbI3 thin films were determined using six different specimens in air. The (224) Bragg reflection in the XRD patter was used. The following relation was applied: where n is the slope of the linear fits to the (224) interplanar spacing d224 vs. sin 2 ψ data, dO is d spacing at ψ = 0 (y-intercept), and ν is the MAPbI3 Poisson's ratio. XRD patterns at different ψ angles (0° to 45°) were collected and the systematic shift in the ( Multi-Beam Optical Stress Sensor (MOSS): The MOSS (k-Space, USA) technique was employed to measure the residual stress (R) in the MAPbI3 thin films in air by measuring the change of curvature of the substrate before and after thin-film deposition. Substrate backside reflective surface was used to measure the change in multi-beam spacings due to the change in curvatures. The position and the alignment of the samples were carefully monitored while measuring the change of curvature. The steady-state curvature measurements were preformed ~12 min after the deposition was complete, and average from the first 60 s of curvature-change measurements were used for subsequent calculations. The Stoney equation (Eqn. 2) was used to calculate the thin film stress from the change in film curvature. 