In a magnetic field, vortices significantly contribute to the dark counts of singlephoton detectors made of superconducting wires, and they are also limiting the critical current of such devices. To address this issue, we prepared superconducting microwires with a pinhole grid from WSi thin films and report on corresponding critical-current and count-rate measurements in an external magnetic field B. When compared to corresponding devices without pinholes, the critical current only weakly depends on the magnetic field at B < 16 mT and it is even larger already at B > 10 mT. Moreover, dark counts are not only suppressed in zero field, but particularly in magnetic fields B < 16 mT, while photon counts are virtually field insensitive in the same range of the magnetic field. After more than two decades of research since the first experimental report in 2001 It is well known that defects, such as artificial holes, can trap vortices and hinder their motion, thereby increasing the current-carrying capability of a superconducting film The fabrication of our devices started with the preparation of a 2-nm thin WSi film by co-sputtering from W and Si targets in argon atmosphere a 3-inch silicon wafer with a 50 nm thermally oxidized SiO2 layer. The stoichiometry of the WSi thin film was determined by EDX to W0.59Si0.41 with a sheet resistance of ≈ 1000 Ω/□. The 1-μm wide meander-shaped wires were patterned by electron-beam lithography at 20kV acceleration voltage on 60 nm PMMA A2 resist, followed by reactive ion etching in SF6. Figure The temperature dependence of the resistances of both samples are shown in Figure Fig. The difference in the critical-current characteristics between the two detectors in magnetic fields between ≈ -40 mT and +40 mT is depicted in Figure We have also compared the dark-count rates of the two detectors by varying the bias current and the magnetic field. The Figures magnetic fields, respectively. For the normal meander, the bias current was rescaled according to the resistance ratio in the normal state to have comparable effective wire widths and current densities. In the normal meander, there is a strong shift in the corresponding DCR data towards low bias currents with increasing magnetic field (Fig. vs. magnetic field for the pinhole meander for selected constant bias currents. As expected from the data displayed in Fig. We have measured the photon count rates (PCR) of both detectors, as shown in Figure Finally, we examined the single-photon detection behaviour of the pinhole meander at a lower photon energy. In Fig. To summarize, we investigated the properties of a superconducting microwire pinhole meander, showing single-photon detection and dark-count properties that are significantly different from those of normal microwire meander detectors Although we did not observe saturated photon counting behaviour, our results suggest that geometric modifications of microwire single-photon detectors can dramatically alter the physical properties and potentially improve photon detection performance, particularly in a magnetic environment. We mention that the chosen pinhole density corresponds to a matching field (i.e., the magnetic field where the vortex density matches the hole density) of ≈ 45 mT. Although this is in the region of the magnetic fields applied in this study, it has been suggested that it may be the hole size that determines the width of the magnetic field window with a plateau in the critical current of superconducting microwires 