Stoichiometric Cr2Se3 single crystals are particular layer-structured antiferromagnets which possess noncolinear spin configuration, weak ferromagnetic moments, moderate magnetoresistance (MR14.3%), and bad metallic conductivity below the antiferromagnetic phase transition temperature. Here, we report an interesting >16000% colossal magnetoresistance (CMR) effect in Ti (1.5 atomic percent) lightly-doped Cr2Se3 single crystals. Such a CMR is approximately 1143 times larger than that of the stoichiometric Cr2Se3 crystals and is rarely observed in layered antiferromagnets and is attributed to the frustrated spin configuration. Moreover, the Ti doping not only dramatically changes the electronic conductivity of the Cr2Se3 crystal from a bad metal to a semiconductor with a gap of ~ 15 meV, but also induces a change of the magnetic anisotropy of the Cr2Se3 crystal from strong out-of-plane to weak in plane. Further, magnetotransport measurements reveal that the low-field MR scales with the square of the reduced magnetization, which is a signature of CMR materials. The layered Ti:Cr2Se3 with CMR effect could be used as 2D heterostructure building blocks to provide colossal negative MR in spintronic devices. The magnetism of materials is carried by electron spin which offers a new degree of freedom of electronic transport properties, therefore providing more applications in spintronic devices. One of the most important electronic transport behaviors in magnetic materials (e.g., magnetic multilayers or cluster-alloys) is the giant magnetoresistance (GMR) MR is usually expressed as a function of the magnetic field B at a certain temperature T: MR(B) = [R(B) -R(0)]/R(0), where R(B) and R(0) are the resistance of a material in the presence and absence of the magnetic field B, respectively. In most cases, MR values of materials are between moderate negative MR to giant or extremely large positive MR (-50% -110 7 %), where MR and resistance change R = R(B) -R(0) show similarly shaped curves with B. However, in the giant negative MR (CMR included) realm, where R(B) << R(0), MR is no longer a good representative of the negative resistance correction phenomenon. In this case, CMR(B) = [R(0) -R(B)]/R(B) is introduced to highlight the dramatical resistance decrease with applied magnetic fields. One of the famous CMR material family is R1-xAxMnO3 whose maximum CMR of a few hundred percent could be achieved around the metal-toinsulator phase transition region Based on the principle of searching for CMR materials, we focus on a particular rhombohedral layered material system: chromium selenide Cr2Se3. Cr2Se3 crystallizes in a Crvacant NiAs-type lattice where the vacant chromium sites are ordered, leading to very delicate electronic and magnetic structure depending on the Cr concentration. As a candidate thermoelectric material, polycrystal Cr2Se3 shows a figure of merit ZT ~0.25 at ~600 K reported that both the paramagnetic fitted effective magnetic moments and the temperature dependent magnetization behaviors change significantly with a very small variation in x for Cr2+xSe3 polycrystalline samples. The slightly non-stoichiometric Cr2.04Se3 single crystals has been reported as a two-dimensional magnetic semiconductor with a band gap ~8 meV and a significant CMR ~ 300% at T=2 K and anomalous Hall effect at low temperatures In this paper, we employ the chemical vapor transport (CVT) method to grow high quality 1.5 at% Ti-doped Cr2Se3 (Ti:Cr2Se3) (1.5 at% is the nomination doping ratio) single crystals and investigated the electronic transport and magnetic properties of the crystals. Magnetotransport and magnetic measurements show that a small amount of Ti doping not only induces an unprecedented negative CMR~10 4 % in the Ti:Cr2Se3, but also dramatically changes the electronic conductivity behaviors and magnetic anisotropy, as discussed in the sections that follow. Our results demonstrate that the Ti-doping is a highly effective approach to induce negative CMR effect in the layered Cr2Se3. High-quality Ti:Cr2Se3 single crystals were grown by the CVT method using the iodine (I2) as a transport agent. Briefly, high-purity Ti, Cr, and Se powders (200 mesh) with a nomination molar ratio of 0.03:1.97:3 and a total mass of 1 g, together with 20 mg/ml iodine, were sealed in a vacuum ampoule as the starting materials. The crystal growth was carried out in a horizontal two-zone furnace between 950 C (source) and 850 C (sink) for one week and furnace cooled to room temperature. Plane-shaped single crystals with a typical size of 350.5 mm 3 were obtained, as shown in the inset of Figure The crystallographic properties of the Ti:Cr2Se3 crystals were characterized using a Rigaku SmartLab x-ray diffractometer equipped with Cuk1 radiation and a Tecnai G2 F20 S-Twin transmission electron microscope. The chemical composition and element mapping were measured using an energy dispersive x-ray spectrometer (EDS) (Oxford AztecLive UltimMax 80) installed on a FEI focused ion beam system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Scios2). Raman spectra were recorded on a Raman spectrometer equipped with a 532 nm laser (Witec Alpha300R) as an excitation source at room temperature. Ohmic contacts were prepared on fresh surface of Ti:Cr2Se3 single crystals using roomtemperature cured silver paste. The magnetotransport and magnetic properties were measured in two different configurations: 1) the direction of the magnetic field perpendicular to the ab plane of the crystals, and 2) the direction of the magnetic field parallel to the ab plane of the crystals, using a physical property measurement system (DynaCool-14, Quantum Design) and a magnetic property measurement system (MPMS3, Quantum Design), respectively. The CVT crystal growth process employed here is slightly different from that employed for growing the metallic stoichiometric Cr2Se3 single crystals which were grown from a mixture of Cr and Se powders with 5:4 molar ratio For the Cr2-Se3 compounds, the Cr concentration is a key factor to determine the magnetic and electronic transport properties. The stoichiometric Cr2Se3 crystals show bad metallic conductivity behaviors (R300 K/R3 K ~ 2) Let's focus on the in-plane magnetization versus temperature (M-T) curves with an applied magnetic field of 0.05 T. There is another magnetic transition (probably from the hightemperature antiferromagnetic phase to low-temperature antiferromagnetic phase Although there are similarities between the magnetic properties of the Ti:Cr2Se3 crystals and the stoichiometric Cr2Se3 crystals Further, we conducted temperature dependent resistance measurements on the Ti:Cr2Se3 crystal under magnetic fields with their direction parallel to the ab plane and perpendicular to the electric current direction and show the results in log-log scale in Figure To study the magnetotransport anisotropy properties of the Ti:Cr2Se3 crystal, we further conducted magnetotransport measurements on the crystal with the directions of the magnetic field perpendicular to the ab plane and along the electric current direction (Figure One can obtain the magnetization contributed by WFM by subtracting the antiferromagnetic background, as shown in Figure In order to figure out the origin of the CMR effect, some classic CMR materials should be recalled. For R1-xAxMnO3 manganites, CMR usually occurs near the paramagnetic-toferromagnetic phase transition temperature TC (usually 0.8 -1.2 TC) above which the shortrange magnetic ordering as well as the magnetic polarons forms Recently, the chiral-anomaly-induced giant negative MR in Dirac semimetals of Cd3As2 Another interesting low-temperature CMR effect has been reported in iodine-doped transition metal dichalcogenide TiTe2-xIx system whose MR reaches -85% (or CMR ~ -567%) at B=5 T and T=10 K for x=1. TiTe2-xIx are also layered compounds which show antiferromagnet ordering at ~90 K and whose electronic transport properties depend on the iodine doping level, quite similar to those of the layered Cr2+xSe3 system. For TiTe2-xIx crystals, CMR is due to the frustrated antiferromagnetic coupling of Ti 3+ moments as well as the band gap opening induced spin-dependent scatterings We have grown high quality layer structured Ti0.023Cr2.002Se3.000 single-crystal antiferromagnets using the chemical vapor transport method and investigated the magnetic and magnetotransport properties of the crystals. A light Ti (1.5 at%) doping dramatically changes the electronic conductivity and magnetic anisotropy of the Cr2Se3 crystal from a bad metal with high magnetic anisotropy (Ref. 21) to a narrow band gap insulator with negligible magnetic anisotropy of Ti:Cr2Se3 crystal. Upon the application of a magnetic field of 14 T to the Ti:Cr2Se3 crystal with the direction of the magnetic field either parallel or perpendicular to the ab plane, a colossal negative magnetoresistance of ~ 16000% is achieved at 2 K, which is 1143 time larger than that of the stoichiometric Cr2Se3 single crystals without Ti doping (Ref. ). Such a huge negative CMR is attributed to the Ti-doping enhanced frustrated spin configuration. Magnetotransport measurements demonstrate that the low-field MR at low temperatures scales with the square of the reduced magnetization. Our results demonstrate that the Ti-doping is a high effective approach to modify the electronic and magnetic properties of Cr2Se3. The Ti-doped layer structured Ti:Cr2Se3 with colossal negative CMR functionality may be used as building blocks in spintronic devices. The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at *E-mail: zrk@ustc.edu (R. K. Zheng) *E-mail: weiyao.zhao@monash.edu (W. Zhao) 