Spin relaxation, dephasing and diffusion are at the heart of spin-based information technology. Accurate theoretical approaches to simulate spin lifetimes (τs), determining how fast the spin polarization and phase information will be lost, are important to the understandings of underlying mechanism of these spin processes, and invaluable to search for promising candidates of spintronic materials. Recently, we develop a first-principles real-time density-matrix (FPDM) approach to simulate spin dynamics for general solid-state systems. Through the complete first-principles' descriptions of light-matter interaction and scattering processes including electron-phonon, electronimpurity and electron-electron scatterings with self-consistent spin-orbit coupling, as well as ab initio Landé g-factor, our method can predict τs at various conditions as a function of carrier density and temperature, under electric and magnetic fields. By employing this method, we successfully reproduce experimental results of disparate materials and identify the key factors affecting spin relaxation, dephasing, and diffusion in different materials. Specifically, we predict that germanene has long τs (∼100 ns at 50 K), a giant spin lifetime anisotropy and spin-valley locking effect under electric fields, making it advantageous for spin-valleytronic applications. Based on our theoretical derivations and ab initio simulations, we propose a new useful electronic quantity, named spin-flip angle θ ↑↓ , for the understanding of spin relaxation through intervalley spin-flip scattering processes. Our method can be further applied to other emerging materials and extended to simulate exciton spin dynamics and steady-state photocurrents due to photogalvanic effect. In last two decades, spintronics in unconventional semiconductors and metals, including two-dimensional materials and their heterostructures Spin is an unconserved quantity in solids due to its coupling with other quantities, such as electron orbital. Therefore, after excess spins being generated, spin can loose its polarization (relaxation) and phase (dephasing) due to coupling with environment. One critical parameter describing the timescale of such processes is spin lifetime τ s including T 1 (relaxation) and T 2 (dephasing), which is often required to be sufficiently long for stable detection and manipulation of spin. Accurate and reliable theoretical approaches to simulate τ s are demanded for the detailed understandings of spin dynamics and transport phenomena, and designing new spintronics ma- * yping3@wisc.edu terials and devices. Previously, methods based on model Hamiltonian with empirical parameters On the other hand, the existing first-principles methodology for τ s has been mostly based on Fermi's Golden rule To overcome these challenges, we recently developed a first-principles real-time density-matrix (FPDM) approach In this article, we briefly introduce the theory and implementation of our method, present its applications and show its predictive power using a two-dimensional Dirac material -Germanene as a showcase. Through detailed theoretical analysis, we show how ab-initio simulations improve our understandings of spin relaxation mechanisms and are used to identify the key quantities and/or factors to spin relaxation, dephasing, and diffusion. At the end, we discuss how our FPDM approach can be generalized/extended to simulate spin dynamics of excitons, instead of free carriers, and transport properties such as photocurrent and spin currents in broken inversion systems (photogalvanic effect). A. Density-matrix (DM) master equation To provide a general formulation of quantum dynamics in solid-state materials, we start from the Liouville-von Neumann equation in the Schrödinger picture, where H, H 0 , and H ′ are total, unperturbed and perturbation Hamiltonians respectively. In this work, where H e , H ph and H photon are unperturbed singleparticle electronic, phonon, and photon Hamiltonian respectively. H e-light is the light-matter interaction term. H e-ph , H e-i and H e-e describe the electron-phonon (eph), electron-impurity (e-i), and electron-electron (e-e) interaction, respectively. In practice, the many-body density matrix in Eq. 1 is reduced to one-particle density matrix for electrons, where the environmental degree of freedom is traced out where [H, ρ] = Hρ -ρH. dρ dt | coh describes the coherent dynamics of electrons including the free-particle dynamics, the field-induced dynamics, etc. dρ dt | scatt captures the scattering between electrons and other particles. Their detailed forms are given in the subsections below. To obtain Eq. 5 which involves only the dynamics of electrons or the electronic subsystem, we have assumed the environmental subsystem is characterized by a huge number of degrees of freedom and is not perturbed by the electronic subsystem; in this work it means there is no dynamics of phonons and photons. Formally this is the prerequisite for the Markovian approximation. This assumption is valid when the system is not far from initial equilibrium, e.g., the excited carrier density is not very high. The inclusion of dynamics of the environment, e.g. phonon degrees of freedom in the dynamics, or formally non-Markovian approximation by taking into account the memory effect of phonon bath, has been discussed in details in Refs. 22, 25. In general, a coherent term corresponding to a singleparticle electronic Hamiltonian H sp reads In absence of external fields, the coherent dynamics contains only one term H e is the unperturbed electronic Hamiltonian, practically computed at the mean-field level, i.e. from density functional theory (DFT). With the electronic eigen-basis, where k is k-point index, m and n are band indices, ε is the single-particle energy, and δ mn is Kronecker delta function. Therefore, we have We note that the exchange-correlation potential in electronic Hamiltonian could be time-dependent, which will introduce an additional term in coherent dynamics The inclusion of external fields in the DM approach for solid-state materials is not trivial and was studied by many theorists since 1950s 2.1 A laser field. In this work, we approximate that the light-mater interaction H e-light consists of two parts -a semiclassical part H laser describing electrons moving in a laser field (i.e., an electromagnetic field caused by the incident laser) and a quantum part describing the electron-photon interaction in the vacuum without considering the laser. The semiclassical part corresponds to light absorption and stimulated emission under a laser field, while the quantum part corresponds to spontaneous emission. We discuss the coherent term due to the semiclassical part first but discuss the quantum part in the next subsection. The Hamiltonian of a laser with frequency ω laser is approximately where H.C. is Hermitian conjugate. A laser (t) is the amplitude. A laser (t) is real (complex) for linearly (circularly) polarized light. p kmn is the momentum operator matrix element. Note that to include the contribution from the nonlocal part of the pseudopotentials, momentum operator is computed with commutator [r, H e ] = ∇. For a Gaussian pump pulse centered at time t center with width τ pump , Note that the corresponding pump power is , where α is fine structure constant. The corresponding dynamics is 2.2 A static electric field along a non-periodic direction. Such electric field along non-periodic direction E np is directly included in the DFT calculation and is modeled by a ramp or saw-like potential. Under such treatment, H e is E np -dependent. As all terms of the master equation (Eq. 5) are built on eigensystems from H e , they are all E np -dependent. However, if electric field is applied along the periodic direction, one needs to properly treat the periodic boundary condition (e.g. using the modern theory of polarization 2.3 A magnetic field. We describe the effects of an external magnetic field B ext using Zeeman Hamiltonian where μ B is Bohr magneton; g 0 is the free-electron gfactor; S and L are the spin and orbital angular momentum respectively. The simulation of L is nontrivial for periodic systems. With the Blöch basis, the orbital angular momentum reads where u is the periodic part of the single-particle wavefunction; H e (B ext = 0) is the zero-field Hamiltonian operator. Eqs. 14 -15 can be proven equivalent to L = 0.5 * (r × pp × r) with r the position operator. The detailed implementation of Eq. 14 is described in Ref. There are two ways to consider magnetic-field effects. The first way is including H Z,k (B ext ) in H e perturbatively (instead of self-consistently), then the new eigensystems can be obtained by diagonalizing H e (B ext ̸ = 0). The second way is including In practice, the two approaches lead to nearly the same dynamical quantities such as lifetimes, since H Z,k (B ext ) is rather weak -e.g. Zeeman splitting under 1 Tesla is of order 0.1 meV for many solid-state systems. In addition, we note that we do not consider the effect of very strong magnetic field such as the appearance of Landau level in this work. The scattering part of quantum master equation can be separated into contributions from several scattering channels, where c labels a scattering channel corresponding to an interaction Hamiltonian H c . Under Born-Markov approximation and neglecting renormalization of single particle energies, in general we have where P c is the generalized scattering matrix and H.C. denotes Hermitian conjugate. The subindex, e.g., "1", is the combined index of k-point and band. The weights of k points must be considered when summing over k points. 3.1 Electron-phonon. The electron-phonon (e-ph) scattering matrix is given by where q and λ are phonon wavevector and mode, g qλ± is the e-ph matrix element, resulting from the absorption (-) or emission (+) of a phonon, n ± qλ = n qλ + 0.5 ± 0.5 in terms of phonon Bose factors n qλ , and δ G σ represents an energy conserving δ-function broadened to a Gaussian of width σ. The explicit derivation of Lindblandian dynamics and scattering matrix can be found in Ref. 3.2 Electron-impurity. Similar to the e-ph scattering, we write electron-impurity scattering as where n i and V cell are impurity density and unit cell volume, respectively, V i is the potential of the impurity system and V 0 is the potential of the pristine system. Here we assume impurities are randomly distributed and impurity density is sufficiently low so that the average distance between neighboring impurities is sufficiently long with nearly no interactions among impurities. In this work, g i of neutral and ionized impurities are computed differently as follows. For neutral impurities, V i is computed with SOC using a large supercell including an impurity. To speed up the supercell convergence, we used the potential alignment method developed in Ref. For ionized impurities, we approximate ∆V i as the potential of point charge and is simply the product of the impurity charge Z and the screened Coulomb potential 3.3 Electron-electron interaction. The e-e scattering matrix is given by where V (r -r ′ ) is the screened Coulomb potential and ) is a Gaussian-broadened energy conservation function. The screening is described by Random-Phase-Approximation (RPA) dielectric function. We note that unlike the e-ph and e-i channels, P e-e is a function of ρ and needs to be updated during time evolution of ρ. This is a clear consequence of the twoparticle nature of e-e scattering. P e-e can be written as the difference between a direct term (P e-e,d ) and an exchange term (P e-e,x ), P e-e =P e-e,d -P e-e,x , According to Ref. where ε s is the static dielectric constant well-defined for insulators, calculated by Density Functional Perturbation Theory (DFPT) where the sum runs over only states having free carriers, e.g., for a n-doped semiconductor, m and n are conduction band indices. In the formula above, f is time-dependent non-equilibrium occupation instead of the equilibrium one f eq . Therefore, if the optical field A laser (t) is activated, ε intra (q) will be updated in every time step, as f will differ from f eq and the difference depends on the excitation density. V bare (q) = e 2 / V cell ε 0 |q| 2 is the bare Coulomb potential with ε 0 vacuum permittivity. We then have the matrix elements in reciprocal space, g e-e 1234 =V scr (q 13 ) δ k1+k2,k3+k4 ⟨u V scr (q 13 ) =V bare (q 13 ) /ε (q 13 ) , where V scr (q) is the screened Coulomb potential and q 13 = k 1 -k 3 . ⟨u 1 |u 3 ⟩ is the overlap matrix element between two periodic parts of Bloch wave functions. (iv) Spontaneous emission. As discussed above, in this work, the light-matter interaction consists of a semiclassical part (absorption and simulated emission by a laser field) and a quantum part. The semiclassical part has been discussed above (Sec. II A 2). Here we discuss the quantum part, which describes the electron-photon interaction in the vacuum. Similar to the electronphonon scattering, we write a similar form for electronphoton interaction (the underlying consideration on positive definition of density matrix is similar) where " +" and " -" correspond to photon emission and absorption respectively, λ is the photon mode, g photon,qλ± 13 is the electron-photon matrix element proportional to p matrix element. The differences from P e-ph are: (i) As ω photon is comparable to the band gap which is much greater than k B T , n photon,- qλ ≈ 0 and n photon,+ qλ ≈ 1. This represents that photon absorption is not allowed in vacuum, and every photon emission process emits one photon. (ii) As photon momentum q is tiny (at long wavelength limit), for A photon The detailed form of P sp-em 1234 will be given in our future work. In most spin lifetime τ s experiments, τ s of ensemble spins are measured. The spin observable of an ensemble is where s i is spin Pauli matrix in Blöch basis along direction i. For spin dynamics, the total excited or excess spin observable is often more relevant and is defined as, where "eq" corresponds to the final equilibrium state. The time evolution must start at an initial state (at t = t 0 ) with a net spin i.e. δρ(t 0 ) = ρ(t 0 ) -ρ eq ̸ = 0 such that S ex i (t) ̸ = 0. We evolve ρ (t) through the quantum master equation Eq. 5 for a long enough simulation time, typically from a few ps to a few hundred ns, until the evolution of S ex i (t) can be reliably fitted by × cos [ω (t -t 0 ) + φ] to extract the relaxation time, τ s,i . Above, ω is oscillation frequency due to Larmor precession. In Ref. Historically, spin relaxation time (or longitudinal time) T 1 and ensemble spin dephasing time (or transverse time) T * 2 were used to characterize the decay of spin ensemble 2 ). For T * 2 , the excess spin S ex (t) precesses with a frequency proportional to |B 0 |. The ensemble spin dephasing rate 1/T * 2 consists of reversible part and irreversible part. The reversible part may be removed by the spin echo technique. The irreversible part is called spin dephasing rate 1/T 2 , which must be smaller than 1/T * 2 . According to Ref. 42, T 2 may be also defined using Eq. 43 without the need of spin echo but instead of S tot i (t), we need another quantity -the sum of individual spin amplitudes 2. Optical measurements Experimentally, τ s is often studied through ultrafast magneto-optical pump-probe measurements The probe pulse interacts with the material similarly to the pump pulse, and could be described in exactly the same way in principle. However, this would require repeating the simulation for several values of the pumpprobe delay. Instead, since the probe is typically chosen to be of sufficiently low intensity, we use second-order time-dependent perturbation theory to capture its interaction with the system The change of dielectric function ∆ε between the excited state and ground state absorption detected by the probe is then Note that ∆ρ probe contains |A probe | 2 so that Im∆ε is independent of A probe . The Im∆ε above is a functional of ρ according to Eq. 44 and is an extension of the usual independent-particle Imε depending on just occupation function f Specifically, the Kerr rotation angle θ K is computed with dielectric functions by where ± denotes the left and right circular polarization, respectively. As shown in Fig. (i) DFT step. The ground-state electronic structure, phonons, as well as the e-ph and e-i matrix elements are firstly calculated using density functional theory (DFT) with relatively coarse k and q meshes in the DFT plane-wave code JDFTx (ii) Wannier step. We then transform all quantities from plane wave basis to maximally localized Wannier function basis (iii) Dynamics step. Starting from an initial state with a spin imbalance, we evolve ρ (t) through the quantum master equation of Eq. 5. After obtaining spin observable S (t) from ρ (t) (Eq. 40) and fitting S (t) to an exponentially oscillating decay curve (Eq. 43), the decay constant τ s is obtained. This part is performed in the DMD code interfacing with the JDFTx code. 4.1 Semiclassical limit and carrier lifetime. At the semiclassical limit, ρ is replaced by (non-equilibrium) occupation f , then the scattering term originally with a full quantum description in Eq. 17 required by DM dynamics becomes using the facts that P 11,22 is real and "2=1" term is zero. "c" represent a scattering channel. Note that the weights of k points must be considered when summing over k points. Suppose f is perturbed from its equilibrium value by δf , i.e., f = f eq + δf , then insert f after perturbation into Eq. 49 and linearize it, using the fact that δP 11,22 is always zero, even for the e-e scattering. Define carrier/particle lifetime of state "1" τ c p,1 by , we have The linewidth or the imaginary part of self-energy for the scattering channel c is related to τ c p by ImΣ c 1 = ħ/ 2τ c p,1 . The DM approach has been widely employed to simulate transport properties In this work, l s are obtained from first-principles using the commonly-used relation where D is the diffusion coefficient of carriers calculated using the generalized Einstein relation where i = x, y, z. N k is the number of k points. V u is the unit cell volume. n c is electron density. [f eq ] ′ is the derivative of the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. v is the band velocity. τ m is the momentum relaxation time and is approximated as where v is the velocity vector. We find that τ m is similar to the carrier lifetime τ p except the angle factor cosθ 12 . Through studying the relations between τ s and important electronic quantities, switching on/off certain dynamic processes, or tuning the key factors affecting spin dynamics, our FPDM method is a powerful technique to determine spin relaxation mechanism and quantitatively predict spin lifetime in different materials at various conditions. There are several mechanisms causing spin relaxation and dephasing of electron carriers in non-magnetic systems We first define some important spin-related properties in spin dynamics. The spin expectation value along i direction is defined as the diagonal element of spin matrix s i , i.e., Note that for degenerate bands, the matrix elements of s i are arbitrary, thus, we need to diagonalize s i matrix in degenerate subspaces. The spin texture presents when the spin up and down degeneracy (Kramers pair) is lifted (e.g., due to broken inversion symmetry), and is the distribution of the spin expectation value vector S exp ≡ S exp x , S exp y , S exp z . Suppose originally a system has time-reversal and inversion symmetries, so that every two bands form a Kramers degenerate pair. Suppose the k-dependent spin matrix vectors in Bloch basis of the Kramers degenerate pairs are s 0 k with s ≡ (s x , s y , s z ). The inversion symmetry broken induces k-dependent Hamiltonian terms where B in k is the so-called internal magnetic fields at presence of SOC. B in splits the degenerate pair and polarizes the spin along its direction. The definition of where ∆ is the band splitting energy. From Eq. 59, S exp k ||B in k (internal magnetic field B in k is along the spin texture direction S exp k ). EY mechanism dominates spin relaxation when spinup and spin-down are well defined (in absence of spin precession), so that it dominates in two types of systems: (i) Materials with both time-reversal and spatial inversion symmetries, e.g., silicon, free-standing graphene in absence of external fields. With such symmetries, every two bands form a Kramers degenerate pair 1. Fermi's golden rule (FGR) 1.1 FGR with spin-flip transitions According to Ref. where g ↑↓ is the spin-flip e-ph matrix element between two electronic states of opposite spins, n q,λ is phonon occupation at momentum q and mode λ, and f eq is Fermi-Dirac distribution function. We will further discuss g ↑↓ in the next subsection. According to Eq. 60 and 61, τ -1 s is proportional to |g ↑↓ q | 2 and also the density of the spin-flip transitions. Therefore we propose a temperature (T ) and chemical potential (ε μ F ) dependent effective modulus square of the spin-flip e-ph matrix element | g ↑↓ | 2 and a scattering density of states D S as where ω c is the characteristic phonon energy chosen as the averaged energy of the phonons contributing to spin relaxation, and w k,k-q is the weight function. The matrix element modulus square is weighted by n qλ according to Eq. 60 and 61. This rules out high-frequency phonons at low T which are not excited. w k,k-q selects transitions between states separated by ω c and around the band edge or ε μ F , which are "more relevant" transitions to spin relaxation. D S can be regarded as an effective density of spinflip e-ph transitions satisfying energy conservation between one state and its pairs. When ω c = 0, we have D S = dε -df eq dε D 2 (ε) / dε -df eq dε D (ε) with D (ε) density of electronic states (DOS). So D S can be roughly regarded as a weighted-averaged DOS with weight -df eq dε D (ε). With | g ↑↓ | 2 and D S , we have the approximate relation for spin relaxation rate, We can similarly define an effective spin conserving matrix element | g ↑↑ | 2 by replacing g ↑↓,qλ k,k-q to g ↑↑,qλ k,k-q in Eq. 62. Then we have the approximate relation for carrier relaxation rate due to e-ph scattering, Although such formula are not as general and accurate as our FPDM formulation, Eq. 65 and 66 can be used to understand the spin flip and spin conserving e-ph matrix element's relation to spin or carrier relaxation, and one can develop intuition on what type of phonons contribute more to | g ↑↑ | 2 or | g ↑↓ | 2 . As our recent studies show Frölich LO phonon strongly contributes to carrier relaxation in CsPbBr 3 , but much less important in its spin relaxation due to the spin-conserving nature of long-ranged Frölich electron-phonon coupling 1.2 Generalized FGR In centrosymmetric systems with strong spin-mixing and band degeneracy, S exp k may have multiple values. For example, valence bands of silicon at Γ are four-fold degenerate and their S exp k are (more precisely, very close to) ±1/2 and ±1/6. In such cases, spin relaxation may be still driven by EY mechanism but needs a generalized FGR formula where ∆S exp is the change of spin expectation value for a pair of electronic states. Therefore, the transitions with non-negligible ∆S exp can contribute to spin relaxation. Again, unlike our FPDM method, this is approximate formula, which can be used to understand how e-ph scattering between a pair of states changes spin expectation value as we showcase bulk Si hole spin relaxation in Ref. 17. 2.1 State-resolved b 2 . Suppose the spin of a state "1" is highly polarized along i direction. Then in general, the wavefunction of state "1" can be written as Ψ 1 (r) = a i,1 (r) α + b i,1 (r) β, where a and b are the coefficients of the large and small components of the wavefunction, and α and β are spinors (one up and one down for direction i). Define i,1 and b 2 i,1 is just spin-mixing parameter of state "1" along direction i Therefore, 2.2 EY relation. According to Eq. 60 and 66, we have where τ p = 1/ τ -1 p . As thermal averaging frequently appears in spin relaxation analysis, we define ⟨A⟩ as the thermal average of electronic quantity A, where [f eq ] ′ is the derivative of the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. According to Refs. 9, 65, 66, The above is a rough relation and cannot be used to predict τ s (the error may be several or even ten times). Practically, we use the following approximate relation This is called EY relation in this work. In our previous paper where A ↑↓ k1k2 and A ↓↓ k1k2 are the spin-flip and spinconserving matrix elements between k 1 and k 2 respectively. We present the detailed derivation in SI Sec. SIII of Ref. From Eq. 77, for the intervalley e-ph matrix elements, we have Finally, similar to Eq. 62, we propose an effective modulus square of sin 2 θ ↑↓ k1k2 /2 , We found spin relaxation time (obtained from our FPDM method) linearly proportional to this quantity (sin 2 (θ ↑↓ /2)) when intervalley spin relaxation process dominates, as an example of substrate effects on spin relaxation of strong SOC Dirac materials in Ref. C. Dyakonov-Perel (DP) and Free induction decay (FID) mechanisms For non-magnetic materials, with nonzero k-dependent internal magnetic field B in k induced by inversion symmetry broken and spin-orbit coupling, the spins at k precess about B in k . The Larmor precession frequency vector can be defined as: where S exp k is the normalized S exp k . We define Ω ⊥ r as the component of Ω perpendicular to direction r. Suppose the fluctuation amplitude among different k-points of Ω ⊥ r is ∆Ω ⊥ r and numerically we define it as (using Eq. 74) According to Refs. 7 and 8, a nonzero ∆Ω leads to finite spin lifetime τ ∆Ω s along r and the spin relaxation mechanism depends on the magnitude of τ p ∆Ω (i) DP mechanism if τ p ∆Ω ≪ 1 (strong scattering limit). We have the DP relation (ii) FID mechanism if τ p ∆Ω ≳ 1 (weak scattering limit). We have (iii) Between (i) and (ii) regimes, there isn't a good approximate relation for τ ∆Ω s -1 , but we may expect that Besides intrinsic spin-orbit coupling, one channel to induce nonzero ∆Ω is through g factor fluctuations under magnetic field. In Sec. II A 2, we have described how B ext is considered in FPDM approach, therefore, with H z (B ext ), the magnetic-field effects on spin dynamics are straightforwardly included in FPDM simulations. For the description of the magnetic-field effects, Landé g-factor has been widely used Here, for simplicity, we assume Ω k (B ext ) ||B ext , which is valid in many materials including CsPbBr 3 . With this assumption and from Eq. 80, Ω k (B ext ) is computed using Eq. 80. However, in many previous theoretical studies C S→J = m at S /m at J with m at J and m at S the total and spin magnetic momenta respectively, obtained from the atomic-orbital model As g k is different at different k, we can define its fluctuation amplitude as From the above equation, we have the fluctuation amplitude of A nonzero ∆Ω (B ext ) leads to spin dephasing under external magnetic field B ext and the mechanism may be DP or FID depending on the magnitude of τ p ∆Ω as discussed above. In general, the applicability of our FPDM approach does not depend on specific spin relaxation mechanism. To determine the dominant relaxation or dephasing mechanism, we have the following two approaches by utilizing our FPDM calculations. The first approach is to compare FPDM results directly with simple models designed for various mechanisms as introduced in previous two sections. If FPDM agrees with one of the model relations, it is a good indicator of dominant mechanism. 1.1 EY mechanism. Since spin precession is suppressed when EY mechanism dominates, the DM master equation in semiclassical limit from Eq. 49 and FGR formula with spin-flip scattering Eq. 60 should describe well spin relaxation (suppose spin matrix is diagonalized in degenerate subspaces along the direction of the excess spin). Therefore, if the values and trends of τ s by Eq. 49 and 60 are similar to those obtained from FPDM calculations, the dominating mechanism is likely the EY. 1.2 DP or FID mechanism. With nonzero ∆Ω, whether spin relaxation is dominated by DP or FID mechanism may be determined by comparing the values and trends of τ s by Eq. 82 or 83 with the FPDM results. We have shown the success of such analysis in our previous work on spin relaxation and transport in germanene and silicene under electric field Conventionally, spin relaxation mechanism is determined from the relation between τ s and τ p -EY mechanism leads to τ s ∝ τ p while DP mechanism leads to τ s ∝ τ -1 p . Another way to look at this is through tuning the strength of scatterings (e.g. physically, increasing impurity concentration increases scattering). If τ s decreases with increasing scattering, it's likely EY; otherwise, it's likely DP mechanism, because τ p always decreases with increasing scatterings. Practically in our FPDM calculations, this approach can be implemented by introducing a scaling factor F sc to tune the scattering strength, i.e. multiplying F sc to the scattering term dρ dt | scatt of the DM master equation (Eq. 5) but keep the coherent term (the first term of Eq. 5) unchanged. This is equivalent to multiply F sc to all elements of the generalized scattering-rate matrix P (Eq. 18, 21 and 25). To avoid confusions , we name carrier and spin lifetimes after introducing F sc as τ ′ s and τ ′ p respectively. According to Eq. 51, we always have τ ′ p /τ p = (F sc ) -1 . On the other hand, τ ′ s depends on the spin relaxation mechanism. For EY mechanism, τ ′ s /τ ′ p = τ s /τ p = C EY , where C EY is a constant unrelated to F sc . Therefore, it can be proven that τ ′ s /τ s = (F sc ) -1 = τ ′ p /τ p . Similarly, for DP mechanism, we can prove that τ ′ s /τ s = F sc = τ ′ p /τ p -1 . For FID mechanism, as τ ′ s is irrelevant to τ ′ p , we have τ ′ s /τ s ≡ 1. Therefore, the relation between τ ′ s /τ s and τ ′ p /τ p by tuning F sc is useful to understand spin relaxation mechanism. Moreover, the relation between τ s and ∆Ω is also useful to understand spin relaxation mechanism. ∆Ω can be tuned easily by tuning the energy splitting. We first present results for systems with inversion symmetry traditionally described by EY mechanism. Figure In ferromagnets and antiferromagnets, spins are highly polarized, so that spin relaxation is likely dominated by EY mechanism. In Ref. 17, we simulated τ s of bcc iron, where we found good agreement with experiments, with a dominant EY mechanism (magnon was not considered here). In nonmagnetic materials, when inversion symmetry is broken and SOC strength is moderate or large, it has been found that some of them such as transition metal dichalcogenides also have highly polarized carrier spins and exhibit EY spin relaxation. Monolayer TMDs exhibit exciting features including spin-polarized bands, valley-specific optical selection rules and spin-valley locking. In Ref. In Ref. For holes of monolayer WSe 2 , spin/valley relaxation is completely determined by intervalley spin-flip scattering between K and K ′ valleys because of spin-valley locking. Previously, we reported spin/valley lifetimes of resident holes of monolayer TMDs at T ≥50 K with e-ph scattering only the highest occupied band is involved in dynamics of TMD holes, for a e-e process, a K→K ′ (K ′ →K) spin-flip transition must be accompanied by an opposite K ′ →K (K→K ′ ) spin-flip transition. Overall, an e-e scattering process cannot change the spin of the system. Therefore, we will include only e-ph and e-i scatterings. Experimentally there exists many types of impurities/defects in TMD samples. Here we pick four types of impurities with different symmetries and chemical bonds (see Fig. From Fig. In Ref. We show band structures and spin textures of freestanding and supported ML-Ge in Fig. A finite E z or a substrate breaks the inversion symmetry and induces a strong out-of-plane B in (and also S exp , Eq. 59), which splits the Kramers pairs into spinup and spin-down bands We compare out-of-plane τ s due to e-ph scattering between the free-standing ML-Ge (with/without an electric field) and ML-Ge on different substrates in Fig. Since spins of ML-Ge at E z ̸ = 0 and on a substrate are highly polarized, spin relaxation in ML-Ge systems is dominated by EY mechanism caused by spin-flip scattering. According to Eq. 65 and 75, τ -1 s is roughly pro-portional to density of states (DOS) and spin-mixing parameter b 2 z . Indeed, in Ref. To have deeper intuitive understanding, we then pro-FIG. FIG. pose an important electronic quantity for intervalley spin-flip scattering -the spin-flip angle θ ↑↓ between two electronic states. For two states (k 1 , n 1 ) and (k 2 , n 2 ) with opposite spin directions, θ ↑↓ is the angle between -S exp k1n1 and S exp k2n2 or equivalently the angle between -B in k1 and B in k2 . At low T , due to large SOC splittings of conduction and valence bands of supported ML-Ge, intravalley spin-flip e-ph scattering processes are forbidden, because the corresponding phonons have too high energies and are not occupied. So spin relaxation in supported ML-Ge is dominated by intervalley spin-flip e-ph scattering. Therefore, θ ↑↓ is helpful for understanding spin relaxation in supported ML-Ge. The motivation of examining θ ↑↓ is that: Suppose two wavevectors k 1 and k 2 = -k 1 are in two opposite valleys Q and -Q respectively and there is a pair of bands, which are originally Kramers degenerate but splitted by B in . Due to time-reversal symmetry, we have B in k1 = -B in k2 , which means the two states at the same band n at k 1 and k 2 have opposite spins and θ ↑↓ between them is zero. Therefore, the matrix element of operator A between states (k 1 , n) and (k 2 , n) -A k1n,k2n is a spin-flip one and we name it as A ↑↓ k1k2 . According to Ref. 67, with time-reversal symmetry, A ↑↓ k1k2 is exactly zero. In general, for another wavevector k 3 within valley -Q but not -k 1 , A ↑↓ k1k3 is usually non-zero. One critical quantity that determines the intervalley spin-flip matrix element A ↑↓ k1k3 for a band within the pair introduced above is θ ↑↓ k1k3 . Based on time-independent perturbation theory, we can prove that A ↑↓ between two states is approximately proportional to sin θ ↑↓ /2 . The derivation is given in Sec. III B 3. As shown in Figure In many non-magnetic materials with broken inversion symmetry, spin relaxation is dominated by DP mechanism. Spin dynamics in GaAs has broad interest in spintronics over past decades Through FPDM simulations of n-GaAs at various T and n i with different scattering mechanisms in Ref. Figure Figure Note that although the DP relation is intuitive to understand the cause of doping-level dependence of spin lifetime, it may break down when we evaluate individual scattering processes. For example, when n i increases from 10 14 cm -3 to 10 15 cm -3 , both carrier lifetime τ s and τ s,z due to e-i scattering decrease while the internal magnetic field remains unchanged. Moreover, the simple empirical relation cannot possibly explain our firstprinciples results that the e-e and e-i scatterings have largely different contributions in carrier and spin relaxation. First-principles calculations are critical to provide unbiased mechanistic insights to spin and carrier relaxation of general systems. Graphene samples exhibit exciting spintronic properties such as long τ s and l s at room temperature From Fig. The discrepancy of the conventional DP model for τ s∥ of Gr-hBN can be rectified by modifying the model. Briefly, the DP model assumes that B in effectively changes randomly each time the electron scatters. The in-plane magnetic field B in || rotates over the Fermi circle and covers all in-plane directions, satisfying this condition, in both Gr+E ⊥ and Gr-hBN. However, the out-ofplane magnetic field B in ⊥ , which matters only for τ s∥ and is present only for Gr-hBN, has the same direction within each valley. Consequently, only intervalley scattering will change the B in ⊥ for a given electron spin. As proposed in Ref. 100, this can be captured by changing the DP model from (τ DP s,x ) -1 ∼ τ p (∆Ω ⊥x ) 2 = τ p Ω 2 y + Ω 2 z as given by Eq. 82 for in-plane x spins, to where τ Inter p is the intervalley scattering time (dotted line in Fig. The ratio τ s⊥ /τ s∥ (Fig. τ s decrease with increasing carrier density magnitude in graphene (Fig. Ω 2 i of Gr-hBN in Fig. As introduced in Sec. II B 1, the dephasing time (or transverse time) of a spin ensemble is called T * 2 and describes the decay of the total excess spin S -S eq at an nonzero B ext perpendicular to S -S eq . As discussed in Sec. II A 2, T * 2 can be simulated straightforwardly through FPDM simulations with Zeeman Hamiltonian considering both spin and orbital angular momenta (Eq. 13 and 14). For the purpose of analysing and understanding spin dephasing, one key parameter is the Landé g-factor g (Eq. 86). It value relates to B ext -induced energy splitting (Zeeman effect) ∆E (B ext ) and Larmor precession frequency Ω, satisfying Ω ≈ ∆E = μ B B ext g. More importantly, the g-factor fluctuation (near Fermi surface or μ F,c ) ∆ g (Eq. 87) leads to a nonzero ∆Ω (Eq. 88) and then T * 2 due to DP or FID mechanism. Spintronics in halide perovskites has drawn significant attention in recent years, due to highly tunable spin-orbit fields and intriguing interplay with lattice symmetry. Recently, we simulate 2 . Together with FPDM simulations of spin relaxation time T 1 of CsPbBr 3 at various conditions, our work provides fundamental insights on how to control and manipulate spin relaxation/dephasing in halide perovskites, which are vital for their spintronics and quantum information applications. The first-principles density-matrix dynamics (FPDM) approach is an important technique for studying spin and electron dynamics and transport, with outstanding advantages: i) it can accurately describe various interactions, scattering processes, and spin precession simultaneously; ii) it can describe processes far from equilibrium; iii) it can simulate dynamical processes on various time scales from femtoseconds to milliseconds. We have shown its success in simulating ultrafast spin dynamics, spin and charge transport, relaxation and dephasing. In the future study, the FPDM approach still has a broad open area for new theory development. Exciton is a bound electron-hole pair generated by optical excitation. Excitons play an important role in optical properties of semiconductors, in particular in lowdimensional systems. Exciton dynamics has been extensively studied using different methods, in particular non-equilibrium Greens' function theory (NEGF) within Kadanoff-Baym equations The exciton-light interaction is responsible to exciton spin generation by light absorption with a circularlypolarized pump pulse and exciton spin relaxation through exciton-phonon scattering and exciton radiative recombination. The light absorption for excitons is similar to that for electrons (see Sec. II A 2) except that the momentum matrix elements are now between two excitonic states The exciton-phonon scattering is responsible to exciton spin relaxation. According to Refs. 109, 110, the exciton-phonon scattering matrix elements can be approximately obtained from the excition wavefunction at finite momentum and electron-phonon scattering matrix elements. Recently we implemented the excitonphonon scattering matrix elements and used them to simulate phonon-assisted indirect exciton radiative recombination. In the density-matrix master equation, the term of the exciton-phonon scattering is rather similar to the electron-phonon scattering, except that the excitons are bosons while the electrons are fermions. Therefore, the implementation of the exciton-phonon scattering in the frame of FPDM approach can be straightforward. CPGE is the effect that under the circularly-polarized light a DC current may be induced in a solid-state material, and widely presents in materials without inversion symmetry, in absence of p-n junction and applied electric field. In recent years, CPGE has attracted growing interests in the fields of topological physics and spinoptotronics If a constant laser field is applied to an inversion symmetry broken system, the quantum master equation for describing density matrix of the electronic system reads: where dρ dt | laser is coherent dynamics due to a laser field (Eq. 12), dρ dt | sp-em and dρ dt | e-ph are the spontaneous emission (Eq. 36) and e-ph scattering terms (Eq. 17 and 18), respectively. CPGE is measuring the steady state current when a nonmagnetic system is under a constant circularlypolarized laser field for a long enough time. In the velocity gauge, the current density is computed using j kmn (t) = -e v kmn + δ mn e m e A (t) , where v is the velocity operator matrix and v = p/m e . The average value of the second term of j is usually zero so that this term does not contribute to CPGE. Although in our FPDM approach, the ab-initio treatment of quantum scattering is rather general, the following theoretical development can further improve the applicability of our methods to different systems: Anharmonic phonons. In current implementation, phonons are harmonic and it is required that the material must be dynamically stable at zero temperature. However, for some soft materials (e.g., hybrid halide perovskites), significant anharmonic effects appear at high-T phase, which requires extracting phonon properties from finite-temperature simulations, e.g. using ab-initio molecular dynamics. Such approach has been implemented Fröhlich interaction and LO-TO splitting in doped semiconductor. The intraband dielectric screening is not considered for Fröhlich interaction and LO-TO splitting in current implementation. This may be problematic in doped semiconductor and may lead to significant errors at moderate or high carrier density. Since we have already implemented the intraband dielectric function (Eq. 33), its effect can be straightforwardly included in FPDM approach similar to Ref. 114. Short-range contribution to the electron-ionizedimpurity scattering. For the electron-ionized-impurity scattering, we currently only consider the long-range contribution. This is appropriate for certain systems like GaAs, but may be problematic when intravalley processes dominate spin relaxation or the short-range spin-flip electron-ionized-impurity scattering is unimportant to spin relaxation. Therefore, it is important to include both long-range and short-range contributions to the electron-ionized-impurity scattering. Similar to Ref. 56, the long-range and short-range parts are treated separately -the short-range part is treated from first principles similar to neutral impurity, and the long-range part is simulated using the screened Coulomb potential.