Zeolites are inorganic materials known for their diversity of applications, synthesis conditions, and resulting polymorphs. Although their synthesis is controlled both by inorganic and organic synthesis conditions, computational studies of zeolite synthesis have focused mostly on organic template design. In this work, we use a strong distance metric between crystal structures and machine learning (ML) to create inorganic synthesis maps in zeolites. Starting with 253 known zeolites, we show how the continuous distances between frameworks reproduce inorganic synthesis conditions from the literature without using labels such as building units. An unsupervised learning analysis shows that neighboring zeolites according to our metric often share similar inorganic synthesis conditions, even in template-based routes. In combination with ML classifiers, we find synthesis-structure relationships for 14 common inorganic conditions in zeolites, namely Al, B, Be, Ca, Co, F, Ga, Ge, K, Mg, Na, P, Si, and Zn. By explaining the model predictions, we demonstrate how (dis)similarities towards known structures 1 Zeolites are inorganic porous materials widely recognized for their rich polymorphism and numerous applications. In this work, we correlate inorganic synthesis conditions to zeolite structure using a mathematically strong representation for comparing periodic crystals, the Average Minimum Distance (AMD), Designing synthesis-structure relationships in zeolites has long relied on intuitive patterns emerging from their natural structure. For example, some CBUs are typically known to be synthesized by different inorganic conditions, such as d6r in the presence of sodium ions or d4r in the presence of germanium or fluorine. Nevertheless, not all structures produced with certain inorganic agents exhibit the same CBUs, and CBUs are not necessarily realized only by one element. Data-driven methods showed promise in connecting zeolite synthesizability to their local structure Examples of such clusters include the ABC-6 zeolites, structures containing lov building units, six-membered rings frameworks (e.g., GIU cluster), Ge-or boron-containing zeolites (e.g., BEC or IRR and SFN-SSF branch, respectively), to name a few (see also Fig. Despite the usefulness of the tree map in connecting zeolites with similar synthesis conditions, the visual analysis cannot determine whether the map consistently provides new insights on the synthesis of zeolites. To improve this qualitative analysis, we performed a hierarchical clustering of the data to quantify whether the structural distance metric clusters the data according to the literature synthesis conditions (see Methods distances, thus providing a more quantitative view to the minimum spanning tree of Fig. Then, to create labels for synthesis conditions, we started with a dataset of extensive synthesis conditions extracted from the zeolite literature from Jensen et al. Although the initial dataset had information on both organic and inorganic conditions, we disregarded the organic templates when labeling the data, thus assuming that inorganic and organic conditions can, to an extent, be predicted independently of each other. Furthermore, given the scarcity of data for some synthesis conditions, we focused only on the 14 inorganic conditions that have been used to synthesize at least 10 zeolites, namely Al, B, Be, Ca, Co, F, Ga, Ge, K, Mg, Na, P, Si, and Zn. Finally, we verify whether flat clusters formed by points with a maximum distance of each other share the same positive labels. This intuition is quantified by computing the homogeneity between data points given clusters formed by a given distance threshold Additional investigations of the data explain the patterns in homogeneity obtained above. Figure Groups formed by zeolites such as NAT, EDI, and THO, or AFO, AEL, AHT show that Figure non-silica zeolites also share structural patterns that may be harder to obtain in silica-based structures. This unsupervised analysis demonstrates that our distance metric relates zeolites with similar inorganic synthesis conditions without any learnable parameters. Although zeolite structures contain several outliers and lack true negative data, the structural patterns still provide a strong prior for exploring the synthesis conditions. In particular, as inorganic synthesis conditions can be inferred by the similarity between crystal structures, they can also help downselect structures for zeolites yet to be realized. One disadvantage of the pure unsupervised learning approach is the inefficient utilization of the available labels. Although similarity between crystal structures is a good indicator of common synthesis conditions, the dissimilarity between structures can also provide insights on which structures are less likely to be synthesized with a given composition. To perform this analysis, we use the labeled data to train supervised learning methods that predict the synthesis conditions of a zeolite given its distances to known frameworks. Specifically, we trained logistic regression, random forest, and XGBoost classifiers on literature data to predict each class label individually. However, training models on the literature labels has two caveats: (1) the data is often unbalanced, i.e., the number of positive data points is much smaller than the number of negative data points; and (2) the negative data is not truly negative, as its lack of literature reporting does not imply that a zeolite cannot be synthesized under the synthesis conditions in analysis. To account for these problems, we trained balanced classifiers by subsampling the dataset for each synthesis conditions, thus ensuring that training sets had the same proportion of positive and negative data points, but validation/test sets were allowed to have more negative samples than positive ones. In that case, because models were tested on different negative splits, they were prevented from memorizing "negative" data points as truly negative, as exemplified by the case of MEI zeolite above. Finally, for each synthesis condition, we performed an extensive hyperparameter optimization for each of the three classifiers, evaluating the models according to their accuracy, precision, recall, F 1 score, and areas under the receiving operating characteristic (ROC) and precision-recall (PR) curves. The results of the hyperparameter search are summarized in Fig. To in Fig. Given that structural similarity is correlated to inorganic synthesis in zeolites and that supervised learning methods are able to predict synthesis using only distances as inputs, we can use the models developed in this work to propose inorganic synthesis conditions for hypothetical zeolites. This approach complements previous work on the design of OSDAs for frameworks, thus enabling inorganic synthesis conditions to be predicted in silico whenever a new framework is proposed. To do that, we used the dataset of 331,171 hypothetical zeolites proposed by Pophale et al., As demonstrated in this work, zeolites in the neighborhood of known frameworks are likely to share similar synthesis conditions as those known structures. Thus, downselecting frameworks for given synthesis conditions can benefit from the unsupervised and supervised methods developed here. This approach can be used in combination with previous "synthesizability metrics" of zeolites, such as local interatomic distances ), structure #308,105 is predicted to be more likely to be synthesized as a silicate than #313,030. Both contain the lta and sod cages characteristic of the LTA zeolite, but differ by the presence of a second cage similar to sod, shown in Fig. Beyond exploration of the zeolite space, the models also uncover existing and new synthesis-structure relationships. Figure While about 45% of all known structures have at least one sodium-based synthesis, 17% of hypothetical structures are predicted to be realizable with Na given the 80% threshold probability. As most enumerated datasets are often created without considering synthesis conditions, Mapping the space of inorganic conditions in materials synthesis is an outstanding challenge due to the complexity of chemical interactions during synthesis. In the case of zeolites, synthesis conditions are known to affect structural patterns in the materials, but finding correlations between structural patterns and inorganic syntheses often relies on heuristics. In this work, we used unsupervised and supervised learning methods to propose inorganic synthesis conditions for zeolite synthesis. In particular, we showed how a mathematically strong distance metric between crystals can predict inorganic synthesis conditions in zeolites. This enables structural comparisons beyond human-crafted labels of building units or pore sizes/topologies. Clustering techniques demonstrate that our metric consistently recalls the inorganic synthesis conditions from literature datasets, thus providing predictive power even in the absence of labels. Then, we show that ML classifiers can predict synthesis conditions of a given framework based on its distribution of distances towards known structures. The classifiers were used to predict 14 different synthesis conditions for known and unrealized zeolites. When explaining the predictions, we showed how ML classifiers analyze synthesis conditions also from the dissimilarity between crystals, as well as from the similarity. The results from the explainability analysis reveals overlaps in inorganic synthesis conditions, such as boron and germanium, as well as complementary relationships, such as silicon and beryllium. Finally, we showcased how our methods can be used to predict inorganic synthesis conditions for hypothetical zeolites, facilitating the downselection of new structures for experimental attempts. This combination of data-driven methods can create a pathway for full in silico prediction of zeolite synthesis beyond the design of organic templates. Any periodic crystal structure is modeled as a periodic set S of atomic centers considered as zero-sized points, with atomic types as optional labels. Any linear basis of vectors The dataset of 253 known zeolite structures used in the unsupervised learning method was obtained from the International Zeolite Association (IZA) database. Following the notation from the IZA, known zeolites are named in this manuscript according to their three-letter code in bold typeface. Known CBUs are represented with their three-letter code in lowercase and italic typeface. Literature data was obtained from public datasets of zeolite synthesis conditions from Jensen et al., A minimum spanning tree between zeolites was constructed by first creating a fully connected, undirected graph with weighted edges, where weights correspond to the distances between two structures. The tree was then obtained using NetworkX's (v. 2.5) 56 minimum spanning tree algorithm, which minimizes the total length of the tree. The dendrogram of known zeolites was produced by creating a linkage matrix from the distance matrix using the Ward algorithm as implemented in SciPy (v. 1.10.0). The homogeneity of the clustering was computed by calculating the Shannon entropy of flat clusters created with a given threshold, Dimensionality reduction was performed using UMAP, Classification of inorganic synthesis conditions was performed by training separate classifiers for each synthesis condition. The features used during training were the distances towards the 253 known frameworks, as computed with the AMD method described above. To obtain a statistically meaningful result, only elements used to synthesize at least 10 zeolites were considered. In particular, 14 inorganic conditions are considered: Al, B, Be, Ca, Co, F, Ga, Ge, K, Mg, Na, P, Si, and Zn. Train-validation-test sets were created starting with a 60-20-20 ratio, respectively, then subsampling the training set to have an equal number of points with positive and negative labels. Although techniques such as reweighting or resampling could have been employed to obtained balanced training sets, removing data points is a simple approach that prevents classifiers from treating negative data as "true negative", resembling positive-unlabeled learning strategies. Hyperparameter optimization of synthesis classifiers was performed using a gridsearch method over relevant spaces of hyperparameters for logistic regression, random forest, and XGBoost 60 methods. The full range of hyperparameters investigated in this hyperparameter search is shown in Tables Explainability of the classifiers was computed using the Shapley value method (SHAP) 61 under the TreeExplainer framework, 62 as implemented in the shap Python package (v. 0.41.0). The interventional feature perturbation method was used without limit for the tree explainer. Then, correlations between the SHAP values and the distance features were computed for each synthesis condition. To ensure that the correlations are not artifacts of particular train splits, we report the average correlation obtained from an ensemble of 100 XGBoost classifiers trained on splits with different negative data points. quired to reproduce all results and figures in this manuscript will be available after peerreview. ( 