The compressive properties of metal-organic framework (MOF) crystals are not only crucial for their densification but also key in determining their performance in many applications. We herein investigated the mechanical responses of a classic crystalline MOF, HKUST-1 by using in situ compression tests. A serrated flow accompanied by the unique strain avalanches was found in individual and contacting crystals before their final flattening or fracture with splitting cracks. The plastic flow with serrations is ascribed to the dynamic phase mixing due to the progressive and irreversible local phase transition in HKUST-1 crystals, as revealed by molecular dynamics and finite element simulations. Such pressure-induced phase coexistence in HKUST-1 crystals also induces a significant loading-history dependence of their Young"s modulus. The observation of plastic avalanches in HKUST-1 crystals here not only expands our current understanding of the plasticity of MOF crystals but also unveils a novel mechanism for the avalanches and plastic flow in crystal plasticity. Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), a new type of porous organic-inorganic composite crystals, have many competitive advantages when compared to traditional porous materials. For instance, the extremely high porosity, large specific surface area, adjustable pore size and vast structural diversity of MOFs make them have broad application prospects in many fields including multiphase catalysis, gas storage and separation, chemical sensing, drug transportation, and environmental purification. Taking the representative MOF, HKUST-1 as a typical example, we investigated here the mechanical behaviours of individual and contacting HKUST-1 crystals under compression by using the in situ compression tests, which exhibited a unique serrated flow phenomenon after yielding. The mechanism of the plastic flow with serrations was also revealed through a series of simulations based on MD and finite element method (FEM). As shown by the optical microscope image in Figure As for the crystal with an edge length of 10 m, at the very beginning of loading or the just contact between the indenter tip and the particle surface, a very short nonlinear relationship is observed (Figure where k S is a constant determined by the angle between the slip plane normal and compression axis,  is a geometrically dependent constant, K IC is the fracture toughness and  Y is the yield strength. The splitting can occur in the column only when its diameter is larger than d cr . Based on the values of K IC and  Y measured in the previous experiment, As shown in Figures To explain the plastic avalanches or the serrated flow observed in the crystalline HKUST-1, the compression of the {111}-oriented HKUST-1 crystals was also simulated by MD simulations (Figure The collapse of local nanopores in the serrated flow process actually corresponds to the irreversible transition of the local HKUST-1 material from the parent open pore (op) phase to the new closed pore (cp) phase, which can be verified by the different radial distribution functions of the HKUST-1 structures extracted before and after the plastic flow (Figure As a widely used experimental technique in evaluating the Young"s modulus of MOFs, where  s and  f correspond to the strains of the start and end of the plastic flow, respectively. As shown in Figure Since the yielded HKUST-1 crystals usually exhibit the phase coexistence, it is thus of great interest to identify locations of the parent op phase and transformed cp phase in realistic particles. As an initial attempt, we used FEM together with the elastic-perfectly plastic model to simulate the mechanical responses of an HKUST-1 particle with the dimension comparable to that considered in experiments. The load-displacement output of FEM simulations is found to be overlaid on experimental load-displacement curves (Figure This result together with the corresponding stress distribution shown in Figure In many practical applications, packed rather than individual MOF crystals are subjected to the compression. Thus, to verify whether the major conclusion extracted above from individual HKUST-1 particles can be extended to the packed particles, in situ compression tests were also performed to the contacting HKUST-1 crystals. In doing this, as shown in Figure Two cases that the contacting particles have comparable and different sizes were considered in the present study (inset of Figure However, if the contacting HKUST-1 particles have different sizes, the phase transition majorly occurs in the smaller particle first (Figure The mechanical responses of individual and contacting HKUST-1 crystals under compression were investigated by in situ compression tests. A plastic flow accompanied by unique strain avalanches was observed in the crystals before their final flattening or fracture with splitting cracks. Through MD and FEM simulations, it is found that the plastic avalanches in HKUST-1 crystals are caused by the dynamic phase mixing originating from the progressive and irreversible closure of their nanopores. The sequence of such strain avalanches broadly distributed in particles results in the overall plastic flow of HKUST-1 crystals. In addition, due to the pressure-induced phase coexistence in the yielded HKUST-1 crystals, the Young"s modulus of HKUST-1 crystals is found to strongly depend on the loading history, which increases as the historical maximum strain grows. The present work not only significantly expands current knowledge of mechanical properties especially the plasticity of MOF crystals, but also discloses a new mechanism for the avalanches and plastic flow in the crystal plasticity. Sample synthesis and characterization. The HKUST-1 crystals were synthesized through a hydrothermal method with the following procedure. The size and the topology of the synthesized HKUST-1 crystals were determined by the optical microscope (DM2700 M, Leica) and confocal microscope (S neox, Sensofar). In situ compression tests. The HKUST-1 crystals were dispersed into ethanol solutions with the aid of the ultrasonic vibration, which were subsequently dripped on a freshly cleaved atomically flat silicon substrate. After the solvent was completely evaporated, HKUST-1 crystals were left and adhered to the substrate, which were activated in a vacuum oven at 100 °C before testing. The in situ compression tests were performed by the FemtoTools in situ SEM nanoindenter (FT-NMT04) with a diamond flat punch tip having a diameter of 10 μm, which was visualized by the SEM (Clara, Tescan) operated at the accelerating voltage of 5 kV. After the HKUST-1 crystal and the indenter tip were aligned with each other well, the indenter tip was moved towards the crystals with a rate of ~10 nm/s by using the constant loading rate indentation mode. Nanoindentation experiments were also performed by the FemtoTools in situ SEM nanoindenter inside the Clara SEM. But a diamond Berkovich indenter with a tip radius of ~20 nm was used here. After an HKUST-1 crystal was located exactly below the indenter tip, it was indented at the constant strain rate of 1 × 10 -2 s -1 with the thermal drift maintained below ±0.05 nm/s. Here, to eliminate the impact of the electron beam irradiation, the electron beam was switched off during the indentation process. After achieving the load-depth curves from the nanoindentation experiments, the Young"s modulus of HKUST-1 crystals was calculated through the Oliver-Pharr method. A velocity-Verlet integration with a time step of 1.0 fs was utilized in MD simulations, while the room temperature was controlled by using the Nosé -Hoover thermostat. FEM simulations. The commercial software ABAQUS/Standard was used to conduct FEM simulations. Here, the edge length of the octahedral particle was set as 10 m, close to that considered in the in situ compression tests, while the flat indenter tip modelled as a cuboid with the dimension of 16 m × 16 m × 10 m was built above the particle (Figure (15) Banlusan, K.; Strachan, A. First-principles study of elastic mechanical responses to applied deformation of metal-organic frameworks. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 146, 184705. (16) Tan, J. C.; Civalleri, B.; Lin, C. C.; Valenzano, L.; Galvelis, R.; Chen, P. F.; Bennett, T. D.; Mellot-Draznieks, C.; Zicovich-Wilson, C. M.; Cheetham, A. K. Exceptionally low shear modulus in a prototypical imidazole-based metal-organic framework. Phys. Rev. Lett.