The observation of room temperature ferromagnetism along with a low temperature paramagnetic counterpart in undoped Cu-Cu2O-rGO nanocomposite was demonstrated. A phenomenological approach was taken to explain the observations based on 3D Ising model for arbitrary spins generated due to Cu vacancy in the Cu2O system preferably at the interface. In semiconductor devices, where the charge of the electron usually plays a key role, further maneuverability of spin direction might open up fresh avenues pertaining to compound architectures; and consequently the development of nanocomposite materials with both charge and magnetic moments have incrementally established themselves as the foci of the current spintronic paradigm. Further, a 3D representation of defective lattice was demonstrated from the knowledge of point defects in the Cu2O lattice. The sample was synthesized using the following protocol. In brief, 80 mL of rGO (1 mg/mL) dispersion in hydrazine and ammonia (1:7 vol %) water was prepared by reported procedure. Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) (Hitachi S-4800) and High-Resolution transmission Electron Microscopy (HRTEM) (JEOL JEM -2100) operating at 5 kV and 200 kV respectively. Magnetic characterizations were done with Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) from Quantum Design. Figure All the refined parameters can be found in table S1 in supporting information. In order to substantiate the chemical composition of the sample, we carried out high resolution XPS analysis at the Cu 2p and O 1s spectral region as shown in figure Though there is considerable variation in the literature of the binding energy for Cu2O, nevertheless, this can be assigned for the Cu + or Cu 0 (as both has almost overlapping binding energy in this region). The field dependence of magnetization, M(H) of the composite sample measured at different temperature was shown in the Fig. Interestingly, from figure where, J ij is the coupling parameter between the adjacent atoms, h is external field strength and s i is the spin of particle. The initial configuration was generated by placing spins (both spin up and spin down) randomly on a cube (L=150 3 ) lattice and performed 10 6 MC steps (spin flip-flop move) to obtain the minimum energy of the system at particular temperature. The move is based on energy considerations and is done by Metropolis algorithm. All quantities were calculated in normalised unit. kB is taken 1 unit and J is taken 1 unit. The whole procedure was done for different temperature ranging from 0.1 to 20. The simulation code was written in Python script. In this case we consider defect spin fraction of 9 % under weak external applied magnetic field (not strong enough to flip-flop the spin) to study the spin organization after equilibrium has reached. Magnetization per lattice site was calculated in the presence of small external magnetic field. We then verify the behaviour of the magnetization with temperature as shown in figure In summary, we reported the unexpected observation of RTFM in otherwise non-magnetic undoped Cu/Cu2O-rGO nanocomposite material. Crystal structural and microstructural analyses show significant amount of Cu vacancy within the Cu2O lattice preferably situated at the particle surface or particle-particle interface. More importantly, a low temperature paramagnetic response was noted in the present case which can be well explained on the basis of 3D Ising model for randomly distributed spins associated with poor nearest neighbour interaction. There are no conflicts to declare. 