Development of compact wireless power transfer (WPT) systems for charging miniature randomly oriented electronic devices is quite a challenge. Traditionally, WPT systems based on resonant magnetic coupling utilize "face-toface" aligned transmitter and receiver coils providing sufficient efficiency at relatively large distances. However, with the presence of angular receiver misalignment in a such system, the mutual coupling decreases resulting in a low power transfer efficiency. Here we develop a compact WPT system for wireless charging of miniature receivers vertically oriented with respect to the transmitter. As a transmitter, we employ a butterfly coil that provides a strong tangential component of the magnetic field. Thus, a vertically oriented receiver located in the magnetic field can be charged wirelessly. We perform numerical and experimental studies of the WPT system's power transfer efficiency as a function of the distance between the transmitter and the receiver. The misalignment and rotation dependencies of power transfer efficiency are also experimentally studied. We demonstrate the power transfer efficiency of 60 % within transfer distance of 4 mm for a vertically oriented receiver with an overall dimension of 20 mm ×14 mm at the frequency of 6.78 MHz. Smart glasses are wearable technology devices that combine the graphic abilities of mobile appliances, artificial intelligence, and augmented reality. With smart glasses, one can make phone calls, get notifications, have 3D map navigation, graphic translation, virtual reality gaming, and more. It is clear that all these utilities require some integrated electronics built into these devices, which require a power source, which most often are available in form of batteries. Traditionally, the smart glasses' batteries can be charged via cords or inside of a special case Wireless power transfer (WPT) has been rapidly becoming a significant technology for many applications, such as electric vehicle charging, implanted medical devices, robotic systems, and wearable electronics [3]- In this paper, we develop a miniature WPT system for charging vertically oriented receivers. We introduce a butterflyshaped Tx coil wich forms a strong tangential component of the magnetic field, which is used to transfer the power to a vertically oriented Rx coil. We perform numerical simulations of the WPT system in CST Microwave Studio 2022 to study the S-parameters, PTE, and near magnetic field distribution. To prove the numerical simulations, experimental studies of the miniature WPT system are provided in the MHz frequency range. The transfer distances, misalignment, and rotation (a) Schematic view of the miniature WPT system for charging vertically oriented receivers. (b) Simulated magnetic field distribution of the WPT system at the frequency of 6.78 MHz numerically obtained for 0.5 W of input power. dependencies of the WPT system PTE are experimentally studied. The miniature WPT system consists of a horizontally located Tx and a vertically oriented Rx separated by a distance d, as shown in Fig. The numerical simulations of the WPT system characteristics are performed in CST Microwave Studio 2022 with the help of the frequency domain solver. The Tx coil is excited through the 50 ohm port, the Rx coil is loaded by 50 ohm port. Due to the opposite wire wingdings of the Tx butterfly coil, the currents flowing in the left and right sides generate a loop of magnetic field penetrating the Tx surface, as shown in Fig. We perform the numerical simulations of the reflection and transmission coefficients for the different distances d between the Tx and Rx with the matching networks. Using the obtained S-parameters, we calculate the PTE as a function of distance d at the fixed frequency of 6.78 MHz (see Fig. To verify the results predicted numerically, the miniature WPT system prototype is fabricated and demonstrated in Fig. During the experimental investigation, we first measure the S-parameters for separation distance d from Tx to Rx ranging from 0 to 10 mm with a 1 mm step. The measured Sparameters for distances of d = 2 mm and d = 4 mm are shown in Fig. Next, we mimic the spatial position of the Rx with respect to the Tx. We experimentally study the PTE of the WPT system as a function of the Rx rotational angle with respect to the Tx, as shown in the insets of Fig. Smart glasses can have many design variations. Some smart glasses allow you to fully fold the temples and in this case, the Rx coil may be in a horizontal position relative to the Tx butterfly coil. However, the misalignment of the Rx coil regarding the Tx coil may remain. That is why we also experimentally investigate the PTE dependency for the misalignment of the Rx with respect to Tx, as shown in Fig. We experimentally studied the PTE of the miniature WPT system composed of the horizontally located Tx and vertically oriented Rx separated by a distance. The transmitter was implemented as a butterfly coil that generates a strong tangential component of the magnetic field, which was used to provide power transfer to the Rx. The overall dimensions of the Tx 40 mm × 27.3 mm × 0.8 mm and the Rx 20 mm × 14 mm × 0.8 mm were selected to be compatible with the existing smart glasses. The PTE extracted from the measured S-parameters of the WPT system is higher than 60 % over transfer distances up to 4 mm for vertically oriented Rx at the frequency of 6.78 MHz. The PTE for rotation with respect to Rx's lower edge is higher than 60 % from 0 • to 90 • . For rotation along the y-axis with respect to the Rx centre, PTE holds higher than 60 % up to 20 • . Therefore, the transfer distances, misalignment, and rotation dependencies of power transfer efficiency have been successfully demonstrated. The proposed WPT system can be considered as a suitable platform for charging compact devices like smart glasses with vertically oriented receivers. This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (Project No. 