We investigate the coupling factor φμ that quantifies the magnetic flux Φ per magnetic moment μ of a point-like magnetic dipole that couples to a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). Representing the dipole by a tiny current-carrying (Amperian) loop, the reciprocity of mutual inductances of SQUID and Amperian loop provides an elegant way of calculating φμ(r, êμ) vs. position r and orientation êμ of the dipole anywhere in space from the magnetic field B(r) produced by a supercurrent circulating in the SQUID loop. We use numerical simulations based on London and Ginzburg-Landau theory to calculate φμ from the supercurrent density distributions in various SQUID geometries. We treat the far-field regime (r ≳ a = inner size of the SQUID loop) with the dipole placed on (oriented along) the symmetry axis of circular or square shaped loops. We compare expressions for φμ from simple filamentary loop models with simulation results for loops with finite width w (outer size A > a), thickness d and London penetration depth λL and show that for thin (d ≪ a) and narrow (w < a) loops the introduction of an effective loop size a eff in the filamentary loop-model expressions results in good agreement with simulations. For a dipole placed right in the center of the loop, simulations provide an expression φμ(a, A, d, λL) that covers a wide parameter range. In the near-field regime (dipole centered at small distance z above one SQUID arm) only coupling to a single strip representing the SQUID arm has to be considered. For this case, we compare simulations with an analytical expression derived for a homogeneous current density distribution, which yields excellent agreement for λL > w, d. Moreover, we analyze the improvement of φμ provided by the introduction of a narrow constriction in the SQUID arm below the magnetic dipole. Magnetic properties of micro-and nanoscale objects, are a topic of intensive research For the application of nanoSQUIDs to the investigation of magnetic nanoparticles, the figure of merit is the spin sensitivity S 1/2 μ = S 1/2 Φ /φ μ , which describes the smallest * koelle@uni-tuebingen.de magnetic moment μ of a point-like magnetic nanoparticle (MNP) that can be detected with a certain device at a certain distance. Here, S 1/2 Φ is the rms flux noise of the SQUID, i.e. the square root of the spectral density of equivalent flux noise power S Φ , which can determined experimentally, and φ μ = Φ/μ is the coupling factor, expressing how much magnetic flux Φ per magnetic moment μ = |μ| is coupled to the SQUID loop by a MNP which is placed at position r. φ μ (r, êμ ) depends on the orientation êμ = μ/μ and position r (with respect to the nanoSQUID) of the MNP and is usually estimated either via magnetostatic considerations In this work, we present a detailed analysis of the dependence of the coupling factor φ μ on various geometrical parameters of the SQUID loop, on the London penetration depth λ L and on the MNP-to-SQUID distance. This analysis is based on numerical simulations, as mentioned above. From the results of these simulations we derive then generalized fit functions for the dependence of φ μ on all relevant parameters. The purpose of this work is to provide such generalized fit functions that can then be used as a straightforward and easy-to-use alternative for estimates of the coupling factor for realistic SQUID geometries. We will treat two different regimes, which have been already introduced in Ref. Our method of numerically calculating φ μ is described and applied in Refs. The coupling factor φ μ (r, êμ ) for a point-like MNP with its magnetic moment oriented along êμ at position r can be calculated as where B J (r) is the magnetic field that is produced by the current J which is circulating in the SQUID loop Within the Amperian loop model the magnetic dipole moment is given as μ = I μ A μ , with the current I μ flowing through an infinitesimally thin loop, surrounding the oriented flat area A μ = A μ êμ ; accordingly, μ = I μ A μ . The mutual inductance M s = Φ/I μ describes the flux Φ coupled to the SQUID by the current I μ flowing through Ms and Mμ between a SQUID and an Amperian loop (with area Aμ and normal unit vector êμ), representing a point-like magnetic dipole moment in the limit Aμ → 0 . the Amperian loop. Conversely, the mutual inductance M μ = Φ μ /J describes the flux Φ μ coupled to the Amperian loop by the current J circulating in the SQUID loop. From the identity M s = M μ , and with I μ = μ/A μ , we obtain This equals Eq. ( We use the finite element software package 3D-MLSI based on London theory from the individual current sheets. Here r = (x, y, z) and r s = (x s , y s , z n ) are vectors pointing at the magnetic moment and at the surface elements dA s of the superconducting sheets of area A s , respectively. We also use numerical simulations based on Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory to calculate j(r s ). The behavior of the superconducting condensate is described by a complex-valued order parameter Ψ, which is allowed to vary in space. The first GL equation Here A is the vector potential, for which the second GL equation is solved: where κ is the Ginzburg-Landau parameter given as the ratio of the London penetration depth λ L and the coherence length ξ. The London gauge (∇ • A = 0) has been used. The GL equations are written in dimensionless form, i.e., all quantities are measured in their natural units: distances are measured in ξ, the vector potential A in cħ/2eξ, the magnetic field B in the upper critical field B c2 and the order parameter in its bulk value Ψ 0 in the absence of field and current. Equations ( allowing us to simulate arbitrary geometries. Equation ( In the GL calculations, we simulated fully threedimensional loops (both circular and rectangular), where we used different ways to induce the circulating current J within the SQUID loop. We either induced J by storing a single flux quantum Φ 0 in the SQUID loop (as in 3D-MLSI simulations), or we induced a screening current J by placing a magnetic dipole with magnetic moment μ, typically of the order of 10 7 μ B (μ B being the Bohr magneton), at a fixed position r 0 close to the SQUID loop. Those different ways to induce J may result in slightly different supercurrent density distributions j(r s ) and therefore slightly different coupling factors as the physics differs in both cases. Another reason for slight discrepancies with respect to simulations based on London theory is the finite coherence length ξ. In either case, the Biot-Savart equation was solved for the magnetic field in free space given the supercurrent distribution calculated from Eq. ( which in turn allowed for obtaining the coupling factors of interest. A. Far-field regime: coupling of out-of-plane moments centered on circular and square loops For the far-field regime we consider the coupling for two simple SQUID geometries, circular and square shaped loops in the (x, y)-plane, to the magnetic moment of a MNP oriented along êz and placed on the z symmetry axis. In this case the origin of the coordinate system is placed in the center of the SQUID loop. As êμ = êz , only the z component B J,z of B J needs to be considered, i.e. we calculate the coupling factor given as φ μ,z = B J,z /J. We first discuss the coupling factor φ μ,z,• for circular loops with inner radius a and outer radius A, as shown scematically in Fig. which has been also found in For an infinitely thin and narrow square shaped SQUID loop with hole size 2a, the coupling factor for arbitrary position z of an MNP along the z symmetry axis can be deduced from Eq. ( For z = 0, Eq. with the geometric scaling factor ∆ = π/ √ 8 ≈ 1.11 One might expect that (ii) provides correct values for the coupling factor only at the position z = z 0 . However, Fig. Altogether, we find that φ μ,z,• (z) calculated by GL simulations with different values of ξ and z 0 has an almost negligible effect on the coupling factor in case of a loop with small line width, and that GL simulations and 3D-MLSI provide consistent results for the coupling factor. In the supplement a similar comparison of coupling factors (Fig. In the following, only data obtained from 3D-MLSI simulations are shown, where the current density originates from trapped flux in the loop. Figure For measurements of the magnetization reversal of individual MNPs, we are mostly interested in the situation which gives strongest coupling. So in the following we consider φ μ,z,• for various circular geometries at z = 0, i.e., for a magnetic dipole placed at the center of the loop, with its moment pointing in z direction. For this case, we derive from our simulation results a fit formula depending only on the loop geometry A, a, d and on λ L : Here, the primes denote that all parameters are dimensionless and must be given in μm. The results given by equation ( Hence, Eq. ( To better facilitate the comparison of our simulation results with the limiting case described by the Ketchen formula for φ μ,K,• (a), given in Eq. ( with When approaching the limit A → a (i.e., g → 1) of a SQUID loop with infinitely narrow linewidth, Eq. ( Figure to take into account the finite width of the loop. This approach corresponds to taking into account the effective area of the SQUID , where A w is the outer loop area, A h is the area of the inner SQUID hole, and b is a geometric factor close to one (b = 1/∆ 2 = 8/π 2 for circular and ≈ 1 for square loops) For a circular loop, Fig. with the 3D-MLSI simulation results φ μ,z,• (g) [Eq. ( For the near-field regime, we consider the situation when an MNP is placed in close vicinity to one arm of a square shaped SQUID loop in the (x, y)-plane. We start with showing that this situation can be reduced to only considering the coupling between the SQUID arm, represented by a cuboid shaped conductor ('single strip') and the MNP. For this coupling, we derive for a homogeneous current density distribution an expression for the dependence of φ μ on the distance z of a magnetic moment centered above a strip and on the width w, thickness d and the length l of the strip; 3D-MLSI simulations show that in the near-field regime λ L has only a minor effect on the coupling factor. We note that this approach can also be applied to the situation when a constriction is introduced in the SQUID arm, which leads to increased coupling, when a MNP ist placed close to the conctriction; this situation is indicated in Fig. We consider a square shaped SQUID loop with inner dimension 2a, outer dimension 2A, film thickness d and London penetration depth λ L . We place the origin of the coordinate system on the upper surface of one SQUID arm, that extends along the y-axis. A magnetic dipole is then placed at position r = (0, 0, z), i.e., it is centered above the arm at distance z from the upper surface. We then assume that the moment of the magnetic dipole is oriented along the x-axis, i.e. êμ = êx (see Fig. For sufficiently large SQUID loops or close proximity of the magnetic moment to the SQUID arm with small cross-section, the dominating part of the coupling results from the interaction of the magnetic moment with the arm only. This is illustrated in Fig. For λ L = 570 nm, which is significantly above the line width w, the current density distribution is homogeneous across the cross section of the single strip. For most of the arm of the full loop this is also true, but towards the corners the current gets inhomogeneous (c.f. Fig. For the simulations with λ L = 10 nm, more deviations between the simulation of the full loop with 3D-MLSI and the single strip are visible, especially for the smallest z. This is due to inhomogeneous current densities in these simulations which slightly differ for the two different geometries. In the case of the single strip, the current density peaks at both edges, symmetrically around the center of the conductor. This produces a φ μ,x (x) dependence (green curves) which is also symmetric about the center of the strip (x = 0). The simulation with the full loop results in a current density with its maximum at the inner edge of the loop (at x = -55 nm), which drops towards the outer edge (at x = 55 nm). This behavior is also reflected in the asymmetry of the resulting coupling factors (cyan curves), peaking close to the inner edge. Nevertheless, at the center (x = 0) the coupling factors are almost the same. GL simulations of full loops yield closely the same coupling factor (only slightly reduced values) as for full loop simulations by 3D-MLSI. The current density distributions with identical λ L are similar and can be found in the supplement Figs. S21 to S24. In the remaining part of this section, we treat only the simpler system of coupling between a single strip (with its length l along the y-axis) and a magnetic moment pointing along the x-axis, and we consider coupling factors obtained above the center of the conductor. To start this analysis we investigate the situation λ L > w, d, where a homogeneous current density in the strip can be assumed. For this case an analytical expression for the coupling factor for a dipole moment at position r can be found by utilizing Eq. ( To calculate the magnetic field B J,x at r = (0, 0, z), i.e., at the height z above the symmetry point of the top surface of an extended strip (with finite d and w), we integrate Eq. ( Here, we introduce 2 and Θ(z, w, d, l) represents the expression in square brackets. From this and Eq. ( where again r 0 is introduced to provide the coupling factor in units of nΦ0 μB . In the following we compare the analytical result given in Eq. ( Eq. ( Clearly, the coupling factor increases with decreasing distance z to the surface of the strip. This increase is most pronounced for small z when the cross section is smallest (red data). Notably, by considering an extended conductor, the divergence at z = 0 of the coupling factor, which is observed in filamentary models, is not present. Moreover, φ μ,x increases with decreasing cross-section of the strip (c.f. red, cyan, blue and orange data for fixed l). For the single strip with d = w = 10 nm (red data) the simulation results are independent of λ L (and current sheet orientation) and coincide with Eq. The strongest deviations between Eq. ( Finally we want to look at the coupling factor above a SQUID arm oriented along the y-direction, containing a constriction at the center of the arm. A magnetic dipole shall be placed above the center of the constriction, with its moment along the x-direction. The parameters w, d and l still denote the width, thickness and total length of the SQUID arm. The smaller dimensions of the constriction are given accordingly by w c , d c and l c (see Fig. Figure From the comparison of the arm with and without a constriction (black and pink line) for small z, a significant increase in coupling due to the introduction of the constriction is visible. In this paper we investigated the coupling factor φ μ , that quantifies the coupling of a magnetic dipole to a SQUID, for various SQUID geometries by means of numerical simulations based on London theory (3D-MLSI) and Ginzburg Landau (GL) theory. We investigated the far field regime, where the distance r between magnetic dipole and SQUID is comparable to or larger than the inner size a of the SQUID loop and the near field regime, where the magnetic dipole is in close proximity to the SQUID. In the far field regime, we reviewed formulas for the calculation of the coupling factor for a magnetic dipole placed on the symmetry axis of circular and square shaped SQUID loops, obtained from filamentary loop models. We investigated the applicability of these formulas on spatially extended SQUID loops with outer size A, film thickness d and under consideration of the London penetration depth λ L and the Ginburg-Landau coherence length ξ, by simulating the coupling factor of various circular and square shaped loops. For loops with small film thickness d ≪ a and small line width Aa < a, the introduction of an effective loop size a eff (connected to the effective area A eff of the SQUID) in the filamentary loop model formulas results in good agreement with simulations. Furthermore, the coupling factor for circular and square loops was investigated for magnetic dipoles placed at the center of the loop, where the coupling factor is largest for a given geometry in the far field regime. From 3D-MLSI simulations we derive a fit formula for the coupling factor φ μ (a, A, d, λ L ) that covers a wide parameter range of the inner and outer size of the loop, film thickness and London penetration depth. In the near field regime we investigated the coupling factor for a magnetic dipole centered at a distance z above the upper surface of one SQUID arm. 3D-MLSI and GL simulations show that in this case, it is sufficient to consider the coupling between a single strip conductor representing the SQUID arm and the magnetic dipole, to reduce the computational effort. The coupling between a single strip and a magnetic dipole centered above the strip at distance z was then calculated analytically for a homogeneous current density distribution across the strip with variable film thickness d, width w and length l. The obtained expression showed an excellent agreement with coupling factors calculated numerically with 3D-MLSI, for single strips of various geometries and variable London penetration depth for λ L > w, d. When λ L < w or λ L < d the analytical calculation slightly overestimates or underestimates, respectively, the results of the simulations for the investigated parameter range. Finally, we investigated the coupling factor for a magnetic dipole centered at height z above a constriction introduced to the center of the SQUID arm. Here, the simulated coupling factor can be well described by calculating the superposition of the coupling factor of the constriction and the surrounding SQUID arm. For small distances z the coupling factor increases significantly by the introduction of the constriction into the SQUID arm, while for larger distances the coupling factor is determined by the SQUID arm geometry. Altogether, our studies show that, by taking into account the finite cross-section of a SQUID loop and finite λ L , results for the coupling factor (and accordingly the spin sensitivity) can significantly deviate from simple approximations based on filamentary loop structures. Still one can avoid time-consuming numerical simulations of the coupling factor by using approximate results that have been derived here for various situations and for ranges of geometric parameters that are relevant for practical applications. On the other hand, we demonstrate that numerical simulations based on Ginzburg-Landau theory provide results that are consistent with our 3D-MLSI simulations that have been frequently used in the past for calculating the coupling factor. This is important if one needs to calculate more complex three-dimensional structures (e.g., vector nanoSQUIDs Figure Overall the fit formula Eq. ( Here we consider the coupling factor for square shaped loops (with inner length 2a, outer length 2A, film thickness d) in the far field regime. A sketch of the geometry is depicted in Fig. As stated in the main manuscript Eq.( For z = 0 the coupling is strongest. To describe the simulation data at z = 0 for square loops, we use a fit formula which is analogous to the fit formula for circular loops (Eq 12 in the main manuscript) where ∆ = π/2 √ 2 and variables with primes are given in μm. Equation (S2) matches the 3D-MLSI results with an error ≲ 10 % for the parameter range a = 0.2 . . . 5 μm A = (a + 0.1μm) . . . 5 μm d = 10 . . . 100 nm λ L = 10 . . . 500 nm . By replacing A ′ by ga ′ (with g = A/a), one finds the same expression for φ μ,z,□ (g, a, Λ)/φ μ,K,□ (a) as in Eq. ( Figure In Fig. In the main manuscript we have shown exemplary simulation results of the coupling factor where the magnetic moment oriented along êx is placed in close proximity at height z above the center of an arm of the SQUID which is oriented along the y-axis (see Fig. Here we analyze for most simulation results, obtained for strips with fixed length l = 500 nm, and variable w, d, z and λ L , the ratio δ = φ μ,x,calc /φ μ,x,sim between coupling factors φ μ,x,calc calculated with Eq. ( Figure In this section sheet current density distributions j 2D (x, y) obtained from 3D-MLSI and GL simulations for various geometries are shown. For better comparability we normalize the current densities to their maximum value j max . All current densities shown, are extracted in the middle of the film thickness. In case of simulations of loops with 3D-MLSI, the current density distribution corresponds to 1Φ 0 stored in the loop. Current densities obtained from GL simulations use two different ways of inducing the circulating current. To compare the results of the simulation tools also current density distributions corresponding to 1Φ 0 stored in the loop are used. Further, the current density can be induced by placing a magnetic moment (μ ≈ 35.5 • 10 6 μ B ) at a height z 0 on the symmetry axis on the loop. A. Simulated current densities for the far field regime: circular and square shaped loops In Fig. A similar decrease is shown in Fig. Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure Figures Figure 