Surface-layer (S-layer) proteins form the outermost envelope in many bacteria and most archaea and arrange in 2D quasi-crystalline structures via self-assembly. We investigated S-layer proteins extracted from the archaeon Pyrobaculum aerophilium with a qPlus sensor-based atomic force microscope (AFM) in both liquid and ambient conditions and compared it to transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images under vacuum conditions. For AFM scanning, a next-generation liquid cell and a new protocol for creating long and sharp sapphire tips was introduced. Initial AFM images showed only layers of residual detergent molecules (SDS), which are used to isolate the Slayer proteins from the cells. SDS was not visible in the TEM images, requiring a more thorough sample preparation for AFM measurements. These improvements allowed us to resolve the crystallike structure of the S-layer samples with frequency-modulation AFM in both air and liquid. Surface (s)-layers are highly ordered protein structures that surround many bacteria and form the cell wall in almost all archaea, as sketched in Figure Lattices in oblique p1 and p2, square p4 or hexagonal p3 and p6 structures (p6 symmetry is depicted in Figure In this work, S-layers from Pyrobaculum aerophilum were investigated due to their robust nature and well-known structure The robustness and the comparably large lattice structure of S-layers make TEM (transmission electron microscopy) a natural imaging method to analyze the symmetrical organisation of the Slayer In this work we present an investigation of the S-layer proteins using frequency-modulation AFM (FM-AFM). FM-AFM is the de facto standard for high spatial resolution AFM imaging at low temperature in vacuum. In contrast to AM-AFM, there are two additional active control loops: One to control the excitation frequency so that the tip oscillates at the resonance frequency and the second to control the excitation amplitude to maintain the oscillation at constant amplitude. If the tip is sufficiently close to the surface, the oscillation frequency changes according to the interaction forces between tip and sample atoms, without physical contact between them. Because FM-AFM offers high spatial resolution and has been used to investigate sensitive systems, it is a natural technique to apply to biological samples. One of the most widely used force sensors for FM-AFM is the qPlus sensor introduced by Giessibl in 1996 The qPlus sensor consists of a quartz tuning fork with a tip attached to the end of the oscillating prong. Detection of the qPlus sensor is electric and is based on the piezoelectric effect. To avoid an electrical short, only the tip of the sensor can be immersed in the conducting liquid. Consequently, the first measurements in liquid were made in small drops of water in which the tip was immersed In this paper we highlight the experimental improvements made to a qPlus-based AFM setup to perform reproducible and stable measurements of S-layer protein structures in both air and liquid. Additionally, we optimized the sample preparation for AFM imaging compared to the more widely used TEM method. Negative stain TEM imaging requires a large enough lattice (defined by the cluster size of the staining agent) and the presence of the staining agent. It is therefore not sensitive to residual layers of detergent that is required for the S-layer preparation (in our case sodium dodecyl sulfate, or SDS). However, we observed layers of SDS in the initial AFM images. Thus, additional steps in the sample preparation method were introduced to reduce the SDS concentration and allow successful imaging of the S-layers in a p6 lattice structure using FM-AFM. There are several challenges when measuring biological samples in liquid with a qPlusbased AFM. First, as the sensor cannot be immersed fully, the liquid volume is open to air. Consequently, evaporation must be limited to achieve long scanning times (e.g. 2 hours). Related to this, the shape of the meniscus at the water-air interface and the immersion level of the tip must be stable over time since the resonance frequency f 0 of the sensor decreases with the immersion depth of the tip If we first consider the tip material, previous work in ambient and liquid environments have shown great success using sapphire. Sapphire (Al2O3) is hard compared to other typically used tip materials like tungsten or platinum. In addition, sapphire is chemically inert, acid and base resistant and insoluble in water Next, we made improvements to the liquid cell. The first design for a liquid cell proposed by Pürckhauer et al. However, some aspects of this setup were not optimal: It exposed many interfaces between the Teflon and the sample as well as abrupt edges in the corners of the cell. Since Teflon is highly hydrophobic, this resulted in unstable meniscus geometries that changed their shape quickly due to small changes in volume (evaporation) (Figure To validate the setup, muscovite mica S-layer proteins were extracted according to a protocol developed for TEM imaging, including a buffer solution containing sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) to support cell lysis. For TEM imaging, the S-layer solution was drop casted on a copper grid and negative staining was performed to increase the contrast for TEM imaging. For FM-AFM imaging, similarly, a drop of the solution containing S-layers was deposited on a freshly cleaved mica sheet. A typical TEM image is shown in Fig. SDS is an anionic surfactant with a hydrocarbon tail and a polar head-group. Previous studies have shown that SDS molecules arrange on different surfaces in stacked bilayers, forming terraces and islands on surfaces To reduce the concentration of SDS molecules in the sample solution we performed additional purification steps after protein extraction (see Methods and Materials). Figure Using the new liquid cell and an extended sapphire tip, the S-layer proteins adsorbed on the mica surface were imaged with AFM in liquid (ultrapure water) and air. Figure We compared the S-layer lattice structure in liquid to the structure in air. Figures show the z-channel and the corresponding ∆f-channel of the samples in liquid. Figure are zand ∆f-channel, respectively) in air. The areas shown in Fig. An average spacing of (25.3 ± 1.7) nm and (26.0 ± 1.3) nm was found for the S-layer protein structure in air and liquid, respectively. The lattice distance measured from the AFM data are in excellent agreement with the lattice distance of 25.8 nm extracted from the TEM images shown in Figs From the topographic line profiles collected with AFM, the peak-to-peak height of the unit cells was measured resulting in an average height of (2.2 ± 0.3) nm for the samples in air and (2.1 ± 0.7) nm in liquid, where again no significant differences can be observed. Finally, we were able to acquire higher resolution images of the dry sample as shown in Figure S-layer proteins extracted from the cell wall of P. aerophilium were imaged with a qPlus-based FM-AFM in aqueous solution and ambient conditions and compared to TEM images. We presented two key developments which enabled the FM-AFM imaging: First, we introduced a next-generation liquid cell design and a method for creating long sapphire tips. These improvements allow clean and stable measurement conditions for imaging in liquids as well as in ambient conditions over long scanning times. And secondly, we adjusted the S-layer sample preparation from TEM requirements to AFM requirements. While initial AFM images showed only ordered SDS layers, additional filtration steps reduced the SDS concentration and allowed us to successfully image the S-layers using FM-AFM. With the new microscope setup and the new sample preparation method, we resolved the p6 lattice structure of the S-layer with a periodicity of (25.3 ± 1.7) nm and (26.0 ± 1.3) nm in air and liquid, respectively. The lattice distance is in good agreement with the distance of 25.8 nm measured from TEM images. This shows that the lattice structure of the S-layer proteins remains almost the same even when the imaging environment is changed, as expected from their robustness. These data furthermore show that FM-AFM can yield structural information on biological systems under biologically relevant conditions achieving spatial resolution sufficient to decipher the structural organization of highly symmetric protein lattices like the S-layer. In contrast to advanced fluorescence-based high resolution imaging techniques like MinFlux The AFM images were acquired on a home-built AFM that was previously described P. aerophilum was cultivated as described in Völkl et al Precipitates originating from the cultivation medium and cell debris were eliminated by short centrifugation at 2,254 g for 7 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and 1.4 ml SDSbuffer (20 mM MES/NaOH pH 6.1, 1 mM MgCl2 , 2% w/v SDS) was added. The mixture was incubated at 80°C for 1 hour to detach the S-layer from the cytoplasmic membrane. After centrifugation at 17,761 g for 2 minutes at 4°C, 3 phases are forming: supernatant, a white pellet and a black pellet. The S-layer is found in the white pellet, which is carefully collected and resuspended in 200-400 μl of SDS-buffer. Samples resulting from this S-layer preparation were used for initial TEM and AFM imaging attempts To further reduce the concentration of SDS from the S-layer preparation, an optimized purification strategy was developed. To this end the white pellet was not resuspended in SDSbuffer but in buffer 1 (20 mM MES/NaOH pH 6.1, 1 mM MgCl2) instead. In addition, the final S-layer mixture was centrifuged 3 times at 15,871g for 5-10 minutes at room temperature and each time the supernatant was replaced with 200-300 μl fresh buffer 1 in order to diminish the final SDS concentration. This procedure is shown schematically in Fig. The S-layer mixture was applied and blotted on a freshly glow discharged copper grid with 400 mesh from Plano GmbH coated with a continuous carbon layer of around 8 nm thickness. The staining was performed by addition of using uranyl formate solution to the grid and blotting with Whatman paper for 3 times. The images were acquired at the inhouse 200 kV FEG transmission electron microscope (JEOL Germany GmbH, Freising), using an F416 CMOS camera (TVIPS GmbH, Gauting, Germany). The micrographs were acquired manually using SerialEM (33) at increasing magnifications as shown in figure ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information. The following files are available free of charge. 