It has been more than 40 years since superconductivity was discovered in organic conductors, and the way scientists view organic superconductors has changed over time. At first, the fact that organic conductors exhibit superconductivity was a novelty in itself, and subsequently it was shown that behind the superconductivity is the physics of electron correlation, which has been a focus in condensed matter physics at large. Amid the remarkable development of correlation physics, the unique characteristics of organic conductors, e.g., a variety of lattice geometries and the highly compressible feature, led to the elucidation of fundamental principles and the finding of new phenomena, such as bandwidth-controlled Mott transitions and possible quantum spin liquids. However, most organic superconductors have commensurate band fillings, such as a half or a quarter, whereas inorganic superconductors, such as high-Tc cuprates and iron-based superconductors, have often been investigated under the variation of their band fillings. Thus, the physical linkage between organic and inorganic superconductors has remained unresolved. In this review article, we focus on the layered nonstoichiometric superconductor, κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8, which is exceptional among organic conductors in that the nonstoichiometry serves as doping to a half-filled band. Moreover, the strong correlation of electrons and a geometrically frustrated triangular lattice make this system exhibit the unique phenomena involved in Mottness, spin liquidity, and superconductivity, which are key concepts of correlated electron physics. This review will summarize what we learned from the pressure study of κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 and how they relate to the extensively studied issues in inorganic materials. The 1980s was a period of discovery of various superconducting organic crystals, such as TMTSF-based compounds and BEDT-TTF-based compounds, where TMTSF and BEDT-TTF represent tetramethyltetraselenafulvalence and bis(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene, respectively Among them is the paper on superconductivity in κ-(BEDT-TTF) 4 Hg 2.89 Br 8 (κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 ), published in 1987 In the 1990s, it began to be recognized that organic conductors are suitable for studying strongly correlated electron systems The development of Mott physics in κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds has provided the basis for κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 to be viewed as a doped Mott insulator. However, this did not immediately lead to the development of the physics of doped systems in organic conductors because of the difficulties of experiments. κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 often exhibits crystalline phases other than the targeted phase In the 2000s, experimental indications of a quantum spin liquid (QSL) in κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 led to further interest in κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds In this review, we describe how the study of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 has opened up new aspects of strongly correlated electron systems. Analogous to the bandwidthcontrolled Mott transition in a half-filled system, how do electron correlations give rise to nonperturbative effects in the doped system? Although charge is not mobile in QSL states of a half-filled system, how does carrier doping superimpose charge degrees of freedom over the exotic spin states? How does superconductivity emerge in these situations? Although there is still much to be learned about these diverse phenomena from κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 , this review summarizes what we have found in the doped Mott insulator. In Chapter 2, we provide an overview of the Mott transition, QSL and superconductivity exhibited by κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds for a clearer understanding of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 . Because many review articles are available on these topics in κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds A characteristic feature of κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds is that materials with similar crystal structures exhibit a wide variety of electronic states. In all compounds, electrons in the HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) of BEDT-TTF molecules are solely responsible for the electrical conduction and magnetism. Therefore, although the phenomena are diverse, they can be attributed to the behavior of electrons in the same type Fig. Based on the extended Hückel and tight binding approximations, the dimer formation of two molecules makes the HOMOs split into bonding and antibonding orbitals. When the intra-dimer transfer integral t b1 is several times larger than the inter-dimer transfer integrals, the conduction band composed of antibonding HO-MOs is half-filled (Fig. Because of the anti-bonding nature of the dimer orbital, an inter-dimer bonding is stabilized when their wave functions have opposite signs (Fig. In the above tight-binding picture, we regard a dimer as a site, and thus, the onsite Coulomb repulsion U means an energy increase due to the occupation of two electrons (or two holes in the present case) on a dimer. Therefore, the value of U is different from an on-molecular repulsion U mol , which is approximately 4 eV without screening A Mott insulating state emerges because of electron correlation in a half-filled system, where the number of electrons in the conduction band equals that of the lattice sites. When U exceeds the energy gain of forming a conduction band, the double occupancy is strongly prohibited, and then every electron becomes localized at each lattice site, resulting in the insulating state. Such Mott insulating states appear in a wide variety of materials, such as oxides, chalcogenides, organic crystals, and more recently twisted bilayer graphene Fig. Cl, and κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 , together with those for the doped compound κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 Although the absolute values depend on the methods, they share the magnitude relation; the t ′ /t value of κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 is close to unity and decreases in the order κ- Thus, κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 is closest to the right triangular lattice system among the half-filled compounds. Because the critical U/W value of the Mott transition depends on the t ′ /t value Molecules are mainly held together by van der Waals bonds or weak ionic bonds in organic crystals, whereas inorganic crystals consist of stronger chemical bonds between atoms. The difference in the strength of chemical bonds leads to a compressibility for organic crystals that is higher than that for inorganic crystals. For example, the compressibility values are 6.8%/GPa for κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 periments When the band filling deviates from half by carrier doping, the doped carriers can be conductive even under the prohibition of double occupancy. Although the doped carriers tend to be trapped by polaron formation, Anderson localization, or charge ordering, they can be conductive as in high-T c cuprates. Then, what will happen when U/W is varied in such doped systems? The system will always be conductive, but prohibited double occupancy is allowed with decreasing U/W . In Chapter 4, an implication of the "bandwidth-controlled Mottness transition" in such situations is discussed with the experimental studies of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 . In the Mott insulating state of κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds, an antibonding HOMO is an open shell, and a localized electron hosts a spin degree of freedom. A finite probability of inter-dimer electron transfer causes a magnetic interaction between spins, which is usually antiferromagnetic. Although classical spins are expected to form AF order, quantum mechanical spins can form a spin singlet, and thus the magnetism of Mott insulators is nontrivial A Mott insulator with a nearly right triangular lattice κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 is reported to show a QSL-like properties, whereas a Mott insulator with an anisotropic triangular lattice κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu[N(CN) 2 ]Cl undergoes AF ordering From a theoretical point of view, the resonatingvalence-bond (RVB) state was proposed by P. W. Anderson as an analogy to the benzene ring While studies on spin excitations are thus underway, charge excitations in quantum spin liquids are also intriguing. The charge excitations of κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 are gapped at ambient pressure, but the charge gap becomes vanishingly small under pressure toward the critical pressure of bandwidth-controlled Mott transition. Then, charge degrees of freedom would be mixed with spin degrees of freedom Quantum-mechanically degenerate degrees of freedom are often unstable at low temperatures, and can form an ordered state by lifting the degeneracy. For instance, a density wave is formed via Fermi surface nesting and a superconducting state is formed via Cooper pairing. In correlated electron materials, the lifting of degeneracy relates to multiple energy scales, and we refer to such coexistence of energy scales as energetic hierarchy. What does it look like to trace the energetic hierarchy of κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu[N(CN) 2 ]Cl from high energy to low energy, or from high temperature to low temperature? Concerning the conduction electrons in the antibonding HOMO band, the largest energy scales are the onsite Coulomb repulsion U and the bandwidth W , which are on the order of 10 3 -10 4 K, as schematically summarized in Fig. In the low-pressure Mott-insulating regime, further cooling results in magnetic ordering at a temperature of a few tens of Kelvin in κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu[N(CN) 2 ]Cl Because the energy scales of electronic correlation U and bandwidth W are one order of magnitude larger than that of thermal fluctuations at room temperature, electrons in the conduction band are neither delocalized as waves nor localized as particles. In this sense, electronic states are quantum mechanically degenerate as shown in the scaling analysis of resistivity In a doped Mott insulator, the doped carriers can be conductive, even in the presence of a large U value exceeding W . Then, what does the energetic hierarchy look like when a doped Mott insulator exhibits superconductivity? A good starting point to trace the energetic hierarchy may not be a conventional Fermi liquid in which electron correlation is regarded as a perturbation. This review traces the energetic hierarchy of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 from high energy to low energy, namely, the synthesis of the crystal in Chapter 3, Mott physics in Chapter 4, magnetism in Chapter 5, and superconductivity in Chapter 6. Although κ-(BEDT-TTF) 4 Hg 2.89 Br 8 (κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 ) has an almost identical molecular arrangement to the half-filled κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds mentioned in Chapter 2, it hosts two sublattices that are incommensurate with each other Most BEDT-TTF salts are synthesized by electrolytic oxidation of the solution in which BEDT-TTF molecules and supporting electrolyte are dissolved. Oxidized BEDT-TTF becomes a radical and binds to the cationic electrolyte. In the earliest synthesis methods, the electrolytes were relatively simple tetrabutylammonium (TBA) salts (e.g., TBAI 3 , TBAIBr 2 in the cases of the anions of I 3 and IBr 2 , respectively) Later, the development of synthesis methods enabled to crystalize the compounds whose counter anions are present only in solution, not in an ingredient salt. For instance, in κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 Therefore, it is necessary to first prepare this divalent anion for the synthesis of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 from the ingredients TBAHgBr 3 and HgBr 2 . The density of [Hg 3 Br 8 ] 2-can be adjusted by the amount of HgBr 2 added to the solvent. In addition to the preparation of [Hg 3 Br 8 ] 2-, the subsequent electrochemical synthesis is complex. If the amount of HgBr 2 is too high, then nucleation of a crystal frequently occurs during electrochemical synthesis, resulating in a large number of small crystals. To obtain a large single crystal, we followed the synthesis conditions described in the literature In our synthesis, we first placed two kinds of so-lutes, TBANHgBr 3 and HgBr 2 , in a 1,1,2-trichloroethane solvent with concentrations of 18.7 mmol/L and 0.30 mmol/L, respectively, and stirred for one day. Since previous studies Crystals of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 are easily distinguished from other polymorphs by their shapes; κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 has a rhombic shape as shown in Fig. When one tries to control band filling, mixed crystals are often used in high-T c cuprates La 2-x Sr 2 CuO 4 where La and Sr ions are trivalent and divalent, respectively However, superconductivity has not been achieved in these organic mixed crystals as they exhibit an nonmetallic temperature dependence of resistivity at low temperatures. One possible reason for the nonmetallic behaviors is the localization of carriers due to an irregular electrostatic potential from randomly distributed multiple kinds of anions. The disorder effect is pronounced in organic materials, whose bandwidth is typically several to ten times smaller than that of inorganic materials such as high-T c cuprates. In κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 , chemical doping is realized due to the incommensurate crystal structure, which is also the case for κ-(BEDT-TTF) 4 Hg 2.78 Cl 8 Another characteristic feature in the structure of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 is a nearly isotropic triangular lattice When the on-site Coulomb repulsion U is sufficiently larger than the bandwidth W , double occupancy of electrons at a lattice site is strongly prohibited. The tendency or degree of prohibited double occupation is often referred to as Mottness Four-probe resistivity measurement is a straightforward approach to study electrical conduction phenomena. However, the inhomogeneity of local resistivity in a sample may obscure the interpretation of measurement results. The current path is determined so that the resistance is minimized and thus may also be inhomogeneous. The measurements under pressure, which may induce inhomogeneity in the internal pressure, should be even more cautious about this. In this respect, liquids are employed as pressure media because the fluidity of the liquid homogenizes the pressure at the sample surface. This allows isotropic pressure, or hydrostatic pressure, to be applied up to the solidification pressure of the pressure medium. The first transport study on κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 under pres- sure was reported by Bud'ko et al. in 1992 A way to minimize inhomogeneity in current path, which inevitably depends on the geometry of electrodes attached to the crystal, is to perform contactless con-ductivity measurements, which are ac susceptibility measurements in the MHz frequency range. When an ac magnetic field is applied to a metallic material, eddy currents induced by electromagnetic induction cause a diamagnetic response (Fig. The temperature-pressure dependence of the exponent α in ρ // = ρ o + AT α is essential for understanding how electron correlations affect their conduction, where ρ o and A are the residual resistivity and the temperature coefficient, respectively. However, the emergence of superconductivity in a pressure range below 1.5 GPa hinders the determination of ρ o , which is necessary to obtain an accurate value of α. Then, the temperature-pressure dependence was investigated by suppressing superconductivity with a magnetic field to determine the ρ o values A T -linear behavior of resistivity is also observed in the doped Mott insulators, high-T c cuprates The Hall coefficient R H is inversely proportional to the carrier density in the simplest view. From the data at 10 K, one can see a clear pressure dependence of R H in κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 (Fig. Pressure does not change the chemical composition and therefore the band filling of HOMO-based conduction bands is fixed. Thus, it is not straightforward to explain the pressure dependence of R H . In general, several factors can contribute to the Hall coefficient, including the carrier density, anisotropy of the carrier mobility, and gauge fields A comparison of the pressure dependence of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 with that of the non-doped κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds reveals a generalized picture of the Mott transition (Fig. The critical U/W values of the Mottness transition are estimated to be 1.07 for κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 and 0.88 for κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 based on extended Hückel and tight binding approximations Bandwidth-controlled metal-insulator transitions observed in non-doped organic compounds and band-fillingcontrolled metal-insulator transitions widely studied in inorganic materials like cuprates have been discussed in parallel In a conventional Fermi liquid state, conduction electrons exhibit Pauli-paramagnetism, obeying Fermi statistics whereas electrons in a Mott insulator lose the charge degrees of freedom and behave like a localized spin system. Thus, Mottness is closely related to magnetism. Then, what does magnetism of doped Mott insulators look like? A doped Mott insulator is similar to a Mott insulator in terms of Mottness, whereas it is similar to a conventional Fermi liquid in terms of metallicity. A wellknown manifestation possessing contradictory properties is a spin gap in the metallic state as observed in high-T c cuprates. What makes κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 even more unique is that the parent Mott insulator can be a QSL instead of antiferromagnets for the cuprates. This chapter describes the magnetism of the triangular-lattice doped Mott insulator κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 . ). Jχspin is plotted against T /J, where χspin is defined per mole of spin and J is in units of kB. The inset shows the in-plane resistivity of the two compounds. Reprented from Ref. We comment on the scaling in terms of J. In Fig. A prominent feature in the scaled susceptibility is a sharp decrease at low temperatures below ∼ 0.1 J, which is out of the relevant temperature range of the series expansion. Although a triangular-lattice Heisenberg model results in 120-degree long-range order at the lowest temperature, magnetic ordering is absent in these compounds In the possible doped QSL state of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 , the charge and spin degrees of freedom seem to be separately excited in a conducting layer as discussed in the preceeding section. In this situation, let's consider the interlayer transfer of electrons. It should accompany the simultaneous transfer of charge and spin because they are usually inseparable as the constituent degrees of freedom of an electron. This means that the interlayer charge transport requires its recoupling with the separated spin degrees of freedom. Thus, even in a metallic state within the layers, it is nontrivial whether the our-of-plane resistivity ρ ⊥ is FIG. Figs. 13(a) and 13(b) compare the ρ ⊥ and ρ // of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 . Remarkably, ρ ⊥ exhibits nonmetallic behavior over a wide temperature range and sharply turns to metallic below 20 K at 0.1 and 0.15 GPa Of particular interest is the contrasting behavior of ρ // and ρ ⊥ in the low-pressure region. In the non-doped compound κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu[N(CN) 2 ]Cl, ρ // and ρ ⊥ simultaneously change from a metallic to an insulating temperature dependence across the critical pressure of the metal-insulator transitions This argument on the nonmetallic behavior of ρ ⊥ provokes further interest in why it changes to metallic be-havior under pressure or upon cooling. The pressure induces the bandwidth-controlled Mottness transition from a strange metal to a Fermi liquid as discussed in Chapter 4. In a Fermi liquid, elementary excitations are carried by quasi-particles with charge and spin combined, whose transport is essentially the same in the intra and interlayer directions. Interestingly, the nonmetallic behavior crosses over to the metallic one upon cooling in the lowpressure region. This implies that spin and charge are coupled in a different manner from a conventional Fermi liquid state because the temperature-linear behavior of ρ // persists down to the lowest temperature. Thus, it would be an intriguing issue to examine how the separated spin and charge degrees of freedom recouple to form unknown elementary excitations at low temperatures. The specific heat measurements underscore the unique excitations in κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 To view the present results with a more broad perspective, we compare the present single-orbital material κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 with multi-orbital metallic QSL candidates Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 and CePdAl, in which localized and itinerant electrons coexist When the localized f -electron spins are subject to spin frustration, e. g., in the Shastry-Sutherland lattice and pyrochlore lattices, a metallic state with a QSL nature can emerge as theoretically suggested Superconductivity often appears when doping or pressurizing Mott insulators, as represented by high-T c cuprates, iron-based compounds, fullerides and κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds, implying an intimate relationship between superconductivity and Mottness. However, because the energy scale of on-site Coulomb repulsion is much larger than that of cooper pairing, we need concepts that connect the phenomena of this energetic hierarchy. Mottness can be varied while metallicity is maintained in pressure experiments on κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 as mentioned in Chapter 4, and thus κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 is a suitable material for investigating the role of Mottness in the emergence of superconductivity. Furthermore, κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 also enables to clarify the relationship between spin liquidity and superconductivity, which has been of theoretical interest A. Pressure dependence of the superconducting transition temperature Superconductivity in κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 was first reported in 1987 by Lyubovskaya et al., [109], who also found a nonmetallic phase emerging at high pressures; however, it has not been reproduced. Contrastingly, there was observed a resistivity drop reminiscent of superconductivity at high pressures exceeding 3 GPa The pressure dependence of T c shows a peak at a pressure of approximately 0.5 GPa, which corresponds to the pressure range of the bandwidth-controlled Mottness rf above Tc is due to the skin effect, which enables contactless conductivity measurements, as described in Chapter 4. Reprinted from Ref. transition, as described in Chapter 4. In non-doped κtype BEDT-TTF compounds As seen in the chapter 4, the nature of carriers responsible for electrical conduction on the low-pressure side of the T c dome differs from that on the high-pressure side. Thus, one may expect something different in Cooper paring between the two pressure regimes. On the highpressure side, the quasiparticles of the Fermi liquid form Cooper pairs; however, in a state where conventional quasi-particles are not well defined, the formation of Cooper pairs is difficult to be described. A critical magnetic field probes the spatial extent of the Cooper pair and thus its pressure variation gives insight into this issue. Fig. Having clarified the pressure variation of ξ // , it is of interest to know how many Cooper pairs spatially overlap with one another. Whereas more than 10,000 pairs overlap in typical Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductors, such as Sn or Pb, the overlapping of only a few pairs or less takes on the nature of a Bose-Einstein Condensation (BEC) C. How does the doped quantum spin liquid form superconductivity? Taken together with the discussions in this review, κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 is suggested to host a doped QSL that exhibits BEC-like superconductivity at low pressures. The charge transport, which is confined in the layer at high temperatures, gets interlayer phase coherence below 20 K and condensate into a superonducting state below 6 K as discussed in Chapter 5. Thus, the behavior of the phase of their wave function is a key to the superconducting condensate. In the vicinity of the superconducting transition under a magnetic field, flowing vortices or preformed Cooper pairs are accompanied by phase fluctuations of the wave functions. Such superconducting fluctuations are known to cause the Nernst signal e N (=E y /▽ x T ), which is an electric field generation E y perpendicular to a thermal gradient ▽ x T and magnetic field B z , as observed in cuprates, iron chalcogenides, and organic conductors Figs. 18(a)-18(d) display the magnetic-field dependences of e N at several fixed temperatures under pressures of 0.3, 0.5, 0.65, and 0.9 GPa, together with their contour plots (Figs. 18(e)-18(h)) In this review, we describe what the study of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 has opened up in the physics of strongly correlated electron systems. The pressure variation in the resistivity and Hall coefficient suggests that a bandwidthcontrolled Mott-like transition, called Mottness transition here, occurs even in the condition that the band filling deviates from a half. Unlike the metal-insulator transitions in half-filled systems, pressure variation of Mottness in the doped system brings about two kinds of metallic states: a non-Fermi liquid and a conventional Fermi liquid, as described in Chapter 4. In the non-Fermi liquid regime, the spin susceptibility of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 behave almost identically to the quantum spin liquid (QSL) in the Mott insulator κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 when scaled by the exchange interactions. The invariant QSLlike behaviors irrespective of whether it is metal or insulator demonstrates a spin-charge separation driven by Mottness. The charge transport is confined in a layer at high tempeartures, but gains interlayer coherence at low temperatures, forming unconventionally degenerative excitations, as described in Chapter 5. Out of the degeneracy, preformed pairs gradually appear on cooling as seeds of superconductivity, as indicated by the enhancement of Nernst effects, and eventually, a superconducting transition occurs. The upper critical field of superconductivity strongly depends on pressure, and the deduced inter-Cooper-pair distance uncovered a drastic pressure variation in superconducting nature from Bose-Einstein Condensation-like to Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer-like, as described in Chapter 6. Thus, we traced the energetic hierarchy of κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 in the order of Mottness, spin liquidity, and superconductivity, which occur in charge, spin, and charge-spin coupled degrees of freedom, respectively. At each energy scale, correlated electrons exhibit unconventional behaviors and the pressure control of correlation reveals how the unconventional states transition into the conventional metal and superconductor. In this review, we discussed the physics behind the experimental results particularly focusing on transport, thermoelectric and magnetic properties. Although experimental methods available under pressure are limited, the extension of these measurements to much higher magnetic fields or spectroscopic studies are expected to afford deeper insight into the interplay between QSL and charges or unveil novel phenomena yet to be observed in strongly correlated systems so far. On the other hand, we anticipate that the development of synthesis methods that produce pressure-controllable doped Mott insulators other than κ-Hg 2.89 Br 8 will widen the present discussion based on a specific material to a broader perspective. Moreover, a comprehensive understanding of correlated electrons should require integration of concepts across multiple research areas, for example, as we compared the present single-band system with heavy electron systems with multiband. It may be a promissing way in this line to attempt to find physical linkage among the diverse phenomena in various materials. We hope this review will help find cross-disciplinary concepts for correlated electrons.