The study of planetary atmospheres is critical to our understanding of the origin and evolution of the Solar System. The combined effect of various physical and chemical processes over billions of years have resulted in a variety of planetary atmospheres across the Solar System. This paper performs a comparative study of planetary atmospheres and their engineering implications for future entry and aerocapture missions. The thick Venusian atmosphere results in high deceleration and heating rates and presents a demanding environment for both atmospheric entry and aerocapture. The thin Martian atmosphere allows low aerodynamic heating, but itself is not enough to decelerate a lander to sufficiently low speeds for a soft landing. With their enormous gravity wells, Jupiter and Saturn entry result in very high entry speeds, deceleration, and heating making them the most demanding destinations for atmospheric entry and impractical for aerocapture. Titan is a unique destination, with its low gravity and greatly extended thick atmosphere enabling low deceleration and heating loads for entry and aerocapture. Uranus and Neptune also have large gravity wells, resulting in high entry speeds, high deceleration and heating compared to the inner planets, but are still less demanding than Jupiter or Saturn. The study of planetary atmospheres is critical to our understanding of the origin and evolution of the Solar System Earth and Venus have similar mass and radius leading to very similar gravity and atmospheric extent, but the Venus atmosphere is much thicker than that of Earth, approximately by two orders of magnitude as seen in Figure Mars however has only about 40% of Earth's gravity and the density at the surface is nearly two orders of magnitude less compared to that of Earth. The thicker Venus atmosphere implies aerodynamic heating rates for atmospheric entry are much higher at Venus compared to Earth, even though the entry speeds are similar due to identical gravity. Figure All planetary entry missions use the deceleration provided by the atmosphere to slow down spacecraft. In this section, we perform a numerical experiment of dropping a descent probe from the top of the atmosphere at each planet and analyze its descent profile. The hypothetical descent probe is modeled based on the Galileo probe, with a mass of 125 kg, and a diameter of 0.66 m. The probe is dropped from the top of the atmosphere and its trajectory is propagated until surface impact using AMAT Figure The hypothetical probe starts experiencing the deceleration effect at about 60 km above the surface, and it slows down considerably even without a parachute. As the probe descents, the increasing density slows it down more the further it descends into the atmosphere. In fact the Venusian lower atmosphere is so thick, that it is comparable to the probe falling in an ocean than an atmosphere. On the Earth, the descent rate is initially comparable to that of Venus, due to the similar gravity but the Earth's atmosphere being not as thick as Venus, the probe starts decelerating only below 20 km. The descent time is approximately 5 minutes. On Mars, the initial descent rate is slower due to the low gravity, but the total descent time is again 5 minutes. The thin Martian atmosphere is unable to effect any significant deceleration on the probe, as seen in the slope of the descent profile still being quite high at impact compared to Earth and Venus. Figure Among the inner planets, Venus has the thickest atmosphere and the highest surface temperature and pressure. The high deceleration and aerodynamic heating rates at Venus present a more demanding entry environment than the Earth or Mars. The heating rates are within the capability of ablative thermal protection systems such as HEEET and will likely be used on future entry probe missions. Aerocapture at Venus using rigid aeroshells is technically feasible, but not an attractive option due to the high deceleration and heating rates Mars has a fairly thin atmosphere which can provide some deceleration for entry, but is often not enough to slow them down enough before they reach the surface. With the lowest deceleration and heating rates in the inner Solar System, Mars presents a relatively benign target for entry and aerocapture. This makes it particularly attractive for payloads using deployable entry systems Jupiter and Saturn have enormous gravity wells which result in very high entry speeds, and results in the most extreme deceleration and aero-thermal loads anywhere in the Solar System. This presents severe challenges for atmospheric probe entry and makes orbiter aerocapture practically infeasible at these destinations Titan is a unique destination, with its low gravity and extended thick atmosphere making it the most benign destination for both planetary entry and aerocapture. Its low gravity implies the entry speeds are the lowest anywhere in the outer Solar System, and the thick extended atmosphere keeps the deceleration and heating rates low. The long descent time to the surface which takes over an hour simplifies entry operations compared to Mars entry which takes only a few minutes. For aerocapture, the combination of low gravity and extended atmosphere results in the largest scale height, and consequently provides the largest corridor width anywhere in the Solar System Uranus and Neptune also have large gravity wells, resulting in high entry speeds and high aerodynamic heating, but they are much less demanding than Jupiter or Saturn. Typical heating rates are in the range of 1000-5000 W/cm 2 , within the capability of HEEET thermal protection system The combined effect of various physical and chemical processes over billions of years have resulted in a variety of planetary atmospheres across the Solar System. In addition to their scientific value, the diversity of atmospheres also has engineering implications for planetary missions. The paper performed a comparative study of the planetary atmospheres and explored their engineering implications for future entry and aerocapture missions. The atmospheric structure and composition of the various planetary bodies is compared. The thick Venusian atmosphere results in high deceleration and heating rates and presents a demanding environment for both atmospheric entry and aerocapture. However, aerocapture is an attractive option for inserting small satellites into orbit using deployable low-ballistic coefficient system. The thin Martian atmosphere allows low aerodynamic heating, but itself is not enough to decelerate a lander to sufficiently low speeds for a soft landing. With the lowest deceleration and heating rates in the inner Solar System, Mars presents a relatively benign target for entry and aerocapture missions. This makes it particularly attractive for payloads using deployable entry systems, and a low-cost aerocapture technology demonstrator mission. With their enormous gravity wells, Jupiter and Saturn entry result in very high entry speeds, deceleration, and heating making them the most demanding destinations for atmospheric entry and impractical for aerocapture. Saturn's moon Titan is a unique destination in the Solar System, with its low gravity and greatly extended thick atmosphere. Its low gravity implies the entry speeds are the lowest anywhere in the outer Solar System, and the thick extended atmosphere keeps the deceleration and heating rates low. The long descent time to the surface which takes over an hour simplifies entry operations compared to Mars entry which takes only a few minutes. The combination of low gravity and extended atmosphere results in the largest scale height, and consequently provides the largest corridor width and most benign environment anywhere in the Solar System for both atmospheric entry and aerocapture. Uranus and Neptune also have large gravity wells, resulting in high entry speeds and high aerodynamic heating, but they are much less demanding than Jupiter or Saturn. Existing entry vehicles and thermal protection system materials are sufficient for both atmospheric entry and aerocapture at Uranus and Neptune. While aerocapture is not considered for the currently proposed Uranus Orbiter and Probe Flagship mission, aerocapture has been shown to be able to enable significantly shorter trip times, as well as insert more useful mass into orbit around both Uranus and Neptune.