We propose a spin Hall effect (SHE) enhancement mechanism due to Kramers-Weyl point (KWP) alignment in chiral topological semimetals with high Chern numbers (CNs). Through model Hamiltonian calculations, we identify enhancements in the intrinsic spin Hall conductivity (SHC) and the spin Hall angle (SHA). Such enhancements, attributed to a unique high CN KWP energetic alignment and a high degree of SOC-induced band nesting, strongly depend on orbital-orbital interactions. This represents a novel mechanism to enhance SHE, differing from the spin-orbit induced anticrossing mechanism in gapped systems. Guided by this principle, we corroborate our results by means of first-principles calculations and reveal multiple realistic materials with large intrinsic SHCs and even larger SHAs than Pt. Introduction. The efficient generation of spin currents is a highly sought-after goal within the spintronics community Analogous to the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in magnetic systems, where a larger AHE can be achieved in topological systems with higher Chern numbers (CNs) Previous intrinsic SHE studies on topological materials mainly examined gapped systems with C = 1, where SOC-induced gaps are responsible for the large SHC In this letter, we propose a distinctive intrinsic SHE Chiral Semimetal Toy Models. We begin by considering a time-reversal (T -) symmetric, single-orbital, CTS model with C = 1 KWPs, which describes crystalline systems from SG-16 where the first three terms are NN hoppings, t i s , i = 1-3 denoting the hopping amplitude along x, y, and z directions. The following three terms are SOC components that define the chirality with SOC strengths t i SO To understand the correlation between the SHC and CN in semimetallic systems, we build upon Eq. ( with two distinct diagonal blocks and one offdiagonal term, H c , which defines OOC. For simplicity, and consistency with the previous model, the OOC matrix, H c = t ΓR 12 [3 cos (k z ) + 2 cos (k y ) -5 cos (k x )]I, is chosen to preserve electron-hole, time-reversal, and SG-16 crystalline symmetries Before turning on OOC, this model represents a trivial duplication of the two-band model in Eq. ( To investigate the effect of OOC on the SHC, we plot the maximum possible SHC as a function of OOC strength, t ΓR 12 [Fig. We further investigate systems with higher CNs, i.e., C = 3 and 4, using a six and eight-band model Hamiltonian by increasing the orbital degeneracy to three and four orbitals, respectively The correlation between SHA and CN under variable OOC is less obvious, since the effect of band degeneracy is factored out. To investigate this, we calculate the difference of SHCs and SHAs at E F = 3eV (energy of high CN KWP at Γ) between C = 2 and C = 3 models for 0.01eV ≤ t ΓR 12 ≤ 0.5eV, as displayed in Fig. These results indicate that gapless higher CN systems can concurrently have higher SHCs and SHAs under KWP alignment, which is tunable through OOC. We note that a trivial increase in the orbital degeneracy in the absence of OOC would render a nearly constant SHA with variable CN We note that the Hamiltonians used thus far rely critically on the specific form of the OOC, which is artificial and may not represent realistic material systems. Fortunately, such simple artificial models can be used to describe realistic chiral systems with an appropriate choice of OOC consistent with the symmetries of a specific chiral space group. We elaborate on this point in the highest CN system and demonstrate an enhanced SHC and, more importantly, SHA enhancement with high CN KWP alignment. Chiral Semimetal With C = 4. Building upon Eq. ( where the first term is an on-site potential and the second describes NNN interactions, as inherited from Eq. ( The band structure, energy-dependent SHC, and SHA at high CN KWP alignment are presented in Fig. SHC and SHA of SG-198 CTSs. Guided by the preceding principles, we focus on material systems with C = 4, i.e. CTSs from SG-198, to identify materials with large SHCs and SHAs. We studied 37 materials within SG-198 with non-magnetic ground states and the required chiral crystal structure Finally, the calculated SHAs (θ = 2e ħ σ z xy σyy ) and SHCs (σ z xy ) for 37 materials from SG-198 (and fcc Pt: θ P t = 0.028 Conclusions and Perspectives. We systematically investigated the intrinsic spin Hall effect (SHE) in topological semimetallic systems with high Chern numbers (CN), which suggests that SHE enhancement can occur under the energetic alignment of high CN Kramers-Weyl points (KWP). At C = 4 KWP alignment, the spin Hall conductivity reveals a characteristic camel-back structure, whose stationary points can be traced to constructive contributions from intense spin Berry curvature hotspots near the high CN KWPs and SOC-induced nested bands emanating from these high degeneracy KWPs. It is important to note that the high CNs in the models studied here are mainly due to high band degeneracies. However, there are gapless systems with high CNs, which are due to higher-order band dispersions 