Systems with flat bands are ideal for studying strongly correlated electronic states and related phenomena. Among them, kagome-structured metals such as CoSn have been recognized as promising candidates due to the proximity between the flat bands and the Fermi level. A key next step will be to realize epitaxial kagome thin films with flat bands to enable tuning of the flat bands across the Fermi level via electrostatic gating or strain. Here we report the band structures of epitaxial CoSn thin films grown directly on insulating substrates. Flat bands are observed using synchrotron-based 1 coupling. In terms of material selection, CoSn stands out due to the existence of flat bands several hundreds of meV below Fermi level and spread across a large portion of the Brillouin zone (BZ). In this paper, we demonstrate epitaxial CoSn thin films grown on insulating substrates as a promising platform to realize flat-band physics. The growth of (0001)-oriented CoSn thin films on insulating MgO(111) and 4H-SiC(0001) substrates was enabled by a three-step MBE growth recipe. Using synchrotron-based ARPES, we directly measured the band structure of the CoSn thin films, and revealed multiple flat bands. At the Γ point, spin-orbit coupling (SOC) gaps were observed between one of the flat bands and the quadratic bands, suggesting the nontrivial topology of this flat band. Using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we studied the tunability of the flat bands through carrier doping and found that the calculations are consistent with the ARPES experiments. Finally, we measured the transport properties of CoSn and quantitatively explained the results using the band structure and semiclassical transport theory. Having synthesized the epitaxial CoSn thin films, the questions one would raise is whether or not our thin films have flat bands, and whether or not the flat bands are topologically nontrivial if they exist. The most straightforward method to answer these questions is to directly measure the band structures using ARPES. In this study, we utilized the synchrotron-based ARPES to map the band structures of a 25 nm CoSn thin films grown on MgO(111) and 4H-SiC(0001) substrates (see SI section S1.3 for methods). In the following discussion, we will mainly focus on the band structures of CoSn on 4H-SiC(0001) substrates, while the band structures of CoSn on MgO(111) substrate are presented in SI section S4.1. Figure Lorentzian fitting of energy distribution curves (EDCs) around the H point gives a binding energy of -0.04 eV for FB1, with effective mass m * =16.7 m 0 along the H-L direction, where m 0 is the mass of free electrons. Meanwhile, fitting EDCs at the A and L points yields -0.31 eV and -0.32 eV binding energies, respectively (see SI section S4.4 for details). It is noteworthy that FB1 is reported to be accountable for the anomalous anisotropic transport properties and orbital magnetic moment in bulk CoSn, due to its proximity to the Fermi level. We next measured the band structures of CoSn thin films in the k z = 0 (mod 2π) plane by changing the photon energy to 128 eV. Different from the k z = π (mod 2π) plane in which two sets of flat bands can be observed, in the k z = 0 (mod 2π) plane only the FB2 can be seen ∼0.3 eV below the Fermi level. The fitting results of the EDCs at multiple high-symmetry points across the 1st BZ suggest that the variation of FB2 binding energy is within ±0.03 eV, signifying the dispersionless nature of FB2 (See SI section S4.4). An important question yet to be answered is whether the flat bands are topologically non-trivial for the CoSn thin films. Theoretically, the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) opens a gap between the flat band and quadratic band (QB) at the band touching point, making the flat band topologically non-trivial. Lorentzian fitting of representative EDCs along this direction yields a SOC gap of 0.12 eV between FB2 and the top QB (Figure To investigate the tunability of the flat bands by carrier doping, we performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations (see SI section S1.4 for methods). Figure (a) (b) The relationship between the transport properties and the band structure of CoSn has been discussed qualitatively, where τ i is the carrier relaxation time, ε(k) is the energy dispersion, and f is the distribution function. Meanwhile, the contribution to Hall conductivity σ H from band i is given by: 23 Since only partially occupied bands contribute to the transport at low temperatures, we hereby calculated the σ xx /τ i and σ H /τ 2 i for the bands crossing the Fermi level, namely band I (cyan), II (pink), III (blue), and IV (gold) in Figure Assuming a universal and k-independent relaxation time τ for all bands, we calculated the Hall coefficient R H by: 23 which is independent of relaxation time τ . With this method, our theory gives a Hall resistivity of -1.0×10 -9 m 3 /C, which has the same order of magnitude as the experimental value of -1.6×10 -9 m 3 /C at T = 5 K. The major contribution to the Hall coefficient comes from band I (see Table This analysis also yields values for σ xx that are consistent with our experimental results if we assume reasonable values for τ , as discussed in SI section S6. Our theoretical modeling bridges the gap between the band structure and the experimentally measured transport properties of CoSn. In conclusion, we synthesized the epitaxial CoSn thin films directly on insulating substrates and studied their electronic band structures. The three-step growth generated highly ordered CoSn (0001) thin films, as confirmed by a combination of RHEED, XRD, and STEM. The electronic band structures of CoSn thin films were measured with synchrotron-based ARPES. The flat bands were clearly visualized and the topologically non-trivial nature of the flat band is signified by the spin-orbit coupling gap at the band touching point. The ARPES measurement, DFT calculations, and the transport properties of CoSn are consistent with each other not only qualitatively but also quantitatively. One very interesting direction in the near future will be the fabrication of devices that allows voltage gating in order to tune the flat bands across the Fermi level. This work makes the epitaxial CoSn thin films ready for studies of strongly correlated electronic states and flat band-induced phenomena. See SI section S1. The epitaxial growth of CoSn thin films was performed in an ultra-high vacuum chamber with a base pressure of 2×10 -9 Torr. Prior to the growth, the MgO(111) or 4H-SiC(0001) substrates were degassed in-situ at 500 • C for 20 minutes. After annealing, the nucleation layer of 5 nm CoSn was grown at 500 The cross-sectional STEM samples were prepared by Ga ion milling using an FEI Helios Nano Lab 600 Dual Beam focused ion beam (FIB) operated at 30 kV and 5 kV. Final cleaning passes to remove any amorphous damage layers created in the FIB were performed in a Fischione Nanomill with 900 V and then 500 V Ar ions at Cryogenic temperature. HAADF-STEM imaging was performed using a probe-corrected Themis-ZTM at 300 kV. Images were collected using the drift-corrected-frame-integration (DCFI) acquisition method within the Thermo Scientific Velox Software. The ARPES experiments were performed at Beamline 7.0.2 (MAESTRO) of the Advanced Light Source (ALS). The samples were transferred from the growth chamber into the ultra-high vacuum (UHV) suitcase and shipped to the ALS, then transferred from the UHV suitcase into the ARPES system. During the entire sample transfer procedure, the samples were kept under vacuum without exposure to air, to ensure a clean surface for ARPES experiments. The ARPES experiments were performed at T = 6 K. The photoemitted electrons were collected using a Scienta Omicron R4000 hemispherical electron analyzer, which provides energy and momentum resolution better than 30 meV, and 0.01 Å-1 , respectively. The geometry optimization and electronic structure calculations were performed using the first-principles method based on density functional theory (DFT) with the projectoraugmented-wave (PAW) formalism, as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). ? All calculations were carried out with a plane-wave cutoff energy of 550 eV and 15×15×11 Monkhorst-Pack grids were adopted for the first Brillouin zone integral. The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized-gradient approximation (GGA) was used to describe the exchange and correlation functional. The transport measurements were performed using a Quantum Design physical properties Using the lattice constant of the substrate as a reference for calibration, fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis of the STEM image over a few nanometer scale yields lattice constants of a = 5.36±0.24 Å and c = 4.25±0.12 Å for CoSn. The out-of-plane lattice constant c agrees well with our XRD result of c = 4.254 Å, and is consistent with previously reported values from bulk crystals ? and thin films. ? Meanwhile, the in-plane lattice constant a is 1.5% larger than the bulk value of a = 5.279 Å, ? but the difference is within the uncertainty of FFT results. Previous DFT calculations suggest that tensile strain shifts the flat bands downwards with respect to the Fermi level. ? Along the direction of growth, there is no obvious change in the lattice constants observed in STEM, suggesting that the strain is relaxed within the first few nanometers of growth. Figure on SiC(0001). In the k z = π (mod 2π) plane, FB1 can be seen using s-polarized photons (Figure The polarization dependence of ARPES spectrum originates from the matrix element effect, which is sensitive to the orbital nature of the bands. ? The observation above is consistent with the DFT results that FB1 and the upper branch of FB2 mainly originate from the d xy and d x 2 -y 2 orbitals, while the lower branch of FB2 mainly originates from the d xz and d yz orbitals. To examine the "flatness" of FB1, we extracted the energy distribution curves (EDCs) from the red box of Figure After fitting in the peak positions versus the corresponding momentum with a quadratic relationship, the m * is determined to be 16.7 m 0 along L-H direction, where m 0 is the mass of free electrons. The enhancement of effective mass comes from the dispersionless nature of FB1. points, as shown in Figure We performed additional DFT calculations with several representative doping levels varying from 1.0×10 22 holes/cm 3 to 1.0×10 22 electrons/cm 3 , as shown in Figure The calculation of transport properties was performed by numerical integration on a three-dimensional grid with 0.01 Å-1 step size. By assuming an isotropic relaxation time τ i for each band, we calculated σ The results are summarized in Table • C to improve the surface crystallinity. The Co and Sn materials were evaporated from Knudson cells, and the typical growth rates were 0.78 Å/min for Co, and 1.91 Å/min for Sn, respectively. The deposition rates were measured using a quartz crystal deposition monitor.