Stimulated Brillouin scattering (SBS), a coherent nonlinear effect coupling acoustics and optics, can be used in a wide range of applications such as Brillouin lasers and tunable narrowband RF filtering. Wide adoption of such technologies however, would need a balance of strong Brillouin interaction and low optical loss in a structure compatible with large scale fabrication. Achieving these characteristics in scalable platforms such as silicon and silicon nitride remains a challenge. Here, we investigate a scalable Brillouin platform combining low loss Si3N4 and tellurium oxide (TeO2) exhibiting strong Brillouin response and enhanced acoustic confinement. In this platform we measure a Brillouin gain coefficient of 8.5 m -1 W -1 , exhibiting a twenty fold improvement over the largest previously reported Brillouin gain in a Si3N4 platform. Further, we demonstrate cladding engineering to control the strength of the Brillouin interaction. We utilized the Brillouin gain and loss resonances in this waveguide for an RF photonic filter with more than 15 dB rejection and 250 MHz linewidth. Finally, we present a pathway by geometric optimization and cladding engineering to a further enhancement of the gain coefficient to 155 m -1 W -1 , a potential 400 times increase in the Brillouin gain coefficient. Stimulated Brillouin scattering (SBS), a nonlinear optical effect mediated through acoustic waves is a burgeoning field, which can be used in a wide range of fields, from telecommunications to sensing To achieve wide adoption of SBS in applications, the Brillouin nonlinearity needs to be integrated in scalable photonic platforms. Traditionally, high on-chip Brillouin gain in standard photonic platforms has been achieved by enhancing the effective length through low-loss waveguides Recently, a hybrid integration platform that combines standard wafer-scale thin silicon nitride and tellurium oxide (TeO 2 , tellurite) has been investigated, see Fig. In this work, we present a comprehensive study of SBS in tellurite-covered silicon nitride waveguides. We experimentally demonstrate, for the first time, SBS in such hybrid waveguides. We study the impact of cladding engineering to tailor the strength of Brillouin interactions in these waveguides. We further demonstrate RF photonic filtering through harnessing the Brillouin gain and loss resonances in our sample. Finally, we perform a geometric optimization via simulations, showing the possibility to improve the Brillouin gain factor by two orders of magnitude. These results represent the highest gain coefficient achieved in a silicon nitride-based circuit and open the possibility towards integrating a Brillouin engine in a tunable complex circuit for applications such as narrow linewidth lasers, frequency combs, and RF photonic signal processors. Our samples consist of single-stripe optical waveguides in LPCVD silicon nitride with a height of 100 nm, and width of 1600 nm. The entire chip is then covered with a layer of tellurite with a height of 354 nm (see Methods for details of fabrication). Fig. We investigate the strength of Brillouin scattering in these waveguides through simulations of the optical and acoustic modes, implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics. We start with an optical simulation as depicted in Fig. We proceeded with the measurements of the Brillouin gain response of a 1 cm long waveguide. We measured a propagation loss of 1 dB/cm in the sample. We then implemented a double intensity modulation pump-probe scheme To further improve the Brillouin gain of these waveguides we analyze their acoustic behaviour. As seen in Fig. A good candidate for cladding material to prevent acoustic acoustic leakage is silicon oxide. Ideally, a thick (over a micron) cladding will allow for optimized acoustic waveguiding (see Fig. The simulated SBS response of a thin (46 nm) silica cladded waveguide is summarized in Fig. We then fabricated the cladding-engineered waveguide, and measured the propagation loss and the SBS gain coefficient. The waveguide consists of a 200 nm layer of silicon nitride, covered with a 299 nm layer of tellurite. The cladding consists of a 46 nm layer of silicon oxide, and again a layer of polymer as protection. We performed SBS characterisations in a 10 cm long waveguide with loss of 0.59 dB/cm. The measured gain response is shown in Fig. As mentioned earlier, optimum performance can be unlocked using thick a silica cladding. We simulated a waveguide geometry with a similar cross-section as the polymer-cladded waveguide considered earlier, only that the cladding is replaced by microns-thick silicon oxide to provide full acoustic waveguiding. The detailed waveguide geometry and acousto-optic characteristics are shown in Fig. We demonstrate the use of the on-chip Brillouin gain in our cladding-engineered tellurite-covered waveguide in a cancellation-based RF photonic notch filter experiment We devise a measurement setup based on a vector network analyzer (VNA) to accurately measure the on-off SBS gain and loss from the sample, as illustrated in Fig. In Fig. To achieve an RF photonic notch filter from the gain resonance, the IQ modulator is set to generate a dual sideband (DSB) modulated signal with opposite phases, so there is a π phase difference between the lower sideband (LSB) and upper sideband (USB). The power imbalance between the LSB and USB is set equal to the Brillouin gain by tuning the DPMZM bias voltages. By now adding a pump laser, appropriately detuned from the signal carrier (probe) laser, signal cancellation is achieved within the Brillouin gain window. This is shown schematically in Fig. Apart from the cladding material, the Brillouin response is also sensitive to the geometry of the waveguide cross-section. In order to obtain the maximal improvement, we performed a genetic optimization on the crosssectional dimensions of the structure with full silicon oxide cladding. The geometry with the highest gain is shown in Fig. 4 (a), with a silicon nitride width and thickness of 4020 nm and 110 nm, respectively, and a tellurite thickness of 270 nm. The cladding thickness was found to have little influence beyond 800 nm, thus it is given a set value of 1 μm. The optical mode and acoustic response are shown in Fig. With the optimized structures the gain is significantly improved, to illustrate the impact we show the calculated gain for different lengths of waveguides in Fig. This high gain can also be leveraged in the use of on-chip Brillouin lasers where g B is the Brillouin gain in m -1W -1, α is the propagation loss in dB/cm and L is the cavity length, that is 2.9 cm in this case. As can be seen in Fig. We have shown, for the first time, the Brillouin response of tellurite covered silicon nitride waveguides. We enhanced the Brillouin gain by adding a thin layer of silicon oxide to reduce the acoustic losses. This resulted in a Brillouin gain coefficient of 8.5 m -1 W -1 , a record for silicon nitride based waveguides. By genetic optimization, we determined an optimal geometry for a tellurite covered silicon nitride waveguide with a full silicon oxide cladding. The improved gain in this waveguide with optimization of the cross-sectional geometry is 155 m -1 W -1 . This represents a 400 times increase in the Brillouin gain coefficient compared to previous results in silicon nitride waveguides. The gain is significantly higher, such that an ultra-narrow amplifier with 10s of dB of gain or a simple design Brillouin laser with a few 10s of mW threshold should be achievable. Various improvements in the fabrication and design can lead to realizing the vision of such high-Brillouin-gain waveguides in silicon nitride PICs, including adding full hard cladding and reducing optical propagation losses. We also aim toward developing tapers from waveguides without tellurite to tellurite covered waveguides. This will open up the possibility of combining standard and versatile silicon nitride waveguide circuits with high Brillouin gain sections enabled by the tellurium oxide layer, as well as low loss edge-couplers for efficient fiber-chip pumping and signal coupling.. This will represent a novel concept of spatial selection of Brillouin enhancement in a large scale circuit. The high Brillouin gain of these waveguides, combined with the other non-linearities, opens an avenue towards the creation of Brillouin-Kerr soliton frequency combs The silicon nitride strips were fabricated on a 100 mm diameter silicon wafer using a standard foundry process The wafer was then diced into individual chips. Next the tellurite layer, and where applicable the silicon oxide layer, was grown using radio frequency (RF) reactive sputtering The measurements were performed using an updated version of the double intensity modulation setup previously used in our work on multilayer silicon nitride waveguides As mentioned in the methods of the main text, the measurements were performed using an updated version of the double intensity modulation setup where both the pump and probe laser are modulated at slightly different frequencies. This way the SBS interaction between them will result in a signal at their difference frequency. A schematic overview of the setup can be seen in Fig. The pump laser is an Avanex A1905LMI, operating at a fixed wavelength around 1550 nm. This light is modulated with a 10 MHz sine wave produced by a Wiltron 69147A synthesized sweep generator (SSG) using another Thorlabs LN82S-FC intensity modulator. The output is then amplified using an Amonics AEDFA-33-B fiber amplifier. The SBS signal is converted from to the electrical domain using a Discovery Semiconductor DSC30S photodiode, and analyzed using a Zurich Instruments MFLI lock-in amplifier. The reference signal is made by mixing the 10 MHz reference output of the SSG and the synchronized output of the AWG (a TTL square wave with the same frequency as the regular output) using a Mini-Circuits ZFM-3H mixer. Using different outputs than those of the modulation signals prevents crosstalk that can lead to an interfering signal. All of this is controlled via a computer, which runs a Python program to control the probe laser and read out the lock-in amplifier data. From these lock-in measurements, the Brillouin gain of a waveguide can be determined as: where the effective length of a waveguide is calculated using: Here, α is the propagation loss, and L is the actual waveguide length. By using (S1), and taking the small signal approximation (e x = 1 + x) we can calculate the gain coefficient using: Here V denotes the signal voltage measured by the lock-in amplifier, the subscripts fiber and chip refer to the properties of the fiber and chip used in this experiment. The measurements for the RF filter and SBS gain using a VNA were performed using an IQ modulator driven by a VNA. In this setup, as illustrated in figure The pump and probe are coupled to a 15 cm spiral of the cladding engineered sample with a total insertion loss from the EDFA to the power meters of 24 dB. The transmitted probe is detected using a photodiode (Optilab PD-23-C-DC), for the VNA based gain measurement the filter indicated in the figure was not present. For the Brillouin based RF filter, the IQ modulator was biased to be near phase modulation with a slight imbalance between lower and upper sideband. In addition, the pump laser was replaced with a laser (Agere D2525P20, DFB) at 1561 nm, and the transmitted signal is filtered before detection to get rid of the majority of the reflected pump using a tunable filter (TeraXion TFN-1561.000-N2-IL6.5-20-C1P-C2). The sample and other settings remained the same between the VNA based gain and RF filter measurements. To demonstrate the utility of large SBS gain in silicon nitride circuits, we demonstrate an SBS-based RF photonic notch filter. To set up this filter, a probe laser and DPMZM are used to obtain DSB modulation, set close to perfect phase modulation by minimising the power received at the photodiode. Next, the upper sideband of the probe carrier (i.e., the probe) is attenuated slightly by adjusting the DPMZM biasing. By placing the pump laser at an appropriate frequency detuning from the probe carrier, the on-chip SBS gain/loss can give a frequency-dependent enhancement of the signal cancellation after photodetection. This setup is shown in Fig. This method of generating a filter with very small signal gain can be done in even smaller waveguides where in Fig. In this work to simulate the opto-acoustic interaction we used the COMSOL Multiphysics model we previously developed for our multilayer silicon nitride waveguides where ω s is the angular frequency of the Stokes wave and Ω the angular frequency of the excited acoustic mode. The peak value of the Brillouin gain coefficient can be simplified by where γ e is the electrostrictive constant, η the acousto-optic overlap, n p the refractive index, λ p the pump wavelength, ρ 0 the density, v a the speed of sound, Γ B the Brillouin linewidth, and A eff the effective area. Table The measured samples had different layer heights for the silicon nitride and tellurite. The layer heights will also affect the Brillouin response, but we expect this to be significantly smaller than the changes made to the cladding. We performed additional simulations to confirm our expectations. ), the width of the silicon nitride layer (wSi 3 N 4 ), the height of the tellurite layer (hT eO 2 ), height of the silica layer (hSiO 2 ) and a CYTOP cover. For each geometry the maximum Brillouin gain coefficient (max gB) with the corresponding Brillouin shift (SBS shift) is given as both simulated and measured results. The geometry of the waveguide from Fig. 100 nm silicon nitride tellurite covered waveguide with silicon oxide layer Fig. From these simulations we can conclude that the higher gain simulated and measured in the second sample is primarily due to the additional silicon oxide layer, and not significantly due to the difference in layer thickness. To determine how much of gain is achievable with current fabrication limitations, a genetic optimization of the Brillouin gain is carried out for the tellurite covered silicon nitride waveguide with a 100 nm layer of silicon oxide and CYTOP polymer cladding. Details about the genetic algorithm which is used can be found in Fig. The optimized geometry obtained from the optimization is shown in Fig. The geometry of this waveguide is considerably larger than the previously considered waveguides, approaching the limits set on silicon nitride and tellurite thickness. From fitting to a Lorentzian line shape, Fig. Because of the hardness and low acoustic loss of silica, the acoustic behaviour in this waveguide is quite different. As opposed to the CYTOP cladded waveguide, the acoustic waves dissipating into the tellurite layer are not quickly damped. At the gain peak, this can lead to unphysical results (e.g. gain depending on the width of the simulation domain), because of reflections from the PMLs which are used to absorb radiating acoustic fields. The acoustic wavevector can be close to parallel with the optical axis near a Brillouin resonance, and PMLs have significantly higher reflectance near parallel incidence. This problem was solved with an adiabatic increase in viscosity of the tellurite layer, increasing the acoustic loss. This resolved the unphysical results by damping the oscillations radiating away from the core. However, this siginificantly increased the computation time, hence the low number of candidate geometries as stated in the main text. The Brillouin gain vs. pump-probe detuning for each candidate in this preliminary optimization are shown in Fig. However, in doing sweeps over the geometric parameters around the current optimum, it was found that higher gain is achieved outside the optimization window. Namely, a silicon nitride width of 4020 nm results in g B ≈ 155 m -1 W -1 . The 4020 nm wide waveguide is shown in Fig. 