Spin Hall nano oscillators (SHNOs) have shown applications in unconventional computing schemes and broadband frequency generation in the presence of applied external magnetic field. However, under field-free conditions, the oscillation characteristics of SHNOs display a significant dependence on the effective field, which can be tuned by adjusting the constriction width, thereby presenting an intriguing area of study. Here we study the effect of nano constriction width on the magnetization dynamics in anisotropy assisted field free SHNOs. In uniaxial anisotropy-based field free SHNOs, either the anisotropy field (B anis ) or the demagnetization field (B demag ) can dominate the magnetization dynamics depending on the constriction width. Our findings reveal distinct auto-oscillation characteristics in narrower constrictions with 20 nm and 30 nm constriction width compared to their wider counterpart with 100 nm width. The observed frequency shift variations with input current (I DC ) and constriction widths stem from the inherent nonlinearity of the system. The interplay between the B demag and B anis , coupled with changes in constriction width, yields rich dynamics and offers control over frequency tunability, auto oscillation amplitude, and threshold current. Notably, the spatial configuration of spin wave wells within the constriction undergoes transformations in response to changes in both constriction width and anisotropy. The findings highlight the significant influence of competing fields at the constriction on the field-free auto oscillations of SHNOs, with this impact intensifying as the constriction width is varied. Our dependence on technological devices has been increasing, and we are striving to find faster and more efficient ways to compute and communicate. Current complementary metal-oxide semiconductors (CMOS) technology SHNO devices utilize the spin Hall effect (SHE) Awad et al Therefore, H eff in this case has contribution from the anisotropy field ( B anis ) in addition to the demagnetisation field (B demag ) due to dipolar interactions and the current induced Oersted field. The demagnetisation field is highly dependent on the constriction width; decreasing the width brings the edges of constriction closer which in turn increases the dipolar interaction energy as well as the B demag . On the other hand, B anis is invariant of constriction width and instead depends on the magnetocrystalline anisotropy in the system. Consequently, wider (B anis > B demag ) and narrow constrictions (B anis < B demag ) have different fields as dominating component in total internal field B int ,at the constriction. In the later part of this paper, we show that frequency response for the different constriction widths is also a subject of the interplay between the anisotropy field and the demagnetisation field. We further show that the nonlinearity coefficient N , which describes the inherent nonlinearity in frequency of the autooscillating modes, is a function of B int and changes sign with decrease in constriction width. In the final part, we discuss about the substantial difference of the spatial profile of auto oscillation modes at varying constriction width. The magnetization dynamics of a ferromagnet is governed by two major torques-a precessional torque due to the effective magnetic field and a damping torque that tries to damp the precession about the effective field (H eff ) due to the electron-phonon, electron-impurities scattering events in the material. The magnetization dynamics can be expressed by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation given as. Here the first term on the RHS is the precessional torque τ p acting on the magnetization, which is tangential to the precession trajectory and the second term is the damping torque τ D pointing towards the B eff . The B eff = B ext + B demag + B anis , consists of the external field (B ext ), demagnetization field (B demag ) and anisotropy field (B anis ) present in the material. To obtain sustained precession of magnetization around the B eff , a so-called anti-damping torque opposite to the direction of τ D must be present in the system to counter the damping. This additional anti- Here t FM is the thickness of the FM layer. Field-like torque τ FL due to the J s , which is analogous to the precessional torque, is not considered due to its low magnitude as compared to the τ AD The spin polarization efficiency ε = describes the transparency of the interface for spin current To examine the width dependent field free auto-oscillations, we have designed the SHNO as a Py (5 nm)/Pt (5 nm) bilayer stack with nano constriction geometry and varying constriction widths. The stack, measuring 5 μm × 5 μm , incorporates a round nano constriction at the center, characterized by an opening angle of 22° and a radius of curvature of 50 nm. Using COMSOL®, this geometry is simulated in air, with an electric current applied to the yz face (Fig. To eliminate the requirement for an external biasing field, we exploit the inherent uniaxial anisotropy of the ferromagnetic material. The uniaxial anisotropy generates the anisotropy field, which, combined with the demagnetization field and Oersted field, forms the effective field (H eff ) responsible for the precession of magnetization. In order to investigate the oscillation properties of such a bias-free SHNO under the influence of an anisotropic field, we performed the simulation with varying the DC current, uniaxial anisotropy constant (K u ) and the orientation of easy axis. Easy axis angle is defined such that it maximizes the amplitude of auto-oscillations. This angle approaches the y-axis for narrower constrictions, while increasing the constriction width causes the angle to shift towards the x-axis (see Appendix C (Fig. This behaviour arises from the dipolar interaction originated from the geometrical confinement at the constriction region which is characterized by the constriction width. (See Table The width dependent field free auto oscillations are studied for NC width ranging from 100 nm to 20 nm at uniaxial anisotropy values varying from K u = 5 kJ/m 3 to 15 kJ/m 3 The spin wave (SW) wells for these narrow widths are mostly restricted to constriction. On the flip side, the frequency response of the 20 nm constriction exhibited a consistent blue shift with current, accompanied by significantly more constrained spin wave wells. These different magnetodynamical behaviour originate from the change in the total internal magnetic field B int at the constriction. In our case the B int also has an additional contribution from B anis along with B Oe , B demag due to the uniaxial anisotropy present in the system. The anisotropy field B anis is represented by. The θ is the angle between magnetization M and the easy axis and u ̂ is the direction of the easy axis. The B anis decreases as the amplitude of the oscillations is increased. The spin torque τ s ∝ J c The major contribution to B int for 20 nm NC comes from the B demag (Fig. The frequency tunability of the auto oscillations is a crucial aspect of the SHNO. The frequency of auto-oscillations f is extracted by performing FFT over the stable regime of oscillations. Current tunability of f with varying constriction width and K u is shown in Fig. The I th depends on the B int , from the macrospin model I th can be written as Here, |τ DL | is the magnitude of damping like SOT, (m ̂o. σ ̂) is the angle between relaxed magnetization and spin polarization. According to the equation above, the threshold current I th should decrease with increasing B int . Fig. This limitation arises from the substantial B demag at the centre of the constriction, which hinders oscillation excitation as the SOT fails to overcome τ D . A spatial profile of the auto oscillation amplitude is shown in Fig. x-axis respectively for wider and narrower constrictions. Additionally, in 20 nm and 30 nm constrictions, the spin wave (SW) wells occupy the entire available volume within the constriction. An increment in amplitude of the auto oscillations with uniaxial anisotropy and current for all the constriction widths is observed (Fig. The SW wells move closer to each other due to the high B int resulting in a larger auto-oscillation area at the constriction, which increases the auto-oscillation amplitude. Additionally, a decrease in auto oscillation amplitude with constriction width is observed. This is attributed to very high B int amplitude due to the dominating B demag . High |B int | gives rise to strong damping torque which reduces the auto oscillation amplitude. The fluctuations in the amplitude are also observed, because at high K u values the amplitude of the oscillations is shared between multiple harmonics. When the minor harmonics have high amplitude, the amplitude of the major harmonic shrinks. This behaviour is also visible in the linewidth spectra of the auto oscillations (see Appendix B). The low linewidth corresponds to the high amplitude of the major harmonic; on the other hand, high linewidth appears due to the significant amplitude of other minor harmonics. In summary, we have demonstrated that the uniaxial anisotropy-based field free SHNOs exhibit significant variations in auto oscillation properties with change in constriction width. Wide constrictions are primarily influenced by the anisotropy field, resulting in a consistently negative frequency shift with current. In contrast, narrow constrictions are predominantly governed by dipolar interactions, leading to a primarily positive frequency shift. Decreasing the constriction width results in a lower oscillation frequency due to the increased central magnetic field B int at the centre of the constriction. Additionally, the oscillation of SW modes forming at the constriction have different behaviour with changes in constriction width. For 100 nm constriction the SW wells are aligned at the opposite edges of the constriction with a positive slope from x-axis, while for the narrow constrictions where B demag dominates the SW wells have a negative slope. Furthermore, the SW modes for wide constrictions stick to the edges of the constriction whereas for narrower (20 and 30 nm) constrictions these modes are inherently different and predominantly occupy the entire constriction region from the start. Our results show that the miniaturization of field-free SHNOs essentially leads to lower threshold current of auto oscillation. However, wider constriction provides higher oscillation amplitude and better frequency tunability with input current. These findings illuminate the field-free auto-oscillation dynamics of SHNOs across varying length scales, opening avenues for their application in diverse unconventional computing schemes like neuromorphic computing, reservoir computing, and probabilistic computing. Also the frequency of spin wave bullet is single modal while in our case the field free auto oscillation have multiple modes. Thus only a qualitative comparison between the simulation and analytical results is made. Figures S9 and S10 show the total shift in the frequency of the oscillations with the current in the arbitrary units. For the 100 nm constriction the shift is negative with decrement in the value with increase in I DC . The 20 nm constriction show a increasingly positive shift with the current while the 30 nm constriction has a very slow change in shift with the current. δH