Technologies that function at room temperature often require magnets with a high Curie temperature, T C , and can be improved with better materials. Discovering magnetic materials with a substantial T C is challenging because of the large number of candidates and the cost of fabricating and testing them. Using the two largest known data sets of experimental Curie temperatures, we develop machine-learning models to make rapid T C predictions solely based on the chemical composition of a material. We train a random forest model and a k-NN one and predict on an initial dataset of over 2,500 materials and then validate the model on a new dataset containing over 3,000 entries. The accuracy is compared for multiple compounds' representations ("descriptors") and regression approaches. A random forest model provides the most accurate predictions and is not improved by dimensionality reduction or by using more complex descriptors based on atomic properties. A random forest model trained on a combination of both datasets shows that cobalt-rich and iron-rich materials have the highest Curie temperatures for all binary and ternary compounds. An analysis of the model reveals systematic error that causes the model to over-predict low-T C materials and under-predict high-T C materials. For exhaustive searches to find new high-T C materials, analysis of the learning rate suggests either that much more data is needed or that more efficient descriptors are necessary. Ferromagnetic materials are essential in modern technologies especially in energy production and data storage. The threshold temperature where magnetism disappears is called the Curie temperature, T C . Searches for high-T C materials typically look for magnets with a T C of at least 550-600 K, which is required for reliably running an application at room temperature. 1,2 High-T C magnets are valuable but rare, Measuring the Curie temperature of a compound is a relatively standard and accurate procedure, but of course needs the material to be made first. In contrast, in a computational design process, the T C must be predicted ahead of experiments, only using physical and chemical information. This is a complex task prone to large errors. In fact, one needs to compute the elementary magnetic excitations of a compound, most typically from density functional theory (DFT), map these on a simple model, usually a Heisenberg-type one, and then perform thermodynamic sampling with Monte Carlo methods. Algorithms such as ridge regression, kernel ridge regression, neural networks, and random forest have been trained on experimental data and used to predict Curie temperatures. In general, the crystal structure affects the Curie temperature and there have been attempts to incorporate structural information into different machine-learning models with varying degrees of success. In some cases, Curie temperature predictions that utilize known structural data are more accurate, in particular when the structural diversity present in the dataset is limited. We cleaned both DS1 and DS2 according to the methods outlined in Ref. [1]. Both datasets had many duplicate compounds often with different reported experimental Curie temperatures. The duplicates were eliminated by selecting only the median Curie temperature in order to retain an actual mea-sured value of the T C . In DS1, we also added entries for each of the non-magnetic elements found in the data and set the Curie temperature to zero. After cleaning the raw data, DS1 contains the Curie temperatures of 2,557 unique compounds and DS2 contains 3,194. There is an overlap of 1,189 compounds between DS1 and DS2. Our feature vector has 85 fea- tures, each one describing a distinct element found in the data. Each compound is characterized by placing the percentage that each element occupies in the compound in the appropriate feature. For each machine-learning prediction, a randomly selected third of the compounds in DS1 was used as the test data and the other two thirds were used to train the models. It is not possible to visualize the data in 85 dimensions. However, a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding In Ref. [1], ridge regression, kernel ridge regression, neural networks, and random-forest machine-learning methods were all tested and the random-forest model made the most accurate predictions. We used DS1 in a k-nearest neighbors model and compared its performance to the accuracy of the random forest model. The k-NN algorithm was varied for 1 to 20 neighbors to determine the optimal k. A k-NN model with 2 neighbors provided best prediction accuracy but was not as good as the random forest (see Fig. To see how well the DS1 random forest model generalizes on unseen data, we did a "blind" test on all the data in DS2 (see Fig. While the random-forest results are encouraging, a few different strategies were tried to improve the random-forest predictions. One of these strategies is to reduce the number of dimensions in the DS1 design matrix. A random forest was made for a range (5-85) of features using principal component analysis (PCA). PCA is not helpful to our model because, although noisy, the change in mean absolute error for each dataset shows that the accuracy improves up to about 60 features and stops improving after that as already observed in Ref. [1]. Another improvement strategy is designing better features. The MAST-ML Getting more balanced training data may be another way to improve the model. An analysis of DS1 shows a significant imbalance, 38% of the magnetic materials have a T C 0 -100 K, while only 15% have a T C 600 -1400 K. This could lead the model to reduce the prediction error at low temperatures at the expense of making larger errors at high temperatures. This is counter to the purpose of the model, which is that to discover candidate high-T C magnets. Thus, we downsampled the low-T C compounds to more evenly distribute DS1. The resulting model is shown in Fig. Let us make one final comment before using the ML model to search for new high-T C . With this unprecedented large database of magnetic compounds, a large range of training set sizes are possible so that the learning rate of the model can be estimated. Figure The purpose of the ML model is to enable identification of candidate high-T C materials. Our first attempt was to sweep over compositions of binary materials, but this revealed a systematic error. The error persists independent of the training data (DS1 or DS2), the particular ML method (random forest, k-NN), or the descriptors. Figure This systematic drift toward the mean can be seen across all the test data in Fig. Recognizing the systematic error in predictions and being more interested in the accuracy of high-T C predictions, we trained a random forest model on a combined set of DS1 and DS2 but only included the 967 compounds with T C > 600 K thus boosting the mean of the training data from 293 K to 825 K and mitigating the regression to the mean. Obviously this new model cannot be used to predict low-T C materials but as we are primarily concerned with high-T C materials, this new model with a higher average protects the predictions from straying too far in data-deficient areas. This new high-T C -only model was used to search composition space for all binary and ternary candidate compounds with exceptionally high-T C . The high-T C -only model used only 71 features, restricted to elements that appear in compounds with T C > 600 K. Figs Unsuspected high-T C materials sometimes appear. For example, see FeNi 3 and Cr 2 Pt 3 in Fig. a. Supplementary Material The supplementary material includes two error plots from the 2-NN predictions shown in the left plot of Fig. b. Acknowledgements We would like to thank Mark Transtrum for useful discussions about the systematic error FIG. 