Ferroelectricity has a wide range of applications in functional electronics and is extremely important for the development of next-generation information storage technology, but it is difficult to achieve due to its special symmetry requirements. In this letter, based on van der Waals stacking, a generic model is proposed for realizing ferroelectric devices, where a freely movable center layer is packaged in two fixed and symmetrically stacked layers. In this model, the ferroelectric phase transition can be realized between the two equivalent and eccentric ground stacking-states with opposite polarizations. By means of first-principles calculations, taking the h-BN/h-BN/h-BN and h-BN/Graphene/h-BN as feasible models, we carefully evaluate the magnitude of ferroelectricity. The corresponding polarizations are estimated as 1.83 and 1.35 pC/m, respectively, which are comparable to the sliding ferroelectricity. Such a new tri-layer model of vertical ferroelectricity can be constructed by arbitrary van der Waals semiconducting materials, and usually holds low switching barrier. Optimized material combinations with remarkable polarization are highly expectable to be discovered from the huge candidate set for future information storage. Spontaneous polarization caused by non-centrosymmetry is a key character of ferroelectric material. The ferroelectric polarizations can be switched in a reversible approach by an external electric field, which plays a critical role in the applications of electronic devices, sensors, field-effect transistors, and memory devices. In recent years, two-dimensional ferroelectric materials have captured widespread attentions in views of their advantages of thinner thickness, low energy consumption, and ease of miniaturization. First-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) are performed using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) code Van der Waals materials typically exhibit a layered structure, consisting of multiple atomic or molecular layers stacked together, with stability maintained by Van der Waals forces among the layers. In Fig. Here, A and B represent different material types or different stacking arrangements of the same material. The distance between the device layers, d device , and the distance between layer A and layer B, d AB , are important parameters in this model. For different values of d device and d AB , the energy curve of this model exhibits two distinct states. When the distance between the device layers is smaller than or equal to twice the Van der Waals distance between A and B (d device ≤ 2d vdw ), layer B prefers to be optimized to the center of the system to form a centric ground stacking-state. In this case, the energy curve exhibits an upward-opening parabolic shape as indicated in the black solid line in Fig. In order to investigate the validity of the proposed A/B/A model of vertical ferroelectricity on realizing out-of-plane polarization, the well-known single layer materials h-BN and graphene are taken as research platform. Two types of vertically ferroelectric devices, h-BN/h-BN/h-BN and h-BN/Graphene/h-BN, are constructed, as illustrated in Fig. The magnitude of polarization is a crucial characteristic influencing the occurrence and properties of ferroelectric phenomena. Figures The ferroelectric polarization switching barrier represents the energy necessary to overcome the atomic rearrangements involved in reversing the polarization direction of a ferroelectric material under the influence of an external electric field. Using the CINEB method, we calculate the polarization switching barriers for the h-BN/h-BN/h-BN and h-BN/Graphene/h-BN systems as 10 and 8 meV/atom, respectively (as shown in Figs. The discovery of van der Waals vertical ferroelectricity has expanded the potential for achieving switchable ferroelectricity in a diverse range of materials, rather than be restricted to specific ones. The recent breakthroughs in fabrication techniques for sandwiched graphene and trilayer magic angle graphene have opened up possibilities for harnessing this property In this work, a conceptual prototype with vertical ferroelectricity based on the van der Waals materials has been proposed. The first-principles calculations also demonstrate the feasibility of assembling such devices using the van der Waals materials and the capability to exhibit switchable vertical ferroelectricity. The results demonstrate that the van der Waals ferroelectric devices based onh-BN/h-BN/h-BN and h-BN/Graphene/h-BN have measurable polarization magnitudes of 1.83 and 1.35 pC/m, respectively. These magnitudes are comparable to the sliding ferroelectric polarization observed in conventional crystal systems. This study overcomes the limitations imposed by the symmetry of traditional ferroelectric materials, and providing novel insights and directions for the development of ferroelectric-based storage technologies. Moreover, it should be emphasized that such ferroelectric devices fabricated based on this model hosting numerous advantages, including low switching barriers, strong controllability, and rapid response, foreshowing the promising prospects for future advancements and applications. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. J. F. Scott, Science 315, 954 (2007).