Correct measurement of the shell properties of coated microbubbles (MBs) is essential to understanding and optimizing their response to ultrasound (US) exposure parameters in diagnostic and therapeutic ultrasound. MBs are surrounded by blood; however, the influence of the surrounding medium charges on the MB properties is poorly understood. This study aims to measure the medium charge interactions with MB shells by measuring the frequency-dependent attenuation of the same size MBs in mediums of varying charge density. In-house lipid-coated MBs with C3F8 gas core were made. The MBs were isolated to a mean size of 2.35μm using differential centrifugation. MBs were diluted to ~8*10 5 MBs/mL in distilled water (DW), and two different concentrations of phosphate buffered saline solution (PBS-1x and PBS-10x). The frequency-dependent attenuation of the MBs solutions was measured using an aligned pair of PVDF transducers with a center frequency of 10MHz and 100% bandwidth in the linear oscillation regime (7 kPa pressure amplitude). The MB shell properties were estimated by fitting the linear equation to experiments. Using a pendant drop tensiometer, the surface tension of mm-size drops was measured inside DW, PBS-1x and PBS-10x. The surface tension at the gas/solution interface was estimated by fitting the Young-Laplace equation from the recorded images. The frequency of the peak attenuation changes at different salinity levels was 13, 7.5 and 6.25MHz in DW, PBS-1x and PBS-10x, respectively. The attenuation peak increased by ~140% with increasing ion density. MBs' estimated shell elasticity decreased by 64% between DW and PBS-1x and 36% between PBS-1x and PBS-10x. Reduction in the shell stiffness is in qualitative agreement with the drop surface tension measurements. The shell viscosity was reduced by ~40% between DW and PBS-1x and 42% between PBS-1x and PBS-10x. The reduction in the stiffness and viscosity is possibly due to the formation of a densely charged layer around the shell, further reducing the effective surface tension on the MBs. This effect may be utilized in enhancing the MB oscillation amplitude and a better understanding of the interaction of the magnetic fields with MBs during MRI-guided applications. Acoustically excited bubbles have fundamental roles in various applications, ranging from cleaning Due to the fundamental role of bubbles in many applications, the dynamics of the bubbles have been studied extensively, and it is well-known that the bubble oscillator is nonlinear and complex The bubble response to ultrasonic excitation depends on the bubble size, the surrounding medium and the inner gas composition One important but under-investigated parameter is the influence of the surface charges on the MB response to ultrasound. The impact of the accumulation of ions on the MB response is not well known. The surface charge effects on uncoated bubbles were studied in early 1900s The influence of selective charge adsorption has not been investigated using carefully controlled experiments. This problem becomes more significant in medical ultrasound, where MBs are inside blood which is dense with ions. Importantly, the encapsulating lipid shell is charged, potentially enhancing the surface ion adsorption that can alter the effective MB surface tension and, therefore, MB response to ultrasound. However, to our best knowledge, no study has investigated this important effect on coated MBs. This study aims to shed light on this topic. In this paper, we investigate the medium charge interactions with the MB shell by measuring the frequency-dependent attenuation of lipid-coated MBs in mediums of varying charge density, and by fitting the appropriate models, the change in shell properties will be investigated. Ultra-stable lipid shell MBs were prepared as described in detail in Size-isolated MBs were diluted to ~8*10 5 MBs/mL in distilled water (DW), PBS-1x and PBS-10x for attenuation measurements. The attenuation measurements were performed using a pair of 100% bandwidth PVDF transducers (10MHz center frequency, 2.2cm active diameter, Precision Acoustics). The frequency-dependent attenuation of the MB solution was calculated by subtracting the measured spectra of the MB suspension from that of the pure water using equation 1 where α is the attenuation, d is the sample holder thickness (acoustic path length of 0.5cm). The experimental setup is shown in Fig. To assess the effect of different salinity levels on the lipid monolayer surface and its potential effects on the MB's effective surface tension, pendant drop tensiometry was applied as described in detail in The shell stiffness and viscosity were estimated by fitting the linear model to the measured attenuation curves using Eq. 1 Eq. 1 where α is the attenuation, f is frequency, R(i) and n are the radius and number density of the ith MB in the size bin, σ (R(i), f), δ (R(i), f) and δ (R(i), f) are the frequency-dependent scattering cross section, radiation damping constant and total damping constant of MB with radius R(i), respectively Figure Results of the surface tension measurements are shown in Fig. One of the open problems in the characterization of the shell properties of the MBs is the dependence of the stiffness and viscosity on the MB radius, despite having the same shell material. It has been suggested that the lipid shell may exhibit shear-thinning and stiffness softening Here we also show that the surface charges influence the shell stiffness and viscosity. The zeta potential is size dependent Recently it has been shown that the MB oscillations undergo additional damping under the influence of strong Magnetic fields (1-4T) during MRI-guided blood-brain barrier opening The influence of the medium salinity on the dynamics of lipid-coated MBs was studied by measuring the frequencydependent attenuation of the MBs in DW, PBS-1x and PBS-10x for the first time. Results showed a strong stiffness softening and shell viscosity reduction with increasing the medium ion density (e.g. 140% increase in the attenuation peak). This effect may have consequences in increasing the MB stability. It may also enhance the MB oscillations in blood at a specific frequency (by designing an appropriate shell and potentially increasing the contrast-to-tissue ratio). It may also provide a better understanding of the stability of NBs and MB oscillations in blood and the interaction of magnetic fields with MBs during MRI-guided applications. pressure dependence of sound speed and attenuation in bubbly media: Experimental observations, a theoretical model and numerical calculations. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry, 95, p.106319. A lipid combina on consis ng of 60.1 mg of 1,2dibehenoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DBPC C22; Avan Polar Lipids), 10 mg of 1,2 dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphate (DPPA; Avan Polar Lipids), 20 mg of 1,2-dipalmitoyl-snglycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DPPE; Avan Polar Lipids), and 10 mg of 1,2-distearoyl-snglycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[methoxy(polyethyleneglycol)-2000] (DSPE-mPEG2000; Avan Polar Lipids) was dissolved in 1mL of propylene glycol and was heated in a water bath at 80 °C un l full lipids dissolved completely. 1 mL of glycerol and 8 mL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS-1X) were then heated to 80 °C and added to the lipid solu on. A er mixing, the resul ng solu on was sonicated in a bath sonicator (Branson Sonicator CPX2800H) for 15 min at room temperature. The experimental setup (Fig. An air-ght syringe with a 1 mm diameter Jshaped needle was filled with octafluoropropane (C3F8) gas. In the cuve e, 1 mL of the lipid solu on was added. The lipid solu on was diluted with 5 mL of DW, PBS-1x or PBS-10x. A gas bubble of 4 ± 1 mL of the C3F8 gas was generated at the p of the J-shaped needle. For each sample, images (Fig. 