Recently in nanophotonics, a rigorous evolution from passive to active metasurfaces has been witnessed. This advancement not only brings forward interesting physical phenomena but also elicits opportunities for practical applications. However, active metasurfaces operating at visible frequencies often exhibit low performance due to design and fabrication restrictions at the nanoscale. In this work, we demonstrate electrochemically controlled metasurfaces with high intensity contrast, fast switching rate, and excellent reversibility at visible frequencies. We use a conducting polymer, polyaniline (PANI), that can be locally conjugated on preselected gold nanorods to actively control the phase profiles of the metasurfaces. The optical responses of the metasurfaces can be in situ monitored and optimized by controlling the PANI growth of subwavelength dimension during the electrochemical process. We showcase electrochemically controlled anomalous transmission and holography with good switching performance. Such electrochemically powered optical metasurfaces lay a solid basis to develop metasurface devices for real-world optical applications. Active functions are indispensable features of modern optical devices. For instance, in a digital camera, the zoom lens is a key component that dynamically varies the focal length and thus the angle of view. In a display device, such as spatial light modulators, dynamic images are processed with rapid speeds, high contrast, and full reversibility. Nevertheless, these state-of-the-art optical devices are often bulky and difficult to miniaturize. Recently in nanophotonics, a new class of optical elements, called metasurfaces, have been rigorously developed. With subwavelength antennas arranged in twodimensional planes, metasurfaces have exceptional control over the propagation of light, enabling flat, ultrathin, and highly compact optical systems. Despite the exciting progress, studies on active metasurfaces still await further research endeavors. So far, metal-and dielectric-based metasurfaces have been continuously improved to exhibit remarkable performance and high efficiencies To this end, a number of active metasurfaces have been implemented by using functional materials as substrates or hosting matrices for antennas In this work, we demonstrate electrochemically controlled metasurfaces with high-contrast switching at visible frequencies. The metasurfaces are designed based on the PB phase with preselected antennas locally conjugated with a conducting polymer, polyaniline (PANI), of subwavelength dimension. The optical responses of the metasurfaces can be in situ monitored and optimized by controlling the PANI thickness during its electrochemical growth. The operation of the metasurfaces is electrochemically powered, showing excellent performance with high intensity contrast up to 860:1, fast switching rate around 35 ms, and notable reversibility over 100 switching cycles without substantial degradations. Among a variety of conducting polymers, PANI is particularly attractive because of its high stability, low cost, and facile synthesis The design principle of the electrochemically controlled metasurface is shown in Fig. A phase difference factor ∆φ is introduced between the light waves scattered by the odd and even rows. The angle between two adjacent gold nanorods in the neighboring odd and even rows is defined as ∆ (see Fig. With PMMA coating and local PANI conjugation in alternating rows as shown in Fig. To validate our design concept, an electrochemically controlled metasurface is experimentally implemented for active switching of anomalous transmission. It is named scheme A to compare with a control metasurface (scheme B), which will be discussed later. The metasurface comprises gold nanorods of four phase levels fabricated by electron-beam lithography (EBL) on an ITO-coated quartz substrate. The gold nanorods are 200 nm by 80 nm by 50 nm in The ITO functions as a working electrode. All the electrochemical potentials described in the experiments are measured relative to the Ag/AgCl reference electrode. To locally grow PANI on the gold nanorods in the even rows, cyclic voltammetry is carried out at a cycling rate of 25 mV/s within a potential range from -0.2 to 0.8 V (see Fig. At this optimal t PANI , electrochemical switching of the anomalous transmission is performed. A monomer-free solution containing 0.5 M HNO 3 is used as the electrolyte in this case. Figure To corroborate the power of our design concept, a control experiment (scheme B) is carried out. As shown in the inset schematic of Fig. To demonstrate the generality and versatility of our design concept, next, we apply it for electrochemically controlled addressable metasurface holography. On the basis of the Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm using eight phase levels In conclusion, we have demonstrated electrochemically controlled metasurfaces at visible frequencies. The metasurface devices exhibit superior performance with high intensity contrast, fast switching speed, and excellent reversibility. The optical output of the metasurfaces can be in situ optimized by controlling the PANI thickness during its electrochemical growth, offering a facile means to enhance the device performance. With this design concept, the active properties of conducting polymers, which can be produced at low cost and large scale, are readily transferred to optical metasurfaces. Our design concept is generic and can be applied to realize a variety of optical metasurfaces with different active functions, such as beam focusing and zooming and dynamic optical vortices, among others. It can also be easily extended to other frequency regions and adopted for dielectric metasurfaces. Our work will foster a profound research area, in which interesting optical functions and material characteristics are elegantly combined together to create novel nanophotonic devices. With the continuous drive for practical applications, this research area will certainly excite intensive academic and industrial activities. The metasurface samples in Figs. 2, 3, and 5 were fabricated by twostep EBL using a "Raith eLine" system. In the first EBL step, the gold nanorods and gold alignment markers were defined in PMMA resist (Allresist) on an ITO (20 nm)/SiO 2 (1 mm) substrate. A 2-nm Cr adhesion layer and a 50-nm gold layer were deposited by thermal evaporation using a "Leybold Univex" system, followed by liftoff. Subsequently, a 100-nm PMMA layer was spin-coated onto the sample. In a second EBL step, computer-controlled alignment was performed using the alignment markers to precisely place and define the alternating grooves into the PMMA layer. The fabrication of the scheme B metasurface in Fig. The light beam was generated from a laser diode source (633 nm). A linear polarizer (LP) and quarter-wave plate (QWP) were used to obtain the required incident CP light. A lens and an aperture were used to reshape the light beam. The light beam was incident on the sample, which was immersed in the electrolyte of the electrochemical cell at normal incidence. The intensity of the cross-polarized light was recorded in situ using a power meter (Thorlabs S130C) during the electrochemical deposition of PANI. The holographic images were recorded by a charge-coupled device camera (Thorlabs DCU223C) using an objective (20×). An LP and a QWP were used to filter out the transmitted light with the incident polarization (see fig. Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/ content/full/7/19/eabd9450/DC1