Volkov-Pankratov surface bands arise in smooth topological interfaces, i.e. interfaces between a topological and a trivial insulator, in addition to the chiral surface state imposed by the bulk-surface correspondence of topological materials. These two-dimensional bands become Landau-quantized if a magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the interface. I show that the energy scales, which are typically in the 10 -100 meV range, can be controlled both by the perpendicular magnetic field and the interface width. The latter can still be varied with the help of a magnetic-field component in the interface. The Landau levels of the different Volkov-Pankratov bands are optically coupled, and their arrangement may allow one to obtain population inversion by optical pumping. This could serve as the elementary brick of a multi-level laser based on Landau levels. Moreover, the photons are absorbed and emitted either parallel or perpendicular to the magnetic field, respectively in the Voigt and Faraday geometry, depending on the Volkov-Pankratov bands and Landau levels involved in the optical transitions. Landau levels (LLs), which arise due to the quantization of the electrons' energy in a strong magnetic field, have been regularly proposed to be a promising system for a frequency-tunable laser in the THz regime Soon after the isolation of graphene, physicists explored this material in cyclotron-emission experiments in the perspective of realizing a LL laser An extremely interesting route towards the realization of a LL laser is the use of Dirac materials with a (mass) gap ∆ that is on the same order of magnitude as the typical LL spacing, i.e. in the 100 meV range, for systems with a characteristic velocity parameter of v ≃ 10 6 m/s. In this case, the LL spectrum is given by where λ = ± is the band index. Indeed, if ∆ ∼ ħv/l B , the LL spectrum is neither (approximately) linear in n and B as it would be in the limit ∆ ≫ ħv/l B nor does it follow the square-root dependence of graphene in the opposite limit ∆ ≪ ħv/l B . In this case, the absence of simultaneous resonant transitions suppress both reabsorption and non-radiative Auger scattering. First encouraging results in this direction have been obtained in gapped HgTe/CdTe quantum wells Another system in which massive Dirac fermions occur is the interface of a topological and a trivial insulator, in the form of Volkov-Pankratov (VP) states Here, q = (q x , q y ) is the two-dimensional (2D) wave vector in the interface, m denotes the index of the surface band, and l S = √ lλ C is a characteristic length determining the extension of the interface states in the z direction perpendicular to the interface. Equation ( Very recently, inter-VP transitions have been measured within magneto-optical spectroscopy in Pb 1-x Sn x Se crystals between the m = 1 VP and the chiral (m = 0) surface states. In the present paper, I argue that smooth topological interfaces, such as in the above-mentioned Pb 1-x Sn x Se crystals, may be extremely promising systems for the realization of long-lived population inversion if a magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the interface that quantizes the 2D electronic motion in the interface into LLs. The main reason for this expectation is the fact that VP bands provide us with several families of LLs that can to some extent be brought into close energetic proximity with LLs of the chiral surface band. This would allow for devices similar to three-or four-level lasers in which population inversion could be more easily achieved than in the usual LL setup. Furthermore, optical pumping and radiative desexcitation can be chosen to happen in different directions via an intelligent choice of the involved transitions. Indeed, while the optical selection rules in the Faraday geometry impose that the emitted or absorbed photons propagate in the direction of the magnetic field for a transition coupling the LLs n and n ± 1, it has been shown previously Let us first review some basic features of VP states and their coupling to light in the presence of a magnetic field along the lines of Ref. where the Pauli matrices τ μ and σ ν represent an orbital and the spin degree of freedom, respectively. Quite generally, the Hamiltonian describes a massive Dirac fermion the mass of which vanishes for ∆(z 0 ) = 0 at the position z 0 that we choose to be zero and that characterizes the topological phase transition. Exchanging τ z and τ x via the global unitary transformation T = exp(iπτ y /4) -a rotation by π/2 around the y-axis in orbital spaceallows one to rewrite the Hamiltonian in the form where 1 represents the identity in spin space. This form unveils the analogy between the quantization of the electronic motion in the z-direction and LL quantization. Indeed, if we linearize the gap inversion over the smooth interface by a linear function connecting a gap parameter of +∆ in the trivial insulator (at z < -l) and -∆ in the topological insulator (at z > l), i.e. -∆z/l, the system may be mapped to the LL problem of massive Dirac fermions in terms of the harmonic-oscillator ladder operators where l S = lħv/∆ is the above-mentioned length characterizing the wave-function extension in the z direction. It plays the role of a "fake" magnetic length. Indeed, within this analogy, the variation of the gap parameter in the z direction may be viewed as a vector potential that generates a "fake" magnetic field oriented in the interface, while the physical magnetic field is oriented in the z direction. In the absence of the latter, the diagonalization of Hamiltonian (6) yields the spectrum (2) of the VP surface bands. Notice furthermore that the above description can easily be generalized to a situation where the gap in the topological insulator is not of the same size as that in the trivial one When a magnetic field is applied to the system in the zdirection, the VP bands (2) get quantized into LLs whose spectrum reads (for n ̸ = 0) For notational simplicity, we merge the band index λ from now on with the VP and LL indices so that (-m, -n) corresponds to the n-th LL in the m-th VP band of negative energy (λ = -), whence the modulus of the indices in the spectrum (8) to avoid confusion. Due to the parity anomaly, the above spectrum is only valid for LLs with an index n ̸ = 0, while the n = 0 LLs of the VP bands stick either to the bottom of the positive-energy bands (ξ = +) or to the top of the negative-energy VP state (ξ = -) depending on the chirality index ξ. The latter can be changed if we change the order between the topological and the trivial insulator (interface between a topological insulator in the lower part and a trivial one in the upper part), and it can also be altered easily by changing the orientation of the magnetic field. The LL spectrum for the m = 0, ±1 and the ±2 VP states are shown in Fig. Notice that the surface-state-width parameter l S can be decreased effectively with the help of an inplane magnetic field B ∥ . In order to appreciate this effect, let us consider the Landau gauge A = (0, -B ∥ z, 0) which conspires with the gap variation ∆(z) = -∆z/l in that is does not affect the (free) electronic motion in the xy-plane. In this case, the Hamiltonian may still be brought into the form (6), albeit with a more complicated unitary transformation T = exp(iθτ y σ x /2) that also acts on the spin sector The analogy between interface width and magnetic field finally yields a physical understanding of the optical selection rules between the levels (m, n) and (m ′ , n ′ ), where I recall that the first index indicates the VP band and the second one the physical LL. In the Faraday geometry, in which the absorbed or emitted photon has a wave vector and thus propagates in the direction of the magnetic field,[32] angular-momentum conservation imposes that the only optically active transitions involve adjacent LL indices, n → n ′ = ±(n ± 1), regardless of the band index λ. The relative sign in the bracket on the right-hand side of the selection rule is determined by the circular polarization of the photon, σ -coupling to the transition n → ±(n + 1) and σ + to n → ±(n -1) This needs to be contrasted to the Voigt geometry, where the photon propagates in the plane perpendicular to the magnetic field and where the LL index remains unchanged n → n ′ = ±n if we consider the electric field E of the photon to be oriented in the same direction as the external magnetic field. Since the fake magnetic field that yields the VP bands is oriented in the interface, Voigt and Faraday geometry are inverted, and a photon propagating perpendicular to the interface couples VP bands with the same index (m → m ′ = ±m) while a photon with a wave vector in the interface couples adjacent VP bands [m → m ′ = ±(m ± 1)]. As in the LL problem, the selection rules, which are summarized in the table above, do not depend on the band index. In both cases, VP states and LLs, it is the circular polarization of the photon that determines which of the adjacent levels or bands are optically coupled. The (m = 0, n = 1) level is populated via pumping (dashed magenta arrow) from the zero-energy (m = 0, n = 0) level, and emission can take place in the Voigt geometry in the transition (m = 1, n = 0) → (m = 0, n = 0) (dashed orange arrow). The level (m = 1, n = 0) is rapidly populated by the (n = 1, m = 0) level if the latter is almost resonant with the former, via a rapid non-radiative decay (dashed black arrow). (b) Similar process with pumping in the Voigt geometry for √ 2ħv/lB < ∆VP. The pumping transition is (m = 0, n = 0) → (m = 1, n = 0) (dashed magenta arrow) while emission takes place in the (m = 0, n = 1) transition (dashed orange arrow) that is populated via rapid non-radiative decay processes (dashed black arrow) from the (m = 1, n = 0) level, which is slightly higher in energy. The insets represent the device geometries, with the direction of propagation of the absorbed (dashed magenta arrow) and emitted (dashed orange arrow) photons, for the two configurations, respectively. Let us first illustrate schematically the different emission processes in terms of resonant (optical) pumping within a three-level picture to fix some basic ideas. In a first step, we consider the situation depicted in Fig. While the magnetic field does then not allow one to control the frequency of the transition, which is determined by l S and thus by the interface width l, it allows us to bring the levels (m = 1, n = 0) and (m = 0, n = 1) into close energetic vicinity and thus to increase the transition rate between the two levels, which is proportional to if we consider Lorentzian level broadening due to a dephasing time τ Similarly, one may use the Voigt geometry for pumping the transition (m = 0, n = 0) → (m = 1, n = 0). If the latter is now slightly above the (m = 0, n = 1) level [see Fig. We now investigate a possible four-level scheme for population inversion, as shown in Fig. It is noteworthy that the above-mentioned resonant cyclotron transitions are also involved in non-radiative Auger processes. Such Auger processes have been shown to be detrimental to population inversion in GaAs and graphene While the above arguments are not restricted to a particular topological insulator, it is useful to discuss the orders of magnitude of the probably best controlled system in which VP states occur that is MBE-grown Pb 1-x Sn x Se crystals Magneto-optical experiments indicate that the fundamental VP gap (3) scales as This implies a the transition rate in terms of the fine-structure constant α = 1/137, if we consider dipolar light coupling. This is roughly a factor of four smaller than in graphene due to the reduced Fermi velocity v. Notice that interaction-induced decay processes take place at much shorter time scales, typically in the fs range. In the case of almost resonant levels, as discussed in the previous section [see e.g. the levels (m = 1, n = 0) and (m = 0, n = 1) in Fig. where ε is the dielectric constant of the host material. Here, ⟨m = 1, n = 0|V C |m = 0, n = 1⟩ ∼ e 2 /εl B is, apart from a possible numerical prefactor, the Coulombinteraction matrix element between the states associated with the two almost resonant levels (of energy difference ∆E), and is the distribution, which may approximated by a Lorentzian with a typical width given by the dephasing time τ and that reduces to a Dirac peak in the limit τ → ∞. One should also notice that the (m = 1, n = 1) level, used e.g. in the above four-level scheme, can also be brought into close energetic vicinity of the bottom of the bulk conduction band at ∆ ∼ 45...100 meV. While the schemes discussed above in terms of resonant pumping in a specific geometry require themselves a THz source, one might then alternatively use the bulk conduction band as a target of pulsed or continuous pumping at higher energies and rely on rapid decay processes towards the band bottom, which then serves as a reservoir for the (m = 1, n = 1) level. However, to test this possibility, one would need to rely on a decay towards this target level at the interface that is more rapid than the bulk recombination. Being aware of the relevance of a detailed balance equation for the involved transition rates and quantitative evaluation of the latter, such a quantitative study is nevertheless beyond the scope of the present paper and left for future investigations. Let us finally mention the role of the topologicalinsulator surface opposite to the active interface investigated here. While the latter is grown such as to provide a smooth interface, the former is considered as sharp so that it does not host VP states. However, it necessarily hosts a chiral surface state that, in the presence of the perpendicular magnetic field, might in principle absorb photons via LL transitions (m = 0, n) → (m = 0, ±n ± 1) that have previously been generated in the active interface within the Faraday geometry. In order to avoid such unwanted reabsorption, one needs to passivate the surface by a judicious choice of the Fermi level. This can, e.g., be achieved by a gate or probably more realistically by chemical electron doping with the help of adatoms so that an absorption to the level (m = 0, n = 0) becomes Pauli-blocked in the schemes discussed above. In conclusion, I have argued that the particular surface-state spectrum, which is formed in smooth interfaces between a trivial and a topological insulator, is a promising path towards the LL laser. A tunable LL laser would indeed be of relevance in the quest for a coherentlight source in the THz range, where the lack of such source is known as the "Terahertz gap" The magnetic field does not only allow one to change the cyclotron frequency, at which light is emitted in certain setups, but also to bring LLs associated with different VP bands into close energetic vicinity. When the gap between the VP bands is on the same order of magnitude as the typical LL separation -this situation can be easily achieved experimentally, e.g. in Pb (1-x) Sn x Se crystals -the LL spectra are neither equidistant nor follow a square-root law so that both Auger and reabsorption processes are maximally suppressed. Futhermore, remaining Auger processes involving the central (m = 0, n = 0) level and the adjacent target levels (m = 0, n = ±1) may even be helful to maintain population inversion. Another highly unusual and, for devices, potentially extremely fertile aspect of light emission in VP LLs is the direction of propagation of the absorbed and emitted photons. Indeed, photons with a wave vector perpendicular to the interface (Faraday geometry) are absorbed and emitted in transitions involving adjacent LL indices n and n ± 1 but the same VP band index m, regardless of whether the LLs are formed in the positive-or negative-energy branch of the VP bands. On the other hand, photons propagate inside the interface (Voigt geometry) for transitions (m, n) → (m ± 1, n). This would allow for a smart design of the Fabry-Pérot cavities such that the extension in the z-and x/y-directions match the photon wavelength of the respective transitions, especially if pumping and emission are associated with the two different geometries (Faraday and Voigt).