A series of MD and DFT simulations were performed to investigate hydrogen self-clustering and retention in tungsten. Using a newly develop machine learned interatomic potential, spontaneous formation of hydrogen platelets was observed after implanting low-energy hydrogen into tungsten at high fluxes and temperatures. The platelets formed along low miller index orientations and neighboring tetrahedral and octahedral sites and could grow to over 50 atoms in size. High temperatures above 600 K and high hydrogen concentrations were needed to observe significant platelet formation. A critical platelet size of six hydrogen atoms was needed for long term stability. Platelets smaller than this were found to be thermally unstable within a few nanoseconds. To verify these observations, characteristic platelets from the MD simulations were simulated using large-scale DFT. DFT corroborated the MD results in that large platelets were also found to be dynamically stable for five or more hydrogen atoms. The LDOS from the DFT simulated platelets indicated that hydrogen atoms, particularly at the periphery of the platelet, were found to be at least as stable as hydrogen atoms in bulk tungsten. In addition, electrons were found to be localized around hydrogen atoms in the platelet itself and that hydrogen atoms up to 4.2 Å away within the platelet were found to be bonded suggesting that the hydrogen atoms are interacting across longer distances than previously suggested. These results reveal a self-clustering mechanisms for hydrogen within tungsten in the absence of radiation induced or microstructural defects that could be a precursor to blistering and potentially explain the experimentally observed high hydrogen retention particularly in the near surface region. Future fusion reactors will require materials that can withstand the harsh conditions at the plasma-material interface including heat loads on the order of 10 MW/m 3 and particle fluxes on the order of 10 24 m -2 s -11 . In particular, the variety of plasma species, including the hydrogen fuel, helium ash, and impurities like beryllium or nitrogen, can damage the plasma-facing components resulting in microstructural changes and degradation of material properties. The current candidate material for the divertor region, which will be subject to most of the particle exhaust from the core plasma, is tungsten due to its high melting temperature and thermal conductivity as well as its low sputtering yield Hydrogen is known to strongly trap at defects sites, like grain boundaries Recent density functional theory (DFT) work has suggested that hydrogen can cluster into 2D platelet geometries in the absence of defects. Li et al. In this work, we simulate hydrogen implantation in tungsten using a newly developed W-H machine learned interatomic potential detailing platelet formation that occurs spontaneously at high hydrogen concentrations. The effects of surface orientation, temperature, and flux on platelet growth are quantified. In addition, we report on unprecedented largescale DFT simulations to unravel the mechanism for stability of these platelets at high temperature. The following sections describe simulation methods, hydrogen implantation MD simulations, and DFT simulations that validate the MD work for hydrogen platelet formation. A combination of simulation methods is required in order to properly address hydrogen self-trapping within tungsten. To achieve experimentally comparable particle fluxes, efficient classical MD simulations that utilize an interatomic potential are needed. Direct simulation of hydrogen implantation is crucial because it allows for an assessment of the timescale of self-trapping in relation to particle flux and operational temperature. Confirmation of MD observations are then carried out with density functional theory, scaling to simulation sizes only accessible with high-performance computing resources to ensure clarity in conclusions drawn. Molecular dynamics simulations were performed with the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) All cluster identification for both MD and DFT was conducted using the Cluster Analysis modifier in the OVITO software In order to unravel the mechanisms for damage in the near surface region, detailing the dynamic changes in hydrogen accumulation is required. Predictions of blister formation due to mass transport of the plasma-borne species within the matrix cannot be made from binary collision simulations of single ion strikes We ran implantations in a representative selection of low energy surface orientations to highlight effects of energetic particle channeling and surface dependencies. However, we did not observe drastic differences between the (100), (110), and (111) surface orientations. For 75 eV particles it was ob- served that all orientations show significant adsorption at the surface, a depletion zone up to 1 nm below the surface, and a monotonically increasing accumulation up to a maximum depth of 12 nm. Beyond fluences of 1.2 •10 19 m -2 (> 5ns) these profiles are self-similar for all surface profile, with very little variation between surface orientations. For the hydrogen retention, the (100) and (111) surfaces had similar hydrogen retention at 47.1% and 47.9%, respectively. In contrast, the (110) surface had a significantly lower retention at 28.3% which was in part due to the higher reflection rate. The percentage of hydrogen at the surface ranges from about 5% for the (111) surface to about 8% for the (110) surface. Throughout the simulated implantations, prompt formation of hydrogen clusters was observed for all plasma-material exposure conditions. Direct simulation of the implantation and time evolution of absorbed plasma species allows for diffusion and self-trapping events to occur naturally, without the need to bias towards clustering phenomena. Snapshots in Figure Due to limitations on length and timescale available to MD, particle fluxes are higher than what is expected at the ITER diverter surface. At the implantation energy studied here a high concentration of absorbed hydrogen resides close to the surface, promoting clustering via short diffusive distances needed and ballistic implantation into preexisting clusters. Indeed, the largest cluster sizes (> 50 atoms) were observed for the highest fluxes tested, where a flux of six times lower resulted in mean cluster sizes a factor of four lower. These observations are captured in Figure Simulations of hydrogen clustering over material and environmental conditions reinforces the importance of understanding the mechanisms of divertor surface degradation as all conditions predict a rapid change in local chemistry and lattice strain. The most surprising observation was the interplay of the lattice and hydrogen cluster orientations. Classical arguments for the formation of a secondary phase in a solid would be that free energy is minimized were the surface area between phases is reduced, implying spheroidal shapes were to be expected. However, as shown in Figure Analysis of these mechanisms of blister formation was conducted using the cluster tracking techniques outlined in Section II C. Figure Tracking the cluster lifetimes of sub-critical sizes, Figure As alluded to previously, and shown in Figure The primary challenge for DFT calculations is the cubic increase in computational cost associated with respect to number of electrons. To mitigate this, smaller representative problems have to be utilized, with the caveat that the predictions be converged with respect to finite size and time effects. Presently, the main concern is that smaller periodic cells will artificially increase the hydrogen self interactions. An initial sweep of supercell sizes ranged from 2 × 2 × 2 to 7 × 7 × 7 containing 4 to 12 H atoms arranged in adjacent tetrahedral sites. Though the SCF per atom H incorporation energy for the 5 × 5 × 5 supercell was converged with the 7 × 7 × 7 supercell to 0.04 eV, we wanted to mitigate finite size effects and enable investigation of higher H atom counts as much as computationally feasible. We selected the 7 × 7 × 7 supercell for further study. It is important to note that smaller volumes were observed to suppress the formation of a thermally stable cluster, rather showing that spatially dispersed hydrogen is energetically favorable. To investigate what mechanisms may be bolstering platelet stability, the 7 × 7 × 7 supercells included a range of H atoms from 2 to 11 and each was simulated at 1000 K for 1 ps. We note these large DFT-MD simulations took ≈ 37k node hours on the GPU machine Summit at Oak Ridge National Laboratories. The H atom range allowed for investigation of early stage platelet formation and comparison across concentrations. Using the same spatial cutoff as the large scale implantation simulations (4.2 Å), the average number of clustered hydrogen was quantified, which is displayed in Figure A snapshot from the highest hydrogen concentration after ≈ 0.8 ps was used to investigate the electronic structure leading to the bonding changes of interest. To better understand the electronic structure of H during platelet formation, we first look at the Local Density of States (LDOS). Any overlap between DOS curves is an indication of hybridization or bonding. The position of H in the W supercell in the DFT-MD snapshot are shown in Figure While overlap or hybridization in DOS peaks may suggest bonding, we need to check whether the electrons are also shared spatially. The partial charge density (PCD) for the supercell snapshot resolved from -11 to -6 eV below the Fermi level is shown in Figure However, a cutoff value of 4.5 Å is needed to classify all 8 H as part of the cluster, but this incorrectly includes one of the isolated H as well which does not share charge with the cluster. While using a radial cutoff metric may not precisely identify all H atoms sharing charge, we can conservatively use a 4.2 Å cutoff distance to identify H platelets that share electrons. This is in good agreement with the findings from our MD simulations. While the PCD reveals an energy resolved charge map, we can get a complete spatial picture of the electronic structure by also examining the Electron Localization Function (ELF). The ELF maps the probability of finding any calculated electron from 0.0 to 1.0, where 0.0 indicates a low probability of finding an electron and 1.0 indicates a high probability of finding an electron. The ELF is scaled such that a value of 0.5 would match the probability of a homogeneous electron gas. The ELF for the 0.8 ps snapshot is shown in Figure In this work, we have performed MD simulations of hydrogen implantation in tungsten using a newly developed W-H machine learned interatomic potential and ran large-scale DFT simulations of hydrogen clustering in unprecedentedly large simulation cells. After low-energy, high flux hydrogen implantation in tungsten, we observe the spontaneous formation of 2D platelet hydrogen clusters which accumulate along preferred directions, especially those containing tetrahedral sites, such as the (111) plane. The platelets require a high concentration of hydrogen and high temperatures above 600 K to regularly form and tend to become more stable as they become larger. A critical size of about 6 hydrogen atoms was needed to form a stable platelet, where clusters smaller than this tend to annihilate within a few nanoseconds. Characteristic platelets formed during the MD simulations were modeled using DFT and also found to be energetically stable and remained clustered at high temperatures. Hydrogen atoms, particularly at the periphery, were found to be at least as stable as hydrogen atoms in the bulk as indicated by the LDOS. In addition, ELF analysis showed that electrons had a high probability of being located near a hydrogen atom in a platelet and that the local electronic structure near the surrounding tungsten atoms was distorted, indicated that the hydrogen were stealing charge from tungsten to become more stable in the platelet. The combination of MD and DFT simulations indicate that these platelets can form form under fusion relevant conditions and are stable at the relevant temperatures. The results discussed in this work indicate a mechanism for hydrogen self-clustering at high temperatures and fluences expected in the divertor region. Tungsten exposed to low-energy hydrogen has resulted in blistering yet the exact mechanism for blister formation is still unknown particularly for blisters that form within the grain. This work suggests that hydrogen can cluster into platelets which may be a precursor to the supersaturated layer and blistering observed in experiments, which would require large inventories of hydrogen to accumulate in the material. If hydrogen can self-cluster at higher concentrations and temperatures, retention and blistering will remain an issue even in the absence of neutron induced radia-tion damage or other microstructural defects that traditionally have shown to trap hydrogen. This could potentially result in higher than expected hydrogen retention in the material just from the hydrogen implantation itself, which will affect the overall tritium inventory in the reactor. Additional work is needed in extending the time and length scales of the observed platelet growth to mesoscale models, which do not currently take into account this mechanism, to bridge the gap between hydrogen platelet formation and blistering. 