In this work, we describe the charge transport in two-dimensional (2D) Schottky barrier field-effect transistors (SB-FETs) based on the carrier injection at the Schottky contacts. We first develop a numerical model for thermionic and fieldemission processes of carrier injection that occur at a Schottky contact. The numerical model is then simplified to yield an analytic equation for current versus voltage (I-V ) in the SB-FET. The lateral electric field at the junction, controlling the carrier injection, is obtained by accurately modeling the electrostatics and the tunneling barrier width. Unlike previous SB-FET models that are valid for near-equilibrium conditions, this model is applicable for a broad bias range as it incorporates the pertinent physics of thermionic, thermionic field-emission, and field-emission processes from a 3D metal into a 2D semiconductor. The I-V model is validated against the measurement data of 2-, 3-, and 4-layer ambipolar MoTe2 SB-FETs fabricated in our lab, as well as the published data of unipolar 2D SB-FETs using MoS2. Finally, the model's physics is tested rigorously by comparing model-generated data against TCAD simulation data. O VER the past few decades, the semiconductor industry has focused on dimensional scaling of silicon transistors based on Moore's law in order to improve their speed, performance, and efficiency Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are a class of 2D materials that can be incorporated into FET device structures. TMDs have a sizeable bandgap, transitioning from indirect bandgap in bulk to direct bandgap in their monolayer limit To enable circuit design and allow technology-to-circuit cooptimization, a compact device model that faithfully reproduces the device terminal behavior over a broad operating range is needed. In the case of MoTe 2 SB-FETs, a physically accurate and scalable compact model must accurately interpret the role of source and drain contacts. As a result of the lack of effective substitutional doping techniques, metal contacts are directly deposited over the MoTe 2 channel The compact model presented here is based on the generalized theory of carrier emission at the metal source/drain contacts. Our model includes both thermionic emission and thermal field emission (tunneling) of carriers at the Schottky contacts. Due to their closed-form nature, the equations we arrive at are easily adaptable to a compact model, where majority of the model parameters have a well-defined physical interpretation. We show that the model captures the essential physics of 2D SB-FETs by comparing model output against numerical simulations conducted in a commercial TCAD tool. We demonstrate the model's applicability to fabricated MoTe 2 ambipolar FETs with varying channel thickness (2-layers to 4-layers) and over broad bias conditions (V GS ∈ [-8, 8] V and V DS ∈ [0.5, 4.5] V), spanning both hole and electron conduction regimes. The model is also successfully applied to fabricated unipolar 2D FETs based on MoS 2 . II. PRIOR WORK Penumatcha et al. The model presented in this paper is specifically developed for SB-FETs using 2D semiconductors, has a strong physical basis, is validated rigorously against numerical simulations as well as experimental data of ambipolar SB-FETs fabricated inhouse and unipolar SB-FETs reported in the literature. Because of its explicit nature with few parameters, most of which have a physical origin, our model is suitable for circuit simulations. III. MODEL DESCRIPTION Figure In the thermionic emission (TE) process, thermally excited carriers with energy greater than the potential barrier at the contacts can traverse over the barrier into the semiconducting channel, resulting in a current flow. The activation energy for TE, i.e., the barrier between the metal and the bottom of the conduction band for electrons and the top of the valence band for holes, decreases linearly with gate bias until it equals the characteristic Schottky barrier height. Due to the linear variation of the activation energy, the channel current varies exponentially with gate bias, as shown in Sec. III-A. With increasing gate bias, the potential barrier thins, which increases the probability of carriers to tunnel through the barrier. Thus, a field-dependent tunneling current is observed in the device. The electric field-enhanced tunneling phenomenon is also referred to as field emission (FE). The sum of TE and FE currents gives the net drain current measured in an SB-FET, illustrated qualitatively in Fig. The current density, J net , due to carrier transmission across an energy barrier from a metal into the channel is given as J net = J 1→2 -J 2→1 , where J 1→2 (J 2→1 ) is the current density due to carriers incident from region 1 (region 2) into region 2 (region 1), shown in Fig. where q is the charge of the carrier, A is the area of the 2D crystal, k is the wavevector in reciprocal space, k x is the xcomponent of k, v x is the velocity of carrier incident at the barrier, f i is the Fermi-Dirac distribution in region i (i = 1, 2 for metal, semiconductor), and T (k x ) is the transmission probability. If the carriers considered are electrons, converting the sum over k-space into an integral in energy space gives where m * e is the effective mass of the electron, h is Planck's constant, E x is the energy due to momentum perpendicular to the barrier or the longitudinal momentum (i.e., E x = p 2 x /2m * e , where p x is the momentum perpendicular to the barrier interface), E y is the energy due to lateral momentum. The metal Fermi-level (E Fm ) is considered as the reference energy level. The model assumes conservation of lateral carrier momentum with effective mass approximation. The same procedure as above can be followed to obtain an expression for J 2→1 to get J net,e as The net hole current density is obtained similarly as the electron current with m * e replaced with the effective mass of holes, m * h . The total drain current density due to both carriers is simply the sum of their respective net currents. Taking into account the direction of the drain current (along thex axis, from drain to source contact), the total current density is -J D = J net,e + J net,h . While the drain current is modeled by considering the spatially localized carrier injection at the contacts, effects of gate-source voltage (V GS ) and drain-source voltage (V DS ) are incorporated via the Fermi functions, f 1 and f 2 , and the transmission probability, T (E x ). For the classical TE process, the transmission probability T (E x ) = 1. Evaluating (3) for electrons for T (E x ) = 1 and non-degenerate statistics and integrating over The activation energy E A reduces linearly with the gate bias until the flatband voltage when E A = φ SB , qV c = E Fm -E Fs = -E Fs is the voltage across the contact (E Fm is used as the reference energy level), A * 2D ≡ (q 8πk 3 B m * e )/(h 2 ) is the effective Richardson constant for a 2D semiconductor. It is important to note the T 3/2 dependence in the pre-factor of the above equation compared to the T 2 dependence in the 3D TE model Tunnel barrier Channel x Fig. The FE transmission probability using the Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin (WKB) approximation for a triangular barrier where F x is the magnitude of the electric field at the triangular barrier. For electron tunneling that dominates for In Sec. III-B, we show an explicit analytic tunneling equation that lends itself well to compact modelling. A simplified conduction band profile at the source contact is shown in Fig. where L B is the tunneling barrier width, and φ (s,d) is the potential drop at the respective source/drain contact. For a constant V DS , as V GS increases, φ s increases and L B decreases, resulting in a strong increase in F x with V GS . At yet higher V GS , φ s remains roughly constant but L B continues to decrease, which reduces the rate of increase of F x with V GS . In our model, the effect of the channel transport is enclosed in the electric field, which ensures the self-consistency between our methodology and the emission-diffusion theory of MOSFETs presented in The SB-FET compact model includes both TE and FE processes and is thus applicable over a broad bias range. The total drain current is I D = W [(J tun,e + J TE,e ) + (J tun,h + J TE,h )], where W is the device width, and J tun (J TE ) is the tunneling (thermionic) current. The holes (electrons) are injected into the channel from the drain (source) contact. The TE process for a 2D semiconductor is described by (4), while the 2D tunneling process can be described by the following set of equations (see Appendix B): J TFE and J FE are the thermionic field emission (TFE) and field emission (FE) components, respectively, of the tunneling current, and K 0 and P f are constant fitting parameters. The terminal voltages modulate F x at the Schottky contact and thus control the current through the device. To model F x , we need to obtain the channel potential and the tunneling barrier width. The channel potential is obtained from the balance equation given as where V FB is the flat-band voltage, Q ch is the mobile charge in the channel, and C ins is the insulator capacitance. Q ch is empirically modeled as where C inv(e,h) is the inversion capacitance, V T (e,h) is the threshold voltage, and n (e,h) is related to the sub-threshold swing. The V DS dependence of V FB and V T is given as where δ FB and δ T are empirical parameters that are determined from calibrating the model with experimental data, as described in the companion paper. V DSeff is the effective V DS that drops across the channel. The effective V DS varies linearly with V DS at low drain bias and eventually saturates at V DSAT . We define V DSeff and V GDeff using a saturation function as, Here, V DSAT is the saturation voltage and ν is the transition region fitting parameter. The tunneling barrier width, L B , depends on the characteristic length, λ, and the depletion width, W D . The tunneling process can happen either over W D or a few characteristic lengths (Λ = n 0 λ, n 0 ≥ 1). At low V GS , W D is greater than Λ, and L B is determined by Λ. At intermediate V , the depletion region thins and W D < Λ, and the tunneling path is influenced by the depletion width. Thus, L B is modeled as t ch (t ins ) is the channel (insulator) thickness, ε ch (ε ins ) is the channel (insulator) dielectric constant, and ζ is a fitting parameter that describes the charge in the depletion region as a fraction of the channel charge. Figure The device physics of MoTe 2 SB-FETs is analyzed using the TCAD tool, Sentaurus, from Synopsys The drift-diffusion formalism was used to model the charge transport in the channel, with carrier mobility fixed at 50 cm 2 /Vs for both electrons and holes. Injection at the source and drain contacts was modeled using thermionic emission and the non-local tunneling equations, as implemented in Sentaurus. TCAD simulation results, shown in Fig. The dependence of the electric field, F x , at the source contact with V GS is shown in Fig. We validate our compact model against experimental measurement data of bilayer, trilayer, and four-layer MoTe 2 SB-FETs fabricated in-house. Figure Our model contains a total of 24 parameters (11 each for electrons and holes and 2 common to both). Nine of the parameters are empirical in nature, while the remainder have a physical origin and can be deduced from straightforward experimental calibration. See Appendix C for parameter extraction methodology. Figure We also apply our compact model to n-type MoS 2 SB-FETs reported in A compact model for ambipolar MoTe 2 SB-FETs was presented. The model relies on explicit, analytic equations to model thermionic emission and field-emission tunneling. We also presented a model for the variation of the tunneling barrier width with the terminal voltages. We conducted TCAD simulations to verify the model physics. Finally, we demonstrated the model's applicability to produce I-V data of realistic devices by comparing the model output against measurements of SB-FETs fabricated in-house as well as data available in the published literature. Because of its compact nature and few parameters, most of which have a physical significance, the model is suitable for technology-device-circuit co-design. To derive (4), we assume T (E x ) = 1 and apply Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics Solving the integrals and using qV c = -E F s , APPENDIX B DERIVATION OF ANALYTIC TUNNELING EQUATION FE can be analytically derived from (3) and (5) as follows. where J tun,e is the electron tunneling current, C 0 is the constant prefactor in (3) and α is the constant in the exponent in 2) The Fermi integral can be approximated as Although K 0 (F x ) can be approximated as a constant value, a piece-wise value of K 0 is a better approximation as shown in Fig. A similar parameter, P f,h is introduced for the hole branch.