Excitonic states trapped in harmonic moiré wells of twisted heterobilayers is an intriguing testbed. However, the moiré potential is primarily governed by the twist angle, and its dynamic tuning remains a challenge. Here we demonstrate anharmonic tuning of moiré potential in a WS 2 /WSe 2 heterobilayer through gate voltage and optical power. A gate voltage can result in a local in-plane perturbing field with odd parity around the highsymmetry points. This allows us to simultaneously observe the first (linear) and second (parabolic) order Stark shift for the ground state and first excited state, respectively, of the moiré trapped exciton -an effect opposite to conventional quantum-confined Stark shift. Depending on the degree of confinement, these excitons exhibit up to twenty-fold gatetunability in the lifetime (100 to 5 ns). Also, exciton localization dependent dipolar repulsion leads to an optical power-induced blueshift of ∼1 meV/μW -a five-fold enhancement over previous reports. Interlayer van der Waals interaction allows us to stack layers of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) onto each other with an arbitrary lattice mismatch Varying twist angle can dramatically change the material properties, drawing attention from the researchers in the recent past Due to type-II band alignment, WS 2 /WSe 2 heterobilayer supports an ultrafast charge transfer The depth of the exciton moiré potential is determined by the twist angle and the degree of lattice mismatch between the two heterobilayers. Hence, dynamic tuning of moiré potential remains a challenge, which, if realised, will be of great importance for both scientific exploration and applications. One could perturb the moiré potential by external stimulus, however, the perturbing potential may not necessarily be harmonic, breaking down the usual harmonic potential approximation for moiré well. In this work, we explore two such anharmonic perturbations to the WS 2 /WSe 2 moiré potential well: the first one through a gate voltage which introduces anharmonic perturbation through screening at high doping regime; and the second one is through optical excitation which introduces the perturbing potential through ILE dipolar repulsion. In both cases, the harmonic to anharmonic switching of the moiré potential manifests through a corresponding change from an equal to unequal inter-excitonic spectral separation. In such a scenario, we explore several intriguing features of the moiré excitons, including giant lifetime tunability, anomalous Stark shift, and dipolar repulsion induced large spectral blueshift. We prepare hBN-capped ∼ 59 • twisted (confirmed by second harmonic generation (SHG) spectroscopy in Supplementary Note 1 and Figure The near-equal inter-excitonic separation suggests that the three exciton resonances appear from excitonic states in the harmonic moiré potential well (Figure From the spectral separation between the quantized states, we calculate peak-to-peak moiré potential fluctuation of ≈ 150 meV (see Supplementary Note 2), as shown in Figure Possible alternative explanations, such as phonon-sidebands and defect-bound excitons, are unlikely in our samples based on the observations including alternating signs of the DOCP and systematic tuning of the ILE peak separation with twist angle, doping, and optical power (discussed later). Gate tunability: Figure Unconventional Stark effect: Interestingly, the average slope (indicated by black dashed line in Figure However, the enhancement in the slope of the redshift for X 1 and X 0 cannot be explained from doping dependent interlayer bandgap reduction and suggests a strong additional effect of localization. To understand this further, we solve the 1D Poisson equation to obtain the movement of bands with V g (see Supplementary Note 3 for the details of the calculation). The results are summarized in Figure This results in an in-plane perturbation potential (∆V ) with even parity about the highsymmetry points (Figure where δ exhibit linear and parabolic variation with V g (reproduced in sample D4 as well, see Supplementary Figure Gate tunable exciton lifetime: Figure The kinetics can be understood by the cascaded processes schematically depicted in Figure The strong gate dependence of the ILE lifetime is captured through a simple model where the gate dependent non-radiative process is considered as proportional to induced carrier density (see equations 6-7 in Methods): The model (solid traces in Figure Optical power induced anharmonicity: We now vary P over nearly two decades using a pulsed laser (531 nm) at V g = 0 V and plot the ILE peak positions in Figure where is the repulsion between two ILE dipoles placed at a distance r (schematically shown in Figure To the best of our knowledge, the observed average rate of the blueshift with power for X 0 (≈ 1 meV/μW) is the highest reported value for ILE to date Figure For a perfect two-dimensional harmonic well, X 0 , X 1 , and X 2 are expected to exhibit a degeneracy of 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Through the optically induced anharmonicity, we expect the degeneracy of X 1 and X 2 to be lifted (Figure Interestingly, while X 2 exhibits a mono-exponential decay at low power, its dynamics becomes bi-exponential at higher power (P > 3.9 μW) with an additional lifetime of τ a ∼ 1 ns, as indicated by the blue solid symbols in Figure In summary, we have shown that the exciton moiré potential in heterobilayer can be dynamically tuned through external stimuli, such as gate voltage and optical power. The usual harmonic approximation of moiré potential breaks down under such perturbation. The strength of such tunability is evidenced through moiré excitons exhibiting (a) confinement dependent tuning of features, (b) anomalous Stark shift where parity is reversed with respect to conventional quantum-confined Stark effect, (c) strong modulation of the lifetime and the inter-excitonic separation, and (d) a giant spectral blueshift through dipolar repulsion. The results will lead to intriguing experiments and applications exploiting dynamic tuning of moiré potential. Device fabrication: We prepared the hBN capped WS 2 /WSe 2 heterojunctions using a sequential dry-transfer method (with micromanipulators) where the individual layers were exfoliated from flux grown crystals (HQ-Graphene) on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) using Scotch tape. For back gated samples, the pre-patterned metal electrodes are prepared using photolithography followed by sputtering of Ni/Au (10/50 nm) and lift-off. The entire stack (for D1 and D4) is gated from the backside (from the WS 2 side) through hBN layer (dielectric) and the pre-patterned metal line. The WS 2 layer is contacted to a different electrode (Gr) for carrier injection. After completion of the transfer process, the devices are annealed inside a vacuum chamber (10 -6 mbar) at 250 • C for 5 hours for better adhesion of the layers and removal of air bubbles. The angle and stacking between WS 2 /WSe 2 layers are confirmed using SHG (see Supplementary Figure TRPL measurement: Our custom-built TRPL setup comprises of a 531 nm pulsed laser head (LDH-D-TA-530B from PicoQuant) controlled by the PDL-800 D driver, a photoncounting detector (SPD-050-CTC from Micro Photon Devices), and a time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) system (PicoHarp 300 from PicoQuant). The pulse width of the laser is 40 ps. For the spectrally resolved TRPL from moiré ILEs, a combination of a long pass filter (cut in wavelength of 650 nm) and a wavelength-tunable monochromator (Edmund optics, 2 cm 2 Square holographic gratings) with 0.5 nm resolution (corresponding to about 0.8 meV resolution in the ILE spectral regime) are placed in front of the SPD. The peak position of the emission from ILEs are simultaneously measured along with TRPL measurement by performing in-situ PL (see Supplemental Material in ref. Exciton formation and decay model: To fit the experimentally obtained TRPL data, we use three differential equations: Here n i (t) is the time dependent population density, τ i is the net decay time, and is the Gaussian formation function, and τ f i is the formation time measured from the laser excitation time for exciton X i , i = 0, 1, 2. After solving these equations numerically, we fit the measured TRPL data from the three moiré exciton emissions using τ f i , σ i , and τ i as fitting parameter. Model for gate-voltage dependent lifetime: The net decay time (τ i ) measured in TRPL (Figure where τ r,i , τ nr0,i , and τ nrg,i (V g ) represent the radiative lifetime, gate voltage independent nonradiative lifetime, and the gate voltage dependent non-radiative lifetime, respectively. From Figure 