Vacuum thermal treatments (baking) are known to improve the superconducting properties of the RF surface layer of niobium cavities, and are employed as a last processing step to increase their efficiency determined by intrinsic quality factor Q 0 . A new method to perform the baking has been demonstrated. It consists in annealing of an evacuated cavity with the local heaters installed on its outer surface in a cryostat which ensures an exterior vacuum and protects the outer cavity surface from oxidation. Such a set-up has a number of advantages as it does not require to cool the cavity flanges during baking, and allows to perform the "cold" RF characterization of the cavity in situ, immediately after the thermal treatment without disassembly of heating elements. Moreover, the air exposure that causes partial degradation of Q 0 by surface reoxidation is avoided. The heat treatment of a single-cell 1.3 GHz niobium cavity at 230 °C for 24 h demonstrated the doubling of Q 0 at E acc =10 MV/m (from 1.20 × 10 10 to 2.4 × 10 10 ) and retained the maximal accelerating field of 35 MV/m without quenching. The selection of treatment parameters is based on our previous XPS studies. This treatment ensures incomplete dissolution of the native oxide by oxygen diffusion, thereby preventing interaction of niobium surface with external contaminants. We propose to bake the cavities directly in a cryomodule, which would allow to use the treatment to improve their performance. The potential impact of material parameters on the components of surface resistance has been briefly examined. g radiofrequency (SRF) cavities form the core of modern accelerators and free-electron lasers, various fields of science, medicine, and industry. The efficacy of SRF cavities hinges on their intrinsic quality factor, Q 0 , and its dependence on the accelerating gradient, E acc . A high Q 0 signifies minimal heat dissipation and reduced cryogenic power requirements. Since the efficiency of 2 K cryogenic plants is in the per mil range, even small gains in Q 0 have a large impact on the AC power consumption and the complexity of the plant. The intrinsic quality factor is inversely related to the resistance of a thin surface layer that interacts with the RF field during low-temperature cavity operation. extensive research has been conducted worldwide to explore the effects of various thermal treatment methods on the superconducting properties of this surface layer. Some methods involve simple vacuum annealing at different temperatures and durations (e.g., mild baking, medium-temperature baking The improvement in Q 0 is attributed to several phenomena. Firstly, this involves reducing the mean free path of electrons in the normal state, which decreases the temperature-dependent component of niobium resistance in the superconducting state (the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer resistance, R BCS ) To address these challenges, alternative approaches have been explored, such as sealing the cavity volume and connecting it to a separate pumping station during heat treatment In this work, we demonstrate a new, simplified method for vacuum annealing niobium cavities that improves their RF performance. This method does not require a traditional vacuum furnace or flange cooling and avoids air exposure of the cavity prior to RF operation. The heat treatment was conducted within the Small Vertical Test Stand (SVTS) cryostat at HZB. The cryostat testing chamber has a diameter of 600 mm and a height of 2000 mm. It is equipped with a helium level probe, multiple PT100 and Cernox temperature sensors, and a resistive heater for helium evaporation. Additionally, a magnetic shield is installed inside the chamber. None of these auxiliary components were dismounted for the experiment. The heat-treatment method was applied to a standard 1.3 GHz single-cell TESLA-shape niobium cavity (1DE13). The cavity (RRR=230) was previously treated with buffer chemical polishing, annealed at 800 °C, followed by electropolishing, high-pressure rinsing (HPR) and a 120 °C bake. It was then stored in air for several years. Prior to the experiment, it underwent HPR at 100 bar at HZB. The cavity was equipped with a high-Q input antenna (attached to the top flange via a 7/16 feedthrough) and a fieldprobe antenna (connected to the bottom flange via an NW16 SMA feedthrough). A vacuum right-angle valve was also attached to the bottom flange. The cavity was placed on a titanium retaining plate within a standard SVTS insert, though it was not tightly connected to the insert. A particle-free pumping line (CF40 bellow) was attached to the cavity right-angle valve. The same SVTS insert was used for the initial baseline RF test, subsequent heat treatments, and followup RF tests. Throughout all phases, the cavity vacuum remained better than 1 × 10 -6 mbar. For the vertical cold RF test, the cavity was equipped with two Cernox sensors and two RF cables. efore each heat treatment, following the cold test, the RF cables and the Cernox sensors were removed from the cavity and placed at the top part of the insert (though the cables and feedthroughs remained attached to the insert). Several additional feedthroughs were installed on the insert, including a 4-pin highvoltage and high-current CF40-feedthrough, a KF-40 5-channel K-type thermocouple feedthrough, and a KF-40 5-channel E-type thermocouple feedthrough. Four E-type thermocouples were installed in the configuration shown in figure Two resistive heaters (Horst HBS010, 250 W nominal power each) were connected to the high-voltage feedthrough allowing independent control. The heaters were operated using two Horst HT31N temperature regulators. To avoid potential contamination of the outer cavity surface, the heaters were wrapped with in aluminum foiler 1 was positioned around the top half-cell, while Heater 2 was placed around the bottom half-cell (see figure The cavity cell was further wrapped in aluminum foil, as shown in figure After the preparation, the insert was installed in the cryostat. The external particle-free pumping line connected to the insert was linked to the pumping station, ensuring the cavity was actively pumped throughout the baking process. The helium space within the cryostat was evacuated to a pressure of 1 × 10 -5 mbar, while the isolation vacuum space was vented with nitrogen to help cool the helium vessel. Hence, both the interior and exterior of the cavity were maintained under vacuum conditions during baking. Prior to heating, the pressure inside the cavity was 9 × 10 -7 mbar. The selection of heat treatment parameters was guided by results from our previous work To select appropriate parameters, the temperature and duration of baking should fall below the curve in figure The heat treatment has been performed in two steps, with an RF test in between each step. The objective was to leave about 1 nm of niobium pentoxide after the second treatment. Since the cavity had been stored in an open environment for an extended period, we assumed that the Nb 2 O 5 layer was at least 5 nm thick, which is greater than the 2.7-3.5 nm thickness of freshly prepared niobium used in Figure During the experiment, the bottom flange temperature remained below 120 °C while the top flange stayed below 90 °C. As shown in figures 2(a,b), the top flange rests on the holding plate. The contact between the flange and the plate is made via bolts that extend beyond the flange. Due to the relatively small contact area, we assume that the lower temperature of the top flange results from radiation shielding by the holding plate rather than contact cooling. The total time-averaged heating power during this experiment ranged between 50-80 W, with both heaters operating at duty cycles between 10 % and 15 %. The cavity was tested vertically before and after each heat treatment. Throughout the experiment, the cavity remained mounted in the insert and under vacuum. The plots of the intrinsic quality factor (Q 0 ) versus the accelerating field (E acc ) were measured at 1.51, 1.64, 1.72, 1.80, 1.86, 1.93, 1.99 and 2.04 K. The Q 0 (E acc ) curves measured at T=1.80 K, before and after heat treatments, are shown in figure Before the heat treatments, the cavity performance was moderate. At T=1.80 K (p He =16 mbar), it had a maximum quality factor of 1.2 × 10 10 at E acc =5 MV/m. The previous cold test in 2018 showed a higher Q 0 , but since the cavity had been stored open to air afterward, it is assumed that this degradation was caused by heavy oxidation. The onset of field emission occurred at approximately E acc =25 MV/m. The field emission was unstable and could be processed away, allowing the final point at 31 MV/m to be measured without field emission (radiation values are not shown in the plots). However, field emission reappeared during the subsequent measurement at around 25 MV/m. We chose not to process the field emission at fields above 25 MV/m as this could degrade Q 0 or lower the field emission onset. As a result, an administrative limit of E acc =31 MV/m was set for all tests. After the first heat treatment, the Q 0 of the cavity increased from 1.20 × 10 10 to 1.75 × 10 10 at E acc =5 MV/m (figure The surface resistance (R s ) versus temperature plots, along with the corresponding BCS fits (solid lines), are presented in figure where R s is the surface resistance, A is a fitting parameter related to the BCS resistance, T is the temperature, f is the frequency of the cavity, k is the Boltzmann constant, ∆ is the superconducting energy gap, and R res is the residual resistance. The best fits were obtained with a superconducting energy gap, ∆, of 1.50 meV. The ratio The BCS surface resistance and residual resistance as functions of E acc at T=2 K are shown in figure As to R res , it initially increased significantly with the field starting from 6 MV/m for the unbaked cavity. After the baking, the dependence changed, i.e. R res decreased with the field up to E acc =12 MV/m, followed by a slow increase at higher fields. It is generally accepted that vacuum heat treatment of niobium leads to the reduction of the native oxide layer, primarily due to the diffusion of oxygen into the near-surface region The R BCS component of the surface resistance is known to be related to the mean-free path of "normal" electrons Using the solution of Fick's second law for a continuous plane source where D is the diffusion coefficient, t is the duration of baking, φ(t) is the rate at which the diffusing species are introduced from the surface plane into the solid, i.e. the rate of oxide reduction, for the first-order reaction equal to φ(t)=kC 0 exp(-kt). The rate constant for oxide reduction, obtained from our previous study was used, k=33.96exp(-63.62/RT) kJ/mol The calculated concentration profiles of oxygen under the surface oxides for both the first and second heat treatments are shown in figure The mean free path, l e , was calculated using the known relation of l e to resistivity and the contribution of oxygen interstitials to resistivity As l e values are lower for the heat treatments at 230 °C for a total time of 13 h and 24 h, it should result in lower R BCS compared to the 300 °C/3 h treatment. However, according to the obtained data, neither treatment achieved optimal l e values. Notably, the oxygen concentration profile at 300 °C is less steep compared to that at 230 °C (figure Comparing the R BCS (E acc ) curves (figure Upon baking, the R res component decreased significantly after the first heat treatment and showed a slight further reduction after the second treatment. The number of vacancies in the top surface layer created by the first treatment was 49 per 100 Nb atoms, and this increased by 1.6 times after the second treatment. Similarly, the number of oxygen interstitials within a 100 nm depth was 18.3 per 100 Nb atoms and increased by a factor of 1.3. Thus, the majority of defects are concentrated within a thin surface layer where the oxide was initially present. We propose that, similar to the optimal value of l e that corresponds to minimal R BCS , there exists an optimal number of defects within the top surface layer after oxide reduction, corresponding to the minimum R res . This hypothesis (described in In the future, the quantity and dimensions of the lower-valence oxides created will be analyzed, as they are also considered efficient pinning centers. It has been previously established that the contribution of defects of different dimensions varies with the applied field Estimating R res after air oxidation, which would "heal" all oxygen vacancies in the surface layer by transforming lower oxides into the highest oxidation state, while keeping the depth profile of interstices within the RF penetration depth, would provide useful information on the impact of surface defects on pinning. The relationship between pinning effectiveness, surface defects (e.g., point defects, oxide layers or islands) and their properties (electronic, magnetic), and other surface properties like roughness, requires further study to improve our understanding of pinning mechanisms and R res behavior of baked niobium surfaces. We have successfully demonstrated the feasibility of performing mid-T baking in-cryostat on superconducting cavities without requiring specialized vacuum furnaces. Instead, a vertical cryostat was used as a vacuum chamber, presenting several advantages for research and development experiments in SRF science: 1) Preservation of cavity cleanliness: A key advantage is that the cavity's inner surface is never exposed to the vacuum environment of a traditional furnace. This reduces the risk of contamination from furnace cleanliness issues and post-treatment reassembling, improving the likelihood of successful heat treatments when "safe" heat treatment parameters from 2) Simplified flange cooling: There is no need for separate pumping systems or active cooling of the flanges to protect gaskets, as temperatures at the flanges remain below the maximum allowable threshold for gaskets and feedthroughs, reducing the complexity of the procedure. 3) Enhanced post-treatment testing: Immediate RF testing of the cavity following the baking process can be realized, without exposing the outer surface to air, hence preventing re-oxidation. This may enhance the heat transfer from the cavity to the surrounding liquid helium, in which case it is expected that the cavity performance is improved. Additionally, using non-magnetic heaters (e.g., tungsten, molybdenum, or ceramic) prevents magnetic flux trapping during cooldown. These heaters can remain on the cavity during rf testing, streamlining the workflow. 4) Selective heating capability: The ability to selectively heat specific regions of the cavity allows for greater experimental flexibility and the potential for optimized heat treatment parameters. 5) Retention of post-baking Q 0 : Avoiding air exposure between baking and RF operation fully preserves the Q 0 values achieved during treatment, preventing degradation due to reoxidation of the inner cavity surface 6) Application in real accelerators: The same procedure can potentially be adapted for the so-called "dressed" cavities installed in cryomodules, with heat treatment performed after installation in situ using simple heaters, maximizing the benefits of mid-T baking. This could fully harness the benefits of moderate-temperature baking in operational accelerators. The SRF module with heaters and its manufacturing method are patent pending. 7) Optimized heat-treatment parameters: It was demonstrated that carefully choosing heat-treatment parameters (temperature and duration) that allow partial reduction of the native oxide layer through diffusion reliably improves the Q 0 of the cavity. 8) Surface resistance modulation: The relation of the change to the state of niobium surface characterized mainly by defects generation in a thin upper layer and alteration of the mean free path of "normal" electrons within the RF penetration depth, to the surface resistance components modulation has been analyzed. The future perspectives to further improve Q 0 have been briefly discussed. We consider this innovative approach to mid-T heat treatment represents a significant advancement in cavity treatment methodologies. This method offers a practical and versatile solution for accelerating progress in SRF science while enabling performance improvements in real-world accelerator systems. A notable advancement is the successful mid-T baking of a single-cell niobium cavity without the use of a conventional furnace and venting the cavity between heat treatment and testing. This approach not only streamlines the process by reducing equipment costs but also simplifies experimental procedures. Preprint ver.6, Dec 2024