Measurements of magnetic properties at the atomic scale require probes capable of combining high spatial resolution with spin sensitivity. Spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy (SP-STM) fulfills these conditions by using atomically sharp magnetic tips. The imaging of spin structures results from the tunneling magneto-conductance that depends on the imbalance in the local density of spin-up and spin-down electrons. Spin-sensitive tips are generally formed from bulk materials or by coating non-magnetic tips with a thin magnetic layer. However, ferromagnetic materials generate stray magnetic fields which can influence the magnetic structure of the probed system, while the magnetization of antiferromagnetic materials is difficult to set tip by externally applied magnetic fields. Here, we use functionalized Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) tips prepared by attaching magnetic adatoms at the apex of a superconducting cluster to image magnetic interactions at the atomic scale. We demonstrate that YSR tips are capable of sensing different magnetization directions, conferring them full magnetic sensitivity. We additionally show that the finite size of the tip superconducting cluster makes it robust against relatively strong magnetic fields, making YSR tips capable of visualizing magnetic field driven transitions of the spin texture. Introduction. Spin-polarized electron tunneling exploits the tunneling magnetoresistance between two spin-polarized electrodes to access the respective spindependent electronic densities of states where -→ m T , -→ m S are vectors corresponding to the spin polarized local density of stats (LDOS) in tip and sample, respectively. SP-STM tip are generally prepared using magnetic bulk tips or by coating electrochemically-etched W tip with thin films of magnetic elements. Besides spinsensitivity, the ideal SP-STM tip needs to fulfill additional conditions, namely: (i) negligible stray fields to avoid dipolar interactions influencing or even destroying the sample's intrinsic magnetic structure Conditions (i) and (ii) are generally difficult to be simultaneously fulfilled. On the one hand, the use of ferromagnetic materials as tip coating layers allows to controllably orient the tip magnetization in applied magnetic fields, but it inevitably results in tip-induced stray fields. On the other hand, the use of antiferromagnetic materials allows to avoid stray fields but it impedes to control the tip magnetization direction due to the absence of a net magnetic moment. Since the tunnelling current decays exponentially with increasing distance, a single magnetic atom or molecules localized at the tip very end is expected to generate a sizable spin-dependent tunneling signal. This consideration has been used to demonstrate how spin-sensitive measurements can be obtained using a detection scheme which relies on the spin-excitations of single magnetic molecules attached to a conventional STM tip Experimental set-up. Experiments were performed under ultra-high vacuum conditions (p < 3 • 10 -10 mbar) in a STM setup operated at a base temperature of T = 550 mK. As a prototypical system, we focus on Cr adatoms coupled to a clean Nb(110) surface Spin-resolved measurements with bulk magnetic tips. Figure To confirm this hypothesis, the same set of measurements have been repeated by reverting the direction of magnetic field (B = -0.7 T). This is expected to revert the contrast across the chains due to the existence on an uncompensated moment which allows them to paramagnetically align with the field, while the antiferromagnetic bulk structure of the tip is left unaffected. As illustrated in Fig. Preparation of YSR tips. Starting from the characterization of the spin coupling along different chains obtained using conventional SP-STM tips, we probe similar structures using functionalized superconducting tips. These tips are produced following a two steps procedure, namely: (i) indentation into the Nb(110) substrate to create a tip whose apex consists of a Nb cluster; (ii) attachment of single Cr adatoms at the tip apex by atomic manipulation pick-up techniques. A similar approach using Fe and Mn adatoms has been reported in Ref. Figure YSR tips with out-of-plane sensitivity. YSR tips prepared by single adatoms are characterized by a small magnetic anisotropy Overall, our measurements reveal that the robustness of the superconducting cluster at the apex of functionalized YSR tips allows to perform spin-resolved spectro-scopic imaging in relatively high magnetic fields. We demonstrate that this property confers YSR tips the possibility to sense in-plane, out-of-plane, and tilted magnetizations as well as to visualize magnetic field-driven transitions of the magnetic texture. We envision that this methodology will be particularly useful to provide a full-magnetic characterization of non-collinear spin structures.