We present a new strategy for the design of dualband planar antennas based on metasurfaces (MTSs) in the microwave and millimeter-wave regimes. It is based on a doublelayer structure obtained by cascading two subwavelength patterned metallic claddings supported by a grounded dielectric slab. Each metallic layer is responsible for controlling radiation at one frequency, and it is engineered to be transparent at the other frequency. Hence, the two metallic layers can be designed independently using the well-established techniques for the design of single-layered MTS antennas. Layers decoupling is achieved by suitably exploiting Foster's reactance theorem, which regulates the frequency response of the impedance sheet modeling the metallic layer. By using the proposed strategy, a dual-band double-layered MTS antenna radiating a circularly polarized broadside beam in two popular frequency bands for climate science applications is designed and numerically verified. T HE demand for multifrequency medium-to-high gain antennas is rapidly increasing in many application areas, including Earth and climate science, remote sensing, satellite communications and 5G. These antennas, by exploiting the same radiating aperture at different frequency bands, offer the possibility to increase the channel capacity, improve the isolation between the transmitted and received signals, and provide multiple functionalities. Reflectarrays The research was carried out at UNC Charlotte in collaboration with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Kristy Hecht and Mario Junior Mencagli are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, North Carolina 28223, USA (e-mail: {khecht2, mmencagl}@uncc.edu). Nacer Chahat and Goutam Chattopadhyay are with Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA (e-mail: {nacer.e.chahat,goutam.chattopadhyay}@jpl.nasa.gov). Enrica Martini is with the University of Siena, Department of Information Engineering and Mathematics, 53100 Siena, Italy (e-mail: martini@dii.unisi.it). Metasurface (MTS) antennas have raised a great deal of interest in recent years In the present work, the behavior of the MTS surface reactance versus frequency is exploited to design dual-frequency MTS antennas. Prior works on dual-band MTS antennas are typically based on two different strategies. The first one consists of superimposing two different surface impedance modulations, each one responsible for controlling radiation at one frequency After briefly reviewing the design principle of single-layered MTSs operating in one frequency band, Sec. II discusses how to build on the Foster's reactance theorem to design doublelayered MTS antennas capable of performing in two different frequency bands. Sec. III presents a realistic implementation of the proposed approach by designing a double-layered MTS antenna radiating circularly polarized broadside beams at two common frequencies in cloud and precipitation radar To begin with, we briefly review the basic principle behind the design of single-layered MTS antennas. Then, building upon this principle, we will discuss our approach to designing double-layered MTS antennas for dual-frequency operation. An e jωt time convention is used and suppressed throughout the paper. The design of single-layered MTS antennas is based on the two-dimensional (2-D) canonical problem shown in Fig. ) and its modulation profile is usually described by a sinusoidal function where E t and H t are the tangential components of the electric and magnetic fields, respectively, at the sheet level, X 0 < 0 is the average reactance, M is the modulation index, and d is the modulation period, . This structure supports a TM (transverse magnetic) mode without cut-off. Due to the periodic nature of X s , such a mode can be represented through an infinite set of Floquet waves (FWs) where k is the longitudinal wavenumber of the 0-indexed FM, which is solution of the dispersion equation. For d larger than a critical value where β sw is the longitudinal wavenumber of the surface wave propagating on the unmodulated surface impedance (M = 0), and the positive real numbers ∆β and α account for the perturbation in the phase and amplitude, respectively, induced by the modulation, with ∆β ≪ β sw . In MTS antennas, the modulation period (d) is usually chosen such that only the (-1)-indexed FM is inside the light cone. As a result, the pointing angle (θ), which is defined with respect to the z axis, and d are related as follows with k being the free-space wavenumber. As mentioned in Sec. I, the desired continuous impedance profile can be accurately synthesized by subwavelength metallic patches smoothly varying along the surface A periodic pattern modeled with the equivalent transmission line model shown in Fig. Based on the procedure summarized in the previous section, our goal now is to develop a new methodology that allows performing two independent MTS antenna designs working at two different frequencies, that can be merged together, resulting in a single flat dual-band radiator. We assume the two frequencies of interest are f 1 and f 2 , with f 1 << f 2 . Henceforth, all the frequency-dependent physical quantities introduced in the previous section are assigned with subscripts 1 and 2, corresponding to f 1 and f 2 , respectively. Let us assume we have the two canonical problems shown in Figs. An alternative approach that does not require the extraction of the equivalent impedance in double-layered periodic structures and does not pose any restriction on the unit cell sizes would be preferable. The proposed approach aims at satisfying these requirement by focusing on a suitable impedance synthesis of the two single-layered MTSs [Figs. As is well known, the equivalent reactance provided by a periodic array of metallic patches is purely imaginary and exhibits a capacitive behavior in the low frequency regime. As a result, according to the Foster's reactance theorem, its frequency response presents a pole at zero frequency and then it increases monotonically alternating zeros and poles for increasing frequencies. The unit cells of single-frequency MTS antennas are normally designed to operate between the first zero and the first pole. Hence, we assume X p1 and X p2 also reside in that region at their operative frequency (see X p1 and X p2 in Figs. In practice, since we assumed f 1 << f 2 , a 2 will be much smaller than a 1 and so will be the relevant patches. Thus, we can assume that their equivalent reactance evaluated at f 1 and β sw1 will be very close to the pole at zero frequency, corresponding to a quasi open-circuit [Fig. The same procedure must be repeated to evaluate the equivalent reactance of the patches implementing X p1 at f 2 and β sw2 . However, now a 1 and the relevant patches are electrically large at f 2 . For this reason, the patches working at f 1 [blue patches in Fig. Following this strategy, the double-layered MTS of Fig. To demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed approach for the design of dual-band double-layered MTS antennas, we chose two largely separated popular frequencies in climate science radars such as 35.75GHz (f 1 ) and 94.05GHz (f 2 ) 