The development of high-activity and low-price cathodic catalysts to facilitate the electrochemical sluggish O2 reduction reaction (ORR) is very important to achieve the commercial application of fuel cells. Here, we have investigated the electrocatalytic activity of twodimensional single-layer Nb-doped zirconium diselenide (2D Nb-ZrSe2) towards ORR by employing the dispersion corrected Density Functional Theory (DFT-D) method. Through our study, we computed structural properties, electronic properties, and energetics of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 and ORR intermediates to analyze the electrocatalytic performance of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2. The electronic properties calculations depict that the 2D monolayer ZrSe2 has a large band gap of 1.48 eV, which is not favorable for the ORR mechanism. After the doping of Nb, the electronic band gap vanishes and 2D Nb-ZrSe2 acts as a conductor. We studied both the dissociative and associative pathways through which the ORR can proceed to reduce the oxygen molecule (O2). Our results show that the more favorable path for O2 reduction on the surface of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 is the 4e -associative path. The detailed ORR mechanisms (both associated and dissociative) have been explored by computing the changes of Gibbs free energy (ΔG). All the ORR reaction intermediate's steps are thermodynamically stable and energetically favorable. The free energy profile for the associative path shows the downhill behavior of the free energy vs. the reaction steps, suggesting that all ORR intermediate structures are catalytically active for the 4e -associative path and a high 4e -reduction pathway selectivity. Therefore, 2D Nb-ZrSe2 is a promising catalyst for the ORR which can be used as an alternative ORR catalyst compared with expensive platinum (Pt). The escalating global population and the ongoing advancements in global industrialization and society have led to a significant surge in global energy demand. Nowadays a great part of the energy demand over the world is fulfilled by fossil fuels. So, the concern about the energy crisis, environmental pollution, and climate change have put at risk the future of human society. To date, Platinum (Pt) and Pt-based materials serve as a suitable catalyst for the reduction of O2 at the cathode in the fuel cell. As a typical earth-abundant material, transition-metal compounds such as transition metal oxide, metal chalcogenides, metal phosphides, metal carbides, metal nitrides, etc. have been widely used as promising catalysts for electrochemical mechanisms in fuel cells and energy conversion applications. 17 Among all the transition metal compounds, two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (2D TMDs) have gained significant interest as a catalyst for electrochemical reactions. The unique properties of 2D TMDs which make them suitable for the catalyst are: (1) large surface area: the 2D TMDs have a high surface-to-volume ratio which provides a large density of active sites; (2) stability and thermal conductivity: as the 2D TMDs have only planar covalent bonding, they show excellent mechanical strength and remarkable resilience, and thermal conductivity enables efficient dispersion of heat generated during exothermic reactions; (3) tunable electronic properties: the electronic properties of the 2D TMDs materials can be tailored by creating defects, doping, stress, etc. To further enhance the HER kinetics, the researchers decided to introduce the Nb, Pt, and W dopants in both the 2D ZrS2 and ZrSe2 materials. Interestingly, they discovered that the 2D Nbdoped systems, namely Nb-ZrS2 and Nb-ZrSe2, exhibited a robust metallic nature, which significantly boosted their catalytic activity towards HER. Furthermore, they observed that, on the basis of ΔG calculations, 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 has the best catalytic activity towards HER. ZrSe2 toward HER, it is the fundamental interest to explore the more catalytic applications of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR. In this work, a DFT-D calculation is performed to explore the catalytic activity of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR. In principle, we aimed to answer these questions: how the doping of Nb alters the structural and electronic properties of the 2D monolayer ZrSe2? Do the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 catalyst acts as an efficient ORR catalyst? If yes, which path it will follow to reduce the O2? To answer these questions, we have analyzed the structural and electronic properties of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 and examined the changes of Gibbs free energy (ΔG) for all ORR intermediates at their minimum-energy condition. This study addresses some unique properties of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 and suggests that it can act as an efficient and useful catalyst for the ORR mechanism. Thus, this 2D Nb-ZrSe2 can serve as an efficient cathodic catalyst in fuel cells and metal-air batteries. The ORR has an essential role in the functioning of fuel cells. These electrochemical devices are designed to convert the chemical energy of the fuel, typically hydrogen (H2), directly into electrical energy. The working principle of the fuel cell can be defined as follows: The protons (H + ) pass through the membrane, while the accompanying electrons travel through the electric circuit. They combine together at the cathode side of the fuel cell with oxygen. At the cathode, oxygen is reduced to water by reacting with H + and e -through the electrochemical reaction: 43,44 All these processes rely on some electrochemical reactions. Among them ORR is one of the reactions at the cathode which reduces oxygen molecule to water. ORR reaction involves oxygen diffusion, i.e., the O2 adsorption on the surface of the catalysts followed by the H + + e -transfer processes to reduce the O2 into water. The oxygen reduction in acidic media mainly occurs through two different pathways:- Direct 4e -reduction: Indirect reduction: The indirect 2e -pathway produces corrosive peroxide (H2O2) intermediates, which may corrode the catalytic surface, hence there would be concern about the stability of the fuel cell. Moreover, the formation of H2O2 hinders the process and kinetics of ORR reaction but also deteriorates polymer membrane by generating reactive radicals. Thus, four electron pathway is preferred and considered more efficient than that of the two-electron pathway. Based on how the O=O bond breaks, the 4e -pathway can be divided into two different reaction pathways: (2) OOH dissociation path: the O2* reacts with H + and e -coming from anode side to form OOH*. Then, cleavage of the O=O bond occurs into O* and OH*. After that, the hydrogenation of the O* occurs to form the next OH*. Finally, the removal of H2O occurs from the surface of the catalyst. The details can be described as follows: Where the asterisk * denotes the adsorption site. In summary, we can say that the ORR reaction basically relies on the cleavage of O=O bond and protonation of the ORR intermediates. The catalytic potential of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR is measured combinedly by computing and analyzing the adsorption energy with the values of ΔG of each intermediate species during the subject reaction. We used computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) method to calculate the adsorption energy and the values of ΔG of each intermediate. In this method, the energies are calculated under the standard conditions (pH=0, p=1 bar, T=298.15 K, and U=0 V). We have implemented the approach introduced by Nørskov et al. in our study. Their research showcased a significant finding that the chemical potential of H + + e -can be correlated with 1/2 H2 in the gaseous state, which was determined using the standard hydrogen electrode. between two consecutive iterations. The threshold controlling of the coulomb exchange integral calculation were controlled by the five-threshold set 7, 7, 7, 7 (ITOL1 to ITOL4) and 14(ITOL5) for both the geometry optimization and electronic property calculations. The CRYSTAL17 code utilizes the default threshold for geometry optimization on all atoms, employing specific values for maximum and RMS force (0.000450 a.u. and 0.00300 a.u., respectively) and maximum and RMS displacement (0.001800 a.u. and 0.001200 a.u., respectively). To ensure accurate 2D monolayer i.e., SLAB calculations using the CRYSTAL17 code, we have established a separation of 500 Å in the normal surface direction of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 along Z-direction where is no symmetry. The equilibrium structure of the 2D monolayer ZrSe2, which is the main object of this and Nb-Se bond lengths were found to be 2.67 Å and 2.60 Å, respectively. The equilibrium bond angles ∠ZrSeZr, ∠NbSeZr, ∠SeNbSe, and ∠SeZrSe were found to be 87.51 ̊, 88.61 ̊, 92.86 ̊, and 92.86 ̊, respectively, as represented in Figure Pakhira investigated the ORR mechanism on the surface chalcogen (S) atomic layer of the 2D monolayer Pt-ZrS2 using DFT-D methods. From the above discussion, we can conclude that the ORR mechanism on the surface of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 material will follow the 4e -associative mechanism. To further analyze the catalytic activity of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR, we have computed the values of ΔG for each intermediate reaction steps. In this work, we have calculated the values of ΔG by computing the harmonic vibrational frequency of each intermediate step of ORR mechanism using the CRYSTAL17 code. We will discuss the ΔG, structural properties, and electronic properties of each reaction intermediate step involved in both associative and dissociative mechanism during the ORR. Thus, this step of ORR mechanism is unstable and readily proceed for the further reaction step(s). Furthermore, the value of ΔG is very close to zero, hence it can be considered ideal for ORR. The dissociative mechanism has the same initial step to initiate the ORR as associative mechanism i.e., O2 adsorption on the Sesite of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2. The next two steps will be different than associative mechanism, which we will discuss later in this manuscript. After that ORR process follows the same ORR steps. The dissociative mechanism involves the following distinct reaction steps: The value of ΔG for this reaction step (O2* → 2O*) was calculated to be 1.90 eV as reported in Table The electronic properties calculations have been accomplished by using the same DFT-D method. We have calculated the electronic band structure along the high symmetric k-path direction Ґ-M-K-Ґ in the first Brillouin zone followed by the previous calculation. We can see that the electronic To summarize the catalytic activity of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR, we plotted and analyzed the ΔG curve (potential energy curve) for both associative and dissociative mechanism based on the DFT-D calculations as shown in Figure 