The excitation of microresonators using focused intensity modulated light, known as photothermal excitation, is gaining significant attention due to its capacity to accurately excite microresonators without distortions, even in liquid environments, which is driving key advancements in atomic force microscopy and related technologies. Despite progress in the development of coatings, the conversion of light into mechanical movement remains largely inefficient, limiting resonator movements to tens of nanometres even when milliwatts of optical power are used. Moreover, how photothermal efficiency depends on the relative position of a microresonator along the propagation axis of the photothermal beam remains poorly studied, hampering our understanding of the conversion of light into mechanical motion. Here, we perform photothermal measurements in air and water using cantilever microresonators and a custom-built picobalance, and determine how photothermal efficiency changes along the propagation beam axis. We identify that far out-of-band laser emission can lead to visual misidentification of the beam waist, resulting in a drop of photothermal efficiency of up to one order of magnitude. Our measurements also unveil that the beam waist is not always the position of highest photothermal efficiency, and can reduce the efficiency up to 20% for silicon cantilevers with trapezoidal cross section. Recent years have been marked by a renewed interest in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and picobalance devices, which enable nanosensing applications across biomedicine, nanotechnology and materials science Many approaches can be used to excite cantilever oscillations: these include acoustic, magnetic, electrostatic, and Lorentz-force-induced excitations. Of these, acoustic approaches are the most common, wherein oscillations are driven by a vibrating dither piezoelectric within the cantilever holder All the above limitations can be overcome by exciting the cantilever with an intensitymodulated light beam, via the photothermal excitation method Most importantly, regardless of whether the cantilever is in vacuum, air or liquid, this excitation method is accurately described by a simple damped harmonic oscillator response However, large cantilever oscillation amplitudes (> 10 nm) with a low average optical power (< 100 μW) remain challenging, particularly when the cantilevers are in liquid Delicate samples such as live mammalian cells or yeast Here we present a detailed characterisation of the changes in cantilever excitation efficiency along the propagation axis (here: z-axis) of a photothermal excitation beam using a picobalance AFMs typically include a laser (wavelength 852 nm in our setup) to determine the cantilever movement. It comes with two lateral degrees of freedom (x-and y) to adjust the position of the laser on the cantilever, whereas its longitudinal (z) position is generally fixed. Photothermal excitation relies on the introduction of a second, intensity modulated laser (wavelength: 405 nm in our setup) As a first experiment, we recorded cantilever resonance curves (amplitude and phase versus the excitation frequency) driven with photothermal excitation for different relative positions of the cantilever along the longitudinal axis of the photothermal excitation beam. Figure The origin of the z axis was chosen at the optimal position. The longitudinal position labelled "apparent beam waist" corresponds to the position at which the beam waist of the photothermal beam coincides with the cantilever, according to optical images. The measurements were performed with average optical powers of the photothermal beam varying from 25.9 μW to 46.3 μW (Fig. These measurements were performed in both air and liquid environments and for cantilevers with standard geometries (rectangular shape with rectangular cross section, triangular shape with rectangular cross section, and rectangular shape with trapezoidal cross section cantilevers) and made of common materials, including gold coated silicon nitride and silicon cantilevers, and bare silicon cantilevers without coating (Fig. The photothermal laser beam in our picobalance is a Gaussian beam with a waist (i.e., minimum 1/e intensity radius) of 3.65 μm (Fig Figure With the focal shift and chromatic aberration ruled out, we considered whether the apparent beam waist could be linked to the wavelength distribution of the laser source. Although more than 99% of the laser light produced by a laser diode is usually centred around the nominal wavelength, there is still some light produced outside that range. In order to be able to acquire fluorescent and/or differential interference contrast images, optical filters are placed in front of the camera (Fig Therefore, the apparent beam waist detected could be the beam waist of unfiltered radiation at a wavelength above 450 nm rather than the actual beam waist of the attenuated 405 nm radiation. To investigate this, we mounted an additional and identical longpass filter to see whether the observed radiation would attenuate further. However, we did not observe further attenuation nor further displacement of the apparent beam waist, implying that the observed beam waist with the microscope was that of wavelengths higher than 450 nm. To confirm this, we returned to the initial configuration of filters (Fig. With this new filter in place, the apparent beam waist was not detectable by the microscope in the presence of the longpass filter, confirming that it corresponded to a wavelength above 450 nm. We then removed the longpass filter whilst keeping the 405 nm bandpass filter and repeated the photothermal efficiency measurements simultaneously with optical power measurements beneath the cantilever (similar to Fig. We then repeated the measurements of Fig. Thus more accurate models are required to better understand photothermal excitation under different conditions. Finally, we conducted a spectral analysis of our laser source to characterise its power distribution within the wavelength range of 350-850 nm. Figure In conclusion, we have characterised the changes in photothermal excitation efficiency along the propagation axis of a photothermal beam. We have found that the beam waist location can be erroneously identified from visual inspection alone, which reduces the photothermal efficiency by nearly an order of magnitude. This surprising result is caused by spurious low-power long-wavelength laser radiation that is well above the specified (narrow) range. This radiation dominates in the presence of filters commonly used in correlative atomic force and optical microscopies to prevent camera saturation and which enable the acquisition of fluorescence and DIC from the sample. We have provided an effective means to manage this phenomenon in order to optimise the photothermal excitation of cantilevers and resonators. Moreover, our results demonstrate that the highest photothermal efficiency occurs at different longitudinal positions for different cantilever types. In particular we identified that silicon nitride cantilevers with rectangular cross section are most efficiently excited near the laser beam waist within the confocal range of the laser, whereas silicon cantilevers with trapezoidal cross section are best excited outside this confocal range. These results point to the need to adjust the relative longitudinal position of a microcantilever or resonator to optimise the photothermal efficiency. This is particularly important when very low laser powers (≪1 mW) are required, as for instance when working with live cells A custom-built picobalance device is shown in Fig. To confirm whether the excitation laser's beam waist observed from the optical microscope coincided with the actual position, we laterally adjusted the excitation laser spot on the cantilever in air for each measurement until a maximum amplitude was obrained. After that, the blue laser was adjusted longitudinally by a ECS nanopositioner with pre-defined increments of 300 μm. The cantilever's oscillation amplitude was registered using the detection laser followed by a photodiode detector and a lock-in amplifier. Two different setups of lock-in amplifiers were used, a CX device from Nanosurf AG (Switzerland) and a BP4.5 control system with an OC5 oscillation controller from Nanonis (Germany). A laser power meter PM100D (Thorlabs, US) was placed underneath the cantilever to measure laser power around the cantilever. The infrared detection laser is switched off to avoid the interference of laser powers with excitation laser during the measurement of transmitted power (Fig. The excitation laser's longitudinal 'position's origin was set at the position with the highest amplitude. The cantilever oscillation amplitude was estimated from thermal noise measurements using 'Sader's method' to calibrate the cantilever's spring constant The comprehensive analysis of peak oscillation amplitude for each position along the excitation laser propagation axis was measured for the different types of cantilevers in both air and water. The cantilever is immersed in the water environment within a 35 mm Petri dish (Ibidi, Germany). Two silicon nitride cantilevers were used: Nunano QUEST R 500 TL (rectangular shape with rectangular cross section) and Bruker NP-010D (triangular shape with rectangular cross section). Both cantilevers were coated with the backside of gold. The silicon cantilever MikroMasch NSC35/CR-AU-C with gold-coated (rectangular shape with trapezoidal cross section) and MikroMasch NSC35/NO AL-A without gold coating (rectangular shape with trapezoidal cross section) were also tested for photothermal efficiency enhancement. The detailed parameters and specs of cantilevers used in the experiments are shown in Table To investigate if the differences between apparent focus and the beam waist were caused by chromatic aberration from the microscopy objective, we placed a pinhole with 2 μm diameter (Edmund Optics) in the center of the 405 nm laser beam and the 550 nm of light emitted from microscopy. We first aligned the laser at the middle of the field of view shown on the microscopy to align the laser and the pinhole on the same axis before placing the pinhole. This avoided the difficulty of alignment without viewing the position. The pinhole was placed on a 35 mm Petri dish (Ibidi) followed by fine-tuning the pinhole position to control the microscopy stage (Nanosurf), ensuring that the laser and the pinhole coincide. The objective height adjusts to find the minimum spot for both 405 nm laser and 550 nm light as the focal position, and the chromatic aberration of the objective is given as the different heights of focal positions. A reflective collimator directs the source beam to an inverted microscope (Nikon Instruments Eclipse). The light is focused to a mirror using a microscope objective (Olympus 50X), and its reflection is directed to a calibrated imaging spectrometer (IsoPlane SCT 320 -Princeton Instruments) with visible camera (PIXIS). Wavelength dependent intensity spectra between 350-850nm are obtained by binning the counts at each wavelength. The results are shown in Fig. of the cantilever. a) Amplitude and phase response of a cantilever versus frequency for two different cantilever positions. The blue lines correspond to resonance curves (amplitude and phase) of the cantilever when the cantilever is located at the beam waist according to the optical microscope. The red lines show equivalent information as the blue lines but for the optimal position along the propagation axis of the photothermal beam. The measurements are performed in water with a R500 TL cantilever. b) Cantilever amplitude at resonance for different relative longitudinal cantilever positions for different optical powers of the photothermal beam. The origin of the axis is chosen to be at the position of maximum (optimal) photothermal efficiency, which is indicated by the dashed line (shaded in blue). The other dashed line (shaded in orange) indicates the longitudinal position at which the cantilever is at the apparent beam waist. The measurements are performed in water with a R500 TL cantilever. c) The images show, top: optical image of a cantilever and photothermal beam at the optimal position; bottom: optical image of the cantilever at the apparent beam waist. d) Results for similar measurements as in b), but for different cantilever types in both air and water environments. The enhancement factors of the resonance amplitude at the optimal longitudinal position compared to that at the apparent beam waist are shown. All results were conducted for at least two independent cantilever probes and measurements for each probe were repeated at least twice. For each laser position five consecutive resonance curves were acquired. 