Robust spin-photon interfaces in solids are essential components in quantum networking and sensing technologies. Ideally, these interfaces combine a long-lived spin memory, coherent optical transitions, fast and high-fidelity spin manipulation, and straightforward device integration and scaling. The tin-vacancy center (SnV) in diamond is a promising spin-photon interface with desirable optical and spin properties at 1.7 K. However, the SnV spin lacks efficient microwave control and its spin coherence degrades with higher temperature. In this work, we introduce a new platform that overcomes these challenges -SnV centers in uniformly strained thin diamond membranes. The controlled generation of crystal strain introduces orbital mixing that allows microwave control of the spin state with 99.36(9) % gate fidelity and spin coherence protection beyond a millisecond. Moreover, the presence of crystal strain suppresses temperature dependent dephasing processes, leading to a considerable improvement of the coherence time up to 223(10) μs at 4 K, a widely accessible temperature in common cryogenic systems. Critically, the coherence of optical transitions is unaffected by the elevated temperature, exhibiting nearly lifetime-limited optical linewidths. Combined with the compatibility of diamond membranes with device integration, the demonstrated platform is an ideal spin-photon interface for future quantum technologies. Color centers in diamond are a leading platform in quantum technologies, key achievements such as the demonstration of a quantum register In this work, we utilize heterogeneous integration of diamond membranes to to generate strain-tuned SnVs. By bonding SnV incorporated pristine diamond membranes to a glass substrate, we leverage the heterogeneous thermal expansion coefficients of the two materials to generate a uniform, in-plane strain in the diamond to the order of 0.1 %. This strain greatly increases the energy splitting between the two orbital levels of the SnV and induces orbital mixing in the spin ground state. We demonstrate MW manipulation of the spin with 99.36 coherence time, which is largely preserved even at 4 K, owing to the strain-induced increased ground state orbital splitting. In combination with near lifetime-limited optical linewidths up to 7 K, our spin-photon interface is compatible with broadly utilized low-infrastructure and cost-effective portable cryogenic systems. Additionally, the demonstrated strained-membrane heterostructure maintains robustness and flexibility for additional photonic, electronic, and micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) integration. Our SnV-based diamond membrane platform greatly reduces the technological barrier for establishing quantum nodes for networking. This work relies on strain engineering to improve SnV qubit performance. First, we demonstrate that heterogeneous thermal expansion disparities between diamond and glass in a diamond-membrane heterostructure are sufficient to generate uniform strain of the magnitude necessary to beneficially impact SnV. The diamond membranes used in this work were generated via the "smartcut" method combined with isotopically purified ( 12 C) overgrowth. The membrane thickness is nominally 150 nm, with pristine crystal quality and atomically smooth surfaces Figure The strain monotonically increases the orbital splitting of the SnV centers in the membranes, which can be directly verified in the photoluminescence (PL) spectra at 1.7 K. The energy level diagram of the strained SnV is shown in Figure To investigate the potential of strained SnV as a spinphoton interface, we first verify that the symmetry of the defect is preserved even under considerable strain by characterizing the optical transitions as a function of the magnetic (B) field orientation. Using the ⟨111⟩ crystallographic axis -the high symmetry axis of the SnV as the reference, we rotate the B field in both polar (θ) and azimuthal (φ) angles at the same magnitude (0.2 T). The absolute energy splitting between the two spin-conserving transitions (A1-B2) with respect to θ and φ is shown in Figure From the B-field scan of the strained SnV, we note that besides the normal A1-B2 splitting maximum along the quantization axis, an additional local maximum at θ =90 • -the equator plane perpendicular to the quantization axis -is observed, with the relative A1-B2 position being inverted, as verified by coherent population trapping measurements (see SI). This differs from the unstrained case. The novel feature arises from the moder- ate crystal strain (comparable in magnitude to the spinorbit coupling) which increases the difference in effective Zeeman shift between ground and excited states, mostly visible for a magnetic field orthogonal to the spin-orbitdictated quantization axis. As is the case for moderately strained SiV centers The resolvable splitting and narrow optical transitions are crucial for the spin initialization and readout of the SnV qubit. The spin initialization curve with subtracted background is shown in Figure A critical component of a spin-photon interface is highfidelity spin control, commonly achieved through MW driving of the electron spin. In the case of group IV centers, a MW field can only drive the spin transition in the presence of strain To demonstrate efficient MW control, we utilize the nominal 0.1 % crystal strain in the diamond membrane. We estimate an effective Landé factor g of 1.62 for the transverse microwave field with the external magnetic field roughly aligned to the SnV quantization axis (see section 2.1 in SI). This value is relatively high compared with spin-orbit-dominated regime for unstrained centers (≤0.3) and is close to the free electron value (g = 2). In addition, we tapered the MW waveguide around the measurement area by shrinking its width to 6 μm to enhance the microwave amplitude, as shown in Figure We begin the MW control characterization by initializing the spin via optical pumping and scan the frequency of a MW field across the expected spin resonance while monitoring the fluorescence intensity of the spin readout at 1.7 K. In Figure We further characterize the single qubit gate fidelity of MW control via randomized benchmarking. For this, we use the following set of Clifford gates: {I, π x , π y , π x /2, -π x /2, π y /2, -π y /2} (see section 5.1 in SI). To prevent excessive heating effect during benchmarking which would lead to undesired spin decoherence, we apply a slightly slower Rabi rate (2.8 MHz, 18 dBm) which requires no time buffer between gates. The benchmarking result is shown in Figure We next utilize microwave control to characterize the SnV coherence at 1.7 K. We perform a Ramsey measurement as shown in Figure Advanced pulse sequences, such as dynamical decoupling via CPMG (Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill) and XY pulse sequences Spin-photon interface at 4 K Finally, we demonstrate that our strained SnV platform shows state-of-the-art spin coherence for Group IV color centers at 4 K. For Group IVs, the dominant decoherence source of the electronic spin is the electronphonon interaction (phonon-mediated decay) between orbital branches The Rabi oscillation of the SnV at 4 K is shown in Figure Equipped with high fidelity Rabi control, we investigate the spin coherence of the SnV centers at elevated temperatures. Due to the much larger splitting ∆ gs of the strained SnV (≈1300 GHz) compared with bulk SnV (≈850 GHz), electron-phonon dephasing onsets at higher temperatures. Figure From Figure To demonstrate the potential of the strained SnV center as a promising spin-photon interface at elevated temperature, we investigate the temperature dependence of the SnV optical coherence. As shown in Figure In this work, we demonstrate that SnV in strained diamond membranes is a promising platform for quantum technologies. We create simple heterostructures that leverage differences in thermal expansion to passively generate significant strain of 0.05 % to 0.1 % in diamond, enabling efficient, high fidelity microwave control of the SnV spin. The presence of the strain also suppresses the phonon-mediated decay and improves the spin coherence of the SnV at 4 K, which greatly reduces the technological barrier for quantum networking applications. We reach a Rabi π gate fidelity of 99.36( In the following three subsections, we discuss each term of the Hamiltonian. The component of the orbital angular momentum operator Lx , Ly vanish for the Hamiltonian expressed in the {|e x ⟩ , |e y ⟩} basis 1 and only the following term is non-zero: where we have set ħ to 1. Therefore, using the {|e x ↑⟩ , |e x ↓⟩ , |e y ↑⟩ , |e y ↓⟩} basis, the SO Hamiltonian can be represented as: The term of the Hamiltonian representing the presence of a strain field can be written as: The elements {ε A 1 , ε Ex , ε Ey } represent the energy response induced by strain belonging to the different irreducible representations A 1 , E x , E y of the D 3d point group of the defect, and are expressed in the SnV -center's local frame, where the z-axis corresponds to the high symmetry axis of the SnV which is the quantization axis. For example, ε A 1 = ⟨Ψ|(H -H 0 )|Ψ⟩, where H 0 is the electronic Hamiltonian in the absence of strain and H is the electronic Hamiltonian, which includes the strain field applied to the supercell by changing the lattice parameters. Here |Ψ⟩ represents a Slater determinant expressed in the {|e x ↑⟩ , |e x ↓⟩ , |e y ↑⟩ , |e y ↓⟩} basis. We can write each term of Eq. 4 as a linear combination of the components of the strain tensor (ε): where ε xx , ε yy , ε zz represent the diagonal components of the strain tensor in the x, y, z directions and ε xy , ε yz , ε zx represent the shear strain components; t ⊥ , t ∥ , d, and f are partial derivatives written as ∂ε Ex ∂εzx , respectively. These four strain-susceptibility parameters completely describe the strain-response of the ground and excited electronic states. In the following, we ignore the diagonal term ε A 1 , which amounts to a global emission wavelength shift. Hence, the strain Hamiltonian has the following form: Due to the D 3d symmetry of the defect, the orbital component H Z,L of the Hamiltonian H Z only includes a term Lz B z 1 , with a pre-factor q 2 , called in the literature effective reduction factor, accounting for: (i) electron-phonon interaction (so-called Ham term), and (ii) the symmetry of the defect being lower than O(3) (so-called Steven's factor). Note that both terms have different values for the ground and excited states and hence the q parameter is different in the ground and excited states. The H Z Hamiltonian is written as the sum of an orbital H Z,L and spin component where μ B is the Bohr magneton and B x , B y , B z are the components of the external, static magnetic field along the crystal frame x, y, z directions, respectively. The last term on the right hand side of Eq. 7 originates from correcting with a factor δ the electronic Landé g factor to account for spin-phonon interaction mediated by spin-orbit coupling 2 . For all the experimental interpretations, we'll only use the Ham factor and set the Steven's factor as 1 except section 4.1 where we gave estimates on the possible values of Steven's factor. In the presence of a strain field, the degeneracy of the ground (gs) and excited (es) states is lifted and we call △ gs(es) the energy difference between the two states split by the degeneracy. By diagonalizing the strain Hamiltonian defined in Eq. 6, we obtain: where the strain-susceptibilities are computed from density functional theory (DFT) calculations. We performed DFT calculations employing both the PBE 3 We use COMSOL to simulate the strain profile of the suspended area measured in experiments. Since the strain expression ε in section 1.1 is defined in local SnV frame while the simulation result ε returns to the lab frame, a combination of rotation matrices are applied. From ⟨100⟩ to ⟨110⟩ to ⟨111⟩, the rotation operators are Rz (45 • ) and Ry (54.7 • ), respectively: Here Ry (θ) and Rz (θ) refer to: In COMSOL simulation, we use the actual three dimensional (3D) geometry for the diamond membrane and the trench. The temperature-dependent thermal expansion ratio for diamond and fused silica are obtained from these references: 5-8 . The initial strain-free temperature is set to 450 • C which is the HSQ healing temperature 9 , while the final temperature is set to 4 K. We note that thermal expansion ratios for both fused silica and diamond become negligible below 30 K, thus the simulated strain profile is nearly constant within the temperature range of interest (1.7 K to 7 K) in this study. The simulated structure and the strain distributions of E xx and E yy are shown in Figure We note that although ε only includes diagonal elements, the transformed strain tensor ε in SnV local frame contains non-negligible off-diagonal elements which could affect the properties of the SnV center through both d and f parameters. By comparing the simulated branch splitting value using equation 8 and PBE results with the actual experimental values, we observed the actual strain to be 0.55 times the simulated value, as shown in Figure More comprehensive studies of the energy response to strain would require a higher level of method, e.g., embedding theory 10 , which we left for future investigations. In the following calculations, we add this 0.55 pre-factor to the simulated strain tensor to best capture the system properties. We qualitatively categorize the strain magnitude to different regimes via the ground state energy splitting ∆ gs . In the spin-orbit regime, this energy splitting is nearly constant, while the splitting is linear with the external strain when in high-strain regime. Guided by that, we use ∆ gs = 1200 GHz as the boundary between the spin-orbit regime and the intermediate regime, and ∆ gs = 2600 GHz to identify intermediate and high strain regime. For our work, those values corresponding to strain magnitudes of 0.055 % and 0.143 %. Here to plot the optical transitions, the magnetic field is set to 80 mT along the quantization axis (⟨111⟩ direction) and the strain profile is set to be the same as COMSOL simulated profile but with an additional scaling factor. The calculated relative energy difference of the four {A1, A2, B1, B2} transitions are plotted in Figure Figure At zero strain, the SnV spin qubit cannot be manipulated by microwave due to different orbits associated with the spin level. As stated in 11 , the presence of the crystal strain introduces orbit superposition to SnV's spin qubit eigenstates, allowing for the coherent control of SnV via external microwave field with qubit frequency ω s . Here we use the electronic g factor to characterize the ability of the MW field (AC B filed) to the spin state of the SnV, including both spin and orbit response of the external magnetic field: Here the B ac is a vector with unitary length indicating the direction of the oscillating B field of the microwave. The ⟨e1 ↓| and |e2 ↑⟩ are the two spin states of the SnV under external, static B field. The Ham reduction factor q of the ground state is set to 0.471 according to 2 . First we investigate the effect of strain magnitude to the transverse and longitudinal g factor. The result is shown in Figure In this work we utilized on-chip coplanar waveguide (CPW) to deliver microwave signals to target SnV centers. Compared with wire-bonded metal striplines 12 , lithography-defined CPW offers deterministic and reproducible microwave power and magnetic field strength at target location. We designed our waveguide to match the impedance (50Ω) of other electronics in the setup. Ignoring the local dielectric variation near the diamond membrane region, we designed the layout of the CPW based on the permittivity of the fused silica (3.7). The width of the center and the gap is set to 60 μm and 6 μm, respectively. To enhance the local field strength near the SnV region on the membrane, the center of the CPW is reduced to 6 μm. The ground lines of the waveguide is designed to across the membrane to compensate for the trench design, offering a balanced microwave delivering mode. We used a two-port microwave transmission design, demonstrating the potential of driving centers in multiple on-chip devices in the future. The two-port design also allows the microwave signal to be transmitted and dissipated outside of the chamber, relaxing the requirements for reflected signal management (such as circulator). The microscope image of the whole CPW design is shown in Figure We use COMSOL to simulate the magnetic field acting on nearby color centers. In the simulation, we set the microwave drive power to 24 dBm, the microwave drive frequency to 2.75 GHz, and set the characteristic impedance of the coplanar waveguide to 50 Ohm. The simulated structure and the magnetic field distribution are presented in Figure To investigate the power dependence of the SnV Rabi oscillation, we sweep the MW drive power and extract the Rabi frequency. We observe the expected √ p-behaviour for low drive powers p < 24 dBm, but a clear deviation for larger drive powers. All the power and voltages are referred to the estimated value on the device, extracted by a separate calibration measurements in transmission geometry. We note that no increase in cryostat temperature is observed during the pulsed Rabi measurement. The effect of heating on the emitter can be modeled as depicted in figure where α is the thermal diffusivity in diamond. Figure gold diamond The value is expressed as a fraction of the initial temperature difference approaching equilibrium. (c) Exemplary pulse sequence applying 10 successive microwave pulses each with intermediate spacing of τ 0 and 30τ 0 , respectively. The maximum temperature differs significantly. 3 Additional optical properties of the strained SnV We probe the polarization of the strained SnVs by inserting a motor-mounted half-wave-plate and a linear polarizer in the detection path. The total intensity of the C-peak and the D-peak over polarisation angle are shown in Fig. We extract the optical lifetime of the SnV by driving the C-transition at zero magnetic field with a single EOM-sideband and turning it off abruptly. The fall time is limited to 200 ps by the EOM. The decay time of the single-exponential is 4.933(190) ns which is similar to the bulk value, as shown in Fig. We extract the initialization rate, optical cyclicity and saturation power by prior knowledge of the optical lifetime and by sweeping the laser power 15 . The initialisation rates are fitted by 1 η Γ 2 p/psat 1+p/psat and we extract a saturation power of 7.96 nW and an optical cyclicity of η ≈ 2018. For the microwave spin control measurement we operate at a saturation parameter of s = p/p sat ≈ 10 for the initialization and readout pulses. We acquire PLE for more than 11 hours to test the long-time stability of the SnV (see Fig. The splitting of the A1, B2 optical transitions with varying B fields can be computed by diagonalizing the system Hamiltonian H sys of Eq. 1, and the results are shown in Fig We coarsely align the B-field by matching it to the polarisation of the optical dipoles (see SI section 3.1) and obtain an optical cyclicity of η ≈ 2018. The cyclicity has a single local maximum close to the pole of the emitter axis, such that we can increase it by sweeping two of the three magnet axes independently. We extract the cyclicity by measuring the decay rate of one of the spin-conserving transitions. The frequency of the sidebands driving the transitions is fixed, noting that the change in B-field magnitude corresponds to a change in spin-conserving splitting within one optical linewidth. One can see only a modest increase in cyclicity in Fig. According to Ref 1 , we use optical dipole matrices to calculate the emission rate of the two transitions. The rate (probablity) can be expressed using Fermi's Golden Rule: Where ρ is the density of states where we set to 1, the |ψ f ⟩ and |ψ i ⟩ are the final and initial state of the SnV which we assign to the excited state minimum |e A ↓⟩ and ground states |e 1 ↓⟩ (|e 2 ↑⟩) for spin conserving (flipping) transitions. The transition probablity (rate) P is related to the optical dipole p which is defined as: Using the above definition, we can calculate the spin flip ratio which is the inverse of spontaneous cyclicity 1 η = P flipping P conserving with respect to the strain magnitude and the B field polar angle θ, as shown in Figure We implemented the all-optical control technique shown in Ref. 15 on Device 1 on a strained SnV with a ground state splitting of ∆ GS =1384 GHz. We extracted an optical lifetime of 7.04 We sweep the Raman drive time T at laser sideband powers of p = 1012 nW and extract a Rabi frequency of Ω/2π = 450(47) kHz(Fig. Ramsey measurements (Fig. Phonon-induced depolarization of group IV centers' spin is the dominant source of decoherence. Therefore, improving the spin decay time T 1 is the central task to enhance the coherence of the system. As discussed in Ref. 11 , the spin decay time T 1 in the group IV has two meanings, the orbital relaxation time T orbit 1 between the energy levels in different orbital branches but with same spin projection, and the T spin 1 between the qubit levels with frequency ω s . Ultimately, the T spin 1 is the factor that directly relates to the coherence of the SnV, so we limit our T 1 discussion to T spin 1 only. There are three phonon-induced T spin 1 decay path 11 , including direct single phonon, resonant two phonon (Orbach process) 19 , and off-resonant two phonon (Raman process). Similar to SiV, the SnV shows much slower single phonon and Raman spin decay, so we focus on the Orbach process and study its dependence with the B field orientation (θ) and the strain magnitude. Adapted from Ref. 19 , we write the decay rate γ 2 spin as follows: where i represent the states of the lower orbital branch (|e 1 ↓⟩, |e 2 ↑⟩) and j represent the states of the upper orbital branch (|e 3 ↓⟩, |e 4 ↑⟩). The H ac ε denotes an AC strain field which correlates to the phonon interaction in the crystal. We used balanced magnitude for the H AC ε Ex and H AC ε Ey by setting the H ac ε as follows: The relative decay rate at temperature 4 K with the maximum normalized to 1 is shown in Figure The gates are chosen from the Clifford group and are {I, π x , π y , π x /2, -π x /2, π y /2, -π y /2}. We randomly choose (N -1)-gates and use the last gate to undo the sequence, followed by a z-basis measurement. The last gate is part of the Clifford group. We get the π-gate from Rabi measurements and adjust the time t π accordingly. The identity is implemented as wait-time for t π , whereas π/2-gates have a duration of t π/2 . No buffer times are used which would make the qubit prone to dephasing errors, but the drive amplitude is reduced such that local heating effects is not a limiting factor. All randomized benchmarking measurements were taken at a Rabi frequency of Ω/(2π) = 2.8 MHz. A total of 10 randomized sequences were applied each time to average out over different implementations. The fidelity F is extracted by fitting the readout with A * F N + B, from which we get the error per Clifford gate 20 . We change the applied magnetic field magnitude from 81.5 to 117 mT and measure the Ramsey dephasing time T * 2 . We extract T * 2 = 2.63( 6 Experimental details The diamond membrane substrate was generated via He + implantation and annealing. 450 nmthick diamond overgrowth layer was introduced in a diamond chemical vapor deposition (CVD) chamber, followed by a 120 Sn implantation with 2 × 10 8 cm -2 dose and 40 nm target depth. Individual membranes were patterned via lithography and electrochemically etched to undercut the graphitized layer. The target membrane was then transferred to a HSQ-coated fused silica substrate with a 5 μm-deep etched trench to the generate suspended area. The substrate was annealed at 600 • C for 8 h in argon atmosphere. Membrane was thinned down to 160 nm via ICP RIE etching using Ar/Cl 2 , O 2 /Cl 2 , and O 2 recipes. The microwave coplanar waveguide was lithographically defined, followed by Ti and Au deposition with thicknesses of 10 nm and 200 nm, respectively. Excess resist was lift-off using 80 • C NMP solutions. All the measurement data in this work were taken in Cambridge, UK. The device was studied in a closed-cycle cryostat (attoDRY 2100) with a base temperature of 1.7 K at the device and in which the temperature can be tuned with a resistive heater located under the sample mount. Superconducting coils around the sample space allow the application of a vertical magnetic field from 0 to 9 T and a horizontal magnetic field from 0 to 1 T. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, all measurements were conducted at T = 1.7 K. The optical part of the set-up consists of a confocal microscope mounted on top of the cryostat and a microscope objective with numerical aperture 0.82 inside the cryostat. The device is moved with respect to the objective utilizing piezoelectric stages (ANPx101/LT and ANPz101/LT) on top of which the device is mounted. Resonant excitation around 619 nm is performed by a second harmonic generation stage (ADVR RSH-T0619-P13FSAL0) consisting of a frequency doubler crystal pumped by a 1238 nm diode laser (Sacher Lasertechnik Lynx TEC 150). The frequency is continuously stabilized through feedback from a wavemeter (High Finesse WS/7). The charge environment of the SnV-is reset with microsecond pulses at 532 nm (Roithner LaserTechnik CW532-100). PL measurements were done with a Teledyne Princeton Instruments PyLoN:400BR eXcelon CCD and SpectraPro HRS-750-SS Spectrograph. Optical pulses are generated with an acoustooptic modulator (Gooch and Housego 3080-15 in the 532 nm path and AA Opto Electronics MT350-A0,2-VIS) controlled by a delay generator (Stanford Research Instruments DG645). For resonant excitation measurements, a long-pass filter at 630 nm (Semrock BLP01-633R-25) is used to separate the fluorescence from the phonon-sideband from the laser light. The fluorescence is then sent to a single photon counting module (PerkinElmer SPCM-AQRH-16-FC), which generates TTL pulses sent to a time-to-digital converter (Swabian Timetagger20) triggered by an arbitrary waveform generator (Tektronix AWG70002A). Photon counts during "initialize" and "readout" pulses are histogrammed in the time-tagger to measure the spinpopulation. Sidebands driving both resonantly transitions as well as off-resonant all-optical control were generated by an amplitude electro-optic modulator (Jenoptik AM635), and the amplitude, phase, and frequency of the sidebands are controlled by a 25 Gs/sec arbitrary waveform generator (Tektronix AWG70002A). The EOM is locked to its interferometric minimum with a lock-in amplifier and PID (Red Pitaya, STEMlab 125-14) and using a freely available Lock-in+PID application 23 with a feedback loop on the signal generated by a photodetector (Thorlabs PDA100A2). Microwave pulses are generated with the second channel of the arbitrary waveform generator and amplified with a low-noise amplifier (Minicircuits ZX60-83LN12+) and a high-power amplifier (Minicircuits ZVE-3W-83+). Microwave signals inside the cryostat are delivered via the in-built pico-coax cables, self-soldered cables and a customised PCB. The signal is transmitted through a second line and terminated outside of the cryostat with 50 Ohms. 