The present work illustrates a novel approach for the maskless and resistless fabrication of nanopatterned metal layers on Si substrates, based on the combination of nanomechanical surface modification techniques (such as nanoindentation and nanoscratching) and electrodeposition. Single crystal (100) n-doped Si substrates were first cleaned from native oxide. Nanoindentation and nanoscratching were then used to locally change the substrate microstructure and create regions with reduced electrical conductivity. The substrates were finally mounted as cathode electrodes in a three electrode electrochemical cell to potentiostatically deposit a Ni layer. Electrodeposition was prevented in regions with modified microstructure, enabling the formation of a patterned Ni layer. The fabrication of several patterns including continuous Ni lines of 200 nm width and several microns length was obtained. Microelectronic and micro-mechanical devices industry is in constant need of high resolution and low cost fabrication processes. One critical aspect is represented by the processes involved in the transfer of a given pattern onto a substrate. Often the substrate is constituted by a semiconductor material, like Si, onto which a patterned metal layer needs to be grown for the fabrication of microelectro-mechanical systems (MEMS) and electronic, optoelectronic and magnetic devices. Metal nanostructures (e.g. nanometric clusters) on semiconductors can also be used as catalysts for chemical reactions and for the fabrication of sensors. Moreover, metal/semiconductor Schottky junctions have a huge number of applications (e.g. solar cells). Several processes, including electrodeposition, are studied for the fabrication of Schottky diodes Typically, lithographic processes such as photolithography are used for transferring the pattern from a mask to a photoresist material layer, previously deposited on the substrate. Subsequently, deposition, etching or other steps are performed in order to add and subtract material as required for transferring the pattern on the substrate On the other hand, nanoindentation and nanoscratching can also be used to change the microstructure, e.g. the phase, of the indented or scratched material. It is for instance known that nanoindentation and nanoscratching of single crystal Si can induce amorphisation in a limited volume of material near the surface Aim of this work is to study a novel approach to the maskless and resistless fabrication of nanopatterned metal layers on Si, where nanomechanically induced local amorphisation of the substrate is used as a mask for electrodeposition. By this approach, the combination of nanomechanical surface modification and electrodeposition results in a negative type of lithography for metal nanopatterning. Patterned Ni layers on n-doped single crystal (100) Si substrates were fabricated using nanoindentation and nanoscratching followed by electrodeposition and characterized by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Commercially available 380 m thick n-type single crystal (100) Si wafers (phosphorous doped with resistivity of 1-10 •cm) with one mechanically polished side were cut into 1 cm x 1 cm samples and immersed in 3.5 % HF solution for 10 min to remove native SiO2 layer and leave a hydrogen terminated surface. A Hysitron® UBI nanoindenter with a Berkovich diamond tip (curvature radius ~1 m) was used to perform nanoindentation and nanoscratching on the Si samples top surface. Nanoindentations were performed by applying a force perpendicularly to the substrate surface (z direction) with loading and unloading sequences of 10 s and peak forces of 1000 to 10000 N. Using its scanning probe mode, the nanoindenter was also operated for nanoscratching, by simultaneously applying a force along the z direction and scanning the tip in the lateral, x-y, directions. Nanoscratching was done at constant forces of 200, 300, 400 and 500 N and scanning rate of 130 m/s. After nanomechanical surface modification step, an ohmic contact was fabricated on the Si samples back surface using InGa eutectic (99.99%). The samples were then mounted on a copper support. An insulating adhesive tape was used to mask off the support and the sample leaving exposed an area of 0.196 cm 2 on the Si top surface. Si amorphisation in the scratched regions was investigated by micro-Raman spectroscopy, using a Jobin-Yvon® micro-Raman system with 632.8 nm excitation laser, and by conductive Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), using a NT-MDT® Solver P47 Pro AFM operated with Pt coated probes. A conventional three electrode cell was used to perform Cyclic Voltammetry After electrodeposition, samples were investigated by a Philips ® XL20 SEM equipped with an Edax® Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX) system. A schematic description of the present approach for maskless and resistless metal nanopatterning on Si is illustrated in Fig. First, force (P) -penetration depth (h) curves were used to characterize Si substrates behaviour during nanoindentation. A typical example of recorded P-h curves is reported in Fig. The recorded curves, such as the one reported in Fig. Ni electrodeposition was then carried out on nanomechanically modified Si substrates. Fig. A typical j-t curve recorded during Ni electrodeposition is shown in Fig. Cathodic current density rises up with t, reaches a maximum value and then starts falling. This is consistent with a deposition process that proceeds by nucleation followed by nuclei growth. Three dimensional nucleation and growth is often observed for metal electrodeposition on semiconductors, as a consequence of weak interaction between metal adatoms and substrate Using the nanoindenter for nanoscratching and by controlling the nanoindenter tip movement in the x-y directions different a-Si patterns, such as lines, squares and arrays were created on Si. Electrodeposition followed, generating a Ni patterned layer. In Fig. The smallest force at which no Ni deposition was observed on scratches was 200 N. It can be inferred that for such load amorphisation of Si is still obtained. In Scanning the surface along further apart lines allowed the fabrication of parallel Ni lines such as those reported in Fig. The smallest line width obtained was below 100 nm, although these lines were discontinuous (Fig. Further improvement on quality and scaling down of the patterning could be attained by additional investigation on the effect of scanning rate during scratching and by use of tips with different geometry. For what concerns the electrodeposition step, the effect of deposition potential and other additives besides of saccharine, on the nucleation and growth stage could be investigated in order to improve deposit quality. A novel maskless and resistless processing method for the fabrication of patterned metal films on Si was studied. The method combines nanomechanical surface modification techniques, for changing the substrate microstructure, and selective film growth by electrodeposition. Nanoindentation and nanoscratching were used to induce localized amorphisation on the surface of n-doped single crystal (100) Si substrates. The regions with modified microstructure were used to mask the substrates during Ni electrodeposition step from a Watts type bath, leading to the formation of patterned Ni layers. Several patterns with characteristic dimensions both in the micrometric and nanometric range were fabricated. As the size of the amorphous lines created during scratching depends on the applied force and on tip size, it is foreseen that by using shaper tips even smaller features could be created. Diamond nanoindentation tips with curvature radius smaller than 50 nm are already commercially available. In alternative an AFM with diamond or diamond coated tips could be used instead of a nanoindenter to attain even smaller feature sizes. 