We demonstrate electromechanical coupling between a superfluid mechanical mode and a microwave mode formed by a patterned microfluidic chip and a 3D cavity. The electric field of the chip-cavity microwave resonator can be used to both drive and detect the motion of a pure superflow Helmholtz mode, which is dictated by geometric confinement. The coupling is characterized using a coherent measurement technique developed for measuring weak couplings deep in the sideband unresolved regime. The technique is based on two-probe optomechanically induced transparency/amplification using amplitude modulation. Instead of measuring two probe tones separately, they are interfered to retain only a signal coherent with the mechanical motion. With this method, we measure a vacuum electromechanical coupling strength of g 0 = 2π × 23.3 μHz, three orders of magnitude larger than previous superfluid electromechanical experiments. Cavity optomechanics, In the present work, a helium volume is enclosed between two nanofabricated quartz substrates, defining a fourth sound in the insert of Fig. As mentioned above, the experimental system consists of a superfluid Helmholtz resonator, similar to Refs. 17, 27, and 31, but now incorporated into a hermetic 3D microwave cavity. The etched Helmholz geometry is a wide flat circular basin, 7 mm in diameter and 1.01 μm deep, connected by two 1.6 mm wide 1.6 mm long channels to the surrounding helium bath. Electrodes of 50 nm thick aluminum are deposited into the etched regions: a 6 mm diameter circle at the center of the basin connects to a meandering 100 μm-wide lead (in one channel) that terminates in a 5 mm × 2 mm square antenna. After fabrication, the wafer is diced into identical top and bottom chips, which are room-temperature direct wafer bonded The Helmholtz mode is an acoustic resonance of the superfluid moving back and forth in the channel, driven by pressure fluctuations in the central basin (shown in the insert of Fig. with k eff the effective spring constant, k p the effective stiffness of the mean deflection of the basin walls, A = πR 2 the area of the basin, and Σ = χ B Dk p /(4A), where χ B is the bulk compressibility of helium. Here, the effective spring constant of the mode is significantly softened by the flexing of the substrate when compared to the compressibility-only case. The flexing of the substrate changes the distance between the capacitive plates above and below the basin, the origin of the electromechanical coupling for this system, which is slightly suppressed by electrostriction due to the compression of the helium. where Cbas is the undeformed basin capacitance and ε is the dielectric constant of liquid helium. The Helmholtz chip is placed at the center of a rectangular 3D microwave cavity, where y zpf is the zero point motion of the superfluid in the channels, and C is the total capacitance of the chip-cavity microwave mode given by ω c = 1/ √ LC. Using δ y zpf = h/2m eff Ω m , Eq. 2, and that the temperature is cold enough for ρ s ≈ ρ, g 0 can be expressed for this electromechanical coupling scheme as: Here, α is the proportion of the microwave mode's total electric field energy within the basin capacitor; for this work, α ≈ 0.005 is calculated via finite element method (FEM) simulations. Equation We began by observing electromechanical coupling using a calibrated homodyne measurement: Despite homodyne measurement enabling detection of the mechanical spectrum, the signal is weak, with a small signal-to-noise ratio near the mechanical resonance frequency, mainly due to low electromechanical coupling strength and undercoupled microwave readout, even after more than 450 averages. Moreover, determination of g 0 was not possible due to uncertainty in the effective temperature of the Helmholtz mode since vibrations from the cryocooler drove the superfluid motion in the present experiment. A coherent measurement scheme can be used to precisely determine the electromechanical coupling rate, g 0 . The scheme in this work is based on OMIT/A: 32,42-44 an interference effect where beating between two optical tones causes coherent oscillation of the mechanics via radiation pressure when the two tones are separated in frequency by the mechanical resonance. The oscillation of the mechanics, in turn, scatters photons from the stronger driving 'pump' tone to the weak 'probe' tone frequency, where they then destructively (constructively) interfere with the probe tone in the case of OMIT (OMIA). In the microwave regime, the equivalent effect is often called electromechanically induced transparency/amplification (EMIT/A). Figure ( Here, s p /2 is the amplitude of the probe signals. Sweeping Ω p across the mechanical frequency Ω m , equivalent to sweeping the probe and pump separation, causes the EMIT/A effect close to Ω m for the upper and lower sidebands respectively, shown in the insert of Fig. where Γ m is the mechanical linewidth, δ = Ω p -Ω m is the detuning of the pump-probe separation from the mechanical frequency, g is the multiphoton coupling defined as χ ± is the cavity susceptibility at ω and the electromechanical self-energy Σ(Ω p ) is defined as When measuring in a bi-directional single port scheme (reflection via a circulator / directional coupler) -√ κ in A ± is effectively the modification of the reflected probe tones due to the cavity electromechanical system. Demodulating this reflected signal at ω d and a relative phase of φ = 0, will give a signal at Ω p with amplitude proportional to the upper probe minus the lower probe, canceling out the probe tone backgrounds and recovering only the coherent effect, shown in Fig where K T is the transfer function of the circuit post reflection from the cavity and P in is the total power incident on the cavity port. A full derivation of X + iY can be found in the Supplementary Information. Figure Here, R δ =0 is the measured signal amplitude at Ω p = Ω m when the probe tones cancel, either directly from the peak signal or from fitting to Eq. 10. Using this methodology, the vacuum electromechanical coupling strength was calculated as g 0 = 2π × 23.3 +6.0 -4.8 μHz, with determination of P in providing the dominant error. This g 0 is in the weak coupling limit of electromechanics, 1 but a three order of magnitude increase when compared to a bulk superfluid-microwave coupling. In conclusion, the first superfluid microwave electromechanical coupling was measured for a micromechanical system, using a microfluidic Helmholtz resonator inside a 3D microwave cavity. The mechanical motion was detected using a homodyne noise measurement scheme; however, thermomechanical calibration was not possible due to strong cryocooler vibrations. To measure an electromechanical system with weak coupling, deep in the sideband unresolved regime, a coherent measurement scheme was developed, inspired by OMIT The coherent measurement scheme provides a powerful tool for measuring electro/optomechanical systems deep into the sideband unresolved regime. Moreover, integrating a superfluid Helmholtz device into a microwave cavity provides a new platform for superfluid microwave electromechanics. With three orders of magnitude improvement to g 0 over previous superfluid electromechanical systems, The same method can be used to solve for A -using Eqs. A14, A16 and A18, resulting in These forms are similar to other OMIT/A experiments This also defines the electromechanical spring effect ∆Ω m(ele) = R Σ(Ω p ) , and the electromechanical damping Γ m(ele) = I Σ(Ω p ) . Using the self-energy and g = ā/ ā * g * , Eq. A23 and Eq. A24 can be rewritten as A -= χ - √ κ in s p /2 + gχ -(gχ * + + g * χ -) Γ m /2 + iδ -iΣ(-Ω p ) √ κ in s p /2 , (A27) which are A ± in equation ( This subsection will take the more general expressions for microwave field amplitude A + and A -, and develop the specific technique of three-tone measurement used in this work. Using the standard input-output relationship for a single port cavity âout = âin -√ κ in â1 , the choice of δ s in in Eq. A9, and using s in (t) = ( sin + δ s(t)) e -iω d t , the signal reflected from the cavity s out (t) is where k p is the transfer function of the circuit after the cavity, including the mixer. The additional 10 kHz amplitude modulation (far from Ω m ) sets φ refφ = π/2. A double-balanced mixer is used to minimize loss, rather than an IQ mixer as the probe tones