We analyze the rectification properties of voltage-biased Josephson junctions exhibiting the superconducting diode effect. Taking into account multiple Andreev reflection (MAR) processes in our scattering theory, we consider a short weak link of arbitrary transparency between two superconductors with finite Cooper pair momentum 2q. In equilibrium, the diode efficiency is bounded from above in this model, with maximal efficiency η0 ≈ 0.4. Out of equilibrium, we find a rich subharmonic structure in the current-voltage curve. For high transparency and low bias voltage V , the rectification efficiency η(V ) approaches the ideal value η = 1 for qξ → 1 (with coherence length ξ). Introduction.-Starting with the work by Ando et al. in 2020 We here study the out-of-equilibrium behavior of Josephson junctions exhibiting the SDE in equilibrium, in particular, the DC current-voltage (I-V ) curve of a voltage-biased intrinsic Josephson diode. At low temperatures, MAR processes where η(V ) is especially large in the subgap regime. For the conventional case without SDE, MAR causes a subharmonic structure, i.e., singular features in the nonlinear conductance for eV = 2∆/n with integer n For Josephson diodes, we predict an even richer subharmonic structure which determines the rectification characteristics and might provide precious information about the microscopic mechanisms generating the SDE. Our central finding is that the efficiency η(V ) can approach the ideal limit of full rectification with η = 1 at low voltages, even though η 0 ≲ 0.4 for the SDE efficiency in equilibrium for the model considered below. The importance of MAR processes for rectification is related to the fact that higher harmonics of the CPR are needed for the SDE. Indeed, equilibrium Andreev states are the result of resonant MAR processes. A finite voltage breaks up the resonant MAR loop (see below) and effectively opens the way to high anharmonicity with many harmonics. In contrast to the current-biased case It is well known that the SDE can arise from magnetochiral effects Model.-For finite q, the order parameter of an s-wave BCS superconductor oscillates in space, ∆(x) = ∆e 2iqx , where q ̸ = 0 may originate from the interplay of the spinorbit interaction with a Zeeman field in superconducting films Linearizing the band dispersion around the Fermi momentum points ±k F with k F ξ ≫ 1, the Hamiltonian is expressed in terms of effectively one-dimensional quasiclassical Nambu spinor envelopes, ψ ± (x, t) = (ψ ±,↑ , ψ † ±,↓ ) T , for right-and left-movers having momenta ±k F + k with |k| ≪ k F , resp., where x < 0 (x > 0) refers to the left (right) superconducting bank. Gauging away the e 2iqx factor from the order parameter, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for x ̸ = 0 follows as (we often put ħ = 1) where we use Pauli matrices τ x,y,z (and identity τ 0 ) in Nambu space and σ x,y,z,0 in chiral (right-left mover) space. Defining the bispinor Ψ(x, t) = (ψ + , ψ -) T in chiral space, modeling the weak link as normal-conducting constriction with length much shorter than ξ and transmission probability T , and using the phase difference φ(t) = 2eV t across the junction, we arrive at a matching condition connecting the bispinors on the left (x = 0 -) and right (x = 0 + ) side, see also with the reflection amplitude r = √ 1 -T . Spectral properties.-Consider first a ballistic junction (T = 1) at zero voltage, where Eq. ( From Eq. ( can freely propagate along one direction but are evanescent along the other. As an important technical step forward, we specify BdG solutions that apply in a unified manner to all three energy regions. We choose a formulation that can be leveraged to describe scattering states for finite voltage. We first observe that for x ̸ = 0, using the Doppler-shifted energy E α = E -αv F q for an α-mover (α = ±) with energy E, Eq. (2) implies that electron (e) and hole (h) type states have the Nambu spinor structure , ψα,h (E) = τ x ψα,e (E), The states (5) describe arbitrary energies and are very useful for the description of outgoing (scattered) states, even though they satisfy unconventional normalization conditions. On the other hand, incident states, ψ α,e/h (E), should satisfy the standard normalization condition ψ † α,e/h (E)•ψ α,e/h (E) = 1. Since incident states are only defined for |E α | > ∆, they follow from Eq. ( + Keeping the incident quasiparticle energy E and scattering channel s implicit, the complex-valued scattering amplitudes (a n , b n , c n , d n ) appearing in the outgoing spinor ( ψα,e/h ) contributions in Eq. ( follows as with the reflection amplitude r in Eq. ( By taking advantage of symmetry relations connecting the solutions incident from the left side (s = 1, 2) to those incident from the right side (s = 3, 4), the latter solutions are contained in Eq. ( Below we consider the zero-temperature limit. For arbitrary system parameters represented by the dimensionless quantities qξ, T , and eV /∆, the efficiency η(V ) in Eq. ( Ballistic limit.-For T = 1, the matching conditions (3) as well as the BdG Hamiltonian conserve chirality, σ z = α = ±, and the recurrence relations admit a closed solution This shift has a clear physical interpretation: it is the current carried by Cooper pairs with finite momentum 2q and charge 2e. The simple decomposition (10) only applies in the ballistic limit where chirality is conserved. The rectification efficiency then follows from Eq. (1) as which depends on the voltage only through the ratio eV /∆, i.e., the Doppler shifted gaps ∆ ± do not appear. For e|V | ≫ ∆, the Ohmic result of a normal-conducting contact, I 0 (V ) ≈ (2e 2 /h)V , implies η(V ) ≃ 2qξ ∆ eV . On the other hand, for e|V | ≪ ∆, using I q=0 (V → 0) ≈ (4e∆/h) sgn(V ) The efficiency is particularly large in the subgap regime eV ≲ 2∆, where we also a subharmonic structure with peaks or dips. The enhancement of η(V ) for e|V | ≪ ∆ compared to η 0 (for otherwise identical parameters) thus persists for T < 1, with optimal rectification at T = 1. The subharmonic structure is more clearly visible in the derivative dη(V )/dV (bottom panel in Fig. The dimensionless coefficient A(qξ, T ) is shown in the inset of Fig. Conclusions.-We have studied voltage-biased Josephson diodes with finite Cooper pair momentum. In the subgap regime, we find that MAR processes allow for large rectification efficiencies accompanied by large currents. We note that the I-V curve for e|V | ≪ ∆ can be computed analytically from a time average over quasistationary Andreev levels 