By numerically solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations, we report a novel π-type vortex state whose order parameter near the core undergoes an extraordinary π-phase change for a quantum-confined extreme type-II s-wave superconductor. Its supercurrent behaves as the cube of the radial coordinate near the core, and its local density of states spectrum exhibits a significant negativeshifted zero-bias peak. Such π-type vortex state is induced by quantum-size effect, and can survive thermal smearing at temperatures up to a critical value T τ . The Anderson's approximation indicates that the π-type vortex may remain stable under sufficiently week magnetic field in the case less deep in the type-II limit. Moreover, we find that its appearance is governed by the sample size and k F ξ 0 with k F the Fermi wave number and ξ 0 the zero-temperature coherence length. Similar effects may be expected in quantum-confined ultracold superfluid Fermi gasses, or even high-T c superconductors with proper k F ξ 0 value. Recently, π-type Meissner state, in which the spatial order parameter changes sign, has been found in many circumstances, e.g. at a superconductor-ferromagnet interface Caroli, de Gennes and Matricon Scenario may change dramatically in the regime of nanoscale superconductivity, where quantum confinement breaks the translational symmetry, and strongly modulates the behavior of quasiparticles. It has been reported that the quantum confinement leads to inhomogeneous superconductivity even for the Meissner state In this paper we numerically solve the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations for a single-quantum vortex in a nanoscale cylindrical extreme type-II superconductor, and find that a π-phase shift may occur in the radial order parameter near the core at T = 0 K when the chirality of the in-gap fermion with the lowest azimuthal quantum number m breaks down due to quantum confinement. Such π-type vortex state shows ρ 3 -dependence in supercurrent j(ρ). Moreover, we find that k F ξ 0 and radius R of the sample control the chirality breakdown of the in-gap fermion with the lowest m, i.e. the appearance of the π-type vortex state. Similar behavior may also be expected in other nanoscale extreme type-II superconductors, e.g. metallic nanoislands on Si The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we outline the theoretical model based on the BdG equations for a single-quantum vortex in an extreme type-II s-wave superconducting nanocylinder. In Sec. 3, the behavior of the radial order parameter and supercurrent of a typical π-type vortex state is investigated at T = 0 K. We also study the critical temperature up to which a π-type vortex state can survive, as well as its distinct feature in the LDOS. The Anderson's approximation is applied to analyze the stability of the π-type vortex under finite magnetic field in the case less deep in the type-II limit. Moreover, the k F ξ 0 versus R phase diagram of the vortex type at T = 0 K is investigated. Sec. 4 gives our main conclusions. Following Hayashi et al. with Ĥe = -1 2kF ξ0 ∇ 2 -μ F , ∆(r) the pair potential, μ F = kF ξ0 2 the Fermi energy, E ν the quasiparticle energy measured from μ F , u ν (r) and v ν (r) the electron-and hole-like wave functions, respectively. Eqs. (1) are calculated self-consistently together with the pair potential equation where g is the coupling constant and ω D the Debye frequency. In our numerical calculations, the Debye window around the Fermi level is set as hω D = 10∆ 0 . Due to the cylindrical symmetry of the sample, cylindrical coordinates, i.e. (ρ, θ, z), are employed in our description. In this work we are interested in an isolated single-quantum vortex, so, it is convenient to take the pair potential of the form where ∆(ρ) is the radial order parameter. Moreover, the quasiparticle wave functions are written as with ν = {j, m}, j the radial quantum number, 2m an odd integer with single-electron wave functions , where J n (x) is the nth order Bessel function of the first kind, α i,n is its ith zero and n = m ± 1 2 . Inserting Eq. ( 3.1. The π-type vortex at T = 0 K Fig. In order to understand the negative contribution of the chirality-breakdown state m = -1 2 for k F ξ 0 = 11 and R = 1.6ξ 0 , its quasiparticle wavefunctions u(ρ) and v(ρ) are plotted in Fig. with f ν = f (E ν , T ) the Fermi distribution function. For all states with positive quasiparticle energy f ν = 0 at T = 0 K, only the second term in Eq. ( When switching on thermal smearing, to what extent the π-type vortex state can survive is of great interest and importance. As increasing T , the first term in Eq. ( For instance, for the π-type vortex state of k F ξ 0 = 11 and R = 1.6 ξ 0 , T τ = 0.19 T c . This criterion is quantitatively supported by numerical results. The temperature dependence of Γ value is shown in Fig. To find the evidence of the chirality-breakdown bound state or even π-type vortex state in experiments, Fig. The chirality-breakdown bound state m = -1 2 plays a crucial role in the appearance of the π-type vortex state with k F ξ 0 = 11 and R = 1.6ξ 0 . But, what controls the appearance of the chirality-breakdown bound state? To answer this question, we can rely on the analysis similar to the Anderson approximation where 2kF ξ0R 2 -μ F are the energies of two neighboring single-electron states and ∆ν = R 0 ρ dρ φ * j,(m-1 2 ) (ρ)∆(ρ)φ j,(m+ 1 2 ) (ρ). As seen from Eq. ( Next, we consider the stability of the π-type vortex in less deep type-II regime. Its exact solution requires to solve the full BdG equations selfconsistently including the magnetic field. However, the calculation of such procedure is very heavy and time-consuming. For simplicity, we employ the Anderson's approximation as in Sec. 3.4, and assume that the magnetic field participates but varies slowly in space in the case of less deep type-II regime. So, the vector potential is approximately taken as A(ρ) = H0ρ 2 e θ with H 0 the applied field and A(ρ) measured in units of Φ0 We only consider the case with sufficiently low H 0 , thus, it is reasonable to neglect the third term in the above equation. Insert Eq. ( into the BdG Eqs. ( where ǫ ± ν and ∆ν defined in Eq. ( When the vortex state is π-type at zero field, i.e. only the in-gap state m = . It implies that if the radius takes R = ξ 0 , the flux passing through the sample is 2Φ 0 . Therefore, for these parameters, the π-type vortex may remain stable under a field in the range from 0 to 4 Φ0 2πξ 2 0 . To conclude, by numerically solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations, we demonstrated that a single-quantum vortex state in a nanoscale cylindrical extreme type-II s-wave superconductor may undergo a π-phase shift in the radial order parameter near the core. We refer to it as π-type vortex state induced by quantum-size effect. The chirality-breakdown bound state of azimuthal quantum number m = -1 2 plays the key role on such behavior. Such state shows two distinctive features: first, the supercurrent has a ρ 3 behavior near the core, rather than the conventional linear dependence; second, the LDOS exhibits a significant negative-shifted zero-bias peak. The π-type vortex state may survive thermal smearing when T /T c < E - 1 2 /∆ 0 with E -1 2 quasiparticle energy of bound state m = -1 2 , and it may remain stable under sufficiently week magnetic field in the case less deep in the type-II limit. Based on the numerically calculated phase diagram of vortex type as k F ξ 0 versus R, we may expect to find π-type vortex state in extreme type-II superconductors and superfluids with low k F ξ 0 (∼ 10) and R < 2 ξ 0 , e.g. Pb nanoislands 