With the field of two-dimensional (2D) magnetic materials expanding rapidly, noncollinear topological magnetic textures in 2D materials are attracting growing interest recently. As the in-plane counterpart of magnetic skyrmions, magnetic bimerons have the same topological advantages, but are rarely observed in experiments. Employing first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations, we predict that the centrosymmetric transition metal halide CoX 2 (X = Cl, Br) monolayers can be promising candidates for observing the frustration-induced bimerons. These bimerons crystallize into stable triangular lattice under an appropriate magnetic field. Compared to the skyrmions driven by the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction or the long-ranged magnetic dipole-dipole interactions, these frustration-induced bimerons have much smaller size and flexible tunability. Furthermore, the biaxial strain provides an effective method to tune the frustration and thereby to tune the bimeron lattice. In detail, for CoCl 2 monolayer, tensile strain can be applied to generate bimeron lattice, further shrink bimeron size and increase the density of bimerons. For CoBr 2 monolayer with inherent bimeron lattice state, a unique orientation rotation of bimeron lattice controlled by compressive strain is predicted. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) materials in the atomic thickness limit with high tunability and peculiar quantum properties have been significantly highlighted in recent years In the field of magnetism, noncollinear magnetic textures with topological untrivial property attracted growing interest for both theoretical and experimental activities As natural excitations of ferromagnet in 2D space, skyrmionic magnetic textures are much expected to exist in 2D magnetic materials, and the previous experiments demonstrated that the reduction of materials' dimension is beneficial to the stability of skyrmions The frustration of exchange interactions is another important mechanism for skyrmions In this work, via first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations, we unveil that the frustration-induced bimeron lattice could be realized in 2D centrosymmetric CoX 2 (X = Cl, Br) monolayers under appropriate magnetic field. Furthermore, biaxial strain provides an efficient approach to tune the frustration and thus to tune these bimerons. For CoCl 2 monolayer, although ferromagnetism dominates, tensile strain can be applied to strengthen frustration and thus induce bimeron lattice. For CoBr 2 monolayer with inherent bimeron state, compressive strain may modulate frustration and thus to control the density of bimerons. In particular, it is intriguing that compressive strain can even control the orientation of bimeron lattice in an angle range of 30°. First-principles calculations are performed within the density functional theory (DFT) framework, as implemented in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) Furthermore, the Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MC) simulations of the Metropolis algorithm combined with the over-relaxation method are performed on triangular lattice with periodic boundary conditions to study the noncollinear spin textures To characterize the spin (S) configuration, the spin structure factor is evaluated for three spin components (γ = x, y and z) respectively as follows: The topological property of magnetic texture is confirmed by topological charge Q, namely, 1 () which quantifies the times S wrapping around a unit sphere as the coordinate (x, y) spans the defined region. If Q=1 for each isolated skyrmionic magnetic texture, then the topological charge of whole lattice is just the number of skyrmionic magnetic textures. In this work, the isolated bimerons induced by frustration with topological charge Q = ±1 are degenerate in energy. To further locate and characterize the topological magnetic textures, the local topological charge density ρ(r) is evaluated as follows: In simulation, Q and ρ(r) are calculated for a discrete spin lattice in the manner of Ref In recent years, transition metal dihalides and trihalides with 2D vdW layered structure attracted considerable attention For the calculation of CoX 2 bulks, the Hubbard U-correction on the 3d orbitals of Co is considered, comparing to the calculation without U. It is demonstrated that the in-plane Co-Co distance and the layer spacing without U are more consistent with the experimental data CoX 2 (X = Cl, Br) monolayer possesses a centrosymmetric crystal structure as shown in Fig. Under the influence of octahedral crystal field, the 3d orbitals of transition metal atom always split into higher energy level e g (d x 2 -y 2 , d z 2 ) and lower energy level t 2g (d xy , d xz , d yz ). Thus Co 2+ ion (d 7 ) has two possible states: high-spin (S = 3/2) and low-spin (S = 1/2). For both CoCl 2 and CoBr 2 , the high-spin state is preferred as shown in Table where S i represents the normalized classic spin (|S| = 1). On the right of Eq. ( To extract the exchange couplings, four basic magnetic orders are considered, namely Ferromagnetic (FM), Zigzag antiferromagnetic (ZAFM), Stripe antiferromagnetic (SAFM) and Double-stripe antiferromagnetic (DSAFM) configurations, as sketched in Fig. where E 0 denotes the energy of nonmagnetic part. The calculated values of J 1 , J 2 , and J 3 are summarized in Table For CoCl 2 monolayer, when the tensile strain (ε > 0) is raised, J 2 and J 3 decrease slightly, while J 1 rises obviously as shown in Fig. The real-space spin textures obtained in MC simulation are displayed in Fig. For CoBr 2 monolayer, the situation is much more complicated than CoCl 2 . As plotted in Fig. In summary, by using first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations, the noncollinear magnetic textures in CoX 2 (X = Cl, Br) monolayers are investigated. The calculation indicates that the frustration-induced bimeron lattice could exist under appropriate magnetic field in these 2D monolayers, and biaxial strain provides an effective method to tune these magnetic textures via controlling frustration. For CoCl 2 monolayer with dominate ferromagnetism, tensile strain could be applied to generate bimeron lattice. Furthermore, it reduces the size of each bimeron and increases the density of bimeron lattice. For CoBr 2 monolayer, bimeron lattice exists even without the application of strain, and it can be modulated by compressive strain. In particular, an exotic strain-controlled rotation of bimerion lattice is revealed in this vdW monolayer. The superiority in size and tunability of these frustration-induced bimerons will trigger special interest to the investigation of the topological magnetic textures in 2D materials, and help for searching more candidates for much-desired spintronic devices with high storage density and low power consumption.