Polarization modulators have a broad range of applications in optics. The acceptance angle of a free-space polarization modulator is crucial for many applications. Polarization modulators that can achieve a wide acceptance angle are constructed by attaching a piezoelectric transducer to an isotropic material, and utilize a resonant transverse interaction between light and acoustic waves. Since their demonstration in the 1960s, the design of these modulators has essentially remained the same with minor improvements in the following decades. In this work, we show that a suitable single crystal with the correct crystal orientation, functioning as both the piezoelectric transducer and the acousto-optic interaction medium, could be used for constructing a highly efficient free-space resonant polarization modulator operating at megahertz frequencies and exhibiting a wide acceptance angle. We construct the modulator using gallium arsenide, an optically isotropic and piezoelectric crystal, and demonstrate polarization modulation at 6 MHz with an input aperture of 1 cm in diameter, acceptance angle reaching ±30 • , and modulation efficiency exceeding 50%. Compared to state-of-the-art resonant photoelastic modulators, the modulator reported in this work exhibits greater than 50 fold improvement in modulation frequency for the same input aperture, while simultaneously reducing the thickness by approximately a factor of 80. Increasing the modulation frequency of photoelastic modulators from the kilohertz to the megahertz regime and substantially reducing their thickness lead to significant performance improvements for various use cases. This technological advancement also creates opportunities for utilizing these devices in new applications. Light exhibits polarization as a fundamental property, which can be modified by using a polarization modulator. This effect could be achieved through different physical mechanisms, with electro-optic and acousto-optic being the conventional modulation approaches. For free-space polarization modulators, large input apertures, high modulation frequency, wide acceptance angle, low-power consumption, and compact form factor is typically desired. Such modulators could find use in many settings, and single frequency modulators are used in applications ranging from polarimetry, ellipsometry, polarization spectroscopy, linear and circular dichroism, to intensity modulation of free-space beams Electro-optic polarization modulators constructed using materials having χ (2) non-linearity (i.e., Pockels effect) offer high modulation speeds, but cannot realize large acceptance angle and low-power consumption simultaneously Liquid crystal electro-optic modulators offer low-power control over the polarization state of light in a compact form factor, and is the state-of-the-art technology in displays. However, they are severely limited in their modulation bandwidth to several kilohertz Acousto-optic polarization modulators are historically referred to as photoelastic modulators, and consist of an isotropic material (typically silica) carefully bonded to a suitable piezoelectric transducer. Acoustic resonance is utilized to reduce the operating power substantially. Since its conception and demonstration in the 1960s Recently, photoelastic modulators using a single crystal that functions as both the piezoelectric transducer and photoelastic interaction medium have been demonstrated using lithium niobate In this work, we demonstrate photoelastic modulators with simultaneously large input apertures, acceptance angle, and operation in the megahertz frequency regime by constructing a LPRPM using an optically isotropic and piezoelectric material. By carefully choosing the crystal orientation of a material belonging to the cubic crystal system with point group 43m or 23, which are materials that are optically isotropic and piezoelectric, we show that it is possible to excite and confine standing shear waves in such materials. The excited standing shear waves in these modulators also couple strongly to light via the photoelastic effect for polarization modulation. We construct an optically isotropic LPRPM using gallium arsenide, a well developed semiconductor material exhibiting a high acousto-optic figure of merit owing to its high refractive index and large photoelastic coefficients. The modulator is fabricated using an undoped gallium arsenide wafer of thickness 234 μm and 2 inch diameter with custom crystal orientation ((332) in Miller indices notation) to optimize the relevant piezoelectric and photoelastic couplings. Indium tin oxide (ITO) is deposited on the top and bottom surfaces of the wafer to function as transparent surface electrodes. With the fabricated modulator, we demonstrate polarization modulation at approximately 6 MHz, an input aperture of 1 cm in diameter, and acceptance angle reaching ±30 • for 940 nm wavelength of light. Compared to state-of-theart photoelastic modulators, this marks a greater than 50 fold improvement in modulation frequency for the same input aperture and approximately 80 times reduction in the thickness of the modulator. We demonstrate greater than 50% modulation efficiency for a drive power of ap-proximately 1 W for the modulator, indicating its immediate deployability for various applications. Even larger input apertures could be realized with the proposed modulator in exchange for higher operating power. The proposed modulator offers a substantially more compact alternative to existing technology for wide acceptance angle and pure polarization modulation that finds use in many applications. Furthermore, the proposed approach opens promising avenues such as timeof-flight imaging using standard image sensors by pushing the modulation frequency from the kilohertz to the megahertz frequency regime The most important choice in designing a LPRPM is the material. This influences the optical transparency window, acousto-optic figure of merit, acoustic attenuation, and piezoelectric and photoelastic tensors. Only crystals belonging to the cubic crystal system are optically isotropic (i.e., nonbirefringent), and two point groups, 43m and 23, in the cubic crystal system are piezoelectric In this work, we choose to use GaAs as the modulator material, as it has a large refractive index, transparency in near-infrared wavelengths, large photoelastic coefficients, and availability of custom cut wafers. With the material set to GaAs, the next step is to determine the input aperture and the modulation frequency of the modulator. To operate at megahertz frequencies, we choose to use a modulator thickness of approximately L ≈ 250 μm, since the speed of longitudinal and shear waves in GaAs are several thousand meters per second The remaining step is to choose the crystal cut (i.e., crystal orientation). The cut angle of the modulator is extremely critical as it determines both the electromechanical and the acousto-optic properties of the modulator, since the single crystal functions as both the piezoelectric transducer and the photoelastic interaction medium. The chosen cut angle should accommodate coupling to the appropriate strain via piezoelectricity, while also maximizing the difference in phase modulation between the two excited eigenpolarizations in the modulator to achieve the largest polarization modulation. We choose to operate the modulator by exciting S ′ yz shear strain, as shear modes typically have lower acoustic loss compared to longitudinal modes. If we assume only S ′ yz strain is excited in the modulator, the BVD equivalent resistance is expressed in Eq. ( The crystal orientation of GaAs should be selected to maximize |p ′ 14 -p ′ 24 | (where p ′ 14 and p ′ 24 are the rotated photoelastic coefficients), while keeping the other rel-evant photoelastic coefficients pertaining to S ′ yz strain small, and also keeping R t at a reasonable value. The variation of the electromechanical coupling coefficient and the effective photoelastic coefficient for polarization modulation as a function of the crystal orientation in Euler angles are shown in Fig. The electromechanical coupling coefficient is a widely used figure of merit to asses piezoelecric transducers. This is an extremely critical parameter when constructing wide bandwidth transducers, as the transduction bandwidth is directly related to the magnitude of this coefficient. For resonant designs, however, a single frequency of operation is needed. The coupling coefficient therefore primarily influences the impedance matching condition for operation at the resonant frequency. The BVD equivalent impedance is usually selected larger than the radio frequency (RF) transmission line impedance in the design stage to make the acoustic and dielectric loss mechanisms of the modulator to dominate parasitic electrical resistances. To couple as much of the RF power carried to the modulator by a transmission line, the BVD equivalent impedance of the modulator is matched to the transmission line impedance. The electromechanical coupling coefficient should also not be too small. Due to non-ideal matching components, an extremely small electromechanical coupling coefficient would result in significant power loss. Notice that standard cuts, such as X-cut ((β, γ) = (90 and Z-cut ((β, γ) = (0 • , 0 • )) do not have sufficient electromechanical coupling to be useful (see Fig. Before choosing the crystal orientation, we need to have a guess on the Q for the desired mode. Based on previous devices fabricated using lithium niobate, which had Q values in the range of 1,000 to 30,000, we choose the crystal orientation as (β, γ) = (64.76 • , 45 • ), which is equivalent to (332) in Miller indices notation. The Euler angles (β, γ) = (64.76 • , 45 • ) relate the rotated system (x ′ , y ′ , z ′ ) to the crystal coordinate system (x, y, z). This cut angle has large photoelastic coupling (as seen in Fig. With the cut angle of the wafer and its other properties determined, we perform an electromechanical simulation of the modulator using finite element modeling software COMSOL Multiphysics We now provide an overview of the modulation principle for the modulator. The LPRPM modulates the polarization of light via the photoelastic effect. This requires the generation of an acoustic standing wave in the wafer. Strain distribution S ′ yz (x ′ , y ′ , z ′ ) is generated in the active volume V = πr 2 L of the modulator via piezoelectricity, requiring approximately P RF drive power, expressed in Eq. ( The other generated strain components are negligible in comparison to S ′ yz (x ′ , y ′ , z ′ ) as well as having small photoelastic couplings pertinent to polarization modulation. The amplitude of polarization modulation for oblique incidence of light is expressed in spherical coordinates (θ, ψ) as Eq. ( (3) φ D rms (θ, ψ) is the root mean square (rms) value of the polarization modulation amplitude evaluated over the active region of the modulator. See Supplementary material section 4 on how to calculate ∆n rms (θ, ψ, z ′ ). This analysis assumes a plane wave is incident on the modulator with incident angle (θ, ψ) with respect to the wafer normal represented in spherical coordinates. We fabricate the modulator using an undoped, doubleside polished GaAs wafer of thickness 234 μm, 2 inch diameter, and with crystal orientation (332) in Miller indices notation. The modulator is schematically depicted in Fig. Approximately 150 nm of ITO is deposited on the top and bottom surfaces of the wafer, centered on the wafer, with a diameter of 12.7 mm using shadow masks. The ITO is deposited in a load locked chamber using sputtering. The sputtered ITO films are vacuum annealed in the chamber after deposition to improve the conductivity and transparency. 1 mm wide aluminum ring region on the edge of the ITO pattern and a microstrip region that extends to the edge of the wafer is evaporated on the top and bottom surfaces of the wafer in a load locked chamber with a thickness of 200 nm. This allows the RF signal to be carried from a printed circuit board (PCB) to the center transparent ITO region. Due to the opaqueness of aluminum deposited on the edge of the ITO pattern, the input aperture that is transparent to light is approximately 5 mm in radius. The modulator is mounted on a PCB, and the ends of the top and bottom aluminum microstrip regions are wirebonded to the PCB. The fabricated modulator mounted on a PCB is shown in Fig. We perform electromechanical characterization to observe the acoustic modes of the modulator, as well as to calculate the Q for the desired mode. The characterization is performed by measuring the s 11 reflection scattering parameter with respect to 50 Ω using a vector network analyzer (VNA). A broad scan is performed first using the VNA, measuring the s 11 of the modulator from 1 MHz to 12 MHz. For this scan, 0 dBm of RF power is sent to the modulator, with a measurement bandwidth of 200 Hz and frequency stepping of 500 Hz. The magnitude of the scattering parameter is shown in Fig. Next, we perform a narrow bandwidth scan around the shear resonance with the impedance matching transformer connected to the modulator. The frequency of the VNA is swept from 6 MHz to 6.13 MHz. For this scan, 0 dBm of RF power is sent to the modulator, with a measurement bandwidth of 50 Hz and frequency stepping of 30 Hz. The magnitude of the scattering parameter for this measurement is shown in Fig. We perform optical characterization to measure the profile of the dominant strain component S ′ yz excited in the modulator, as well as to measure the modulation efficiency. Perpendicular incidence of light to the wafer surface is used for this characterization. The setup shown in Fig. , where â′ x and â′ y are unit vectors corresponding to directions x ′ and y ′ in the rotated frame, respectively. The linearly polarized light is converted into circularly polarized light after propagating through a quarter-wave plate with fast axis oriented along â′ x . The light is converted into circularly polarized light to maximize the intensity modulation term at the fundamental frequency (after a polarizer is placed). The laser beam propagates through the modulator driven with RF frequency f drive , where the light is polarization modulated at the applied RF frequency. The light finally propagates through a second polarizer with transmission axis identical to the first polarizer. The second polarizer converts the polarization modulated light into intensity modulated light. The intensity modulated light (with a beat tone at 4 Hz) is detected by a CMOS camera with megapixel spatial resolution. A second measurement is performed with the second polarizer removed from the laser beam path to calibrate the measurement. This additional measurement allows the static birefringence of the modulator (expected to be zero) and the S ′ yz strain distribution to be estimated. The general form of the rms intensity of the laser beam after propagating through the optical elements for oblique incidence is expressed in Eq. ( For this optical characterization, we intentionally drive the modulator red-detuned from the lowest order acoustic mode to minimize the mode non-uniformity. Due to the proximity of the spurious acoustic modes (see Fig. The optical characterization results are shown in Fig. is shown in Fig. We also measure the variation of the rms modulation efficiency (see Supplementary material section 4), defined as the ratio in the power of the beat tone at 4 Hz to the DC level (where appropriate normalizations are taken into account) and the rms strain amplitude S ′ yz as a function of the RF drive power. The peak-to-peak variation and the estimated strain S ′ yz are averaged in rms sense over the pixels to estimate these rms values. These are plotted in Fig. Hinds Instruments The modulator that has the smallest thickness is model II/FS84, with a thickness of 19.05 mm. We note that this is the thickness of the packaged optical head, including the packaging of the modulator, and therefore the crystal thickness is slightly smaller. The thickness of the GaAs modulator reported in this work is approximately 81 times thinner than model II/FS84. The thickness of these commercial photoelastic modulators could be reduced in exchange for higher operating power. We perform optical characterization on the modulator for different angles of incidence of the laser beam. This characterization is performed to demonstrate the wide acceptance angle of the modulator (due to its lack of optical birefringence). The characterization is similar to the optical characterization outlined in the previous section for normal incidence of light except for the positions of the optical elements and the capture of 320 frames rather than 640 frames (to speed up data capture). For this characterization, the laser mount position is changed to vary the angle of incidence of the laser beam as depicted in Fig. Inset figures are plotted in Fig. The attainable modulation efficiency is critical for many applications. To demonstrate high modulation efficiency, we need to generate sufficient strain in the modulator. In order to accomplish this, we drive the modulator at the minimum of its |s 11 | near the fundamental shear resonance frequency of approximately 6 MHz, and use an amplifier to increase the RF power driving the modulator. Using the setup depicted in Fig. We track the drift in the resonance frequency by adjusting the drive frequency as a function of time. Every 1 second, the reflected waveform is captured with an oscilloscope using the setup depicted in Fig. We observe that the |s 11 | remains below -20 dB for RF drive power up to 1.075 W, demonstrating the ability to successfully track the resonant frequency of the modulator and couple significant portion of the available RF power into the modulator. We see from Fig. Optically isotropic and piezoelectric materials, like GaAs, can be used to construct highly efficient resonant photoelastic modulators operating at megahertz frequencies, with a large input aperture and exhibiting wide acceptance angle. In this work, we demonstrated wide angle polarization modulation at 6 MHz with an input aperture diameter of 1 cm. Acceptance angle reaching ±30 • and modulation efficiency exceeding 50% for a drive power of approximately 1 W is demonstrated. Compared to state-of-the-art resonant photoelastic modulators that find use in applications ranging from polarimetry, ellipsometry, polarization spectroscopy, linear and circular dichroism, to intensity modulation of free-space beams, we report more than 50 times improvement in the modulation frequency and significant reduction in the thickness of the modulator. As future work, thinner wafers and operation using a longitudinal mode could be used to increase the modulation frequency. The impedance matching network could be improved to increase Q, and therefore reduce the power required to drive the modulator. The transparency window of the proposed modulator could be pushed into the visible region by using other materials in the cubic crystal system with point group 43m and 23. The complete simulated strain profiles in the GaAs wafer when excited with 2Vpp at 6.0658 MHz are shown in Fig. The stiffness The rotated tensors in the primed coordinate notation are related to the crystal coordinate notation through the Bond transformation matrices We assume a plane wave incident on the modulator (after propagating through the first polarizer) with normal incidence, where the input electric field of light is expressed as follows: For the equation above, c.c. denotes the complex conjugate, w L = 2πc λ the angular optical frequency, j is the imaginary unit with j 2 = -1, k = 2πn λ the optical wavevector magnitude in GaAs. Primed notation indicates representation in the rotated coordinate system (x ′ , y ′ , z ′ ). The output electric field is expressed as Ēf (θ = 0 • , ψ = 0 • , t), and the following coupled-mode equations can be arrived at using a similar derivation used in B n (z ′ )e j((w L +nwr)t-kz ′ ) + c.c. For the equation above, K is the acoustic wavevector magnitude and In this section, we will calculate the relevant parameters for oblique incidence of light to the modulator. The derivation is similar to the one carried out in We start with the wavevector direction k = â′ x sinθcosψ + â′ y sinθsinψ + â′ z cosθ of a plane wave represented in spherical coordinates. The transmission axis of the polarizers is t = The calculation of the relevant parameters are as follows: 1. The totally blocked polarization of light by the first polarizer is calculated as p1 (θ, ψ) = t × k. 2. The transmitted polarization by the polarizer is calculated as p2 (θ, ψ) = p1 (θ, ψ) × k. 3. The plane of incidence is useful for future calculations, and is calculated as v(θ, ψ) = â′ z × k. 4. The refracted wavevector direction kr (θ, ψ) is found through the following relations, where θ r is the refraction angle: 5. We now find the polarizations po (θ, ψ) and pe (θ, ψ) corresponding to the refracted eigenpolarizations. The eigenpolarizations are found by calculating the semi-axes of the ellipse formed by the intersection of the plane orthogonal to kr (θ, ψ) and the modified index ellipsoid via photoelasticity. The time-varying index ellipsoid for GaAs as a function of spatial position is expressed as follows, where f drive is the excitation frequency of the RF source applied to the modulator through the surface electrodes: The vectors pointing from the origin to the semi-axes of the ellipsoid correspond to the polarizations po (θ, ψ) and pe (θ, ψ), respectively. The lengths of the axes correspond to the time-varying refractive indices experienced by the ordinary n o (θ, ψ, x ′ , y ′ , z ′ , t) and extraordinary wave n e (θ, ψ, x ′ , y ′ , z ′ , t), respectively. 6. The time-varying birefringence due to photoelasticity is calculated as ∆n(θ, ψ, x ′ , y ′ , z ′ , t) = n o (θ, ψ, x ′ , y ′ , z ′ , t) -n e (θ, ψ, x ′ , y ′ , z ′ , t). The root mean square (rms) birefringence is expressed as follows, where the surface integral is carried out over the aperture of the modulator (with area πr 2 ): The amplitude of the time-varying birefringence is expressed as follows: ∆n rms (θ, ψ, z ′ ) converges to its expected value for normal incidence of light ( k = â′ z ) (corresponding to polarization modulation of light). lim 7. We now calculate the amplitudes of the excited ordinary (c o (θ, ψ)) and extraordinary (c e (θ, ψ)) polarizations in the modulator (for transmitted polarization p2 (θ, ψ) through the first polarizer). These amplitudes are found by calculating the inner product of the refracted polarization pr (θ, ψ) and the refracted eigenpolarizations po (θ, ψ) and pe (θ, ψ). To simplify the analysis, we assume that no reflection occurs at the air-modulator interface. 8. We now calculate the polarization pr (θ, ψ) corresponding to the refracted light. Using the plane of incidence v(θ, ψ), we analyze the p polarization (polarization parallel to the plane of incidence) and the s polarization (polarization perpendicular to the plane of incidence) separately. We express p2 (θ, ψ) in the basis of the p (p 2p (θ, ψ)) and s (p 2s (θ, ψ)) polarizations. These polarizations satisfy the following relations: The two polarizations are found as follows: We now relate these s and p polarizations in air to the refracted s (p rs (θ, ψ)) and p (p rp (θ, ψ)) polarizations in GaAs. The relations are as follows: The refracted polarization is finally found as pr (θ, ψ) = prs (θ, ψ) + prp (θ, ψ). 9. The excited ordinary and extraordinary wave amplitudes are calculated as follows: After propagating through the second polarizer, the intensity of the plane wave with wavevector direction k is expressed as in Eq. 5 in the main manuscript (including a quater-wave plate placed between the modulator and the first polarizer to impart a π/2 radians phase shift between the ordinary and extraordinary polarizations). The depth of modulation (DOM (θ, ψ)) is defined as follows (the ratio of the beat tone amplitude to the DC value): The plot of an approximate form of DOM (θ, ψ) as a function of the incidence angle is shown in Fig. Most of the light that is incident on the modulator passes through the modulator once. Some portion of the light, however, bounces multiple times before exiting the wafer (due to the large refractive index of GaAs). The interference of these two (or more) paths that have propagated a different distance to the detector leads to intensity modulation (in addition to intensity modulation due to polarization modulation and the polarizers). We have performed a measurement for normal incidence of light with and without the second polarizer present in the beam path for the results corresponding to Fig. Similar to the optical characterization performed when the modulator was driven at f drive = 6.056 MHz, we perform an optical characterization when the modulator is driven at the minimum of its |s 11 | near the shear resonance frequency of approximately 6 MHz. The optical characterization results are shown in Fig. When the modulator is driven with sufficiently high drive power, and when the |s 11 | is small (here, it is less than -20 dB), sufficient strain builds up in the wafer that acoustic non-linearities start becoming noticeable. Using the setup depicted in Fig. 