Progress in magnetoelectric materials is hindered by apparently contradictory requirements for time-reversal symmetry broken and polar ferroelectric electronic structure in common ferromagnets and antiferromagnets. Alternative routes could be provided by recent discoveries of a time-reversal symmetry breaking anomalous Hall effect in noncollinear magnets and altermagnets, but hitherto reported bulk materials are not polar. Here, we report the observation of a spontaneous anomalous Hall effect in doped AgCrSe2, a layered polar semiconductor with an antiferromagnetic coupling between Cr spins in adjacent layers. The anomalous Hall resistivity 3 μΩ cm is comparable to the largest observed in compensated magnetic systems to date, and is rapidly switched off when the angle of an applied magnetic field is rotated to ∼ 80 • from the crystalline c-axis. Our ionic gating experiments show that the anomalous Hall conductivity magnitude can be enhanced by modulating the p-type carrier density. We also present theoretical results that suggest the anomalous Hall effect is driven by Berry curvature due to noncollinear antiferromagnetic correlations among Cr spins, which are consistent with the previously suggested magnetic ordering in AgCrSe2. Our results open the possibility to study the interplay of magnetic and ferroelectric-like responses in this fascinating class of materials. The anomalous Hall effect (AHE), in which electrons acquire a transverse velocity relative to an applied electric field in the absence of a magnetic field, is one of the most fundamental phenomena in condensed matter physics Among many predictions and observations in this rapidly-moving field, the case of an AHE associated with a polar structure stands out. Polar materials can exhibit ferroelectricity and spin-orbit interaction induced spin polarization In terms of material physics, a minimal ingredient for such an observation is a system with a crystal and magnetic structure that allows for the coexistence of a polar vector, P , and a Hall pseudovector, σ = (σ yz , σ zx , σ xy ), where the components represent anomalous Hall conductivities Here, we report that one such a doped semiconductor, AgCrSe 2 , fulfills the symmetry requirements of polar crystal structure, and shows a spontaneous AHE. We demonstrate that it is an intrinsic AHE by comparing its evolution to that of the magnetization, and perform a consistency check by showing that the magnitude of the anomalous Hall conductivity is temperature-and scattering-independent below 50 K. We also report and discuss the observation of a rather pronounced plateau in the Hall resistivity as a function of the angle of the applied field relative to the crystalline c-axis, and show that the magnitude of the observed AHE is tunable by the application of an ionic gate. AgCrSe 2 has a layered structure with alternate Ag layers and edge-sharing CrSe 6 octahedral layers repeating along the c-axis For the magneto-transport measurements, we realized microfabricated devices based on exfoliated AgCrSe 2 crystals with thicknesses ranging from 100 nm to 800 nm and compared our results with those from bulk single crystal devices. As expected in a material with a layered crystal structure, the resistive anisotropy ρ T OT zz /ρ T OT xx is large, rising from 25 at 50 K to 100 at 2 K, and the in-plane resistivity at 2 K is approximately 2 mΩ cm, which may be the result of doping due to an intrinsic non-stoichiometry. Throughout the paper we map the Cartesian coordinates commonly used to describe the Hall effect to the crystalline ones, with the z axis being the crystalline c axis, the xy plane being the ab plane of the crystalline layers. We first discuss our main experimental evidence for the AHE, which was observed by measuring the Hall resistivity ρ T OT xy upon applying the magnetic field H perpendicular to the ab-plane. The measurements were carried out employing the setup as illustrated by the schematic in the inset of Fig. A common question regarding hysteretic AHE signals is their relationship to the magnetization. Because the Hall effect can have a variety of origins, the total Hall conductivity σ T OT xy can be expressed as a sum of contributions: , where σ 0 xy is the traditional Hall conductivity from orbital electronic motion and σ A xy is the term resulting from k-space Berry curvature. Written in terms of the measured quantities which are resistivities, has a weak magnetic field dependence, a similar separation can be made, to a good approximation, in the Hall resistivity: Here, R 0 is the ordinary Hall coefficient, μ 0 is the permeability, and we use ρ 0 xy to represent R 0 μ 0 H. In our AgCrSe 2 microcrystals, ρ T OT xx varies between 1.5 and 3 mΩ cm between 2 K and 300 K, with a magnetoresistance of less than 2% for μ 0 H < 4 T. Inspection of Fig. The field-linear part of ρ T OT xy (H) enables the identification of R 0 , and the subtraction of ρ 0 xy . As shown in Fig. One diagnostic sometimes used for the existence of an intrinsic AHE is an anomalous Hall conductivity, σ A yx , that is independent of scattering , is plotted in Fig. The data shown in Fig. However, one other form of topological response is worthy of consideration. A net non-zero Chern number due to surfaces could result in the reduction of the observed σ A yx from the quantized value by the ratio n s /n b , where n s is the number of topologically non-trivial layers at or near the sample surface and n b is the number of topologically trivial bulk layers. This intriguing hypothesis can be checked experimentally by studying samples of varying thickness. We did this, with the results shown in Fig. Another, even more direct, way to investigate the surface layers of a material such as AgCrSe 2 is to apply an ionic gate using an ionic liquid. We now demonstrate that an ionic gate drastically modulates the AHE. We employ an ionic field effect transistor setup, in the configuration schematically illustrated in the inset of Fig. In the experiment, we applied both negative and positive gate voltages, producing sheet carrier densities per layer that are both smaller and larger than the carrier density per layer of the bulk devices. As is seen in Fig. By isolating the carriers to a quasi-two-dimensional sheet at the surface of the AgCrSe 2 crystals, and demonstrating that σ A yx remains far from a quantized value, we provide further strong evidence for a non-quantized anomalous Hall origin of the signal. We will show below, through symmetry arguments and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, that its origin is still Berry curvature, but a carrier-density-dependent one in the valence band of these p-type doped crystals. We start from the symmetry analysis to look for necessary conditions for the occurrence of a nonzero anomalous Hall conductivity, i.e. σ xy . The out-of-plane spin tilting that is favored by Dzyaloshinsky-Moriya interaction Inspection of the magnetic space group for various possible magnetic orderings reveals that an anomalous Hall conductivity can be generated either by (a) an in-plane magnetic moment The above-described models are based on coplanar spin configurations which generate a Hall vector perpendicular to the plane. This is distinct from the conventional ferromagnetism that a Hall vector is generated by a moment along the same direction. The scenario involving a more complex noncollinear spin structure has been examined on model level, and is consistent with the main conclusions based on DFT results. We emphasize that these models discuss possible origins of the Hall signal only. Nevertheless, our theoretical analysis and calculations demonstrate that the AgCrSe 2 crystal structure family can host intriguing in-plane magnetization 