Magnetic van der Waals materials are often proposed for use in future spintronic devices, aiming to leverage the combination of long-range magnetic order and near-atomic thinness to produce energyefficient components. One class of material that has been discussed in this context are the iron halides FeCl2 and FeBr2, which are A-type antiferromagnets with strong uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy. However, despite characterization of the bulk materials, the possibility for sustaining the magnetic behaviors that would underpin such applications in thin flakes has not been investigated. In this work, we use nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center microscopy to quantitatively image magnetism in individual exfoliated flakes of these iron halides, revealing the absence of magnetic remanence, a weak induced magnetization under bias field and variable behavior versus temperature. We show that our results are consistent with the antiferromagnetic behavior of the bulk material with a soft ferromagnetic uncompensated layer, indicating that extended (> 1 μm) ferromagnetic domains are not sustained even at low temperatures (down to 4 K). Finally, we find that the magnetic order is strongly affected by the sample preparation, with a surprising diamagnetic order observed in a thin, hydrated sample. Intense research is directed towards magnetic van der Waals materials due to their potential for allowing the creation of miniaturised and energy-efficient spintronic devices The iron halides FeCl 2 and FeBr 2 are compounds known to exhibit A-type AF ordering in the bulk form We study mechanically exfoliated, high purity flakes of varying thickness up to 100's of nm, and first find limited remanent magnetization at temperatures down to 4 K for both FeCl 2 and FeBr 2 . We then observe diverse behaviour when varying the background magnetic field and sample temperature, sometimes even within the same flake. By comparing our results to micromagnetic models, considering the possibility for paramagnetic (PM) and AF ordering, we find that these observations are most consistent with soft ferromagnetism in uncompensated monolayers, unable to sustain large domains (≳ 1 μm) even at T ≈ 4 K. In addition, we observed a surprising diamagnetic order in a thin, hydrated sample of FeBr 2 produced via a wet transfer method. Our results provide useful information on the magnetic behaviour of FeCl 2 and FeBr 2 in the thin, single flake regime, and highlight the importance of sample preparation on their magnetic order. The iron halides samples studied in this work were made from commercially sourced anhydrous bulk FeCl 2 (97%, Acros organics) and FeBr 2 (98%, Acros organics) materials, mechanically exfoliating thin flakes and transferring them onto a diamond substrate. We found that the as-bought iron halides are flaky materials that can be directly exfoliated from powders using a tape, without any solid state crystal growth, obtaining large enough flakes (few tens of microns in size) down to tens or few hundreds nanometers thin. All exfoliation and transferring steps of flakes were carried out in a glovebox at room temperature by the dry transfer method (unless specified otherwise). The flakes were mechanically exfoliated onto polymethylsiloxane (PDMS) sheets and subsequently transferred onto a specified region of a diamond substrate. In order to protect the samples against ambient degradation, the iron halides flakes were sealed with a hBN flake (thickness < 40 nm). More details about the complete process can be found in Appendix A. The experimental setup for widefield magnetometry is depicted in Figure Widefield NV microscopy is a stray field measurement technique, meaning that we aim to infer information about a sample's magnetization by measuring the result-ing magnetic field Both FeBr 2 and FeCl 2 materials are expected to have A-type AF order below the Néel temperature T N (14 K for FeBr 2 , 24 K for FeCl 2 ) and under low bias fields (<1 T) applied along the c axis, alternating positive and negative magnetization for consecutive layers The stray magnetic fields generated by arbitrary flakes' geometries can be calculated if the material's magnetization ⃗ M is known, as described elsewhere where the energy density contributions come from the Zeeman, demagnetizing, magnetocrystalline and antiferromagnetic exchange terms, respectively. For A-type an- tiferromagnetism, a flake composed by N layers can be treated as two sublattices (namely "odd" and "even") with independent magnetization orientations. We consider bias fields B 0 applied along the c axis (also z direction) and define the polar angles θ with respect to this axis. For the general case of axial symmetry, the only two free variables to minimize E are the polar angles θ odd and θ even . Each energy contribution can be described as follows: where M S is the magnetization saturation, N odd and N even are the number of layers for each sub-lattice, K u is the uniaxial anisotropy and J AF is the AF exchange constant (absolute value). For more details about the explicit formulation and parameter values see Appendix C. The simulated hysteresis cycle for a FeBr 2 flake according to the No UL model (even N ) at temperature T = 0 K is shown in Figure The cycle is zoomed-in in Figure The multiple domain models (No UL and Soft UL) assume that the domain size is below our 1 μm spatial resolution, in which case the detected stray fields would be averaged over the contributions of many domains within the same flake. In order to simulate the energy landscape according to this model, Equation 1 should be updated by adding complex domain dynamics, which depend on many factors such as the sample's geometry and crystallographic defects. In contrast with the single domain models, we expect a strong dependence on the bias field, since magnetic domains will be competing to grow and at the same time to balance the AF exchange. In the case of multi-domain compensated layers (No UL), no stray fields will be generated regardless of the domain dynam-ics. However, simulating the UL case (Soft UL) under these conditions is a nontrivial task. To circumvent this complicated scenario we consider a soft FM model [see cartoon in Figure Optical images of the iron halides samples are shown in Figure We performed a set of widefield magnetometry measurements at different bias fields applied along the c axis, keeping the temperature T constant at 4 K. Another set was measured with a constant 200 mT bias field and varying the temperature up to 50 K. The first set (T = 4 K) is displayed as stray field maps series in Figure Following the existing characterization of the bulk material To consider the paramagnetic explanation, we build a model for thin flakes assuming that they are PM throughout their volume, in which case the magnetic response will be proportional to the number of layers. Each Fe 2+ ion (Br or Cl contributions are negligible) will contribute to the magnetization M PM based on their quantum numbers S (spin), L (orbital angular momentum) and J (total angular momentum), see Appendix E for more details. High quantum numbers will result in large M PM , and for this model we use the lowest configuration J = S = 1, L = 0, as suggested in where n is number of atoms per unit volume, g = 2 is the Landé factor for this quantum configuration, μ B is the Bohr magneton, B J is the Brillouin function and k B is the Boltzmann constant. The magnetization ⃗ M PM will be oriented parallel to the bias field direction, and the stray fields outside the flake can be simulated Considering the Soft UL and PM models, we analyze the magnetic properties in small regions within the thin flakes, looking for evidence that supports any of them. Figure In both samples and in all regions, the stray fields exhibit a linear dependence on the bias field intensity (dashed fitted lines), with negligible remanent magnetization and coercivity. As discussed before, this general behavior is in clear disagreement with the single domain models in this low bias field regime, showing either zero stray fields (No UL) or constant values for an UL (Hard UL) , equal to (57±9) μT for FeBr 2 and (85±4) μT for FeCl 2 (based on anticipated saturation magnetizations 0.49 MA/m and 0.61 MA/m, respectively, see Appendix C). Even if we consider a mixed case for our spatial average, containing sub-micrometer regions with even and odd number of layers, the average stray field would have an intermediate value but it should be constant as a function of the bias field. A pure PM model taking into account lower and upper boundaries for the number of layers (obtained from the AFM measurements) also fails, because the experimental magnetic signal should be much more intense. Figure Despite the fact that pure PM is not the appropriate model to describe our samples, it is possible that only small volumes within a flake are PM, contributing with a weak linear response. However, the lack of correlation between the flakes' topography [i.e. the height distribution; Figure The Soft UL and PM hypotheses can be further examined by looking at the temperature-dependent volume magnetic susceptibility χ v (T ). Since we previously showed that the stray fields are proportional to the bias fields B 0 at T = 4 K in our measurement range, we will assume the following approximation: where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability and M is the sample's magnetization. In the PM case, χ PM v (T ) can be calculated using M = M PM (T ) from Equation The experimental stray fields maps are displayed in Figure The magnetic models are mainly different below T N , where the interactions between magnetic moments are stronger than the thermal energy. Above T N , χ v (T ) de-cays roughly as 1/T for all cases, slightly modified for the AF models (SD and Soft UL) by the Weiss temperature θ W which gives χ v (T ) ∝ 1/(T + θ W ) (see Appendix F for details). Comparing the experimental results with the model predictions at low temperatures in Figure The AF models describe the susceptibility much better, as expected for these materials, anticipating an increasing χ v (T ) as T decreases for a multiple domain structure and a decreasing χ v (T ) in the single domain case. If we assume a multiple domain structure and the presence of uncompensated layers in these thin flakes, then it is reasonable to find average susceptibility values in between the SD and Soft UL predictions, depending on each region. For instance, region D4 [see Figure The temperature results reinforce the previous discussion about the linear response to the bias field, in favor of the Soft UL model. Furthermore, the region-dependent behavior is in agreement with the hypothesis that crys-tallographic defects and irregular shape effects will play a major role and generate a multiple domain magnetic structure. Finally, we examine a separate FeBr 2 sample fabricated using a wet transfer method, anticipating that the sample preparation may affect the magnetic behavior. Additionally, this sample was prepared on a ⟨100⟩ surface-oriented diamond sensor, meaning that all the NV axes have both parallel and perpendicular components relative to the sample c axis, see Appendix G. In this geometry, bias fields can be applied along any of the NV axes, which are not aligned with the anticipated crystal anisotropy axis, possibly allowing us to uncover more varied magnetic behaviors such as canting away from the c axis Figure The stray fields in the selected regions are averaged, projected into the z direction ( ⃗ B NV • ẑ) and plotted as a function of the bias field z-component, see Figure Using widefield NV microscopy, we have measured the magnetic properties of individual FeCl 2 and FeBr 2 thin flakes (100-300 nm thick) over a range of bias and temperature conditions, complementing the previous bulk experimental research for these materials with novel results. No flakes examined exhibited magnetic remanence or obvious hysteresis, which we explain by a multiple domain model with domain sizes below our ≈ 1 μm resolution and the presence of uncompensated layers. The volume magnetic susceptibility as a function of temperature showed good agreement with our model and suggested irregular domain configurations, which could originate from crystallographic defects and shape effects in these thin flakes. More surprisingly, we found that one sample was diamagnetic, which we tentatively attribute to hydration of the crystal during a wet transfer process. Our results show that high purity, iron halides thin flakes produced via a dry transfer method exhibit antiferromagnetic properties aligned with those observed in the bulk materials, but they do not sustain the large magnetic domains required for many spintronic applications. Future investigations into methods better suited to producing high quality monolayer and bilayer samples such as molecular beam epitaxy The evaluation of the flakes' stability was assessed by three different preparation/control methods: 1. exfoliation in air and posterior Raman spectroscopy in air; 2. exfoliation in inert environment (glovebox full of Ar atmosphere) and Raman in air; 3. exfoliation in inert environment and Raman in a hermetic cell. Raman spectra are shown in Figure Samples FeBr 2 and FeCl 2 from the main text were exfoliated in glovebox but we didn't immediately evaluate the Raman results to ensure that the flakes were not degraded. Only after all the magnetic measurements were done we proceeded to the Raman evaluation, as shown in The crystallographic structure was studied by a Rigaku FR-X DW diffractometer on the bulk materials before mechanical exfoliation (signals coming from the thin flakes are too weak for this study), see Figure 