Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors are promising candidates for optoelectronic application and quantum information processes due to their inherent out-of-plane 2D confinement. In addition, they offer the possibility of achieving low-dimensional in-plane exciton confinement, similar to zero-dimensional quantum dots, with intriguing optical and electronic properties via strain or composition engineering. However, realizing such laterally confined 2D monolayers and systematically controlling size-dependent optical properties remain significant challenges. Here, we report the observation of lateral confinement of excitons in epitaxially grown in-plane MoSe2 quantum dots (~15-60 nm wide) inside a continuous matrix of WSe2 monolayer film via a sequential epitaxial growth process. Various optical spectroscopy techniques reveal the size-dependent exciton confinement in the MoSe2 monolayer quantum dots with exciton blue shift (12-40 meV) at a low temperature as compared to continuous monolayer MoSe2. Finally, single-photon emission was also observed from the smallest dots at 1.6 K. Our study opens the door to compositionally engineered, tunable, in-plane quantum light sources in 2D semiconductors. Exciton confinement in low-dimensional materials modifies the density of states and enhances the Coulomb interaction between electrons and holes, resulting in a range of novel effects for both fundamental physics and device applications. Over the past decade, atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) crystals have been extensively explored in developing quantum optical devices. However, the lack of lateral confinement of excitonic wave functions in such structures has limited their potential for quantum applications. Single photon emission from point defects Several groups have also attempted to solve this challenge of individual exciton confinement in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) monolayers by physically shaping them into quantum dots (QDs) via both top-down In this study, we have successfully demonstrated the lateral confinement of excitons in large area 2D MoSe2 QD@WSe2 matrix heterostructures grown by a metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) method. These heterostructures were created using sequential epitaxial growth to achieve an ultraclean interface. By controlling the reaction time, we can manipulate the size of the triangular MoSe2 QDs in the range of 15-60 nm. Our optical spectroscopic measurements prove size-dependent exciton confinement within the MoSe2 monolayer QDs. Further, our confined heterostructures exhibited quantum emission with ~0.6 nm spectral line width at cryogenic temperatures for dots as small as 10 nm and a single photon purity of g 2 (0) = ~0.4. Our results serve as an important milestone in achieving quantumconfinement and quantum emission in bottom-up grown 2D QDs at scale opening new avenues for exploring confined excitonic physics and developing novel quantum photonic devices. Figure The atomic structure of the MoSe2 QDs embedded in the WSe2 matrix was examined using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Figure In addition, the formation of the MoSe2 QDs was confirmed using micro-Raman spectroscopy with a 633 nm laser on the heterostructures transferred onto SiO2 substrates (Supplementary Figure The far-field Raman spectroscopic results described above sample an ensemble of QDs in the WSe2 matrix since the laser spot size (~1 um) is much larger than the average diameters or spacing between the QDs. Therefore, it is difficult to display the actual QD size and distribution via purely optical means because of the resolution limitations of the instrument. To determine the spatial position and study the band alignment between the MoSe2 QDs and the WSe2 matrix, we perform tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) combined with Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) on the heterostructures. First, an epoxy-assisted template stripping procedure was used to prepare the 5min-MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructures buried in a metallic Au substrate (Figure Thin hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) films (Supplementary Figure The confinement of excitons in the encapsulated quantum heterostructures was examined using micro-photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy with a 633 nm-excitation laser. Figure We performed first-principle calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) to investigate the shift of optical transitions due to the confinement effects in QDs with various sizes. Equilateral triangular MoSe2 quantum dots embedded in WSe2 with edge lengths ranging from 2.7 to 5.3 nm were studied. As the size of the QDs decreases, the absolute energy of the conduction band minimum (CBM) rises due to the quantum confinement effect, while that of the valence band maximum (VBM) decreases at a much slower rate. The energy difference between the CBM and the VBM increases with increasing dot size (Supplementary Figure Next, we evaluate the effect of quantum confinement on the intra-dot optical transition by defining an energy shift between two relevant energies: (1) the energy difference between the CBM of QDs and the VBM of pristine MoSe2; (2) the optical gap of pristine MoSe2. To account for the excitonic effects and the underestimation of band gaps by DFT, we increase the calculated band energy differences by 0.11 eV (which is the energy difference between the calculated band gap and the measured optical gap of MoSe2) to roughly evaluate the optical transition energies. The energy shift is plotted as a function of the inverse size of QDs. Due to the limitations in computational capacity, linear extrapolation is used to estimate the results for more sizable QDs. The energy shift is estimated to be 40, 20, and 12 meV for 15, 30, and 50nm quantum dots, respectively (Figure In addition to PL analysis, the confinement effect in the quantum heterostructures was also verified through reflectance measurements (Figure Figure To further validate that the emission acts as a truly quantum light source, we measure the second-order correlation function g 2 (t) using a Hanbury-Brown-Twiss (HBT) set-up with two single photon-counting avalanche photodiodes (APDs). Figure In conclusion, we have successfully demonstrated the lateral confinement of excitons via compositionally controlled in-plane 2D quantum heterostructures of the MoSe2 QDs embedded in the WSe2 matrix. These heterostructures show quantum-confined emission that is significantly blue-shifted from the main neutral excitons of pure 2D monolayer MoSe2. Further, the wavelength and intensity of the emission can be modulated passively according to the QD size and actively via electrostatic gating since the QDs are embedded in the WSe2 matrix. Our work represents a significant step towards the synthetic control of truly two-dimensional inplane epitaxial QDs, making them a versatile and tunable quantum light source. To fully exploit their potential for future, high-fidelity quantum light sources, further work must focus on their controllability in terms of spatial position, density, and composition. The in-plane MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructures were synthesized on sapphire substrates in a horizontal MOCVD reactor A thin gold film (100 nm) was deposited onto the surface of The in-plane MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructures grown on the sapphire substrate by using an e-beam evaporator (Kurt J. Lesker PVD-75) under a high vacuum. Then, a Si wafer was attached to the outer gold surface using an epoxy resin. Once the epoxy was cured at 80 o C for 2h, the gold-sapphire interface was separated by peeling. The in-plane heterostructures are more strongly bound to the Au film and are thus separated from the sapphire substrate. The process results in the transfer of the heterostructures from the sapphire surface to being inlaid in the gold film, exposing the pristine surfaces of the heterostructures that were previously in contact with the sapphire substrate. For electrostatic gating device preparation, the mechanically exfoliated h-BN and graphene layers were transferred over the sample by using a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-based dry transfer process to use them as each a dielectric and a top gate electrode. Next, the fabrication of Ti (10 nm)/Au (100 nm) electrode contacts was achieved by using electron beam lithography (Elionix ELS-7500EX) and the e-beam evaporator (Kurt J. Lesker PVD-75). Finally, the samples were cleaned in acetone for the lift-off process. Far-field Raman and PL spectroscopy were performed in a Horiba LabRam HR Evolution confocal microscope with 633 nm excitation lasers. The signals were collected through a 50× microscope objective (Olympus SLMPLN, NA = 0.35) for low-temperature measurements (from room temperature to 80 K). Also, for the low-temperature analysis, samples were placed in a Linkam stage with a liquid nitrogen supply while cooling and heating and pumped to 5 × 10 -3 Torr during the measurement. Additionally, for electrostatic gating, the electrical bias was applied using a Keithley 2450 sourcemeter. An OmegaScope Smart SPM (AIST-NT) setup was used for topography scans. For near-field PL measurements, Au coated OMNI-TERS probes (APP Nano) were used in the identical AFM setup coupled to a far-field Horiba confocal microscope with a 633 nm excitation laser. For the cryogenic PL (from 80K to 1.6 K), time-resolved PL, and g For the TEM analysis, the as-grown MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructure films were transferred to Quantifoil Cu TEM grids using a PMMA-assisted wet transfer method First-principles calculations are performed by using the VASP code 