Achieving kJ/mol accuracy in the cohesive energy of molecular crystals, as necessary for crystal structure prediction and the resolution of polymorphism, is an ongoing challenge in computational materials science. Here, we evaluate the performance of second-order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory (MP2), including its spin-component scaled models, by calculating the cohesive energies of the 23 molecular crystals contained in the X23 dataset. Our calculations are performed with periodic boundary conditions and Brillouin zone sampling, and we converge results to the thermodynamic limit and the complete basis set limit to an accuracy of about 1 kJ/mol (0.25 kcal/mol), which is rarely achieved in previous MP2 calculations of molecular crystals. Comparing to experimental cohesive energies, we find that MP2 has a mean absolute error of 12.9 kJ/mol, which is comparable to that of DFT using the PBE functional and TS dispersion correction. Separate scaling of the opposite-spin and same-spin components of the correlation energy, with parameters previously determined for molecular interactions, reduces the mean absolute error to 9.5 kJ/mol, and reoptimizing the spin-component scaling parameters for the X23 set further reduces the mean absolute error to 7.5 kJ/mol. Molecular crystals are periodic arrangements of molecules bound by weak, noncovalent interactions. They play an important role in the pharmaceutical industry, and their unique electronic and optical properties are of interest for the development of molecular optoelectronics. Density functional theory (DFT) Recently, our group reported a periodic MP2 study of the benzene crystal, Our calculations were performed using PySCF where ) are electron repulsion integrals, and ε k i i are HF orbital energies. The primed summation indicates conservation of crystal momentum such that where G is a reciprocal lattice vector. For each N k , we have verified that the HF energy is converged at the QZ level and we extrapolate the MP2 correlation energy. Specifically, we perform a series of MP2 calculations with increasing X, and we extrapolate the correlation energy to the CBS limit using the two-point X -3 form, where X = 3, 4 (i.e., TZ and QZ). The CBS HF and MP2 energies are then extrapolated to the TDL assuming finite-size errors that decay as which is consistent with our use of a Madelung constant correction for the integrable divergence in the HF exchange. An example of the CBS and TDL extrapolations is shown in figure Large systems in the X23 dataset required special attention because their high computational costs precludes study of appropriately large basis sets and k-point meshes. For example, the largest unit cell in the dataset, pyrazole, contains 80 atoms and 5872 basis functions at the QZ level. Therefore, for large systems like these, we employed a composite correction scheme to estimate the TDL/CBS limit, (5) the accuracy of which is illustrated in figure where E cell is the total crystal energy per cell, E crystal mol+ghost is the energy of the molecule in its crystal geometry including basis functions from its first nearest-neighbor shell of ghost atoms, and the final term in parentheses (a molecular relaxation energy) is the energy difference between the molecule in the crystal geometry and its most stable gas phase geometry (without any ghost atoms). We note our sign convention is such that the cohesive energy E coh is the (positive) energy required to dissociate the crystal into its constituent molecules. All geometries used are obtained from the original X23 paper, Before comparing to experiment and assessing the accuracy of spin-component scaling, we first pause to note that-in contrast to periodic, canonical MP2-the many-body expansion (MBE) has been one of the most popular formalisms for correlated calculations of molecular crystals. In table I, we present a comparison of the cohesive energies of three commonly studied molecular crystals and find that the agreement between our own periodic calculations and ) of the molecular crystals in the X23 dataset using MP2 and four modified MP2 models: the scaled-opposite spin (SOS) model, the MBE calculations from Ref. 47 is excellent. When we use PBE-TS structures (as we do throughout the rest of this work), the differences are 4.9, 1.1, and 4.4 kJ/mol, for ammonia, carbon dioxide, and benzene, respectively. When we repeat our calculations with the same CSD structures, the difference is reduced to 0.2, 0.3, and 0.5 kJ/mol. However, upon extending this comparison to the rest of the X23 dataset, we find that some of the CSD structures used in Ref. 47 have extremely large molecular relaxation energies, yielding abnormally bad cohesive energies. We thus suggest that unoptimized CSD geometries should be used with caution, and postpone a detailed comparison with MBE to future work. We conclude that kJ/mol agreement is possible with tightly converged MBE or periodic calculations, but that alternative geometries can cause differences of about 5 kJ/mol or more. To demonstrate the challenge of kJ/mol agreement, in the bottom half of table I, we also show MP2 cohesive energies from a few other reports in the literature, which commonly differ by 5-15 kJ/mol. Having shown an example of our own convergence in figure 1 and demonstrated good agreement (sub kJ/mol) with similarly converged MBE results, we now turn to a comparison with experimental cohesive energies. In figure In table II, we collect performance statistics of MP2 and the spin scaling variants, along with those of DFT results with various dispersion corrections. We see that SCS(MI)-MP2 In contrast, the improved performance for hydrogenbonded crystals can likely be attributed to the ability of HF to capture some amount of polarization and electrostatics. Rather remarkably, DFT with the PBE functional and dispersion corrections largely outperforms MP2-based methods. Specifically, we see that PBE-TS In figure where γ = E os /E ss , and γ is typically 3-3.5 (see Ref. 13 and figure Approximate conservation of correlation energy has been widely regarded as a good practice for mixing different energy components, with the most famous example being hybrid DFT. When δ = 0, nonzero corrections can be obtained by a theory that disregards the conservation of the MP2 correlation energy, but such a theory is at risk of uncompensated, abnormally large corrections as seen in SCS(MI)-MP2. With all these observations in mind, we assess the extent to which further improvement is possible by a reoptimization of the spin-scaling parameters. In figure In summary, we have presented cohesive energies of 23 molecular crystals at the MP2 level of theory, with careful attention paid to basis set and finite-size errors. For our chosen geometries, we believe our results are converged to better than 2 kJ/mol. We hope that these results will serve as useful benchmarks in future applications of wavefunction methods for molecular crystals and other solids. Importantly, we have emphasized that the cohesive energy of different but reasonable geometries can differ by 5 kJ/mol or more, which presents a challenge for precise comparisons between calculated or experimental values. With regards to performance, we have demonstrated the well-known trend of MP2 to overbind, resulting in an overestimation of the cohesive energy by about 10-20 kJ/mol on average. Separate scaling of spin components approximately halves this error, making predictions with 5-10 kJ/mol accuracy possible. Although we proposed a new spin scaling prescription, we note that optimization against experimental values is imperfect, for reasons discussed throughout the text, and the degree to which this new model is transferable to other problems is unknown. Although we have demonstrated that kJ/mol accuracy cannot be reliably obtained within the family of spin-component scaled MP2 methods, we anticipate applications of regularized MP2 The Supporting Information is available free of charge at [publisher inserts link]. Cohesive energies for all 23 crystals at all levels of theory discussed, basis set and thermodynamic limit convergence testing, and discussion on the spin scaling correction to the cohesive energy. The authors declare no competing financial interest. The most computationally efficient pair of k-point sampling meshes for extrapolation is obtained by screening a range of "viable" k-point meshes. We define "viable" meshes as those for which the number of k-points along each axis is roughly inversely proportional to the corresponding lattice constants of the unit cell. All such exploratory calculations are done with a minimal basis set, and the most efficient choice of k-point mesh pairs for production calculations is determined from the smallest k-point mesh pair with an extrapolation error smaller than 2 kJ/mol with respect to a dense k-point mesh pair. An example for ethyl carbamate is shown in figure Figure S1. Extrapolation errors from "viable" k-point mesh pairs for ethyl carbamate crystal, whose lattice constants are a = 5.009 Å, b = 6.954 Å, and c = 7.418 Å. From this data, we choose 211/322 as the most efficient k-point mesh pair for production calculations. As discussed in the main text, when the calculation at the larger k-point mesh with N k,2 points is not possible in the QZ basis, we apply the composite correction in equation (5). The error of this approximation can be assessed on molecular crystals for which the large calculation is possible (13 crystals in a) Electronic mail: hzyechem@gmail.com b) Electronic mail: t.berkelbach@columbia.edu total). In the main text figure 2, we showed an example for ammonia including the estimated TDL/CBS cohesive energy using the composite corrected N k,2 /QZ value. The error in the cohesive energy due to this composite correction is shown in figure S2 for all 13 crystals for which it is accessible. Results reported in the main text were obtained using TZ/QZ extrapolation. In figure Numerical values of the cohesive energies of all 23 molecular crystals at all discussed levels of theory (plus experiment) are given in table Let γ = E Let X denote spin scaling prescription specified by coefficients (c X ss , c X os ), which are listed in table (S2) The spin scaling correction to the cohesive energy reads where we have discarded the relaxation energy whose contribution to ∆E X coh is small. The values of γ mol and γ cell for the entire X23 set are plotted in figure The parameter δ is small but positive for the entire X23 set (figure where The first term ∆E X coh,α thus reflects how much the spin scaled correlation energy deviates from the bare MP2, while the second term is proportional to (c X ss -c X os )δ. From figure S4(c) we see that α SOS ≈ α SCS ≈ 1, consistent with the two methods approximately conserving the MP2 correlation energy, while α SCS(MI) ≈ 0.6. As a result, ∆E X coh,α vanishes for both SOS and SCS-MP2, while being a large negative value for SCS(MI)-MP2. The second term, on the other hand follows a trend where the sign change for SCS(MI)-MP2 is due to the flipped spin scaling coefficients (table 