Ferromagnetic metal-superconductor heterostructure with spin-orbit coupling is a promising candidate for topological superconductivity. Inspired by recent experimental progress in layered van der Waals metalsuperconductor heterostructures, we study the interplay between the interface Rashba hopping and the intrinsic Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling and demonstrate rich topological phases with five distinct Chern numbers. In particular, we find a topological state with the Chern number as large as four in a range of parameter space. We calculate the Berry curvatures that construct the Chern numbers and show that these Berry curvatures induce anomalous thermal Hall transport of the superconducting quasiparticles. We reveal chiral edge states in the topological phase and helical edge states in the topologically trivial phase, and show that the wave functions of these edge states mostly concentrate on the ferromagnetic metal layer of the heterostructure. Topological superconductors with Majorana modes have attracted much interest recently due to their possible applications in topological quantum computation Topological superconductors with nontrivial Chern numbers usually require a chiral superconducting gap functions In these heterostructures, spin-orbit coupling is the central ingredient for topological superconductivity. Previous theoretical proposals for the required spin-orbit coupling fall into two distinct mechanisms. Firstly, there can be intrinsic spinorbit coupling in the metal layer of the heterostructure, such as the surface states of the three-dimensional topological insulator and the spin-orbit coupling semiconductor. Then a proper Zeeman energy can turn the system into the topological state Instead, there is Rashba spin-orbit hopping between the halfmetal and the conventional superconductor. The heterostructure will enter the topological superconducting phase when the half-metal has an odd number of Fermi surfaces. Recently, there has been considerable progress in the experimental realization of heterostructures between conventional superconductors and layered van der Waals (vdW) ferromagnetic materials The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the ferromagnetic metal and s-wave superconductor two-layer model that is considered in the work, and we show the phase diagram which exhibits topological states with different Chern numbers. In Sec. III, we show the Berry curvatures in the momentum space which construct the Chern numbers and the anomalous thermal Hall conductivity governed by these Berry curvatures. In Sec. IV, we demonstrate the dispersion of the edge states with open boundary conditions in one direction and show the real-space distribution of the edge state wave functions. Finally, we give a summary in Sec. V. In the designs of realistic topological superconducting systems, one of the main theoretical proposals is the heterostructure of conventional superconductors and spin-orbit coupling semiconductors. In these designs, the central ingredient is the spin-orbit coupling. To be specific, there are two different methods to incorporate spin-orbit coupling into the system. One proposal is to consider a semiconductor with intrinsic spin-orbit coupling where ⟨i j⟩ represents the nearest-neighboring sites, t 1 is the nearest-neighbor hopping energy, α and γ represent the spin index, μ 1 is the chemical potential, M z is the effective Zeeman energy, β represents to the strength of Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling, σ αγ corresponds to Pauli matrices in spin space, and d i j is a unit vector which can be written as (-(i x -j x ), i y -j y , 0). The lattice constants are set to unity. The s-wave superconducting layer is described by the Hamiltonian where t 2 is the nearest-neighbor hopping energy, μ 2 is the chemical potential, and Δ represents the superconducting order parameter. The two layers are coupled through electron hopping and the Hamiltonian can be written as where α 0 and α 1 represent the hopping parameters for spinflip hopping and spin-conserving hopping when electrons hopping across the interlayer, respectively, d ′ i j can be written as (i x -j x , i y -j y , 0), is the unit projection vector from j to i in x -y plane. This vector represents an electron hopping that resembles the form of Rashba spin-orbit coupling. The total Hamiltonian for the model in real space can be written as H = H FM + H SC + H I . It can be transformed into the momentum space when we consider periodic boundary conditions. In the presence of superconductivity, it is more convenient to formulate the total Hamiltonian in the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) form, which is written as where we define the Nambu spinor operator , and the mean-field BdG Hamiltonian is written as and τ, s, σ are Pauli matrices in the particle-hole, layer, and spin degrees of freedom, respectively. The topology of this two-layer system is characterized by the BdG Hamiltonian H BdG ( k), which is effectively a single particle Hamiltonian with particle-hole symmetry. The system has a Zeeman energy which breaks the time-reversal symmetry. As a result, the chiral symmetry of the system is also broken, and the system belongs to the D class (6) The summation of the Berry curvatures of bands with negative energies provides the Chern number of the system. We calculate the Chern number of the BdG Hamiltonian and find that this two-layer system exhibits multiple topological phases with different Chern numbers. This complicated phase diagram comes from the competition between the intra-layer Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling and the inter-layer Rashba spin-orbit hopping. To reveal this competition, we demonstrate phase diagrams for the Chern number with four typical parameters in Fig. where Similarly, we can also solve the secular equation to obtain the phase boundary between the topologically trivial phase and the topological phase with the C = -2 (the gap closes at X points) as where and b 3 = α 4 0 . We notice that these expressions resemble the phase boundaries for the single-layer system where θ = arctan(β √︃ (sin k 2 x + sin k 2 y )/M z ), and n = (sin k x , sin k y , 0)/ √︃ sin k 2 x + sin k 2 y is a unit vector. After this unitary transformation, the Hamiltonian is written as where We notice that both Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling and the Rashba spin-orbit inter-layer hopping are now transformed to the off-diagonal 2 × 2 block of the Hamiltonian. The model is now equivalent to the half-metal/superconductor system introduced by Ref. [40], where the spin-orbit inter-layer hopping is a combination of the Dresselhaus and the Rashba terms. By simplifying the h 12 in Eq. ( ) Now it is clear that the off-diagonal elements of the h 12 term are topologically equivalent to sin k y + i sin k x or sin k y -i sin k x , depending on the relative sign of the two coefficients in Eq. (13). For two distinct cases, the system corresponds to effective p + i p and p -i p chiral topological superconductivity, and their corresponding Chern numbers are plus and minus one, respectively. The phase transition condition is the zero for the imaginary part which is written as This function provides a rough analytical understanding of the phase boundaries between C = 1 and C = -1 in Fig. The topological phase diagram with different Chern numbers can be understood more clearly by checking the Berry curvatures in the momentum space. For this purpose, we illustrate Berry curvatures for typical Chern numbers in Fig. The Berry curvatures are important to transport properties. The anomalous thermal Hall conductivity is related to the Berry curvatures through the formula where f (E nk , T) = 1/(e E nk /T + 1) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution at temperature T, f ′ is its derivative with respect to E nk , E nk and Ω nk are energy and the Berry curvature in momentum space with the energy band index n, respectively. We show the temperature dependence of anomalous thermal Hall conductivity with different Chern numbers in Fig. For open boundary systems, the bulk-edge correspondence predicts the chiral Majorana modes in the class D topological states with nonzero Chern numbers For larger Chern numbers of C = 2, we find two chiral Majorana edge states propagating in the same direction, as shown in Fig. Finally, we analyze the results of topological trivial states. For Chern number equals zero, the simple analysis would expect the absence of edge states. This is indeed the case for most topologically trivial states as shown in Fig. This one-dimensional Hamiltonian has both particle-hole symmetry and chiral symmetry. We can define particle-hole operator P = τ x s 0 σ 0 κ, where κ is the complex conjugation operator, and the particle-hole symmetry is explicitly written as H (k x ) = -PH (-k x ) P † . The chiral operator is defined as Ĉ = τ x s 0 σ 0 , and the Chiral symmetry is written as H (k x ) = -ĈH (k x ) Ĉ-1 . The combination of these two symmetry operations gives H (k x ) = H ⊤ (-k x ), which suggests that the one dimensional Hamiltonian H (k x ) belongs to class BDI We calculate the winding number for Fig. Since we are studying the two-layer system, we would like to examine the distribution of the wave functions of the edge states. In Fig. In summary, we have studied a double-layer model consisting of spin-orbit coupling ferromagnetic metal and s-wave superconductor. The ferromagnetic metal layer has the intrinsic Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling, while the two layers have the Rahsba spin-orbit interlayer hopping. We calculated the Chern numbers of the system and demonstrated the phase diagrams. We found topological phases with five different Chern numbers. In particular, we found that the Chern number can be as large as four if the parameters of the systems are well controlled. We illustrated the Berry curvatures and showed that there are non-vanishing Berry curvature distributions in the momentum space even in the topologically trivial regime. We calculated the thermal Hall conductivity governed by the Berry curvatures. We revealed the chiral Majorana edge states protected by Chern numbers and by the winding numbers. We found that the wave functions of these edge states mostly distribute in the ferromagnetic metal layer. 0 /t 1 = 1/4, and μ 2 /t 2 = 1. (d) the near half-filled regime with μ 2 = 0 while other parameters are taken the same as (b).