The lattice dynamics of the superconducting materials LaFeSiH and LaFeSiO 1-δ as well as their intermetallic precursor LaFeSi are investigated by polarized Raman spectroscopy and first-principles calculations, together with X-ray and advanced electron diffraction techniques for their structural analysis. We find that the Fe-dominated Raman-active modes reflect the chemical peculiarities of these silicides compared to their pnictide counterparts, with enhanced structural couplings between the FeSi layer and the spacer that can be related to the ionic vs covalent character of the latter. In addition, we find signatures of enhanced electron-phonon coupling for some of the Raman-active modes. Beyond that, our study reveals intriguing Fe-based Raman features as well as structural subtleties in LaFeSiH suggesting that this superconductor may formally be non-centrosymmetric. Introduction. -Iron-based superconductors provide a distinct realization of unconventional superconductivity In this paper, we address the dynamical structural properties of the FeSi-based superconductors together with that of their LaFeSi precursor by means of polarized Raman spectroscopy combined with density-functionaltheory (DFT) calculations and advanced diffraction techniques. The measured phonon frequencies as well as the observed selection rules are found to be in good agreement with the calculations. In LaFeSiH, however, we observe a Raman Fe-based feature displaying an intriguing double-peak shape. Driven by this observation, we revisit the crystal structure of this system by means of electron and X-ray diffraction. Furthermore, we elucidate the structural coupling between the FeSi layer and the LaX spacer in these systems from the trends of the phonon energies, which we discuss also in relation to the ionic vs covalent character of the spacer as a function of its precise composition (X = empty site, H, or O). In addition, the relative strength of the electron-phonon interaction is discussed from the Fano shape observed for some of the Ramanactive modes. Methods. -Single crystals of the intermetallic LaFeSi were extracted from the bulk of an arc-melted sample with nominal composition La 35 Fe 35 Si 30 . LaFeSiH single crystals were then obtained by hydrogenation of these crystals at 250°C under a gas flow of H 2 for 4h. Both the LaFeSi precursor and the LaFeSiH superconductor crystallize in the tetragonal ZrCuSiAs-type structure as confirmed from single-crystal X-ray diffraction. The samples have sub-millimeter size and a plate-like shape with the larger faces perpendicular to the crystallographic c-axis. The LaFeSiO samples, however, are from the same batch as Ref. The Raman spectra of small single crystals were measured under a microscope attached to a WITec (Model: alpha 300R) confocal Raman spectrometer. A 532 nm laser line was used for the excitation. The laser power was kept below 1 mW in order to avoid local overheating and/or damaging the crystals. Macro-Raman as a function of temperature was performed on a triple-stage spectrometer and in a cryo-free cryostat down to 9 K. Different polarizations of the light and orientations of the samples were investigated to access the symmetries of the excitations. Precession electron diffraction tomography (PEDT) was performed with a JEOL F200 cold-FEG transmission electron microscope operated at 200 kV, equipped with a NANOMEGAS DigiStar precession module and a GATAN RIO16 camera. Samples for PEDT investigations were prepared by smoothly crushing powder. PEDT data was processed using the programs PETS 2.0 The DFT calculations were performed with the Quantum ESPRESSO package Preliminaries. -We first recall the nature of the Γpoint phonons expected in our systems and their Raman selection rules. The systems under consideration represent the FeSi-based counterparts of previous 111 and 1111 Fe-based superconductors with P 4/nmm crystal structure (D 4h point group) In our experiments, the c-axis of the samples is parallel to Poynting vector of the light. The E g modes, which are strongly affected by magnetism in BaFe 2 As 2 Γ-point modes La (2c) selection rules as summarized in Table Fe/H/O 1g according to the main contribution to these displacements. However, these modes generally have a mixed character with dominant and subdominant displacements of different atoms (Fe-X and Si-La). LaFeSi precursor. -The Figure Superconducting LaFeSiH. -The polarized Raman spectra obtained from single crystals of LaFeSiH are shown in Figure In the measured spectra, however, the B Fe 1g mode at ∼228 cm -1 appears as a double-peak feature. This is surprising because, even if this mode involves dominant Fe and subdominant H displacements, it should be a single non-degenerate mode. Accordingly, a symmetry breaking, for example, cannot produce such splitting. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. Fig. Table LaFeSiH LaFeSiO Frequency (cm -1 ) Mode Frequency (cm -1 ) Mode Frequency (cm probed symmetries, which is consistent with the absence of a structural transition associated with magnetism re- ported in However, according to the above, that feature cannot be easily explained within the P 4/nmm structural model of LaFeSiH and hence questions the accuracy of such a model. Thus, we used PEDT to carefully revisit the structure of this system. As explained in the Supplemental Material, the analysis of the PEDT data confirms the atomic positions and the site occupancies previously derived from X-ray diffraction However, due to their very weak intensity in both PEDT and X-ray diffraction, we could not determine the crystal structure of these systems more accurately. At the same time, we note that the extra reflections could also be due to the presence of stacking faults along c. In any case, the actual structure of these systems seems to be immeasurably close to P 4/nmm while the Raman double-peak feature observed in LaFeSiH is visibly a much stronger effect. These observations then remain open questions. Superconducting LaFeSiO. -The polarized Raman spectra obtained from LaFeSiO are shown in Fig. The B O 1g mode is not immediately identifiable given the present data. This mode is expected at 272 cm -1 according to our calculations and should be observable in the same configuration as the B Fe 1g mode. We do observe intensity at 262 cm -1 but it is more likely attributed to a "leakage" of the A Si 1g (marked with a losange in Fig. Comparative analysis. -To gain further insight about the structural properties of the above systems, we perform a comparative analysis in this section. The most relevant Raman features are summarized in Fig. First, we discuss the modes associated with the FeSi layer. We note that the frequency of the B Fe 1g mode in LaFeSi and LaFeSiH is comparable to that of the reference compounds LaFeAsO (201 cm -1 ) and SmFeAsO (208 cm -1 ) reported in Next, we discuss the modes associated with the spacer. The A La 1g becomes progressively harder from LaFeSi, to LaFeSiH then to LaFeSiO. This can be related to the insertion of the light element within the spacer and its electronegativity. The observed trend then suggests that the ionic character of the spacer increases with increasing electronegativity of the inserted element, thereby hardening the A La 1g mode. At the same time, we also note that the frequency of this mode in LaFeSiO is higher compared to that in LaFeAsO. This can be associated with the subdominant contribution of the Si displacements, which again suggests an enhanced structural coupling between the FeSi layer and the spacer. Since this is eventually determined by the corresponding chemical bonds, the electronic structure of these silicides can be expected to be more three- • 1 q 2 for the two A1g modes mainly associated with La and Si. The corresponding fits are shown in Fig. These differences can be due to enhanced electronphonon couplings for these particular Γ-point modes. In relation to superconductivity, however, the most relevant couplings involve the Fe-dominated modes and, in any case, the strength of the overall coupling according to DFT calculations remains too weak to explain the superconducting T c of LaFeSiH for example Conclusion. -Our combined analysis of the lattice dynamics of Fe-based superconducting silicides reveals that, compared with their arsenide counterparts, the structural coupling between the FeSi layer and the spacer is stronger. This dynamics is also found to be affected by the change from covalent to more ionic bonds within the spacer across the LaFeSiX series (X = empty site, H, and O). Consequently, despite their layered structure, the effective 2D behavior is different in these systems. Intriguingly, the Raman spectrum of LaFeSiH displays a doublepeak feature that cannot be easily explained according to the ideal P 4/nmm crystal structure of these systems. Besides, detailed electron and X-ray diffraction suggests that the structure may in reality be non-centrosymmetric. Thus, it would be interesting to determine the structure of these systems more accurately and, if the absence of centrosymmetry is confirmed, to further investigate the superconducting properties of Fe-based silicides from that perspective.