Electrochemical reactions represent essential processes in fundamental chemistry that foster a wide range of applications. Although most electrochemical reactions in bulk substances can be well described by the classical Marcus-Gerischer charge transfer theory, the realistic reaction character and mechanism in dimensionally confined systems remain unknown. Here, we report 1 / 20 The development of modern science and technology benefits vastly from the quantitative understanding on natural phenomena and the acquisition of basic regularities behind the world. In analytical chemistry, however, quantitative understanding on the degradation behavior in bulk substances still represents an attractive but challenging topic. First, it is arduous to fully monitor the degradation processes because they are essentially multiparametric and rely on a plethora of parameters More formidably, the frontal reaction boundaries naturally evolve into hidden planes inside materials, restricting a direct implementation of reaction tracking. All factors pose grand challenges in quantifying the degradation kinetics in bulk substances. While two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals materials are being exploited for many emerging applications To date, most studies on the degradation behavior of 2D monolayers have been carried out via less efficient micro-zone techniques, such as atomic force microscope (AFM) Here, we report comprehensive survey on the kinetics of photooxidation in 2D WS2 and MoS2 through environment-controlled photoluminescent (PL) imaging inside a glovebox. The ad hoc defect engineering on [V] levels and on-demand controls over the environmental factors allow us to fully access a wide parameter space for quantitative analyses. On the basis of the systematic data, we managed to formulize the lateral oxidation rate as a function of various crystallographic (i.e., [V]) and environmental [i.e., relative humidity (RH), temperature (T), and illumination fluence (F)] parameters, which thus enables an insight into the roles of lattice vacancies and absorbed aqueous oxygen during degradation. Moreover, we identify the presence of conditional boundaries [V]~3×10 14 cm -2 and RH~46% that determine the practical oxidation modes (i.e., peripheral or basal) and reaction mechanism (i.e., dry or wet), respectively. Most importantly, through contrastive analyses on the reaction barriers and band alignments in the two structurally identical 2D semiconductors (WS2 and MoS2), we unravel an unusual non-Marcusian charge transfer mechanism in these dimensionally confined systems due to limit in reactant supplies, which represents an important correction to the classical reaction theory. Apart from the technical contributions for reliability evaluation and corrosion protection, these findings also add knowledge into fundamental science. Methodology and material characterization. Figure Figure N. Xu et al., Nature Communications, 14, 4074 (2023) Full text at https://rdcu.be/dguOJ The material crystallinity in the oxidized areas is completely destroyed and a full amorphous state is detected from the circular STEM diffraction patterns (top inset of Fig. In contrast, the crystallinity is well preserved in the unoxidized areas, as corroborated by the spotted diffraction patterns (bottom inset of Fig. Evidently, the full exposure of lattice atoms in 2D semiconductors represents a unique advantage to address the reaction character and mechanism. A comprehensive survey was performed on the oxidation kinetics versus various parameters, including [V], RH, T, F and photon energy (Fig. [V] levels enable the entire reaction process to accelerate and unfold within a short time of minutes or hours, as compared to, otherwise, months in the pristine states. Since the precise control and identification of [V] levels are essential for the quantitative characterization, we first prepared defect engineered WS2 monolayers with various [V] levels. Here, we employed an aberration-corrected STEM to estimate the generation rate of [V] versus the pretreatment time (tpt) in H2O2 soaking. Figure Note that both single-and double-sided sulfur vacancies would correspond to individual reactive sites during the oxidation reaction. The generation rate of reactive sites is then assessed by counting the density of single-sided lattice vacancies per pretreatment time. Figure Apart from the crystallographic parameter [V], the influences of environmental factors (i.e., RH, F, and T) on r1L are also quantitatively understood (Fig. This implies that the 2D disulfides would sustain greatly reduced degradation in surroundings at RH below 46%, constituting useful guidance for corrosion protection. In the broad RH range covered, we also accessed regimes with different response linearity. A linear relation r 1L ∝ (RH -RH 0 ) is present in the intermediate RH levels, while r1L becomes saturated at high RH levels. We attribute the deviation of the linear trend at high RH levels to the excessive supply of water molecules, which leads to the saturation of reactants (e.g., the aqueous superoxide anions O 2-). To rationalize r1L completely, we further consider the effect of T. At first, we exclude the possibility of remarkable T rise induced by photothermal effect. The T rise under typical F levels is simulated to be less than 0.1 K (Supplementary Note 11 and Fig. α 1L e -E a kT where A = e 28±1 m 4 •s 2 •(kg) -2 is a prefactor accounting for parameters not addressed explicitly, β = 2.17 g•K•J -1 •es(T)•T -1 is inserted for the algebraic conversion from RH to AH, and es(T) is the T dependent saturation vapor pressure, in unit of Pa. For the two exponential terms, the former reflects the crucial role of chalcogen vacancies in the degradation process and the latter is a natural result of the Arrhenius plot to reflect E a . This semi-empirical equation can be used as guidance for evaluating reliability and service expectancy in electronic devices A few discrepancies are also observed. In general, r1L in MoS2 is much higher than in WS2 (Fig. α 1L e -E a kT where H() denotes the Heaviside step function, used to describe its quick saturation behavior. In this case, the prefactor A = e 4.2±0.3 Pa -1 , the characteristic vacancy factor α 1L = 3.7×10 It is well known that the WS2 and MoS2 monolayers share several physical features, such as lattice structure and bandgap (~2.0 eV) Preparation of few-layer disulfides. Except for the CVD samples used in XPS characterization, all the other WS2 and MoS2 flakes were mechanically exfoliated from synthesized crystals using viscoelastic poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) as supports. The use of viscoelastic supports helps to achieve large-area and atomically thin flakes with high yields. The ample supplies of 1L disulfide flakes laid the material foundation for this study where a huge quantity of samples were required. To avoid possible contamination, the freshly exfoliated flakes attached on the PDMS supports with clean surfaces (Supplementary Fig. were directly used for defect engineering and oxidation tests without further transfer. High-resolution STEM imaging. The top-view STEM samples for atomic imaging were prepared by transfer or H2O2-pretreated monolayers from silicon substrates onto 200-mesh copper STEM grids through polymer poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) as transfer medium (Supplementary Figs. For each condition, 30 independent local regions of an area of 4×4 nm 2 were adopted for [V] statistics (Supplementary Figs. 9-14 for WS2 and Supplementary Figs. 34-37 for MoS2). The independent regions were randomly selected from clean portions free of polymer residues. The spatial distance of the regions ranges from 100 nm to 10 μm, dependent on the surface condition and imaging quality of the samples. On average, 2-5 samples were used for each condition to ensure experimental reproducibility. N.