Performance limitations for implanted antennas, taking radiation efficiency as the metric, are presented. The performance limitations use a convex optimization procedure with the current density inside the implant acting as its degree of freedom. The knowledge of the limitations provides useful information in design procedure and physical insight. Ohmic losses in the antenna and surrounding tissue are both considered and quantitatively compared. The interaction of all parts of the system is taken into account in a full-wave manner via the hybrid computation method. The optimization framework is thoroughly tested on a realistic implanted antenna design that is treated both experimentally and as a model in a commercial electromagnetic solver. Good agreement is reported. To demonstrate the feasibility of developed performance limitations, they are compared to the performance of a loop and a dipole antenna showing the importance of various loss mechanisms during the design process. The trade-off between tissue loss and antenna ohmic loss indicates critical points at which the optimal solution drastically changes and the chosen topology for a specific design should be changed. significantly from antennas operating in free space. Of particular interest for this paper are the performance limitations on the maximum power density of electromagnetic (EM) waves reaching free space from implanted antennas Until recently, performance limitations for implanted antennas have only been treated considering elementary sources A popular methodology for evaluating performance limitations is to find the optimal solution for a specific scenario. For instance, the optimal current density within an allowed volume can be obtained using an electric field integral equation (EFIE) formulation combined with a quadratic optimization scheme. This has, however, the disadvantage that in the case of implanted devices, the method of moments (MoM) formulation used to solve the EFIE will require a large number 1 of unknowns to account for the interaction of the electrically small implant with a potentially large host body 2 . To overcome the computation difficulties, a hybrid method Fig. The aim of this work is to use the hybrid method as formalized in The framework employs previously developed optimization schemes This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the used model and the basis of the numerical tools used later. Their description is necessary to understand the following sections. Section III stresses the importance of finite metal conductivity of the current-supporting region and consequences. The method verification is done in Section IV, which also presents results of simulations in commercially available solvers and measurement results. Further investigation and discussion in the setup for verification are given in Section V. In the context of maximizing radiation efficiency, this section provides the necessary theoretical foundation for determining optimal current density distribution within the designated design region. Modeling the wireless link between an implanted antenna and an external node is a challenging problem, resolved here using the advantages of two distinct approaches, MoM and VSWE, which are combined within the hybrid method The hybrid method allows a matrix system describing the entire scenario to be set up, including both the antenna and host body. Based on equations defining MoM, VSWE, and their interconnection, the description reads where identity and zero matrices are denoted by 1 and 0, respectively. The meaning of the individual rows is illustrated in Fig. 2) Outgoing vector spherical waves (VSWs) f 2 are generated via current vector I through the coupling matrix U 1 . 3) Incoming VSWs a 2 inside the encapsulation are generated by reflected outgoing VSWs f 2 via matrix Γ. 4) Outgoing VSWs f 1 outside the host body result from penetrating outgoing VSWs f 2 . The phenomenon is expressed by matrix Ψ. For further details about the hybrid method and the matrices, see Appendix A and Within the quadratic representation of power-like quantities in MoM and VSWE, the performance limitations are readily evaluated as in previous studies Concerning implanted antennas, radiation efficiency is one of the most important performance metrics. The performance is generally low due to the lossy tissues surrounding the antenna. The previously studied limits Within the hybrid method shown in Appendix A, ohmic losses in the antenna can also be considered and separated from the total loss. Similarly to where η rad = P rad P tot = P rad P rad + P ant + P tis , with P ant being the cycle-mean lost power in the currentsupporting region Ω Z , and P tis being the cycle-mean lost power in region Ω T . Both powers are assumed to cover conduction and polarization losses as well. The individual power terms are defined within the hybrid method as follows Note that the first term on the right-hand side of ( The relaxed system only relies on the boundary conditions between different regions, which are represented by other rows. Specifically, the equation system is used as an affine constraint in the optimization problem, while the current density vector I is optimized to maximize radiation efficiency. The explicit solution to the optimization problem is presented in Appendix C, and the computational complexity of the optimization is presented in Appendix B. Implanted antennas suffer from power dissipated in two different regions: the antenna itself and the host body. So far, only idealized EM dipole sources were considered in Let us consider two frequencies within standard medical bands: f 1 = 403 MHz and f 2 = 2.45 GHz. Further, let us consider the following example: the currentsupporting region is a copper disc with radius r swept from 0.75 mm to 7.5 mm placed in a centered spherical air bubble with radius a = 7.5 mm and implanted in spherical muscle (ε r,m = 57 -36j at frequency f 1 and ε r,m = 53 -13j at frequency f 2 ) phantom with radius R = 61.5 mm. The current-supporting region is supposed to be made of copper with a thickness much higher than skin depth and, therefore, can be modeled by a sheet of surface resistivity An interesting phenomenon is an abrupt growth in radiation efficiency at frequency f 1 for support sizes larger than r/a = 0.32. For current supports up to a radius of r/a = 0.5, it is convenient to use frequency f 2 with stable performance among different radii. In contrast, for larger sizes, the first frequency is preferred. A better physical insight into the aforementioned phenomenon is attained by analyzing the power quantities in ( and the total dissipation factor The comparison of all dissipation factors is shown in Fig. The behavior of power losses is elucidated by examining the optimal current density in scenarios with small and large current-supporting regions. For the smaller sizes, depicted in the left panels of Fig. The rationale behind this transition lies in the fact that TE 1m -like currents exhibit less coupling to the lossy dielectric host body In general, antenna loss decreases with increasing r for both TM 1m -like and TE 1m -like currents, as it allows for greater spreading of the current. Regarding computational complexity see Appendix B, where the most demanding scenario: currentsupporting region with r/a = 1 and frequency f 1 = 403 MHz is discussed. The following two sections show how to use the previously developed methodology in the real design of an implanted antenna. This provides an experimental validation of the method and also demonstrates some new features that were not observed previously. To allow for a simple experimental setup, the host body is simulated by a glass bottle filled with distilled water, see Fig. The implanted antenna, see Fig. At first, the above-mentioned antenna setup is used to validate the hybrid method used to define the fundamental bound. For this aim, the gain pattern of the antenna was measured in an anechoic chamber, see Fig. The radiation efficiency of the experimental setup, as illustrated in Fig. -60 -45 -30 -15 AToM CST FEKO meas. The dipole antenna, loop antenna, and fundamental bound correspond to varying sizes of the current support, the size of which is measured by the radius of the smallest circumscribing sphere r. The sizes are normalized to the radius of the ceramic encapsulation, i.e., at r/a = 1 the antenna fills the entire capsule. The performance of the experimental setup remains approximately 1 dB below the fundamental bound. This implies that, given the material composition and shape of the design region (disc), there is limited room for improvement. The hybrid method elucidates that the interaction with the host material is predominantly dipolar, indicating a limited dependence on the specific composition of the host body. This design is anticipated to perform similarly under realbody conditions. The difference is that the real body is not ideally spherical, and its composition is more complex than pure water. This evidence might cause a slight frequency shift and variance of tissue loss and critical point as well. Similar phenomena may happen once the encapsulation is not ideally lossless and spherical. Furthermore, introducing other conductive components inside the implant can influence the optimal current, overall maximal possible radiation efficiency, and the proportion of power dissipation in different regions. In order to understand the design principles of implanted antennas in more detail, it is worth studying the simple cases of loop and dipole antennas in Fig. Due to high antenna losses, the performance gap (distance to fundamental bound) for small electrical sizes is significant for straight dipole antennas (being comparable to tissue losses) and even wider for loop antennas. To see the reason for this behavior, it is instructive to plot how the dissipation factors, see Fig. The use of the hybrid method for the computation of radiation efficiency limitations for implanted antennas is shown in this paper. The hybrid method not only allows for a dramatic reduction of computational demands (order in magnitude faster than commercial solutions of the same setup) but also reveals different contributions of losses in the problem of an antenna radiating through lossy media. The technique is applied to a disc-like current-supporting region that is encapsulated in a dielectric and placed in the host body, i.e., a setup able to accommodate many of the practical implanted antenna designs. The paper shows how the upper bound on the radiation efficiency of all these designs can simply be evaluated. Furthermore, the paper reveals the importance of ohmic loss in the antenna proper compared to tissue loss. Varying the size of the current-supporting region, the tradeoff between ohmic losses in the antenna and the tissue drastically changes the shape of the optimal current density. The critical points were identified where the TE 1m -like current density performs better than a TM 1m -like current and viceversa. This proves the importance of the fundamental limitations on the performance of implanted antennas and the usefulness of evaluating them for the scenario before starting the design to know the bounds. The method is verified by measurement and by computation in commercial solvers, with the example being a meander dipole with a balun immersed in a phantom filled with distilled water. Great agreement is achieved for the results from the hybrid method, commercial simulators, and measurement. A detailed study of the fundamental bound on radiation efficiency in this scenario has also been done, concluding that ohmic loss in an implanted antenna must be considered in the design. MoM and T-matrix methods are described in Within MoM, the current-supporting region, see Ω Z region in Fig. Substitution of where Z 0 is the free-space impedance matrix, Z ρ is the material impedance matrix, V i is the excitation vector, and I is the unknown vector of current expansion coefficients I n . This allows for the characterization of the antenna in the free space. It should also be noted that the addition of dielectric inclusions or the use of non-spherical encapsulation can be resolved by the use of a volumetric electric field integral equation in the same way as described above. The field expansion into a set of basis functions is also applied to the T-matrix method. In this case, entire-domain basis functions are used, and the electric and magnetic fields are expanded in vector spherical harmonics where k and Z are wave number and background wave impedance, respectively, a α , f α are the expansion coefficients, and u α , u α are regular and outgoing VSWs [24, Appendix A], respectively. To describe the scenario of an implanted antenna, the relation between the field outside the body and in the implant (antenna) encapsulation is given in matrix form as with T, Γ being transmission matrices outside and inside, respectively, matrices M Ψ, Ψ T accounting for field penetrating from inside to outside or vice-versa, and a, f gathering expansion coefficients. Sub-indices "1" and "2" correspond to expansion outside and inside, respectively; see Fig. In the case of a spherically layered host body, the interaction matrices in ( The coupling of the MoM and T-matrix method is done via projection matrix U 1 defined element-wise as which maps VSWs to basis functions from MoM as The above relations are written for a particular case of outgoing VSWs and complete excitation within MoM, where V i is the direct excitation in the current-supporting region (for example, the delta-gap source). Integrating both methods necessitates using a distinct spherical boundary. This characteristic is integral to the approach for calculating performance limitations. Inside the spherical boundary, the volume is treated by MoM and outside by VSWE. This work considers the spherical lossless encapsulation with the surface current-supporting region centered inside Computation times and memory requirements are discussed in this appendix. The evaluations in AToM and CST are performed on computer using an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10700 CPU, 32.0 GB RAM and an NVIDIA T1000 (3718 MB) GPU. Computation in AToM is based on hybrid method of MoM and VSWE and subsequent optimization using QCQP. Within MoM, the considered disc current-supporting region is represented by 1026 Rao-Wilton-Glison functions To compare the time and memory requirements of different solvers for the simulation of the set-up from Fig. Computation via a hybrid approach has extremely low memory and time computation requirements compared to others, as shown in Table As seen in ( The implanted meander dipole antenna within a glass bottle filled with distilled water gain pattern is measured at a distance of 2.1 m from the reference antenna (a quad-ridge horn antenna, QH400, MVG Industries), see Fig. The reflection and transmission coefficients were measured from 2 GHz to 3 GHz, see Fig. Allowed design region, support for the optimized current density in the sense of the performance limitations defined in Section II, or simply the antenna metalization in the case of a design. Note that equation system (1) has a unique solution, which binds the excitation vector with current vector. In order to set up an upper limit to radiation efficiency of all antennas fitting the prescribed current-supporting region, this unicity must be relaxed. One of the possible ways is to skip the first row of equation system The perfect electric conductor (PEC) symmetry plane is applied to reduce the number of cells and speed up the computation.