The manipulation and control of nanoscale magnetic spin textures is of rising interest as they are potential foundational units in next-generation computing paradigms. Achieving this requires a quantitative understanding of the spin texture behavior under external stimuli using in situ experiments. Lorentz transmission electron microscopy (LTEM) enables real-space imaging of spin textures at the nanoscale, but quantitative characterization of in situ data is extremely challenging. Here, we present an AI-enabled phase-retrieval method based on integrating a generative deep image prior with an image formation forward model for LTEM. Our approach uses a single out-of-focus image for phase retrieval and achieves significantly higher accuracy and robustness to noise compared to existing methods. Furthermore, our method is capable of isolating sample heterogeneities from magnetic contrast, as shown by application to simulated and experimental data. This approach allows quantitative phase reconstruction of in situ data and can also enable near real-time quantitative magnetic imaging. Magnetic spin textures on the micro-and nano-scale are of continued importance for both a fundamental understanding of their physical behavior and for potential applications in novel computing paradigms Lorentz transmission electron microscopy (LTEM) is a powerful technique for imaging magnetic spin textures in these materials and other thin films, as it allows the simultaneous observation of magnetic domains and microstructure Phase retrieval is commonly achieved by solving the transport of intensity equation (TIE), which relates φ to a through-focal series (TFS) of images All of these phase reconstruction techniques require either multiple images, long acquisition times, or complicated experimental setups and are therefore unsuitable for in situ experiments that study the time evolution of magnetic spin textures. In many cases, a movie or a sequence of defocused LTEM images are the only data that can be collected. There exists a useful modification of the TIE, known as single image TIE (SITIE), that enables phase reconstruction for some samples In this work, we present the development and demonstration of Single Image Phase Reconstruction via Automatic Differentiation (SIPRAD): a method for reconstructing the magnetic phase shift, φ m , from a single defocused LTEM image. SIPRAD is shown to be quantitatively accurate and robust to high levels of noise across a wide defocus range. It is also uniquely able to isolate φ m in samples with amplitude and φ e variations that are present because of artifacts or sample heterogeneity. These characteristics make SIPRAD ideally suited for performing phase reconstructions from in situ experiments. Figure As described in Ulyanov et al., a DIP is a generative convolutional neural network (CNN) that is trained to create a desired image We will begin by considering a case where the amplitude and φ e are both uniform across a sample, such as for a uniformly thick flake of vdW material or amorphous film. The branch of the algorithm that reconstructs variations in the electron wave amplitude, which will be discussed further, is therefore turned off. In all cases the algorithm begins with an untrained DIP that is given an approximate phase input and which iteratively learns to output an Figure The image formation forward model begins by writing the electron exit wavefunction at the sample as ψ (r ⊥ ) = a (r ⊥ ) e iφ (r ⊥ ) , where a (r ⊥ ) is the amplitude function the electron wave that depends on the sample shape function and composition, φ the total phase shift imparted by the sample, and r ⊥ is a radial vector perpendicular to the electron beam direction, which is taken to be z. This wavefunction is then convolved with the microscope transfer function, which consists of an aperture function, phase transfer function, and damping envelope. This linear image formation model has been shown to work well for LTEM, as the deflection angle due to the Lorentz force is very small compared to that of the diffracted beams Our goal is to reconstruct φ m and, for samples with uniform amplitude and uniform φ e , a single DIP is sufficient because φ ∼ φ m except for a uniform offset. The SIPRAD method also provides a way to simultaneously reconstruct φ m and separate it from the non-uniform amplitude function and φ e that arise from sample heterogeneity and contamination. For the examples in this work, we assume that the origin of a non-uniform electron wave amplitude are particles on the sample surface which also contribute an electrostatic phase shift. This is a situation that frequently arises when performing cryogenic LTEM. For these cases, the optional amplitude reconstruction branch can be enabled. A second DIP is then trained to output an amplitude map that corresponds to surface contaminants, which is both input directly into the forward model and also scaled to generate the φ e induced by the contaminants. This method works because a non-uniform amplitude is required to accurately reproduce the very low image intensity that occurs at the location of surface contaminants, and from this amplitude map we can also approximate φ e , which is added to φ m to give the total phase shift that is input to the forward model. The amplitude DIP thus learns to generate the image contrast from the contaminants while the phase DIP learns to output the phase shift corresponding to the magnetic contrast. We have chosen to focus on the case of surface contaminants that generate both a non-uniform amplitude and a contribution to φ e , but we believe this method could be adapted and extended to account for sources that generate only a non-uniform φ e , such as variations in local electrostatic potential in multiferroics, or only a non-uniform amplitude, for example bend contours that generate strong amplitude contrast but do not contribute to the Aharonov-Bohm phase shift. We first compare the phase retrieval accuracy of SIPRAD and SITIE for stripe domains in a simulated, uniformly thick CGT sample. Figure The SIPRAD approach reconstructs the phase with slightly higher accuracy than the SITIE approach, but both techniques perform well. The integrated induction map, however, is much more accurate for SIPRAD than for SITIE, and this is confirmed in Fig. We next demonstrate the application of the SIPRAD method to a more experimentally-relevant, noisy input image. Fig. For this simple example, SIPRAD outperforms SITIE with respect to the accuracy of both the phase shift and the integrated magnetic induction maps for all cases. The SIPRAD technique accurately determines the location and width of the domain walls, which can be important when trying to use domain information to calculate magnetic material parameters such as the micromagnetic exchange stiffness To better compare the accuracy of the SIPRAD and SITIE techniques, we compute the accuracy of both the reconstructed phase and the in-plane integrated magnetic induction for a wide range of defocus and noise values. There are several noise sources that contribute to LTEM images, including Poisson, Gaussian, and salt & pepper noise. We have found that SIPRAD performs similarly well when given an input with equal amounts of either pure Gaussian noise or a mix of noise types, while SITIE performs slightly better for pure Gaussian noise (see Supplementary Section S1). Gaussian noise was therefore used in the following accuracy measurements as it is easier to quantify. The level of Gaussian noise refers to the standard deviation of the noise distribution relative to the mean image intensity. Figure For both reconstruction methods, noise is more impactful at low defocus values. This is because the intensity of the magnetic contrast increases with increased defocus. At ∆z = -100 μm, even small amounts of noise can completely obscure the magnetic contrast in the image, which is why real-world LTEM imaging is normally performed at relatively high defocus values, outside the small defocus limit within which the SITIE approach is accurate. The SIPRAD technique, by contrast, shows an increase in accuracy up to, and beyond, a defocus of -1 mm, meaning that it is most accurate for real-world imaging conditions. Likewise, the SIPRAD technique maintains a high accuracy in both the reconstructed phase images and the in-plane integrated magnetic induction maps up to noise values approaching 100%. Both of these trends are also reflected when measuring accuracy using the structural similarity index measure (SSIM), as shown in Supplementary Section S2. The SIPRAD method is accurate when reconstructing the phase shift from images taken at high defocus, which means that it can be applied to samples with weak magnetic moments or which would otherwise induce only a small magnetic phase shift. Due to the high noise tolerance, shorter acquisition times can be used which makes SIPRAD viable for imaging highly beam-sensitive samples and for imaging with increased time resolution. The most important development enabled by our SIPRAD approach is not the increased accuracy or robustness to noise, but the ability to perform magnetic phase reconstructions on samples across which the amplitude and electrostatic phase shift of the exit wave are varying. All of the previously-introduced phase retrieval techniques, including the TIE approach and off-axis holography, reconstruct the total electron phase shift φ of the sample. If the electrostatic phase shift, φ e , is uniform across the sample, then the gradients of φ and φ m are equal and B ⊥ can be obtained. However, if the mean inner potential or the sample thickness is not uniform, then the amplitude of the electron wave and φ e are not constant and a single phase reconstruction cannot be used to calculate B ⊥ . There are methods for separating φ e and φ m , such as performing a second phase reconstruction with the sample inverted in the microscope The distinction between φ and φ m is especially important when considering SITIE reconstructions. A major assumption for the SITIE technique is that all contrast in the defocused image arises from magnetic contributions in the sample. This requires samples that do not display diffraction or amplitude contrast in the images, and that are perfectly clean and of uniform thickness. These conditions are frequently not met. It is especially difficult to ensure these conditions when imaging single-crystal samples that generate strong diffraction contrast, or when performing cryogenic in situ experiments that can easily lead to sample surface contamination. Contamination that collects on the sample is particularly problematic, as it can create variations in both the amplitude and the electrostatic phase shift. While diffraction contrast can frequently be avoided by adjusting sample tilt and imaging conditions, contrast from contamination cannot be removed once the sample is in the microscope. Especially troubling is that surface contamination can lead to phase reconstructions and to integrated magnetic induction maps with features that appear similar to viable magnetic features, but which are actually non-magnetic in origin. Performing the amplitude reconstruction poses an additional computational problem, namely that an amplitude map can be created that generates contrast which matches magnetic contrast. The reconstruction algorithm is therefore less stable when performing amplitude and φ e reconstructions and will often diverge or generate nonphysical amplitude maps. We remedy this by adding the additional constraint that the amplitude should be dual-valued, i.e. uniform except in finite regions that correspond to the surface contamination (which is visible in the bright-field, in-focus image), and this sufficiently constrains the model such that reconstructions can be performed in many cases. The general workflow of the algorithm does not change when performing amplitude reconstructions, but the additional branch shown in Fig. Figure By contrast, the SITIE approach does not produce an accurate reconstruction of either φ m or B ⊥ from the LTEM image shown in d. Figs. We now apply the SIPRAD reconstruction technique to an experimental LTEM image of an exfoliated CGT flake, shown in Figure process is thus stable while still taking into account local contributions to the amplitude and to φ e , which allows the reconstruction of φ m isolated from the total phase shift, φ . Fig. Even though the SIPRAD approach uses only one image, rather than a TFS of three images, the SIPRADreconstructed maps of the phase shift and integrated magnetic induction both appear qualitatively to better represent the true domain structure than those produced by the TIE reconstruction. This is further supported by comparing the domain wall profiles in the reconstructed magnetic induction maps to the true profile of a simulated bubble, which is shown in Supplementary Section S5. The SIPRAD reconstruction with a fixed, dual-valued amplitude map therefore appears to enable the magnetic phase shift to be quantitatively and qualitatively determined from the experimental data shown in Fig. We next show the application of SIPRAD to experimental in situ LTEM cooling data. This is an example of a situation in which acquiring a TFS of images is not feasible. Figure Fig. In this work, we have demonstrated that we can reconstruction the magnetic phase shift, and thus the integrated magnetic induction, from a single input LTEM image, using a DIP-enabled automatic differentiation method. The SIPRAD approach is shown to be significantly more accurate than existing techniques over a wide range of input conditions, including moderate to large defocus values and noisy inputs that best represent experimental data. The use of a large defocus is often required when performing experimental LTEM, as the increased phase sensitivity at large defocus allows magnetic contrast to be more easily distinguished from noise and other contrast contributions. Other phase reconstruction methods, such as those based on solving the TIE, are only accurate in the small defocus limit and lose both spatial and phase resolution when experimentally-relevant defocus values are used. The SIPRAD method, by contrast, is based on a forward model that retains high accuracy of the reconstructed phase to defocus values as large as -6 mm, and accuracy of the in-plane integrated magnetic induction to defocus values as large as -3 mm. The robustness of the approach against high noise levels is primarily due to the implementation of a DIP. DIPs have been shown to be an effective way of regularizing noisy input data without relying on manually-chosen parameters, and this work further reinforces these findings. The downside of the using a DIP in AD-based phase reconstruction is that computationally it is much slower than inference by a conventional machine-learning model, though with the benefit of not needing to train such a model in the first place. Reconstructing each image requires optimizing a new CNN, but we find that the ∼ 5000 iterations required to converge the model for a 512 x 512 image takes only 35 seconds on an NVIDIA A100 GPU. We are able to achieve this reconstruction time by inputting an estimated phase shift calculated with the SITIE method, which reduces the total number of iterations required. By demonstrating the high accuracy at both large defocus and low signal-to-noise levels, we have shown that SIPRAD is an excellent technique for reconstructing LTEM images in these experimental conditions, such as would occur when imaging weakly magnetic or beam-sensitive samples. Although the increased accuracy and robustness towards noise is promising, the most important aspect of the SIPRAD approach is that it allows φ m to be reconstructed even in the presence of image contrast arising from variations in amplitude and φ e . Real-world samples inevitably contain heterogeneities that can make magnetic phase reconstruction challenging. This is especially true when imaging spin textures across a large field of view. We have demonstrated that the SIPRAD approach enables simultaneous reconstruction of both the amplitude and φ m , but we find that to optimize both components from a single image can be difficult and will often lead the algorithm to diverge at high noise levels. Even in these cases, however, the magnetic phase can still be effectively isolated and reconstructed after creating a thresholded binary amplitude map (or otherwise determining the amplitude distribution), as demonstrated in Fig. The fact that SIPRAD can accommodate large defocus values, high noise levels, and heterogeneous samples or those with surface particulates demonstrates that it is most useful when given noisy images recorded in conditions that do not allow for the sample to be inverted or even a TFS to be recorded. This makes the technique especially appealing for application to in situ experiments. When studying the time evolution of magnetic domains it is frequently impossible to collect a TFS at each point of interest-normally a movie of a series of defocused images will be the only data available. SIPRAD is a viable technique able to perform both quantitatively-and qualitativelyaccurate reconstructions of φ m and of the integrated magnetic induction from single movie frames. In addition, in these scenarios it is often paramount to study the evolution of one particular region over time, and SIPRAD is able to isolate φ m even for changes in the imaging conditions, or additional surface features, that develop during the experiment. We therefore hope that SIPRAD can be broadly applied to future LTEM in situ experiments and studies of difficult-to-observe magnetic spin textures. model section. Experimental cryo-LTEM imaging of CGT was performed on a JEOL JEM-2100F TEM instrument using a Gatan double-tilt liquid helium holder. TEM samples were created by dry-exfoliating flakes from a bulk crystal, which were then placed on a silicon nitride TEM membrane. The thickness of the flake was measured with atomic force microscopy to be 150 nm. The sample was field-cooled in the microscope in a 500 Oe out-of-plane magnetic field to 23 K in order to nucleate and stabilize magnetic bubbles. The transport of intensity equation can be written as where I 0 is the in-focus image, λ the electron wavelength, ∂ I/∂ z the through-focal image intensity derivative, with z being the electron propagation direction. Under the single-image TIE approximation, the equation becomes where ∆z is the defocus and the in-focus image I 0 is approximated as a uniform image with the mean intensity of the defocused image I ∆z Here we show how the LTEM images are calculated. We begin with the Aharonov-Bohm equation where φ is the total phase shift, φ e and φ m the electrostatic and magnetic components of the phase shift respectively, λ is the electron wavelength, E the relativistic electron energy, l the electron propagation direction, and φ 0 = h/2e the magnetic flux quantum. The in-plane component of the integrated magnetic induction can be obtained from φ m , The total phase shift is used to write the electron wave function at the exit surface of the sample as ψ(r ⊥ ) = a(r ⊥ )e iφ (r ⊥ ) , where a(r ⊥ ) is an amplitude function and φ is the total electron phase shift. We do not include detailed electron scattering when calculating the amplitude function, but only the absorption of the electrons, which is given by a(r ⊥ ) = e -t ⊥ /ξ 0 , where t ⊥ is the sample thickness shape function, and ξ 0 is the absorption coefficient for the sample material. In order to calculate the resulting image intensity, we propagate this wave function to the exit plane by convolving it with the transfer function of the microscope in the back focal plane and determining the intensity of the wave function, where * is a convolution operation, and T (r ⊥ ) is the microscope transfer function. This operation is written here in real space but is computed in Fourier space. The LTEM transfer function is composed of three parts where A(k ⊥ ) is the objective aperture function, e -iχ(k ⊥ ) the phase transfer function, e -g(k ⊥ ) the damping envelope, and k ⊥ the reciprocal space wave vector perpendicular to the beam direction. The aperture is a binary function (1 inside and 0 outside) centered in reciprocal space for the Fresnel imaging mode. We can define the phase transfer function as where ∆z is the defocus, C a and φ a are the magnitude and orientation of the two-fold astigmatism, and C s is the spherical aberration coefficient. The damping envelope can be written as where u = 1 + 2 (πθ c ∆) 2 |k| 2 , θ c is the beam divergence angle, and ∆ is the defocus spread Micromagnetic simulations of CGT were performed with Mumax3 39 . The following parameters were used: cell size (4 nm × 4 nm × 10 nm), grid size (512 × 512 × 10), M s = 2 × 10 5 A m -1 , A ex = 1.2 × 10 -12 J m -1 , K u = 2 × 10 4 J m -3 , B ext = 0.08 T along the z direction. For simulations of magnetic bubbles, a random starting magnetization of Bloch type domains and bubbles was placed and then relaxed. The PyLorentz software was used to calculating the total electron phase shift of the simulated samples 