Optimizing density-functional theory (DFT) and G0W0 calculations present coupled problems as orbitals from DFT are needed as G0W0 starting points. Applied to 341 two-dimensional (2D) materials, we demonstrate that CAM-B3LYP provides minimal changes in bandgap (e.g., mean absolute deviation of 0.23 eV) when used to start G0W0 calculations, compared to traditional functionals such as PBE, PBE0, and HSE06 (1.07 eV, 1.48 eV, and 1.51 eV, respectively). CAM-B3LYP also delivers the smallest changes in orbital representation. These and other results indicate the suitability of CAM-B3LYP as a density-functional approach for modelling 2D materials, as well as for use in optimizing G0W0 calculations. Our findings parallel well established features of applications to molecules, as well as for spectroscopic applications involving 3D materials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials sparked widespread research, owing to their attractive electronic, photonic, and straintronic characteristics Among the many applications of 2D materials, band-structure engineering is an important one that plays a vital role in optoelectronics As the chemical and structural properties of 2D materials can be very different to 3D ones, and as intuition concerning the optical properties of 2D materials may be difficult to estimate from known properties of 3D materials owing to the significant difference in dielectric properties As a most effective first-principles method, DFT has had widespread use for the modelling and design of both molecular systems and bulk materials. Nevertheless, the precise exchangecorrelation formation of DFT is unknown, and in all postulated functionals, the exchange component of DFT has a different asymptotic shape compared to the Coulomb term. As a result, these DFT functionals manifest flaws, such as self-interaction errors and errors associated with charge partial occupancy Practical solutions to the charge-separation problem alone have been known for two decades, with many approaches now in common use. This work follows advances Methods like CAM-B3LYP are essential for the understanding of the spectroscopy of large aromatic molecules As an alternative to DFT, ab initio approaches using the GG 0 WW 0 For periodic materials, this method computes quasiparticle energies from a single GW iteration by disregarding all off-diagonal matrix members of the self-energy Finding the most suitable density functional for some application, and optimizing the results of GG 0 WW 0 calculations, therefore present as coupled problems Supporting this, at the level of pure DFT, spectroscopic properties evaluated using CAM-B3LYP have already been demonstrated to provide substantial qualitative and quantitative improvements in the simulation of defects in hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) compared to HSE06 CAM-B3LYP is chosen for study as it provides an example from amongst the numerous class of established density functionals that embody corrections to the asymptotic potential. Indeed, many related methods also appear worthy of similar investigation CAM-B3LYP is chosen herein as it provides an old and clearly established functional description that is universally applicable. Two methods are widely used to postulate and screen 2D materials: (i) construction inspired by the properties of layered bulk materials, and (ii) brute-force construction by applying optimization algorithms based on atomic composition All calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Standard "PBE" pseudopotentials Individually optimized atomic structures are obtained for each density functional, using a force convergence criterion of 10 -3 eV Å -1 . Full results, including optimized coordinates and calculated bandgaps for the 341 2D materials, are provided in Supplemental Material. Figure A measure of the quality of the different GG 0 WW 0 calculations is the quasiparticle weight An alternative measure of quality is the change in the bandgap between that from a GG 0 WW 0 calculation and that from its initiating DFT calculation, with results listed in Table Consideration of the pure-DFT bandgaps requires some standard to compare to, and in the absence of experimental data we choose GG 0 WW 0 @CAM-B3LYP values as they are associated with the highest ZZ values and the smallest bandgap changes from pure DFT. Results from CAM-B3LYP, PBE0, HSE06, and PBE DFT calculations are compared to them in Figure A feature noted previously (Fig. In terms of qualitative features, an essential aspect of any DFT calculation is that it correctly determines the occupied orbitals. This property forms the basis of the empirical "DFT+U" scheme in which orbital forms are qualitatively retained and bandgaps adjusted to fit experiment. The GG 0 WW 0 @PBE (etc.) calculations often reveal negative bandgaps, indicating that PBE actually failed to correctly describe the ground-state of the material. The serious underestimation of bandgaps predicted by PBE0, HSE06, and PBE (Fig. Combined, the results for 341 2D materials indicate the high quality of the CAM-B3LYP DFT calculations and their suitability as starting orbitals for GG 0 WW 0 calculations. Similar results have already been observed for the application of CAM-B3LYP to GG 0 WW 0 calculations of molecules Table 