We generalize the Thiele equation with a transverse velocity to the skyrmion motion described by the collective coordinate of magnetization vector. It is applied to investigate significant disparity in the existing data sets of skyrmion and antiskyrmion Hall angles. Our analysis further reveals interesting differences of these Hall angles near the angular momentum compensation point. We identify a possible physical quantity that is responsible for the disparity. Thiele where M s = | ⃗ M | is a saturation magnetization, and x i the field position. Roman indices i, j represent the spatial vector components with repeated ones summed over. The collective coordinate X j is parametrized as to describe the center of domain wall or skyrmion, which moves with a velocity v i as time t ticks. The resulting Thiele equation has the form where α is a damping parameter, and Here γ 0 is gyromagnetic ratio, G ij v j is the Magnus force, D ij v j is total dissipative drag force, and F i is total external force that includes forces due to effective magnetic field and various spin torques. Internal forces due to anisotropy and exchange energies, internal demagnetizing fields, magnetostriction do not contribute Since its publication on 1973, the Thiele equation has been extensively used to describe the steady state motion of magnetic structures such as domain walls or skyrmions. Note that the Magnus force is proportional to the skyrmion charge Q, G ij ∝ ε ij Q = ε ij d 2 x ε lmn n l (∂ x n m )(∂ y n n ) in a 2 dimensional film geometry with coordinates (x, y). Here we propose to generalize the Thiele equation (3) with an additional transverse velocity in addition to v i of the collective coordinate as where the parameter R represents the strength of the transverse velocity compared to the original one. This generalization has been introduced in As M i and ∂ t M i are orthogonal to each other (due to the normalized magnetization vector, ⃗ n 2 = 1), one can show the equation is equivalent to the LLG equation. Explicitly, it can be checked by multiplying -ε jik M k to Thiele equation has been used recently, for example, to compute the velocity of various topological spin structures such as ferromagnetic skyrmion-based logic gates and diodes To derive the Thiele equation with the generalization (5), we multiply -∂M j /∂x i to By integrating over a (skyrmion) volume, one arrives at Two coefficients G ij , D ij and the force term F i are given in (4). This is the Thiele equation generalized with the transverse velocity. Hereafter, we use the same notations of (9) after multiplying γ 0 /M s , for example, It is interesting to see some general features of the new contributions. First, G ij = Gε ij , antisymmetric with the two indices ij. Thus (10) arXiv:2307.07006v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 13 Jul 2023 Thus the new term G ij Rε jk v k actually increase or decrease the longitudinal velocity v i depending on the sign of GR, while the original term G ij v j is transverse to v j that is the Magnus force. Second, we decompose the drag tensor into symmetric and antisymmetric parts as The new contribution αD s Rε ik v k modifies the transverse motion added to the contribution Gε ij v j , while αD s v i is the contribution Thiele derived. On the other hand, the antisymmetric part is given by This has the same structures of the first term in Thus we see that both the original longitudinal and transverse velocity components are modified by R. Using this form (13) in 2 dimensions (x, y), it is straightforward to compute the Hall angle. Without loss of generality, we set the force along the x coordinate. Then the equation along y direction gives Then the Hall angle is given by This is our generalization of the Hall angle in the presence of the new transverse effect Without the new transverse effect (R = 0), the Hall angle ( We further checked D a = 0 for the stable positive-and negative-charge skyrmions with Q = ±4π After describing continuous skyrmion model, we look into basic aspects of the generalized Thiele equation ( The constraint ⃗ n 2 = 1 allows us to parametrize the vector ⃗ n = sin Θ cos Φρ + sin Θ sin Φ φ + cos Θẑ with two dimensional coordinates (ρ = (x 2 + y 2 ) -1/2 , φ = tan -1 (y/x)) and its perpendicular direction z. An isolated Néel-type skyrmion has Φ = 0 and thus can be modeled as with a parametrization where P and 2ω represent the position and width of the domain wall (DW) illustrated in Fig. The continuous skyrmion model enables us to compute the Magnus and dissipative force tensors defined in (4). The former is sin 2 Θ. These two terms only contribute for the DW region upon integration and depend on the ratio ω/P . We omit the second term which is much smaller than the first, especially for the skyrmions with a skinny DW region, ω/P ≪ 1. Thus, The diagonal components are the same D yy = D xx ≡ D even with the omitted term. It is straightforward to check as (∂ y ⃗ n) 2 = sin 2 φ(Θ ′ (ρ)) 2 + (cos 2 φ/ρ 2 ) sin 2 Θ, which gives the same result upon φ integral. Now we check that the off diagonal components vanish, sin φ cos φ, which vanishes upon φ integral. Thus, we demonstrate the decomposition Note Explicitly, it can be shown to D xx = D yy = D and D xy = D yx = 0. Thus, the dissipative tensor have the same results as in For the rest of the paper, we focus on investigating the consequences of the transverse velocity effect R in the Hall angle Before considering some physical systems, we note that tan θ H = R for Q = 0. This tells that the positiveand negative-charge skyrmions have the same Hall angles (same transverse motion), for example, in antiferromagnetic materials. There exist only a small number of systematic experimental data sets on Hall angles performed for both positiveand negative-charge skyrmions with the same environment [9] Let us start with with their % difference as This is a strikingly large difference with naive expectation that the Hall angles between positive-and negativecharge skyrmions should be the same. In It is surprising to observe that there exist a large difference between the positive-and negative-charge skyrmion Hall angles (measured in the same environmental setup). Moreover, the former is consistently bigger than the latter. The original Hall angle formula We start with θ Q>0 = -35 o for Q = 2π and θ Q<0 = 31 o for Q = -2π Thus the transverse force due to the new transverse effect R is about 5.4% of the conventional skyrmion Hall effect, which is surprisingly large. With the estimated values αD and R, we revisit the skyrmion Hall angle We turn to the data Thus we conclude that, from two systematic experimental data sets, there exist an unexpected large difference: the positive-charge skyrmion Hall angle is 6.5 -12% larger than the negative-charge skyrmion Hall angle. The corresponding transverse force amounts to 2.9 -5.4% of the conventional Hall effect due to the skyrmion charge. These were analyzed before in We return to (ferrimagnetic) compound, GdFeCo/Pt film. The angular momentum compensation point is defined as the temperature when the spin densities of the two subcompounds cancel each other as discussed below. For a clearer presentation, we also define another temperatures T± , where the positive-and negative-charge skyrmion Hall angles vanish. Before considering the Hall angle formula, we note interesting observations for FIG. Ferrimagnet compound is composed with two subnetworks of magnetization, ⃗ M 1 and ⃗ M 2 , that are antiferromagnetically coupled through an effective local exchange field. While the gyromagnetic ratios γ a = M a /s a (a = 1, 2) are constants as temperature changes, their magnet moments ⃗ M a and spin densities ⃗ s a of the two subnetworks change differently. There are two special temperatures, the magnetization compensation point where the net magnetization vanishes and the angular momentum compensation point (T = T A ), across which the net spin density s n (T A ) = s 1 (T A ) -s 2 (T A ) = 0 changes its sign. Its general treatments using two independent magnetization vectors were developed in We note that the net spin density increases as temperature decreases. When the exchange field is sufficiently large, the two magnetization vectors remain strongly coupled and antiparallel to each other where the net and total spin densities are s n = s 1 -s 2 and s t = s 1 + s 2 , respectively. α eff = (α 1 s 1 + α 2 s 2 )/(s 1 + s 2 ) is the effective damping parameter. We are ready to apply our generalized Hall angle (20) for the experimental data in FIG. When R = 0, tan θ H = s n Q/s t αD, which vanishes at the compensation temperature as s n (T A ) = 0. The positiveand negative-charge skyrmion Hall angles are the same (with opposite signs). We highlight the Hall angle Let us look at the Hall angle (25) more carefully near the compensation point as a function of s n /s t . a. When s n = 0, that happens The two Hall angles are the same at T = T0 and negative as R < 0. Thus T0 coincide with the compensation temperature T A . b. The positive-and negative-charge skyrmion Hall angles vanish at different temperatures as they happen when s n Q + s t αDR = 0. In terms of spin densities, Note also vanishing Hall angle temperatures T± do not coincide with the compensation temperature T A . The positive-charge skyrmion Hall angle vanishes when s n /s t > 0 (thus T+ < T A ), while the negative-charge skyrmion one vanishes when s n /s t < 0 (thus T-> T A ), where we use αD > 0 and R < 0 [26]. From a) and b), we confirm that these three different temperatures ( TA+ < T0 < TA-) serve as vertices of the triangle mentioned above for FIG. Finally, we plot the positive-charge (red) and negative-charge (blue) skyrmion Hall angles in FIG. In this paper we have generalized the Thiele equation with the transverse velocity effect introduced in (5) and demonstrated its usefulness for describing the surprising mismatches (6.5 -12%) between the positive-and negative-charge skyrmion Hall angles. In particular, this new transverse force accounts for 2.9 -5.4% of the conventional skyrmion Hall effect. Moreover, our generalized Hall angle formula (25) (also One can ask whether there is a physical motivation for introducing the transverse velocity component R to the Thiele equation. The answer is affirmative. Recent study of Hydrodynamics revealed that there exists a universal transport coefficient, Hall viscosity This Hall viscosity was introduced to skyrmion motion, whose systems also have broken parity, by utilizing the topological Ward identity 