Inducing Cooper pairing in a thin ferromagnetic topological insulator in the quantum anomalous Hall state (called quantum anomalous Hall insulator, QAHI) is a promising way to realize topological superconductivity with associated chiral Majorana edge states. However, finding evidence of superconducting proximity effect in a QAHI has proven to be a considerable challenge due to inherent experimental difficulties. Here we report the observation of crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) across a narrow superconducting Nb electrode contacting the chiral edge state of a QAHI, evinced by a negative nonlocal voltage measured downstream from the grounded Nb electrode. This is an unambiguous signature of induced superconducting pair correlation in the chiral edge state. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that CAR processes of the chiral edge are not strongly dependent on the nature of the superconductivity 1 that mediates them. Nevertheless, the characteristic length of the CAR process is found to be much longer than the superconducting correlation length in Nb, which suggests that the CAR is in fact mediated by superconductivity induced on the QAHI surface. The approach and results presented here provide a foundation for future studies of topological superconductivity and Majorana physics, as well as for the search for non-Abelian zero modes. Inducing superconducting (SC) correlations using the SC proximity effect in the one-dimensional (1D) edge state of a two-dimensional (2D) topological system would lead to exotic topological superconductivity hosting non-Abelian anyons In this context, the SC proximity effect in the quantum anomalous Hall insulator (QAHI), which is a ferromagnetic TI showing the quantum anomalous Hall effect (QAHE), is highly interesting. If the 1D edge state of a QAHI can be proximitized, one could create a non-Abelian zero mode by coupling two counter-propagating edges via the CAR process through a superconductor The QAHI can be realized by doping Cr or V to a very thin (typically ≲ 10 nm thickness) film of the three-dimensional (3D) TI material (Bi x Sb 1-x ) 2 Te 3 in which the chemical potential is fine-tuned into a magnetic gap opened at the Dirac point of the surface states as a result of a ferromagnetic order Our samples are Hall-bar devices of V-doped (Bi x Sb 1-x ) 2 Te 3 In Ref. 28, the AR of the electrons in the 2D "bulk" states of a magnetic TI film in the metallic regime was observed in devices similar to Fig. The CAR process converts an incoming electron with energy eV smaller than the SC gap ∆ to a hole carrying a potential of -V in the downstream edge (Fig. where the resistance of the QAH film R QAHI is zero for low probe currents below the breakdown, R Nb,InP is the resistance of the Nb section lying on the InP wafer between the film edge and the SC contact 4a (which is zero when the Nb is superconducting), and R SC-QAHI is the SC-QAHI interface resistance including the nonlocal CAR/CT contribution. Note that the present setup is a 3-terminal configuration and the contact resistance of the Nb electrode always gives a finite contribution to V D . An external magnetic field is not required for the realization of the QAHE, enabling us to examine R SC-QAHI as a function of the applied magnetic field from 0 T up to the upper critical field H c2 of superconducting Nb. This is an important difference from the previous studies of the SC proximity effect in the quantum Hall edge states Due to the chiral nature of the edge state, no AR occurs into the upstream edge. Figure Below ∼1 T, the downstream resistance is negative, signalling the CAR process across the Nb electrode. This is the most significant result of this work and demonstrates that superconducting correlations are induced in the chiral edge state across the SC finger via CAR processes in our devices. As the magnetic field is increased, R D gradually turns positive and saturates as the superconductivity is lost in the Nb electrode. The change in the nonlocal downstream resistance due to the suppression of the CAR/CT process is calculated as When ∆R D is negative (positive), the CAR (CT) process is dominant. We estimate ∆R D ≈ -400 Ω after subtracting the contribution of the normal-state Nb resistance R Nb,InP ≈ 120 Ω (see Fig. To give confidence that the negative R D is not just a result of voltage fluctuations, the I-V characteristics for the downstream voltage V D in 0 T are shown in Fig. dominates the downstream voltage at high current values (see Fig. Figure To further analyze the nonlocal CAR process across the Nb contact, we investigated R D for devices with different Nb-finger widths up to 520 nm. The magnetic-field dependence of R D in device B with W Nb = 235 nm is shown in Fig. The R D value fluctuates around zero in this W Nb = 235 nm sample when Nb is superconducting, which is an indication that the CAR contribution happened to be nearly of the same magnitude as the normal contact resistance, so that the resulting R SC-QAHI is around zero. Note that the simple AR can only account for a factor of two reduction in the interface resistance For comparison, we show in Fig. As shown in Figure One can see in the inset of Fig. At first sight, the chiral edge state of a QAHI appears similar to the ν = 1 state of the quantum Hall insulator where f (y) ∼ e -y/λ is an exponentially decaying envelope function with length-scale λ determined by the Fermi-velocity and magnetic gap opened in the 2D topological surface states denotes the spin-up (spin-down) state in the top (bottom) surface of the QAHI, and χ specifies the top/bottom anisotropy. In the isotropic case, χ = 1, the edge state has no net spin-polarisation and the CAR process will not be hindered as long as the SC finger is narrow enough. Superconducting pairing across the finger will be only slightly suppressed by a partial spin-polarisation of the edge states, which may arise in realistic situations We now turn to possible scenarios by which SC correlations could be introduced into the edge states via CAR processes, starting first with a scenario where the SC finger defines a trivial SC region, such that no chiral Majorana (CM) edge state can form. The Nb finger is itself trivial and, under certain circumstances, the induced proximitised SC state in the TI surface can also be trivial An alternate scenario is that the proximitized TI surface realises a topological superconductor (TSC) region that hosts a single CM edge mode. This can happen, for instance, if the Nb slightly dopes the TI surface to make the chemical potential lie above the magnetic gap and only the top surface is proximitized 2 . In this case, for a wide finger, an incoming electron hitting the TSC region splits into two CMs that take opposite paths enclosing the region covered by the finger. The two CMs recombine on the opposite side of the TSC region as either an electron or a hole, depending, in principle, on the number of residual vortices trapped in the SC region enclosed by the path Therefore, our simulations suggest that, similar to the trivial SC case, the CAR process can indeed become dominant in the TSC case. We should nevertheless note that the stabilized value of T eh for a narrow finger at large L SC is strongly dependent on W SC in our simulation and is not always larger than 0.5 (see Supplementary Note No. 10), which implies that ∆R D would fluctuate between negative and positive as a function of W SC in the narrow-finger regime. A similar oscillatory behaviour was also predicted by theoretical calculations for the trivial SC case However, in our experiment we found ∆R D to be always negative for narrow fingers, as was also the case with similar experiments on graphene with a trivial SC finger One can see from the above discussions that both trivial and nontrivial scenarios are consistent with our observations. Hence, further studies will be required to determine the exact nature of the SC phase that results in CAR of the QAHI edge. Irrespective of its nature, our observation ξ CAR ≫ ξ Nb implies that CAR occurs through the superconductivity of the proximitized magnetic TI surface, rather than the SC finger itself. This makes sense, since Nb has negligible spin-orbit coupling and the finger on the top surface does not naturally result in processes coupling to the bottom surface, while our simulations suggest that the bottom surface needs to be involved in the CAR processes in the QAHI platform. Furthermore, the dependence on the magnetic history of the device suggests that trapped vortices and/or the magnetic disorder profile play a role, which is natural in the above scenario for the CAR through the proximitized surface. A negative ∆R D cannot be explained without the Andreev processes, and therefore our result gives unambiguous evidence that SC correlations can be induced in the chiral edge state of a QAHI. The stable dominance of the electron-hole conversion observed here joins the previous similar observations A possible experiment to address this question would be based on a device similar to ours, but has a much shorter finger electrode, such that the interference between the two CM edge states traveling along either sides of the finger can be detected without self-averaging. If the transmitted charge switches between electron and hole depending on the number of vortices in the finger, it gives strong evidence for chiral Majoranas The Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests. Correspondence: Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.A.T. (taskin@ph2.unikoeln.de) and Y.A. (ando@ph2.uni-koeln.de). Solid black line is a fit of the data to ∆R D = R 0 exp(-W Nb /ξ CAR ), yielding R 0 ≈ -750 Ω and ξ CAR ≈ 100 nm. c, Similar measurement as in panel a for the 160-nm-wide Nb electrode of device F, fabricated on a different wafer after a few months from the film growth. Reflecting a relatively large interface resistance between the QAHI film and Nb electrode, R D of device F is ∼255 Ω even when Nb is superconducting and increases to ∼525 Ω above H c2 . Nevertheless, ∆R D ≃ -170 Ω is still obtained for this 160-nm-wide Nb electrode. Figure L Nb,InP /L Nb,sect. = 1.2 μm / 2.5 μm. This R Nb,InP was also used in the calculation of the data points In the main text, Fig. where T ee 35 and T eh 35 are not independent parameters, they represent transmission probabilities of an electron leaving the contact 5 and should satisfy the following relation: where T D is the probability of the direct transfer of the electron into the SC contact 4. The T D = 0 condition represents the case of a perfect superconductor, for which an electron with the energy smaller then the SC gap cannot enter SC contact directly, but only through Andreev processes with finite T eh 35 . In the extreme case of the perfect Andreev process with T eh 35 = 1, one should observe a doubling of the current in the Hall bar (see Eq. S7) and the maximal negative downstream resistance with the magnitude of the half quantized resistance value (see Eq. S8). The T D = 1 condition represents the case when the contact 4 acts as a perfect metal, whitch can be achieved in our experiment, for example, by applying the magnetic field and fully suppressing the superconductivity in the finger. In this case, R D = 0 (see Eq. S8) as expected for an ideal metallic contact. For a real metallic contact, one would expect some finite (positive) contact resistance, which will contribute to R D in both metallic and SC states. For any finite T D , the observation of a negative downstream resistance R D < 0 is a direct indication that T ee 35 < T eh 35 (see Eq. S8), i.e. the number of holes, which arrive into the contact 3, is larger than the number of electrons. For real samples with a relatively large contact resistance of the finger, the T ee 35 < T eh 35 relation will be also seen as an increase in the downstream resistance R D when the superconductivity is supressed by the applied magnetic field. Both T ee 35 and T eh 35 represent total probabilities for electrons and holes to get into the downstream channel after interacting with the SC finger and finally reach the contact 3. It is useful to distinguish between different contributions. In particular, crossed Andreev reflections (CAR) and direct tunneling of electrons from upstream to downstream channel (so called electron cotunneling, CT) are expected to decay exponentially with increasing the width of the finger. We can write T ee 35 = T CT + T N and T eh 35 = T CAR + T A , where T N and T A represent the probabilities of all other processes at the finger to get into the downstream channel as an electron and hole, respectively. In most processes such as formation of the Andreev edge state or chiral Majorana interferometry, one would expect an equal mixture of electron and hole on a long finger, i.e. T N = T A . In this case, the expression for R D reduces to Hence, R D becomes negative for the measurement geometry shown in Fig. Following similar derivations in Refs. 9, 10, without loss of generality and neglecting coupling to the two split-off bands far from the Fermi-level that do not have a band inversion resulting from the magnetisation, we write the two lowest energy states as where (+) is a symmetric (bonding) and (-) is an antisymmetric (antibonding) state spread over the top and bottom surface with spin ↑ z and ↓ z along the magnetisation axis. In the basis (|+ ↑ z ⟩ , |-↓ z ⟩) the Hamiltonian of the lowest energy states is then given by where A magnetisation M > m ensures that there is a band inversion that results in the existence of the chiral edge mode. We consider an edge state on a boundary parallel to the x-axis such that the state lives in the region y > 0 and k x remains a good quantum number. For k x = 0 we make the Ansatz that the ; for the latter, a disorder configuration that gave a particularly high T eh is chosen for demonstration purpose. strengths. When S dis becomes large enough to push the system locally out of the magnetic gap, electron-hole conversion starts to appear (T eh > 0). Note that S dis is the standard deviation of the Gaussian random field added to the on-site energies to simulate the disorder potential. At larger S dis , the disordered region is effectively doped and T eh fluctuates around 0.5 with a large standard deviation. This scenario is unlikely to apply to the experimental setup, as the QAHI state is well established in the sample. This suggests that a TSC phase due to uniform doping below the SC finger is needed in the proximitized top surface in order to mediate Andreev processes of the chiral edge channel with its peculiar spin polarization [see Eq. (S14)]. Note that, with this simulation setup, we do not consider alternative (trivial) scenarios, e.g., the possibility of the QAHI edge state leaking into a subgap state in the SC finger and undergoing Andreev processes there before going back into the QAHI edge state as a hole. Furthermore, note that we model the SC lead (shown in Fig. In Fig. Although our quantum transport simulations for narrow SC fingers indeed support the possibility of CAR to take place in the QAHI edge, they do not yield a regime with T eh > 0.5 that yielding ⟨T eh ⟩ > ⟨T ee ⟩ even when CAR and CT are equally likely in the case without dissipation. We can further speculate that such an (imbalanced) dissipative process only starts to appear when the SC finger is narrow enough, because for wide fingers the chiral Majorana edge channels are well formed and they may short-circuit the tunneling processes. aim is to investigate the CAR (ξ MTI ≈ W SC ) and Majorana interference (ξ MTI ≫ W SC ) regimes qualitatively. Hightheoretical simulation. A.A.T. and Y.A. interpreted the data with the help of H.F.L. and K.M. A.U., Y.A., H.F.L. and K.M. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors.