Two-dimensional Dirac fermions in HgTe quantum wells close to the topological phase transition can generate significant cyclotron emission that is magnetic field tunable in the Terahertz (THz) frequency range. Due to their relativisticlike dynamics, their cyclotron mass is strongly dependent on their electron concentration in the quantum well, providing a second tunability lever and paving the way for a gate-tunable, permanent-magnet Landau laser. In this work, we demonstrate the proof-of-concept of such a back-gate tunable THz cyclotron emitter at fixed magnetic field. The emission frequency detected at 1.5 Tesla is centered on 2.2 THz and can already be electrically tuned over 250 GHz. With an optimized gate and a realistic permanent magnet of 1.0 Tesla, we estimate that the cyclotron emission could be continuously and rapidly tunable by the gate bias between 1 and 3 THz, that is to say on the less covered part of the THz gap. The ability to generate and manipulate THz waves opens up new avenues for exploring fundamental phenomena and developing innovative technologies in various fields such as wireless communication, imaging, spectroscopy, and sensing. Several techniques have already been developed among those Schottky 1 , Gunn 2 , Resonant Tunneling Diode The idea of amplification and generation of electromagnetic waves at the frequency of cyclotron resonance (CR) arose in the late 1950s. At that time, the amplification of electromagnetic waves in the CR regime was obtained in plasma Although the ideas of vacuum and semiconductor LL lasers appeared simultaneously, their further development went in completely different ways. The active research of vacuum LL lasers yielded creating of gyrotrons The dual need for a non-parabolic band structure and a very low electronic mass then naturally directs cyclotron emission research towards graphene and its relativistic massless Dirac fermions Recently, Landau emission has been reported in HgTe quantum wells (QWs) close to the topological phase transition Although these experimental findings indeed revive the interest to the Dirac materials in the context of tunable LL lasers, the tunability of Landau emission through the variation of carrier concentration in a single back-gated device has not yet been experimentally demonstrated. The aim of this work is therefore to verify experimentally a concept for voltagetunable THz cyclotron emission from Dirac fermions in HgTe QWs. This indeed represents a significant milestone towards the development of a gate-tunable THz Landau laser at a fixed magnetic field operating with a permanent magnet. The measurements were performed on a HgTe based QW grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on a (013)-oriented GaAs substrate, followed by a CdTe/ZnTe buffer to relax the lattice mismatch induced strain on the well 41 (see Fig. Figure where e is the electron charge, B the magnetic field value, h the Planck constant and m c the cyclotron mass at the Fermi level. On the basis of the conduction band dispersion by applying the semiclassical quantization rule, it is possible to predict the behavior of this cyclotron mass with the electron concentration. This dependence allows to evaluate theoretically the tuning range of the resonant emission energy at given magnetic field with changing of electron concentration through the use of an electrical gate. The primary concept An alternative method of tuning the carrier concentration in the HgTe QW involves utilizing the persistent photoconductivity (PPC) effect, also known as "optical gating". This approach is often more convenient compared to fabricating gate structures The high energy LLs are populated thanks to short electrical pulses, of frequency 127 Hz and typical peak to peak amplitude of 8 V. The pulses are injected in the sample via Indium balls welded at the surface of the sample and which diffuse in the whole structure, enabling us to have ohmic contacts. The typical distance between two contacts is 2-3 mm, giving rise to electric fields in the sample of typically hundredth of V • cm -1 . We used a unique Landau spectrometer (see Supplementary materials of Ref. Figure From a linear fit, we are able to extract the value of the cyclotron mass. The associated electron density, induced by the gate effect, has been obtained by the measurements of Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations As a proof of concept, we performed cyclotron emission measurements at a fixed low magnetic field of 1.5 T, for different values of the gate voltage applied. Figure In comparison to p-Ge, and without considering population inversion and laser action processes, HgTe QWs offer numerous advantages as cyclotron emitters. Firstly, due to the twodimensional nature of the system, it inherently allows for the use of an electrical carrier density modulation gate, enabling the emission to be tuned at a fixed magnetic field and thus allowing the use of a permanent magnet. Second, the cyclotron mass of Dirac fermions in HgTe QWs, even with a small gap, is lower (0.018•m 0 at zero gate bias) than that of holes in p-Ge (0.047•m 0 ) One interesting observation from the insert of Fig. Various approaches can be considered to accomplish this goal. One way is to enhance the gate efficiency from the back-side through a more sophisticated technological process, possibly involving the use of an alternative dielectric material. Additionally, the gate efficiency can also be improved from the top by employing semi-transparent gates, typically used in magneto-transmission experiments In Fig. In summary, our study successfully demonstrated the proof of concept for a gate-tunable THz cyclotron source at a fixed magnetic field, by utilizing the Landau emission from 2D Dirac fermions in HgTe QWs through a straightforward technological process involving substrate thinning and a basic back-gate. Such a source holds the potential for modulation speeds reaching the GHz range, surpassing the limitations of magnetic field variation. Although the current tunability range is limited due to the simplicity of the technological process, our calculations indicate that it can easily cover the range from 1 to 3 THz by realistically achievable variations in carrier density using a high-quality gate. These findings pave the way for the development of a Landau laser capable of continuous tuning within the THz range, solely through modulation of an electrical gate voltage, while maintaining a fixed magnetic field provided by a permanent magnet.