The electrical polarization switching on stoichiometric GaFeO3 single crystal was measured, and a new model of atomic displacements responsible for the polarization reverse was proposed. The widely adapted mechanism of polarization switching in GaFeO3 can be applied to stoichiometric, perfectly ordered crystals. However, the grown single crystals, as well as thin films of Ga-Fe-O, show pronounced atomic disorder. By piezoresponse force microscopy, the electrical polarization switching on a crystal surface perpendicular to the electrical polarization direction was demonstrated. Atomic disorder in the crystal was measured by X-ray diffraction and Mössbauer spectroscopy. These measurements were supported by ab initio calculations. By analysis of atomic disorder and electronic structure calculations, the energies of defects of cations in foreign cationic sites were estimated. The energies of the polarization switch were estimated, confirming the proposed mechanism of polarization switching in GaFeO3 single crystals. The GaFeO3 compound crystallizes in the orthorhombic structure of space group Pna21 (No. Stoeffler proposed a model of atomic displacements realizing change between two polarization states of Pna21 structure of fully ordered GaFeO3, Pz > 0 (Fig. on Ga-Fe-O thin films doped by Mg In this paper, we propose an explanation of apparent inconsistency among experimentally observed switching between two polarization states in disordered GaFeO3 crystals and a theoretical description The GaFeO3 single crystals were grown by the optical floating zone crystal growth technique according to Crystals were grown at the rate of 3-5 mm/h, with feed and seed rods rotated at 15 rpm in the opposite directions. The growth direction was enforced using oriented GaFeO3 seeds in a or c crystallographic direction The crystal orientation was performed using pieces of about 300 μm for which X-ray diffraction data were collected at room temperature. The Rigaku SuperNova diffractometer using Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å) was used. Diffraction data were evaluated with the CrysAlisPro package Following the available literature A schematic view of the atoms' movements during the polarization switching is shown in Fig. We have calculated spontaneous polarization as a multivalued vector quantity using point charge approximation and the modern theory of polarization The first-principles calculations were performed using the projector augmented wave (PAW) potentials The Hubbard parameter U and exchange interaction J were optimized for the ion's magnetic moment to fit with the experiment (U = 8 eV, J = 1 eV) To determine, which positions are energetically favorable for additional Fe atoms, we have calculated crystal energy when one Ge atom is substituted by a Fe atom in the unit cell. The calculations were done for two non-equivalent Ga sites, resulting in the off-stoichiometric crystal Ga2-xFexO3 with x=1.125, see Table Details of the Mössbauer experiment are given in Using electronic structure calculations on ideal GaFeO3 and on single Fe cations at Ga sites, we obtained electric field gradients on 57 Fe probe at cationic sites (Table The experimental spectra of GaFeO3 consist of overlapping subspectra, and the assignment of absorption lines to the sites is not apparent. Also, the ambiguity problem is present, i.e., the continuous distribution of parameters results in the exact shape of the spectrum. The measurements of texture-free absorbers in external magnetic fields were performed to make the interpretation precise. Moreover, the measurements of single crystal absorbers with the orientation of wave vector k parallel to the main crystal directions were done. One of the most difficult problems is spectra interpretation; the orientation of the EFG was solved by adopting principal directions obtained by electronic structure calculations. Also, the asymmetry parameter in the in-magnetic field experiment was adopted from the theoretical calculations. It is worthwhile to add that throughout the paper, we use four colors related to the four cationic sites, already shown on unit cells (Fig. The results of single crystals measurements, with k -vector parallel to the three main crystallographic directions, are presented in Fig. Almost the same fraction of iron occupies the Fe1 and Fe1 sites, while in Ga2 sites, the fraction of iron is twice smaller than in Fe1 and Fe2 sites. There is no experimental evidence within the limits of experimental uncertainty that Fe is located in the tetrahedral Ga sites. Table Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) is designed to measure piezoelectric and ferroelectric materials on the nanoscale BioScience (JPK Instruments, Berlin, Germany) AFM. Images were acquired using conductive diamond-coated AFM tips with resonant frequencies close to 110 kHz. The experimental setup allowed tip/detector calibration to measure PFM response in pm. The modulation voltage was set to 1 V, which gave a relatively strong PFM signal. In addition, the bias voltage was applied in the range of 0 to 20 V, depending on the experiment. The piezo-switching (images) were obtained with no bias, where the polarization change was forced by +5 V bias, while the PFM spectroscopy was performed in the range of ± 20 V. The data analysis was performed using Gwyddion software The sample plane of dimension 3.9 x 3.9 mm was cut from a single crystal grown along a axis (Pna21 space group). The plane was perpendicular to the c crystallographic axis within the accuracy of 2°. By intensive PFM investigations, we could not find visible ferroelectric domain structure registered down to the nanoscale range. It suggests that the sample was a single domain or that the domain size was above the possible scan size of implemented AFM equipment, which was 100 x 100 μm. However, to the best of our knowledge, no such ferroelectric domains (on single crystals) were found using other techniques like surface decoration, etching, optical microscopy, polarized light microscopy, X-ray techniques, or electron microscopy techniques. It is consistent with the fact that relatively large energy is needed to switch between opposite polarization, as mentioned previously. Nevertheless, the piezoresponse signal from the sample was relatively strong, showing typical piezoelectric behavior. To manifest that, two types of experiments were performed. First, we switched the material's polarization by applying a bias voltage to a small region (in this case, 5 x 5 μm and +5 V bias voltage). We measured the same region in a larger scan (10x10 μm, no extra bias voltage). The result is shown in Fig. The results of theoretical calculations of the electric field gradient tensor allow the use of its local orientations in data analysis. The relative line intensities of Mössbauer spectra shown in Fig. The atomic disorder measured by X-ray diffraction (Table It is clear from Table The results of theoretical calculations are consistent with a simple model of structural defects. Let us simplify interactions by assuming that, on average, Fe or Ga atoms entering the foreign site increase the crystal energy by a value independent of their geometrical arrangement in the unit cell. This assumption is governed by the observation in Table as well. We also neglect the compositional dependence of the energies in the range covered in Table E Fe (2) -E Fe (1) -u 2 + u 1 = 0, E Ga (2) -E Ga (1) -u 4 + u 3 = 0, E Ga (1) + E Ga (2) + E Fe (1) + E Fe (2) -4e 0 = 0, where u i is given in the i-the row of Table where v i,j is given by any row between i and j of Table Fig. By Mössbauer experiments (Table The occupation numbers c 1Ga , c 2Ga , c 1Fe , c 2Fe are defined as a fraction of foreign atoms occupying Fe1, Fe2, Ga1, and Ga2 sites, respectively. Note that the index in the occupation numbers shows foreign atoms located at the site indicated by the integer. All occupation numbers are between 0 and 1; the condition of stoichiometry demands that c 1Ga + c 2Ga -c 1Fe -c 2Fe = 0. For perfectly ordered GaFeO3, all the occupation numbers are equal to zero. For the sake of clarity, we quote that the site Fe1 consists of 1 -c 1Ga Fe atoms and c 1Ga foreign Ga. The occupation numbers at thermal equilibrium can be obtained using the estimated energies and statistical approach. Assuming that in N positions of the given site (say, Fe1), there are Nc 1Fe foreign Ga atoms, the number of possible microstates is equal to the number of all different Nc 1Fe -element subsets taken from the set of N elements. Thus, the number of microstates Γ for four sites with occupation numbers c 1Ga , c 2Ga , c 1Fe , c 2Fe is ), where ( n k ) is n!/(k! (n -k)!). Using the Stirling formula for n! the entropy S = k B lnΓ can be obtained from (7) in the limit of large N: S = k B Nlnf(c 1Ga )f(c 2Ga )f(c 1Fe )f(c 2Fe ), where The energy U is equal to U = N(E Fe (1) c 1Fe + E Fe (2) c 2Fe + E Ga (1) c 1Ga + E Ga (2) c 2Ga ). The number of foreign atoms has to fulfill the chemical composition of the crystal, From eq. ( Eq. ( We have observed the switching of the polarization state by piezoresponse force microscopy. The measurements indicate symmetric, nonbiased hysteresis of the polarization switching. Thus the microscopic mechanism proposed in The new concept of atomic displacements in the unit cell guarantees equal energy for two polarization states for disordered GaFeO3 crystals and is consistent with observed symmetric energy switching induced by PFM spectroscopy. We have synthesized GaFeO3 single crystals. The site disorder was determined by X- A new mechanism of electrical polarization switching of disordered GaFeO3, consistent with physical properties measured so far, was proposed. In contrast to earlier concepts . Atomic positions in the unit cell of GaFeO3 and details of the atomic displacements corresponding to switching of electrical polarity. Columns 2-4 -atomic coordinates of state Pz > 0, columns 6-8 -atomic coordinates of state Pz < 0, columns 10-12 -a shift of atoms between Pz > 0 and Pz < 0 states. Column 9 shows the displacement of atoms when switching between Pz > 0 and Pz < 0. separation between two absorption lines in the quadrupole doublet, A 1 /A 2 -a ratio of the absorption line intensities in the doublet, k -direction of the wave vector of a photon with respect to the main crystal direction (reference of Pna21 space group). Superscript asterisk (*) in the first column indicates the results of calculations for single iron at the foreign site of GaFeO3. Symbol e is the elementary charge,