We present a systematic method to design arbitrary energy-phase relations using parallel arms of two series Josephson tunnel junctions each. Our approach employs Fourier engineering in the energy-phase relation of each arm and the position of the arms in real space. We demonstrate our method by engineering the energy-phase relation of a near-ideal superconducting diode, which we find to be robust against the imperfections in the design parameters. Finally, we show the versatility of our approach by designing various other energy-phase relations. The Josephson tunnel junction is the fundamental building block of superconducting circuits An example device that can be realized using Josephson junctions is a superconducting diode: a junction with unequal critical currents in different directions. Superconducting diode effect manifests generically in inhomogeneous Josephson junctions subject to a magnetic field We propose a systematic approach to engineer arbitrary energy-phase relationships (EPRs) of a two-terminal device using parallel arrays of Josephson tunnel junctions. We draw inspiration in the observation that circuits of conventional tunnel Josephson junctions implement a variety of Hamiltonians Our conceptual algorithm relies on the following realizations: • The current-phase relation of two Josephson junctions in series matches the functional form of that of a short Josephson junction with a finite transparency. This allows single-parameter control over the Fourier components in the energy-phase relation of the arm. • The energy-phase relation of multiple parallel junctions is a convolution of the individual energy-phase relations with the vector of junction strengths when each arm has equal phase offsets and transparency. • Shifting the total Josephson energy of all arms by the same amount does not change the lowest Fourier components, and therefore the overall shape of the current-phase relation stays the same. The elementary unit of the design used to generate higher harmonics of a CPR, of an arm of the Josephson junction array, consists of two Josephson tunnel junctions connected in series, with Josephson energies E J1 and E J2 [see Fig. where φ = φ 1 +φ 2 , with φ the total phase difference across the arm (see Figure with Φ 0 = ħ/2e the superconducting flux quantum. The corresponding EPR is where E J ≡ E J1 + E J2 is an overall Josephson energy of an arm and τ ≡ 4E J1 E J2 /(E J1 + E J2 ) The EPR and CPR of an arm become highly nonsinusoidal at τ ≈ 1 or We introduce the Fourier transform of the normalized EPR of an arm: where U m are the Fourier coefficients of U(τ, φ). In the high transparency limit, τ ≈ 1, We plot τ -dependence of several lowest Fourier coefficients of a single arm EPR in Fig. The EPR of the Josephson junction array is where N is the total number of arms. This EPR is highly nonlinear in τ n and x n , and linear in E J . Our goal is to find U (φ) that approximates a target EPR, U target (φ), by optimizing the design parameters E J , τ and φ. Because the role of τ is to introduce higher harmonics, and the role of x n is to break time-reversal symmetry, we choose to make τ n and x n uniform to simplify the problem. Specifically, we use φ(x n ) = 2πn/N and τ (x n ) = τ ≈ 1, which makes the right hand side of Eq. ( In general, the set of Josephson energies E J (x n ) found by inverse discrete Fourier transform includes negative values, whereas the stable state of a single arm has a positive E J . We resolve this obstacle by adding the most negative E J,min to all the Josephson energies E J (x n ). Because n U(φ -2πn/N ) has a period of 2π/N , N of its lowest Fourier components are absent, and therefore adding it to the EPR only changes it minimally, as shown in Fig. We now apply our approach to design a superconducting diode. This device has an asymmetric CPR with unequal critical currents in opposite directions. The diode efficiency η is the degree of asymmetry of its two critical currents: where I c± are the maximum critical currents for current flow in opposite directions. An ideal superconducting diode with η = 1 has a sawtooth-shaped EPR: where ⌊φ⌋ is the floor function. To optimize a superconducting diode, we apply the algorithm of the previous section with U target = U sawtooth , with the results shown in Fig. The discrete Fourier transform approach yields a closed form solution, it applies to any target EPR using the setup of Fig. • It makes U (φ) agree with U target (φ) at N points, instead of minimizing an error norm. • It requires that all τ n are equal and x n are equidistant. • It does not take into account the random variation of junction strengths. To relax the first limitation we observe that as long as the error norm is quadratic in U (φ)-U target (φ), the optimization problem stays a least squares problem (LS), implemented in the SciPy library To apply LS to the superconducting diode design, we use the error norm min which makes the negative current as constant as possible in the range φ i ∈ [φ min , φ max ], with φ min and φ max being the upper and lower boundary values for the phase range used for applying LS method. To make the solution nonzero we fix E J (x 0 ) = 1 and solve for the Josephson junction strengths of the remaining N -1 arms. After finding a solution to the LS problem, we add the most negative junction strength, similar to the Fourier method. We then apply a brute force optimization to determine the phase region [φ min , φ max ] that yields highest η. We solve the nonlinear problem by applying the SciPy's In Fig. To demonstrate the generality of our approach, we apply it to other example EPRs: a square wave, a triangular wave, and a double well potential. For square and triangular wave potentials, we employ the discrete Fourier transform approach. Similar to the superconducting diode EPR case, we choose a constant τ and solve for the Josephson energy distribution. The convergence of this method with N , shown in Fig. By discretizing Eq. ( We proposed and investigated an approach to design arbitrary energy-phase relationships using Josephson tunnel junction arrays. In particular, our approach allows to design a superconducting diode with a desired efficiency and the resulting design is robust against variation in device parameters. The main building block of our approach is possibly the simplest source of a nonsinusoidal CPR: two Josephson tunnel junctions in series. While our method does not rely on a specific arm EPR, this choice offers practical advantages. For example, more than two junctions in series generally have a multi-valued CPR We have focused on the DC properties of the circuit, and we envision engineering the RF characteristic as the next logical step. For example, we expect that diode effects are correlated with odd-order RF nonlinearities, which we could explore We ignore the weak higher harmonic terms that have recently been reported in single Josephson tunnel junctions While the Eq. (2) is known, see e.g.