Diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces have recently opened a broad range of exciting developments in nanophotonics research and applications, leveraging spatially extended -yet locally patternedresonant modes to control light with new degrees of freedom. Their operation generalizes the response of periodic gratings, which conventionally resonate only for selected plane waves at specific combinations of incident angle and frequency (momentum-frequency selectivity). Nonlocal metasurfaces, empowered by quasi-bound states in the continuum (q-BICs), can be tailored to fully resonate for specific combinations of custom shaped wavefronts and frequencies (space-frequency selectivity). While conventional grating responses are elegantly captured by temporal coupled mode theory (TCMT), which is commonly employed to model and design grating responses across a wide application space, TCMT is not well equipped to capture the more sophisticated response observed in the nascent field of nonlocal metasurfaces, in which the eigen-states are arbitrarily shaped in space and hence not well confined in terms of momentum. Here, we introduce spatio-temporal coupled mode theory (STCMT), capable of elegantly capturing the key features of the resonant response of wavefrontshaping nonlocal metasurfaces. This framework can quantitatively guide nonlocal metasurface design, and is compatible with local metasurface frameworks, making it a powerful tool to rationally design and optimize a broad class of ultrathin optical components. We validate this STCMT framework against full-wave simulations of various nonlocal metasurfaces, demonstrating that this tool offers a powerful semi-analytical framework to understand and model the physics and functionality of these devices, without the need for computationally intense full-wave simulations. We also discuss how this model may shed physical insights into nonlocal phenomena in photonics and into the functionality of the resulting devices. As a relevant example, we showcase STCMT's flexibility by applying it to study and rapidly prototype nonlocal metasurfaces that spatially shape thermal emission. shown to support stronger nonlocal interactions with light. In dielectric thin film platforms, the dispersion of guided modes provides an engineerable mechanism to control even longer-range nonlocal phenomena [32]-[34]. In this context, nonlocal metasurfaces [35]-[37] have been gaining increasing attention for their capability of enhancing the control of light by tailoring it in momentum space, of particular interest for signal processing [36], image differentiation [37]-[39], spectral [40] and chiral sensing [41], augmented reality applications [42], and for mimicking the effects of freespace wave propagation within compact systems [43]-[45]. This class of devices employs subwavelength, transversely invariant structures, hence the spatial features of their extended resonant modes do not escape the near field of the device. As a result, when applied to infinitely periodic systems TCMT remains very effective, because it can lump their resonance into a spatially invariant modal parameter ( ) at [Fig. 1(a)]. Recent reviews Over the years, coupled mode theory (CMT) has become a powerful tool to model and understand the scattering response of complex resonant electromagnetic structures The spectro-spatial properties of photonic resonant systems are important in various settings, particularly when the optical energy is correlated across distances larger than the wavelength, i.e., when nonlocality, also known as spatial dispersion, cannot be neglected. In turn, these systems exhibit strong dependence of the optical response on the momentum of light A sharp response in momentum space is referred to as nonlocal because the corresponding extent of the resonant modes in real space is necessarily broad. Nonlocality in the material permittivity has been studied in plasmonic systems for decades To address this need, here we introduce a general spatio-temporal coupled mode theory (STCMT) that extends TCMT to capture spatially varying resonant modes. We show excellent agreement with full-wave simulations of spatially selective diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces demonstrating the validity and relevance of this model. Our theory introduces a nonlocality length, which quantifies the degree of nonlocality of a given device, and it establishes how this parameter directly controls the degree of spatial selectivity. We clarify two distinct regimes of operation for nonlocal photonic devices, governed by the numerical aperture of the anomalous diffraction encoded into the device, and we demonstrate the relation between spatial selectivity and the supported eigenmodes. As such, STCMT elegantly captures the fundamental working mechanisms of spatially varying resonant photonic systems, and it provides physical insights into the nature of nonlocality in this emerging class of novel devices, enabling rational designs and rapid, computationally efficient analysis of next-generation photonic systems. In the following, we develop STCMT by writing down the appropriate dynamical equations, determining the constraints stemming from time-reversal invariance, reciprocity and energy conservation, and then computing the scattering from a general nonlocal device by appropriately specifying its parameters. We obtain the spatio-temporal dynamical equations by appropriately manipulating and tailoring standard TCMT equations Equation ( In contrast, the dynamical equations for a device with space-varying modal properties must inherently depend on the nature of the mode itself. In other words, we need at the outset to know the form of the dispersion of the mode in order to capture its spatial properties. We expect, for instance, the phenomenology of a travelling wave to differ from the one of a standing wave, and hence we expect distinct dynamical equations. The most general approach to capture this dependence is a Taylor expansion for the resonance frequency in terms of its momentum k dependence: ( ) For instance, a traveling wave is captured by the linear term with speed c , while a standing wave with parabolic dispersion, such as near a band edge, is captured by the coefficient b . As detailed in Supplementary Section S2, transforming Eqns. ( Equations ( Next, we specialize our general STCMT to capture the novel functionalities demonstrated by recent diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces, as in Refs. ( Together, these assumptions yield the dynamical equations where we simplify the notation to 0 ’ü¦’ü¦ = . Supplementary Section S2b derives the same set of equations using the leading order terms of a cosine series expansion. In TCMT, the scattering matrix is obtained by assuming time-harmonic solutions, solving Eqn. (1) for ( ) at , and then inserting the result into Eqn. (2) to yield In comparison, in STCMT we must solve Eqn. ,, , 2 Compared to the conventional Schr├Čdinger equation, we have 1 = and 1/ bm = , consistent with the expectation that the band curvature plays the role of an inverse effective mass. We also note that non-Hermiticity (a complex valued potential) is expected of an open or damped system. In absence of the potential V , we have the equation for a free particle, for which the solution is described by the propagator K and the initial condition ( ) ( ) The addition of a spatially constant V adds a phase factor independent of x . Hence, in our case the propagator is In addition to solving the homogenous equation, the propagator yields the Green's function t G for the inhomogeneous equation ( where ( ) t ’üæ is the Heaviside step function. Using these functions, we may apply physical constraints such as conservation of energy (which takes the form of a continuity equation), time-reversal invariance and reciprocity (see Section II.C and Supplementary Section S4). In practice, we are interested in the response to monochromatic waves [ ( ) ], i.e., we seek the solution to the scattering problem in the space-frequency domain. In this case, Eqn. and we seek the Green's function satisfying which yields the modal amplitude Insertion of Eqn. where the scattering kernel ’ü│ correlates input positions x’éó with output positions x , and where the closed form of the Green's function is parameterized by the complex coefficient This quantity was originally introduced to capture the spatial coherence of thermal metasurfaces, derived with alternative methods which we call the nonlocality length. This length is the characteristic distance that light travels inplane before scattering out when engaging with the band-edge mode; in other words, it is a quantitative measure of the nonlocality of the metasurface at the band-edge frequency. Since nonlocality is equivalently defined as a dependence on the incident wavevector, no optical interface is truly local. However, as a rule of thumb, if the nonlocality length is larger than the wavelength in the surrounding media, the resulting device may be considered nonlocal, since its nonlocality cannot be neglected (see Supplementary Section S3 for a comparison of a nonlocal metasurface to a bare interface between two media). Before proceeding with the application of STCMT to practical metasurface devices, we must determine the relevant physical constraints to our system, including time-reversal invariance, reciprocity and conservation of energy. In TCMT, these constraints impose the well-known requirements These results hold, for instance, in infinitely periodic devices supporting q-BICs (see Supplementary As detailed in Supplementary Section S4, we find that in our STCMT all these conditions hold locally, i.e., ( ) ( ) 2 ( ) ( ) We stress that this result is not obvious a priori and, indeed, it does not hold for the general case described by Eqns. ( The significance of this result for modelling diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces should not go underappreciated. This property stems from the shift-invariance of the Green's function in Eqn. STCMT enables us to rigorously define characteristic 'eigenwaves' for nonlocal metasurfaces with arbitrarily varying spatial profiles. An eigenwave can be defined as a spatially varying wavefront that a nonlocal metasurface is selective for: maximal reflectance is achieved when the eigenwave is incident, and the reflected wave is the eigenwave's time-reversed copy (preserving coordinate system handedness, in contrast to specular reflection) or equivalently ** ) ( , , ) ( , ) (, Combing Eqns. ( suggesting that the eigenwave of interest is the eigenvector of ( that has the largest eigenvalue eig R , i.e., the eigenvector with maximal reflectance. Equation In this section, we apply the introduced STCMT to illustrative examples, confirming that our analytical framework reproduces the results of full-wave simulations, quantitatively captures the underlying physics and enables rational designs for relevant functionalities. Schematically depicted in Figure where the first element is the coefficient scattering to side 1 and the second element is the coefficient scattering to side 2. In diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces, we allow ’üĪ to vary spatially: For a system based on the meta-units in Fig. )exp e e () The other kernels 12 ’ü│ and 22 ’ü│ are treated equivalently, but omitted here for brevity. Figures show the magnitude and phase of 11 ’ü│ for the meta-unit corresponding to Figs. 2(e,f). Note that in this case the phase angle () x ’üĪ’üĪ = is constant, and there is only one diffraction order on each side, meaning that this metasurface can be handled with conventional TCMT. In the following examples, however, the angle is spatially varied, and the use of regular TCMT is not possible. We will then demonstrate that STCMT readily offers excellent agreement with numerical simulations and captures the underlying physics. In this sub-section, we focus on nonlocal metasurfaces with a linear phase gradient. In particular, we consider a gradient in the geometric angle following ’ü¼ ’Ć╝ , eliminating all but 1 diffraction order on each side. (b) Schematic of the coupled mode theory approximation of the scattering in (a), wherein independent scattering events occur at the interfaces, each of which may generally couple to both side 1 (down) and side 2 (up). Reflectance (c) and reflection phase (d) in the momentum-frequency response of an example meta-unit, computed by Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD). Reflectance (e) and reflection phase (f) in the momentum-frequency response of an example meta-unit, modeled using TCMT. Amplitude (g) and phase (h) of 11 ’ü│ in the space-frequency domain of the same meta- unit, a key object for modeling this system using STCMT. When 0 G k = , we recover the nonlocal reflection kernel without phase gradient, which we denote with the subscript 0 : Since a phase gradient provides a spatially constant momentum kick, it is natural to study these devices in momentum space. In particular, we seek the scattering matrix ) ,( ) , where k’éó and k are the basis wavevectors of the incoming and outgoing wavevectors, respectively, and the indices refer to the top and bottom sides of the metasurface. We then need to relate this scattering matrix to the scattering kernel ’ü│ , which, as shown in Supplementary Section S5, is the mixed Fourier transform Using this relation, the scattering components for a metasurface without phase gradient are Notably, this result is consistent with TCMT, with the explicit addition of a Dirac ’üż term enforcing scattering only when kk ’éó = (conservation of momentum in a specular process). Meanwhile, the scenario with nonzero G k in terms of Eqn. ( which implies, due to the basic properties of the Fourier transform The impact of a nonlocal phase gradient is to shift the scattering matrices in k-space, in both the input , and from side 2 only when 2 . Hence, our results confirm that the anomalous reflection is associated with the 2 m = ’é▒ diffraction orders, and the direction of momentum kick imparted by the nonlocal metasurface depends on which side light is incident from. We now validate our analytical model numerically for 2 / , focusing here on the band-edge frequency. Supplementary Section S6 extends the following analysis to a representative frequency off the band edge. To aid in this, it is useful to cast STCMT in matrix form, detailed in Supplementary Section S7. In this case, the scattering kernels are discrete, and we write them as ’üÆ and ’üö (capital ’ü▓ and ’ü┤ ). We write the input electric field as a column vector ( The main diagonal of ’üÆ and ’üö correspond to xx ’éó = , i.e., the local response, while the off-diagonal components contain the correlations across distant positions, i.e., the nonlocal response. Meanwhile, the scattering matrix defined in Eqn. ( Using this discretized form of STCMT, Figure 3(e-h)]. We emphasize that, while the former case may be straightforwardly treated with conventional TCMT, the latter may not. Figure In contrast, in the presence of a phase gradient the device retroreflects light at the resonance frequency, as shown in Fig. This shift, as well as the anomalous reflection, is encoded in ’üÆ and ’üö within the phase information Note that this behavior is consistent with the requirements stemming from reciprocity: the scattering matrices must be symmetric about the main diagonal, which corresponds to kk ’éó =-, or retroreflection (see also Supplementary Section S5). Hence, we see that the action of the phase gradient is to shift the response along the retroreflection condition by an amount ( ) unidirectional momentum kick irrespective of incident direction: it is a vertical asymmetric phenomenon, requiring vertically asymmetry in the structure to achieve (see also the discussion in While the previous section confirmed that our STCMT extends conventional TCMT modeling to phase gradients, we now demonstrate how this accurate modeling is actually retained even when G k varies arbitrarily across the device In this section, we study nonlocal metalenses described by hyperbolic phase gradients of the form 22 To find the eigenwave we use relation ,, The eigenwave of the metalens is therefore the solution to ( ) ( ) ) By inspection, as W ŌåÆ ’éź (i.e., ignoring boundary effects), we have because in this case which is identical to the spatially invariant q-BIC modeled by the subscripted kernels. For finite W and radiative boundaries, Eqn. However, our quantitative definition of an eigenwave introduced here allows us to numerically describe non-ideal eigenwaves for finite structures, including radiative boundary conditions. To do so, we employ again the discrete matrix form of our STCMT. The nonlocal reflection matrix for this scenario is seen in Fig. We also may numerically compute the reflectance due to waves incident from side 1 with ( ) Ref. , where n is the index of refraction of the surrounding medium. The NA characterizes the range of deflection angles encoded into the q-BIC, and hence it also characterizes the range of resonant wavelengths across the device for normally incident light. As the NA increases, the part of the nonlocal metalens resonating at a given frequency is reduced, and the reflectance also diminishes. In other words, as expected, spatial selectivity increases with the lens numerical aperture. This feature is confirmed numerically in Figs. Point sources near the eigenwave experience large reflectivity, while point sources away from the eigenwave are transmitted through without resonant interactions with the device. In other words, the nonlocal metalens is strongly spatially selective, and the eigenwave is the optimally selected wavefront to trigger the resonance. When the NA lowers, we observe an increase in reflectance away from the eigenwave condition, e.g., for large 0 z , which approaches a plane wave in the limit that 0 z ŌåÆ ’éź . This study suggests that, when NA 0.8 = , we have a wavefront-selective device, only reflecting when the incident light closely matches the eigenwave condition. Yet when NA 0.1 = , we have a wavefront-shaping device, abiding large reflectance under a larger range of incident conditions. Notably, away from the eigenwave condition the response to plane waves, 0 zf , is better than the response of point sources near the device, 0 zf , and it plateaus after a certain distance. This is because point sources near the device launch a large range of spatial frequencies (kvectors), while point sources far from the device (nearly plane waves) launch a very narrow range. The eigenwave may be considered the condition in which the spatial frequencies launched by the source and encoded the device are matched; the NA is characteristic of the range of k-vectors encoded by the device. Since plane waves represent a lower bound on range of k-vectors, the response plateaus for 0 zf to a value function of the NA . Importantly, the transition from wavefront-selective to wavefront-shaping is also a function of the degree of locality. When the nonlocality length is substantially larger than the free-space wavelength, the device is highly wavefront-selective, i.e., it only acts as a wavefront-shaping device for very low NA . But when the nonlocality length is comparable to the free-space wavelength, i.e., it supports a large degree of a localization, the device is highly wavefront-shaping, i.e., it acts as a wavefront-shaping device for a large range of NA . We find (Supplementary Section S11) that the wavefront-shaping regime is satisfied when or equivalently We therefore may quantitatively conclude that the degree of spatial selectivity is due to the degree of nonlocality of the q-BIC. Supplementary Section S12 further quantifies this feature by discussing the expansion in the eigenbasis of the device, an analysis related to modal expansions in optics We now explore devices with varying b , Q , and NA to demonstrate the transition between wavefront-selective and wavefront-shaping recipes. As an additional relevant application, we use STCMT to model thermal metasurfaces Engineered nonlocalities have been recently shown to provide a powerful platform to shape thermal emission and photoluminescence from metasurfaces, and STCMT may enable rapid study and prototyping of focused incoherent light emission with respect to the defined nonlocality length and the design parameters. , and we allow the background scattering to follow an idealized geometric phase metasurface implemented by pillars with orientation angles ( ) Meanwhile, for perturbations governing the q-BIC defined by an orientation angle ’üĪ , the coupling coefficients are Finally, to account for the presence of loss, we make the simple adjustment For clarity, we may also separate the scattering kernel into its local and nonlocal components where Then, assuming that the power not reflected is absorbed by the device, the absorption of a given input wave can be simply computed as while the corresponding thermal emission is described by the time-reversed wave, following the universal modal radiation laws for the chosen polarization ’üø ’üØ Beyond specific examples, we may rapidly compute the full width at half maximum (FWHM), x ’üä of the thermal metalens response as a function of Q-factor and NA . Figure This naturally stems from incomplete interference: the finite size of the lens is too small, and the q-BIC leaks out the sides of the metalens instead of building up a complete Fano resonance through destructive interference. ’üĖ ’Ć╝ . However, when 0 W ’üĖ ’ĆŠ we notice instead that the FWHM plateaus, as confirmed in Fig. x ’üä is determined only by the NA . From this, we learn that increasing the Q-factor does not linearly improve the performance of a thermal metalens. Instead, there is a threshold Q above which the focal spot does not continue to tighten; instead, increasing the Q-factor only reduces the intensity of the response. While the transition near 0 W ’üĖ = is gradual, yielding a 'gray area' rather than a sharp threshold, the distinction between the two regimes is clear. Figure TCMT is the foundational model and framework for studying infinite, periodic resonant flat optics. In analogy, here we have introduced STCMT as the framework to model space-varying resonant flat optics. Given the success of TCMT, we expect STCMT to become a foundational tool for design nonlocal meta-optics before implementing a concrete geometry in full-wave simulations and experiments. STCMT qualitatively and quantitatively clarifies the classification of nonlocal metasurfaces into two functionalities: wavefront-selective nonlocal metasurfaces and wavefrontshaping nonlocal metasurfaces. In practice, this allows rapid classification and prototyping of a system for comparison to the selectivity requirements of an application. More generally, STCMT enables computation of the idealized performance of a given system, taking into account finite size, space-varying properties, and degrees of freedom manipulatable across the surface. In other words, it sets goalposts (upper bounds on performance) to be reached for in practical implementation under a given set of assumptions (geometry, number of layers, loss, size, reciprocity, etc.). In addition to its practical advantages, among the key benefits of CMT is the potential to add quantitative and qualitative understanding to the underlying physics of a resonant response. STCMT captures and provides insight into several novel aspect of recent efforts on nonlocal metasurfaces: directly stemming from STCMT, we clarified that: (i) the two hallmarks of a nonlocal phase gradient (shift of band structure in input angle, and anomalous reflection) are simple consequences of a mixed Fourier transformation in the context of STCMT; (ii) a symmetric response after such mixed Fourier transformation is enforced by reciprocity, revealing that a near-unity efficiency nonlocal phase gradient is a vertically asymmetric phenomenon, in turn revealing the requirement of vertical asymmetry in the structure; and (iii) that the spatial selectivity is intrinsically tied to the eigenwave encoded into the metasurface, to a degree controlled by the nonlocality length 0 ’üĖ of the q-BIC (a quantitative measure of the lateral interaction length, thereby setting the minimum metasurface size required to observe a Fano response, as seen in Fig. While we demonstrated the utility of STCMT for understanding and studying diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces, we emphasize that this represents a unified framework capable of describing metasurfaces with or without the assumption of locality. For instance, the local assumption is recovered if only the main diagonal of the nonlocal matrices is populated, and the effects of nearest neighbors are included when more elements than just the main diagonal are nonzero. As discussed further in Supplementary Section S14, our framework may enable future work explicitly taking into account neighbor-neighbor (nonlocal) interactions-that is, to go beyond the so-called "local phase approximation" foundational to metasurface design (perhaps by extension to quasi-normal modes In summary, in this work we have extended the coupled mode theory formalism to capture the resonant physics of space-varying metasurfaces. We demonstrated excellent agreement with full-wave simulations of devices within the rapidly emerging paradigm of diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces, which are capable of wavefront and thermal emission manipulation via the physics of q-BICs. This emerging platform is capable of unprecedent control of light for applications such as augmented reality, secure optical communications, compact optical sources, and nonlinear and quantum optics. STCMT elegantly captures the essential physics of these systems, and enables rapid, analytical and numerical study and design of next-generational meta-optical system. . (1) The coupling vector ’ü½ contains the coupling coefficients from free-space excitation, ’üĘ r is the (resonant) modal frequency of the q-BIC, ’ü¦ r is the radiative scattering rate, and ’ü¦ i is the nonradiative scattering rate (which we will take to be 0 throughout). We note that the scattering rates may be used interchangably with a corresponding lifetime, e.g. ’ü┤’ü¦ = 1/ rr is the radiative lifetime of the mode. We also wish to know the outgoing (scattered) waves - s , which are also normalized so that -- ss is the outgoing intensity. We assume timeharmonic solutions of the form ) Then, if in the absence of the q-BIC the outgoing wave is given by where ’üĘ) ( C is the background scattering matrix, the contribution from the decaying q-BIC means - s must be given by Equations ( parameterizing the system of interest with phenomenological parameters. In doing so, we will retrieve the scattering matrix S relating the incoming waves to the the outgoing waves, parameterized by quantities rationally controlled through the symmetry properties of q-BICs. Regarding (i), here we are interested in physical systems subject to the constraints of reciprocity, energy conservation, and time-reversal Energy conservation means that the intensity coupling out of the q-BIC is constrained by the radiative decay rate, in particular, Finally, for time reversal invariant systems, the equations describing a decaying q-BIC with no driving (incoming) waves must, under time reversal, match the equations describing a q-BIC being populated at the radiative decay rate without scattering to any outgoing waves, which requires We may now eliminate the modal amplitude in Eqns. ( We are interested in particular in the local scattering matrix of the form: where 0 r and 0 t are real-valued Fresnel coefficients (e.g., as approximated by a thin film interference model). This scattering matrix uses a basis for the fields of the form: where E is the electric field on side i with polarization p . Then we seek the complex coupling coefficients where we include the background scattering phase factor for convenience, allowing us to write Eqn. and, without loss of generality, we may parameterize the perturbation strengths as where ’üż 0 is a measure of the overall perturbation strength and ’üż is an angular parameter determining the relative contribution from each interface. By construction (or definition for a q-BIC), the Q-factor (or radiative lifetime) is controlled by the overall perturbation strength, and hence we expect ’ü┤’üż ’éĄ where the first two coefficients represent scattering directly from an interface to their respective ports and the latter two represent indirect scattering from an interface through the slab and to the opposite port. The direct scattering coefficients are not equal in magnitude because the perturbation strengths are different (parameterized by ’üż ), but by the symmetry of the unperturbed system (and thereby, the mode profile), a symmetric mode will scatter with the same direct phase ’üå . An anti-symmetric mode will scatter with opposite phase, which may accounted for with ’üż . The indirect scattering coefficients [the latter two in Eqn. We now begin step (2) of developing the TCMT by applying physical constraints by applying the consequence of energy conservation, and time-reversal symmetry, to determine the allowed forms the complex coefficients. From Eqn. which, upon inserting Eqn. Meanwhile, from time reversal symmetry [Eqn. from which we have )cos( ) cos( )sin( ) )cos( cos( cos( ) Calling the left-hand side 0 h , the right-hand side requires that , from which it may be shown that To simplify the final form, we now note that for the system at study here, we operate such that the resonant frequency ’üĘ r is near the transmission peak of a Fabry-Perot background, And thereby, we arrive at the following form for the scattering coefficients, Equation ( with our case specifically parameterized by These phenomenological parameters are each directly controlled by geometric (and material) parameters as where ) ( f represents some function (with no generalized closed form) of the period, permittivity, and other geometrical parameters of the unperturbed PCS. Finally, we may simply extend this model to the momentum-frequency domain by the replacement ’üĘ’üĘ ŌåÆ () rr k and by taking the incoming and outgoing wave basis as planewaves with in-plane momenta k . Here, near normal incidence (i.e., a band edge) the resonant frequency may be approximated parabolically as where ’üĘ 0 is the resonant frequency at normal incidence (i.e., the band-edge frequency) and b is the Taylor expansion coefficient describing the curvature of the band near the band edge. In the main text, we are principally interested in the case where ’üż’ü░ = /4 and ’ü▒ ’ü” ’ü░ =+ /2. In this case, Eqn. ( In a circular polarization basis, we therefore have ( ) as used in the main text. Well within the purview of TCMT is modelling infinitely periodic structure defined by a band structure in momentum-frequency space. In this case, simple transformation yields: where we introduce the complex resonant frequency ’üĘ’ü¦ ’üŚ= + 0 i , and assume that the time dependence of the broadband, background scattering is instantaneous, tt (see the discussion in Ref. To proceed, we assume the Taylor expanded form of the complex resonant frequency: With Eqn. On the left-hand side, the spatial derivative terms are obtained from the well-known Fourier transform properties that the nth derivative satisfies where ( ) is the Fourier transform of ( ) fx. While on the right-hand side we use the convolution theorem. Since we know ahead of time that the band structure of a q-BIC in an unperturbed nonlocal metasurface is periodic in momentum space, and is even by reciprocity, another natural choice for expanding the resonant frequency is the cosine series: where here we keep the loss constant for simplicity, n b are coefficients and x dt Noticing that a well-known approximation for a second derivative is which becomes an equality in the limit that , we re-obtain the non-Hermitian Schrodinger equation used in the main text with the equivalents Given the Taylor series expansion of the cosine function, this result is well within expectation. At the band-edge frequency, ’üĘ’üĘ = 0 , the nonlocal kernel drops to a factor -1 e of its maximum value at a distance equal to This value, which we call the nonlocality length, is the characteristic distance across which the optical response is correlated for the band-edge mode. In general, if this value is sufficiently small, optical power is well-localized, and the metasurface may be considered local. For comparison, we consider scattering of s-polarized light from free-space to a bare interface of a dielectric with refractive index n , described by the Fresnel coefficient 22 00 22 00 () The nonlocal reflection kernel may be computed by taking the Fourier Transform of Eqn. (52) (setting s r to 0 when ’ĆŠ 0 kk ). For comparison, Fig. We begin with Eqn. which carries a scattered power following ( where we leave the ( ) (75) Finally, we derive Eqn. ( . That is, as (79) Regardless of periodicity, a nonlocal metasurface device may still be studied in the basis of plane waves (especially useful for phase gradient devices). A complete description of the scattering from such a metasurface requires knowledge of its scattering matrix ) ,, ) ( , , where ’éó k and k are the basis wavevectors of the incoming and outgoing wavevectors, respectively, and subscripts delineate the two sides of the metasurface interface. For a lossless, reciprocal, system we have by reciprocity, )) In words, in a lossless system the sum of the reflectance and transmittance to all output momenta 1 k must be unity for any input momentum In the space frequency domain, we correspondingly have ) We now seek the relationship between ij S and ’ü│ ij . Since we wish to compare this to the scattering matrix elements in a plane wave basis, we use the test incident plane wave in which case Eqn. (84) shows, for instance, the reflected field is simply the Fourier transform of the nonlocal reflection kernel. We may then decompose the reflected field into its constituent plane waves by an inverse Fourier transform ii E dxE ikx kx That is to say, the elements of the scattering matrix may be computed by a mixed Fourier transform of the nonlocal kernels, confirming that the nonlocal kernels fully contain the Next, we show that the continuous form of the STCMT equations may be translated to discrete, or matrix form. This is done for convenience of numerical computation, and is in keeping with the tradition of metasurfaces as being built from discrete subwavelength building blocks (meta-units). Consider, for instance, the scalar case wherein the modal parameters are invariant. For such a metasurface having meta-units at positions ’üø ’üØ = 12 ... we are interested in the response to incident electric fields of the form where , after interacting with a nonlocal metasurface described by the discrete phase profile where ’üå’üå = () ii x and the positive (negative) sign applies to light coming from port 1 (2). For instance, in Sec. III.C the phase functions followed x . Throughout we assume that the n meta-units are equally spaced such that --= a . The reflected and transmitted fields may be calculated by where (95). Then, the output fields due to an excitation in E are obtained by while the reflectance and transmittance are then calculated simply as where E is the norm of the vector E . Using the matrix form, we may also determine the eigen-wave of a discrete nonlocal metasurface by the eigenvector with maximal eigenvalue from the eigenvalue problem where ŌĆĀ refers to the Hermitian conjugate. In full there will be n eigenvalues and eigenvectors; however, we are primarily interested in the eigenvector with the highest eigenvalue, which is the principal eigen-wave. Finally, we note that the discretization introduces artificial spatial frequencies of magnitudes a , where m is an integer. This numerical approximation produces artificial resonances at frequencies satisfying In case (i), we wish to study devices of finite size. For a finite metasurface, the energy in a q-BIC at position ’éó x is not correlated with positions x that exist outside the metasurface. Hence the value of ’ü▓ or must vanish accordingly. Happily, this boundary condition happens naturally following the procedure of the previous section. For instance, we consider the matrix form ’üÆ at the band-edge frequency for the device in In case (ii), we wish to capture infinite devices, in which case we should expect the deviations from a plane wave should vanish. In the periodic case we require that the energy be correlated according to contributions from every period of the device. For instance, the left edge of the period (near -/2 W ) must be closely correlated to the right edge of the period (near /2 W ), which is not captured in the above procedure or the matrix in Fig. Instead, we must alter the construction of ’üÆ in order to include contributions from every period. For instance, for normally incident light, we sum instances of the nonlocal term shifted by integer multiples of the period W of the device: In this section, we briefly demonstrate the extension of the STCMT to two-dimensional (2D) metasurfaces. This required extending the nonlocal kernels to be a function of both (106) For simplicity, we assume that the band structure is completely isotropic. Lastly, we note that the matrix size (which has important consequences for memory requirements and other computational costs) scale as 4 N , where N is the characteristic number of positions in each x and y . This compares poorly to full-wave simulations, in which the field matrices scale as 2 N for fixed z dimension simulations. However, it is apparent from Fig. Here, we extend our study of the nonlocal metalenses to frequencies off the band edge. We begin by computing the principle eigen-wave at three frequencies and studying how they propagate. Figure A plane wave at normal incidence excites a resonant frequency depending on the local value of the phase gradient [as in Eqn. ’éó ( ) Cx , and (iii) add absorption loss, distinguishing the radiative scattering rate r ’ü¦ and the nonradiative scattering (loss) rate nr ’ü¦ . Our scattering matrix r r