Metasurfaces, optics made from subwavelength-scale nanostructures, have been limited to millimeter-sizes by the scaling challenge of producing vast numbers of precisely engineered elements over a large area. In this study, we demonstrate an all-glass 100 mm diameter metasurface lens (metalens) comprising 18.7 billion nanostructures that operates in the visible spectrum with a fast f-number (f/1.5, NA=0.32) using deep-ultraviolet (DUV) projection lithography. Our work overcomes the exposure area constraints of lithography tools and demonstrates that large metasurfaces are commercially feasible. Additionally, we investigate the impact of various fabrication errors on the imaging quality of the metalens, several of which are unique to such large area metasurfaces. We demonstrate direct astronomical imaging of the Sun, the Moon, and emission nebulae at visible wavelengths and validate the robustness of such metasurfaces under extreme environmental thermal swings for space applications. Large objective apertures are necessary for optical systems which collect weak or rapidly evolving signals, such as in astronomical imaging and remote airborne surveillance, as well as in high-power laser applications to decrease the incident power density. Due to the optomechanical mounting limitations and the volumetric-and-weight scaling of refractive objective lenses with the diameter, large aperture optics must often be reflective instead of transmissive. Dielectric metasurfaces, which consist of sub-wavelength-spaced nanostructures with micron-scale thickness, have the potential to serve as ultralight and thin transmissive optics if they can be fabricated at scale over large areas. Although many early demonstrations of metasurfaces and binary subwavelength diffractive optics utilized electron-beam (e-beam) lithography Increasing the metasurface diameter to accommodate large-aperture applications, however, does have physical and economic manufacturing limitations, as the number of required nanostructures scales as the square of the radius. E-beam lithography, which involves the serial writing of each nanostructure at high spatial resolution, is not a practical method for producing metasurface lenses (metalenses) larger than several centimeters in diameter. Even with state-of-the-art tools equipped with ultrafast 100 MHz-scale e-beam oscillators and multi-beam settings 14 , the fabrication process takes several hours per sample, rendering it inefficient for large-scale production. Recent developments in e-beam writing techniques using variable-shaped beam (VSB) and cell-projection (CP) allow repeated metasurface structures to be written over a 280 mm diameter circle in 36 hours. The use of modern semiconductor foundry technology, which has supported the exponential growth in transistor density in integrated circuits since 1965 Here, we experimentally demonstrate and characterize of a sub-meter scale (i.e., 1/10 th of a meter) large diameter metalens operating at visible wavelengths, fabricated using fully CMOS compatible process and materials. The metalens is manufactured using DUV projection lithography and has an area that exceeds the single shot exposure size limit of the lithography tool. We do this by stitching multiple exposure fields using different photolithography reticles in an exposure cycle. The metalens is polarization-insensitive, has a 100 mm diameter and 150 mm focal length for 632.8 nm wavelength light, corresponding to a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.32 or an fnumber of 1.5. We choose fused silica (SiO2) as the sole constituent material for this monolithic metalens not only for its low absorption in the visible and CMOS process compatibility but also for its high laser-induced damage threshold, which is suitable for high-energy applications. Also, the thermal robustness enables various coatings (e.g., anti-reflection or anti-fouling coats) to be deposited directly onto the metalens or its backside, which is an essential requirement for such metalenses to be utilized in versatile astronomical applications. We show that this photolithography-based manufacturing approach, which was previously limited to the infrared spectrum Metasurfaces comprise nanostructures that impart a designed local wavefront or polarization transformation to incident light and can demonstrate unconventional functionality and performance with a very thin form factor that is difficult to achieve with conventional bulk optics. For instance, full Stokes polarimetry imaging has been realized with a single metasurface coupled to a commercial camera sensor To design a 100 mm diameter metalens in a manner compatible with the fabrication workflow of existing semiconductor chip manufacturing tools, we first divide the 100 mm diameter region into 25 square sections (5×5 square array). Each section occupies a 20 × 20 mm square area (Fig. The metalens is composed of fused silica nanopillars with diameters ranging from 250 nm to 600 nm which have a constant edge-to-edge spacing of 250 nm and a height of 1.5 μm. This keeps both the pattern and the gap dimensions above the 200 nm single-exposure feature size limit of the DUV lithography tool used (ASML PAS 5500/300C DUV Wafer Stepper, λ=248 nm). The simulated transmitted phases and amplitudes versus the nanopillar diameter are plotted in Fig. where λ d is the design wavelength, f is the focal length of the metalens, and φ(0) is the phase at the center of the metalens. When Eq. 1 is satisfied, the transmitted light from each point on the metalens interferes constructively at the focal point; this is equivalent to having a spherical wavefront that converges at the focal point. We set φ(0) to that of the transmitted phase of the nanopillar with the largest diameter in the library (600 nm) so that the phase wrapping zone transition between the largest and smallest nanostructures is located the furthest from the optical axis. The nanopillars at each radial position are placed uniformly across the azimuthal direction with a constant edge-to-edge spacing of 250 nm. The full metalens design comprises 18.7 billion nanopillars. The azimuthal spacing between nanopillars is slightly larger than 250 nm close to the metalens center due to the larger quantization error associated with the small integer number of nanopillars; however, such changes to the edge-to-edge gap have minimal effect on the transmitted phase from each nanostructure (see Fig. The seven individual stitching sections of the metalens are indexed as reticles 1 to 7 (Fig. As the first fabrication step, we coat a 150 mm (6-inch) fused silica wafer with a 150 nm-thick aluminum (Al) film (Fig. We then coat the wafer with another ARC layer and a negative DUV photoresist layer, which serves as the etch mask for the metalens pattern creation in the Al layer. We opt to use a negative photoresist due to its advantageous process window compared to positive photoresist when creating isolated structures: overexposure of positive resist can cause shrinkage or delamination of the resist patterns, while patterns on negative resist simply become enlarged. As shown in Fig. After the metalens pattern is formed in the negative photoresist, it is first transferred to the ARC layer using an Ar/O2 reactive ion etch (RIE) (Fig. A photograph and a tilted scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the 100 mm diameter metalens are shown in Fig. To evaluate the focusing quality of the metalens, we illuminate the pristine backside of the metalens with the expanded and collimated beam of a Helium-Neon laser (λ=632.8 nm). We then acquire the focal profile along the optical axis separately using a horizontal microscope (Fig. The Strehl ratio of the fabricated metalens is 0.6. Furthermore, the diameter of the first ring of minimum intensity around the focal point of the metalens is 3.4 μm, whereas the ideal Airy disk diameter for a diffraction-limited lens with NA=0.32 would be 2.3 μm, indicating the presence of aberrations in the metalens. The measured PSF, degraded by the wavefront aberration, resembles that of a lens with an effective NA of 0.2, which corresponds to a lens with a diameter of 60 mm and a focal length of 150 mm that has an Airy disk diameter of 3.86 μm (Fig. The primary cause of the aberration is the reticle quality difference between the industry-grade center sections (reticles 1-3) and the lab-made outer sections (reticles 4-7). The SEM images in Fig. The effect of the missing pillars on the PSF becomes more apparent when the transmitted phase and the diffracted amplitude information are decoupled using interferometry and diffraction intensity imaging. The deviation of the transmitted wavefront phase of the metalens from the ideal, i.e., wavefront aberration function (WAF), is obtained using full-aperture interferometry. For this, a commercial Fizeau interferometer (Zygo VeriFire TM ATZ, Zygo Corporation) is used in a double-pass nulling interferometry configuration, in which the metalens-focused beam is reflected back by a return sphere (i.e., high-accuracy spherical ball), and produces an interferogram at the interferometer aperture (Fig. The diffracted intensity after the metalens (Fig. Exposure field-linked fabrication errors are a unique problem for metasurface optical elements made with CMOS-compatible manufacturing processes, since such rectilinear imperfections do not exist for traditional optics manufacturing methods such as diamond turning or other mechanical grinding and polishing techniques. To fully characterize such fabrication errors on the imaging quality degradation and their corresponding tolerances, we conduct a simulation-based study quantifying the following effects: (1) unresolved nanopillars below certain diameters, (2) a uniform shift in nanopillar diameters, and (3) a uniform shift in nanopillar height. Effects ( Since full-lens simulation of 18.7 billion nanostructures is impractical on full-wave Maxwell equation solvers, we employ the locally periodic assumption 37 and take the transmitted field to be equal to the stitched fields from individual nanopillars. We numerically discretize the metalens into 100,000 annular rings, each divided into 100 sections evenly in the azimuthal direction, resulting in a total of 10 million arc sections. This discretization choice allows for fine resolution of the rapidly-varying radial transmission behavior without expending additional elements to resolve the slowly-varying azimuthal behavior. We then propagate the transmitted electromagnetic field from each arc section toward the focal plane using a vectorial propagator 38 , weighting each arc section with its area. The focal plane complex fields are used to calculate the MTF, Strehl ratio (volume under the 2D MTF relative to that of the diffraction limit), and focusing efficiency (fraction of incident power that passes through 3 Airy disk diameters centered on the optic axis). Further details of the simulation are provided in the Supplementary Information. Fig. For fabrication errors other than section-linked missing nanopillars, the Strehl ratio remains diffraction-limited although the focusing efficiency decreases. The calculated Strehl ratios and focusing efficiencies resulting from nanopillar diameter shifts are provided in Fig. Beyond fabrication errors, we investigate the role of imperfections in the measurement apparatus, which arise easily due to the challenges of aligning and characterizing large aperture optical elements. If the illuminating light is non-uniform, for example, with a Gaussian intensity profile (Fig. Table To illustrate the imaging performance of the fabricated metalens, we build a wide field-of-view (i.e., ~0.6°) meta-astrophotography apparatus using only the 100 mm diameter metalens (without any other optical lenses or mirrors), a narrowband color filter, and a cooled CMOS imaging sensor placed at the metalens focal plane (Fig. In summary, we demonstrate the fabrication of an all-glass 100 mm diameter metalens capable of operating in the visible wavelength range using DUV lithography, surpassing the tool's exposure size limit. The diameter of the metalens can be further increased to about 290 mm, as 300 mm diameter wafers and corresponding CMOS foundry tools become increasingly available in the industry. We also show that in addition to PSF measurements, full-aperture interferometry offers valuable insights into the optical wavefront-based characterization of metalenses. This technique effectively decouples the phase and amplitude error information, which identifies a unique challenge for flat optic elements fabricated by stitching multiple exposure fields. Through simulation-based study, we also show the effects of various possible exposure field-linked fabrication errors on the imaging quality of the metalens, which provide tolerance windows for the manufacturing processes. Additionally, we demonstrate that the single metalens is capable of imaging celestial objects in the visible wavelength range. The efficiency of the presented metalens can be improved by using all-industrial grade reticles and higher resolution manufacturing techniques such as immersion DUV lithography (λ=193 nm), so that even smaller diameter nanopillars can be fabricated Fabrication process 150 mm diameter, double side polished, 500 μm thick JGS2 fused silica wafers (WaferPro LLC) are used in this study. During the fabrication process, the creation of a photoresist edge-bead, either by recoil or surface tension, can introduce unreliable fabrication conditions. This includes challenges such as difficulties in wafer height detection or achieving plasma etch uniformity at the edge of the wafer. In addition, some plasma etching tools mechanically clamp down on edge of the wafer during processing that the edge of the area should be avoided. Therefore, it is generally a good rule of thumb to exclude a few millimeters around the rim of a wafer during wafer-based manufacturing. As conventional semiconductor foundries typically use 100 mm (4in.), 150 mm (6-in.), 200 mm (8-in.), or 300 mm (12-in.) wafers, here we choose 150 mm diameter wafer as a substrate for a 100 mm diameter metalens. The wafers are cleaned using a MOS clean process involving an organic cleaning step by immersing the wafers in 1:1:6 volumetric ratio H2O2:NH4OH:H2O solution at 85 °C for 10 minutes, followed by an ionic clean step by immersing in 1:1:6 H2O2:HCl:H2O solution at 85 °C for 10 minutes. After each cleaning step, the wafers are thoroughly rinsed in deionized (DI) water bath by filling and dumping the rinse bath 3 times. The MOS cleaned wafers are then spinrinsed and dried (Superclean 1600 Spin Rinse Dryer, Verteq). The 150 nm thick Al film is deposited on the cleaned wafers using an e-beam evaporator with planetary wafer holders (CHA MARK 50 E-beam Evaporator, CHA Industries). The Al-coated wafers are first spin-coated with 62 nm thick DUV anti-reflection coating (ARC) layer (DUV 42P, Brewer Science), followed by spin-coating of 600 nm thick positive DUV resist (UV210-0.6, Shipley). The alignment marks are exposed at the designated positions as shown in Fig. The wafer with alignment marks (i.e., fiducials) etched into Al layer is then coated with 62 nm thick DUV ARC layer, followed by 500 nm thick negative DUV resist (UVN2300, Dow Electronic Materials). The 100 mm diameter metalens pattern is exposed onto the wafer with the DUV stepper system as depicted in Fig. Using the patterned resist and ARC layer as an etch mask, the metalens pattern is then transferred to Al film using Ar/Cl2 inductively coupled plasma RIE (ICP-RIE, PlasmaPro 100 Cobra 300, Oxford Instruments). The resist and ARC layer are then stripped using downstream plasma ashing (Matrix 105, Matrix Integrated Systems), leaving only the patterned Al on the wafer. Then, the 1.5 μm tall, fused silica nanopillars are formed by vertically etching into the fused silica substrate using C3F8 ICP-RIE (NLD-570, ULVAC), using the patterned Al as an etch mask. In detail, when C3F8 is introduced in the etch chamber and is dissociated into plasma, a thin film of fluorocarbon deposits on the exposed area of the substrate, creating an etch inhibitor layer that prohibits fluoride ions from chemically etching SiO2 (Fig. In this metalens design file generation, we place the nanopillars in cylindrical coordinates from azimuthal symmetry considerations 1 . The required fused silica nanopillar diameter D(n) at each radial position r n is chosen to satisfy Eq. ( where ⌊x⌋ is the floor function. This places nanopillars so that they have the same edge-to-edge distance equal to or slightly larger than 250 nm. This resulted in placement of 18,700,751,972 nanopillars for the entire 100 mm diameter metalens. The created 100 mm diameter metalens design is then discretized into 25 sections, each having an area of 20 × 20 mm. Out of the 25 sections, only 7 sections (see Fig. The 100 mm metalens is numerically simulated by discretizing the 100 mm aperture into 100,000 annular rings with equal radial thickness of 500 nm, then discretizing each annular ring into 100 equal sections in the azimuthal direction, which produces 10 million annular sections. The radial discretization is chosen to resolve the highest spatial frequency zone at the edge of the metalens using at least four points. Each of the 10 million annular sections is associated with the complex scalar electric field that is transmitted through the nanopillar located at the geometric center of that annular section. The transmitted electric field through each nanopillar is obtained using the locally periodic assumption 2 . Each glass nanopillar on glass substrate geometry combination is individually simulated using the Rigorous Coupled Wave Analysis platform RETICOLO 3 on a periodic square lattice with a nominal edge-to-edge distance of 250 nm, 200 staircase discretization per circular arc quadrant, and 2601 Fourier plane waves. Empty regions without nanopillars are simulated under the same conditions with the nanopillar being replaced with a layer of air that has the same thickness as the nanopillar height. The fused silica refractive index as a function of wavelength is obtained from the dispersion equation published by A fiber-coupled He-Ne laser (λ = 632.8 nm, N-LHR-121, Newport Corporation) is used as an illumination source. After passing the laser beam through the fiber collimator (F220APC-633, Thorlabs), the collimated beam is then sent through an objective lens (EA achro 20X/0.40, W.D. 0.8 mm, Motic) from its back side. The focal point of the objective lens is used as the point-source image, which is placed at the focus of a 45° off-axis parabolic mirror (#35-629, Edmund Optics). The parabolic mirror then creates a collimated beam with diameter of 101 mm, which is incident on the 100 mm diameter metalens. The image of the focus is 40X magnified and recorded by the microscope camera of Optikos MTF measurement tool (LensCheck, Optikos Corp.). The microscope camera is stepped along z-axis to acquire the point-spread-function along the optic axis. The focal plane of the metalens is determined by the plane of maximum on-axis intensity. For an accurate PSF measurement, a high-quality collimated light incident on a metalens at a normal angle is important. This is relatively easier to achieve for few millimeter aperture optics, where quality optomechanical components are readily available, but not for a hundred-millimeter or larger scale optics: Not only is the creation of large-diameter collimated beam with nearplanewave phase front difficult and costly, the alignment of large optics with respect to the collimated beam also requires extensive trial and error. To ensure the validity of the PSF characterization, therefore, a different measurement technique is needed to corroborate the PSF analysis for large-diameter optics, in general. A more commonly used and widely accepted characterization method for large optics is interferometric analysis. A point source image is projected onto the objective lens' object plane, which is used as a reference to ensure the PSM is correctly focused on the surface of interest or at the center of a sphere. Detailed descriptions and discussions can be found in Ref. 42. (b) Schematic of the focal length measurement apparatus. A PSM is securely mounted on a coordinate measurement machine (CMM, Tesa Micro-hite 3D, Tesa Technology), which is first focused on the rear surface of the metalens. After acquiring the x,y,z positions of the PSM at various metalens surface positions, the PSM is then moved to focus at the center of the return sphere (RS), whose center is aligned to the metalens' focus using a Fizeau interferometer. The known thickness of the metalens substrate is subtracted out. (c) Various points of measurements at the surface of the metalens. The positional data are taken at 13 different locations and are labeled with numbers: 1-6 for the inner section of the metalens, and 7-13 for the outer section of the metalens. The measured distance from the focal plane (i.e., metalens' surface to the return sphere's center of curvature) is 149.97 mm with standard deviation of 0.18 mm, which is in good agreement with the designed focal length of 150 mm. (d) List of measured axial (i.e., along the metalens' surface normal) distance values from the return sphere's center of curvature at different positions of the metalens. A laser Fizeau interferometer (Zygo Verifire TM ATZ, Zygo Corporation) was used in nulling interferometry double-pass configuration to obtain the full-aperture wavefront measurement. We note that the image depicted on the left is not an exact configuration of the used interferometer but is only a simplified schematic diagram to illustrate the measurement concept. For better understanding, please see Ref. 42. The metalens is illuminated by a collimated beam ( λ = 632.8 nm) from a Fizeau interferometer, creating the metalens' focus at its focal plane. A return sphere (RS) with a known diameter is placed at the center of the metalens' focus, having the focal plane coincide with the center of the return sphere. The focused beam by the metalens propagates toward the return sphere and is retroreflected from the RS surface, which is re-incident on the metalens. The doubly transmitted (i.e., double-pass) wavefront creates twice of the wavefront aberration function (WAF) deviating from an ideal spherical wavefront; if the wavefront from the metalens is perfectly spherical, the reflected wavefront from the return sphere would also be perfectly spherical, resulting in a null interferogram. The interfered irradiance image is then acquired with a camera. Multiple phase-shifted fringe patterns are used to calculate the phase map. The phase map is unwrapped across the full-aperture to provide the wavefront error map. After removing artifacts from misalignment (i.e., piston, tip, tilt, and power) of the metrology configuration (i.e., interferometer, metalens, and the return sphere) we obtain the metalens' wavefront error. We investigate the effect of non-uniform illumination intensity by modelling the incident intensity profile using a cylindrically symmetric Gaussian intensity profile with a flat phase front. The Gaussian width w is defined so that the radial intensity profile has the form I(ρ) = I 0 exp(-ρ 2 w 2 ). The Strehl ratio drops below the diffraction limit (0.8) when the Gaussian width of the incident beam is less than 40% of the total aperture size. Measured wavefront aberration from null interferometry configuration (Fig. For this tilt study, the metalens focal spot is sampled on a 601 × 601 square grid around the tilted focal spot center up to a transverse diameter of 18 Airy disks. This large sampling region is required to capture the spatial patterns associated with strongly aberrated focal spots. The incident tilt angle is defined as the angle of the incident wavefront in air before it hits the first air/glass interface on the back face of the metalens. The Strehl ratio falls below the diffraction limit (~0.8) at a 30" tilt. Image of the North America Nebula (NGC7000) acquired from rooftop of the Science Center Building, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, on May 13, 2022. The used metalens astro-imager comprises a 100 mm diameter metalens, SVBONY 2-inch, 7 nm bandwidth H-alpha filter, and a ZWO ASI1600mm-pro cooled CMOS mono camera (4656 x 6520 pixels, 3.8 μm × 3.8 μm pixel size), mounted on a Celestron AVX equatorial mount with optical tracking provided from a QHY miniquidescope as a guide-scope mounted to a guidecamera (ASI178mm, ZWO). The image sensor was cooled to 0.5 °C, and 11 light frames and 4 dark frames were acquired with 120 second exposure time per frame in RAW12 format with a gain value of 200. Pixel binning was not used. The acquired images are then processed using Deep Sky Stacker (http://deepskystacker.free.fr/) software, with standard mode (Light: average, Dark: median, Alignment: Automatic). A 1 cm diameter metalens was immersed in isopropanol and put in an ultrasonication bath (Ultra Clean Equipment, Inc.) for 20 minutes at the highest power setting to see effects of the vibrational stress on the nanopillars. From optical microscope images taken (a), (b) before and (c), (d) after ultrasonication, the nanopillars seem to remain intact even after prolonged exposure to sonic waves. The optical images are taken at a similar location to show that the nanopillars remain intact. Gaps in the rings are where the nanopillars were not fabricated due to photomask resolution limitations. We do not observe evidence of fabricated nanopillars being damaged they leave a telltale mark at the base when they are broken off from the substrate. A 1 mm diameter TiO2 metasurface (700 nm tall, Ref. 43) on a 1-in. diameter fused silica wafer went through the same thermal shock cycles, illustrated in Fig. A 1 mm diameter TiO2 metasurface (700 nm tall, Ref. 43) fabricated with e-beam lithography on a 1-in. diameter fused silica wafer went through the same 20 minute ultrasonication as illustrated in Fig. 