Superconducting (SC) state has spin and orbital degrees of freedom, and spin-triplet superconductivity shows multiple SC phases due to the presence of these degrees of freedom. However, the observation of spin-direction rotation occurring inside the SC state (SC spin rotation) has hardly been reported. UTe2, a recently discovered topological superconductor, exhibits various SC phases under pressure: SC state at ambient pressure (SC1), high-temperature SC state above 0.5 GPa (SC2), and low-temperature SC state above 0.5 GPa (SC3). We performed nuclear magnetic resonance and AC susceptibility measurements on single-crystal UTe2. The b-axis spin susceptibility remains unchanged in SC2, unlike in SC1, and decreases below the SC2-SC3 transition with spin modulation. These unique properties in SC3 arise from the coexistence of two SC order parameters. Our NMR results confirm the spin-triplet superconductivity with SC spin parallel to b in SC2, and unveil the remaining of spin degrees of freedom in superconducting UTe2. One-Sentence Summary: Multiple superconducting phases with spin rotation in the superconducting state was observed. What kind of an ordered state is realized under competing interaction is a central issue in condensed matter physics. Superconductivity and superfluidity are most remarkable macroscopic quantum phenomena produced by two-fermion pairs, so-called the Cooper pair. In conventional superconductivity, which covers almost all superconductors discovered so far, the Cooper pairs have zero total spin and orbital angular momenta, and have no degrees of freedom. Therefore, only one superconducting (SC) state is realized. Theoretically, it is possible that either or both of the two angular momenta are non-zero, and hence the coexistence of two SC phases, and/or multiple SC phases was anticipated. The wellknown example of such multi-phases is superfluid 3 He, in which two phases (A and B) with lowest energy are realized in zero field, and becomes more complex under magnetic fields and/or anisotropic environment Herein, we focus on a recently discovered uranium-based superconductor uranium ditelluride (UTe2) with SC transition temperature Tc ∼ 1.6 K In addition, UTe2 shows multiple SC phases even at ambient pressure. For H || b, Tc first decreases with increasing H and shows a minimum at around 16 T, then Tc increases up to 35 T To elucidate the SC properties of the multiple SC phases in UTe2, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) serves as a highly effective tool. NMR is a technique that probes nuclear spins, which interact with electron spins through strong hyperfine interactions. Consequently, it enables us to investigate the electron spin susceptibility microscopically. While the spin susceptibility in the SC state cannot be measured due to the SC diamagnetism by the bulk magnetization measurement, NMR can detect it with the hyperfine interaction. Moreover, to measure spin susceptibility in the multiple SC states under pressure, NMR is a unique measurement that meets these requirements. Here, we report the results of the NMR Knight shift K for H || b (Kb) at 1.2 GPa, at which Tc of SC2 is maximum. We found that the spin susceptibility along the b axis is unchanged in SC2, which is different from that observed in SC1 at ambient pressure. More surprisingly, at the SC2-SC3 transition, Kb suddenly decreases and the NMR-spectral width becomes broader. These results suggest that the SC order parameter of SC1 and SC2 is different and that SC2 is a spin-triplet superconductivity with spin oriented toward the b axis and SC spin reoriented in SC3 state. These results suggest that the SC order parameter d-vector was changed at the SC3 transition, and the spin degrees of freedom remains in the superconductivity of UTe2. As there are two crystallographically inequivalent Te sites in UTe2, we observed two 125 Te-NMR peaks as reported in the previous paper Another important point of Fig. We consider the several possibilities of the origin of linewidth broadening in SC3. One is due to the SC vortex state in SC3. Since spin susceptibility is unchanged in SC2, the NMR signal from the vortex core is observed at almost the same position as the SC NMR signal outside the vortex. On the other hand, the spin susceptibility decreases in SC3, and the signal from the vortex core should be observed at the different position from the SC NMR signal, resulting in the NMR signal becoming broader in the mixed state of SC3. However, this possibility would be unlikely, because the measurement fields are far below Hc2 orb ~ 70 T expected from Werthamer, Helfand, and Hohenberg (WHH) theory Figures Another similarity between HFSC and SC2 is that Tc increases with increasing Kb; Figure In conclusion, we have performed 125 Te-NMR measurement on UTe2 under pressure to investigate the SC properties and determine the SC order parameter of SC2 and SC3 phases. The b-axis spin susceptibility in SC2 has the same value as that of the normal state below 3.0 K above 0.5 K. Below 0.5 K, spin susceptibility decreases, and the NMR linewidth increases. These results indicate that the SC order parameter is changed, i.e., SC spin rotation occurs at the SC2-SC3 transition, and the novel SC state with two SC order parameters in SC3. This is microscopic evidence for the remaining the spin-degrees of freedom in the superconductivity of UTe2, inherent to the spin-triplet superconductivity. A high-quality single-crystal UTe2 sample was grown by the chemical vapor transport method with Iodine as a transport agent, details of which are described in ref. In order to confirm Tc, we measured the high-frequency AC susceptibility χAC using the NMR tank circuit. In the superconducting state, the impedance of the circuit changes due to the Meissner effect, and thus the tuning frequency of the circuit drastically changes just below Tc. The hydrostatic pressure is applied using a piston-cylinder-type cell made of NiCrAl and CuBe alloys as described in ref. We used a split-pair magnet to apply horizontal fields to the sample and a 3 He- 4 He dilution refrigerator that can be rotated about the vertical axis. With this setup, we could rotate the magnetic field direction within the bc plane of the sample. The direction of the magnetic field was confirmed by measuring the Te1 signal as described in ref. An NMR spectrometer with a 100 W (at 0 dB input) power amplifier (Thamway Product: N146-5049A) was used for the measurements. A conventional spin-echo method was used for NMR measurements in the temperature range from 0.1 to 4.2 K and in the magnetic field range from 0.8 to 2.5 T. All measurements were carried out with the 3 He-4 He dilution refrigerator, in which the pressure cell was immersed into the 3 He-4 He mixture to reduce radio frequency heating during measurements. The NMR spectrum was obtained by summation of the FFT spectrum with a 5 kHz step. The applied field is estimated by 65 Cu-NMR measurements as discussed here 