We stress that the lower hysteresis line should not be used to infer any thermodynamic quantity below the temperature at which the lower hysteresis line shows a maximum. The following two results of Matsuura et al On the first point we note that the hysteresis in temperature-dependent measurements is dictated by the limits of supercooling (T*) and superheating (T**). At these thermodynamic stability limits the metastable states become unstable We take two examples of free-energy that are in common use We thus note that TC will not, except in some fortuitous case, be the mean of T* and T**. One therefore cannot assert that TC is the mid-point of the lowertemperature and higher-temperature boundaries of the hysteresis region. By analogy, one also cannot assert that H0 is the mid-point of the lower-field and higher-field boundaries of the hysteresis region. The mid-point of hysteresis being taken as the equilibrium phase-transition point is an approximation frequently used by experimentalists, but is not rigorously valid even in simple models for first-order transitions. We now come to the second point of peculiar behaviour of the hysteresis midpoint at low temperature. We wish to assert that the peculiarity is actually in the behaviour of the lower-field limit of the hysteresis, which starts reducing with lowering temperature below 30K, while the upper-field limit does not show such peculiarity and is continuously increasing with reducing temperature. We assert that the lower-field limit of the hysteresis should not be used below 30K (i.e. even above 18K) as it corresponds to the de-arrest of the higher magnetization FRI phase that has undergone glass-like kinetic arrest in this material. It is not due to the thermodynamic phase transformation from metastable FRI phase to stable AFM phase. Matsuura et al Umetsu et al Such peculiarity in the lower-field limit of the hysteresis was observed and highlighted as a consequence of glass-like kinetic arrest of the first-order magnetic transition in both the half-doped manganite Nd0.5Sr0.5MnO3 Thermodynamics looks at transitions that occur at equilibrium, when the free energy of the two phases are equal. As noted in this paper, thermodynamics allows transitions to occur away from equilibrium and up to the metastability limit or the spinodal, from a metastable state to the equilibrium state and in such cases hysteresis is observed. Transition between two phases, with sharp change in physical properties, can also be observed beyond the metastability limit when a glass-like arrested state is de-arrested. Hysteresis in the isothermal scan will again be observed. We note that the lower field of the hysteretic scan shifts from the T* spinodal to the de-arrest line with lowering temperature, and will go from increasing with reducing T to decreasing for reducing T. We assert that the data of Matsuura et al It follows that the lower hysteresis line, below the temperature Tmax at which its maximum is observed, is a manifestation of the arrested high magnetization FM phase being de-arrested and transforming to the equilibrium AFM phase. It has no relation to the equilibrium phase transition line. The upper hysteresis line could be used below Tmax by doing an analytic continuation of its relation to the equilibrium phase transition line obtained at higher temperature. The kinetic arrest, and de-arrest, lines are dictated by kinetics. These do not correspond to thermodynamic processes. While Matsuura et al do not use the mid-point [H0] below the temperature (18K) at which the mid-point shows a maximum, we stress that the lower hysteresis line should not be used to infer any thermodynamic quantity below the temperature (30K) at which this lower hysteresis line shows a maximum. If this line of mid-points viz. H0(T) is used as the equilibrium phasetransition line in their study on Fe(Zn)2Mo3O8 then something peculiar is found from the Clausius-Clapeyron equation below 18K. Specifically, the entropy difference (and the magnetization difference) between the two phases would show complicated behaviour, and would switch its sign below this temperature. Recognizing that such an unusual behaviour requires novel origin like in the melting curve of helium-3, they consider this an unphysical artefact arising of an erroneously inferred equilibrium phase-transition line. The equilibrium phase transition line determined through their studies, that avoid the "two-phase mixture" region of field and temperature, flattens below 18K and does not show peculiarities below this temperature. The lower-field boundary of hysteresis, they conclude, should not be used below 18K.