Global optimization techniques are increasingly preferred over human-driven methods in the design of electromagnetic structures such as metasurfaces, and careful construction and parameterization of the physical structure is critical in ensuring computational efficiency and convergence of the optimization algorithm to a globally optimal solution. While many design variables in physical systems take discrete values, optimization algorithms often benefit from a continuous design space. This work demonstrates the use of level set functions as a continuous basis for designing material distributions for metasurface arrays and introduces an improved parameterization which is termed the periodic level set function. We explore the use of alternate norms in the definition of the level set function and define a new pseudo-inverse technique for upsampling basis coefficients with these norms. The level set method is compared to the fragmented parameterization and shows improved electromagnetic responses for two dissimilar cost functions: a narrowband objective and a broadband objective. Finally, we manufacture an optimized level set metasurface and measure its scattering parameters to demonstrate real-world performance. Just as the intrinsic properties of any material are determined by the chemical and physical arrangement of constitutent atoms, the metamaterial is an artifical material composed of an arrangement of "meta-atoms" Design of increasingly advanced metasurfaces therefore benefits from global topology optimization techniques to explore the design space for an optimal solution. Design space parameterization is required because the computational cost of simulations limits the possible number of cost function evaluations, which in turn significantly limits the number of design variables which can be tuned by optimization algorithms. For example, the canonical metasurface shapes described above have few design variables which are optimized quickly, but only locally optimal solutions are attained. A more expressive design space parameterization for metamaterials is the "fragmented" or "coded" basis The convergence of metamaterial optimizations may be accelerated by employing adjoint methods to compute the gradient of the cost function with respect to the design variables. Used in conjunction with gradient-based optimizers, adjoint methods quickly converge to an optimum. The metamaterial design problem can be formulated as a special case of a general topology optimization problem. We define a design region Ω ⊂ R D and a material distribution function ρ ∈ L 2 (Ω) which is defined on Ω. The vector space in which the distribution function resides is paired with a forward operator that maps distribution functions to points in another vector space which we call the "system response": where M is the number of samples. We formulate a topology optimization problem to design a material distribution function minimizing the error between the resulting system response and a target response y y y ∈ R M subject to inequality constraints c i : where L(•, •) is a loss function such as mean squared error. The general framework can be specialized to metasurfaces by taking Ω = R 2 and constructing a distribution function with a periodicity constraint of period s s s = [s 1 , s 2 ]: The region ) is representative of the infinite structure and is called the unit cell. The design of metasurfaces is challenging because the forward operator H often requires a computationally intensive full-wave electromagnetic simulation that does not compute gradients with respect to the material distribution function. To make metasurface optimization tractable, the material distribution function can be parameterized with a set of design variables that are tuned by an optimization algorithm. The optimization of metamaterials and metasurfaces benefits from a design space parameterization which produces sophisticated material distribution functions while maintaining favorable properties for gradientfree optimization algorithms, i.e., a small number of design variables, a continuous and convex design space, and a Lipschitz continuous cost function. We address all of these goals simultaneously through level set functions. For any scalar function f (x x x) for x x x ∈ R D , a level set of f is a hypersurface in R D where the function takes on a constant value. For instance, given the 2-dimensional function f (x, y) = x 2 + y 2 , the level set for any nonnegative level f (x, y) = r is a circle of radius r. Without loss of generality, we will consider level set functions of the form f (x x x) = g(x x x) -T , where T is the threshold, and the level set is always taken at f (x x x) = 0. For the metasurface designs in this work, we define a binary material distribution of metal and air, where the zero level set defines the boundary between the two materials. However, the level set is applicable to continually varying material parameters, e.g. graded dielectrics A common choice of level set function for topology optimization is composed of a sum of Gaussian radial basis functions (RBFs) with coefficients α α α. Rounding is done relative to the zero level set. where T is the threshold, c c c i are the RBF centers, and γ i are the scale factors (which are typically inversely proportional to the distance to adjacent centers). The norm used is nearly always the Euclidean l 2 norm, but we experiment with the l 1 and l ∞ norms in this work as well. The basis coefficients and threshold determine the shape of the level set function and the resulting material distribution after rounding. For most problems, it is helpful to bound the basis coefficients since a single large positive or negative coefficient can result in a trivial one-material solution. For topology optimization, the RBF basis coefficients α α α are the design variables presented to an optimization algorithm. The RBF parameters γ i and c c c i are initialized and kept fixed, and the threshold T is often determined by a constraint on the volume of material in the material distribution function. To make level set functions more suitable for periodic structures like metamaterials, we propose a new formulation that wraps the distance from the topology variable x x x to the RBF centers around the unit cell boundaries. Given an RBF center c c c and a D-dimensional unit cell of size s s s = [s 1 , . . . , s D ], we consider The proposed distance wrapping enables RBF features to flow continuously around the boundaries of the unit cell. Without this modification, material features do not align across the unit cell boundaries, which results in discontinuities when the LSF is converted to a periodic structure as shown in Figure We note that sinusoids could also be used to construct level set functions with inherent periodicity on the unit cell. Such a basis would cause each parameter to impact material distribution globally across the unit cell with larger changes from lower-frequency basis functions; use of RBFs with added periodicity maintains the locality of each parameter. For small changes in basis coefficients, a cost function varies less (i.e., has a smaller Lipschitz constant) due to localized material placement with RBFs rather than global material placement with sinusoids. An effective approach to gradient-free topology optimization is multi-stage optimization, where an initial coarse problem with a reduced design space is solved quickly and iteratively refined to a fine-grained solution. We first attempt the matrix inverse method proposed by Guirguis et al. We also construct an N × N sampling matrix G G G for the fine basis, and vector β β β of the unknown fine basis coefficients: We intend to solve the system of equations G G Gβ β β = y y y, so we find the fine basis coefficients by inverting G G G and taking β β β = G G G -1 y y y. The matrix inverse method works well when the l 2 norm is used for the radial basis functions, but it fails when applied to upsampling with the l 1 and l ∞ norms, where the resulting sampling matrix is ill-conditioned and results in large upsampled basis coefficients. We instead derive a more robust P-LSF upsampling process using an overdetermined system of equations and the pseudo-inverse of the resulting rectangular sampling matrix. The pseudo-inverse method solves a least-squares problem matching the coarse and fine P-LSF values at P > N mask positions {z z z p }, instead of at the N fine basis centers. The number of mask positions to sample may be arbitrarily selected; the spacing in a uniformly spaced grid of mask positions is generally chosen based on the resolution required for a discretized simulation or manufacturing process. We first construct a vector t t t by sampling the coarse basis at the P mask positions z z z p , which is equivalent to the coarse P-LSF mask values before rounding: We then construct a P × N sampling matrix H H H and solve for the upsampled coefficients β β β with the pseudo-inverse: We find that this formulation works well for both the l 1 and l ∞ LSF upsampling. Additionally, we find the pseudo-inverse method matches masks with the l 2 norm more closely than the matrix inverse method. Upsampling examples for masks with each norm are shown in Figure As a case study, we construct representative geometries for a microwave metasurface using both fragmented and periodic level set function parameterizations and optimize them for two different objectives: We use the maximization convention to align with genetic algorithm notion of maximizing a fitness function. We construct the forward operator H by first mapping the parameterized material density function ρ α α α to a metal mask on the simulated metasurface geometry. We perform a full-wave electromagnetic simulation of an incident plane wave followed by a near-field to far-field transform and Fourier transform to compute the metasurface scattering parameters (S-parameters) at M different frequencies. The resulting S-parameters are scored with a target system response y y y and loss function L designed to describe the desired performance of the metasurface for each objective. The first objective aims to design a 2:1 bandpass filter which minimizes the reflectance (S 11 ) between the passband frequency range of 15-30 GHz while maximizing the reflectance outside this band. We use the weighted mean absolute error (MAE) as the loss function and define the target system response as an S 11 of less than -10 dB in the passband and greater than -0.5 dB in the stopband. S 11 values exceeding the design goal are considered to have an error of zero and hence optimal. We negate this objective to construct the maximization problem. As a second objective, we design a highly resonant metasurface for materials characterization. We apply the non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II For both fragmented and P-LSF parameterizations, the coarse basis has approximately 25% the number of parameters as the fine basis. Though the coarse optimization stage may bias the fine stage towards a locally optimal solution, this is favorable since optimizing directly in the fine basis may not converge in the allocated time. The continuous design space of the P-LSF parameterization lends itself to a variety of optimizers other than genetic algorithms. We use the package Nevergrad To validate the design process, we fabricated the optimized 2:1 bandpass filter metasurface suggested by the P-LSF GA multi-stage optimization. We measured transmission and reflection scattering parameters in a free-space focused beam system, and close agreement between the full-wave simulation and measured results is shown in Figure For topology optimization problems, the interplay between material distribution functions and the design variables presented to gradient-free optimization algorithms determines algorithm convergence and the performance of optimized designs. Canonical metasurface designs -Jerusalem cross, split-ring resonator, etc. 11-13 -offer well-behaved, convex design spaces but are too heavily constrained to push the boundaries of achievable frequency responses. The fragmented parameterization offers many more degrees of freedom, but has a discrete, non-convex design space (the vertices of a unit hypercube, α α α ∈ {0, 1} N ) which is completely disjoint and poses a difficult combinatorial optimization problem. A new basis for periodic structures like metasurfaces is defined using the periodic level set function (P-LSF), which creates a continuous, convex design space (the interior of a hypercube, α α α ∈ [-1, 1] N ) that facilitates optimization. Moving from a non-convex to a convex design space improves the performance of applied optimization algorithms. The P-LSF basis also produces more sophisticated material distribution functions than either the fragmented basis or canonical designs. Considering bases with the same number of parameters, a fragmented basis can only construct rectangular material features which are integer multiples of the fragment size, whereas a P-LSF basis can realize continuously varying features as well as diagonal or rounded edges that are unattainable in the fragmented basis. Masks constructed with the P-LSF basis can be arbitrarily resampled at higher or lower resolutions to account for simulation regridding or manufacturing constraints on the mask. As shown in Figure Using the l 2 norm when defining the P-LSF results in rounded features which are suitable for broadband cost functions. For narrowband problems, the P-LSF basis can produce sharper features by redefining the basis with the l ∞ norm. Multi-stage optimization can be applied to both P-LSF and fragmented designs to accelerate convergence by solving an initial coarse problem and incrementally refining the coarse solution to a fine one. The P-LSF can be used as a drop-in replacement for fragmented designs with few changes to existing evolutionary algorithm infrastructure. Additionally, the P-LSF facilitates the use of more efficient optimization algorithms such as the covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES) which can converge to better solutions in fewer iterations. The P-LSF method is broadly applicable to array technologies including microwave spatial filters as shown in this work, optical elements for super-resolution imaging We performed electromagnetics simulations using FDTD software developed at Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI). We discretized each metasurface design onto a N N N = [120, 120, 62] T grid with a uniform grid cell size of 0.051 mm (0.002 in) in each dimension. The resulting periodicity of the proposed metasurface is 6.1 mm (0.240 in) in both planar dimensions. The supporting substrate for the metasurface is chosen to be 0.127 mm (0.005 in) Rogers RO3003 (ε ′ r = 3.0 ±0.04, tan δ = 0.001) For the genetic algorithm optimizations, we define a mating operator for both the fragmented and P-LSF parameterizations with uniform crossover for binary parameters and intermediate recombination (α = 0.5) for continuous parameters. For fragmented designs, we define an entry-wise binary mutation with a 10% probability of flipping the value of each fragment. For the P-LSF, we define an entry-wise continuous mutation which has a 10% chance of triggering for each individual RBF basis coefficient. If a mutation is triggered, there is an 80% chance to apply a uniform random mutation which is bounded in a small range around the current basis coefficient, and a 20% chance to redraw the basis coefficient from the full range of values. We use a population size of 200 and a total of 200 generations, or 40, 000 total cost function evaluations. CMA-ES is applied to the P-LSF designs using the ParameterizedCMA implementation found in the Nevergrad package 