In solid-state physics/chemistry, a precise understanding of defect formation and its impact on the electronic properties of wide-bandgap insulators is a cornerstone of modern semiconductor technology. However, complexities arise in the electronic structure theory of defect formation when the latter triggers partial occupation of the conduction/valence band, necessitating accurate post-process correction to the energy calculations. Herein, we dissect these complexities, focusing specifically on the post-process band-filling corrections, a crucial element that often demands thorough treatment in defect formation studies. We recognize the importance of these corrections in maintaining the accuracy of electronic properties predictions in wide-bandgap insulators and their role in reinforcing the importance of a reliable common reference state for defect formation energy calculations. We explored solutions such as aligning deep states and electrostatic potentials, both of which have been used in previous works, showing the effect of band alignment on defect formation energy. Our findings demonstrate that the impact of defect formation on electronic structure (even deep states) can be significantly dependent on the supercell size. We also show that within band-filling calculations, one needs to account for the possible change of electronic structure induced by defect formation, which requires sufficient convergence of electronic structure with supercell size. Thus, this work emphasizes the critical steps to predict defect formation energy better and paves the way for future research to overcome these challenges and advance the field with more efficient and reliable predictive models. Point defects are present in all materials as their formation arises from a balance between the energy cost needed for their formation and configuration entropy gain due to increased defect concentration. Previous works There is a common misconception that post-process corrections are only necessary when dealing with charged defects and that uncharged defects do not require such corrections. This is only partially accurate. For instance, both charged and uncharged point defects can cause partial occupation of the conduction or valence band. Within electronic structure theory for a finite supercell size, such electrons or holes are spread in energy range. In contrast, in the dilute limit (one which we often aim to represent within electronic structure theory), they are expected to only contribute to the tip of band edges (see Fig. ) For p-type dopants: (2) where Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function, ω k are the weights of the k-points, e n,k are the energy eigenvalues of state (n, k), γ n,k are the occupations of the eigenstate (n, k), E cbm * is the aligned conduction band minimum (CBM) of supercell without defects, E vbm * is the aligned valence band maximum (VBM) of the supercell without defects. Fig. We note, however, that for the defective system, Eqs. 1-2 cannot be directly used in modern first principles codes (e.g., VASP Within the global scientific community, there exists a consensus that recognizes the significant role that the reorganization of valence states plays in the formation and nature of chemical bonds. The foundation of this principle is based on the idea that transitions in the electron states of an atom's outermost shell do not simply dictate the variety of bonds that the atom is capable of forming. In addition, these shifts also wield a considerable influence on key factors such as the strength, stability, and overall reactivity of the bonds themselves. Following this line of thought, core electrons or, more generally, deep states, which occupy lower energy levels and are somewhat insulated by the outer electron shell from direct influences of other atoms (they till indirectly influence bonding) can be used as potential consistent reference points across various systems. In the case of full electron codes (e.g., Wien2k Methods: All calculations at the first-principle level were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) 