Polarization dynamics and domain structure evolution in ferroelectric Al0.93B0.07N are studied using piezoresponse force microscopy and spectroscopies in ambient and controlled atmosphere environments. The application of negative unipolar, and bipolar first-order reverse curve (FORC) waveforms leads to a protrusion-like feature on the Al0.93B0.07N surface and reduction of electromechanical response due to electrochemical reactivity. A surface change is also observed on the application of fast alternating current bias. At the same time, the application of positive biases does not lead to surface changes. Comparatively in a controlled glove box atmosphere, stable polarization patterns can be observed, with minuscule changes in surface morphology. This surface morphology change is not isolated to applying biases to free surface, a similar topographical change is also observed at the electrode edges when cycling a capacitor in ambient environment. The study suggests that surface electrochemical reactivity may have a significant impact on the functionality of this material in the ambient environment. However, even in the controlled atmosphere, the participation of the surface ions in polarization switching phenomena and ionic compensation is possible. For over 50 years, ferroelectric materials have been actively explored in the context of potential information technology applications. Correspondingly, multiple ferroelectric device geometries including ferroelectric gate field effect transistor (FeFET), The paradigm shift in this field was achieved with the discovery of ferroelectricity in hafnia solid solutions. It is also important to mention that these behaviors are reminiscent of unusual behaviors observed in very thin films of classical ferroelectric or non-ferroelectric oxides such as SiO2 or unstrained SrTiO3 as summarized in Ref. Here, strong irreversible electrochemical phenomena are observed on open surfaces of AlxB1-xN thin films in which protrusion-shaped structure is formed by applying electric biases in ambient conditions. This electrochemical phenomenon is observed in both 20 nm and 205 nm thick films for both alternating current (AC) and direct current (DC) biases. It is found that negative voltage is the causal origin of this electrochemical phenomenon. It is proposed that the small protrusion-shaped structures produced are associated with field-assisted hydrolysis on the AlxB1-xN surface. Two AlxB1-xN thin films synthesized on a sapphire substrate with W bottom electrodes and thicknesses of 20 nm (Al0.93B0.07N) and 205 nm (Al0.93B0.07N) were utilized for this work. These films show large reorientable polarizations exceeds 120 C/cm 2 , with coercive fields ranging between 5-6 MV/cm in metal-ferroelectric-metal structures, as shown in Figure AlxB1-xN open surfaces, we explore them via piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) imaging and spectroscopy measurements. Typically, ferroelectric polarization can be switched by applying a DC bias greater than the coercive field to the scanning probe microscopy tip, Vdc loops are shown in Figure Topography (Figure where Vdc was applied. Additionally, BEPFM imaging shows a lower piezoresponse (Figure and resonance frequency shift (Figure Noteworthily, shown in Figure However, those studies didn't reveal any significant changes in the stoichiometry of switched regions, as shown in Figure A hypothesis is that application of the negative bias to the tip in the presence of the water layer induces an electrochemical reaction with the increase of the molar volume of resulting product. Note that electrochemical reactions should always have reduction and oxidation half reactions at spatially separated sites, satisfying the conditions of detailed charge and mass balance. For electrochemical processes induced by the tip, the attribution of the cathodic and anodic processes can be ambiguous. Under tip: Al x B Finally, we explore whether these phenomena are relevant for devices with top electrodes. Shown in Figure Before cycling, well defined capacitor edges are observed as shown in Figure To summarize, polarization switching and domain dynamics in aluminum boron nitride have been explored using piezoresponse force microscopy and spectroscopies. It was found that in ambient environment the application of positive biases to the tip, either in the form of DC bias, or unipolar or bipolar FORC waveforms, or AC bias sweeps lead to significant surface expansion and decay of electromechanical response. This behavior is attributed to the tip-induced electrochemical reactions mediated by the presence of the water layer. On transition to the controlled glovebox environment, the sharp polarization domain patterns can be created. However, hysteresis loops still exhibit dynamic changes with time and the change in surface topography can be observed on repeated cycling. Based on the shape of the hysteresis loop, we speculate that in this case the polarization switching, and the electrochemical surface changes coexist. Overall, we pose that electrochemical phenomena are in many cases inseparable part of polarization dynamics on open ferroelectric surfaces, due to the fact that polarization switching is possible only when the polarization charged is screened by electronic and ionic charges. In ambient and even controlled atmosphere environments when top electrodes are not present, the screening is ionic in nature and hence the surface undergoes multiple chemical changes during the application of periodic biases.