Reservoir computing (RC) is a promising solution for achieving low power consumption neuromorphic computing, although the large volume of the physical reservoirs reported to date has been a serious drawback in their practical application. Here, we report the development of a fewmolecule RC that employs the molecular vibration dynamics in the para-mercaptobenzoic acid (pMBA) detected by surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) with tungsten oxide nanorod/silver nanoparticles (WOx@Ag-NPs). The Raman signals of the pMBA molecules, adsorbed at the SERS active site of WOx@Ag-NPs, were reversibly perturbated by the application of voltage-induced local pH changes in the vicinity of the molecules, and then used to perform RC of pattern recognition and prediction tasks. In spite of the small number of molecules employed, our system achieved good performance, including 95.1% to 97.7% accuracy in various nonlinear waveform transformations and 94.3% accuracy in solving a second-order nonlinear dynamic equation task. Our work provides a new concept of molecular computing with practical computation capabilities. While AI provides convenience in variety of human activities through high performance deep learning, the huge energy consumption and heavy communication traffic that accompanies the current cloudbased AI systems have become serious problems Here, we demonstrate few-molecule reservoir computing (FM-RC) using the molecular vibration dynamics in para-mercaptobenzoic acid (pMBA). The molecular dynamics of a few pMBA molecules was detected by surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) with tungsten oxide nanorod/silver nanoparticles (WOx@Ag-NPs) The molecular vibrations of few molecules were detected using the very large surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) effect of conductive tungsten oxide (WOx) Figure A nonlinear waveform transformation task , where k and Y(k) are the discrete time step and reservoir output, respectively. This task requires nonlinearity and high dimensionality in the reservoir, by which the basic computational capability of the reservoir can be evaluated. The input triangular wave for the nonlinear waveform transformation task was converted into a voltage signal of 10 s per step and 20 steps per period, and input to the WOx nanorod working electrode on which the pMBA molecule was adsorbed. This was done in the range of -340mV to +160 mV vs SHE. The Raman spectral response for time steps to the periodic triangular wave input is shown in Fig. Figure We evaluated the performance of the subject FM-RC with the more difficult task of solving a secondorder nonlinear dynamic equation where u(k) is a random input ranging from 0 to 0.5. The reservoir is required to have at least two steps of short-term memory and nonlinearity in order to express Eq. 2. A detailed explanation of the learning algorithm can be found in the Methods section. Figure Voltage Signal Input ! ! Second-order nonlinear system " ! = $. &" !"# + $. &" !"# " !"$ + $. (! ! % + $. ) We analyzed the origin of the computational capability of the FM-RC in terms of nonlinearity, which is a required property for reservoirs. In reservoir computing, the nonlinearity of the reservoir is directly related to the nonlinear information processing capability, and strong nonlinearity with respect to the input contributes significantly to the expressive power of the reservoir. Figure , where X 7 is the average of X. The redox-IGR, which utilizes the redox reaction by ion gating to WO3 as the nonlinear dynamics, has rnonlinearity =0.964, which is close to 1 and the nonlinearity is weak. On the other hand, FM-RC, which utilizes the structural changes associated with local pH changes in the pMBA molecule as nonlinear dynamics, achieved a wide range of nonlinearities, from a strong nonlinearity (rnonlinearity =0.885) in the reservoir state obtained at 1571 cm -1 , to a weak nonlinearity (rnonlinearity =0.978) in the reservoir state obtained at 1587 cm -1 nonlinearity. Such coexistence of reservoir states with different nonlinearities has been reported to improve performance in fullsimulation reservoirs such as the echo state network (ESN) The lower panel of Fig. The redox-IGR results are also shown as a comparison for all nodes, indicated by the dotted line. The all-node average correlation coefficients for both are almost identical, indicating that the subject FM-RC has the same high dimensionality as a redox-IGR with virtual nodes, even though it does not use virtual nodes. r̅ 2 of the FM-RC is particularly small in the region where the normalized node number is below 0.2 (that is, 20% of all reservoir states) These reservoir states correspond to the peaks of the Raman spectra. Although this study focuses on the computational power realized by only a few pMBA molecules, the coexistence of molecules that peak at different wavenumbers from pMBA, for example, has the potential to dramatically increase the overall high-dimensionality. From these results, it can be concluded that the high computational performance of the subject FM-RC is based on good nonlinear characteristics, as shown in Figs. Few-molecule reservoir computing was firstly demonstrated on the basis of the molecular vibration dynamics of pMBA in WOx@Ag-NPs systems, measured by means of SERS. The Raman signal of the few pMBA molecules, absorbed at the SERS active site of WOx@Ag-NPs, were successfully detected under various local pH conditions, which were attained by applied ion-gating stimuli corresponding to input signals in RC. The reversible nonlinear response of pMBA SER spectra were utilized for performing RC on pattern recognition and prediction tasks. In nonlinear waveform transformation tasks, the subject system achieved 95.1% to 97.7% accuracy with respect to various waveforms and phase shifts, which accuracy is better than the scores reported for atomic switch nanowire network reservoirs and a solid electrolyte/diamond-based EDL-IGR The WOx nanorods used as SERS active nanomaterials were prepared in an ultrahigh vacuum chamber at an atmosphere of 8×10 -4 Pa O2, by sublimation of tungsten oxide from a tungsten filament. This was then heated to 1100 °C and placed 20 mm in front of a 0.2 mm diameter tungsten wire, which was heated to 700°C to 800°C The subject WOx nanorod was modified with silver nanoparticles in the same configuration as the SERS measurements. 10 nM AgNO3 and 6 μM poly dopamine in 0.15 M NaCl solution was used. Poly dopamine was added to confirm from the Raman spectra that the SERS active sites were formed by Ag electrodeposition. WOx nanorods were irradiated with 488 nm laser light at 2 mW intensity, while -340mV to -840mV vs SHE was applied to form silver nanoparticles, by electrodeposition of silver, at the light irradiated position. The tungsten tip, with silver-modified WOx nanorod, was removed from the aqueous solution and transferred to a 10 μM pMBA in 0.15 M NaCl aqueous solution for reservoir computing. The silver-modified WOx nanorod was observed with TEM and EDS (JEOL, JEM-ARM200F). For TEM observation, a tungsten tip with a silver-modified WOx nanorod attached at the apex was cut into a 1 mm long piece and fixed to a TEM grid using silver epoxy. The following explains the method employed to perform the waveform transformation task that was demonstrated to evaluate the nonlinear transformation capability of the subject molecule reservoir. In the waveform transformation task, a triangular wave was used as input, and the target waveforms T(k) were sin wave (Sin), square wave (Square), p/2 phase-shifted triangular wave (Shift), and frequencydoubled triangular wave(2f). The input triangular wave was converted to a step-like voltage signal (10 s/step, 20 step/period) and input to the molecule reservoir. The applied voltage ranged from -160 mV to +340 mV vs SHE. Fourteen (14) periods of triangular waveforms were input to the molecule reservoir, and 10 periods were used for computing; excluding the first 4 periods to make the reservoir steady state. SERS measurements were made by integrating for 10 seconds corresponding to each voltage step, and the obtained Raman spectra were smoothed by moving average. From the Raman spectra in the region from 945 cm -1 to 1728 cm -1 , the signal intensity every 3.92 cm -1 was taken as the reservoir state. Therefore, the total reservoir size N was 200. The reservoir output y(k) is the linear sum of the readout weight vector W and the reservoir state vector x(k) at a certain time step k, as shown in Eq. 1. The weight matrix W was learned by ridge regression, so that the reservoir output matches the target waveform T(k). The cost function J in the ridge regression is defined by following equation ( where T = <T(1), T(2), ... , T(L)= , X = <X(1), X(2), ... , x(L)= and I(⊆ R :×: ) are the target output matrix, the reservoir state matrix and the identify matrix, respectively. The computational performance of the reservoir was evaluated by the accuracy (Eq. 8) calculated from the normalized mean squared error (NMSE) between the reservoir output and the target Solving a second-order nonlinear dynamic equation task In the second-order nonlinear equation task, a random input u(k) was converted to a step-like voltage signal from -160 mV to +340 mV vs SHE and input to the device. As in the waveform conversion task, one step was 10 seconds, and the Raman spectra were measured by integrating for 10 seconds, corresponding to each voltage step. The input random wave was 255 steps. To avoid the influence of noise and to verify the computational capability of the molecule reservoir, the input was applied six times and the average of the Raman spectra obtained was smoothed by a moving average. From the Raman spectra in a region of from 1041 cm -1 to 1726 cm -1 , the signal intensity every 7.87 cm -1 was taken as the reservoir state. Therefore, the total reservoir size N was 88. Reservoir states were normalized from 0 to 1, and the readout weights were trained by ridge regression as in the waveform transformation task. However, the ridge parameter λ was 1.0 and the data length L was 150 for the training phase and 100 for the testing phase. Computational performance was evaluated by the accuracy shown in Eq. 8. In a previous study 