We present a detailed theoretical investigation of the linear and non-linear optical response in a model system for a disordered d-wave superconductor, showing that for both quantities the gap symmetry considerably changes the paradigm of the optical response based on the conventional s-wave case. For what concerns the linear response our findings agree with previous work showing that in strongly-disordered d-wave superconductors a large fraction of uncondensed spectral weight survives below Tc, making the optical absorption around the gap-frequency scale almost unchanged with respect to the normal state. Our numerical results are in excellent quantitative agreement with experiments in overdoped cuprates. In the non-linear regime we focus on the third-harmonic generation (THG), finding that, as already established for the s-wave case, in general a large THG is triggered by disorder-activated paramagnetic processes. However, in the d-wave case the BCS response is monotonously increasing in frequency, loosing any signature of THG enhancement when the THz pump frequency ω matches the gap maximum ∆, a hallmark of previous experiments in conventional s-wave superconductors. Our findings, along with the mild polarization dependence of the response, provides an explanation for recent THG measurements in cuprates, setting the framework for the theoretical understanding of non-linear effects in unconventional cuprates. Since the discovery of high-critical temperature (T c ) superconductivity in cuprates, optical-conductivity measurements have been central in advancing our understanding of their unusual electronic properties, including e.g. the symmetry of the superconducting (SC) gap, the opening of a pseudogap above T c , or the transition from a Mott-insulating state to a (non-) Fermi liquid with increasing doping (for a review see e.g. A paradigmatic demonstration of non-linear THz processes is provided by the measurement of enhanced thirdharmonic generation (THG) below T c , that has been demonstrated so far in a variety of systems, ranging from conventional NbN where χ (1) is the linear response which is related to the optical conductivity, and χ (3) is the non-linear optical kernel. Despite such a considerable simplification with respect to the pure non-equilibrium phenomena, the interpretation of the THG experiments on superconductors stimulated so far considerable theoretical work In this manuscript we address explicitly the role of disorder on the THG response of a d-wave superconductor. In general, cuprates are usually expected to be in the relatively clean limit, at least for underdoped and optimally-doped samples, where optical-conductivity measurements in the THz regime The situation can be eventually different for strongly overdoped cuprates, as e.g. in overdoped LSCO films To address these issues we compute the linear and nonlinear current response within a disordered lattice model where the d-wave SC order is induced via a Heisenberg-like spin-spin interaction. As compared to previous work in the s-wave case For the THG our calculations show a marked qualitative difference with respect to the s-wave case. Indeed, while the general mechanism of a strong overall enhancement of paramagnetic-like THG processes is confirmed, for d-wave pairing the response rapidly looses the resonance at 2∆ characteristic of the clean limit, that is instead found to survive for s-wave superconductors up to strong disorder The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II we discuss the model and how the disordered ground state solutions are obtained within the Bogoljubov-de-Gennes approach. Sec. III presents the corresponding results for the optical conductivity, that are discussed within context of experiments on the superfluid density in overdoped cuprates. The influence of disorder on the third harmonic response and its dependence on the polarization of the incoming light is then analyzed in IV and we conclude our discussion in Sec. V. In the Appendix A we give a detailed derivation on how we compute the linear and nonlinear current, Appendix B is devoted to an analysis of finite size effects, Appendix C discusses the evaluation of the universal conductivity for the parameters used in the present paper, and finally in Appendix D we report the estimate of the transport scattering time for the different disorder levels we used to evaluate the optical response. To model the d-wave SC order emerging in cuprates we consider a tight-binding model on a square lattice, with an interaction part modelled as intersite spin-spin (∼ J) interactions together with local on-site disorder (cf. e.g. where t ij includes the hopping between nearest (∼ t) and next-nearest (∼ t ′ ) neighbors, ⟨ij⟩ denotes the summation over nearest-neighbors only, and S i is the spin operator at lattice site R i . V i is a random variable taken from a flat distribution with -V 0 ≤ V i ≤ +V 0 . In order to avoid any interference with competing phases, we neglect the decoupling of the interaction part with respect to on-(i = j) and intersite (i ̸ = j) charge densities ⟨c † i,σ c j,σ ⟩. The mean-field hamiltonian therefore reads where represent a bond SC order parameter with δ ≡ ±x, ±y. In analogy with the well-studied s-wave case which yields the eigenvalue equations: In the following u i (k) and v i (k) are taken to be real. This excludes e.g. ground states with circular currents which have been studied in models where disorder is implemented via a variable concentration n i of scatterers with fixed impurity strength Starting from an initial random distribution for the anomalous expectation values we diagonalize the system of equations Results are obtained for a charge density n = 0.875, and all parameters are measured with respect to the nearest-neighbor hopping t. The exchange coupling is taken as J/t = 1 and we also include a nextnearest-neighbor hopping t ′ /t = -0.2, as appropriate for cuprates. For the homogeneous system one obtains a dwave gap with ∆/t = 0.316 and thus a maximum optical gap 2∆, which decreases upon including disorder. In cuprates, gap values extracted from angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES) on Bi2212 (see e.g. The optical conductivity for an applied electric field along e x and the current response along the same direction is obtained from where χ 1,2 are the real and imaginary part of the currentcurrent correlation function χ(ω), respectively. Within our formalism, cf. appendix A, χ(ω) is obtained from para (ω) and ⟨t x ⟩ ≡ j dia , where in general j (n) para/dia refers to the n-th term in the expansion in powers of the gauge field of the paramagnetic or diamagnetic electronic current. Since the diamagnetic current response is already linear in the gauge field, the 0-th term is sufficient to compute the linear response. We set ħ = e = a ≡ 1 so that the conductivity in these units is dimensionless and should be multiplied by e 2 /ħ in order to obtain a two-dimensional σ(ω) in SI units. In order to obtain the three-dimensional σ(ω) for layered cuprates one should multiply the dimensionless conductivity times e 2 /(ħd), with d denoting the interlayer spacing. Fig. Here blue solid lines denote results in the SC state at T = 0, while red dashed lines denote results at T = 0 in the absence of SC order. On finite lattices and for a given particle number the chemical potential μ does not necessarily coincide with an available quasiparticle energy ε k , so the minimum gap for a d-wave superconductor k can be different from zero also along the nodal direction. As shown in Appendix B, for a clean system this minimum gap is an oscillatory function of the system size N . Clearly also the low-energy density of states depends on N . Nonetheless, this spurious effect can be removed by performing an additional average over systems of different sizes, as shown explicitly in Appendix B in the homogeneous case. The grey region in Fig. To better quantify the disorder strength we estimate the dimensionless quantity 2∆τ , where ∆ is the gap maximum obtained for each disorder level from the maximum in the density of states and τ is the normal-state transport scattering time. To this aim we extract τ from an analysis of the normal-state conductivity, as outlined in Appendix D. In general, by increasing disorder (i.e. by decreasing 2∆τ ), one observes an enhancement of σ 1 (ω) in the frequency range below 2∆, as due to the increase of the paramagnetic current response (χ 2 (ω) in Eq. ( Panels (b,d,f,h) of Fig. Our results can be compared with experiments on overdoped LSCO films To better quantify this effect we follow the same procedure adopted in the experiments x ⟩, while S sc can be derived from Eqs. ( The ratio S sc /S sn is plotted as a function of 1/(2∆τ ) in Fig. We point out that a reduction of D s due to fluctuation effects has a significantly stronger impact on the optical conductivity for the isotropic s-wave case rather than for the d-wave symmetry. Indeed, the f-sum rule dictates that the decrease in D s , entering the S n spectral weight of Eq. ( It should be noted that at strong disorder V 0 /t = 1.0 and upon including fluctuations our calculations reveal a negative stiffness for a significant number of disorder realizations. Such samples have been then excluded from the average procedure leading to the results shown in Fig. As it has been widely discussed in previous work both for clean In the clean limit the third-harmonic paramagnetic current in response to a monochromatic field at ω vanishes whose value in the limit N → ∞ is also plotted for comparison with a red dashed line in Fig. corresponds to a density-like correlation function with a diamagnetic vertex (3) dia,clean at ω = ∆ in Eq. ( The paramagnetic current (Fig. netic response with disorder up to 2∆τ ≈ 1, which then is followed by a decrease in the limit of strong disorder. In contrast to the diamagnetic current the orientational dependence of j para is weak at any disorder level, with almost no dependence within the range of the numerical error. This results is also consistent with previous work for the same band structure and s-wave pairing The dramatic increase of the response at low energies together with the absence of a clear resonance in the paramagnetic response represent a marked qualitative difference with respect to the s-wave case, where instead the paramagnetic current follows the diamagnetic response and is enhanced around ω = ∆ Our theoretical findings are also in excellent agreement with the mild polarization dependence of the THG signal measured experimentally in cuprate superconductors In the present manuscript we performed a detailed analysis of the linear and non-linear optical response for a model system of d-wave superconductors, intended to reproduce the main features of cuprate superconductors in the SC state. Since strong correlation effects have not been explicitely included, our analysis is more appropriate for optimally and overdoped samples, even though general aspects, concerning symmetry and disorder also apply to underdoped systems. The linear response, that has been widely studied in the past with various analytical and numerical approaches For what concerns the non-linear optical response we focused on the third-harmonic current generated in response to a monochromatic gauge field, that has been recently experimentally studied by different groups in various families of cuprates So far, we only computed the BCS response due to quasiparticle excitations. Indeed, the large system sizes needed to correctly deal with the zero-frequency limit makes it numerically challenging computing also the collective-mode response, as done for the s-wave case the BdG mean field energy as and the latter is given by Here we denote with ρ and κ the normal and anomalous averages, These are represented in the inhomogeneous systems by L × L matrices, with the lattice size L varying from 52 to 68 in our simulations. In the absence of an external field the density matrix R and the Hamiltonian H BdG commute, so it simply follows from Eq. (A2) that the density matrix has no time evolution. The dynamics of R(t) is induced via the coupling to the electromagnetic field ⃗ E(t) = -∂ ⃗ A(t)/∂t. Let us consider e.g the case of a (spatially constant) field along the x direction. A x (t) is coupled to the system via the Peierls substitution c † i+x,σ c i,σ → e iAx(t) c † i+x,σ c i,σ , where for simplicity we will drop form the equations all the constant by putting the lattice spacing, the electronic charge e, the light velocity c and the Planck constant ħ equal to one. As one can easily check, the interaction terms in Eq. ( --e -iAx ρi+x+y,i -e iAx ρi+x+y,i + e iAx ρ i+x,i-y + e -iAx ρ i-x+y,i -e -iAx ρi+x-y,i -e iAx ρi+x-y,i . (A4) Writing A x (t) = A 0 f (t) one can now expand the density matrix and the hamiltonian (i.e. the kinetic part resulting from Eq. (A4)) in powers of A 0 , i.e. where R (0) is the equilibrium density matrix for which as we already emphasized above. The current density is obtained at all orders in A x as j with N ≡ L 2 . Thus, by retaining terms up to third order in A x one has: Here the subscript para and dia refer to the usual identification of the leading terms coupling the gauge field to the fermionic operators in the Hamiltonian, i.e. the linear coupling between the paramagnetic term and A x , and a quadratic coupling between the electronic density and A 2 x , that leads to the standard diamagnetic contribution to the current in linear response. To make a closer connection to standard notation in Nambu operators for the SC state which upon inserting into Eq. (A7) allows us to extract the various current contributions to order n, j x . In particular, the 3rd harmonic contribution to the current density reads j (3) x = j x, (3) para - dia - where we find that, similar to the isotropic s-wave case x,(3) para and A 0 j x, x,(1) para and j x,(0) dia also enter the calculation of the optical conductivity in first order, cf. next subsection. The first order current contribution, relevant for the evaluation of the optical conductivity, is given by j (1) x = j x, (1) para + A 0 j x,(0) dia (A9) which requires evaluation of the density matrix up to order n = 1. By selecting all terms ∼ A 0 in the equation of motion Eq. (A2) one obtains i Ṙ(1) = R (1) , with and The non-perturbed hamiltonian H (0) (i.e. for A 0 = 0) can be diagonalized With this transformation Eq. (A10) can be written as ) where Ṽ denotes the transformed matrix Eq. (A11). Consider now a harmonic vector potential f (t) = cos Ωt. Then the Fourier transformed correction which can be transformed back to yield the first order perturbation R (1) ij to the density matrix in the original site representation. For the presentation of the results in Sec. III, χnm (ω → ω -iη) has been computed with a small imaginary part in order to avoid singularities. We proceed by evaluating the diamagnetic contribution to the third harmonic current A 0 j x,(2) dia , cf. Eq. (A8). Collecting all term ∼ A 2 0 we find for the correction to the density matrix in second order where we have defined the matrix and Fourier transformation yields ωR (2) (ω) = R (2) (ω), which upon inserting Eq. (A15) and diagonalizing can be solved for the second order contribution to the density matrix as and χ(ω) Ṽ nm has to understood as χnm (ω) Ṽnm . Finally, we evaluate the paramagnetic contribution to the third harmonic current j x, The solution for the contribution at ω = 3Ω is then given by Not that in case of an isotropic s-wave SC with minimum energies E n = ±∆, Eq. (A22) has contributions at frequencies 3Ω = 2∆ and 2Ω = 2∆ in agreement with Ref. Appendix B: Averaging over finite size effects On finite lattices the SC gap is strongly influenced by the number of k-points, in particular for d-wave systems where the gap vanishes along the nodal direction. This is shown in Fig. Despite such an oscillatory behavior, for the lattice sites shown in Fig. Within a Boltzmann-type approach, the DC conductivity of a disordered superconductor can be written as where N F is the normal-state DOS at the Fermi energy and T xx plays the role of an effective transport time, that is defined by the equation Here ⟨. . .⟩ denotes the average over the Fermi surface, v 2 F ≡ ⟨v 2 F,x (φ)⟩, and γ is the width of the impurity band determined from Γ imp is proportional to the impurity concentration and C denotes the cotangent of the scattering phase shift. We solve Eqs. (C1,C2) for the homogeneous model Eq. ( Appendix D: Determination of the scattering time in the normal state In order to extract the scattering time τ one could in principle fit the low-energy numerical normal state optical conductivity to the bare Drude form where ω p denotes the plasma frequency. However, it is more convenient to start from a frequency-dependent optical conductivity represented in terms of a memory function M (ω) We briefly comment on an alternative possibility, namely determining the scattering rate from the imaginary part σ 2 (ω) in the normal state, cf. red dashed curves in the right panels of Fig. 