• Workflow for calculating defect free energies • Outstanding challenges for accurate defect predictions Defects determine many important properties and applications of materials, ranging from doping in semiconductors, to conductivity in mixed ionic-electronic conductors used in batteries, to active sites in catalysts. The theoretical description of defect formation in crystals has evolved substantially over the past century. Advances in supercomputing hardware, and the integration of new computational techniques such as machine learning, provide an opportunity to model longer length and time-scales than previously possible. In this Tutorial Review, we cover the description of free energies for defect formation at finite temperatures, including configurational (structural, electronic, spin) and vibrational terms. We discuss challenges in accounting for metastable defect configurations, progress such as machine learning force fields and thermodynamic integration to directly access entropic contributions, and bottlenecks in going beyond the dilute limit of defect formation. Such developments are necessary to support a new era of accurate defect predictions in computational materials chemistry. a) Electronic mail: a.walsh@imperial.ac.uk The understanding and control of defects in materials are essential for the development of new technologies. Defects have the power to turn insulating materials conductive, transparent materials coloured, and inert materials reactive. In batteries, point defects determine the balance between electronic and ionic transport in solid-state components, and thus charging and degradation rates. that produces one vacancy V Si and a corresponding interstitial Si i a . The equilibrium fraction of such Frenkel pairs in a sample will depend on the energetic cost of their formation. This problem prompted Mott and Littleton to develop a formalism to compute the energies of charged vacancies and interstitials in ionic solids in 1938, which combined an atomistic description of the defect site with a continuum description of the dielectric response of the host crystal. In this Tutorial Review, we focus on the free energy of point defect formation at finite temperatures. The disruption of translational symmetry at a defect site induces changes in the local degrees of freedom, which can be classified into configurational, vibrational, spin and electronic terms. We explore these contributions in detail, and describe a modern computational workflow for the systematic calculation of defect free energies. Finally, we highlight some outstanding computational challenges, including the identification of global minima and the necessary timescales to describe anharmonic potential energy surfaces of defects with accessible metastable configurations. A crystal in thermal equilibrium at finite temperatures always contains a finite concentration of defects. Their formation increases the internal lattice energy of the crystal. Yet this penalty is counterbalanced by an entropy gain, so that the balance between these quantities determines the defect concentration at equilibrium. While it has become standard to estimate defect concentrations by calculating their formation energies under constant volume (isochoric) conditions in the absence of temperature, they are actually determined by the Gibbs free energy of the defect reaction, defined under constant pressure (isobaric) conditions at finite temperatures. Indeed, the equilibrium number of defects n d is determined a Defects are often represented as M s c with M being the defect or species occupying the lattice site s and with charge state c. by minimising the Gibbs free energy of the defective system at constant growth/annealing temperature and pressure: where the total number of atoms n X of each element X is kept fixed the free energy of the bulk crystal, G b,P , and the change in free energy upon defect formation. The latter is often further decomposed into the configurational entropy S conf and the (nonconfigurational) free energy G f,P of forming n d defects at arbitrary lattice sites In the dilute limit, where there are no defect-defect interactions (i.e. c = n d N << 1%, with N being the number of lattice sites where the defect species can form), Eq. (3) becomes where lowercase letters represent quantities for one defect (e.g. The main driving factor for defect formation is the mixing or configurational entropy S conf . This arises from the many distinct ways to arrange defects in the solid and can be calculated using with W given by the number of possible arrangements of n d equivalent defects among the N lattice sites available to that defect species Combining Eqs. ( Substituting into Eq. ( where c eq denotes the fraction of available lattice sites N occupied by n d defects at equilibrium, which can be expressed as a concentration by multiplying by the density of available , where V is the volume). In Eq. ( Here, s f,P is the non-configurational entropy contribution per defect, incorporating the changes in all degrees of freedom (spin, orientational, vibrational, electronic, etc.) except for site configurational entropy which was separated from g f,P in Eq. ( and ( where accounts for the internal degrees of freedom through a ratio of the internal partition function of the defective (Z d ) and reference bulk (Z b ) crystal where the elastic term P v f,P is negligible at low pressures 21,24-27 (P v f,P ≈ 10 -2 meV at an external pressure of 1 atm for typical defect formation volumes of 10 -20 Å3 ). Eq. (11) can then be transformed to the expression widely used in defect studies by applying the approximation h f,P (T ) ≈ u f,P (T ) ≈ u f,V (0 K): which thus neglects the enthalpic term P v f,P and finite temperature effects. Yet, the entropic term can be significant at elevated temperatures where many materials are grown or processed and their defects are formed (often 60%-100% of the melting point), and thus should be considered for accurate estimations. The impact of entropic contributions on predicted defect concentrations is illustrated in Fig. ) Effect of neglecting entropic contributions when predicting defect concentrations. On the top panel, the defect formation entropy of O 2- i in CeO 2 is shown The defect formation enthalpy can be calculated from the change in internal energy using where v f,P denotes the change in volume upon defect formation and its enthalpic term is only relevant at high pressures. The internal energy change can then be separated into two contributions: a static term and a vibrational one: The second term is small and often neglected in defect studies, yet can be important for accurate predictions at finite temperatures and will be discussed in Section IV C. Most defect studies focus on the first term, which is calculated within the supercell framework using 30,31 where U static b is the potential energy of a supercell of the pristine crystal and U static d of an equivalent supercell containing the defect, and V b and V d denote their equilibrium volumes at temperature T and external pressure P . The integer n i indicates the number of atoms of type i that have been added to (n i > 0) or removed from (n i < 0) the supercell to form the defect, and u i are the corresponding per-atom internal energies of these species (either in their elementary form or competing phases, and at temperature T and pressure P ). q is the defect charge, E F the Fermi level or electronic chemical potential relative to the valence band maximum E VBM and E corr represents a correction term to account for finite-size effects. b As this is the standard approach, with recent reviews focusing on these terms, we refer the reader elsewhere for further information Firstly, Eq. ( This can affect the formation energies of charged defects at growth/annealing temperatures through the Fermi level dependence (u f,P ∝ q(E F + E V BM )) best of our knowledge, it can be studied by calculating the band gap at the growth temperature and comparing the predicted concentrations obtained with E V BM (V b,0K , 0 K) and Another common approximation in the field involves calculating u static f at constant volume rather than pressure -by fixing the volume of the defect supercell to its pristine value -as discussed in Refs. 19,40,41. This is generally a reasonable approximation for u static f since the associated error is of the order of 30 meV 32 , and simplifies the application of some of the finite-size corrections However, isobaric conditions are more convenient for a consistent thermodynamic description of the atomic chemical potentials, and thus the constant pressure approach 42 (i.e. volume optimisation of the defect supercell) will be used. c Secondly, to accurately calculate U static d , a stable atomic structure of the defect should be identified. Since structural reconstructions at defects can be significant, a local optimisation of an unperturbed high-symmetry defect configuration often fails to find the ground state, requiring the use of structure searching methods. Since the localisation of electrons/holes in both space and energy can result in different defect structures and energies, DFT functionals that accurately describe these properties are essential. Further, for heavy element systems (period five/six and below), an accurate electronic description also involves accounting for relativistic effects like spin-orbit coupling (SOC), which is key to obtaining accurate positions of the band edges and band gap energyc Finite-size corrections can still be applied by performing the geometry optimisation of the defect supercell in two steps -first optimising the atomic positions while constraining the shape and volume of the cell, then calculating the finite-size corrections, and finally performing a full optimisation. and thus accurate defect levels and formation energies The defect formation entropy comprises the entropy change upon creating one defect at a specific lattice site. As this entropy change is defined for a given site, it does not include the mixing or off-site configurational entropy -which arises from the multiple ways of placing the defect in different lattice sites. It does, however, include the on-site configurational or orientational contribution, which results from inequivalent orientations of the defect at the same site due to a lowering of the local symmetry, as discussed below. Beyond the orientational contribution, spin can also result in an entropy change -a defect with one unpaired (collinear) electron has two equivalent electronic configurations as the electron can have up or down spin. Two additional contributions stem from changes in d While the effect of SOC on electronic structure can be significant, its role in geometry relaxation is often small; one pragmatic approach consists of geometry optimisation with scalar-relativistic DFT followed by single-point SOC calculations. the vibrational and electronic entropies. The first is mainly determined by changes in the atomic vibrations of the defect environment, while the second stems from changes in the thermal occupation of electronic states. For convenience when calculating defect concentrations, these contributions can be accounted for with the pre-exponential factor Z d /Z b , as described in Eq. (10). Considering the different timescales of these degrees of freedom (Fig. or equivalently, Point defect degrees of freedom Mult. 1 2 3 4 5 τ ~ps -ns Various degrees of freedom for point defects, with their typical timescales τ 78,79 and formation entropy ranges s f (T), where T m is the melting temperature. These entropic terms and the resulting prefactors are illustrated in Fig. , where S is the total spin angular momentum. e For example, e When SOC is significant, for systems containing heavy elements, the total spin angular momentum should be considered to account for the possible combinations and orientations of the electron spins and their interaction with orbital motion. the unpaired electron (S = 1 2 ) for a neutral chlorine vacancy in NaCl results in a prefactor of 2. If the orientational degrees of freedom also change, the spin prefactor is multiplied by the orientational one, with the latter determined by the number of symmetry-equivalent orientations of the defect (e.g. 4 for the ). Finally, excited states are accounted for in the usual sum over levels i with energies E in Z = i e -E i /(k B T ) . For example, the chlorine divacancy in NaCl shows a sixfold orientational degeneracy, as well as a S = 1 spin excited state at energy E above the S = 0 ground state, resulting in the prefactor ). In the following sections, we describe in detail these degrees of freedom and how to approach the calculation of the associated entropic terms. ) and E i represents the energy of the available states. For simplicity, the vibrational degree of freedom is not included. Host Crystal Defect Species Degrees of Freedom Cd None 1 The number of equivalent defect orientations can be estimated from the change in point group symmetry at the defect site. For example, each Cd site in zincblende-structured CdTe has a T d point group (with 24 symmetry operations). If a V Cd defect maintains this environment then no additional factor is required. However, a C 2v (4 symmetry operations -i.e. order 4) or C 3v (order 6) distortion would lead to Z d Z b = Z d 24 = 6 and 4, respectively, as determined by the index of the subgroup The orientational contribution can significantly increase predicted defect concentrations. For instance, a change from T d to C 1 symmetry would result in a 24-fold increase in the predicted concentration. This contribution is also important for calculating the concentration of defect complexes at finite temperatures -where one has to account for the difference in orientational entropy of the complex and its associated point defects, as well as the loss in offsite configurational entropy, to predict the temperature-dependent binding energy required to overcome entropically-driven dissociation into the constituent point defects The electronic density of states (DOS) can also change upon defect formation. As a first approximation for low temperatures, the electronic entropy can be estimated using the Sommerfeld approach where D(E F ) represents the DOS at the Fermi level E F . A more sophisticated treatment involves using the fixed DOS approximation where D(E) is the electronic density of states at energy E (calculated at 0 K) and f (E) is the occupation of the energy level E given by Fermi-Dirac occupation statistics Further accuracy requires using self-consistent finite temperature DFT to calculate a temperature-dependent DOS Generally, changes in the electronic degrees of freedom are only significant for metals or narrow band gap semiconductors at high temperatures Beyond changes in the local atomic arrangement, defects can also modify the vibrations of a crystal. A point defect may produce localised vibrations (e.g. 2854-3096 cm -1 modes for H in ZnO) In early theoretical studies, the vibrational entropy was approximated by only considering the change in force constants of the defect's nearest neighbours In practice, this is generally replaced by the vibrational Helmholtz free energy to account for the vibrational internal energy including zero-point motion, giving The vibrational frequencies are obtained from the interatomic force constant matrix, which can be calculated using either the linear response method where a Legendre transformation can be used to obtain the Gibbs free energy In Eqs. ( The vibrational contribution can significantly affect predicted defect concentrations. For The thermal expansion of a crystal is an anharmonic effect that can be accounted for in the quasiharmonic approximation. While still assuming non-interacting phonons, this formalism accounts for the volume dependence of the phonon frequencies -and thus, indirectly, for their temperature dependence. In practice, this involves repeating the harmonic force constant calculation for a range of slightly expanded and contracted lattice constants, so that the total free energy (i.e. U static + A vib ) can be minimised at different temperatures, as done for instance in Ref. 41. We can then evaluate u static f,P and g vib f,P (Eqs. ( Generally, the (quasi)harmonic approximation works well at low to moderately high temperatures. However, at high temperatures where the atomic vibrations significantly deviate from the perfect lattice positions, approaching a phase transition or the melting point, higher-order anharmonic effects should be included and will be described in Section IV C 3. The (quasi)harmonic approximation works well for modelling the thermal physics of many materials but fails when the potential energy surface becomes too complex to describe with quadratic fits. This is the case for systems that exhibit second-order phase transitions involving soft phonon modes or order-disorder phase transitions involving a multi-valley potential energy surface. In general, at elevated temperatures, higher-order anharmonic terms are necessary for accurate free energy predictions 100,114 and can be included with two approaches: thermodynamic integration or anharmonic phonon theory. Thermodynamic integration (TI). Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations offer an alternative to a lattice dynamics expansion of interatomic force constants. In principle all orders of anharmonicity can be included, and TI provides a straightforward way of computing the anharmonic free energy. The most common type of TI is where integration is performed along a coupling parameter, λ, from a reference system for which the free energy can be calculated analytically -often the (quasi) harmonic reference -to the fully anharmonic system. Thus, a set of MD simulations are performed with Hamiltonians H(λ) = (1 -λ)H qh + λH DFT , where H qh and H DFT are the Hamiltonians of the quasiharmonic reference and the full DFT system, respectively. The anharmonic correction to the (quasi) harmonic free energy then becomes ∆A = where ⟨• • • ⟩ λ indicates an average over an MD simulation with Hamiltonian H(λ). To compute the anharmonic correction to the free energy of defect formation, (quasi)harmonic phonon calculations should thus be performed for both the bulk and defective systems, and separate TIs (Eq. ( The TI is most conveniently performed in the NVT ensemble, thus yielding the correction to the anharmonic free energy at constant volume, but constant pressure quantities can be obtained if the simulation cell volume is first determined at the relevant temperature and pressure, using e.g. NPT dynamics. Alternatively, a mapping from the Helmholtz free energy to the Gibbs free energy can be performed following the method of Cheng & Ceriotti. However, beyond being computationally demanding, performing TI at high temperatures can be challenging due to diffusion or dynamic disorder. These issues can be avoided by carrying out the coupling constant TI only at a sufficiently low temperature, and then performing TI using temperature as the external coupling parameter to obtain the free energy as a function of temperature, i.e. A(V, T 1 ) for the Helmholtz free energy, and similarly for the Gibbs free energy at constant pressure by replacing the internal energy, U , with the enthalpy, H. 115 Since TI using ab initio MD (AIMD) can be computationally expensive due to the extensive sampling required, several methods have been devised for improving convergence, such as the UP-TILD 116 (TU-TILD 117 ) method; (two-stage) upsampled TI using Langevin dynamics. In the former, TI is performed between the quasiharmonic reference and a poorly converged, but faster, DFT method followed by thermodynamic perturbation from the lowquality DFT to high-quality DFT, while in the latter, an empirical potential is introduced as another stage in the TI to speed up the simulations even further. In both cases, one takes advantage of the fact that low-quality DFT and even empirical potential MD trajectories tend to sample the relevant phase space very well. While this has been shown to be efficient for metals and refractory materials, it is unclear if sampling with low-quality DFT or an empirical potential will be sufficient for defects with more complex electronic structure, such as competing localised and delocalised states. MLFFs further hold the promise of studying the thermodynamics of defects in more complex systems beyond simple metals, where hybrid DFT or more accurate electronic structure methods are necessary even for a qualitative understanding of the defect formation. While sition temperatures in soft-mode driven transitions, and thermal conductivities, but they also allow for the calculation of anharmonic free energies. So far we have focused on calculating free energies for the ground state configuration of a defect species. However, defects often feature metastable states or local minima in their potential energy surface where Z i , s f,P,i and h f,P,i denote the partition function, entropy and enthalpy of formation for configuration i, and n the number of accessible configurations. Eq. ( f Here we assume that the different configurations of a defect have the same contribution to the configurational entropy (i.e. different configurations involve the same type of lattice site). To consider defects that involve different lattice sites (e.g. T d and O h for interstitials in cubic crystals), their respective concentrations should be calculated independently using Eq. ( where h f,P,0 is the enthalpy of formation of the defect ground state and ∆h f,P,i are the relative enthalpies of the metastable configurations (∆h f,P,i = h f,P,i -h f,P,0 ). With Eq. ( , so that the predicted concentration may be increased by up to a factor of 250. We note here that there are several non-equilibrium cases where metastable states are also important, such as in solar cells under illumination In these cases, defects will exhibit strong vibrational anharmonicity due to the presence of thermally accessible metastable configurations on their energy landscapes, likely requiring anharmonic treatments for accurate predictions. A TI approach may be especially applicable, as it could allow one to sample over all possible configurations of a particular type of defect, thus obtaining the total defect free energy without needing the abstraction into vibrational and orientational degrees of freedom, as illustrated in Fig. Similarly, defect migration would be handled naturally by this method. In contrast, if the barriers between configurations are large, giving rise to slow and rare transitions that would not be adequately sampled in standard MD ensembles, a TI approach would be less applicable. In these cases, one could use harmonic (or anharmonic) phononbased methods to calculate the (an)harmonic vibrational free energy for the relevant defect configurations, as illustrated in Fig. Drawing together the concepts discussed above, we describe how to combine these contributions for the systematic calculation of defect free energies. The enthalpy change upon defect formation is usually the dominant contribution and an important starting point. The first step is to construct a pristine supercell, whose size should be large enough to minimize defect-defect short-range interactions (i.e. lattice parameters > 10 Å32,132 ). The defect structure can then be generated by adding or removing the corresponding atom(s) from the pristine supercell -which can be automated using packages such as PyCDT 133 , PyLada 134 , DASP 135 , Spinney 136 , pymatgen-analysis-defects 137 or doped 138 . Once the defect supercell has been created, a structure searching method From the local minimum configurations identified, one should decide whether their effect on the defect thermodynamics is likely to be relevant (depending on their relative energy and entropy). Different criteria will apply in non-equilibrium cases. We next consider entropic contributions. Starting with the temperature-independent terms, the spin degeneracy is determined by the number of unpaired electrons (e.g. from , while the orientational degeneracy can be estimated from the change in symmetry of the defect site using codes such as pymatgen 82 (Section IV A). Within host materials that exhibit various types of disorder, such as site 139 , spin 140 , rotational, polar The vibrational contribution can be calculated using an appropriate approximation (Section IV C), depending on the target system and temperature, desired accuracy and available resources. At low temperatures, vibrational contributions may be negligible, but at high operating or annealing temperatures, their effect on free energies will be significant (Section IV C). One should consider whether the harmonic approximation reasonably describes the target system at the conditions of interest. This involves assessing the importance of thermal expansion and anharmonic effects for the target system and temperature (e.g. by considering the magnitude of the volumetric thermal expansion coefficient and the existence of low-lying metastable states, respectively). Based on these considerations, we highlight three possible approaches. The simplest is to employ the harmonic approximation to calculate the (temperature-dependent) vibrational entropy for the defective and pristine supercells at the 0 K volume, using phonopy When defect formation involves the exchange of atoms with an external reservoir, it is essential that consistent thermodynamic potentials are employed throughout. For the special case of stoichiometric defect formation, including Frenkel and Schottky pairs, the chemical potential terms cancel out and these complications can be avoided. The atomic chemical potentials in Eq. ( μ(P, T ) = u(P, T ) + P v -T (s spin + s vib + s elec + s rot + s gas/liquid ) (29) where lowercase letters are used since these are per-atom quantities and the internal energy u(P, T ) includes vibrational contributions (zero-point motion and heat capacity terms). The dependence of the entropy terms is not shown for simplicity. For gaseous/liquid reference phases, rotational (s rot ) and translational/configurational (s gas/liquid ) entropy contributions can become significant. For gases, these quantities may be calculated analytically for arbitrary partial pressures via the ideal gas and rigid rotor approximations Determining the chemical potential limits by considering the free energy of all possible secondary phases would involve a significant increase in computational cost. After combining all terms into the defect formation free energy, the remaining variable is the Fermi level, E F . The position of E F is dictated by the condition of net charge neutrality, such that the sum of all excess positive charge in the material (from donor-type defects and holes) equals that of all excess negative charge (from acceptor defects and electrons). As the energies and thus concentrations of charged defects themselves depend on the Fermi level, with g f,P (T ) = (...) + q(E V BM + E F (T )) -T s elec (E F ) where q is the defect charge, both E F (T ) and the defect free energies and concentrations must be solved self-consistently under the net neutrality constraint 150,151 . Typically materials are grown or processed/annealed under elevated temperatures where defects form with concentrations given by Eq. ( to the operating temperature. While the total concentration of each defect is kept fixed due to kinetic trapping, the Fermi level and thus relative populations of different charge states and electron/hole carrier concentrations re-equilibrate upon cooling. This is modelled by calculating the formation free energies at the growth/annealing temperature, which gives the total concentration of each defect that forms during synthesis (using Eq. ( where c d is the total concentration of defect d (calculated at the growth/annealing temperature) and g q f,P is the formation free energy in the q charge state. As mentioned, in solving for the (self-consistent) Fermi level, the electron and hole carrier concentrations are also computed, giving the predicted doping behaviour. The calculated defect concentrations can then be used in the prediction of a range of defect-related material properties, including carrier recombination rates, 4,50,126 ionic/electronic conductivity balance, 1,2 catalytic activity The calculation of defect free energies poses a significant computational challenge, especially when considering all intrinsic defects in structurally or chemically complex systems. This complexity can lead to many inequivalent defect species that need to be considered 128 . Depending on the application, one can envision different strategies to make the problem more tractable. One approach would be to filter the configurational space and only calculate the entropic terms for those defects with the lowest formation energies and thus highest concentrations. Alternatively, one could employ reasonable approximations to make the calculation of entropic terms more efficient. For instance, this could involve employing (semi-)local DFT exchange-correlation functionals for calculating vibrational entropies, instead of their hybrid counterparts often used for the energetic terms. Considering that (semi-)local functionals generally describe pristine structures and force constants accurately, this may be a reasonable approximation if the defect structure is stable at that level of theory. Alternatively, a surrogate model could be used instead of first-principles methods. Indeed, much of the existing defect literature has been built on the development and application of classical force fields. Given the remarkable progress achieved in machine learning force fields (MLFFs), which can provide a more flexible and accurate description of the potential energy surface, 155,156 they may be an optimal solution in certain cases. For instance, MLFFs may be appropriate when targeting in-depth studies of specific defects (e.g. metastable states or migration paths) or requiring high accuracies (e.g. including anharmonic interactions The significant cost of these calculations would justify training a model for the defective systems, which can be achieved via fine-tuning (e.g. training a model for the bulk and then re-training it for relevant configurations of the defective systems 157 ). We highlight that further work is still required to determine the optimal approach for defect MLFF training, particularly regarding the number and diversity of defect configurations required to achieve sufficient accuracies. Additional research is also needed to investigate whether current MLFFs can describe defects with complex electronic structures and configurational landscapes, a challenge that will likely benefit from progress in fourth-generation MLFFs that include local charges and non-local effects At shorter length scales, defect complexation can also occur, such as the combination of a vacancy and interstitial to form a bound Frenkel pair. Defect aggregation will alter the configurational landscape, in addition to vibrational, electronic, and spin terms. thermodynamically-unstable but kinetically-stable material (e.g. diamond), can exhibit true negative defect formation energies.