Nanoelectromechanical systems offer unique functionalities in photonics: The ability to elastically and reversibly deform dielectric beams with subwavelength dimensions enable electrical control of the propagation of light with a power consumption orders of magnitude below that of competing technologies, such as thermo-optic tuning. We present a study of the design, fabrication, and characterization of compact electrostatic comb-drive actuators tailored for integrated nanoelectromechanical silicon photonic circuits. Our design has a footprint of 1.2 × 10 3 μm 2 and is found to reach displacements beyond 50 nm at 5 V with a mechanical resonance above 200 kHz, or, using different spring constants and skeletonization, a mechanical resonance above 2.5 MHz with displacements beyond 50 nm at 28 V. This is sufficient to induce very large phase shifts and other optical effects in nanoelectromechanical reconfigurable photonic circuits. Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) have become ubiquitous in communication systems The miniaturization of MEMS combined with advances in nanofabrication technologies have led to the vision of nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS), which are not just scaleddown versions of MEMS but offer a wide range of new and different functionalities. For example, NEMS have less mass and higher surface-to-volume ratio compared to their MEMS counterparts, making them ideal for many sensing applications in fields such as biochemistry The prospects of NEMS are particularly strong within photonics because NEMS enable direct integration with silicon photonics or other planar photonics platforms where elastic deformation of photonic waveguides through electrostatic actuators built in the photonic device layer allows for filtering Most previous works on electrostatic NEMS have so far assumed that NEMS are governed by the same physics as MEMS, but it turns out that both the electrostatic and the material properties change at the nanoscale. For example, the electrostatic force in thin actuators is dominated by fringing fields rather than parallel fields The ideal NEMS comb drive should have a compact footprint, low driving voltage, large travel range, and high operating frequency. However, the extreme sensitivity of optical fields to the displacement of boundaries of materials with high refractive indices such as silicon, means that the travel range is often less important for photonic NEMS. Balancing these parameters calls for a compact design with a high density of comb fingers. Here we focus on developing compact comb-drive actuators with sub-micrometer displacements and high operating frequencies fabricated on silicon on insulator (SOI) platforms with a device-layer thickness of 220 nm, i.e., the standard thickness for silicon photonics. To this end, we use a compact folded-cantilever spring design together with a battering-ram body, as illustrated in Fig. The electrostatic force, FE, acting on an actuator is found as the derivative of the stored electrostatic potential energy In MEMS, the capacitance between fingers is often well approximated by the parallel-plate approximation due to the large thickness of the device layer compared to the gap between fingers. However, due to the thin device layer of our platform, fringing fields contribute significantly to the capacitance. While this changes the scaling of the capacitance with respect to g, the resulting electrostatic force remains largely independent of the displacement of the comb drive where E = 169 GPa is Young's modulus of silicon in the ⟨110⟩ direction where we define the comb- shows a contour plot of the steady-state displace-ment of comb drives with spring constants ranging from 0.5 to 32 N m -1 and a range of forces varying as specified in Fig. Figure We fabricate comb drives with N = 72 finger pairs, a gap between fingers of g = 200 nm, a spring width of W = 200 nm, and a spring length varying between L = [2.55, 3.21, 4.04, 5.09, 6.42, 8.08, 10.18] μm corresponding to spring constants kEB = [0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32] N m -1 according to Our comb drives are fabricated from nominally undoped SOITEC SOI wafers with a 220 nm device layer, a resistivity of ρ ∼ 10 Ω cm specified by the manufacturer, and a 2 μm buried oxide (BOX) layer. The substrate is spin-coated (ALLRE-SIST CSAR 62), and patterned by electron-beam lithography (JEOL JBX-9500FSZ 100 kV). The pattern is then transferred into the device layer by reactive-ion etching (SPTS-Pegasus). Afterwards, metal contacts are formed by liftoff using a negative UV-sensitive resist (AZ nLOF 2020) exposed with a maskless aligner (Heidelberg MLA100). Metal contacts are defined by electron-beam evaporation (Ferrotec Temescal FC-2000) of a 5 nm Cr adhesion layer followed by a 200 nm Au film. As the last step, the structures are released by a selective etch of the BOX layer with a temperature-and pressurecontrolled vapor phase HF etch (SPTS Primaxx uEtch). Figure Conventionally, comb drive actuators are doped, which for many applications can be done without introducing additional complexity to the fabrication process, whether by working with pre-doped SOI wafers or by fabricating actuators in polysilicon, which can be deposited with doping by lowpressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) To study the effect of doping, we fabricate two sets of nominally identical comb drive actuators and dope one set by diffusion-doping using boron-doped silica to obtain a resistivity of ρ = 6 × 10 -4 Ω cm. The doped comb drives are not limited by the electrical impedance, and we can excite their mechanical resonances by applying an alternating-current (AC) signal. We measure the dynamic response by applying the AC drive in-situ in an SEM. To illustrate the capabilities of this in-situ technique, we refer to supplementary Visualization 1 for an animation composed of single SEM images of the combdrive obtained for different values of an applied constant bias. Returning to the AC-measurements, we measure the amplitude of the blur where V0 is the DC bias, A is the AC amplitude, ω is the angular frequency, and t is time. For an AC signal with zero DC bias, the force will oscillate at twice the frequency of the input signal, but for V0 >> A the frequency of the generated force is dominated by a single frequency component, ω. The increased sensitivity enabled by the DC bias allows us to image the oscillating comb drives without significant interference from beam deflections. The mechanical resonance frequencies corresponding to the observed peak amplitudes of the image blur are plotted in Fig. Finally, we consider Timoshenko beam theory where κ = 5 6 is the Timoshenko shear coefficient for rectangular cross section and G = 79 GPa is the shear modulus of silicon in the ⟨110⟩ direction We measure the displacement of the actuators as a function of applied DC voltage using image analysis of SEM images aquired with zero tilt angle of the periodic structures shown in Fig. We now turn to the extraction of the comb-drive constant, ξ = 1 2k ∂C ∂d , which we have defined as the proportionality between V 2 and d, i.e., it can readily be extracted by fitting a quadratic function to the measured displacement curves in Fig. For high-speed applications, a comb drive with a high mechanical resonance frequency is required and doping is required to minimize the circuit impedance. The resonance frequency of a comb drive can be increased either by using stiffer springs or by reducing the mass of the comb drive. Skeletonizing a comb drive reduces mass at the cost of decreasing the stiffness of the comb-drive body. Figure In conclusion, we propose and experimentally validate a combdrive actuator designed for reconfigurable photonic integrated circuits. Our design concept allows for a wide range of customization balancing the desired performance and trade-offs between speed, displacement, and actuation voltage. For example, by choosing a low spring constant of km = 0.4 N m -1 , a displacement of 50 nm can be reached with actuation voltages below 5 V. Such a displacement is sufficient to reconfigure tunable photonic components such as phase shifters 