An approach to analyzing the spinor wave functions that appear in the electronic structure calculations when taking the spin-orbit interaction into account is developed. It is based on the projection analysis of angular parts of wave functions onto irreducible representations of the point group and analysis of the evolution of the energy levels upon the adiabatic turning on the spin-orbit interaction. The technique is illustrated by an example of the changes in the valence band structure in strained bulk CdSe with zinc-blende structure. An analysis of the character of mixing of various branches of the valence band supports the Luttinger-Kohn model of the valence band. It is shown that the above calculations complemented by the Zeeman splitting in a magnetic field make it possible to unambiguously determine the polarization of all optical transitions. Using the spinor wave functions, matrix elements of optical transitions between the valence subbands and the conduction band are calculated. Being one of the perturbation theory techniques, the k • p method [1, 2] found wide application in solid state physics. Strictly speaking, the use of this method requires to know the energies of an infinite number of bands and an infinite number of matrix elements. Löwdin A detailed comparison of predictions obtained using the first-principles calculations and the k • p method showed that in respect to low-dimensional structures (they will be the subject of our further research), the predictions of the k • p method are characterized by a large number of shortcomings described and analyzed in detail in Refs. The aim of this work was to develop an approach to analyzing the spinor wave functions that would allow one to determine the genesis of various bands in lowdimensional structures. The problem is that due to the size quantization effects and strong mixing of different branches of the electronic spectrum, the identification of electronic states in the valence band of these structures becomes extremely complicated. Since optical transitions that take into account their polarization are determined by the total angular momentum j and magnetic quantum number m j in the initial and final states, it becomes necessary to determine the contributions of states with different (j, m j ) to the corresponding wave functions. The available programs for an analysis of spinor wave functions (see Cadmium selenide CdSe was chosen as an object on which the proposed approach will be tested as it is a direct-gap semiconductor and has interesting optical properties. A considerable interest in CdSe now is associated with the study of nanoparticles of various shapes made of this material In the bulk form, cadmium selenide usually crystallizes in the wurtzite hexagonal structure (space group P 6 3 mc = C 4 6v ) while its cubic phase with the zinc-blende structure (space group F 43m = T 2 d ) is metastable. However, under certain synthesis conditions, samples can be obtained in the zinc-blende structure. In particular, nanoplatelets and quantum dots prepared by chemical route at low temperatures often have this structure. Calculations of the electronic structure of cubic CdSe and its optical properties in a wide energy range were carried out using OPW, LCAO, empirical pseudopotential, and FP-LAPW methods Calculations of the electronic structure of bulk CdSe with the zinc-blende structure with taking the spinorbit interaction into account were carried out from first principles within the density-functional theory using the ABINIT program In real low-dimensional structures-superlattices, nanoplatelets, and nanoheterostructures grown in the [001] direction-the layers are strained, and so their symmetry is tetragonal or lower. This is why we consider CdSe as an active region of such structures and study the properties of CdSe biaxially stretched and biaxially compressed in the xy plane. Since the spin-orbit interaction practically does not affect the geometry of structures, the calculations of the equilibrium geometry were carried out without taking spin into account. The band energies and spinor wave functions in the obtained structures were calculated with the spin-orbit interaction turned on. To output the values of the matrix elements of the momentum operator, small changes were added into the code of the ABINIT program. To unambiguously separate optical transitions from the light holes and of split-off holes to the conduction band in σ and π polarizations, a magnetic field was applied parallel to the [001] axis of the sample. The possibility of such calculations was recently added into the program Using two components of the new approach, namely, (1) tracing the changes in the energies of bands upon the "adiabatic" turning on the spin-orbit interaction and (2) determining the genesis of the spinor wave functions by expanding their angular parts in terms of irreducible representations of the point group, it becomes possible to identify the bands, trace their evolution, and determine the degree of mixing of various electronic states in them and their symmetry. As far as the author knows, this approach to an analysis of the spinor wave functions have not been used before. Since CdSe is a direct-gap semiconductor with the band extrema at the Γ point of the Brillouin zone, we will be interested in optical transitions exactly at this point when analyzing its optical properties. Upon a tetragonal distortion of the structure along the z axis, the FCC Bravais lattice transforms into a body-centered tetragonal Bravais lattice whose translation vectors are rotated by 45 • in the xy plane with respect to the axes of the FCC lattice. Therefore, the directions of the ∆ and Σ axes in the Brillouin zone are also interchanged with respect to their directions in the cubic structure. As will be shown in Sec. IV A, the valence band of cubic CdSe is mainly composed of the p orbitals of Se (orbital angular momentum l = 1). They will be denoted by |X , |Y , and |Z . Without taking spin into account, the valence band at the Γ point is threefold degenerate and is described by a vector irreducible representation T 2 When the spin-orbit interaction is turned on, the symmetry of wave functions is described by the irreducible representations of the double group in which the operations of the T d point group are supplemented by the transformations of the spin variable. In contrast to five irreducible representations of the T d point group at the Γ point, there are three irreducible representations in the double group Spin-orbit interaction causes a complex mixing of |X , |Y , and |Z orbitals and results in the lifting of the threefold degeneracy of the valence bands at the Γ point; the bands are split according to their total angular momentum j. The heavy holes HH (j = 3/2, m j = ±3/2) and light holes LH (j = 3/2, m j = ±1/2), which originate genetically from the doubly degenerate band of heavy carriers with m = ±1, are shifted upwards, and the splitoff SO band (j = 1/2, m j = ±1/2) arising from the nondegenerate band of light carriers with m = 0 shifts downwards. The symmetry of the LH and HH bands which are doubly degenerate at the Γ point is described by the Γ 8 irreducible representation of the double group, the symmetry of the SO band is described by the Γ 7 representation, and that of the conduction band is described by the Γ 6 representation. The wave functions of the conduction and three valence bands at the Γ point in a cubic crystal have the form (when choosing the coefficients, we follow the paper Below, when analyzing the symmetry of spinor wave functions, we will use the projection analysis to determine the expansion coefficients of the angular parts of wave functions in an orthogonal basis of irreducible representations of the point group. In a cubic crystal, all 4th order axes are equivalent, and the projection analysis does not allow to resolve the contributions of bands with different m at the Γ point. Under a tetragonal strain (F 43m → I 4m2), the z direction becomes distinguished, the degeneracy of the m = 0 and m = ±1 states is lifted, and unambiguous determination of the fraction of |Z states in the LH and SO bands of the Γ 7 symmetry using the projection analysis becomes possible. Taking the one-to-one correspondence between JM J and LS bases into account, this allows us to unambiguously determine the contributions of the j = 3/2 and j = 1/2 states to the wave functions of interest. This turns out to be very important for determining the matrix elements of optical transitions. In a cubic semiconductor, in accordance with Eq. ( We note that until now the discussion of the strain effects on the electronic structure of the valence band within the k • p method was usually limited to consideration of the band energies and their dispersions As was already noted, the symmetry of the spinor wave functions at the Γ point in tetragonal structures can be either Γ 6 or Γ 7 . Determination of the symmetry of wave functions and their genesis proved to be not an easy task. The fact is that in programs for electronic structure calculations, only the spatial symmetry of wave functions (given by the point group) is taken into account. This is because in the double group there is always the Ē operator, which corresponds to a rotation of a crystal by 360 • and changes the sign of the wave function to opposite. So, if the spin variable were taken into account, then the resulting wave function would always be identically equal to zero. To find the double group representation that describes the symmetry of a given wave function, we analyzed the symmetry of each of its spinor components for k = 0 averaged in the xy plane with respect to reflections in the plane passing through the cadmium atom. The components of the wave functions were extracted from the array of wave functions using the cut3d program included into the ABINIT software package. Although the I 4m2 space group does not contain the indicated symmetry operation, the improper rotation S 4 creates such an operation for the plane-averaged wave function. Even functions correspond to the Γ 6 symmetry, odd functions correspond to the Γ 7 one. The obtained symmetries of wave functions were confirmed later by calculations of the matrix elements of optical transitions between the valence subbands and the conduction band; they completely agree with the results obtained using the IrRep program As noted above, the existence of only two double group representations means that they can arise from a superposition of four different states: light, heavy, split-off holes, and s-like states of the conduction band in the initial cubic crystal. To determine the genesis of spinor wave functions, the symmetry of both components of the spinor wave function ψ for each band was analyzed in respect to all operations g of the point group G = D 2d . The desired parameters were the values which were then decomposed using the character table in an orthogonal basis of irreducible representations of the D 2d point group. The decomposition coefficients where |G| is the number of elements in the group, and χ i is the character of the ith representation, determine the contributions of different representations to the analyzed wave function. The factor ν i corrects the scalar product (2) for the dimension of the ith representation. When performing the analysis, it turned out to be important to choose the position of the reference point in the unit cell in such a way that it coincided with one of the points of high symmetry; in our calculations, it was the 2(a) Wyckoff position. To avoid the problem arising from the degeneracy of components of the spinor wave function at k = 0, the analysis was performed for the wave vector shifted along the Σ axis from the Γ point to a distance of about 0.0005 Å-1 . [34] As expected, the A 1 , B 2 , and E representations appeared in the projections; the projections onto A 2 and B 1 irreducible representations were absent. An analysis of the projections of the obtained spinor wave functions onto atoms shows that the conduction band of bulk CdSe is composed of 56% of s orbitals of Se atoms and 44% of s orbitals of Cd atoms. The states in the valence band are formed mainly from p orbitals of Se with an admixture of about 7% of d states of Cd and 2% p states of Cd and therefore, according to their genesis, can be classified as light, heavy, and split-off holes. The main problem in the interpretation of these bands is how to distinguish them. There is no problem for the heavy holes since their wave functions have the |X ± iY symmetry (1), and so under the projection analysis they show zero |Z component. For light and split-off holes the situation is more complicated, however the study of the behavior of |Z projections of wave functions on the scaling parameter λ SO , which determines the degree in which the spin-orbit interaction is taken into account in the calculations (λ SO H SO ) can help: with an increase in this parameter, the magnitude of projections should tend to fractions of |Z states predicted by formulas (1). Such calculations can be performed within the ABINIT program, in which the scaling parameter λ SO used in the calculations with PAW pseudopotentials is controlled by the spnorbscl variable. An analysis of the projections of spinor wave functions onto irreducible representations of the point group shows that the symmetry of the conduction band (CB) in CdSe is closest to the s type: the angular part of its wave function Γ 6 is projected onto the A 1 representation; the admixture of contributions of other symmetries does not exceed 0.1%. The angular part of the wave functions of HH band with the Γ 6 symmetry is projected onto the E representation; an admixture of wave functions of other symmetries does not exceed 0.1-0.2%. Despite the same symmetry of the CB and HH bands, they have different parity with respect to the inversion and, therefore, they do not mix at the Γ point (their mixing becomes possible at k = 0). As expected, the strongest mixing at the Γ point is observed for the LH and SO bands, which have the same Γ 7 symmetry. As the sum of fractions of the |Z states in these bands is close to unity, this indicates the weakness of interaction with remote bands and the adequacy of the assumptions underlying the Luttinger-Kohn model of the valence band The evolution of the energies of various branches of the valence band upon the adiabatic turning on the spinorbit interaction in biaxially compressed and biaxially stretched CdSe crystals is shown in Fig. In biaxially stretched samples the situation is also surprising. The strangeness here is in that for λ SO → 0 the HH and SO branches, which have completely different j and m j , turn out to be degenerate. The k • p method can help us understand the reason for what is happening. In the JM J basis (1), by taking into account only the biaxial strain ǫ xx = ǫ yy = ǫ, the ǫ zz = -2νǫ/(1 -ν) condition to get zero stress along the z axis, the calculated Poisson's ratio for bulk CdSe (ν = 0.422), and neglecting the isotropic strain which simply shifts all three bands by the same amount, the 6 × 6 block corresponding to the valence band subbands in the Hamiltonian at k = 0 is where ǫ = ǫ zz -(ǫ xx + ǫ yy )/2 = -2.460ǫ. Here the rows and columns in the 3 × 3 matrix correspond to the HH, LH, and SO bands, respectively, b 1 is the deformation potential of anisotropic strain, ǫ is the magnitude of this strain, and ∆ SO is the spin-orbit splitting. At ǫ = 0 and λ SO = 0, the bands form a singlet with the energy -2b 1 ǫ and the wave function |Z (of symmetry B 2 ) and a doublet with the energy +b 1 ǫ and wave function |X ± iY / √ 2 (of symmetry E). One of the wave functions of the doublet and the wave function of a singlet turn out to be linear combinations of the j = 3/2 and j = 1/2 states (the symmetry of the D 2d group admits such a mixing When the spin-orbit interaction is turned on, the degeneracy of the doublet is removed, and the proportion between the j = 3/2 and j = 1/2 components in wave functions of the LH and SO subbands evolves to the values described by the equation (1): as can be seen in Fig. The changes in positions of the valence subbands at k = 0 as a function of strain are shown in Fig. The fraction of |Z states in wave functions of the SO band as a function of biaxial strain is shown in Fig. Hamiltonian (4), the fraction of |Z states in the wave function of SO subband is described by the formula where t = 3b 1 ǫ/λ SO ∆ SO (this formula was previously obtained in paper The group theory states that for optical transitions to be allowed in the dipole approximation, the direct product of representations of groups describing the initial and final states should contain at least one vector representation. For the D 2d group we have Γ By examining the scheme of possible optical transitions (Fig. [38] For their unambiguous identification, we used a trick with the imposition of an external magnetic field, which removes the degeneracy of these levels due to the Zeeman splitting. This allowed us to solve our problem. The only unresolved question was that the sign of the g factor in the Zeeman splitting remains unknown. If we take its sign to be positive for electrons, then the same sign applies for heavy holes, but the signs for other two bands are opposite to each other and depend on the strain. At a strain close to zero, the sign of the g factor for the SO band is positive while for the LH band it is negative. However, under strong biaxial compression, the signs of g factors for these bands are reversed. Curiously, the change in signs of g factors for these two bands occurs at approximately the same strain at which the contributions of the |Z states into the bands become equal. The results with imposition of a magnetic field obtained using the HGH pseudopotentials were completely confirmed by calculations with norm-conserving ONCVPSP pseudopotentials The squares of the matrix elements of individual transitions in CdSe as a function of strain are shown in Fig. An approach to analyzing the spinor wave functions that appear in the electronic structure calculations when taking the spin-orbit interaction into account is developed. It is based on the projection analysis of angular parts of wave functions onto irreducible representations of the point group and analysis of the evolution of the energy levels upon the adiabatic turning on the spin-orbit interaction. This approach makes it possible to determine the genesis of the spinor wave functions, calculate the fractions of different contributions to the mixing of these states, and thus unambiguously identify electronic states. It seems promising to further use this approach to identify electronic states in lowdimensional systems such as superlattices, nanoplatelets, and nanoheterostructures, in which the valence band states are strongly mixed, and their unambiguous identification is complicated by the appearance of a large number of minibands as a result of the size quantization. This work was partly supported by the Russian Science Foundation grant No. 22-13-00101. [38] In particular, this peculiarity results in appearance of forbidden transitions with ∆mj = 2 when calculating the HH→CB matrix elements with these wave functions.