A recent report of room temperature superconductivity at ambient pressure in Cu-substituted apatite ('LK99') has invigorated interest in the understanding of what materials and mechanisms can allow for high-temperature superconductivity. Here I perform density functional theory calculations on Cu-substituted lead phosphate apatite, identifying correlated isolated flat bands at the Fermi level, a common signature of high transition temperatures in already-established families of superconductors. I elucidate the origins of these isolated bands as arising from a structural distortion induced by the Cu ions and a chiral charge density wave from the Pb lone pairs. These results suggest that a minimal two-band model can encompass much of the low-energy physics in this system. Finally, I discuss the implications of my results on possible superconductivity in Cu-doped apatite. High-T C superconductors are arguably the holy grail of condensed matter physics with huge potential applications for an energy-efficient future. The first class of superconductors that were considered to be high-T C were the cuprates which were discovered by Bednorz and Müller in 1987 While significant strides have been made in the discovery and understanding of high-T C superconductors, and we continue to unearth novel examples within established classes The recent report of possible room temperature superconductivity at ambient pressures in Cu-substituted apatite (also known as 'LK99') Apatites are materials with the general formula A 10 (TO 4 ) 6 X 2±x , where A = alkaline or rare earth metal; T = Ge, Si, or P; and X = halide, O, or OH. The name 'apatite' derives from the Greek apatē meaning 'deceit' as a result of the diverse range of forms it can take While the Pb(1) forms the overall framework with the PO 4 tetrahedra, the Pb(2) play a crucial role in Pb-O connectivity and polyhedra tilts throughout the structure. In fact, while both Pb(1) and Pb(2) possess 6s 2 lone pairs, only the latter is stereochemically active. I verify this by calculating the electronic localization function (ELF) as shown in Fig. I next consider the substitution of Cu on a Pb(1) site resulting in CuPb 9 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 , with the fully optimized structure shown in Fig. Looking closely at the change in coordination of Cu on the Pb(1) site, I see the Cu 2+ is now six-coordinated with oxygen forming a distorted Jahn-Teller trigonal prism. In an ideal trigonal prism the anions are arranged at the vertices of a regular triangular prism with the transition metal at the center with D 3h symmetry. However, breaking in-plane mirror symmetry results in Jahn-Teller distorted trigonal crystal field with C 3v symmetry, such as is found in the Janus compounds I present the calculated spin-polarized electronic structure in Fig. The crystal-field splitting for the trigonal prism comprises a single d z 2 , doubly degenerate d xy and d x 2 -y 2 , and doubly degenerate d yz and d xz . In fact, the relative positioning of the d z 2 and the d yz /d xz is set by the anisotropy induced by the mirror-symmetry breaking -large values of asymmetry can cause the d z 2 to be destabilized. In our case for Cu 2+ with a d 9 configuration I expect half filling of the doubly degenerate d yz /d xz bands -this is corroborated with our calculations in Fig. While the calculations presented here are performed for GGA+U with a U = 4 eV applied to the Cu-d, I find the same qualitative features of the band structures for a wide range of U values, as presented in the SI. This suggests that the presence of such an isolated manifold of flat Cu-d bands is a feature of the structural reconstruction and new crystal field environment provided by the apatite network. I further confirm this by calculating the band structure of the Cu-substituted compound without performing a structural relaxation, that is, taking the structure of the ideal Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 and replacing a Pb(1) with Cu without allowing the structure to relax. In this case, I find slight spin-polarization in the band structure, however all Cu-d states are now in the bulk valence manifold and do not form an isolated manifold (see SI Fig. I next investigate the exchange interactions between Cu ions in different unit cells by constructing doubled unit cells in the in-plane and out-of-plane directions. I find that there is a preference of 2 meV/Cu for ferromagnetic coupling in the out-of-plane direction (with a Cu-Cu separation of c = 7.307 Å), whereas a preference of 7 μeV/Cu for antiferromagnetic coupling in the inplane direction (with a Cu-Cu separation of a = 9.738 Å). However, while this result is indicative of the potential exchange interactions in the system, it relies on the unrealistic assumption that the Cu ions will sit on the same substitution position in each unit cell. A full study of potential exchange interactions for various Cu locations is out of the scope of this work, and will crucially be informed by the Cu locations determined in experiment. So far all calculations have been for Cu on the Pb(1) site, which is the site occupancy reported in Ref. These theoretical results suggest that the apatite structure provides a unique framework for stabilizing highly localized Cu-d 9 states that form a strongly correlated flat band at the Fermi level. The central role of stereochemically active 6s 2 lone pairs of Pb(2) manifests in the formation of a chiral charge density wave and the propagation of structural distortions with connected polyhedra. When Cu is substituted on a Pb(1) site, the result is a cascade of structural alterations, including reduced lattice parameters, changes in coordination, and modified polyhedral tilts, leading to a local Jahn-Teller distorted trigonal prism around Cu. This results in an unusually flat set of isolated d yz /d xz bands with half-filling. I briefly note that achieving such a crystal field environment should also be possible in intercalated twisted heterogeneous bilayers where selection of different heterobilayers can provide the mirror symmetry breaking, while moiré twist can provide an arbitrary rotation of the upper and lower triangles. In fact such a platform would be ideal for probing the physics found here given its broad range of tunability and the state-of-the-art characterization probes for their interrogation I now discuss the potential implications of these features of Cu-substituted apatite for possible high-T C superconductivity, and in particular the role of the flat bands and the presence of competing magnetic interactions and phonons. Isolated, flat bands have long been a target for achieving high-T C as predicted from BCS theory In contrast to conventional superconductors, where phonon-mediated interactions govern Cooper pair formation, there is wide consensus that other bosonic excitations are responsible for the attractive pair formation in high-T C superconductors ranging from paramagnons to spin-and charge-density waves Finally, the calculations presented here suggest that Cu substitution on the appropriate (Pb(1)) site displays many key characteristics for high-T C superconductivity, namely a particularly flat isolated d-manifold, and the potential presence of fluctuating magnetism, charge and phonons. However, substitution on the other Pb(2) does not appear to have such sought-after properties, despite being the lower-energy substitution site. This result hints to the synthesis challenge in obtaining Cu substituted on the appropriate site for obtaining a bulk superconducting sample. Nevertheless, I expect the identification of this new material class to spur on further investigations of doped apatite minerals given these tantalizing theoretical signatures and experimental reports of possible high-T C superconductivity. I used the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) We used the AMPLIMODES software from the Bilbao Crystallographic Server The resulting relaxed structures in POSCAR format are given below. The specific geometry is given in the headers. 