Biodegradable and biocompatible 3D printable biomaterials with tunable mechanical properties and degradation rate adapted to target tissues were urgently required to manufacture scaffolds for tissue regeneration. Herein, a strategy based on a series of copolymers are proposed where the mechanical and degradation properties can be optimized regarding the specific biological application. With this purpose, poly(ɛ-caprolactone)-poly(ethylene glycol)-poly(ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL-PEG-PCL, PCEC) triblock co-polymers with high molecular weight were synthesized by using PEG with a wide range of molecular weight (from 0.6 kg/mol to 35 kg/mol) as macroinitiators. PCEC copolymers exhibited tunable mechanical properties with an elastic modulus in the range 338-705 MPa and a degradation rate from 60% mass loss after 8 h to 70% mass loss after 23 days in accelerated tests, as well as excellent cytocompatibility and cell attachment after culture with mouse fibroblast L929 cells. The mechanisms responsible for these properties were ascertained by means of different techniques to ascertain the structure-property relationship in PCEC copolymers. Furthermore, it was shown that it is possible to manufacture PCEC scaffolds by 3D printing with excellent dimensional accuracy and controlled microporosity. This study provides a promising strategy to design, select, and fabricate copolymers with tunable mechanical properties and degradation rate for tissue engineering applications. Tissue engineering is currently considered an excellent approach to replace damaged tissue, and synthetic polymer scaffolds play a very important role in this task due to their similar structure and function to extracellular matrix (ECM) Besides, favorable biological properties are also required for tissue recovery The emergence of 3D printing technologies provides broad prospects for the manufacture of personalized scaffolds for tissue engineering, since it can accurately and quickly fabricate scaffolds with precise geometry and high pore connectivity, similar to native tissues As a nontoxic and water-soluble polymer, poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG) is often used for copolymerization or blending with PCL matrix to improve the hydrophilicity of PCL-based 3D printed scaffolds, and some interesting results have been achieved Herein, this study aims to produce and characterize biocompatible and biodegradable PCEC copolymers with high molecular weight using macroinitiators from low molecular weight PEG (0.6k g/mol) to high molecular weight PEG (35k g/mol). They are expected to cover a wide range of mechanical properties, degradation rates and biological performance, so they can be used in different applications. The composition, thermal properties, crystallization behavior, mechanical properties, degradation rate, and biological properties are studied systematically to define the structure-property relationships of PCEC copolymers. Finally, they were used to manufacture scaffolds via a pellet-based screw-driven 3D printer, so the potential for personalized medicine is demonstrated. As shown in Figure Because the catalyst Sn(Oct)2 can also be dissolved in petroleum ether, it was removed during the dissolution and precipitation. After filtration and drying in a vacuum oven at 40 °C for 24 h, white block products were obtained (yield: > 95%). According to the molecular weight of initiators, the obtained samples were named by PCE0.6kC, PCE2kC, PCE6kC, PCE20kC and PCE35kC, respectively. PCL was synthesized as above from ethylene glycol (EG, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%, anhydrous) and Ɛ-CL at the same ratio. PCL and PCEC copolymer samples (~ 7 g) were transferred to a mold (100 × 100 × 0.5 mm 3 ) and processed by hot-pressing at 120 °C for 10 min under a pressure of 20 MPa to obtain regular polymer films for characterizations. Surface morphology of the polymer films were assessed by using atomic force microscopy (AFM) (XE-150, Park Systems). Areas of 40×40 μm were scanned in contact mode at a rate of 0.3 Hz. Average roughness (Ra) were measured and recorded from the surface. The composition and structure of PCL and PCEC copolymers was analyzed by 1 H-NMR, 13 C-NMR (AVANCE III 400, Bruker, USA) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR, Thermo Fisher Nicolet 5700 spectrometer). 1 H NMR and 13 C-NMR analysis spectrum were measured at 400 MHz using deuterated chloroform as the solvent, while FT-IR was performed under an ATR mode. Then, the molecular weight and the poly-dispersity index of PCL and PCEC copolymers were obtained from a gel permeation chromatographer (GPC, Waters1525, Spain) that equipped with a Waters 2424 refractive index detector and a Waters 2489 UV detector, this process was carried out at 25 °C. Monodisperse polystyrene (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) was used as the standard sample, and tetrahydrofuran (THF, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) was used as the solvent. Additionally, dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) were performed to investigate the thermal properties and crystallization behavior of PCL and PCEC copolymers. DMA was studied by using a TA-Q800 machine, and the samples were test from -110 °C to 40 °C under with a heating rate of 3 °C/min and a frequency of 1 Hz. DSC was performed for each film (5-10 mg) using a TA-Q200 machine in an N2 atmosphere (50 mL min -1 ). Samples were tested from -40 °C to 100 °C and kept for 1 min to remove the thermal history, then quenched to -40 °C at a cooling rate of 10 °C/min, and after isothermal equilibrium for 1 min, heated to 100 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min. XRD was conducted on an X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical B.V., Netherlands) with Ni-filtered Cu Kα radiation from 10° to 40°. Rheology properties were explored on a rheometer (Anton Paar MCR 702e, Austria) by using disk samples with a diameter of 25 mm and a thickness of 1 mm at 110 °C under a shear stain of 3% in a frequency range of 0.1-50 rad/s. The storage modulus (G'), loss modulus (G'') and complex viscosity (η*) were recorded during the experiment. PCL and PCEC copolymer films were cut into dog-bone shape with dimensions of 75 mm × 4 mm × 0.5 mm, following ISO 527/2 5A (1996) standard. A universal tensile testing machine (Instron 5966, USA) was utilized to carry out the tensile tests with a 500 N load cell and an initial length of 40 mm at a speed of 10 mm/min. A minimum of 6 specimens were tested for each sample. The water contact angle of PCL and PCEC copolymers was measured by a Drop Shape Analyzer (DSA25S, KRÜSS). A drop of water (3 μL) was served on the surface of samples and the image was immediately recorded. The behavior of the drop and the material was recorded for 5 seconds, and the average and the standard deviation were obtained. A minimum of 3 specimens were tested for each sample. Accelerated degradation tests were carried out in 5 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) solution at 37 °C to explore the degradation behavior. Briefly, PCL and PCEC copolymer films with a diameter of 15 mm × 5 mm × 0.5 mm were placed into glass vials, respectively. Then 2 mL of 5 M NaOH solution was added to each vial to immerse the whole film. After tightly sealed, the vials were placed into an oven with a temperature of 37 °C. Samples were checked every 2 or 3 days to monitor the change in mass. To this end, samples were removed, washed with deionized water, and dried in a fume hood for 24 h. Then samples were weighed every time and put back to the glass vials. The process was repeated until the samples completely lost their structural integrity. A least 3 pieces of each sample were performed at the same time to obtain the average and standard deviation. A mouse fibroblast L929 cell line (ATCC-CRL-2593) was used for the cytocompatibility tests. Cells were cultured in a complete medium consisted of high-glucose Dulbecco's modified eagle medium (DMEM, Gibco, USA), fetal bovine serum (FBS, Corning, USA), penicillin (100 units/mL, Invitrogen, USA) and streptomycin (100 μg/mL, Invitrogen, USA). Cells were used at 80 % of confluence and incubated at 37 °C with an atmosphere of 95 % air and 5 % CO2. Extracts of the PCL and PCEC copolymers were obtained by immersion of polymer films in complete culture medium with a ratio of 3 cm 2 /mL and incubated at 37 °C for 72 h. Then, the samples were removed and extracts were used for the cytocompatibility assay. To this end, L929 cells were seeded with a cell density of 1 × 10 4 cells/cm 2 and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Then, the culture medium was removed and replaced with diluted extracts (100%, 50%, 25%, 12.5%, 6.25% and 3.125%) and incubated for another 24 h. The mitochondrial activity was measured by adding thiazolyl blue tetrazolium bromide (MTT, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) at a concentration of 5 mg/ml with a ratio of 10 μL by each 100 μL of complete culture medium. Afterwards, the cells were incubated under the same conditions for another 3 h and 100 μL dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) was added in each well to dissolve the formazan crystals produced. Finally, the absorbance was measured in a microplate reader (Tecan Infinite M Plex, Switzerland) at a 570 nm wavelength. Cells without extract but with complete culture medium were used as the control. The mitochondrial activity was reported after normalize the optical density (OD) of the cells exposed to the extracts with respect the control (mitochondria activity (%) = (OD of sample / OD of positive control) × 100 %). Mouse fibroblast L929 cells were seeded at a cell density of 1 × 10 4 cells/cm 2 directly on the surface of the samples and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Afterwards, cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde (PFA 4%, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) at 37 °C for 25 min. Cell morphology was studied for immunofluorescent staining. After fixation, cells were treated with 0.1% of triton ® X-100 (Thermo Scientific, USA) for 15 min and washed several times with Dulbecco's phosphate buffered saline (D-PBS, Corning, USA). Afterwards, cells were stained with Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin (Invitrogen, USA) at a concentration of 1:300 to observe the cytoskeleton, and with DAPI (Invitrogen, USA) at a concentration of 1:1000 for the identification of the nucleus. After incubation under dark at room temperature for 1 h, the morphology of cells was observed under confocal microscopy (Olympus FV3000, Japan). The cell-material interaction was studied on cells seeded directly in the sample in a scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI Helios NanoLab 600i, USA). After fixation with PFA 4%, samples were dehydrated by immersion in increasing concentrations of ethanol in distilled water (30%, 50%, 70%, 90% and 100%) for 10 min each. Then, the process was repeated by increasing 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS, TCI EUROPE N.V., Belgium) in ethanol at concentration of 33%, 50%, 66% and 100% for 10 min each. Samples were dried overnight and then observed in the SEM at magnifications of 500 x and 2500 x. A pellet-based 3D printer with a screw-assistant system (Direct 3D, Italy) was used to manufacture scaffolds. Firstly, the PCL and PCEC copolymers were dissolved in CH2Cl2 solution and cast into flat containers to dry into thin films in the vacuum oven at 40 °C overnight, respectively. Then, films were cut into small pieces for the 3D printing. The printing task was conducted in the following parameters; the nozzle of the printer has a diameter of 500 μm, the extrusion temperature was 110 °C, the experimental temperature and printing bed temperature was 25 °C, the layer thickness 500 μm, the printing speed was 5-10 mm/s with screwing flow percentages of 2000-8000%, in which the difference depended on the rheological properties of each sample). Scaffolds with different features were designed. They include 2-layer sheets (strut thickness of 500 μm, pore size of 1000 μm, and 0°/90° lay-down pattern) of 30 mm × 30 mm × 1 mm, 10-layer scaffolds (strut thickness of 500 μm, pore size of 1000 μm, and 0°/90° lay-down pattern) of 15 mm × 15 mm × 5 mm, and 10-layer scaffolds (strut thickness of 500 μm, pore size of 500 μm, and 0°/90° lay-down pattern) of 15 mm × 15 mm × 5 mm. The microstructure of 3D-printed scaffolds was observed in an optical microscope (Olympus SC50, Japan) to assess the accuracy of the 3D printing process. PCL and a series of PCEC block copolymers with different PEG contents were successfully synthesized by the ring-opening reaction of ɛ-CL as the monomer, and EG or PEG as initiators using Sn(Oct)2 as the catalyst (Figure In addition, the proportions of PEG block and PCL blocks in the synthesized PCEC copolymers were also different due to the different molecular weights of the macroinitiator PEG. It can be seen in Figure Thermal properties and crystalline behavior are critical in tissue engineering because they can significantly affect the mechanical properties and degradation rate. The thermal properties, crystalline behavior and rheological properties of PCL and PCEC copolymers were studied by DSC, DMA, XRD and rheology (Figure However, when the PEG block content increases (PEG ≈ PCL), the crystallization of PEG begins to appear, resulting in two crystallization peaks in PCE20kC, where the one at 30.2 °C corresponds to the PCL block and the other at -2.1°C stands for the crystallization of the PEG block. This result can also be confirmed from the overlapping melting peaks and a higher ΔHm (melting enthalpy, 75.0 J/g). However, the actual Tc of PEG20k was around 45 °C according to DSC (Figure This reduced temperature comes from the crystallization of the PCL block at high temperature, which affects the mobility of the PEG block, leading to the difficulty in PEG crystallization. Conversely, when PEG > PCL, PEG block crystallization dominates and appears as a sharp peak similar to the crystallization peak of the PEG block (Figure When PEG < PCL, the crystallization enthalpy of the copolymers decreased with the increase of PEG block content, resulting in the decrease in Tg. While when the crystallization of PEG begins to appear, the Tg of the copolymer increases. It is because the Tg of the copolymer decreases as the crystallinity of the copolymer decreases, which is consistent to the results of DSC. For extrusion-based 3D printing, the rheological behavior of the material is a key factor as it greatly affects printability. In particular, the shear thinning behavior is beneficial to 3D printing, because the low viscosity under high-frequency shear is conducive to the extrusion of the material which prevents the nozzle clogging; while the high viscosity under low-frequency shear is beneficial to maintain the shape after deposition and preventing microstructure collapse. The rheology of PCL and PCEC copolymers was explored and the results are plotted in Figure Furthermore, it also provides an effective method to improve the rheological properties of PCLbased polymers without reducing the molecular weight or blending with other materials. Tensile tests were carried out to ascertain the mechanical properties of PCL and PCEC copolymers. The stress-strain curves and tensile properties are plotted in Figure Water contact angles were explored before degradation tests to determine the surface hydrophilicity of PCEC copolymers, as it directly affects the degradation rate and cell behavior. PCL, PCE0.6kC and PCE2kC showed similar contact angles of 84.2°, 87.3° and 87.1°, respectively, representing a hydrophilic behavior (contact angle lower than 90°) (Figure The contact angle begins to drop from PCE6kC (73.4°), and when PEG ≥ PCL, PCE20kC and PCE35kC show excellent hydrophilicity, with contact angles of 45.2° and 65.4°, respectively. This is due to the increase of the presence of the highly hydrophilic PEG blocks. Notably, PCE35kC with higher PEG content shows a contact angle higher than that of PCE20kC due to the joint contribution of crystallization discussed before, which makes it more difficult for water to diffuse on the surface. These results indicate that the hydrophilicity can be changed in a wide range by adjusting the PEG block content, providing a useful strategy to tailor the degradation rate and cell behavior. The degradation rate is a vital factor for biomedical applications as it will directly affect the in vivo performance of the scaffolds. The degradation mechanism of PCL under physiological conditions (water or PBS solution) is bulk erosion. The sample first experiences a reduction in molecular weight, which later leads to the loss of mass. However, the degradation rate is not constant in bulk erosion, because of the complexity of degradation process This constant degradation rate facilitates the comparison of the degradation among different materials. Therefore, accelerated degradation tests were performed by immersing PCEC copolymer films in 5M NaOH solution (pH = 13) at 37 oC in this study. The degradation was monitored by measuring the mass residue over time until structural integrity was lost (Figure When PEG < PCL, PCL, PCE0.6kC and PCE2kC show similar degradation rates with ~70% mass loss retained structural integrity after 23 days, while PCE6kC shows a faster degradation rate, with about 90% mass loss after 20 days and loss of structural integrity after 23 days. Surprisingly, when PEG ≥ PCL, PCE20kC and PCE35kC exhibit extremely fast degradation rates and they were fully degraded within 1 day, so that samples were checked every 2 h. PCE20kC and PCE35kC show ~60% mass loss after 8 h and lost their structural integrity after 10 h (Figure Cytotoxicity of PCL and PCEC copolymers was tested by MTT assay. To this end, different diluted extracts (100%, 50%, 25%, 12.5%, 6.25%, and 3.125%) were used to incubate L929 cells at a concentration of 1 × 10 4 cells/cm 2 for 24 h. The mitochondrial activity of PCL and PCEC copolymers was normalized by the obtained value of the control and the relationship between the mitochondrial activity at function of the dilution is plotted in Figure These results confirm that the increased PEG content has an indirect effect on cell attachment and proliferation in PCEC copolymers. The 3D printed PCEC copolymer scaffolds were fabricated by pellet-based screw-assisted 3D printers. It is highly tolerant to the shape of the material, such as powders, pellets, or gels. Compared with the commonly used fused deposition modeling (FDM) system, it reduces the cumbersome process of making uniform filaments, which is simpler and more efficient for manufacturing. The printing parameters of 3D printing were greatly influenced by the rheological behavior, especially the extrusion flow rate, which is directly related to the viscosity. As shown in Figure However, due to the shear thinning behavior, even though PCE20kC and PCE35kC exhibit high viscosities, they can be extruded at low extrusion flow rates, improving printing efficiency and reducing nozzle clogging issues. PCL and PCEC copolymers can be all printed into scaffolds with precise geometry and high pore connectivity. Taking PCE20kC as an example, 3D printed scaffolds with different sizes, number of layers, and porosity were displayed in Figure Biodegradable and biocompatible PCEC copolymers with tunable mechanical properties and degradation rate were synthesized by using macroinitiators ranging from low molecular weight PEG (0.6k g/mol) to high molecular weight PEG (35k g/mol). Three different crystallization regimes were found depending on PCL/PEG block ratio which significantly affected the mechanical properties. The elastic modulus of the copolymers could be tuned between 338 -705 MPa, close to the value of cancellous bone, tendon, and collateral ligament, while the elongation to fracture was always > 500%. The surface hydrophilicity and degradation rate were directly related to the PEG content. PCEC copolymers with higher PEG content showed higher hydrophilicity, faster degradation rate, and improved cell attachment. In fact, PCE20kC and PCE35kC copolymers exhibited extremely fast apparent degradation rates in 5M NaOH solution. Moreover, all PCEC copolymers could be manufactured into 3D scaffolds with controlled microstructure, particularly PCE20kC and PCE35kC which exhibit excellent shear-thinning rheological properties. These results show that is possible to tailor the mechanical properties, degradation rate and hydrophilicity of PCEC copolymers to adapt the properties of the copolymers to different native tissues, and they also provide a strategy for the design and selection of other copolymers for biomedical applications. a PCL/PEG block ratio calculated from the peak area ratio of peak e and h in 1 H-NMR b Number-average molecular weight (Mn) obtained from GPC c Weight-average molecular weight (Mw) obtained from GPC d Polydispersity index (PDI, Mw/Mn) obtained from GPC crystal planes of PEG block