We perform theoretical calculations to investigate the naturally occurring high-frequency cutoff in a circuit comprising a flux qubit coupled inductively to a transmission line resonator (TLR). Specifically, a decoupling occurs between the qubit and the high-frequency modes. The coupling strength between the qubit and resonator modes increases with mode frequency ω as √ ω at low frequencies and decreases as 1/ √ ω at high frequencies. This result is similar to those of past studies that considered somewhat similar circuit designs. By avoiding the approximation of ignoring the qubit-TLR coupling in certain steps in the analysis, we obtain effects not captured in previous studies. In particular, we obtain a resonance effect that shifts the TLR mode frequencies close to qubit oscillation frequencies. We derive expressions for the TLR mode frequencies, qubit-TLR coupling strengths and qubit Lamb shift. We identify features in the spectrum of the system that can be used in future experiments to test and validate the theoretical model. The fields of cavity quantum electrodynamics (cavity-QED) As we shall discuss in more detail below, a complication arises in the theoretical treatment of the high-frequency modes in a multimode resonator. In the perturbative approach in which the qubit-resonator coupling is treated as a perturbation to the bare qubit and resonator Hamiltonians, high-frequency divergences arise. In particular, the coupling strength between the qubit and individual modes grows indefinitely with mode frequency. Because the Lamb shift depends on the ratio between the coupling strength and the mode frequency, and the coupling strength increases only as the square-root of the mode frequency, the Lamb shift caused by individual modes decreases with increasing mode frequency. However, the decrease is slow, such that the total Lamb shift diverges. This complication was avoided in past theoretical studies by imposing a frequency cutoff above which resonator modes are ignored. It was recently shown, however, that no ad-hoc cutoff is needed. A natural decoupling occurs between the qubit and high-frequency modes, which eliminates the divergences mentioned above In this work, we present a theoretical treatment of a circuit-QED system that comprises a flux qubit coupled inductively to a quarter-wavelength transmission line resonator (TLR). The circuit was investigated experimentally in Ref. 1: Schematic diagram of the qubit-TLR system, with the TLR modeled as a series of LC elements. After setting up the equations with a finite length δx, we will take the limit δx → 0. The TLR is a quarter-wavelength resonator, terminated to ground at one end and with a (near-zerocapacitance) capacitor at the other end. The qubit is modeled as a loop with a single Josephson junction, in addition to linear inductances. The loop is threaded by an externally applied flux Φ ext . The qubit-TLR coupling arises from the shared inductance L c . The x values at the bottom show the correspondence with the original circuit and mathematical model. We consider the circuit shown in Fig. Ref. We replace the spatially extended TLR by a long series of small inductances and capacitors, which is a standard approach to model such resonators. Each inductance-capacitor pair corresponds to a segment of length δx of the TLR. At some point in our derivations below, Note that, apart from the profile of the current as a function of x for each mode, the maximum amplitudes in the figure do not have any physical significance; for example, they should not be compared to each other. The point x = 0 is where the TLR makes contact with the ground plane. In the absence of the qubit (Panel a), there is no charge accumulation, and all the modes have horizontal current profiles at x = 0. The presence of the qubit at x = 0 (Panel b) interrupts the current flow at the location of the qubit, which suppresses the current amplitudes at that location. As with a low-pass filter, the suppression effect becomes increasingly strong with increasing mode frequency, with I(0) → 0 in the limit of infinitely high mode frequency. The amplitude suppression is exaggerated in this figure for clarity. we will take the limit in which the inductance-capacitance series is replaced by an infinite series of infinitesimally small elements, corresponding to the infinitesimal length dx. We follow the standard technique for calculating the quantum mechanical Hamiltonian for superconducting circuits The flux (or phase) variable Φ represents the qubit variable that introduces the nonlinearity in the circuit via the effective Josephson potential U q (Φ, Φ ext ) = -E J cos {2π(Φ -Φ ext )/Φ 0 }. The coefficient E J = I c Φ 0 /(2π) is the Josephson energy of the junction, I c is the critical current, and Φ 0 = h/(2e) is the superconducting flux quantum. The variables φ j are the phase variables at the nodes j (j = 0, 1, 2, ..., N ) along the TLR. The capacitance C q is the junction capacitance. The parameters c and l are, respectively, the capacitance and inductance per unit length of the TLR, such that the capacitances and inductances of the elements shown in Fig. Using the Legendre transformation, we obtain the Hamiltonian: As is common in the theoretical treatment of superconducting circuits, the main changes that occur when going from the Lagrangian to the Hamiltonian are: (1) the time derivatives of the phase variables are replaced by charge variables, (2) capacitances move from numerators to denominators, and (3) the signs of the potential energy terms are reversed. The smallness of δx adds the following feature in our case: the new variables δq j are proportional to δx. Hence, the term δq 2 j /(2cδx) is also proportional to δx. Similarly, since the difference φ j -φ j+1 is equal to the spatial derivative of the phase variable multiplied by δx, the term (φ j -φ j+1 ) 2 /(2lδx) is proportional to δx. These properties are to be expected and allow a smooth transition from this discrete description to the continuous description that we shall introduce shortly. It is worth pointing out another interesting property of the Hamiltonian: although L c is the mutual inductance between the qubit and the TLR, it is L 2 that appears in the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian terms that combine the qubit and TLR variables, i.e. the variables Φ and φ 0 . Furthermore, L 2 appears in the denominator, whereas we expect the mutual inductance to appear in the numerator in the effective coupling term, which should be equal to the mutual inductance times the product of the qubit and TLR currents. This situation might seem paradoxical. However, it is simply a matter of deceptive appearance in the intermediate steps of the derivation. For example, a somewhat similar situation was encountered in Ref. The question of the qubit-TLR coupling term form also leads to the question of gauge choice. The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where ν is a constant, we obtain the transformed Hamiltonian The charge gauge is obtained by setting ν = L c /(L c + L 2 ), which eliminates the terms that contain the product Φφ 0 . Instead, the qubit-TLR coupling is now described by the product Q × N j=0 δq j . Considering that the coupling term now involves long-range interactions between the qubit's charge variable Q and the charge densities at all points in the TLR, it is simpler to work in the flux gauge. This result is consistent with past results in the literature From the Hamiltonian, we can derive the equations of motion for the dynamical variables straightforwardly: It is convenient for the analysis below to turn the first-order equations of motion into second-order equations of motion for the phase variables We now take the limit in which δx becomes the infinitesimal dx, and we obtain the continuous version of Eqs. In Eq. ( Since the TLR is connected to the ground at x = 0 (to the left of the qubit), the boundary condition there is If the TLR is well isolated from the environment on the right-hand side of Fig. Considering that (-φ N + φ N -1 )/δx = -(∂φ/∂x)| x=X , where X is the length of the TLR, we find that to avoid a divergence in the last line of Eq. ( In physical terms, this boundary condition means that the current at x = X is equal to zero, which is needed to prevent the accumulation of an infinite charge density at that point. By integrating Eq. ( with modified boundary conditions: We now calculate the frequencies and electric current profiles of the normal modes in the TLR. First, we note that the presence of Φ in the boundary condition in Eq. ( where , we obtain Φ-independent equations for φ. The equations are given by We can now determine the normal modes by solving this one-dimensional wave equation. We do so by substituting sinusoidally oscillating solutions with temporal frequency ω: which gives The solution of the wave equation in Eq. ( where k = √ ω 2 cl. The parameters k and x 0 are determined by the boundary conditions. It is worth noting here that, since the differential equation and boundary conditions are linear, they do not impose any conditions on u c . As we will see below, since u c is the amplitude of current oscillations, it will be governed by energy quantization, especially when analyzing the ground state of the system. Considering the boundary condition at x = X, we can write u(x) as The boundary condition at x = 0 now gives and therefore This transcendental equation has an infinite number of solutions, i.e. there are an infinite number of k values that satisfy the equation, as illustrated in Fig. As explained in Appendix A, including the first-order corrections caused by the deviations of Φ from Φ leads to replacing Eq. ( where and ω q is a characteristic qubit oscillation frequency defined in Appendix A. This equation is clearly more cumbersome than Eq. It is helpful at this point to rewrite Eq. ( or alternatively, where and Z 0 = l/c is the impedance of the TLR, typically set to 50 Ω. This expression for ω cutoff is the one for an inductance-based low-pass filter. This result is in line with that of Ref. where the authors treated capacitive qubit-TLR coupling and found a cutoff frequency that corresponds to a capacitor-based low-pass filter. We emphasize, however, that in spite of the similarity in the underlying physics, the circuit of Ref. Similar expressions for the cutoff frequency also appear in Refs. For the low-frequency modes with ω ≪ ω cutoff , the solutions of Eq. ( As a result, Taking into consideration the fact that Xl/L c2 ≫ 1 (which is required for the validity of the condition ω ≪ ω cutoff ), we obtain the approximation starting at n = 0 for the fundamental mode. From now on, we shall refer to the value of k that corresponds to a certain value of n as k n , and we shall refer to the corresponding frequency as ω n . Using various expressions given earlier in this section, we find the (zeroth-order) approximate expression for the fundamental mode frequency as should be expected for a quarter wavelength resonator. It is worth noting that with this expression for ω 0 , we find that Xl/L c2 = πω cutoff /(2ω 0 ), and Eq. ( It is also worth noting that the factor (1 -L c2 /Xl) in Eq. ( For the high-frequency modes with ω ≫ ω cutoff , the solutions of Eq. ( Using the approximation tan(nπ + δ) ≈ δ for δ ≪ 1, we obtain the first-order approximation This formula in turn gives the approximate expression for k n X: Note that in the limit n → ∞, we obtain k n X = nπ, and the boundary condition at x = 0 effectively becomes du/dx = 0, which is the appropriate boundary condition if the TLR were terminated with capacitors at both ends, i.e. the connection to the ground is effectively cut and no (high-frequency) current flows at the point where the qubit is located. The lowpass-filter behavior now becomes clear. In fact, this behavior is perhaps more intuitive for the circuit with inductive coupling compared to the case of capacitive coupling studied in Ref. In addition to ω cutoff , we can also define the parameter n cutoff as an estimate for the number of TLR modes whose coupling to the qubit is not significantly suppressed: The actual number of modes below the cutoff frequency is n cutoff /2. The factor of 2 in the denominator arises because the fundamental mode (n = 0) has k 0 X = π/2 while the distance between adjacent modes is (k n+1 -k n )X ≈ π. Another way to look at the factor of 2 is to note that the normal mode frequencies of a quarter-wavelength resonator are odd multiples of the fundamental mode frequency, and the even multiples are missing. It should be emphasized, however, that this factor does not have too much significance, because the current suppression with increasing mode frequency is a gradual process and not a sharp cutoff. Now that we have determined the frequencies and current profiles of the normal modes in the TLR, we can calculate their quantum properties and determine how they interact with the qubit. From the form of the Hamiltonian, we can see that the energy is proportional to In the ground state of any of the modes, the energy should be E = hω n /2, which is the ground-state energy of a harmonic oscillator. Equating these two formulae for the energy gives the formula for the zero-point (root-mean-square) fluctuations in the mode variable: These fluctuations give the zero-point current fluctuations at x = 0: This expression can be substituted in the formula to obtain the coupling strength g n as a function of mode frequency ω n . Here g n is the parameter that enters in the quantum Rabi model (QRM) Hamiltonian where ∆ 0 is the bare qubit gap, i.e. not including renormalization by the Lamb shift, ε is the qubit bias, σ x and σ z are qubit Pauli operators, and a n and a † n are, respectively, the annihilation and creation operators for mode n. The coupling strength g n grows as √ ω n for ω ≪ ω cutoff and decreases as 1/ √ ω n for ω ≫ ω cutoff , as found in several recent studies. We now consider the dependence of g n on ω n . Since the coupling between the qubit and the TLR arises from the shared coupling inductance L c , it is interesting to also ask how g n depends on L c . There is a factor L c that appears explicitly in Eq. (50). Both qubit and TLR currents also depend on L c in principle, because the same inductance that mediates the coupling can be seen as part of the qubit loop and part of the TLR circuit. For example, following Ref. In other words, g n ∝ √ ω n , with relative corrections on the order of (ω n /ω cutoff ) 2 . This result is consistent with the low-frequency behavior obtained in previous studies. Additionally, we note that g n ∝ L c . This result is intuitively to be expected, considering that L c is the mutual coupling inductance. This behaviour is illustrated in Fig. For the high-frequency modes which gives In agreement with past studies, g n ∝ 1/ √ ω n . Furthermore, Eq. ( Instead, treating Z 0 and ω n as constants, the two possible approaches to increase g n are either increasing I qubit or reducing the total TLR inductance Xl. Note that in this section we assumed that L c is small compared to other inductances in the circuit in order to be able to derive simple expressions. Taking large L c would significantly modify the behaviour of the dynamical variables, which can lead to significant deviations from the approximate expressions that we derived. This situation could require numerical analysis of the equations of motion etc. We will not perform any such analysis in this paper. In the absence of the qubit, the mode frequencies of a quarter-wavelength TLR follow the pattern: ω 1 /ω 0 = 3, ω 2 /ω 0 = 5, ..., i.e. ω n /ω 0 = (2n + 1). We now consider the correction to this pattern induced by the finiteness of L c2 /Xl. The motivation to look for such deviations is that a modified pattern could serve as an experimental test for the theory and a means to infer system parameters from measured spectra. As can be seen from Eq. ( First, we take Eq. ( This equation can be rearranged into the form We now take the lowest-order approximation for k n X, i.e. k n X ≈ (nπ + π/2)/(1 and we substitute it in the cubic term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( and therefore This expression then leads to the approximate relation For the lowest three modes, we find that ω 1 /ω 0 ≈ 3 + 16/(πn 3 cutoff ) and ω 2 /ω 0 ≈ 5 + 80/(πn 3 cutoff ). In Ref. Next, we consider Eq. ( This equation can be rearranged into the form which then gives We then obtain the approximate relation Taking n cutoff = 13.2, μ = 0.1 and ω q /ω 0 = 20, we find that ω 1 /ω 0 -3 ≈ -4 × 10 -4 and ω 2 /ω 0 -5 ≈ -2 × 10 -3 . These values are smaller than the ones calculated based on Eq. ( In the context to calculating small variations in ω n /ω 0 , we consider the effect of having a finite C R on the mode frequencies. For this calculation, we ignore the presence of the qubit and focus on the effect of the finite C R . The wave equation for φ is still given by Eq. ( with ω = k/ √ cl. In the absence of the qubit, the boundary condition at x = 0 is φ(x)| x=0 = 0, which allows us to express φ(x, t) as The last line of Eq. ( Substituting Eq. (66) into Eq. (67) gives the transcendental equation This equation has exactly the same form as Eq. ( The effect of a finite C R is therefore to modify the ratios ω n /ω 0 in the same way that the coupling to the qubit modifies the frequency ratios. Depending on the relationship between the two small parameters L c2 /(Xl) and C R /(Xc), either one of the two mechanisms can be dominant. The design parameters of Ref. , which suggests that the effect of the qubit will be much larger than the effect of the finite C R . It should be noted, however, that the coupling of the TLR to the measurement transmission line in Ref. Here it is worth establishing the relation between the ratio C R /(Xc) and the TLR's quality factor Q TLR (not to be confused with the charge variable Q introduced in Sec. II), because Q TLR can be measured more directly than other circuit parameters. Following Ref. Using the last formula for ω 0 in Eq. ( or, in other words, If, for example, we take the relatively low quality factor Q TLR = 10 3 , we obtain the relatively high estimate C R /(Xc) = 0.013, which is still significantly lower than the value L c2 /(Xl) = 0.048 for the circuit of Ref. One of the important questions in the study of multimode cavity QED is the Lamb shift and its convergence as we take into account the coupling between the qubit and an increasingly large number of modes. If the qubit frequency is small relative to the oscillator frequency, the renormalized gap, i.e. the Lamb shifted qubit frequency, is given by which is the straightforward generalization of the single-mode formula (74) It should be emphasized that the above formula is valid in a wide range of parameters. For example, if we think of the normalization process as occurring in steps starting at n → ∞ and gradually going down to n = 0, the above formula is valid as long as the renormalized value of ∆ is smaller than ω n in every step of the process. Using Eq. ( Using the software package Mathematica, we found that the sum in Eq. ( where γ is Euler's constant (approximately 0.577), and ψ(x) is the digamma function. For large n cutoff , the above expression reduces to the simpler function: In other words, the expression 0.635 + 0.5 log n cutoff provides a good approximation for the sum, as long as n cutoff ≫ 1. Here it is worth making a small digression and giving the related sum n=1,2,3,... For large n cutoff , we obtain the asymptotic behavior lim This formula can be relevant to a situation in which a qubit is capacitively coupled to a halfwavelength TLR with capacitors at both ends, and the qubit is placed at one of the TLR's ends to maximize the coupling to all modes. The differences between Eqs. (77) and (79) are intuitively logical: a slightly different constant term and a factor of 2 in the log n cutoff term. The slow logarithmic dependence of the above sums on n cutoff means that ∆ changes very slowly as a function of n cutoff . It also means that the sum remains on the order of 1 and can be treated as almost constant compared to other factors that play a role in determining the Lamb shift. For example, for n cutoff = 100, the sum is approximately equal to 3. We have performed theoretical analysis of a circuit comprising a flux qubit inductively coupled to a quarter-wavelength TLR. We showed how the qubit naturally decouples from the high-frequency modes of the TLR. Our results on this point agree with past results on somewhat similar circuits. Our analysis therefore complements previous theoretical studies and adds insight into the physics of the decoupling effect. We also derived new formulae for the mode frequencies, coupling strengths and Lamb shift. By avoiding certain approximations used in previous studies, we derived more accurate results, which allow us to predict previously unknown features in the spectrum of the system. Our results can help guide future experiments to test the physics of ultrastrong and deep-strong coupling in multimode circuit QED. Appendix A: Deriving the equations of motion for the TLR variables In this Appendix, we provide a more detailed calculation for how we can decouple the equations of motion for the variables Φ and φ, i.e. how we can derive Eqs. Eq. ( If we want to find the oscillation modes of a system with continuous variables in some multi-dimensional trapping potential, we first find the ground state. We can find the semiclassical ground state from Eqs. which in turn give Substituting Eq. (86) in Eq. (85), we obtain In this work, we are assuming that the variable Φ describes a flux qubit. Then there will in general be two solutions, i.e. two values of Φ GS that satisfy Eq. ( We can now look for deviations of Φ and φ away from the ground state values [and we call the deviations δΦ(t) and δφ(x, t)] and analyze their dynamics. Then we find the equations with boundary conditions The equations of motion are now both linear differential equations, as is expected in calculations of normal modes. If we ignore δΦ in Eq. (90), we obtain Eqs. First, we rewrite Eq.(88) as: where ω q = 1/ C q L q2 , L q2 = L q L 2 /(L q + L 2 ), and L q = (d 2 U q (Φ, Φ ext )/dΦ 2 ) | Φ GS . It should be noted that ω q is not the frequency separation between the qubit's 0 and 1 states, but rather the classical oscillation frequency about the appropriate local minimum in the effective potential for the variable Φ. In particular, the flux qubit's minimum gap is typically a few GHz and is much smaller than ω q , which is typically a few tens of GHz. Equation ( In the QRM, the flux qubit is approximated as a two-level system, with two quantum states that differ by the current going around the qubit loop. The coupling strength between the qubit and TLR modes can be calculated from the energies of the corresponding states of the electric circuit. These energies can be calculated from the TLR mode frequencies for the two qubit states, as well as the overlap between the mode wave functions for the two qubit states. For this purpose, we consider two flux qubit states with different values of Φ GS as discussed in Appendix A. We consider the case where the mode frequencies are almost the same for both qubit states. Indeed, this condition is needed for the standard QRM Hamiltonian to be valid. Since we generally expect L q to be different for the two qubit states, we find that we must have μ ≪ 1 for this condition to be satisfied. Next we consider the overlap between the TLR mode ground state wave functions for the two different qubit states. The two qubit states with opposite persistent-current directions have two different values of Φ GS , which lead to two different values of φ GS , as described by Eq. ( If we consider the QRM Hamiltonian in Eq. ( with the inverse We do not show the derivation in detail here, but the other terms in the Hamiltonian, which contain the variables φ n but not q n , modify the above term in the Hamiltonian to As a consistency check, we note that this form of the Hamiltonian gives as expected. The term sin(2k n X)/(2k n X) is small, decays quickly with increasing n and can therefore be ignored. As a result, the vacuum fluctuations of φ n can be approximated by Having obtained (1) the nth mode component of the separation between the two φ GS values and (2) the vacuum fluctuations in φ n , we calculate their ratio δα n : which can then be substituted in the formula g n = δα n ω n /2 to obtain the coupling strength: We therefore recover the standard, intuitive formula for the coupling strength used in Sec. IV.D, i.e. Eq. ( 