The development of luminescent organic radicals has resulted in materials with excellent optical properties for near-infrared (NIR) emission. Applications of light generation in this range span from bioimaging to surveillance. Whilst the unpaired electron arrangements of radicals enable efficient radiative transitions within the doublet-spin manifold in organic lightemitting diodes (OLEDs), their performance is limited by non-radiative pathways introduced in electroluminescence. Here, we present a host:guest design for OLEDs that exploits energy transfer with demonstration of up to 9.6% external quantum efficiency (EQE) for 800 nm emission. The tris(2,4,6-trichlorophenyl)methyl-triphenylamine (TTM-TPA) radical guest is energy-matched to the triplet state in a charge-transporting anthracene-derivative host. We show from optical spectroscopy and quantum-chemical modelling that reversible host-guest triplet-doublet energy transfer allows efficient harvesting of host triplet excitons. Advances in efficient near-infrared (NIR) organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) can enable light generation in the biological window for healthcare diagnosis and treatment. The requirement for long-wavelength light generation beyond the visible range is also motivated by communications and security applications. Whilst > 20% external quantum efficiency (EQE) in electroluminescence (EL) has been demonstrated for visible-light OLEDs, and commercial displays are commonplace, the performance of NIR OLEDs is generally limited to 5% EQE using fully-organic emitters with emission peak wavelengths at 800 nm and longer. Figure The steady-state photophysical properties of TTM-TPA, MADN, and 4,4'bis(carbazol-9-yl)biphenyl (CBP) are depicted in Fig. The device structure of the radical OLEDs based on TTM-TPA-doped emitting layer (EML) studied in this work is depicted in Fig. 2b-e and summarised in Table Under these conditions, we do find the MADN:TTM-TPA device shows nearly a factor of 10 improved lifetime (to 50% EL) of 58 hr (at 0.1 mA cm -2 ) compared to 7 hr in the CBP:TTM-TPA device (Supplementary Fig. CBP:TTM-TPA 3% (TTA) (blue dotted line, Fig. the CBP:TTM-TPA OLED shows fast prompt doublet fluorescence (τ = 150 ± 3 ns) where the initial feature of additional emission at ~50-100 ns is attributed to recombination with trapped charges remaining at radical sites from the previous excitation pulse (purple solid line, Fig. Magneto-electroluminescence (MEL) studies were conducted on the MADN:TTM-TPA device and reference devices: MADN-only, CBP-only and CBP:TTM-TPA (Fig. These studies provide further insights into the EL mechanism by elucidating the effects of magnetic fields on luminescence yield of exciton states in devices. We performed transient optical spectroscopy studies to investigate the exciton dynamics and the available radical energy transfer pathways depending on T1-D1 energy alignment in these host:radical systems. Picosecond transient absorption (TA) studies were carried out at low fluences to exclude exciton-exciton annihilation. TA under 400 nm pump for host-selective excitation (Fig. Transient PL studies were conducted on these host:radical films (Fig. The TA and PL dynamics in MADN:TTM-TPA film with low ∆ETD allow us to conclude that triplet-doublet and doublet-triplet energy transfer pathways are present in this system (Supplementary Information S3). This results in excited-state (re)cycling of triplet and doublet states in a delayed emission mechanism. The temperature dependence of transient PL in MADN:TTM-TPA film shows thermal activation of delayed radical emission under selective radical excitation (Fig. An amorphous sample made of MADN as the host doped with radical TTM-TPA molecules at a 3.1% m/m concentration was prepared using classical force-field Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations. After equilibration, a few interacting MADN:TTM-TPA pairs were extracted from the sample, and their ground-state equilibrium geometries were subsequently relaxed at the density functional theory (DFT) level (ωB97X-D/6-31G(d,p)). Vertical excitation energies were computed by resorting to an optimally-tuned screened range-separated hybrid (OT-SRSH) approach (LC-ωhPBE/6-311G(d,p)) within the time-dependent (TD) DFT in the Tamm-Dancoff approximation (TDA) (Supplementary Information S4). The computed excited state energies for all pairs are shown in Fig. Excitation energy transfer (EET) rates for the S1-D1 and S1-D2 processes were computed with the Marcus-Levich-Jortner equation, where all the key parameters (i.e., reorganisation energies, Huang-Rhys factors, electronic couplings and energy differences) were obtained by quantum-chemical calculations. For dim1, we calculate an EET time constant from S1 to D1 of 3.0 ps (excluding outliers, an average value of 9 ps is obtained for the investigated pairs, Supplementary Table We now turn to triplet-doublet energy transfer. A triplet state interacting with a radical can form either an overall doublet or quartet encounter pair in a 1:2 statistical ratio (Fig. hopping rates to all nearest neighbours of three randomly selected MADN molecules (Supplementary Information S4). While the values vary over multiple orders of magnitude, the fastest event for the three cases approaches a few tens of ns (Supplementary Table Electrical excitation with a fast charge-transporting host leads to the generation of singlet and triplet exciton states that can be harvested by doublet radicals towards highly efficient NIR EL in OLEDs. Here, the handling of excitations mitigates the energy gap law for non-radiative decay by a design that combines high-energy singlet (S1) and low-energy triplet (T1) excitons of the host with matching to low-energy doublet (D1) excitons of the radical emitter. The principle is demonstrated using the MADN:TTM-TPA combination, which shows rapid singlet-doublet transfer (τ = 8 ps) upon photoexcitation and reversible doublet-triplet cycling with efficient delayed emission (τ > 0.16 μs). The luminescent NIR radical system is implemented in high-performing OLEDs with a maximum EQE of 9.6% for EL at 800 nm that operate to the high maximum radiance of ⁓68,000 mW sr -1 m -2 , with low efficiency roll-off and enhanced stability. Our design boosts performance in radical-based OLEDs and has broad implications for reducing non-radiative losses in devices beyond light-emitting applications with NIR light.