Organic molecular crystals encompass a vast range of materials from pharmaceuticals to organic optoelectronics and proteins to waxes in biological and industrial settings. Crystal defects from grain boundaries to dislocations are known to play key roles in mechanisms of growth 1,2 and also in the functional properties of molecular crystals [3][4][5] . In contrast to the precise analysis of individual defects in metals, ceramics, and inorganic semiconductors enabled by electron microscopy, significantly greater ambiguity remains in the experimental determination of individual dislocation character and slip systems in molecular materials 3 . In large part, nanoscale dislocation analysis in molecular crystals has been hindered by the severely constrained electron exposures required to avoid irreversibly degrading these crystals 6 . Here, we present a low-dose, single-exposure approach enabling nanometre-resolved analysis of individual extended dislocations in molecular crystals. We demonstrate the approach for a range of crystal types to reveal dislocation character and operative slip systems unambiguously. Across materials classes, dislocations in crystals have a profound effect on functional properties. Mechanical properties of metals are intimately linked with dislocation motion and pinning Dislocations are in-effect a planar cut through a crystal followed by atomic displacements in a particular direction, the Burgers vector B (Fig. edge dislocations B is perpendicular to u, while for screw dislocations B is parallel to u (Fig. Atomic resolution imaging of dislocations Scanning electron diffraction (SED), a type of four-dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy (4D-STEM) with a nearly parallel, low convergence angle probe, In SED, all recorded ghkl in the diffraction plane of sufficient signal-to-noise ratio can be used to construct VDF images for this bend contour analysis as a function of the azimuthal angle in the diffraction plane φ (Supplementary Figure where A, B, and C are fitting coefficients related to the local radius of curvature, the Burgers vector, and the azimuthal orientation of the diffraction pattern on the detector, respectively. The displacement f(φ) is zero at the invisibility criterion and maximal along the Burgers vector direction. The crystal orientation ascertained from the electron diffraction data together with the Burgers vector direction (equation 1) provides the necessary information to identify the operative slip system (Supplementary Note 1) as well as the dislocation character by inspection of the relative directions of B and u. Figure Among organic crystals, p-terphenyl is relatively stable under electron beam exposure, with a critical fluence (CF) >330 e -Å -2 (Supplementary Figure of the bend contours at the dislocations (Supplementary Figure Figure Depending on the particular ghkl bend contours crossing a dislocation line and the width of these contours, the approach results in a loss of precision in the Burgers vector direction. Supplementary Figure Burgers vectors in the ab plane reflect slip between the planes of anthracene molecules where intermolecular interactions are weakest. While this dislocation (Supplementary Figure Figure In summary, we have demonstrated dislocation analysis in varied organic molecular crystals from low-dose, single-exposure SED measurements. These dislocations exhibit characteristic Burgers vector directions that lie predominantly in planes containing weak intermolecular interactions between layers of molecules. These planes are likely to be those suited to insertion or deletion of nonparallel planes without cutting across the internal molecular structure. Identification of the specific, observed Burgers vector directions in these slip planes now provides input for computational modelling of experimentally constrained structures with known edge, screw, or mixed dislocation character. Moreover, the generalisation of this approach provides a means for routine analysis of extended dislocations in molecular crystals with CFs down to a few e -Å -2 , driving forward research into methods for inhibiting or designing dislocation formation during crystal growth and controlling their contributions to the functional properties of organic crystalline materials. Thin films of p-terphenyl and anthracene were prepared by solvent evaporation from xylene solutions Single-crystal films of theophylline were prepared by the solvent evaporation approach Briefly, theophylline powder was dissolved in nitromethane followed by heating to ~60 °C to obtain a saturated solution. The solution was then drop-cast onto a holey carbon film TEM support grid (EM resolutions) and left to evaporate. Highly faulted particles of partially hydrated Form II plates were produced by immersion in water. A sample of theophylline monohydrate (Form M) was prepared by evaporative crystallisation from either an ethanol:water or nitromethane:water solutions at 3:2 molar ratio followed by heating to ~55 °C. The solution was allowed to cool slowly to ∼35 °C under continuous stirring for a period of 3 h. The solution was then drop-cast onto a holey carbon film TEM support grid and left to evaporate. Form III (indexed to Form IIIb structure All other reported data were acquired at ambient conditions. Single-crystal films of nhentriacontane were likewise prepared by solvent evaporation Electron diffraction pattern series as a function of cumulative electron fluence for pterphenyl and anthracene were recorded using an FEI Titan SED data were acquired on the JEOL ARM300CF instrument (ePSIC, Diamond Light Source, UK) equipped with a high-resolution pole piece, a cold field emission gun, aberrationcorrectors in both the probe-forming and image-forming optics, and a 4-chip Merlin/Medipix pixelated electron counting STEM detector. The instrument was operated at 300 kV. Selected samples were analysed at 200 kV, identified in the corresponding figure captions. The electron optics were configured for nanobeam diffraction by switching off the aberration corrector in the probe-forming optics and adjusting the condenser lens system to produce a convergence semi-angle of 0.8 mrad using a 10 μm condenser aperture. At 300 kV, this produces a 3-nm diffraction-limited probe diameter d diff = 1.22λ/α for electron de Broglie wavelength λ and convergence semiangle α. The probe current was measured using a Faraday cup as ~1 pA, and the exposure time at each probe position was set as 1 ms. The electron fluence was approximately 8.8 e -Å -2 at 300 kV or 5.4 e -Å -2 at 200 kV in a single scan, assuming a disk-like probe with a diameter equal to ddiff. All SED measurements were conducted over a scan size of 256×256 probe positions. Image and diffraction calibration data, including reference calibration of residual elliptical distortion in the diffraction plane, were acquired using a gold diffraction cross-grating with a period of 500 nm (Ted Pella). The relative rotation between the diffraction pattern and the raster pattern was calibrated using standard MoO3 crystals (Agar Scientific). Calibration data were acquired under identical conditions to the molecular crystal samples. Data analysis SED data were processed, aligned, and calibrated using Pyxem-0.11.0 and supporting tools from the HyperSpy package (1.6.5) Diffraction patterns at different major orientations for each material were compared to the calibrated experimental diffraction patterns in overlay. In most cases, the samples were indexed to low-index zone axes such as [001] for p-terphenyl, [101] for anthracene, and [001] for n-hentriacontane. Mis-tilt from high symmetry zone axes, e.g. Supplementary Figure Python using the functions from Pyxem-0.11.0 and Hyperspy-1.6.5 packages. Diffraction patterns, originally 515×515 pixels, were cropped and then binned by a factor of two to produce diffraction patterns with dimensions 257×257 pixels. Bragg disks were detected using a peak finding function using the difference of Gaussians method. Filter settings were tuned iteratively and assessed by manual inspection to capture all disk-like diffraction features in a randomized sub-sample of diffraction patterns. After peak finding, the position of each Bragg disk in the diffraction pattern was recorded in diffraction vector (kx, ky) coordinates. The peak position was further refined using a local centre of mass search. VDF images were then constructed from the integrated intensity within a circular aperture centred at the peak position for each probe position in the SED scan. The aperture radius was adjusted to minimise Bragg disk overlap, typically set in the range 0.016-0.026 Å -1 . The angle of the associated diffraction vector ghkl for each Bragg disk taken as the inverse tangent of ky/kx. Bend contour displacements were measured in ImageJ. The displacement of the bend contours on crossing the dislocation line is determined as the distance, tracing along the dislocation line, between the middle of the two bend contours, as highlighting by the red dashed lines in Supplementary Figure We introduce a geometric solution for the bend contour displacement on crossing dislocations in Supplementary Figure with χB is a constant for any fixed set of displacements for a given dislocation. For a perfect crystal with no defects presented, local bending of the sample, at the angles larger than the Bragg angle, defines a set of diffraction conditions for a particular set of planes where the planes are brought into or through the Bragg condition. This condition produces bend contours running across images of the film. Putting it another way, the bend contour is formed by the tilting of the lattice planes, and is thus, linked to the parameter x. We can now calculate the θ ||B for the specific hkl planes (Supplementary Figure with d┴ is the d-spacing that allows for completing the triangle to translate the x parameter into an angle θ ||B . The vertical R line is taken in Supplementary Figure The function f(φ) can be simplified to: f(φ) = A arctan(B cos 2 (φ -C)) where A, B, and C are fitting coefficients. From equation S-3, it can be noticed that f(φ) will be 0 when φ is 90 o , i.e. the ghkl perpendicular to the Burgers vector (g hkl • B = 0), which is equivalent to when the Burgers vector lies parallel to the planes. It is in agreement with the definition for the invisibility criterion that states: the strain field around the dislocations causes local deviations or distortion of diffracting planes from their regular arrangement unless the Burgers vector of the dislocations lies parallel to the diffracting planes Supplementary Figure Supplementary Table We report the fitting function (equation 1) f(φ) = A arctan(B cos 2 (φ -C)) arising from the geometric model for the bend contour displacement on crossing the dislocations (Supplementary Figure We have evaluated the goodness-of-fit of the proposed model using goodness-of-fit statistics and together with inspection of the residuals, and evaluation of uncertainties in fitting parameter estimation. For goodness-of-fit statistics, the coefficient of determination R 2 and the chi-square (χ 2 ) test statistic are used. Meanwhile, visualization of the fitting on the measured data and residual analysis are used as graphical methods to evaluate the fit. The R 2 statistic seeks to summarise how close the fitted curve passes through the recorded measurements, most commonly used in linear regression analysis. R 2 can be defined from the sum of squared residuals (SSres) and the total sum of squares (SStot): with yi is the measured data, fi is the predicted data from the fitting model, and y ̅ is the mean of the measured data. Where the predicted values determined from the fitting model exactly match the measured values, the SSres = 0 and R 2 = 1. We report this statistic as an indicator of the match between experiment and the fitted curve, while noting its limitations in distinguishing distributed errors arising from experimental uncertainty and systematic errors in a poor model correspondence to the recorded measurements. The χ 2 statistic offers a route to evaluate a fitted curve in the context of variance in experimental measurements. The simplest χ 2 can be calculated as follows: where yi is again the measured data, f(x) is the fitting model, xi is the independent variable, and σi is the uncertainties/standard variation. For the purposes of the evaluation of curve fitting, the chisquare per degrees of freedom or reduced chi-square is useful as it takes into consideration the number of data points (measurements) and number of parameters describing the fitted function. The reduced chi-square can be calculated by dividing the chi-square to the number of degrees of freedom ν: The uncertainties in the fitting parameters in the simplified function f(φ) (equation 1) were calculated from the diagonals of the estimated covariance matrix of these parameters after fitting the data with the curve_fit function. The standard errors on the parameters were calculated by taking the square root of the diagonals of the covariance matrix. We also calculated the confidence interval for the fitting parameters using lmfit() function to determine how tightly the determined values of the fitting parameters are after fitting. In addition, a two-dimensional (2D) plot of the confidence region for each pair of fitting parameters was used to evaluate the dependence between the fitting parameters. For some datasets, fitting to equation 1 resulted in estimated standard errors for the fitting parameters larger than the fitting parameter magnitudes, suggesting these parameters were not well-constrained in the fitting to equation 1. We note that phenomenologically, there may be inherent ambiguity in constraining the parameters given limited data or where the available data can be fitted well with a range of compensating parameter settings. This off-setting property is particularly possible for the parameters A and B in equation 1 which both contribute to the scaling of the 'lobes' in the polar plots. In these cases, we have accordingly reduced the number of fitting parameters to avoid physically unreasonable fitting results. In summary, our fitting evaluation procedure followed the workflow outlined below: i. Carry out an initial fit to equation 1 f(φ) = A arctan(B cos 2 (φ -C)) ii. Evaluate the suitability of equation 1 for the dataset: We illustrate this workflow in two example datasets: One that exhibits the properties of a well-constrained fit to equation 1 and a second that exhibits poorly constrained fitting to equation parameters are very asymmetric and approach negative and positive infinity (-inf and +inf). In other words, there is insufficient data to unambiguously determine the fitting parameters A and B in the model. Effectively, many sets of A and B parameters will generate curves that fit the data equally