We performed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) on hexagonal MnTe, a candidate for an altermagnet with a high critical temperature (T N = 307 K). By utilizing photonenergy-tunable ARPES in combination with first-principles calculations, we found that the band structure in the antiferromagnetic phase exhibits a strongly anisotropic band-splitting associated with the time-reversal-symmetry breaking, providing the first direct experimental evidence for the altermagnetic band-splitting. The magnitude of the splitting reaches 0.8 eV at non-high-symmetry momentum points, which is much larger than the spin-orbit gap of ∼0.3 eV along the ΓK highsymmetry cut. The present result paves the pathway toward realizing exotic physical properties associated with the altermagnetic spin-splitting. A new type of magnetism called "altermagnetism" is attracting a great deal of attention because it is regarded as the third type of magnetism neither categorized into conventional ferromagnetism nor antiferromagnetism Here we focus on hexagonal MnTe which is suited to observe the possible large spin splitting In this article, we report an ARPES study of MnTe bulk single crystal and show a direct evidence for the altermagnetic band-splitting. This was enabled by the utilization of photonenergy tunable micro-focused ARPES in combination with DFT calculations. We found that the magnitude of altermagnetic band-splitting strongly depends on the k location in the 3D BZ, and is also affected by the SOC. We discuss implications of the present results in relation to other experiments on altermagnets. Single crystals of MnTe were grown by the chemical vapor transport method with I 2 as an agent gas. Obtained single crystals were characterized by x-ray diffraction, magnetization, and electrical resistivity measurements. Details of the sample preparation and characterization were described elsewhere Since MnTe single crystal is hard to cleave, we tried to cleave several times in an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV), occasionally obtained a small flat area of the crystal with a few tens μm square and then focused the micro photon beam on it. Temperature during ARPES measurements was set at T = 30-310 K, which covers T N (= 307 K). The Fermi level (E F ) of samples was referenced to that of a gold film electrically in contact with the sample holder. First-principles band-structure calculations were carried out by using a projector augmented wave method implemented in Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code First, we discuss the overall band structure of MnTe in the AF phase. We carried out hν-dependent ARPES measurements and estimated the k z value (see Fig. The contour map of ARPES intensity at E F for the AHL plane obtained with hν = 117 eV in Fig. Since these two cases show almost identical band structure, we hereafter adopt the former case just for our convenience. As shown in Fig. . The valence-band top is experimentally located at the A point around E F , in line with the calculation, signifying the semiconducting nature of MnTe. Taking into account the total band-gap size of ∼1.3 eV Next we focus on the observation of the altermagnetic band-splitting. Since the altermagnetic band-splitting was predicted to have nodes along high-symmetry lines under negligible SOC, it is necessary to carry out ARPES measurements along non-high-symmetry cuts to observe the altermagnetic band-splitting. Non-high-symmetry ΓL cut [see Fig. When the SOC is included, the band degeneracy of the nodal surfaces is lifted by the spin-orbit gap in entire BZ, whereas the bands are still spin degenerate along some particular high-symmetry lines such as the ΓA line, protected by the C 2z symmetry of the crystal. Lowenergy excitations of such nodal line are characterized by the altermagnetic quasiparticle with a quadratic band dispersion 1 . Importantly, since the overall energy scale of the spinorbit gap (< 0.3 eV) is smaller than that of the altermagnetic band-splitting (< 0.8 eV), the anisotropic sign-reversal exchange splitting, a key characteristic of altermagnets, is still maintained even under the presence of SOC. The present result thus establishes that the theoretically predicted altermagnetic band-splitting is indeed realized in MnTe. It is emphasized that the altermagnetic band-splitting verified in this study would be responsible for the piezomagnetic effect and the x-ray magnetic circular dichroism recently reported for MnTe The micro-ARPES measurements and the DFT calculations have established the presence of altermagnetic band-splitting in the colinear AF phase of MnTe. The altermagnetic bandsplitting is strongly k dependent and reaches ∼0.8 eV at non-high-symmetry k points in the ΓKHL plane, whereas the splitting at the high-symmetry k points is suppressed, producing multiple nodal lines. We also observed a small (∼0.3 eV) band splitting along the highsymmetry ΓK cut, suggestive of an additional contribution from the SOC. The present results lay a foundation for exploring unique physical properties inherent to the altemagnetic MnTe, paving a pathway toward investigating the altermagnetic band-splitting in other altermagnets. there exist two inequivalent ΓK cuts, one directed along the spin axis, ΓK 1 , and the other rotated by 60 • from it, ΓK 2 [Fig. 