Discovered and reported exactly 40 years ago, microwave plasma assisted chemical vapor deposition (MPACVD) pointed out an economic technology that could potentially produce lab-grown diamond stones at scale. After this breakthrough discovery, demonstrating that diamond can be growth at low pressure and temperature, the progress quickly curbed and synthetic single crystal diamond (SCD) size and quality could not be improved toward attaining requirements critical in solid-state electronics. This led to the early promise of MPACVD to not come true and slowed the level of investments, thereby further stalling the progress in diamond syntheses. With the invention of a few novel homo-and hetero-epitaxy growth techniques, the diamond research and technology has recently reinvigorated. This mini review attempts to capture the momentum of recent progress in diamond MPACVD that could finally bring scalable manufacturing of high quality large size wafers for future electronics and optics. Like no other gemstone, diamonds have been praised in human history and culture. Diamonds were scarce, and thus a symbol of wealth and prestige. Beyond jewelry, it quickly became clear that diamond possesses extraordinary mechanical, thermal, and electronic properties and has been deemed the ultimate engineering material and frontier material of the 21st century. Indeed, diamond has the potential to reshape a wealth of applications ranging from quantum computing to electric grid infrastructure. Radiation hardness makes diamond the detector for space and high energy physics To realize the promise that diamond holds for future electronics, high quality, large size diamond plates must be produced at scale. Developed for plethora of semiconductors The material nearest to the seed is usually poor in quality, and the highest quality diamond plates are cut from the outer regions of the boule, meaning that the boules must be much larger than the desired plates. The growth rates of crystal-clear type IIa HPHT diamond with N-concentration of ~10 ppb must be very slow to prevent the uptake of nitrogen and other impurities. In Ref. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of diamond at subatmospheric pressures then came as a remedy. By different accounts, it is claimed that diamond CVD was pioneered in USA To grow diamond, one needs diamond to initiate the growth. Historically, the choke points for MPACVD were always the seed crystals that had to be sourced from HPHT grown substrates, and therefore historically the SCD production by CVD revolved around crystals of no more than 3-5 mm is linear size. With no special means, in homoepitaxy, the film being grown is as large and good as the initial seed/substrate. The initial substrate must have the lowest possible defect densities, starting with point defects in terms of desirable impurity levels and line defects in terms of dislocation densities. As a rule, dislocations must be reduced as low as possible to make the best performing devices. Plane and bulk defects are just unacceptable. Simultaneously, useful substrate area must be as large as possible for industry to even consider diamond as a base material. The initial dislocation densities tend to be the lowest in the HPHT technology. Substrates with defect densities as low as 10 3 cm -2 are readily available (Fig. In 2020, the Department of Energy (DOE) funded programs in the search of growing large diffraction-grade diamond crystals for the manufacturing of X-ray optics for next generation brilliance light sources (synchrotrons and free electron lasers). The requirements were based on some early feasibility demonstrations Si and Ge are in the carbon group of the periodic table. Unlike Si and Ge, carbon can assemble in different crystal forms, so-called allotropes, as explained and example in Fig. Little has changed in terms of understanding of basic diamond growth kinetics in methane/hydrogen plasmas. Main efforts and successes were achieved in finding innovative ways to overcome substrate related choke points and substrate holder re-designs for scalable productions. These successes and innovations are reviewed for the remainder of this review. It must be noted that in 1-to-2-inch diamond plate production, separating the grown layer from the substrate using laser ablation is no longer a viable option due to the kerf loss In MPACVD, the parameters for a geometric growth progression are expected to remain the same with time once the macroscopic reactor parameters like the gas flow, pressure and microwave power are set. It appears to be an incorrect assumption. As the CVD crystal grows thicker on the substrate, gaining thickness similar to that of its substrate, additional effects caused by sample-plasma interactions start playing role. A practical method allowing for quasi-stable growth conditions was proposed and realized at AIST in Japan. They introduced a so-called enclosed (or pocket) type molybdenum holder in 2005 This technique should not come as a surprise if one remembers how thin solid films grow undergoing through nucleation, isolated crystal/island growth and coalescence, as illustrated in Fig. Stringent requirements on tile preparation and assembly in terms of tile height, twist, tilt and torsion and limited substrate sourcing slowed down the progress toward attaining high quality SCD plates of 10+ mm in linear size. To make the mosaic technology economic, multiple sourced high quality substrate tile had to be found, characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), laser cut, polished, remeasured by XRD making sure the correct crystallographic qualities. There was slow progress until a cloning technique was invented at AIST, Japan Each cloned tile is fine-tuned by laser cutting and polishing leading to the resulting angle misalignments from the mosaic re-assembling process of about 2° which yielded excellent results and effectively showed a path for solving the substrate sourcing bottleneck. As Fig. Fourth, to minimize internal stresses as the mosaic crystal assembles growth conditions must be incentivized to allow for the resulting boundary to form hundreds of microns away from the actual touching boundaries (see Fig. At Michigan State University, there were a series of important findings Once SCD heteroepitaxy has been successfully developed on iridium, it allowed to synthesize freestanding SCD wafers close to 100 mm. See Fig. Fig. The approach of growing on various sides of a crystal in order to expand its lateral dimensions was first introduced by Mokuno et al. The two biggest problems associated with using flipped crystal growth is that defect density and the local stress increased significantly at the interfaces, where the actual crystal flipping occurred. This was experimentally verified by Mokuno et al. during their half-inch wafer demonstration This section presents the use of artificial intelligence (AI) as an emerging technology that, in the authors' opinion, has so far been underutilized in the realm of materials development. As such it has the potential to define how diamond wafers and application devices are being manufactured. Further, these techniques have the protentional to disrupt the semiconductor industry, as well as adjacent crystal growth applications and additive manufacturing. The use of AI has pioneered and transformed, even created, many new technologies and application fields. In turn, these had an invaluable impact on our economy and society. Only 15 years after the introduction of the first iPhone in 2007, people are using a swath of apps that are built into every major operating system to instantly translate foreign language text, use biometric facial and fingerprint recognition as a safety feature, identify nearly any object in a taken picture, or use external apps for recognition of your favorite music, or birdsong. All of these apps, and many more, that greatly improving our quality of life, are fueled by clever AI The takeaway is that while AI has disrupted society and large parts of the economy, similar impacts have not been seen in hardware driven technology development. So far, AI has only seen preliminary use in these, such as predictive maintenance decision making, creation and analysis of digital twins, and AIenabled generative design creations for resource efficiency and waste reduction Diamond is a perfect material for adoption of such an approach. For one, diamond as a material is still in its infancy when it comes to material maturation. The last 30 years of diamond research have shown that development of diamond as material, and its derived applications, follows similar timelines and cost as those of other semiconductor materials, such as SiC and GaN. For example, following the traditional reactive approach to material manufacturing development, 20 years and $10 billion dollars in R&D investment were required to introduce SiC devices to commercial markets in Japan alone (Fig. Separately, the authors want to highlight another technology in which diamond has potential disruptive use, namely heterointegration of diamond with other semiconducting materials. There, diamond is co-integrated with other semiconducting materials, such as Si, SiC, GaN, and others, to build devices and solutions that leverage beneficial properties for each of the materials. For example, integration of diamond with GaN makes a lot of sense, since it benefits from the great n-type conductive properties in GaN, while diamond has superb thermal conduction and p-type conductive properties. As such diamond-GaN p-njunctions are a very promising solution for heterointegrated devices. One way of achieving such a heterointegration is by using a semiconductor grafting technique to transfer an n-type membrane onto a prepared diamond wafer. One other specific realization of heterointegration is the creation of AlGaAs/GaAs/diamond heterojunctions for diamond-collector heterojunction bipolar transistors This section reviews some outstanding issues that, in authors' opinion, are critical for advancing economic and scalable mad-made diamond production. Understanding of the interplay between the activated plasma and the substrate holder system is a key issue: it takes both the knowledge of the types and distributions of reactive species in methane/hydrogen base plasmas and the heating that activates chemistry in the gas phase and on the substrate. The interplay in question is affected by macroscopic reactor parameters such as forward microwave power, total pressure, precursor gas flow rates, sample stage cooling and overall geometry of a MPACVD reactor. Because these macroscopic parameters are simply the means to actuate plasma and reactive species and heat flow, plasma modelling becomes critical for rapid growth optimization and comparison between various reactors. Currently, state-of-the-art models try to understand SCD growth behavior by only utilizing the static reactor discharge region without the presence of the SCD sample It must be stressed that the development of self-consistent reactor models specific to SCD growth could further reenergize the diamond supply chain technologies. Through modelling, respective plasma and substrate domains need to be optimized for high-quality growth where defect nucleation and propagation, and internal stresses due to defects and thermal gradients are inhibited, which is especially become critical when growing on the 1-to 2-inch wafer scale and beyond. Another critical aspect is that modelling must be carried out hand in hand with in situ reactor spectromicroscopy such that chemical species in the plasma center and periphery and thermal gradients across substrates and sample holders can be mapped and quantified. One current, basic and yet outstanding issue is benchmarking models and experiments in terms of absolute substrate temperature. Generally, the proposed modeling approach should involve coupled steps 1) electromagnetic design of the reactor cavity, 2) plasma-microwave interaction, 3) plasma-substrate-cooling bath heat transfer, 4) chemical kinetics and reactivity of the CH4/H2 plasma, and 5) additional emerging perturbations/interactions between CVD crystal (as it grows thicker) and plasma. These effects were not fully understood. Exemplary results of such a numerical model executed in COMSOL with boundary conditions coupling , thereby completing steps 1-3, are shown in Fig. Scalable production also requires enhanced growth rates without compromising quality. It has been long known that addition of only 10's ppm of nitrogen in to methane/hydrogen plasma can boost SCD growth rates ten-fold Lastly, it is proposed that modelling using standards platforms that can be easily accessed, like COMSOL and ANSYS assisted with BOLSIG+, and shared open access reaction databases must be prioritized. This way modelling can be reproduced and verified in academic research. The importance of using codes like BOLSIG+ stems from its ability of giving a more detailed view of the electron energy distribution function (EEDF). It is generally known that, while the major fraction of electrons of roughly 1-2 eV defines properties like gas temperature, EEDF tails can drastically change plasma reactivity and reaction selectivity. Fig. In conclusion, an overview of recent advancements in scalable diamond production was given. In 2016, Yole Group published a graph that charted history and comparison between wafer development for the major wide bandgap semiconductors, as plotted against Si (Fig. In heteroepitaxy, one big concern is the high cost of the iridium itself. Another is the lack of a process to reuse prepared wafers for multiple growth runs, like it exists in homoepitaxy, e.g., see cloning in mosaic growth. When mosaic homoepitaxy and heteroepitaxy are compared, it is clear that both techniques rely on pre-existing tile-like seeds that merge/coalesce into a single crystal under CVD growth: in mosaic method tiles are placed by hand and in heteroepitaxy tiles are generated via BEN. Because the twist, tilt and torsion set by hand will never be as perfect as can be achieved through BEN, an argument can be made that diamond grains in mosaic method will never merge perfectly at the interface but rather stay connected. As Fig. It is fair to state that at this point, no technique can achieve size, quality and quantity at the same time. Wafer size in heteroepitaxy is the largest and so is the defect density, 10 7 -10 9 cm -3 method is highlighted. It can be hypothesized that, moving forward, new combinations between the existing four methods could be developed to pave ways for new methodologies attaining large size, low defect density and low-cost diamond wafers. From historic perspective, the progress in diamond synthesis consisted from two stages: 1) development of physics and chemistry of methane/hydrogen plasma activation and kinetics that led to engineering development of the workhorse reactor designs and 2) engineering development of novel substrate and substrate holder techniques, like ion-assisted lift-off, BEN, mosaic assembly and pocket holder. In this paper, it was argued that in order to enable future progress and diamond manufacturing, selfconsistent synergy should be applied between plasma modelling and theory and in situ diagnostics, and substrate/holder optimization. This way best conditions could be found and implemented where chemical species and heat flux distributions are of proper magnitude and uniformity to enable 2+ inch wafers growths at high rates and minimal thermal stress mitigating cracking and minimizing dislocation densities. When models, in situ spectromicroscopy data and other reactor observables are combined with AI and machine learning, it is expected to further bolster advancement in diamond manufacturing for future microelectronics that includes both all-diamond and heterointegrated devices. 