Spin-orbit coupled electronic structure of two representative non-polar half-Heusler alloys, namely 18 electron compound CoZrBi and 8 electron compound SiLiIn have been studied in detail. An excursion through the Brillouin zone of these alloys from one high symmetry point to the other revealed rich local symmetry of the associated wave vectors resulting in non-trivial spin splitting of the bands and consequent diverse spin textures in the presence of spin-orbit coupling. Our first principles calculations supplemented with low energy k.p model Hamiltonian revealed the presence of linear Dresselhaus effect at the X point having D 2d symmetry and Rashba effect with both linear and non-linear terms at the L point with C3v point group symmetry. Interestingly we have also identified non-trivial Zeeman spin splitting at the non-time reversal invariant W point and a pair of non-degenerate bands along the path Γ to L displaying vanishing spin polarization due to the nonpseudo polar point group symmetry of the wave vectors. Further a comparative study of CoZrBi and SiLiIn suggest, in addition to the local symmetry of the wave vectors, important role of the participating orbitals in deciding the magnitude of the spin splitting of the bands. Our calculations suggest half-Heusler compounds with heavy elements displaying diverse spin textures may be ideal candidate for spin valleytronics where spin textures can be controlled by accessing different valleys around the high symmetry k-points. In non-centrosymmetric systems, the non-vanishing gradient of the electrostatic potential results in a momentum dependent magnetic field Ω (k) in the rest frame of the electron. The coupling of this field with the spin σ of the electron lifts the spin-degeneracy of the bands in an otherwise non-magnetic system. The resulting spin-orbit coupled Hamiltonian is given by, H SOC = Ω (k) .σ. Depending on the symmetry, Ω (k) may have both linear and higher order k-dependent terms. The momentum dependent field Ω (k) that locks the electron's spin direction to its momentum not only remove the spin degeneracy of the bands but also leads to complex spin textures in the reciprocal space. Spin texture(ST) is the expectation value of the spin operator -→ S n (k) in a given bloch wave function u n (k) around a specific k-point, where n is the band index. Spin textures depending on the symmetry may display Rashba 1 , Dresselhaus 2 , persistent 3 , radial It is well known that in materials either with intrinsic magnetic ordering or in the presence of a magnetic field, time reversal(TR) symmetry is broken, leading to splitting of energy bands with opposite spins, referred to as, Zeeman spin splitting Earlier research on Dresselhaus effect have primarily focused on materials in which the bulk exhibits inversion asymmetry. It was originally proposed for non-polar zinc-blende semiconductors, where the splitting of the band is proportional to k 32 . On the other hand the Rashba effect was proposed for non-centrosymmetric polar wurtzite structure displaying linear splitting of bands The Zeeman effect on the other hand was observed in the two-dimensional WSe 2 and MoS 2 While crystallographic point group symmetry(CPGS) was originally attributed to be responsible for the nature of spin textures (Rashba or Dresselhaus type), very recently it was observed that the point group symmetry of the wave vector (little group) In this paper, we have considered two representative semiconducting half-Heusler compounds with heavy elements having 18 and 8 valance electrons respectively. The unique non-polar crystal structure of the half-Heusler compounds where the ternary half-Heusler is a combination of two binaries, one with centrosymmetric and the other with non-centrosymmetric structure will be shown to host variety of spin textures depending on the symmetry of the k-points in the BZ. Our calculations clearly identify the importance of the little group of the chosen k-point in determining the nature of the spin textures. A comparative study of the two half-Heusler compounds show that the orbital character of the bands are important in deciding the strength of the SOC induced band splitting. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec. II is devoted to the description of the structural properties of non-polar half-Heusler compounds and details of the computational methods. In Sec. III we have discussed the results of our first principles electronic structure calculations. Sec. IV is devoted to the description of the nature of band splitting and consequent spin textures at various high symmetry k-points of the BZ. The results of our first principle calculations have been analysed here in the framework of a low energy k.p model. Finally, conclusions are presented in Sec. V. The half-Heusler compound XYZ crystallize in the face-centered cubic structure with one formula unit per primitive unit cell, as shown in Fig. The calculations presented in this paper have been carried out using Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The details of the structure, including structural parameters are summarised in Table Fig. time reversal(TR) invariant. A time reversal invariant kpoint To begin with we have analysed the density of states without SOC for the 18 electron compound CoZrBi obtained from DFT calculations. The non-spin-polarized total as well as projected density of states of Co-3d and Zr-4d have been shown in Fig. In Fig. Fig. The total as well as the projected DOS and the band structure around the Fermi level without SOC for the 8 electron half-Heusler SiLiIn is shown in Fig. Finally the DOS and band structure of SiLiIn including SOC is shown in Fig. Next we have analysed the nature of the SOC induced splitting of the bands near various high symmetry points of the BZ, in order to elucidate the importance of local symmetry. In the following, we have discussed in detail the spin orbital locked split bands and the novel spin textures displayed by them in the k-space at and around the TR invariant non-polar(X), polar(L) and nontime reversal invariant W points, which based on local symmetry are expected to display Dresselhaus effect, Rashba effect and Zeeman effect respectively. to the principle axis(C ′ 2 (x) , C ′ 2 (y)), reflection in the dihedral plane(M d1 , M d2 ), four fold rotation followed by reflection through a plane perpendicular to the principle axis S 4 (z). All the symmetries are listed in Table where H 0 is the Hamiltonian of the free electrons with the dispersion {ky, kx, kz} {-σy, -σx, -σz} Similarly, for the 8 electron system SiLiIn, the band structure of the CBM around the X point, in the absence and presence of SOC is displayed in Fig. Using the model Hamiltonian Eqn. 1, we have calculated the band structure without and with SOC and is shown with dotted line in Fig. 2. L point π a , π a , π a Next we have focused around the polar L point of the conduction band of the 18 electron half-Heusler compound CoZrBi that features a local maximum. The DFT band structure without and with SOC is plotted in a narrow k-range around the neighbourhood of the high symmetry L π a , π a , π a point along W 2π a , 0, π a and K 3π 2a , 3π 2a , 0 directions as shown in Fig. x and k ′ y are lying in the plane while k ′ z is along (111) direction. The new coordinate system k ′ x , k ′ y , and k ′ z is related to k x , k y , and k z by a shift of origin and rotation preserving the local point group symmetry. The resulting unit vectors As a consequence, the co-ordinate of the high symmetry points in this plane are L ′ (0, 0, 0), 2a , 0 . The corresponding spin textures are calculated for the two branches in the above mentioned plane around the L ′ point are shown in Fig. In both the inner and outer branches, the spin is orthogonal to the wave vector k, which is typical of Rashba-type SOC. The Rashba parameter estimated from the DFT calculation is found to be α R =0.37 eV Å. The k.p model Hamiltonian is constructed by preserving C 3v symmetry at the L point. The k.p Hamiltonian is defined in the reciprocal space (k ′ x , k ′ y , k ′ z ) as mentioned above, where the three-fold rotation (C 3 ) occurs around the trigonal axis k ′ z (parallel to the [111] direction) in both clockwise (C + 3 ) and anticlockwise (C - 3 ) directions. The point group symmetry also includes three mirror planes. One mirror plane lies in the k ′ y -k ′ z plane and is defined as σ ′′ , while the other two mirror planes can be obtained by applying C 3 and C 2 3 operations to the initial mirror plane, and they are defined as σ and σ ′ , respectively. Under these symmetry operations, the momentum and spin operators undergo transformation as listed in Table The cubic term in the effective Hamiltonian is included to explain the out-of-plane component σ ′ z in the spin texture. The band structure without and with SOC obtained from the model Hamiltonian is shown with dotted line in Fig. Since the point group symmetry of SiLiIn is identical to 18 electron half-Heusler compound CoZrBi, we can easily obtain the model Hamiltonian for the 8 electron system around the L ′ point, where While the model Hamiltonian captures the band dispersion for both the compounds accurately, however the out of plane component of the ST obtained from DFT calculation have additional features which is not reproduced by H C L suggesting the presence of symmetry allowed additional terms. Next we have analysed the top most valence bands around the L point for CoZrBi and SiLiIn that displays a maximum. In the absence of SOC the 3-fold degenerate t 2 bands at the Γ point splits into a two fold degenerate and a singly degenerate band at the the L point; consistent with the C 3v symmetry of the L point(see Fig. K 3π 2a , 3π 2a , 0 direction without and including SOC as shown in Fig. The plot of the DFT spintextures for the two bands around the L ′ point is illustrated in Fig. Our calculations reveal that the in-plane spin-component exhibit characteristic chiral configuration with the presence of substantial out-ofplane spin component as illustrated in Fig. In order to corroborate our DFT results a k.p model Hamiltonian is constructed with cubic Rashba as the leading term respecting the C 3v symmetry at the L point The band structure without and with SOC obtained from the model Hamiltonian for the topmost two bands are shown with dotted line in Fig. Similar results are obtained for the 8-electron compound SiLiIn where the splitting of the bands as expected is small. Till now we have discussed spin splitting and consequent spin textures around the time reversal invariant k-points, here we shall consider spin textures around the non time reversal invariant W point. The band structure of the top of the valence band of CoZrBi around the W π a , 2π a , 0 point along the path X 0, 2π a , 0 and K 3π 2a , 3π 2a , 0 all lying in the k x -k y plane without and including spin orbit coupling are displayed in Figs. where λ Z is the Zeeman parameter. At the W point the splitting of the top two bands of CoZrBi is 186 meV as revealed from our DFT calculations. As the W point lies at the boundary of the BZ, therefore from the above Hamiltonian we can easily understand that effective magnetic field is more at the boundary, causing a large splitting. In order to understand the origin of SOC induced different spin textures in different planes we need to understand the symmetry associated with the chosen paths in the reciprocal space. The symmetry operations around the W point in the k x -k y plane along X 0, 2π a , 0 -W π a , 2π a , 0 is C 2x . The spin components under the symmetry operation C 2x transforms like, C 2x : (σ x , σ y , σ z ) → (σ x , -σ y , -σ z ), ensuring primarily the σ x component survives in the Hamiltonian. Using the model Hamiltonian in the k x -k y plane with k z = 0, we focus on the X 0, 2π a , 0 → W π a , 2π a , 0 direction, where k y is fixed and only k x changes. This leads to an effective Hamiltonian around the W point and along the path XW, given by a . This suggest that the spin expectation value will be mostly contributed by the S x component having positive value for the upper valence band around the W point, and negative for the lower valence band in agreement with DFT calculations shown in Figs. The results of our calculation for the 8 electron half-Heusler compound is shown in Fig. In order to understand the origin of the vanishing spin polarisation we have constructed a k.p model Hamiltonian following Ref. and H -breaks the spatial inversion symmetry, Here, γ 1 , γ 2 , γ 3 and c are constants. J x , J y and J z are 4 × 4 angular momentum matrices for a state of spin 3 2 , and k x , k y and k z are the kinetic momentum terms. The symbol {a, b} means the symmetrized product Here, we focus on the band degeneracy and spin polarization instead of the exact band dispersion. The DFT band structure in a narrow range around the Γ point along the path A-Γ-L can be reasonably reproduced with the fitted parameter values are γ 1 = -9.0, γ 2 = 2.0, γ 3 = -1.9, 2 m = 1 and C = -0.05 [see Fig. Similar results around the Γ point and along the path Γ-L is displayed by the 8 electron compound SiLiIn. In Fig. Using the same model Hamiltonian as described for the 18 electron half-Heusler we can understand the origin of the BSVSP for SiLiIn. We find the SOC-induced effective magnetic field acting on two different p orbitals of the same atom are equal and opposite in strength along the ΓL path, resulting in a BSVSP The splitting of the bands depends on the strength of SOC, as a consequence BSVSP effect is much stronger (30 meV) for the 18-electron compound while it is 3 meV for the 8-electron compound SiLiIn and only 0.05 meV for GaAs, suggesting 18-electron compounds will be ideal candidate for experimental detection of BSVSP. In the present paper we have analysed the electronic structure of two representative half-Heusler systems with 18 electrons and 8 electrons respectively in the presence of spin-orbit interaction. Our calculations reveal rich features in the electronic structure due to spin-momentum locking induced by SOC. Although both the compounds have identical crystal structure, 0.00 X 0, 0, 2π a 0.07 X 0, 0, 2π a non-polar 44 the orbital composition of the valence and conduction bands are different for the 18 electron and the 8 electron system. This brings in subtle changes in the SOC induced band structures emphasizing the important role of orbitals. In addition, the BZ of the half-Heusler system admits diverse local symmetries(little group) leading to non-trivial splitting of the band structure due to SOC, resulting in novel spin textures around the valleys of the high symmetry k-points. Around the X point we have observed Dresselhaus effect as expected for a non centrosymmetric and non-polar material Similar to the Dresselhaus effect, we have observed the Rashba effect in both half-Heusler systems around the polar L π a , π a , π a point in the [111] plane. The Rashba effect features both linear and higher-order terms for the conduction band, but the strength of the higher-order term is found to be much weaker compared to the linear term. However for the topmost valence band at the L point we have identified cubic Rashba to be the leading term of the SOC Hamiltonian with novel spin texture. The identification of pure cubic Rashba splitting in half-Heusler alloys is rather unique and are expected to play important role in spin transport. Further both the Dresselhaus and Rashba splitting is found to be much weaker for the 8 electron sp based compound in comparison to the 18 electron system. At the non-TR invariant high symmetry point W, we observe Zeeman spin splitting. From the k.p model Hamiltonian, we have established that only the cubic terms are invariant under symmetry operations, and the component of spin orientation depends on the chosen plane. Finally, we have observed the BSVSP along the high symmetry path Γ-L in both 18 electron and 8 electron half-Heusler systems. Around the Γ point the tetrahedral environment causes the d orbitals of the 18 electron half-Heusler to split into t 2 and e states while leaving the p states degenerate for the 8 electron half-Heusler compound. The SOC further splits the t 2 and p states into four fold degenerate J = Our calculations reveal that the valence band and the conduction band of half-Heusler alloys at the various high symmetry points feature extrema(valleys) characterized by spin texture which are dependent on the location of the valleys in the k-space designated by a valley index. In the presence of SOC the spin splitting is tied to the valley index, requiring the scattering of charge carriers between valleys to have simultaneous spin flip and momentum transfer. This favors long valley life time required for valleytronics application. These valleys can be accessible by doping. Our detailed first principle calculations complemented with k.p model Hamiltonian method for the two representative half-Heusler systems identifies in a family of ternary half-Heusler system with heavy elements another novel functionality for potential application in spin-valleytronics 