Recent advances in delicate topology have expanded the classification of topological bands, but its presence in solid-state materials remains elusive. Here we show that delicate topology naturally emerges in the Luttinger-Kohn model that describes many semiconductors and semimetals. In particular, the Luttinger semimetal is found to be a quantum critical point leading to a quantized jump of an integer-valued delicate topological invariant. Away from this criticality, we have identified new types of electronic insulators and semimetals with intertwined stable and delicate topologies. They all carry gapless surface states that transform anomalously under rotation symmetry. Our work provides a starting point for exploring delicate topological phenomena in quantum materials. Topological band insulators are not smoothly connected to trivial, atomic ones Are Wannierizable systems always trivial? Recently, the answer to this fundamental question is revised by the discovery of delicate topology in Wannierizable systems Our main finding is that the classic Luttinger-Kohn (LK) Hamiltonian The unexpected connection between delicate topology and LSM originates from the following observation: a smooth evolution path P can be established between the LK Hamiltonian and a Dirac dipole (DD) Hamiltonian, wherein any node-enclosing Fermi surface remains gapped. The DD has recently been recognized as a delicate topological critical point (TCP) for spin Hopf systems The topological nature of phases A and B are explored by converting the LK Hamiltonian into a lattice model. By employing various lattice regularization schemes, we have successfully identified the anticipated delicate TI phase, as well as intriguing scenarios where delicate and stable topologies coexist and interact synergistically. As proof of concept, we discuss two examples based on the LK Hamiltonian, a weak TI and a Weyl semimetal (WSM). In both cases, stable topological invariants, such as Z 2 indices and Weyl charges, decide the number and k-space locations of the boundary states. Meanwhile, the delicate topology requires the top and bottom surface states to carry different angular momentum labels J z , resulting in a remarkable surface angular-momentum anomaly. Across the delicate topological transition through the QBT, the J z pattern of surface states will vary as a response to the change in RTP, while the stable topological information remains invariant. We term this novel class of topological phenomena RTP-enriched topological phases. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. In Sec II, we define and discuss the topological charge carried by the QBT of LK Hamiltonian. To facilitate our subsequent discussions, a brief review of RTP physics is provided in Sec III. We then establish the QBT of LK Hamiltonian as a delicate TCP and further discuss the phase diagram surrounding this TCP. A representative delicate TI phase is identified and analyzed in Sec. IV, elaborating on the origin of its unconventional surface states. We further introduce the concept of RTPenriched topological phases, which is exemplified through investigations on the weak TI and WSM phases. We conclude with highlights, remarks on candidate materials, and open questions for future research in Sec V. The QBT of j = 3/2 fermions in LSM systems arises from a 4D double-valued irreducible representation (irrep) of crystalline point groups such as O, T d , and O h . The low-energy physics is well captured by the 4-band LK Hamiltonian, Here S = (S x , S y , S z ) denote the spin-3/2 Pauli matrices. Besides respecting time-reversal symmetry T = iσ x s y K, H LK preserves an O(3) symmetry in the continuum limit, which results in an isotropic dispersion relation with describes the quadratically dispersing LSM phase. Without loss of generality, we will focus on this LSM phase and set λ 1 = 0 and λ 2 = 1 by default, unless specified otherwise. Let us recall that any k-space Fermi surface containing a Weyl node will harbor a Berry flux of ±2πn with n ∈ Z is the projector onto valence/conduction subspace. The Wannier band spectrum λ W (θ) is the set of exponents of unit modulus complex eigenvalues of the Wilson loop operator, which intuitively describes the evolution of 1D Berry phase along L θ for the projected subspace. In Fig. To better decipher the topological physics here, we further propose a generalized LK model, where h (1) 0 = H LK recovers the original LK Hamiltonian. Here, x + k 2 y -2k 2 z . σ x,y,z and s x,y,z are Pauli matrices for orbitals and spins of electrons, respectively. We consider an evolution path from the LSM limit α = 1 to α = 0, along which we find that (i) the QBT of j = 3/2 fermions remains resilient; (ii) an energy gap is always present for any finite-radius Fermi sphere S that encloses the node. We, therefore, expect that any topological information of the QBT should be preserved as α evolves. Interestingly, α = 0 represents another special limit with w c = w v = 2, as shown in Fig. Away from α = 0 or 1, however, the Wannier bands λ W (θ) in both valence and conduction space do not generally admit an integer number of windings. This is clearly shown in the Wannier band spectrum for α = 1/2 in Fig. In the Supplemental Material (SM) S1, we derive Eq. ( Crucially, Eq. ( The above results have clearly unveiled an inherent connection between LSM and delicate topology. First of all, w net is defined for the entire Hilbert space, which contrasts with most previously known topological indices that are solely based on VB properties. The quantization of w net could then be spoiled when coupling an additional set of trivial bands to either CB or VB subspace, resembling the definition of delicate topology Furthermore, the conservation of w net indicates a topological equivalence between the LSM (α = 1) and the DD (α = 0). Notably, the DD band degeneracy is found to be a phase transition point between two class-AII crystalline insulators with distinct delicate topologies As a warm-up, let us first review the theory of RTP, which is a delicate topological phenomenon that will play a key role in deciphering the core physics of LSM. Without loss of generality, we consider a 3D Wannierizable C 4symmetric system with the rotational axis aligning with the z-axis. A theory for general C n symmetry can be defined analogously. To reveal the hint of delicate topology, we consider the 1D charge polarization P (κ) z (k ∥ ) for each k ∥ -labeled k z axis, where the index κ = v/c labels the valence/conduction electrons. The 2D k xk y plane that k ∥ lives in is dubbed a reduced Brillouin zone (rBZ) [see Fig. n ⟩ is the non-Abelian Berry connection along z-direction, and |u (κ) n ⟩ is the n-th valence or conduction Bloch states. There exist two C 4 -invariant axes with K0 ∈ { Γ, M }, along which electrons are further labeled by an angular momentum index J z modulo 4. It is then possible for the system to respect a mutually disjoint condition (MDC), that for any given J z , all of J z -labeled eigenstates at a K0 must live in either conduction or valence subspace, but not in both. The MDC guarantees that the following polarization difference is quantized in the unit of lattice constant Viewing M -Γ -M as an adiabatic evolution path for z , we schematically depict the scenario for both R = 0 and R = 1 in Fig. From the real-space perspective, a non-zero R directly implies that the ground-state wavefunctions necessarily span at least |R| primitive unit cells. This strictly prevents a RTP insulator from being smoothly deformed into an atomic insulator. While the value of RTP invariant R is robust against any adiabatic deformation that respects C 4 and the MDC, it is always possible to spoil it through an MDC violation, by coupling either the valence or conduction bands with a certain set of atomic bands. In this sense, the topology described by an RTP is "delicate". Consider a transition of RTP tuned by a single parameter φ ∈ R, with R(φ > 0) ̸ = R(φ < 0). Following Eq. 6, it is easy to see that a RTP jump ∆R across the TCP is induced by a quantized jump of charge polarization at Γ, M , or both. Specifically, where ∆P In the forthcoming subsection, we will exploit the quantized polarization jump as a key indicator for delicate topological phase transitions. To uncover the hidden RTP physics of LSM, we consider perturbing H LK with, with γ jk = -iγ j γ k and β ≥ 0. The first term of H φ (k) manifests as a 2D Rashba effect, and the second term describes an in-plane lattice-strain effect. While respecting time-reversal symmetry and the continuous rotation symmetry C ∞ around z axis, H φ breaks spatial inversion, M z , and all n-fold rotation symmetries around x or y axis with n > 2. The phase diagram of H c ≡ H LK +H φ for a fixed β = 1 is shown in Fig. Notably, to connect phases A and B without passing any intermediate phases, any evolution path will necessarily hit the LSM degeneracy at Σ = φ = 0. The equivalence between LSM and DD inspires us to check whether phases A and B could differ by a ∆R. First, since H c (k) is an effective model around Γ, we will focus on the contribution of ∆R only from Γ, but not other high-symmetry momenta. Namely, the continuum limit imposes ∆R = ∆P (v) z ( Γ). To evaluate ∆P z ( Γ), we consider a continuous path R [see Fig. While the above discussions have focused on the LSM, all the conclusions in Sec II and Sec III also hold for the metal phase of the LK model with |λ 1 | > 2|λ 2 |. This is because the identity term parameterized by λ 1 has no impact on the specific form of energy eigenstates and will further vanish at the QBT. Consequently, the delicate topology, which is a wavefunction property, is independent of the value of λ 1 . The ∆R across the LSM has proved a delicate topological distinction for A and B. To clarify the explicit nature of each phase, however, we would require the topological band information over the entire BZ, which is beyond the scope of any continuum model. In this section, we will regularize the continuous Hamiltonian H c (k) on a 3D lattice to construct tight-binding models, with which a variety of delicate topological phases are uncovered. In particular, we will demonstrate the possibility for a stable topological insulator or semimetal to carry an additional built-in delicate topology and discuss the corresponding boundary physics. We start by introducing a RTP-carrying delicate TI phase that is free from any stable topological physics. We will elaborate on how the bulk-state RTP will necessarily lead to anomalous surface states. To this end, we regularize H c (k) into a lattice Hamiltonian H a (k) with the following rules, Due to the lattice geometry, H a (k) is now invariant under a discrete point group of C 4v , as well as the time-reversal symmetry T . Both symmetries are crucial for the delicate topology that we are going after. Notably, at Σ = φ = 0, H a (k) always exhibits a pair of four-fold degenerate QBTs at Γ and Z, respectively. Each QBT resembles the one found in the continuum model H c (k), and is thus expected to serve as a delicate TCP. For our purpose, we hope to spoil the simultaneous occurrence of these QBTs of H a (k), so that we can investigate their topological consequence individually. This motivates us to parameterize the Rashba parameter φ as Fixing Σ = 0 and β = 1, it is easy to see that u = 3 leads to φ(Γ) = 0 and thus a QBT at Γ. For 2 √ 2 -1 < u < 3, we find that H a (k) realizes a delicate TI with a RTP invariant of R = 2. Take u = 2 as an example, the nontrivial RTP invariant for valence and conduction electrons are clearly visualized by tracking P (v/c) z along M -Γ -M , as shown in Fig. The energy spectra for (001) top and bottom surfaces are calculated for the R = 2 phase using the iterative Green's function technique This unusual boundary physics originates from the bulk-state RTP Let us make several remarks on the surface states. First, they are guaranteed to be gapless when boundaries are "ideally sharp" Besides, the topological nature of these surface modes manifests in the symmetry contents of their wavefunctions. To illustrate, let us denote the effective 2D systems formed by the top/bottom surface states as h In a real-world material, there always exist many other bands beyond the delicate ones, so it is unlikely for the complete band manifold to respect the MDC. Therefore, delicate topology should, in principle, be interpreted as a low-energy effective phenomenon in a realistic system. However, as we numerically show in the SM S7, the RTP physics is surprisingly robust against the multiband effect. In particular, a visible breakdown of RTP occurs only when (i) certain types of band couplings are involved; and (ii) the coupling strength is sufficiently strong. Furthermore, the delicate topological surface states are more resilient against perturbations and persist even when the Wilson-loop spectrum of RTP is spoiled. This "solid" nature of delicate topology hence makes the exotic surface physics predicted in this work much more accessible in experiments. With Eq. ( The new lattice model is termed H b (k), where we consider Σ(k) = Σ 0 cos k z and a constant Rashba parameter φ. When φ = Σ 0 = 0, H b (k) hosts a QBT at each of Γ = (0, 0, 0) and R = (π, π, π), respectively. For our purpose, we focus on the following choice of parameters β = 0, φ = √ 0.1, and Σ 0 = -0.1. Fig. along the high-symmetry path in the rBZ, which clearly features a non-trivial RTP invariant R = -2 along M -Γ -M . Remarkably, a further examination of Fig. The interplay between RTP and Z 2 physics has intriguing boundary consequences. Unlike the previous delicate TI phase, this weak TI phase satisfies the MDC independently at both Γ and M . Specifically, all the valence states at Γ have J z = ±3/2, while their conduction counterparts feature J z = ±1/2. The pattern of J z at M is exactly the opposite of that at Γ. Following the bulkboundary relation depicted in Fig. Since both delicate and Z 2 topologies are shared by the same set of bulk bands, we thus expect the above exotic features will be carried by the Dirac surface states. This is directly confirmed in our iterative Green's function simulations in Fig. (ii) Delicate topology informs the energy and symmetry features of the surface states. This intriguing synergy between delicate and stable topologies arises from the fact that they are hosted by the same set of bands. On the other hand, it is also possible for delicate and stable topologies to coexist, but they are attributed to distinct band sets. This scenario in the RTP-enriched weak TI and WSM phases, respectively. The intertwined stable and delicate topologies are manifest in both cases. In (b) and (c), we show the (001) surface spectra for the weak phase, where we have marked the value of Jz for the surface Dirac nodes. As for the WSM phase, we plot in (e) the Fermi surface for the top (001) surface. The red and blue dots are bulk Weyl nodes with a monopole charge of +1 and -1, respectively. (f) shows the energy spectrum for the top surface of the RTP-enriched WSM. falls out of the RTP-enriched topological physics defined above, and the delicate and stable topologies are thus expected to contribute independently to the boundaries. We leave the discussion of this kind of hybrid delicatestable topological phases to future research. The notion of RTP-enriched topological physics also applies to gapless systems. As proof of concept, we will discuss a Weyl semimetal phase that emerges from the LK Hamiltonian. The lattice regularization scheme considered here is similar to Eq. ( To topologically characterize H c (k), we take u = 2 and calculate P (v) z along a high-symmetry k-path, as shown in Fig. The value of R requires the emergence of two gapless surface states along Γ -M , with one of them contributed by the Weyl nodes. Consequently, there must exist another RTP-enforced surface state that is beyond the Weyl physics. To confirm our expectation, we exploit the iterative Green's function method to map out the zero-energy Fermi surface for (001) top surface, as shown in Fig. To summarize, we have established the j = 3/2 Luttinger systems as a realistic paradigm for delicate topology. Specifically, the QBT of LSMs not only carries a delicate topological charge, but also serves as a TCP connecting phases with distinct RTPs. Our lattice-model investigations clearly showcase the abundance of delicate topological phenomena that a LSM can lead to. We hope to specially highlight the new scenario of RTP-enriched topology, where the intertwinement between delicate and stable topologies will cause unusual boundary physics. This notion offers a new direction to explore the role of RTP in modern topological band theory. Material candidates of LSMs are common in nature, and notable examples include elemental α-Sn As a final remark, real-world LSM materials often feature intriguing correlated electronic orders such as magnetism and superconductivity. The inherent delicate topology will shed new light on comprehending these interacting phenomena. For example, fragile topological bands are recently found to impose topological lower bounds for both superfluid weight where k ∥ ≡ k 2 x + k 2 y , and h ± are blocks for m z = ±1 sector, respectively. The valence eigenstate in m z = +1 sector takes the form where is the normalization factor, and e iφ ≡ k + /k ∥ . From Eq. (S8), it is straightforward to calculate the Berry connection along the azimuthal direction: Since λ + W,v is nothing but the Berry phase along the equator, then Eqs. (S6) and (S10) together give Eq. ( We consider the 6-band Kane model as a multi-band generalization of the LK Hamiltonian, which contains two extra J z = ±1/2 p-orbital bands. Specifically, where h 1 2 = (E 0 + λ 3 k 2 )σ 0 , and the coupling takes the form Since T (Γ)=0, the QBT persists in the Kane model. We now numerically evaluate the Wilson loop spectrum on a Fermi sphere surrounding the QBT, of which the radius is π/40. In our calculations, we set λ 3 = -0.5 and E 0 = -2, and increase the coupling strength v from 2 to 6. As shown in Fig. where x , versus in kz = 0 and kz = π planes. Here, we conduct a numerical study to understand how the inclusion of extra bands in a delicate topological insulator affects the RTP and the surface states. We begin by noting that adding J z = ±1/2 bands following the Kane model presented in Eq. (S11) will not affect the RTP and the surface states at all. This is because the Kane model preserves an emergent 1D inversion symmetry along the rotation invariant axis, and thus the P z at M and Γ are forced to be quantized and cannot jump without bulk gap closing. A similar scenario has been previously discussed in Ref. To nullify the quantized RTP and illustrate the strength of this nullification under different conditions, we consider the addition of two flat bands in the valence space at energy E extra < 0 into the delicate TI model H a (k). We choose the coupling between these two flat bands and the original bands as T ′ = t 0 e ikz 0 0 0 0 e ikz 0 . (S17) which breaks the emergent 1D inversion symmetry. Explicitly, the 6-band Hamiltonian we study here takes the form where h ′ = E extra σ 0 . We then tune the value of the two parameters E extra and t to investigate the effects of the two extra bands. As shown in Fig. 