Monolayer PbSe has been predicted to be a two-dimensional (2D) topological crystalline insulator (TCI) with crystalline symmetry-protected Dirac-cone-like edge states. Recently, few-layered epitaxial PbSe has been grown on the SrTiO3 substrate successfully, but the corresponding signature of the TCI was only observed for films not thinner than seven monolayers, largely due to interfacial strain. Here, we demonstrate a two-step method based on molecular beam epitaxy for the growth of the PbSe-CuSe lateral heterostructure on the Cu(111) substrate, in which we observe a nanopore patterned CuSe layer that acts as the template for lateral epitaxial growth of PbSe. This further results in a monolayer PbSe/CuSe lateral heterostructure with an atomically sharp interface. Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy measurements reveal a four-fold symmetric square lattice of such monolayer PbSe with a quasi-particle band gap of 1.8 eV, a value highly comparable with the theoretical value of freestanding PbSe. The weak monolayer-substrate interaction is further supported by both density functional theory (DFT) and projected crystal orbital Hamilton population, with the former predicting the monolayer's anti-bond state to reside below the Fermi level. Our work demonstrates a practical strategy to fabricate a high-quality in-plane heterostructure, involving a monolayer TCI, which is viable for further exploration of the topology-derived quantum physics and phenomena in the monolayer limit. To date, various kinds of monolayer two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), can be physically or chemically isolated from their parent crystals. Being in the monolayer limit, these 2D materials often exhibit richer properties that are not found in their 3D forms. Here, we demonstrate the synthesis of quasi-freestanding monolayer PbSe on Cu(111) by means of two-step molecular beam epitaxy, in which a nanopore patterned CuSe layer has been employed as the template for lateral epitaxy of PbSe, thereby forming a monolayer PbSe/CuSe lateral heterostructure. Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements show that the synthesized PbSe exhibits a four-fold symmetry with a periodicity of 0.43 nm. A quasi-particle band gap of 1.8 eV has been obtained by scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS), revealing no major hybridization between monolayer PbSe and Cu(111) substrate. Our experimental results are in line with density functional theory (DFT) and projected crystal orbital Hamilton population (pCOHP), confirming a band gap of ~1.5 eV for freestanding PbSe and weak monolayer-substrate interaction. Figure To gain more information of the surface, we investigated the structural and electronic properties of monolayer PbSe and the surrounding CuSe. Figure The incommensurate epitaxy involved here reduces the PbSe-substrate interaction, which also explains the absence of strain-induced lattice constant variation in our monolayer PbSe film. The resulting quasi-freestanding nature of the monolayer has also been verified by the dI/dV spectrum in Figure In order to further confirm the formation mechanism of PbSe/CuSe lateral heterostructure, we focus on the structural and electronic properties of the interface. It indicates that our proposal model fit quite well with the experimental observations, revealing the lateral heterostructure formed this way. It also explains the measured height of the PbSe islands of only ~70 pm (see Figure To support our observation in experiments, we performed the first principal calculations based on DFT. We have performed an extensive search for the stable structure of CuSe/Cu(111) and PbSe/Cu(111). We notice that the 33 (101) unit cell of CuSe (PbSe) is commensurate to the 77 (273) Cu(111) with a lattice mismatch of less than 5%. We have considered three typical configurations (see Figure After extensive geometry optimizations, we found that the bridge CuSe/Cu(111) and hollow PbSe/Cu(111) structure are the most stable structure. For CuSe/Cu(111) heterostructure, top structure is more consistent with the experimentally grown structure. Hence, we take top CuSe/Cu(111) and hollow PbSe/Cu(111) as the objects for the following investigation. To quantify the interaction between CuSe/PbSe and Cu(111) substrate, we calculated the binding energy Eb, defined as Eb = (ECuSe/PbSe+ECu(111)-Etot)/N. ECuSe/PbSe, ECu(111) and Etot are the total energies of the CuSe/PbSe, the Cu(111) substrate, and the total energies of the CuSe/Cu(111) or PbSe/Cu(111). N is the number of the CuSe/PbSe atoms at the interface. The calculated Eb is shown in Table Figure represents electron charge density. The ELF provides a value between 0 and 1. ELF = 0.5 stands for the same level of Pauli repulsion as in the homogeneous electron gas, while a higher ELF value represents that the electrons are more localized (ELF = 1 indicates perfect localization of electrons). Figure In summary, we have successfully synthesized monolayer PbSe by sequential deposition of Se and Pb on Cu(111). We find that nanopore patterned CuSe acts as a template for lateral epitaxy of PbSe, forming PbSe/CuSe lateral heterostructure. STM and STS shows the structural and electronic properties of PbSe, confirming its fourfold symmetry directly locate on Cu(111) with a weak interaction. The detailed atomic lattice of the obtained PbSe shows a lattice constant of 0.43 nm, revealing no strain effect exist. Combining STM/STS and DFT calculations, we find the obtained monolayer PbSe is in weak interaction with the substrate. Our work expands the strategy of lateral epitaxy of heterostructures based on 2D materials, paving the way toward the production of high-quality monolayers of 2D materials for both fundamental studies and potential applications. Our experiments were carried out in a home-built ultrahigh vacuum molecular beam epitaxy (UHV-MBE) chamber equipped with an STM (Unisoku). The base pressure of the system is better than 1×10 -10 Torr. A generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in the form of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functional and HSE06 hybrid functional Å vacuum slab was considered to avoid the interaction between the supercell with its image. Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack mesh was used to sample the Brillouin zone of the supercells. 