Electrohydrodynamic 3D printing is an additive manufacturing technique with enormous potential in plasmonics, microelectronics, and sensing applications, thanks to its broad materials palette, high voxel deposition rate, and compatibility with various substrates. However, the electric field used to deposit material is concentrated at the depositing structure resulting in the focusing of the charged droplets and geometrydependent landing positions, which complicates the fabrication of complex 3D shapes. The low level of concordance between design and printout seriously impedes the development of electrohydrodynamic 3D printing and rationalizes the simplicity of the designs reported so far. In this work, we break the electric field centrosymmetry to study the resulting deviation in the flight trajectory of the droplets. Comparison of experimental outcomes with predictions of an FEM model provides new insights into the droplet characteristics and unveils how the product of droplet size and charge uniquely 1 The autofocusing effect is a double-edged sword for electrohydrodynamic (EHD) 3D printing. On the one hand, this phenomenon-describing the attraction of charged droplets towards a printed object in response to the electric field concentration it creates-helps the fabrication of high-aspect-ratio structures and ensures sub-100 nm resolution. To that end, efforts were made to understand how perturbations in the electric field by the deposited voxels (the 3D equivalent of a pixel) influence the droplet dynamics and thus the landing position of the subsequent voxels. Yudistira et al. systematically studied the deflection and the breakup of ejected droplets in response to the accumulation of charged solvent on a dielectric substrate. In parallel, efforts were made to alleviate the negative impact of the electrostatic deflection. O'Connell et al. derived an empirical model to compute printing paths counteracting the effect of electric field distortion around hemispheres of different sizes. To tackle this challenge of high geometric fidelity in EHD printing, we here develop a combined experimental and modeling approach to investigate the flight dynamics of charged droplets using electrohydrodynamic redox 3D printing (EHDRP) process as a model system. EHDRP has recently been introduced as an electrochemical alternative to EHD, Electrohydrodynamic redox 3D printing (Figure Electrostatic deflection offers a unique approach for the precise positioning of voxels with lateral jet speeds and accelerations unattainable by nano-positioning systems. The introduction of a second electrode perpendicular to the first unlocks complete in-plane positioning of the droplet and enables the deposition of 2.5D structures (Figure The post-printing deflection amplitude is derived from SE micrographs in the 1D configuration (Figure The amplitude of the deflection from the vertical path appears to be closely linked to the characteristics of the droplet, for instance, its radius and the number of elementary charges it carries (Figure The autofocusing effect-i.e., the attraction of charged droplets to readily printed structures-represents both an opportunity and a challenge for the EHDRP process. On the one hand, it improves reliability in the fabrication of out-of-plane wire-like structures, such as pillars, by attracting charged droplets to the apex; it attenuates any imprecision in the positioning of the printing nozzle. On the other hand, the resulting droplet deviation from a straight path complicates the fabrication of complex geometries, for which the use of non-trivial printing paths needs to be developed. Here, we highlight this phenomenon by studying the droplet deflection in response to the presence of a 2 μm-tall pillar as a function of the offset, i.e., the lateral nozzle displacement between the first pillar and the secondary branch. The flight path-whose endpoint is revealed by the branch attachment point in the secondary electron (SE) micrographs-appears strongly modified by the presence of the first pillar (Figure The map of the electric potential predicted by the FEM model shows how the small radius of curvature associated with the body and the tip of the pillar locally increases the magnitude of the electric field and bends the field lines towards it (Figure Predictions of the two aforementioned FEM models-electrostatic deflection by a thin-film electrode and autofocusing effect-reveal how the droplet flight path is closely bound to the product of its radius and charge: r and q. In both these configurations, droplets with identical r • q (or, in terms of mass, m 1/3 • q) follow similar trajectories (Figure Additionally, the trajectory deflection is inversely proportional to the r • q product. A heavy or strongly charged droplet follows a straighter path (i.e., less impacted by the bending of the electric field lines) than a light or weakly charged droplet. This result follows intuition with respect to the radius-a heavier droplet has more momentum and thus deflects less-but is more nuanced with respect to the charge. While the lateral acceleration during the flight scales with stronger charge (Figure Thus for a more strongly charged droplet, the reduced flight time allows for less lateral deflection despite the increase in lateral electrostatic force. This result is particularly interesting given that the deflection of charges in response to an electric or magnetic field typically follows the mass-to-charge m/q ratio and not m 1/3 • q. In mass spectrometry measurements, m/q is the ratio discriminating between species and is independent of the type of mass selection (sector field, time-of-flight, quadrupole filter). Here, the observed difference in behavior arises from the aerodynamic drag force acting on the droplet in the model, which is negligible in mass spectrometry (see comparison in the absence of drag force, Figure To support and understand the model's predictions with regards to the r • q relationship, a simple analytical model can be derived with the following assumptions: 1. The space between the nozzle and the substrate is divided between two zones (acceleration, deflection) at a distance h from the substrate. 2. In the first zone, the droplet accelerates vertically due to the electric field, while the drag is neglected. The total voltage drop in this zone is denoted ∆V . 3. In the second zone, the droplet decelerates due to the drag force and is deflected laterally by a constant electric field E x , while the vertical electric field is neglected. 4. In the second zone, the lateral velocity is small compared to the vertical one (Fig- 5. The drag follows Stoke's law, F = 6πμrv, with μ as the dynamic viscosity, r as the radius of the droplet, and v as the droplet speed. ρ∆V , and ρ as the solvent density. In this relationship, r and q are only found in the form of their product r • q. Therefore, in accordance with the predictions of the FEM model, all droplets with identical r • q are equally impacted by the lateral electric field. Moreover, the comparison between the experimental results and the predictions of the models (both numerical and analytical) only allows for the determination of its r • q product, not the individual values of r or q. In that regard, the predictions of the analytical and FEM models for the droplet deflection differ appreciably for the investigated range of size and charge. For instance, the analytical model is not valid for r • q > B 2 (≈ 80 μm e, for larger r • q, the argument of the logarithm is negative) which is not negligibly far from the value predicted by FEM. Therefore, while the analytical model supports our phenomenological understanding and validates the FEM model, we will rely on numerical methods for a quantitative assessment of the droplet deflection. The r • q products obtained from the two above-mentioned experimental approaches do not perfectly correspond: (34 ± 4) μm e from the autofocusing experiment vs. 7-30 μm e from the experiment with a deflection electrode. The origin of the discrepancy may arise from neglecting the role of solvent evaporation. In experiments, the droplet mass decreases in flight due to evaporation and changes the r • q product. Thus for longer flight times, the r • q product is on average smaller. Since the nozzle distance was larger for the experiments with the deflection electrode (9 vs. 7.5 μm), it may explain the smaller r • q derived from this approach. Another source of error could be the absence of a dielectrophoretic force in the model. Since this force is proportional to the gradient of the squared magnitude of the electrical field-which is different for the two configurations-it would alter the droplet path differently. While the significance of the dielectrophoretic force in the droplet dynamics is still unclear, it is most likely negligible, as discussed in Section S2 (Supporting Information). The value derived from the autofocusing configuration appears more reliable for the two following reasons. First, the estimated error in the SEM measurement is significantly smaller for this experiment (see error bars, Figure One can further narrow down this estimation of r • q by considering the Rayleigh limit, Although the exact droplet size and charge remain uncertain, the results of the previous sections showed that the r • q product is sufficient to predict the flight behavior. Using the r•q calculated from the autofocusing experiments, we transform the FEM model into an optimization tool in which the lateral nozzle position is iteratively adapted to reduce the absolute distance between the calculated and the target landing position. This enables a corrected nozzle path that compensates for the autofocusing effect. Note that we choose the r•q derived from the autofocusing experiments, 34 μm e, firstly for the reasons discussed in the previous paragraph, and secondly since the model should correct for this exact phenomenon. As a proof of principle, we derive the optimal printing path for a simple geometry which, despite its apparent ease, represents a challenge in the absence of print corrections: two closely spaced nanopillars. These are designed to be 2 μm in height and spaced by 300 nm, resulting in a gap of half the pillar width (assuming 200 nm-thick cylinders). As visible in the left-most micrograph of Figure The nozzle positions optimized by the FEM model and corresponding droplet flight path are shown for a subset of growth steps in Figure The experimental results further corroborate the benefit of this approach. Pillars fabri-cated using a corrected path (Figure To generalize this approach to the fabrication of arbitrary shapes, the 3D models are discretized into printing steps, each corresponding to an added spherical voxel. For each printing step, i.e., building block, the FEM model constructs the geometry as the union of the previous spheres and then optimizes the nozzle position accordingly. The experimental outcomes for a double helix, a bicycle, and a tree-like network with and without corrected printing paths are visible in Figure Second, the bicycle frame illustrates the difficulty to fabricate overhanging structures with beam angle approaching 0°from the horizontal. In this example, the top tube at 25°above horizontal (between saddle and handlebars) was fabricated successfully, while the 9°down tube (which has been simplified here into a tube connecting the wheels) was not. Although 0°beams have been reported, We present two experimental approaches to study the deflection of charged droplets involved in the EHDRP 3D printing process. First, a voltage signal applied to external deflection electrodes directly controls the trajectory of EHD droplets and allows for their precise positioning in the fabrication of 2.5D structures. Second, alteration to the droplet's landing position due to a nearby nanopillar is observed to quantify the autofocusing effect directly and highlights the related challenges in achieving high geometrical complexity by EHD. The reported FEM simulations agree with both experimental approaches and unveil that the product of droplet size and charge predominantly governs its flight dynamics. In the current study, this quantity (r • q) lies around 34 μm e and likely corresponds to a droplet radius of ≈ 95 nm and a charge of ≈ 358 e. Finally, we show how the printing paths can be optimized by an FEM model to compensate for the electrostatic deflection of the charged droplets. This strategy unlocks the deposition of complex 3D nano-objects that are not achievable otherwise, and unleashes the full potential of EHD 3D printing in the field of microfabrication. The printing nozzles were prepared with a pipette puller (P-2000, Sutter Instrument) from quartz capillaries (QF100-70-15, Sutter Instrument). The pulling parameters were: Cycle 1: Heat 810, Filament 5, Delay 128, Pull 50, Velocity 30; Cycle 2: Heat 700, Filament 4, Delay 130, Pull 75, Velocity 50, leading to aperture diameters of 150-220 nm. The nanopipettes were filled with acetonitrile (Optima, Fisher Chemical) using a glass syringe (Gastight #1010, Hamilton) equipped with a 20 nm syringe-filter (Anotop 10, GE Whatman). Cu wires used as sacrificial anodes (99.9999 %, 0.25 mm-thick, Alfa Aesar) were etched in 65 % concentrated nitric acid (Sigma Aldrich) for 10 s, rinsed in water (Optima LC/MS grade, Fisher Chemical), stored in ethanol (EMSURE, absolute for analysis, Supelco, Merck) and finally inserted into the nanopipettes. The printing process was conducted in an inert Ar atmosphere with <100 ppm O 2 , as monitored by a Module ISM-3 oxygen sensor (PBI Dansensor). Substrates used for printing were Si wafers ((100), SiMat, with 50 nm diffusion barriers of SiO 2 and Si 3 N 4 ) coated by DC magnetron sputtering (PVD Products Inc.) with a 3 nm Ti and a 80 nm Au film. The thin-film electrodes were made by standard lithography process, with a patterning step performed by laser writing (DWL66+, Heidelberg). The steering setup with electrical wiring is visible in Figure The samples were imaged with a FEG-SEM (Magellan 400, FEI, USA) and with a FIB-SEM station (NVision40, Zeiss, Germany), both operating with in-lens mode with an acceleration voltage of 5 kV for the electron source. All 3D numerical models were built in COMSOL Multiphysics ® software. The Electrostatics module computed the electric potential distribution for a printing potential applied at the capillary surface and a grounded substrate. The droplet trajectory was calculated thereafter using the Charged Particle Tracing module, comprising an electrostatic force and a drag force as defined by Feng et al. for the motion of a viscous sphere subjected to interfacial slip. 