Ultrafast laser induced thermionic emission from metal surfaces has several applications. Here, we investigate the role of laser polarization and angle of incidence on the ultrafast thermionic emission process from laser driven gold coated glass surface. The spatio-temporal evolution of electron and lattice temperatures are obtained using an improved three-dimensional (3D) two-temperature model (TTM) which takes into account the 3D laser pulse profile focused obliquely onto the surface. The associated thermionic emission features are described through modified Richardson-Dushman equation, including dynamic space charge effects and are included self-consistently in our numerical approach. We show that temperature dependent reflectivity influences laser energy absorption. The resulting peak electron temperature on the metal surface monotonically increases with angle of incidence for P polarization, while for S polarization it shows opposite trend. We observe that thermionic emission duration shows strong dependence on angle of incidence and contrasting polarization dependent behaviour. The duration of thermionic current shows strong correlation to the intrinsic electron-lattice thermalization time, in a fluence regime well below the damage threshold of gold. The observations and insights have important consequences in designing ultrafast thermionic emitters based on a metal based architecture. Ultrafast intense laser (typical peak intensity > 10 19 W cm -2 and central wavelength ≃ 800 nm) interacting with any optical quality material surface instantly ionizes it into a conducting dense plasma medium, in its rising edge. The peak of the femtosecond pulse then interacts with the reflective dynamic plasma surface and the associated nonequilibrium energy transport has wideranging applications in plasma optics The concept of two-temperature model (TTM) as proposed by Anisimov and coworkers In this work, first, we propose an improved 3D TTM model, where generalized non-linear heat equation and laser interactions are described in all three spatial directions (x, y, z ) to evaluate the spatial and temporal profiles of electron and lattice temperatures when a nanometric gold coated glass substrate is irradiated with a focused Gaussian femtosecond laser pulse. The framework allows us to investigate the effect of oblique incidence excitation, influence of laser polarization and the impact of hot spot due to the finite focal spot size. Then we self-consistently couple 3D TTM with suitable thermionic emission description, and simulate ultrafast laser induced energy deposition and resulting absorption within the gold film, and further elucidate essential space-charge-led modification in thermionic currents. While the electronic temperature, lattice temperature and electron-lattice thermalization time are calculated using the TTM based approach, the characteristics of thermionic emission of gold films under ultrashort laser excitation are investigated using a modified Richardson-Dushman (MRD) equation that includes the dynamic effect of space-charge. Our results reveal that the maximum polarization sensitivity of the thermionic current can be achieved at larger angle of incidence. The investigations unravel a clear dependence of the thermionic current and emission duration on the electron-lattice thermalization dynamics, a correlation not reported in the existing literature. Our analysis suggest ways to tune the duration of thermionic current, which is a significant feature for further applications of thermionic emission. In an experimental scenario, ultrashort laser pulse with an appropriate polarization is focused onto the relevant material surface at a predefined angle of incidence. The laser pulse temporal and spatial profiles, the focusing geometry as well as the material properties The irradiation configuration is depicted in Figure Subjected to ultrashort, moderately intense laser excitation (Peak laser intensity I 0 = 10 9 ∼ 10 14 W cm -2 and duration t p ∈ [100, 1000] f s), a metal surface exhibits different thermal responses for the electronic and the lattice sub-system: spanning over 3-4 order of magnitude in t p . Each of these processes operates on distinct time scales [Figure The temperatures T e (for electron sub-system), T l (for lattice sub-system), and T s (for glass substrate) are functions of three dimensional space at each time step, and their evolution is governed by set of coupled differential equations that account the coupling between the thermal sub-systems, thermal diffusion and the laser absorption. The evolution of T e , T l , and T s are described by the following coupled non-linear partial differential equations, respectively: G T e (x, y, z, t) -T l (x, y, z, t) G T e (x, y, z, t) -T l (x, y, z, t) -S ls (T l , T s ) , S ls (T l , T s ) + S es (T e , T s ) , where C e , C l , and C s denote specific heat capacities, and k e , k l , k s denote thermal conductivity for electron, lattice, and glass substrate sub-systems, respectively. Parameter G accounts for the coupling between the electron and lattice systems. S es (S ls ) is the energy exchange parameter at the metal-glass interface for the metal electrons(lattice). Q is the laser power density representing the laser energy input into the electron sub-system. We model the incident laser field within this source term as Gaussian, both in space and time (following , where I abs is the absorbed laser intensity on the sample at a point (x, y) and is given by Thickness of Au film is given by d = 500 nm, thickness of substrate d s = 500 nm, δ is the wavelength and temperature dependent optical penetration depth, given as δ = 1/α In order to solve the set of coupled non-linear partial differential equations given in Eq. ( where z = 0 is the irradiated surface, e is the charge of the electron, E f is the Fermi energy, φ is the work function (work function of gold is 5.17 eV In the standard Richardson-Dushman equation At higher temperatures, μ deviates from its value (E f ) at absolute zero. Thus, a suitable form of temperature dependent μ is essential. Furthermore, during thermionic emission, the emitted electrons form a thin disk of negative space charge cloud parallel to the metal surface where C = 4πm/h 3 , m is the mass of electron, h is the Planck constant, φ sc is the effective space-charge potential. T e in the above equation represents the surface electron temperature T e (x, y, z = 0, t). As mentioned previously, during the interaction, I abs in Eq. ( where n 1 is the refractive index of ambient medium, assumed to be unity (corresponding to vacuum), and n 2 is the target's refractive index (n 2 = n + ik = ε DCP (ω), where ε DCP is the complex dielectric constant for gold; n and k are the real and imaginary parts of the refractive index, respectively). The refractive index depends on the wavelength of the incident laser pulse. However, a material's index of refraction may also change during periods of extreme temperature variations that occur during the interaction. For metals the widely used formula for calculating permittivity is derived from Drude-Lorentz model. It has been shown that the accuracy of the dielectric function can significantly increase, specially for noble metals like gold and silver, by utilizing the Drude-critical points (DCP) model where the first and second terms on the right hand side of Eq. ( However, this model is not temperature dependent. Hence, we made modifications in the model by considering γ to be similar to the work by Block et al. Table Thus, given T e (x, y, t) and T l (x, y, t) at the plane of interface, as well as the parameters of the incident laser, we can evaluate reflectivity R s,p (x, y, t). The calculations can be generalized and extended to any arbitrary orientation of the laser polarization, by decomposing the surface laser electric fields into orthogonal S and P components and combining the reflection coefficients of each polarization condition individually. In order to control and optimize the thermal evolution and to understand its dependence on the laser polarization and angle of incidence, we undertake a series of numerical simulations. Figure To highlight the effect of laser polarization and to choose a laser incidence angle that is experimentally feasible, the rest of the results, unless stated otherwise, are calculated for θ = 45°. In Figure The polarization sensitivity of T max e along with its dependence on θ can be interpreted in terms of laser energy absorption into the gold-glass hetero-structure. The polarization dependent reflectivity from gold can be obtained from Eq. ( Hence, in all the numerical simulations, we have considered temperature dependent reflectivity of the material in order to calculate the thermal response of it under the influence of an ultrashort laser pulse. In Figure We calculated the spatial distribution of surface electron temperatures for both S and P-polarized cases at different time intervals just before and after the peak of the laser intensity (peak at t = 0 ps) (see Figure In order to investigate the evolution of the lateral size of the laser generated hot spot, we take lineouts along x and y axes on the surface electron temperature profile, at different time instants. Corresponding x and y lineouts through the center of the hot spots of the T e profiles from Figure We compute the thermionic emission current density due to the thermal evolution of the laser heated metal surface by using MRD (Eq. ( Thermionic emission ensues, soon after laser-induced electron heating of the metal surface. As the ultrashort thermionic emission starts taking place, a thin charged disk of escaped electrons parallel to the metal surface forms, introducing the space charge barrier. Consequently, suitable consideration of laser induced space-charge effects is required. The influence of the space charge field is in general complex If the laser pulse is short enough the emitted electrons form a thin disk with spatial width ∆x parallel to the gold surface. To investigate further, we consider a rectangular temperature pulse of duration τ with maximum electron temperature T e and focus our attention on the emitted elec-trons that are still above the surface. If τ is also the emission duration then the maximum width of the emitted electron disk is ∆x = (3k B T e /m) 1/2 τ (where (3k B T e /m) 1/2 is the root mean square speed) and the maximum lateral width can be estimated by max(2R 1 , 2R 2 ) = 2R 1 . Thus, we can define the temperature dependent ratio to set a criteria on whether the emitted hot electrons can be approximated by a thin disk or not, given as: Thus, for η(t) ≪ 1, the electrons emitted by thermionic process is well represented by a thin disk. Assuming τ in gold to be about ∼ 1 ps where R 1 and R 2 are the lengths of the semi-major and semi-minor axes of the elliptical electron charge disk and a is a constant that depends on the geometry of the escaping electron cloud. For an uniform thin disk a = 16/(3π) = 1.7 Following the ansatz in We extend the space charge model by incorporating spatial (and also temporal) dependence of φ sc , through the computed surface temperature profile. We calculate φ sc based on the emitted electrons coming out of the surface of the sample. Thus, for our formulation, φ sc = aN yield e 2 /R 1 (t), thereby providing the dynamic variation of the space charge. The total number of thermionic electrons emitted per unit area 'N sc ' (number/m 2 ) is calculated numerically, and given as where t i and t f are the numerical simulation initial and final times, respectively. N yield is given as, N yield = N sc δxδy, where δx and δy are the grid sizes along the x and y directions, respectively. Depending on the pulse profile, laser polarization, the angle of incidence and the focal spot size the thermal distribution on the target surface and hence the space charge accumulated over the metal surface will change. Thus, in our calculations of thermionic emission rate ' Ṅsc ', we incorporate this contribution in a time dependent manner. Instead of taking a rectangular T e temporal profile, we take its profile self-consistently. According to the Fermi-Dirac distribution, at absolute zero temperature, the low-lying single particle states become occupied up to the Fermi energy, following the Pauli exclusion principle, while any states beyond E f remain unoccupied. As the temperature rises, the total internal energy of the system increases, consequently the electrons undergo excitation, thereby populating higher states beyond E f . Therefore, an increased number of low-lying single particle states become unoccupied, causing a decrease in the energy of the lowest lying states. Consequently, the chemical potential μ decreases. Thus, temperature depen-dent chemical potential should be included in calculations of Ṅ1 . The Fermi-Dirac equilibrium distribution of electrons, is given by f N i = 1/(exp (ε i -μ)/k B T + 1), where μ is the chemical potential, T = T e is the temperature. f N i is the mean number of electrons in one-electron level i. The total number of electrons N is just the sum over all levels of the mean number in each level. Sommerfeld expansion can be applied to the integral forms to calculate the temperature dependence of the chemical potential . The dependence of μ on higher order terms in T (up to T 6 ), is evaluated from Eq. ( Under the same irradiation conditions as in Figure Figure spot on target behave. The temporal evolution of Ṅsc at the center of the laser-irradiated area is calculated using Eq. ( The dependence of S and P laser polarization on el thermalization duration 'τ el ' and thermionic emission duration 'τ em ' is calculated as a function of laser incidence angle and presented in Figure Figure is true in the case of S polarized pulse. Therefore, higher surface electron temperature is attained in the case of P polarized laser compared to S polarized case. Similar kind of trends seen in Figure Due to low T max e value in the case of S polarized laser compared with P polarization case (see Figure The duration between these two points represents the thermionic emission duration. Gold being a noble We examined the temporal evolution of electron and lattice temperatures with varying laser incidence angles. Our findings indicate that at near Brewster angle of incidence, laser polarization can be switched from S to P to control and increase the hot spot size, the surface electron temperature and the thermionic emission rate. Our analysis show that at all angles of incidence, the duration of thermionic current pulse shows a significant correlation with the intrinsic electron-lattice thermalization time of the sample. Since increase in electron phonon coupling strength leads to a reduction in electron-lattice thermalization time, our results indicate that by proper choice of metal coating, it would be possible to control the pulse duration of the thermionic current, while maintaining the peak brightness. In view of the recent experimental capabilities to resolve and detect electron emissions at ultrafast time scale We also note that, thermophotovoltaic power generation has recently achieved significant gains in efficiency Mousumi Upadhyay Kahaly: Writing -original draft, Supervision, Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Resources. Saibabu Madas: Writing -original draft, Software, Validation, Visualization, Formal analysis, Investigation. Boris Mesits: Software, Writingreview and editing, Validation, Investigation. Subhendu Kahaly: Supervision, Conceptualization, Methodology, Project administration, Writing -review and editing, Visualization, Funding acquisition.