As one of the most important topics studied in creep fracture mechanics, mechanics fields at three-dimensional (3D) sharp V-notches and crack tip have drawn tremendous attentions. With many years efforts on constraint theory developed in creeping solids, there still seems dense fog on how in-plane and out-of-plane constraint effects are interacted for 3D sharp V-notch and crack in creeping solids. To shed lights on this topic, a 3D higher-order termed solution for sharp V-notches in creeping materials subjected to mode I loading is established by introducing the out-of-plane factor z T , which is the out-of-plane stress divided by the sum of in-plane normal stress. The solution can naturally be degenerated to a 3D crack. Based on the 3D higher-order term solution, a new fracture parameter T A is proposed and combined with z T to characterize 3D constraint effect. It is found that the stress exponents and angular distribution of higher-order term for 3D notches and cracks are highly related to z T . The proposed higher order termed solutions show better agreement with the FEA results than the 3D leading-term and 2D two-term solutions, especially for smaller notch angles and ligament width. Moreover, the presented 3D constraint theory shows that effects of z T and T 2 A are highly interlinked rather than simply separated. It implies that the 3D constraint level may be significantly influenced by z T . The 3D mathematical solutions discussed in this paper could enhance the understanding of the 3D effect and has the potential to explain the 3D constraint effect on the notches and cracks under creep conditions. Three-dimensional (3D) fracture-related issues are possibly the most challenging and charming topic in fracture mechanics. Understanding, accurate and reasonable descriptions of the 3D crack or notch tip fields are preliminary for further engineering applications of those built-up fracture mechanics frameworks. Due to higher requirements on global trends of carbon neutrality, energy saving, and environment protection, large amounts of mechanical components, electronic devices, and civil nuclear infrastructures will be operated under higher temperatures to promote energy conversion and utilization. For those components serviced at elevated temperatures under harsh and extreme conditions, viscoplastic damage or creep damage and cracking need to be evaluated efficiently and accurately in structural integrity assessment On 3D crack fronts, researchers have been working on this for a long time, and it is still in process. Earlier studies always focused on the calculation and distribution of stress intensity factor (SIF) and energy release rate of 3D cracks through numerical computations, e.g., boundary-integral method For example, there is a pronounced loss of HRR dominance along the crack front for 3D elastoplastic plates On 3D crack in elastic-plastic and creeping solids, there are some relevant works studying the asymptotic solutions of tip fields. Guo and his co-authors have done a series of innovative works in the tip fields of 3D crack under out-of-plane constraint effects since the 1990s A is combined with z T to characterize both in-plane and out-of-plane constraint effects in plastic Moreover, different constraint parameters in describing 3D creep crack front were discussed by From the perspective of fracture mechanics bearing creep and elastoplastic conditions, the HRR field Higher-order term solutions shall be developed to characterize the 3D crack and notch apexes with finite sizes Based on proposed to characterize the tip field. Afterward, the two-parameter solutions considering higher-order terms and the in-plane constraint effect for cracks under creep conditions were developed, such as * 2 CA -and * CQsolutions For notches, In-plane and out-of-plane constraint effects were always considered widely to describe the crack or notch front of 3D crack and notch fronts considering constraint effects. On the one hand, for the in-plane effect, a load-independent parameter * R was proposed to quantify in-plane constraint under creep conditions Especially, the higher order term solutions of 3D creep crack and sharp V-notch were obtained analytically. With the obtained 3D higher-order term solutions, i.e., the KA -solution, 3D constraint effect was presented. The presented 3D constraint theory can quantify all constraint effects reasonably, as well as deepen the understanding of constraint effects in 3D fracture issues. Most importantly, the solution will give a very clear explanation on the relation between in-plane constraint and outof-plane constraints from the perspective of asymptotic analysis. The correlation between the in-plane and out-of-plane effects was also revealed and discussed systematically through this investigation. To investigate the eigenvalue of the 3D front tip fields in creeping solids, the following formulation analysis is based on rigorously higher order asymptotic analysis. As the 3D creep crack can be degenerated from the 3D sharp V-notch tip fields only by setting notch angle to be zero, hence the following analysis is naturally valid and applicable for 3D creep crack front conditions. For the convenience of illustrating, the fact that the following solutions are also applicable for the 3D creep crack tip fields will not be emphasized again in the following analysis. A 3D sharp V-notch in creeping materials under mode I loading is considered as shown in Fig. To obtain the tip fields of 3D sharp V-notches, the 3D governing equations for power-law creeping materials are needed. The constitutive equation is written as ’üż are strain rate, deviatoric stress, hydrostatic stress rate, Mises equivalent stress, and Kronecker delta, respectively. The following theoretical analysis takes stress function as a fundamental variable. The relation between stress components and stress function is given as The Maxwell stress function ( 1 The relation between strain and displacement is written as The strain components should obey the strain compatibility equation: , where ijk e is the Eddington tensor, i.e., ( )( )( ) 2. ijk e i j j k k i = --- Before stress exponent characteristics analysis, here we should know that there are some basic assumptions for the asymptotic solution. One important assumption is the small strain deformation assumption. The second assumption is the creep predominant assumption. It represents that the creep strain is enclosed around the entire notch or crack tip fields, which also indicates that the creep strain is greater than that of elastic strain. Another important assumption is that all the tip field components, such as stress components and strain components, shall be expressed in a series of expansion form. With those assumptions, the stress components of a 3D sharp V-notch, which considers the out-of-plane effect, are given as the following form without loss of generality: It has been widely recognized and validated that the out-of-plane effect plays an essential role in 3D fracture problems theoretically For sharp V-notch under creep conditions, it is necessary to clarify the following hypotheses about the out-of-plane factor () Specifically, the out-of-plane factor is independent of r and ’ü▒ for a perfect sharp V- notch in a cylindrical coordinate system when r approaches 0. It is reasonable to consider ( ) Similar to the stress components in Eq. ( The stress exponents of the stress components can also be concluded as follows: Substituting Eq. ( The detailed derivations of Eq. ( However, the out-of-plane shear components are of higher order which can be ignored in the asymptotic analysis. According to Eq. ( Considering Eq. ( The asymptotic method is a mathematical method for series of expansion. It has successfully applied in solving the leading term of the tip field in 2D and 3D cases, such as the HRR solution The following analysis in this paper is conducted in a cylindrical coordinate which is shown in Fig. ’üŻ is as follows: is the stress exponents depending on * T , s ’üó is assumed to obey: Herein, the stress exponents of the higher order term s ’üó does not require that the higher order stress exponent should be also singular form although the stress exponent of the first order term is singular (referred to The stress components are written as follows: ( ) Combining Eq. ( It follows from Eq. ( Hence, it is obtained that As discussed in Section 2.2, after ignoring xz ’ü│ and yz ’ü│ , the deviatoric stress components are written as: According to Eq. ( In the following analysis, only the leading and the second-order terms are considered, as the combination of the leading and the second-order terms are sufficient to characterize the tip fields discussed below. Hence, 1 n e ’ü│ -can be rewritten as: Substituting Eq. ( The compatibility relation equation in a cylindrical coordinate system is written as in which ( ) ( ) , r r = ’éČ ’éČ . Substituting Eq. ( , , , ; , 0 where In Eq. ( It follows from Eq. ( Hence, this problem is solvable as a fourth-order ordinary differential equation To obtain the leading term of the asymptotic solution, the first part in Eq. ( The equation is a fourth-order ODE with respect to , and the boundary condition is given by Eq. ( Hence, the boundary conditions can be expressed as follows: An initial guess value x is set in Eq. ( The solving process for the second-order term is divided into two steps according to the value of 2 s . According to Eq. ( ŌĆó Case I: , the governing equation for the second-order term is written as: The boundary conditions are the same as Eq. ( Moreover, the solving strategy is also consistent. ŌĆó Case II: On the condition of ( ) , the governing equation turns into the following form: To make the solution of angular distribution function independent of 2 A , it is reasonable to set . Hence, Eq. ( The boundary conditions of Eq. ( However, the difference is that 2 s is a known quantity while k is unknown in Eq. ( . Similarly, a shooting method and iterative strategy are employed in the solving process. The commercial mathematic solver MATLAB is employed in the solving process. A standard shooting numerical procedure and the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method are used. With appropriate initial guess variables, the solving process can be obtained within several seconds. Through solving the governing equations, the characteristic base quantities of the first two terms (i.e., 1 s , 2 s , ( ) ( ) The characteristic parameters of tip fields for 3D sharp V-notch subjected to mode I creeping loading are given through asymptotic analysis. In this section, a novel tip field considering 3D constraint effects is established, and FEA analysis is executed for verification. The first two order terms of tip fields are considered. Hence, the stress expansion is written as: While in Eq. ( A novel tip field solution is defined in Eq. ( In other words, the A term is also influenced by z T , the in-plane and out-of-plane effects on constraint level are highly interlinked and interacted. The specific explanation and discussion are shown below. The effect of outof-plane effect on the leading term of notch tip fields has been reported in our previous study The problem of how to degenerate the 3D second-order term to the-plane strain solution needs to be discussed separately. For Case I in which ( ) As shown in Fig. and show good accuracy. In addition to the second-order stress exponents, the stress angular distribution functions are also obtained. The second-order angular distribution functions with various z T for 2 30 ’üĪ =’é░ and 2 120 ’üĪ =’é░ are presented in Figs. 5~6, respectively. The colors of the projection in plane have the same meaning as those already shown in Fig. ) The phenomenon is also manifested in the leading term of the tip fields In general, the 3D second-order stress exponents and angular distribution functions are closely related to the out-of-plane factor z T . Hence, for a 3D sharp Vnotch, it is necessary to consider z T in the analysis of higher-order terms. z T characterizes the level of out-of-plane effect. The 3D stress exponents s ’üó and angular distribution function A 3D notched thick plate is adopted as the finite element model. , respectively. According to Fig. In addition, the 3D leading term considering the out-of-plane effect shows advantages in the distance from the tip, especially in the tendency of stress drop. The phenomenon indicates that the out-of-plane effect has a more apparent influence than the in-plane constraint in 3D sharp V-notch cases, especially in the plane near the free surface ). However, the 3D two-term solution ( TT N2 KA -solution) considering 3D constraint effect has significant progress in describing the stress distribution of 3D sharp V-notch compared with all the previous theoretical solutions, especially when the distance from the notch tip is far. It is found that the plane-stress (PS) solution cannot show good agreement with FEA results for thick specimens. Thus, the second-order term prediction based on plane-stress theory for thick specimen is not given in Fig. On the other hand, the leading-term and the two-term solutions based on planestress conditions agree well with the FEA results when the radial distance gets large. And the plane-stress two-term solution has a slight advantage over the leading-term solution in accuracy with the FEA results when 0.05 ra’ĆŠ (see Fig. KAsolution on the tip fields for thin plates is less pronounced than that for thick specimens, as shown in Fig. Undeniably, the 3D leading-term and two-term solutions considering the out-ofplane effect have an obvious advantage for 3D sharp V-notch in thin plates compared with the 2D plane solutions. The reason is that the 3D solution can quantify both the plane-strain state and the plane-stress state, as well as the transition from plane-strain to plane-stress state in the thin specimen near the notch front. The second-order term solved based on the 3D constraint theory (i.e., T 2 A -term) is much more reasonable and practical than the second-order term based on plane-strain condition. ’üĪ =’é░ and 5 n = . In addition, the 3D solutions considering the out-of-plane effect show better agreement with FEA results than the 2D solutions. Similar to those of the notches with opening angle 30’é░ , the two-term solutions have better agreement with FEA results, especially the 3D two-term solution. However, there is only a slight advantage over the 3D leading-term solution. Hence, the 3D constraint effect has less influence on the tip fields for notches with large opening angles. Hence, the 3D leading-term solution is sufficient to describe the stress field for notches with large notch opening angles. Adding of the second-order term does not significantly improve the prediction accuracy of the 3D notch tip stress fields for large notch specimens regardless of thick or thin plates. In order to have a better understanding of the 3D constraint effect, the FEA results and theoretical solutions of the angular distribution of the tip fields are given. Fig. Generally, the 3D two-term solution, i.e., TT N2 KA -solution deduced from the 3D constraint theory considering the out-of-plane effect has good accuracy in describing the tip fields of the 3D sharp V-notch. The TT KA -solution has the advantages of higher-order solutions considering the constraint effect and 3D solutions considering the out-of-plane effect. Only the TT KA -solution based on the 3D constraint effect gives a reasonable and accurate description of the tip fields of 3D sharp V-notches. The distributions of stress exponents along the thickness at the notch front are obtained based on the TT N2 KA -solution. Fig. z T and stress exponents of 3D notches in thin plates change less rapidly than those in thick plates near the free surface. Similarly, the stress state turns into the plane-stress condition approaching the free surface. As discussed in Section 3.1, the sharp V-notch is equivalent to an ideal crack when ’üĪ is 0┬░. And the stress exponents for crack ( 0 ’üĪ =’é░ ) can also be obtained from the governing equation. The second-order stress exponents considering the out-of-plane effect for cracks are already shown in Fig. in which the stress, strain and displacement components are related to the out-of-plane effect. ’üć is a vanishingly small contour surrounding the crack tip. i n is the outer normal unit vector of ’üć . ,1 i u represents the displacement gradient rate. Hence, the relation between the ( ) in which L is the characteristic length, and ( ) T n is an integration constant as a function of creep exponents n and out-of-plane factor z T . detailed analysis about ( ) T n has been presented by Xiang and Guo (2013). Accordingly, a higher-order solution for 3D cracks, i.e., when the radial distance from the notch tip is small. In other words, the plane-strain solutions can describe the stress fields for the 3D crack near the notch tip as the specimen is relatively thick. The relative error gets pronounced with increasing radial distance without considering the out-of-plane effect for 3D cases. And the performance of the 3D leading-term solution is not satisfactory for deep cracks ( 1 ab= in this example, see Fig. The 2D three-term solution is a significant solution in quantifying the tip fields 2D cases, especially for plane-strain condition As shown in Fig. As presented in Section 3, the proposed It means that the out-of-plane effect on the leading term and the higher-order term are taken into consideration. Hence, the 3D constraint effect makes the out-of-plane effect and in-plane constraint effect for the 3D fracture problem form an undivided and unified theory. In other words, the proposed TT KA -solution provides a new perspective of constraints in 3D fracture problems. In previous literature, the constraint of 3D cracks and notches are divided into out-of-plane constraint and in-plane constraint A is a parameter representing the constraint proposed for the 2D plane problems. Therefore, 2 A is taken as an appropriate parameter to represent in-plane constraint in 3D fracture spontaneously For 3D notches and cracks, the out-of-plane effect is of great importance for the constraint effect as presented in Section 3. The out-of-plane factor z T plays a significant role in both the leading term The two parts determine the level and effect of the entire constraint (see Fig. Hence, the 3D constraint effect is very necessarily needed as it is hard to distinguish the in-plane and out-of-plane part. It fully considers the influence of the out-of-plane effect on higher-order terms. Although this paper demonstrates the advantage of the two-term solution under some conditions, the leading-term is still the most important term in the stress expansion. For large notch angle specimens, the advantage of higher order term solutions is not remarkable. However, combined leading and second terms will generally enlarge the fracture parameter dominant region and better quantify fracture resistance for shallow to deep cracks (small notch angle specimens) in engineering structures. ’üĪ =’é░ and 2 120 ’üĪ =’é░ are analyzed. If 2D plane 2 A -based theory is directly applied without considering the out-of-plane effect, corresponding 2 A can be obtained for 3D finite element analysis results. The 2 A calculated based on the plane-stress hypothesis can be considered invalidly for thick specimens. The 2 A calculated based on the plane-strain hypothesis is also invalid for notches with small opening angles whose constraint effect may be significant. However, as shown in Fig. A tend to be stable on the specific slice parallel to the mid- plane of a specific specimen. Moreover, T A is an appropriate parameter to characterize constraint effect as it keeps constant on the mid-plane of a specific specimen. Furthermore, the results obtained based on the 3D constraint effect show a different characteristic from the 2D plane cases. As discussed in Section 2, the condition in which the second-order term is not affected by the elastic part of the constitutive equation is defined as Case I. And the condition in which the second-order term is affected by the elastic part of the constitutive equation is defined as Case II. It is found that the distribution of Case I and Case II is significantly affected by the out-of-plane factor z T . Moreover, Case I and Case II can co-exist in one 3D notch or crack specimen. This phenomenon is distinguished from the 2D plane cases. Case I and Case II cannot co-exist in 2D plane notches or cracks. Case II only appears for specific ranges of material properties As T A is a constant on the mid-plane of a specific specimen, it is an appropriate parameter to characterize constraint effect which is dependent on the geometry of different specimens. According to the 3D constraint effect, the second-order term whose amplitude is characterized by T A is sensitive to the A for 3D sharp V-notches with different ligament widths is shown in Fig. A is related to the width of the ligament and the out-of-plane factor for a given notch opening angle ( 2 30 ’üĪ =’é░ in Fig. As shown in Fig. For 3D specimens with specific opening angle and ba, the thicker the specimen is, the higher the 3D constraint effect will be. This can be concluded from the comparison of Fig. This paper proposes a novel solution of mode I tip fields for 3D sharp V-notch in power-law creeping solids closing to the truth theoretically by introducing z T into the higher-order governing equations, which can be also degenerated to crack cases. The 3D constraint effect for 3D fracture issues is proposed based on the solution. Moreover, the characteristics of 3D constraint are also discussed. According to the theoretical analysis and numerical verification, the conclusions are drawn as follows: 1) The higher-order terms of the tip fields considering the out-of-plane effect for 3D sharp V-notches and cracks in power-law creeping materials are present. The stress exponents and angular distribution functions of the second-order term for 3D sharp V-notches and cracks are given. The second-order stress exponents and angular distribution functions are found to be sensitive to the out-of-plane factor z T . Moreover, different from 2D plane conditions, the second-order term can be related to the elastic part of the constitutive equations with decreasing z T and increasing notch angle 2’üĪ for specific material properties. 2) A higher-order termed tip field solution of 3D sharp V-notch with 3D constraint effect, i.e., 3) The 3D constraint effect for notches and cracks is analyzed through combining z T and T A . Based on the 3D higher-order solution, it is verified that the in-plane and out-of-plane parts of constraint effect is highly interlinked. A theoretical framework for analyzing the 3D fracture issues with It should be noted that the inequality about the exponent of stress function has been proven by In other words, only if 12 1 ss +’ĆŠ , the first-order of the out-of-plane shear stress can be ignored in the second-order analysis. The proof process is as follows. For second-order part of the in-plane stress components, it has been widely accepted that 21 (2 ) s n s ’éŻ-(A.17) for both notches according to the previous literature For most of the creep solids, 1 n ’ĆŠ , hence, Combining Eq. (A.17) and Eq. (A.20), the conclusion is drawn as below: 21 1 ss ’Ć╝+ (A.21) ab= are adopted to present the constraint effect. 