The performance of an organic-semiconductor device is critically determined by the geometric alignment, orientation, and ordering of the organic molecules. While an organic multilayer eventually adopts the crystal structure of the organic material, the alignment and configuration at the interface with the substrate/electrode material is essential for charge injection into the organic layer. This work focuses on the prototypical organic semiconductor para-sexiphenyl (6P) adsorbed on In2O3(111), the thermodynamically most stable surface of the material that the most common transparent conducting oxide, indium tin oxide (ITO) is based on. The onset of nucleation and formation of the first monolayer are followed with atomically-resolved scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and non-contact atomic force microscopy (nc-AFM). Annealing to 200°C provides sufficient thermal energy for the molecules to orient themselves along the high-symmetry directions of the surface, leading to a single adsorption site. The AFM data suggests a twisted adsorption geometry. With increasing coverage, the 6P molecules first form a loose network with poor longrange order. Eventually the molecules re-orient and form an ordered monolayer. This first monolayer has a densely packed, well-ordered (2×1) structure with one 6P per In2O3(111) substrate unit cell, i.e., a molecular density of 5.64 × 10 13 cm -2 . Transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) such as ZnO, CdO, SnO2, Ga2O3, and In2O3 uniquely combine transparency in the visible range of light with electric conductivity as wide-band-gap semiconductors (fundamental band gap > 2 eV). The molecules of the first layer 6P on In2O3(111) are lying flat on the surface, although their adsorption and appearance in STM differs significantly from what has been observed on other substrates. While the flat-lying 6P molecule is usually imaged as a stiff, rod-like object (occasionally with internal zigzag-like protrusions due to twisting of the phenyl rings The STM experiments were carried out in a two-chamber UHV system equipped with an Omicron LT-STM cooled with liquid nitrogen and operated at ~80 K. Electrochemically etched W tips were initially prepared by sputtering with Ar followed by scanning on Au(110). Voltage pulses were applied until clear atomic resolution and sharp step edges were obtained as well as a metallic signature in the scanning tunneling spectroscopy signal. The tip was treated similarly on In2O3(111) as well and was frequently refreshed on gold. Additional experiments were conducted in a commercial Omicron qPlus LT-STM at 5 K, using tuning-fork sensors 20 with a separate wire for the tunneling current 21 (k = 3,750 N/m, fR = 47,500 Hz, Q ≈ 10,000) and a differential preamplifier. During the AFM measurements, a small positive bias voltage was applied, and the mean tunneling current <IT> was simultaneously recorded. On In2O3(111), 0.4-5 mV was applied for the metallic tips, and 50-100 mV was used for CO tips. Single crystals of indium oxide, Sexiphenyl was deposited via thermal sublimation from powder (Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd.) using a water-cooled four-pocket evaporator (Omnivac) as well as a home-built single evaporator; in both cases, the crucible was heated indirectly by a filament. The deposition rate was monitored with a quartz crystal micro balance (QCM) positioned directly in front of the sample, and the temperature of the evaporator (~210/230 °C measured at the bottom/top of the crucible of the commercial/home-built evaporator) was set to achieve a deposition rate of ~1-2 Å/min (density of 6P in the β-phase: 1.3 g cm -3 ). During deposition, the sample was kept at room temperature and was afterwards annealed at 200 °C for 3 min. This final annealing was used because deposition of 6P at RT results in disordered and randomly oriented molecules. Possibly water co-evaporation contributes to the disordered character of the layer (see Supporting Information). The post annealing allows the molecules of the first layer to diffuse, reorient, and align themselves on the surface; additionally, hydroxyl groups (originating from dissociated water from the residual gas and the evaporator) desorb from the surface. Depositing molecules directly at a substrate temperature of 200°C leads to the same results as deposition at RT followed by post-annealing. At this temperature, molecules of successive layers already desorb; this allows for the easy preparation of the densely packed layer by flashing off the multilayer. Higher coverages were thus annealed at 120 °C only. The growth of the first layer of sexiphenyl on In2O3(111) can be divided into two regimes in terms of the orientation and assembly of the molecules. At low, sub-monolayer coverages, as shown in Figures In addition to the STM measurements, the single molecules were investigated with nc-AFM. Figure To obtain further information about the other phenyl rings of the molecule and the exact adsorption site on the In2O3(111) surface, CO was co-dosed into the STM/AFM at 5 K and picked up by the tip, which allowed us to image the "chemical structure/backbone" of the molecules in constant-height measurements. The result is depicted in Figure The "dilute layer" and the (2×1) monolayer are the only stable structures after annealing at ~200 °C. Depositing small amounts of additional 6P at room temperature on top of the (2×1) layer leads to a mostly disordered phase with some ordered patches but with an overall unstable surface during STM imaging. An ordered phase can be produced by gentle annealing at ~120 °C. In STM large protrusions forming a (1×1) pattern are observed, see Figure In the present work, we have used single crystals of pure In2O3 as a model system to investigate the early stages of 6P growth on the In2O3(111) surface. The growth process is followed using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and non-contact atomic force microcopy (nc-AFM) at cryogenic temperatures. The use of nc-AFM, operated at constant height with a CO-functionalized tip is an invaluable tool in discerning the chemical structure of organic molecules, not only on insulating substrates, but more recently also on metals and oxides. The appearance of the individual molecule in constant-current STM resembles an asymmetric "W", i.e., there is a significant zigzag in the shape of the molecule. This differs from the way 6P usually appears in STM, Sexiphenyl is a structurally flexible molecule due to the single C-C bond linking the phenyl rings. This allows the molecule to bend out of plane, e.g. across step edges, while in-plane bending (without twisting) is limited by the sp2-hybridisation of the C-C bond and steric hindrance of the hydrogen atoms. However, 6P can twist, i.e., individual phenyl rings can be rotated out of plane, usually to increase the π-π overlap between neighboring molecules, which is observed in the 6P crystal structure (αphase), and, supported on surfaces, both in multilayers Moreover, the error in positioning is about 0.1 nm. Similar to the STM images, the appearance of 6P in constant-height AFM differs from what has been seen previously for planar and flat, rod-like conjugated molecules on metals and insulating surfaces, even if the registry of the phenyl rings with the substrate changes along the molecule. 6P adsorbs in a position where it touches two In(6c) triangles (blue in Figure Although the phenyl rings "4" and "1" are in a similar configuration the interaction with the CO functionalized tip is quite different (Figure Increasing the sexiphenyl coverage results in a significant re-orientation of the molecules from the "dilute layer" into a (2×1) structure, once a critical coverage is reached. The molecules change from their preferred azimuthally oriented adsorption site of the single molecule into positions that are rotated +/-30° off of these directions (i.e., from <1-10> to <-211>), and they adopt a densely packed structure. In STM this 6P layer shows a prominent dark-and-bright stripe pattern, where the individual molecules are difficult to discern with a metallic tip (Figures The density of the "dilute layer" would be 0.5 6P molecules per substrate unit cell, i.e., 0.5 ML, if a single domain were to ideally cover the whole surface. Experimentally, a higher coverage is observed due to the presence of three orientations that allow the molecules to share their substrate unit cells. The transition from the "dilute layer" into the (2×1) structure happens at coverages very close to 1 ML, compare Figures In summary, we have reported on the adsorption of single molecules and the formation of the first layer of sexiphenyl on In2O3(111), as investigated with STM. For the single molecules, we find an unusual zigzag like appearance by STM and nc-AFM, suggesting a strong interaction with In(5c) atoms of the substrate, possibly distorting the molecule. The first monolayer features a (2×1) structure of flat-lying molecules with a density of one 6P molecule per substrate unit cell and molecules that are not uniaxially aligned. Supporting Information. Deposition of 6P at room temperature; 6P on Cu(100) imaged with a CO tip; Appearance of the (2×1) structure in STM. 