Considerable experimental skills have been accumulated in the preparation of field-cooled (FC) magnetic materials. This stimulates the search for FC magnetic materials that are superconductors. The article overviews the recent proposed mechanism of superconductivity in field-cooled magnetic materials. It is based on previously published results for magnon-induced superconductivity in field-cooled spin-1/2 antiferromagnets [P RB96, 214409] ( The study of the mechanisms of superconductivity and the methods to synthesize superconductors is an exciting challenge in solid state physics. Since the discovery of superconductivity (1911), these two activities have been a major driver for the successful dissemination of superconductivity ideas in other fields of physic and for application in technology. One way to prepare superconducting state is to subject a suitable material to strong hydrostatic pressure. The coexistence of ferromagnetism and superconductivity in U Ge 2 under pressure was reported in the paper The theoretical predictions are important, since they allow to focus experimental research on specific chemical compositions and also to suggest appropriate conditions for the synthesis. In his theoretical studies Ashcroft predicted that metalized hydrogen Another way to fabricate unconventional superconductor is by chemical manipulation. The most famous example is copper-oxide superconductor. The parent compound La 2 CuO 4 is an antiferromagnetic Mott insulator with Néel temperature T N = 300K. The parent compound can be doped by substituting some of the trivalent La by divalent Sr. The result is that x holes are added to the Cu -O plane in La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , which is called hole doping. The hole-doping suppresses the antiferromagnetic order and at x = 0.03 -0.05 hole concentration the system undergoes quantum antiferromagnetic-paramagnetic transition. After suppression of the antiferromagnetism, superconductivity appears, ranging from x = 0.06 -0.25 In the present Overview we discuss theoretically the emergence of superconductivity in field cooled magnetic materials. As examples we consider spin s = 1/2 antiferromagnetic insulator and chromium spinel F eCr 2 S 4 . We also discuss some perspective antiferromagnetic compounds. The material is field cooled (FC) if, during the preparation, an external magnetic field as high as 300Oe is applied upon cooling. If the applied field is below 1Oe it is zero field cooled (ZFC). The magnetization-temperature and magnetic susceptibility curves for (ZFC) and (FC) spinel show a remarkable difference below Néel T N temperature The spinel M nV 2 O 4 is a two-sublattices ferrimagnet, with site A occupied by the M n 2+ ion, which is in the 3d 5 high-spin configuration with quenched orbital angular momentum, that can be regarded as a simple s = 5/2 spin. The B site is occupied by the V 3+ ion, which takes the 3d 2 high-spin configuration in the triply degenerate t 2g orbital, and has orbital degrees of freedom. The measurements show that the set in of the magnetic order is at Neel temperature T N = 56.5K 36 , and that the magnetization has a maximum near T * = 53.5K. Below this temperature the magnetization sharply decreases and goes to zero when temperature approaches zero. The ferrimagnetic phase of vanadium spinel is divided into two phases: high temperature (T * , T N ), where the magnetization-temperature curves of (ZFC) and (FC) materials coincide, and low temperature 0 < T < T * , where there is a pronounced difference between the two curves. The two phases are basic characteristic of field cooled magnetic materials. As a second example we consider chromium spinel F eCr 2 S 4 . The magnetization-temperature curves are depicted in Fig. The magnetic orders of vanadium and manganese electrons are antiparallel. Magnetic field applied, during preparation of the material, along the M n magnetic moment, remains M n electrons localized with saturated magnetic order, while V electrons are delocalized. Increasing the applied magnetic field the magnetization of M n electrons remains unchanged, as long as the compensation of the Zeeman splitting of V electrons increases and respectively the magnetic moment of V electrons decreases. As a result increasing the applied, during the preparation, magnetic field the total magnetization of the field cooled vanadium spinel increases below T * temperature (see Fig. We discuss a novel mechanism for insulator-metal transition and superconductivity in field-cooled spin-1/2 antiferromagnets on bcc lattice. Applying magnetic field on sublattice A and B electrons along the sublattice B magnetization, during preparation of the material, we change the magnetic and transport properties of the material. Sublattice B electrons are localized, while sublattice A ones are delocalized. This remains true when applied field is switched off. Theoretically a "frozen" magnetic field should be included in the A fermion dispersion, which leads effectively to decreasing of Zeeman splitting. The effective model is a spin-fermion model with Zeeman splitting of itinerant electrons compensated by the applied field. The Hamiltonian of the system is where t > 0 is the hopping parameter, S A i is the spin of the itinerant electrons at the sublattice A site with components and (τ x , τ y , τ z ) are the Pauli matrices, S B i is the spin of the localized electrons at the sublattice B site, μ is the chemical potential, n iσ = c + iσ c iσ and n i = n i↑ + n i↓ . The sums are over all sites of a body centered cubic lattice, ⟨i, j⟩ denotes the sum over the nearest neighbors, while ≪ ij ≫ A and ≪ ij ≫ B are sums over all sites of sublattice A and B respectively. The Heisenberg term describes ferromagnetic Heisenberg exchange between sublattice B (J B > 0) electrons, while the term J > 0 is the antiferromagnetic exchange constant between localized and itinerant electrons. The term with the constant U > 0 is the Coulomb repulsion. The "frozen" magnetic field H accounts for the effect of the applied, during the preparation, magnetic field on itinerant electrons. We represent the Fermi operators, the spin of the itinerant electrons and the density operators of sublattice A electrons in terms of the Schwinger-bosons (φ i,σ , φ + i,σ ) and slave fermions ( The Bose fields are doublets (σ = 1, 2) without charge, while fermions are spinless with charges 1 (d i ) and -1 (h i ). In terms of the new fields one obtains the Hamiltonian of free fermions (h with dispersions The ground state of the system with Hamiltonian Eq.( and the zero temperature spontaneous dimensionless magnetization, of the sublattice A electron At half-filling To solve this equation, for all values of the parameters U , t and H, one sets the chemical potential μ = U/2. Utilizing this representation of μ we calculate the dispersion of "d" and "h" fermions (4) as a function of the applied magnetic field. It is convenient to introduce the critical magnetic field Fermions dispersion can then be rewritten in the form When the applied magnetic field is below the critical one H < H cr1 the Fermion dispersions are positive (ε d k > 0, ε h k > 0) for all values of the wave vector k. The minimum of the d-fermion dispersion is in the center of the Brillouin zone of a cubic lattice B r k = (0, 0, 0) and The minimum of the h-fermion dispersion is in the vertices of the Brillouin zone k * = (±π, ±π, ±π) and ε h k * = (H cr1 -H)/2. This means that Fermions excitations are with gap which is our definition for insulating state. If one applies magnetic field below the critical one the prepared material is insulator. When the applied field is above the critical one H > H cr1 , the solutions of the equations define the Fermi surfaces of "d" and "h" quasiparticles. The resultant material is metal. The system possesses a novel insulator-metal transition when magnetic field is applied and the critical value is H cr1 (8). The equation (9) shows that when the magnetic field is zero the system is insulator if Coulomb repulsion is strong. When a hydrostatic pressure is applied the hopping parameters t increases, and for 24t > U + 4J the system is metal. The point is that under a hydrostatic pressure all electrons in the material delocalize, while when a magnetic field is applied the electrons in the system are geometrically separated and sublattice A electrons are delocalized, but sublattice B ones are localized. This is important novelty. There is a second critical value When H = H cr2 the material is metal (H cr2 > H cr1 ) and Zeeman splitting of sublattice A electrons is zero. The Fermion dispersions ε d k and ε h k (9) adopt the form With dispersions (12) spontaneous magnetization m (6) of sublattice A electrons is zero and they do not contribute the magnetization of the system. At this critical point the system is in partial order state. Only sublattice B electrons are magnetically ordered, while sublattice A electrons are magnetically disordered. When Zeeman splitting is zero we use the approximate representation for the fermi operators at quantum partialorder point (QPOP) Then we can write the Hamiltonian of the system at QPOP in terms of the fermion operators c + iσ , c iσ and Holstein-Primakoff (HP) bose operators a + j , a j used to represent the spin operators of sublattice B localized electrons S B j (a + j , a j ). The Hamiltonian is a sum of three terms We introduce two sublattices. The Hamiltonian of the Magnon-Fermion Effective Theory, in momentum space, reads with fermi ε A k and bose ε B k dispersions where the bose dispersion is calculated in Hartree-Fock approximation and u is HF parameter that renormalizes the sublattice B exchange constant J B . The two equivalent sublattices A and B of the body center cubic lattice are simple cubic lattices. Therefor the wave vectors p, q, k run over the first Brillouin zone of a cubic lattice B r . Let us average in the subspace of Bosons (a + , a)-to integrate the Bosons in the path integral approach. In static approximation one obtains an effective fermion theory with Hamiltonian and potential Following standard procedure one obtains the effective Hamiltonian in the Hartree-Fock approximation with gap function The Hamiltonian can be written in a diagonal form by means of Bogoliubov excitations α + , α, β + , β with dispersions In terms of the new excitations the gap equation reads where T is the temperature. Having in mind that sublattices are simple cubic lattices and following the classifications for spin-triplet gap functions ∆ -k = -∆ k is a solution of the gap equation ( It is important to underline that the applied, during preparation of the material, magnetic field separates spatially electrons. Sublattice A ones are delocalized and participate in the formation of Cooper pairs, while B ones are localized and form the magnetic moment of the system. Thus the system possesses coexistence of p-type superconductivity and magnetism. At zero temperature the magnetic moment of sublattice B electrons is maximal. This is in contrast with known systems that possess coexistence of superconductivity and magnetism near quantum critical point. The above result shows that a superconductor can be prepared from any antiferromagnet . In the present section we investigate two sublattice F eCr 2 S 4 spinel. The sublattice A sites are occupied by F 2+ (s=2) iron ions, and sublattice B sites are occupied by Cr 3+ (s=3/2) chromium ions. The F e 2+ and Cr 3+ ions are located at the center of tetrahedral and octahedral S 2-cages, respectively, and the three Cr 3+ electrons occupy the lower energy t 2g bands. The shape of magnetization-temperature diagrams for all spinels is remarkable and emblematic. In the case of F eCr 2 S 4 spinel the curves, which show the temperature dependence of spontaneous magnetization M s , are depicted in Fig. The temperature dependence of the spontaneous magnetization M s of ZFC, FC1, FC2, FC3 and FC4 (F eCr2S4) spinel. The ZFC, FC2 and FC3 curves are adapted from experimental results The ZFC, FC2 and FC3 curves are adapted from experimental results Based on the analysis of Fig. where , with the Pauli matrices (τ x , τ y , τ z ), is the spin of the lth -t 2g chromium electron (l = 1, 2, 3) at the sublattice B site , S A i is the spin operator of the localized iron electrons at the sublattice A site. The sums are over all sites of a body centered cubic lattice, ⟨i, j⟩ denotes the sum over the nearest neighbors, ≪ ij ≫ A is a sum over all sites of sublattice A and ≪ ij ≫ B is a sum over all sites of sublattice B . The Heisenberg term (J A > 0) describes ferromagnetic exchange between iron spins, and J l > 0 are the antiferromagnetic exchange constants between iron and chromium spins. H > 0 is the "frozen" applied magnetic field in units of energy. The compensation mechanism of the field induced superconductivity suggests that the formation of Cooper pairs is possible when Zeeman splitting of electrons is compensated by the applied magnetic field. We choose the exchange constants well separated J 1 < J 2 < J 3 , so that if the magnetic field H compensates the Zeeman splitting of one of t 2g chromium electrons, it is far from the compensation of Zeeman energy of the other two electrons. With this in mind, we can simplify our study. When the value of the "frozen" magnetic field is close to the Zeeman energy of one of t 2g chromium electrons, we can consider one band spin-fermion model of this electron instead of model (24). The contribution of dropped fermions can be accounted for by appropriate choice of the parameters. In this way we consider three independent, one band spin-fermion models. In momentum space representation, the Hamiltonians h l (l = 1, 2, 3) have the form with bose dispersion ε k of spin (s = 2) iron magnons and fermi ε kσl dispersions of chromium electrons The bosons (a + k a k ) are introduced by means of Holstein-Primakoff representation of the spin-2 operators of localized iron electrons. To proceed we account for the spin fluctuations of iron, and in static approximation obtain three effective fourfermion theories with Hamiltonians h ef f l , and potentials The Hamiltonians in the Hartree-Fock approximation are with gap functions In terms of Bogoliubov excitations α + l , α l , β + l , β l , with dispersions the gap equations have the form where < α + pl α pl > and < β + pl β pl > are fermi functions for Bogoliubov fermions. Having in mind that sublattices are simple cubic lattices and following the classifications for spin-triplet gap functions ∆ -kl = -∆ kl , we obtained that the gap functions with T 1u configuration 60 ∆ kl = ∆ l (sin k x + sin k y + sin k z )) (33) are solutions of the gap equations for some values of the applied, during the preparation, magnetic field and temperature. The dimensionless gaps ∆ l /J A at zero temperature, as a function of H/H 1 where H 1 = 8sJ 1 , are depicted in Fig. (5) for parameters J 1 /J A = 2, J 2 /J 1 = 1.4, J 3 /J 1 = 1.8 and t/J A = 1. The applied magnetic field H 1 compensates the Zeeman splitting of t 2g chromium electrons with minimum Zeeman energy (26). The Fig. (5) shows that near this value the above mentioned electrons form Cooper pairs and superconductivity emerges. Increasing the magnetic field we restore the Zeeman splitting with opposite sign and suppress the superconductivity. Further increasing the magnetic field, we reach H 2 = 2sJ 2 that compensates the Zeeman splitting of another t 2g electrons. Now, the Cooper pairs are formed by the second group electrons and the superconductivity is restored near H/H 1 = H 2 /H 1 = J 2 /J 1 = 1.4. This process continues until the magnetic field, applied during preparation, becomes equal to Zeeman energy of the third group of chromium electrons H 3 = 2sJ 3 and third superconductor state emerges near H 3 /H 1 = 1.8. In that way we can create a sequence of superconducting states in field cooled F eCr 2 S 4 . Actually there are three different superconductors prepared applying, during preparation, different magnetic fields. In these compounds superconductivity coexist with the saturated magnetism of iron ions. In summary, we have predicted the possibility to synthesize three different superconductors. The difficult moment is to applied a field which compensates the Zeeman splitting of one of the chromium electrons. An useful guidance to do that are the curves depicted in figure (4). The curves FC1, FC2 and FC4 illustrate the three cases when one of chromium electrons is with compensated Zeeman splitting. They are well separated from the others which permits the exact choice of the applied, during preparation, magnetic field. The spinel F eCr 2 S 4 is well studied compound, but superconductivity has not been observed. The explanation is very simple. The focus of research is on colossal magnetoresistance effect (CMR) The experiments with spinel stimulate the study in detail some perspective antiferromagnets. Closest to the F eCr 2 S 4 spinels are calcium manganese oxides (CaM nO 3 ). They are G-type antiferromagnetic insulators with Néel temperature T N = 350K. As in the case with spinels, the electrons of the t 2g triplet contribute magnetic order. Experiments must be performed to show the degeneracy or non-degeneracy of the t 2g states, which will ultimately determine how to prepare the superconductor. The magnetic field induced superconductivity (FISC) is one more issue of special interest. Experimentally, (FISC) in the H c2 -T phase diagram was observed in Eu x Sn 1-x M o 6 S 8 A great deal of interest has been centered on the heavy fermions in cerium and uranium systems. The heavyfermion system CeP b 3 at zero field is an antiferromagnet. In 72 the authors report magnetic field of 14 T induces the system into the superconducting state below 0.20 K. Similarly, at 0.48 K, 15 T magnetic field drives the sample superconducting. The (FISC) in these compounds is considered to be due to the Jaccarino-Peter mechanism, extended to antiferromagnetic superconductors U RhGe displays ferromagnetism with magnetic moment oriented along the c -axis, and spin-triplet superconductivity at a lower temperature Finally, magnetic-field-induced superconductivity has been observed in organic superconductors It is important to emphasize, that magnetic-field induced superconductivity disappears when the field is switched off.