LK-99, with chemical formula Pb10-x Cux (PO4)6O, was recently reported to be a roomtemperature superconductor. While this claim has met with little support in a flurry of ensuing work, a variety of calculations (mostly based on density-functional theory) have demonstrated that the system possesses some unusual characteristics in the electronic structure, in particular flat bands. We have established previously that within DFT, the system is insulating with many characteristics resembling the classic cuprates, provided the structure is not constrained to the P 3(143) symmetry nominally assigned to it. Here we describe the basic electronic structure of LK-99 within self-consistent many-body perturbative approach, quasiparticle self-consistent GW (QSGW ) approximation and their diagrammatic extensions. QSGW predicts that pristine LK-99 is indeed a Mott/charge transfer insulator, with a bandgap gap in excess of 3 eV, whether or not constrained to the P 3(143) symmetry. The highest valence bands occur as a pair, and look similar to DFT bands. The lowest conduction band is an almost dispersionless state of largely Cu d character. When Pb9Cu(PO4)6O is hole-doped, the valence bands modify only slightly, and a hole pocket appears. However, two solutions emerge: a high-moment solution with the Cu local moment aligned parallel to neighbors, and a low-moment solution with Cu aligned antiparallel to its environment. In the electron-doped case the conduction band structure changes significantly: states of mostly Pb character merge with the formerly dispersionless Cu d state, and high-spin and low spin solutions once again appear. Thus we conclude that with suitable doping, the ground state of the system is not adequately described by a band picture, and that strong correlations are likely. A recent paper 1 reported that Cu-doped Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O (AKA LK-99, the trademark name given by its discoverers) exhibits a Meissner effect up to 400 K. This rather startling claim Recent density-functional theory (DFT) calculations Our study turns to the effect of electron-and holedoping of Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O. Indeed, some remarkable many-body effects emerge in both cases. In the hole doping case, the system can be reasonably approximated by a conventional picture: change in occupation of largely unaltered valence bands. However, two stable magnetic solutions emerge at the QSGW level, a high-spin state and a low-spin state. Electron doping is more exotic because of the magnetic (Cu d ) character of the lowest conduction band, as we explain below. At the QSGW level of theory the rigid band approximation breaks down, which leads to somewhat exotic changes in the one-particle spectrum, with higher lying bands hybridizing with the quasi-atomic Cu d state, and give rise to a conduction band consisting several bands, derived mostly from Cu and Pb. As in the hole-doped case, a high-spin and a low-spin state can be stabilized. The presence of two nearly degenerate spin states suggests that the ground state is a strongly correlated manybody state that lies outside of a band picture, which is limited to a single Slater determinant. In this picture, the correlations arise from spin exchange between the Cu and O (hole doped case) and between Cu and Pb (electron doped case). The parent compound Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O, (AKA LK-99, the trademark name given by its discoverers), forms in the hexagonal P 3 structure, space group 143. Stoichiometrically, it may be regarded as combinations of formula units (Pb 3 (PO 4 ) 2 ) 3 PbO. Six of the Pb (which may be called Pb(6h) using Wykoff conventions) form a staggered set of triangles consistent with three-fold rotational symmetry along the c axis. The other four Pb(4f ) atoms lie farther from this axis. Each P is surrounded by four almost equidistant O atoms, in a slightly deformed tetrahedron. From the perspective of chemical bonding, the P form sp 3 hybrids which bond to an O p orbital and form bond-antibond pairs. Assigning a formal charge of +5 and -2 to P and O, the PO 4 unit has a formal charge of -3. Treating the Pb s states as core, Pb has two valence electrons, so (Pb 3 (PO 4 ) 2 ) forms a combination of covalent and ionic bonds. PbO also forms an ionic bond; thus the parent compound (Pb 3 (PO 4 ) 2 ) 3 PbO is a mixed covalent-ionic insulator. This last O sits in the center of the Pb rings and forms a linear chain on the c-axis. Four sites are available to it, but only one site is occupied. We use the minimum-energy configuration as determined from the SCAN functional 22 (Ref. By the parent compound we refer to an ideal Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O, with O | occupying the lowest energy configuration determined from the SCAN functional, as described in Ref. For the single-particle band structure, we use the Quasiparticle Self-Consistent GW approximation in the Questaal package The energy bands of the parent compound (Fig. The QSGW band structure has notable differences with those generated by standard density functionals. In the latter case, the symmetry-constrained structure is predicted to be metallic; only by breaking symmetry one Cu d state splits off to form the the conduction band. Even after a gap forms under relaxation, the gap is small, and the conduction band contains much more O character (compare the red color of the QSGW conduction band to the yellowish PBEsol 26 result). Adding U to PBE increases the Cu local moment, shifting and conduction band closer to the QSGW result, the amount depending on the value of U . However, even for U =5 the gap is still ∼1.5 eV. Also note that the gap between higher-lying (Pb-derived) bands and the valence band is much reduced. This reflects a well-known tendency of DFT to underestimate bandgaps. These differences will turn out to be important when doping is considered. On the other hand, QSGW has a well-known tendency to overestimate bandgaps, largely because ladder diagrams are omitted from the polarizability With Cu substituting for Pb, Cu d states must lie at the Fermi level if restricted to nonmagnetic solutions. Indeed calculations show that the Cu d overlap with p states belonging to O | and O P . Cu is formally d 9 , the valence band maximum has one hole, making the system metallic. Bonds of both the Cu-d O-p are have a dispersion of ∼0.2 eV or less, and they weakly hybridize with each other. Because of their extremely low dispersion, their kinetic energy is small and both charge and spin easily fluctuate between Cu and the environment. It is Energy bands of the parent compound Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. Top panels show calculations in the QSGW approximation for the symmetry-constrained relaxation (a) and the fully relaxed case (b). Panel (c) shows the band structure obtained from the PBESsol functional, using the fully relaxed structure and panel (d ) how the band structure is modified from QSGW (a) when ladders are added to the polarizability (QSG Ŵ ) To avoid peculiarities of the "chemical personality" of specific dopants, we dope the system by adding a homogeneous nuclear background charge, which must be compensated by adding or removing electrons to keep the unit cell neutral. We consider both electron and hole doping. As check on the appropriateness of uniform background model, we compared the electron-doped case to a system with a real dopant -a F atom substituting for the chain-O, and find it similar to a QSGW calculation in the presence of a homogeneous background, requiring one extra electron. Doping LK-99 with holes acts similarly to doping cuprates or sp semiconductors: the energy bands do not change shape significantly and a hole pocket at the valence band maximum appears. Fig. A very different picture emerges when LK-99 is doped with electrons. The rigid-band approximation no longer applies. For small doping, electrons occupy the unoccupied Cu d state and reduce the local moment in proportion to the doping. When heavily doped, the splitting between states of Pb s character and the lowest conduction band Cu d character can close. This likely occurs because the gap between Cu and the valence band originates primarily from an exchange splitting as a consequence of the onsite Hubbard interaction, while much of the splitting between the unoccupied Pb(s) and valence band is a consequence of the long-range screened coulomb interaction W 28 . The latter is important in determining the bandgap in sp semiconductors, while the former is The original work The present work confirms that conclusion at a higher level of theory, and turns to the question of electron and hole doping, within the QSGW framework. Two surprising results emerge from QSGW that are not found in density-functional theory. The first is the marked change in splitting between Pb states in the conduction band and the O-derived valence band states with doping. This can be understood as a change in the screening as the system becomes metallic. The close relation between bandgaps in sp bonded semiconductors and the long-range form of the screened coulomb interactions has been established for some time We apply quasiparticle self-consistent GW theory (QSGW ) Crucially, both our QSGW and QSG Ŵ methods are fully self-consistent in both selfenergy Σ and the charge density 