Monolithic integration of novel materials for unprecedented device functions without modifying the existing photonic component library is the key to advancing heterogeneous silicon photonic integrated circuits. To achieve this, the introduction of a silicon nitride etching stop layer at selective area, coupled with low-loss oxide trench to waveguide surface, enables the incorporation of various functional materials without disrupting the reliability of foundry-verified devices. As an illustration, two distinct chalcogenide phase change materials (PCM) with remarkable nonvolatile modulation capabilities, namely Sb2Se3 and Ge2Sb2Se4Te1, were monolithic back-end-of-line integrated into silicon photonics. The PCM enables compact phase and intensity tuning units with zero-static power consumption. Taking advantage of these building blocks, the phase error of a push-pull Mach-Zehnder interferometer optical switch could be trimmed by a nonvolatile phase shifter with a 48% peak power consumption reduction. Mirco-ring filters with a rejection ratio >25dB could be applied for >5-bit wavelength selective intensity modulation, and waveguide-based >7-bit intensity-modulation photonic attenuators could achieve >39dB broadband attenuation. The advanced "Zero change" back-end-of-line integration platform could not only facilitate the integration of PCMs for integrated reconfigurable photonics but also open up the possibilities for integrating other excellent optoelectronic materials in the future silicon photonic process design kits. Silicon photonics holds broad prospects for practical applications in high-speed optical communication However, current modulation schemes in photonic chips primarily rely on modulation approaches such as thermo-optic modulation and free-carrier dispersion in silicon, exhibiting weak modulation strength (usually with the change of effective refractive indices Δneff <10 Introducing innovative materials for function units in silicon photonics has become imperative to attain exceptional device performance and reduce power consumption Enabling the monolithic integration of functional materials into silicon photonics while maintaining the existing fabrication process and using the available process design kits (PDKs) is of utmost importance Moreover, they play a crucial role in constructing photonic networks and serve as essential elements for optical storage In this paper, a"Zero change" platform for a monolithic back-end-of-line integration scheme facilitating the large-scale integration of PCM-based photonic devices was demonstrated. By customizing the full process flow of silicon photonics and introducing a CMOS-compatible silicon nitride (SiN) layer as an etch stop layer on Si waveguides, a deep SiO2 trench was etched with a low insertion loss of < 0.09 dB/trench for subsequent integration of various PCMs. Two kinds of chalcogenide phase change materials (PCMs), Sb2Se3 and Ge2Sb2Se4Te1(GSS4T1), with completely different nonvolatile modulation capabilities, were monolithically back-end-of-line integrated into silicon photonics. Electrical-assisted programmability of the fabricated devices was verified, enabling reconfigurable post-trimming, multi-level nonvolatile phase modulation, and intensity modulation in optoelectronic chips. This endeavor not only showcased the back-end-of-line integration technique for combining phase change memory (PCM) with silicon photonics but also accomplished this without the need to modify the existing library of passive and active photonic components. Furthermore, it establishes a clear path for integrating other promising optoelectronic materials into future silicon optoelectronic chips. Large-scale fabrication based on the CMOS platform without modifying the existing passive and active photonic component library is essential for realizing various practical applications of PCM-based nonvolatile electrically programmable photonic chips. However, PCM is a kind of material that is incompatible with standard CMOS processes. Therefore, a back-end-of-line integration of PCMs is coveted for commercial photonics platform-compatible nonvolatile devices. Here, we propose a trench etch process utilizing SiN as the etch stop layer to realize deep SiO2 cladding etching above the functional areas (where PCM would be deposited), which is suitable for developing CMOS back-end integration of multiple functional materials The SiN-assisted silicon photonic process was conducted on a 200-mm wafer at the IMECAS foundry, including the low-loss SiO2 trench etching atop the functional areas. The integration of PCM was accomplished by a back-end-of-line process involving ultraviolet lithography and film deposition, which exhibits significant potential for facilitating large-scale integration. The customized silicon photonic process incorporating a layer of SiN serves as an etch stop layer to preserve the Si waveguide from damage during the etching of SiO2 trenches (see Fig. Following the deposition of SiO2 and subsequent metal interconnection, the silicon oxide above the waveguides in functional areas of the photonic devices was selectively etched. Due to the high etching selection ratio (>50:1) between SiO2 and SiN, the etching process is effectively halted at the etch stop layer (SiN), thereby preventing damage to the silicon waveguide. Finally, a wet etch process was employed to remove the SiN layer above the functional areas. Benefiting from the etch stop layer, waveguides with low-loss narrow SiO2 trenches were realized, with their measured transmission spectra shown in Fig. Finally, the contact window above the metal electrode was etched to ensure electrical interconnection (process temperature < 110°C). Fig. Silicon photonic devices inevitably suffer from fabrication errors and consequent deviation of performance from the intended design. Meanwhile, the device-to-device deviations could be significantly magnified in networks, leading to an increased complexity when configuring PICs. Post-fabrication trimming (PFT) enables the calibration of the photonic devices after their fabrication. Compared to other trimming methods, including femtosecond-laser annealing The microscope image of the push-pull MZI is presented in Fig. After applying a series of electrical pulses with varying amplitudes (ranging from control over the amorphous-and-crystalline-mixing state of Sb2Se3 was achieved, thereby enabling device trimming without impact on the electrical property of the device (see Fig. The imbalance of insertion loss at the bar (2.69 dB) and cross (2.62 dB) states was effectively minimized to a mere 0.07 dB at 1550 nm while simultaneously ensuring an extinction ratio >20 dB in both states (see Fig. The Sb2Se3-based trimming unit provides a reliable PFT technique, which not only achieves a balance of the drive voltage and insertion loss but also significantly reduces both the total and peak power consumption of a push-pull MZI. The embedded trimming units are essential for simplifying the control and reducing the power consumption of very large-scale PICs. The compact nonvolatile multi-level phase modulation not only mitigates static power consumption but also enhances integration density, making it a promising candidate for constructing reconfigurable PICs such as microwave photonics The nonvolatile MRR switch, featuring an 8 μm-long SbSe/Si hybrid waveguide, is shown in Fig. The reversible switching was achieved by applying a 7.15 V/500 ns pulse for amorphization and a 2.25 V/100 ms pulse for crystallization, resulting in an extinction ratio (ER) larger than 25 dB at 1551.513 nm (see Fig. To achieve multi-level switching, two types of manipulating pulses were employed, including electrical pulses with varying amplitude and fixed duration (PVAFD) and pulses with varying duration and fixed amplitude (PVDFA). The change in transmittance (ΔT) at 1551.145 nm was utilized for monitoring the nonvolatile multilevel phase modulation exhibited by the MRR. As shown in Fig. The back-end integrated SbSe/Si hybrid waveguide offers a reversible low-loss phase modulation, enabling fine multi-level switching by employing PVDFA, providing an attractive fine-phase tuning solution for large-scale PCM-driven photonic networks. Intensity modulation has been widely used in optical computing The back-end integrated photonic attenuator offers a high extinction ratio with a small footprint (16 μm), owing to the high extinction coefficient contrast (Δk=0.549) between different states of our sputtered GSS4T1 films (see Fig. Although fine-tuning for any target state can always be accomplished via multiple fine-correction pulses akin to the trimming process, the arbitrary state configuration is essential in certain scenarios. The arbitrary state configuration is usually accomplished by applying an amorphization pulse followed by a crystallization pulse. Through this process, we were able to realize a > 3-bit arbitrary state configuration for the GSS4T1based attenuator. By applying pulses with varying amplitude (varying duration), a total of 7 (13) distinguishable states were achieved (see Fig. We have demonstrated a back-end integrated GSS4T1-based photonic attenuator with an ER >39 dB and a multi-level switching >7 bits, thereby forging a pathway for large-scale nonvolatile intensity-modulated PICs. 