Recent reports of a possible room-temperature superconductor called LK-99 have generated a lot of attention worldwide. In just a few days, a large amount of experimental works attempted to reproduce this sample and verify its properties. At the same time a large amount of theoretical works have also been reported. However, many experiments have drawn different conclusions, and many theoretical results are not consistent with experimental results. For one of the structures of LK-99 with the chemical formula as Pb9Cu(PO4)6O, many first-principles calculations did not consider spin-orbit coupling and concluded that it is a flat band metal. However, spin-orbit coupling is often not negligible in systems with heavy elements, and LK-99 contains a large amount of heavy element Pb. We performed calculations of electronic structure of Pb9Cu(PO4)6O with spin-orbit coupling, and the results show that it's not a metal but a semiconductor. This is consistent with many experimental results. In the ferromagnetic state Pb9Cu(PO4)6O is an indirectbandgap semiconductor with a bandgap of 292 meV. Moreover, its conduction band is a flat band. At an electron doping level of 0.5 e/unit cell, Pb9Cu(PO4)6O becomes metallic and has a flat band with a width of only 25 meV at the Fermi level in the ferromagnetic state. While in the antiferromagnetic-A state, Pb9Cu(PO4)6O is a direct-bandgap semiconductor with a bandgap of 300 meV. As a magnetic narrowband semiconductor, Pb9Cu(PO4)6O may have potential application value in the field of optoelectronic device, photocatalytic, photodetector and spintronics device. Recently, a group from South Korea reported a possible room-temperature and atmospheric-pressure superconductor LK-99 in the form of a preprint, which has attracted great attention worldwide As reported, LK-99 is a compound that replaces part of Pb with Cu in lead apatite, and its chemical formula is Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O (0.9 < x < 1.1) In this work, we used first-principles method to calculate in detail the crystal structure and electronic structure of LK-99 in the case of x = 1 with the chemical formula of Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. First, we identified the most stable structure and a metastable structure. Then, for the most stable structure, we calculated its electronic structure without and with considering the SOC. If the SOC is ignored, our calculations agree with most previous first-principles calculations Figures Some previous works have calculated the electronic structure of LK-99 without considering the SOC, and found two flat bands at the Fermi level Figure The total energy of the FM state is 0.15 and 0.20 eV lower than that of the NM state in LK-99-1 and LK-99-2, respectively. After Cu substitution, both LK-99-1 and LK-99-2 become metals in the FM and the NM states. What's more interesting is that there are two flat bands near the Fermi level of these four band structures. We call the upper and lower flat bands as flat band1 and flat band2 respectively, as shown in Figure The calculation results without considering the SOC look very interesting. But it should be noted that Pb is a heavy element with a relative atomic mass of 207.2, so the effect of SOC is often not negligible 21 . It is necessary to consider the electronic structure calculation with SOC. The direction of the magnetic moment is very important in calculations of the FM state with SOC, so the magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) is calculated first. The MAE is defined as Ehard -Eeasy, while Ehard and Eeasy are the total energy of the system when the magnetic moment is parallel to the hard-axis and easy-axis, respectively. Calculations prove that the easy-axis of LK-99-2 is c-axis while hard-axis in the ab-plane and perpendicular to b-axis. The MAE is calculated as 1.03 meV. Cu atoms contribute most of the magnetic moment. The three nearest neighbor O1 atoms around the Cu atoms also contribute a small amount of magnetic moment. The total magnetic moment is about 1 μB/unit cell. Other common antiferromagnetic (AFM) configurations are also considered, as shown in Figure The flat bands near the Fermi level are considered to be one of the reasons for hightemperature superconductivity 25 , because these flat bands will cause a large DOS near the Fermi level. According to the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, this is beneficial to increase the TC of superconductivity It should be noted that our calculations are only focus on two simple structures (LK-99-1 and LK-99-2) with the chemical formula of Pb9Cu1(PO4)6O, which are the second and most stable structures considering only x = 1 with the Cu atoms occupying the Pb1 sites. These are just some of the possible structures of LK-99. Depending on the number and position of Cu atoms and O2 atoms, LK-99 has other more complex structures with larger unit cells. In addition, it is impossible to judge whether a compound is a superconductor or not only from the calculations of the electronic structure. Even if there is a flat band at the Fermi level, it does not mean that it is a superconductor. In conclusion, our first-principles calculations show that SOC is non-negligible in Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. If the SOC is not considered, although the calculation can get the flat bands on the Fermi level, this result is not rigorous and does not agree with some experiments. Our calculations show that the ground state is the AFM-A state but the energy difference between different magnetic configurations is very small. Once the SOC is considered, a bandgap is opened, making Pb9Cu(PO4)6O an indirect-bandgap semiconductor with a bandgap of 292 meV and a flat conduction band in the FM state. After electron doping at the level of 0.5 e/unit cell, it becomes metallic and has a flat band with a width of only 25 meV at the Fermi level in the FM state. While in AFM-A state, Pb9Cu(PO4)6O is a directbandgap semiconductor with a bandgap of 300 meV. Our calculation results explain the inconsistencies of some previous experimental and theoretical works In addition, our work also provides some theoretical basis for the possible potential application of Pb9Cu(PO4)6O as a magnetic narrowband semiconductor. In this work, the calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) 36 with the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method 37 . The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) 38 realization was used for the exchange-correlation function. The cutoff energy was set above 450 eV. The force and energy convergence criteria were set to 0.01 eV/Å and 10 -5 eV, respectively. A 5 × 5 × 7 Γ-centered k-point mesh was used for the Brillouin zone sampling. In order to better compare with the experimental results, in the process of structure optimization, we fixed the lattice constants as the experimental value: a = 9.843 Å and c = 7.428 Å 1 . The electronic correlation effects of Cu 3d orbits were described using the DFT+U method 39 , and the values of U are carefully tested from 0 to 4 eV. 