Single crystals of In-doped PbBi2Te4 are synthesized via a conventional solid-state method. Chemical analysis and hall measurements indicate that In replaces Pb, introducing n-type carriers, creating Pb1-xInxBi2Te4. A superconducting transition is observed with a maximum transition temperature around 2.06 K for Pb1-xInxBi2Te4. Field dependent transport measurements reveal type-II superconductivity and yield a maximum upper critical field around 1.55 T. Thermodynamic data indicates bulk superconductivity in the BCS weak coupling limit. Our findings establish an ambientpressure superconducting system in the AM2X4 family, and doped PbBi2Te4 as a promising platform for the study of topological superconductivity. The emergence of superconductivity in topological materials is predicted to open an energy gap in the surface states and lead to the exotic Majorana zero modes Tuning the Fermi level by pressure or chemical doping is a feasible way to induce superconductivity in topological materials. For example, Bi 2Se3 and Bi2Te3 are well studied topological insulators Here, we report the synthesis of Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 (x = 0, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7) crystals using a conventional solid-state reaction method. Superconducting transitions are observed from x = 0.4 to x = 0.7. The superconducting Tc increases monotonically with increasing In doping concentration, and reaches maximum Tc ~ 2.06 K for x = 0.7. Thermodynamic measurements suggest bulk superconductivity as well as weak coupling BCS nature for the superconducting state. Hall measurements suggest that the parent compound PbBi2Te4 is n-type, and that the In replacement of Pb introduces more electrons into the system, which is opposite to the case reported for In-doped SnBi2Te4 Crystal growth: Stoichiometric amounts of Pb, In, Bi, and Te were weighed and placed in an alumina crucible. The crucible was sealed in a vacuum quartz tube, heated to 600 o C, held for 100 hours, and then furnace-cooled to room temperature. The obtained ingot was then ground, poured into an alumina crucible, and sealed in a vacuum quartz tube. The tube was heated to 590 o C, kept for 50 hours, then cooled to 300 o C at 2 o C/h. The crystal ingot was mechanically separated from the crucible. Al and Si were not found to be present in the crystals in the EDS characterization, suggesting negligible contamination from the crucible materials. Electric, magnetic, and thermodynamic measurements: The data were collected in a Dynacool PPMS-9. Electrode contacts were made by silver epoxy. Measurements below 1.8 K used a He-3 refrigerator. Structural and chemical characterizations: Powder x-ray diffraction was carried out at room temperature using a Bruker D8 Advance Eco diffractometer with a Cu anode. Single-crystal x-ray diffraction was carried out using a Bruker D8 Quest Eco diffractometer equipped with a Photon III CPAD detector and monochromated Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å). The frames were integrated using the SAINT program within the APEX III 2017.3-0 operating system. The structure was determined using direct methods and difference Fourier synthesis (SHELXTL version 6.14) The resistivity vs. temperature (ρ-T) curves down to around 0.4 K of Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 crystals are displayed in Fig. , where / c t T T = . The fitting results are displayed in Table , where Ф0 = hc/2e is the flux quantum. iii. Thermodynamics Fig. (In fact, the 5 T term is also claimed to be necessary to explain the normal state heat capacity of In-doped SnBi2Te4 , where the μ * is the Coulomb pseudo potential parameter and is typically given a value of 0.13 , where kB is the Boltzmann constant. N(EF) are calculated to be 1.01, 1.11, and 1.12 states eV -1 per formula unit for x = 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7, respectively, in Pb1-xInxBi2Te4. Considering the observed disorder from Indium doping in SC-XRD, an important question is, in the In-doped crystals, how the disorder affects the topology in the band structure. First, though In-Pb-Bi anti-site disorder was observed, the whole chemical stoichiometry does not show significant deviation with nominal based on the EDS and SC-XRD refinement results, which suggests that the total charge in each unit cell and the fermi level should be mostly unaffected by the anti-site disorder. However, the anti-site disorder level is expected to show detectable effect on the band gap and the band topology In summary, we have experimentally demonstrated type-II bulk superconductivity in Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 crystals. In contrast with In-doped SnBi2Te4 which was found to be p-type, the Hall results confirm dominate n-type carriers in Pb1-xInxBi2Te4. Although these two systems show opposite types of carriers, their superconducting parameters are close to each other. The quantitative analysis of the electron and superconductivity parameters reveals BCS superconductivity in the weak coupling limit. The maximum Tc and Hc2 (0) are 2.06 K and 1.55 T, achieved for the nominal composition Pb0.3In0.7Bi2Te4 -both slightly enhanced compared to In-doped SnBi2Te4. Our findings establish a new ambient-pressure superconducting system, as well as a promising candidate for topological superconductivity. In future investigations, high-resolution electron microscopy or neutron diffraction studies are desired in order to determine the chemical distribution of different atoms in the lattice and understand how they interplay with superconductivity and topology. Our sizable Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 single crystals also provide excellent opportunities for future spectroscopic studies to search for topological surface states. The superconducting Tc monotonically increases with higher In doping concentration although 70% In for Pb substitution seems to be the upper limit of In solubility for ambient pressure synthesis via a conventional solid-state reaction method, a higher In doping concentration or even InBi2Te4 without changing the structure may be achievable via techniques such as high-pressure synthesis, and there might be a chance for a further promoted superconducting Tc. Pb0.3In0.7Bi2Te4 Pb0.33In0.67Bi1.80Te3.73 4.4067(9) 41.344(9) 3.47e+21 2.06(7) 1.55(2)