We examine the origin of the formation of narrow bands in LK-99 (Pb9Cu(PO4)6O) and the parent compound without the Cu doping using density functional theory calculations and model Hamiltonian studies. Explicit analytical expressions are given for a nearest-neighbor tight-binding (TB) Hamiltonian in the momentum space for both the parent and the LK-99 compound, which can serve as an effective model to study various quantum phenomena including superconductivity. The parent material is an insulator with the buckle oxygen atom on the stacked triangular lattice forming the topmost bands, well-separated from the remaining oxygen band manifold. The C3 symmetry-driven two-band TB model describes these two bands quite well. These bands survive in the Cu-doped, LK-99, though with drastically altered band dispersion due to the Cu-O interaction. A similar two-band model involving the Cu xz and yz orbitals broadly describes the top two valence bands of LK-99. However, the band dispersions of both the Cu and O bands are much better described by the four-band TB model incorporating the Cu-O interactions on the buckled honeycomb lattice. We comment on the possible mechanisms of superconductivity in LK-99. even though the actual Tc may be much smaller than reported, and suggest that interstitial Cu clusters leading to broad bands might have a role to play. A recent experimental study by Lee et al. The excitement over realizing the room temperature superconductivity has led to many DFT calculations on LK-99 A careful look at the proposed tight-binding (TB) models and the DFT studies suggests that the parent compound Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O has been largely ignored in analyzing the electronic structure. Understanding the electronic structure of the parent compound is crucial to examining the host-Cu interaction. Furthermore, as far as TB models are concerned, few of them are two-band models with a minimal number of parameters that do not necessarily replicate the actual band structure. Some of these models have proposed symmetry-driven flat bands which do not appear in the actual band structure. Wannier formalism In this work, we have carried out DFT calculations and developed a set of TB model Hamiltonians (two-bands and four-bands) both for the parent compound and LK-99 to provide insight into (a) the formations of narrow bands and (b) the role of oxygen orbitals of CuO 6 complex as well as that of the Cu-O honeycomb lattice in governing the Cu-host interactions. From the TB models, we have provided explicit analytical expressions of the Hamiltonian matrix elements in the k-space, which could be useful in studying the physics of parent and Cudoped apatite. When optimized, the hopping parameters in these elements reproduce the actual band structure of the parent compound and LK-99 very well. Furthermore, these tunable parameters provide flexibility to develop mechanisms and phenomena. It has been proposed that the LK-99 inherits the crystal structure of the parent compound Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O by replacing one of the Pb with Cu. The structure has P3 space group symmetry (No. 143). The structure is shown from different perspectives in Fig. The salient features of the LK-99 structure are: (I) When projected onto the (001) plane, the parent compound has an inner Pb hexagonal ring and concentrically an outer Pb-Cu hexagonal ring formed by Pb The paired PO 4 tetrahedral to form a hexagonal ring by occupying the interstitial space of the outer ring (see Fig. To describe the electronic structure of the parent compound and LK-99, we have carried out density-functional theory calculations and have developed a set of twoband and four-band TB models. The DFT calculations are performed using the pseudopotential based projectoraugmented wave (PAW) method The band structure of the parent compound Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O is shown in Fig. With one of the Pb atoms is replaced by Cu, as shown in Fig. Further analysis of the band structure of the parent compound and LK-99 reveals the following two important aspects. First, in both cases, the bands are narrow across all the energy windows. The bandwidth of the bands lie in the range of 0.1 to 0.3 eV. Similar observations are made by Jena and Nanda in the case of transition metal based Olivine phosphates Second, when the band structure of the parent compound and LK-99 are compared, the striking difference that one observes is that the presence of Cu has altered the shape of the dispersion of the O b -(p x , p y ) bands significantly. This implies that the Cu-d states initiate new covalent bonds with the O b -p states. To gain more insight into it, in Fig. The electronic structure analysis from the DFT calculations, made in the last section, infers that the top two valence bands of the parent compound and the top two distinct pair of bands in LK-99 form the low-energy electronic structure and determine the probable existence of the quantum states (e.g. superconductivity, flat-band magnetism, spin-liquid, correlated Mott insulator, etc.) in them. Therefore, it is instructive to examine the formation of these bands and for this purpose, we have developed a set of TB models in this section and the next section. The orbital characters of the top two bands are shown in Table is the rotation matrix for rotation about the ẑ axis for both (x, y) and (xz, yz) sets of orbitals. The form of the hopping matrices along a NN can be obtained by considering the symmetry of the structure, or by explicit downfolding of a minimal set of orbitals that carries the symmetry of the structure, or by examining the TB matrix elements from the DFT methods such as the NMTO method or the Wannier functions. The matrices take the following general form: The Hamiltonian in the Bloch function basis where the sum is over the positions of all m orbitals, is given by where the matrix elements are given by where c x = cos(k x a/2), c y = cos( √ 3k y b/2), s x = sin(k x a/2), and s y = sin( √ 3k y b/2). We have fitted the DFT band structure of the parent compound with this model, with the Hamiltonian parameters listed in Table In this section, we construct a nearest-neighbor (NN) TB model Hamiltonian for the top four bands, the top two being "Cu" bands, while the next two "O" bands. Wannier functions computed from DFT indicate that the top two bands are dominated by the Cu-d xz and d yz orbitals, while the next two bands below are dominated by the O b -p x and p y orbitals, just like in the parent compound, where O b denotes the "buckle" oxygen atom in the unit cell that along with the Cu atom forms the buckled honeycomb lattice (see Fig. Further insights come from the orbital characters of these bands, which are summarized in Table Cu Cu O b O b Oa Rest Total xz/yz rest d x/y z "Cu" bands 0.41 0.16 0.07 0.00 0.19 0.17 1.00 "O" bands 0.17 0.05 0.25 0.00 0.01 0.53 1.00 normal to the plane as The new terms are the Cu-O hopping, which are along the three NN Cu-O bonds on the plane, connected by the C 3 symmetry. Actually, these Cu-O bonds are not exactly on the plane; rather, they form a buckled honeycomb structure as indicated in Fig. where H O is given by Eq. ( where c x = cos(k x a/2) as defined before, s ′ Note that in Eq. ( The parameters for LK99 obtained by fitting the DFT band structure with the 4 × 4 TB Hamiltonian are listed in Table In view of this, the idea of a broad-band doped Mott insulator has been proposed The idea of the flat-band superconductivity, of the type that has been proposed for twisted graphene, is not relevant here because the bands are narrow on account of the smallness of the TB hopping integrals, rather than destructive interference as the electron propagates Thus it is difficult to reconcile the room-temperature superconductivity in the LK-99 and the observed diamagnetic behavior with the existing theories. Accurate determination of the structure for the Cu-doped system is urgently to make further progress on the understanding of the electronic structure and evaluation of potential mechanisms for room-temperature superconductivity. Imperfect, inhomogeneous crystals will not necessarily be detrimental to superconductivity but might even be the cause. In addition to superconductivity, the lead apatites are bound to have other interesting phenomena arising from the richness of their crystal structure. To summarize, we have comprehensively investigated the electronic structure of Cu-doped Pb apatite by carrying out density functional theory calculations and a series of model Hamiltonian studies on the Bloch function basis. The models are based on the Cu-Cu, Cu-O, and O-O nearest-neighbor interactions and the C 3 symmetry of the lattice in ab-plane. From our analysis, we find that the four-band valence manifold, which occupies the vicinity of the Fermi level, is three-dimensional in nature. This manifold is predominantly formed by the interactions within a buckled honeycomb lattice made out of an oxygen triangular sub-lattice and a CuO 6 triangular sublattice. From the model, we have developed explicit analytical expressions of the Hamiltonian matrix elements in the k-space. These expressions with tunable hopping parameters could be useful to develop new mechanisms and phenomena. We argue that the formation narrow band should be attributed to the presence of strongly bonded PO 4 tetrahedral ionic complexes. These complexes are formed by distorting the metal-oxygen complexes in the system and keeping them well separated. As a result, the covalent hybridization becomes weak to form narrow bands. The narrow bands are not the answer to the expected room temperature superconductivity as they can produce a T c of the order of 20 mK. However, if Cu is doped at the Pb site as has been assumed in the present study in the literature, these narrow bands become a rich source to exhibit correlated quantum phenomena. the tight-binding Hamiltonian, which could be helpful for further modeling both the undoped and the Cu-doped lead apatite.