We present a comprehensive study of the magnetocaloric effect (MCE) in a family of kagome magnets with formula RMn 6 Sn 6 (R=Tb, Ho, Er, and Lu). These materials have a small rare-earth content and tunable magnetic ordering, hence they provide a venue to study the fundamentals of the MCE. We examine the effect of different types of order (ferrimagnetic and antiferromagnetic) and the presence of a metamagnetic transition on the MCE. We extend the study to high-entropy rare-earth alloys of the family. Our results suggest several guidelines for enhancing the MCE in tunable magnetic materials with a small rare-earth content. Since the discovery of a giant magnetocaloric effect (MCE) in Gd 5 Si 2 Ge 2 by Pecharsky and Gschneidner In this work, we use a tunable family of RMn 6 Sn 6 materials (R=Tb, Ho, Er, and Lu) to gain a deeper insight into the fundamentals of the MCE. Each unit cell of RMn 6 Sn 6 comprises one layer of RSn 2 sandwiched between two layers of Mn 3 Sn 2 (Figs. Single crystals of RMn 6 Sn 6 were grown using a self-flux technique. The starting chemicals were terbium, holmium, erbium, and lutetium pieces (99.9%), manganese granules (99.98%), and tin pieces (99.999%). They were mixed with the ratio R:Mn:Sn = X:6:18 (X = 1.25 for Tb, 1.50 for Ho, 1.10 for Er, and 1.20 for Lu), placed in alumina crucibles and sealed inside evacuated silica tubes. The tubes were heated in a box furnace to 1000 • C at 3 • C/min, held at that temperature for 12h, cooled to 600 • C at 6 • C/h, and centrifuged to remove the excess flux. Using lesser amounts of rare-earth or centrifuging at T < 600 • C resulted in the formation of impurity phases such as HoSn 2 and RMnSn 2 . The crystallographic structure was verified by Laue x-ray diffraction using a real-time back-reflection MWL120 system. Picture of a representative HoMn 6 Sn 6 crystal and its Laue diffraction pattern are shown in Figs. Magnetization measurements were performed on single crystals using a 7 T Quantum Design MPMS-3 equipped with vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) and oven options. The MCE was quantified by measuring magnetization isotherms in the vicinity of the critical temperature and evaluating the magnetic entropy change (∆S m ) using the Maxwell equation which was approximated with the following expression for discrete isotherms: (2) using H max = 0.5, 2, and 5 T. A bell-shaped curve was obtained for -∆S m (T ) with three parameters that characterize the MCE: (i) the height of the curve (-∆S MAX ), (ii) full width at half maximum (FWHM), and (iii) refrigerant capacity (RC) defined as the area under the curve. The magnetic ordering of RMn 6 Sn 6 depends sensitively on the choice of rareearth element, evidence of a strong R-Mn coupling due to RKKY interactions. Figure The field dependence of magnetization is summarized in Fig. for RMn 6 Sn 6 with R=Tb, Ho, Er, and Lu. In Figs. Unlike TbMn 6 Sn 6 and HoMn 6 Sn 6 , the magnetization of ErMn 6 Sn 6 begins to saturate at nearly 1 T, instead of 0.2 T, following a metamagnetic (MM) transition. The MM transition signals a change of magnetic state from AFM to FIM induced by the external magnetic field. Below 1 T, the dark blue M (H) curve in Fig. In Fig. We characterized the MCE by evaluating ∆S m (T ) from the M (H) curves using Eq. 2. The red, green, and blue curves in Fig. Despite having comparable -∆S MAX values, HoMn 6 Sn 6 is a more efficient MCM than TbMn 6 Sn 6 because its bell-shaped -∆S m (T ) curve has a larger FWHM. Thus, the refrigerant capacity (RC) defined as the area under the bellshaped curve within FWHM (Eq. 3) is greater in HoMn 6 Sn 6 than in TbMn 6 Sn 6 . The RC values are quoted for each compound in the upper right corner of every panel in Fig. The significance of FWHM in the MCE is further illustrated in a comparison between TbMn 6 Sn 6 and ErMn 6 Sn 6 (Figs. In Fig. Following the work of Yeh et al. in the early 2000s In our study, we decided to examine the effect of high-entropy alloying on the MCE of RMn 6 Sn 6 system by mixing different rare-earth elements on the R site The important observation in Fig. Comparing Fig. By comparing the MCE metrics in the different studied RMn 6 Sn 6 members in Table T c (K) -∆S MAX (JKg -1 K -1 ) FWHM (K) RC(JKg The MCE was characterized in the vicinity of the low temperature transitions. In Fig. The MCE of two high entropy alloys with fewer rare-earths included are reported here. We refer to (Gd 0.25 Tb 0.25 Dy 0.25 Ho 0.25 )Mn 6 Sn 6 as HEA-4 and (Gd 0.2 Tb 0.2 Dy 0.2 Ho 0.2 Er 0.2 )Mn 6 Sn 6 as HEA-5. Fig. 