This paper describes an inverse analysis method using neural networks on optical spectroscopy, and its application to the quantitative optical constant evaluation. The present method consists of three subprocesses. First, measurable UV-visible spectroscopic quantities were calculated as functions of the optical constants of the solid based on the Tomlin equations [J. Phys. D 1 1667 (1968)] by carefully eliminating the unpractical combinations of optical constants. Second, the back-propagation neural network is trained using the calculated relationships between the measurable quantities and the optical constants. Finally, the trained network is utilized to determine the optical constants from measured responses. The conventional (Newton-Raphson) method tends to require the judgement of a wellexperienced analyst, while machine learning shows automatically human-free performance in data conversion. In recent years, the importance of elucidating basic physical properties has been increasingly recognized in the development of organic and inorganic semiconductors. Efforts are being made to gain a deeper understanding of the electronic structure. The importance of optical evaluation as a characterization tool for this is well known. One of the representative techniques for such an optical characterization is UV-visible spectroscopy (UVS). A transformation of the measured quantities into optical constants (complex refractive index) is often performed to facilitate comparison with the electronic structure properties. However, it is known that the conversion of these physical quantities may become an inverse problem depending on a semiconductor structure to be measured. Even worse, there is a multisolution problem. By setting R is the reflectance and T transmissivity, let us consider light of wavelength λ in air or vacuum incident normally on a film of thickness d and complex refractive index η -iκ which is supported on a non-absorbing thick substrate of refractive index n . The expressions of R and T are too complicated to be shown even in this case. Following Heavens f = ((η -1) + κ ) (n + 1)(η + κ + n ) -4ηn (10) with d = 2πηd/λ, and d = 2πκd/λ. The measurable quantities R and T are usually represented as functions of complex refractive indices (η and κ). This is regarded as a direct problem. Different from the case of a substrate-free standalone wafer, the optical constants (η and κ) cannot be represented by these quantities (R and T). Because of the intimacy of the optical constants with the electronic structure of the compound, conversion of the measured quantities into these is often performed. On the other hand, this is classified into an inverse analysis. Traditionally, this type of conversion has been solved numerically with e.g. Newton's method. Even worse, we suffer from the multi-solution problem as indicated by Fig. One can consider about an implementation of such a restricted optimization problem in the traditional framework using e.g. penalty functions. Nevertheless, the code would become very difficult and complicated to implement. Traditionally, dielectric functions have been obtained by iterating the Newton-Raphson method to minimize an error function consisting of calculated and experimental values, without using a model dielectric function (MDF). It is now widely adopted that spectroscopic ellipsometric analysis relies on the MDF, which is often found to be easier to perform. Here, we describe about candidates to avoid the abovementioned multi-solution problem. One possible way is the thickness-dependent measurement by preparing several samples. Denton and coworkers In order to solve the above-mentioned current problems, this paper aims to establish an implementation method for automatic analysis of UVS and examines the effectiveness of supervised machine learning methods that have recently developed rapidly. In this work, UV-Vis spectrophotometer was used to measure the transmission T and reflectance R. A light source of deuterium and halogen lamps fires an incident beam in the wavelength range of 190 to 900 nm. Monochromatized light then passes through or reflects on a sample. After that, a photomultiplier tube is used to detect the transmitted or reflected light as a function of wavelength λ or photon energy. Details can be found elsewhere. There are no weights between units in the same layer, but weights exist between two adjacent unit layers. Figure The basic idea of learning a neural network is as follows. First, we define an error function E as follows. where E is an error, y is an output value of the output layer, and t is a correct answer value. In the learning process, the weights w and bias b are iteratively updated based on the stochastic gradient descent method Here, η is the learning coefficient. The number of units in the input and output layers is automatically determined by the problem. The output layer has two units whose outputs are the real and imaginary parts (ε , ε ) of the dielectric function. The relationship between complex refractive indices and dielectric functions is as follows: However, the number of units in the hidden layer varies from problem to problem. Since the backpropagation is based on the stochastic gradient descent, the weights and bias values have a significant impact on the learning and estimation. In addition, the error value usually monotonically increases as the number of training iterations of the training data decreases. However, during the estimation phase, the error phenomenon sometimes stops and increases. This is called overlearning. Tomlin One option would be to calculate and obtain the measured quantities for all possible combinations of η and κ as far as is practically possible (0 ≤ η ≤ 8, 0 ≤ κ ≤ 0.8), but because of the multi-solution problem described above, a different method is employed here, as described below. The adopted method relies on the model dielectric functions, which will be explained later in detail. Transitions involving these energy bands are responsible for all the features in the dielectric functions. In a model that we have employed, one approximates the dielectric function as a sum of several components, each of which is an explicit function of energy(ħω). The dielectric function represents a contribution from the neighborhood of a critical point in the joint density of states. with values of A and Γ in Eqs. ( We next describe the E1 feature. We labeled a structure found in the optical spectra in the region higher than E0 as E1 (∼ 6.8 eV). The E1 peak is difficult to analyze as it does not correspond to a single, well-defined critical point. Thus, we have characterized the E1 structure as a damped harmonic oscillator with χ = E/E , where A1 is a dimensionless strength parameter. The quantity Γ is a dimensionless broadening parameter. We then describe the total dielectric function. The whole dielectric function was found by summing the expressions given previously. We created our training dataset by changing the parameters in the dielectric function such as A and A from minimum to maximum values shown in Tables Table ε parts of the complex dielectric functions, respectively, of the two transitions. The evaluation of optical properties by UVS involves the conversion of measured quantities to dielectric functions. The following inverse analysis procedure using a neural network is considered in this study. 1. the measured UVS quantity is calculated as a function of the dielectric function based on the Tomlin equation and the MDF calculation. These values are used as training data. 2. train a neural network using the training data obtained in 1. Here, (1 ± R) T ⁄ are used as inputs, and the real ε and imaginary ε parts of the dielectric function are used as outputs. 3. using the trained neural network, we calculated the dielectric function from the measured quantities (R and T). We here show examples of the converted results on ε-Ga2O3 and Yb2O3 respectively. Figure We make a discussion here regarding universality. Figure In this paper, we present an inverse analysis method using neural networks and the evaluation of quantitative optical constants. An attempt to automatically convert measurable UVS quantities into optical constants, based on machine learning methods, allowed us to validate the effectiveness of the machine learning method. We also checked versatility of this proposed method by assessing two materials, i.e., ε-Ga2O3, Yb2O3 respectively. 3.1 Structure of neural networks