Recently, the remarkable capabilities of large language models (LLMs) have been illustrated across a variety of research domains such as natural language processing, computer vision, and molecular modeling. We extend this paradigm by utilizing LLMs for material property prediction by introducing our model Materials Informatics Transformer (MatInFormer). Specifically, we introduce a novel approach that involves learning the grammar of crystallography through the tokenization of pertinent space group information. We further illustrate the adaptability of MatInFormer by incorporating task-specific data pertaining to Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs). Through attention visualization, we uncover the key features that the model prioritizes during property prediction. The effectiveness of our proposed model is empirically validated across 1 Machine Learning (ML) models have made significant progress in the field of computational material science. One other novel approach is to represent structures as text and use Large Language Models (LLMs), which has emerged as a promising solution in artificial intelligence. LLMs have been successful in a variety of natural language processing tasks and have shown potentials in molecular machine learning tasks. 10, Devising appropriate pretraining methods is fundamental when developing LLMs to predict material properties. Pretraining plays a pivotal role in bolstering the effectiveness of deep learning models. In the context of computational material science, this stage is even more critical due to the sheer complexity and diversity of the materials landscape. In this work, we introduce Materials Informatics Transformer (MatInFormer) that attempts to address some of the aforementioned questions (Figure Space Group Tokens The initial input to the MatInFormer model is an embedded representation produced through the tokenization of available material information. This tokenization process for the Mat-InFormer model divides the material representation into three distinct parts: space group tokens, informatics tokens, and formula tokens. The first of these is the space group tokens. In the field of crystallography, a crystalline material structure is specified by a combination of the structure's space group, the dimension of its unit cell, and the element at its Wyckoff position. . The space group token representation follows the exact order as specified in Table where Φ void represents the void fraction, N unoccupied represents the number of unoccupied grids, and N total signifies the total number of grids. The accessible porosity is estimated under the premise that a sphere with a probe radius (r probe ) does not interact with the atoms. Additional details about the GPA approach that we used for porosity calculation are available in SI(Figure Taking hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites (HOIPs) as another example, we treat the organic cation as an informatics token. The application of informatics tokens lends a level of flexibility to the architecture. This flexibility can be used to incorporate additional information and simultaneously minimize redundancy. The third component of our tokenization process is the formula tokens. The stoichiometric formula is used to generate an elemental information embedding using "Matscholar" embedding. If a particular stoichiometric formula does not contain 20 elements, we employ zero-padding to achieve a consistent length across all formula tokens. Finally, to ensure compatibility across all token types, the formula tokens are projected into the appropriate dimension using a single linear layer. Following this transformation, all three types of tokens-formula, space group, and informatics-are simultaneously concatenated to form a unified token set. This aggregated set is then fed into the transformer, offering a comprehensive representation of the crystalline material system. Our MatInFormer is based on a Roberta transformer architecture where d k is the dimensions of K. Materials Informatics Transformer is able to capture bidirectional information meaning it can processes the input data from both left-to-right and right-to-left directions and is able to capture features from both directions. The transformer encoder with 8 blocks, 12 heads, and 768 hidden sizes is used. A [CLS] token is located at the first position in each layer. The [CLS] embeddings of the last layer are used for the downstream task. Pretraining significantly enhances the learning capabilities of LLMs, especially when trained on vast unlabeled datasets. Our pretraining datasets are sourced from JARVIS-Tools, Our first strategy leverages the Masked Language Modeling (MLM) objective for pretraining the MatInFormer. We employ a masking ratio of 25% for space group tokens during pretraining, thereby enabling the model to learn and infer the masked space group information. This process enables the Materials Informatics Transformer to understand the intricate crystallographic relationships among 'Space Group', 'Point Group', and 'Crystal System' tokens. Under the MLM strategy, we task the model with predicting the masked space group tokens, thereby enabling it to learn crystallographic information. This includes the classification of the crystal system based on a given space group, or the prediction of the space group number from individual space group tokens. The model is pretrained using the cross-entropy loss function and trained for 50 s under the MLM objective. The pretraining hyperparameters for the MLM strategy are given in Table The second strategy involves lattice parameters prediction(LPP) of the unit cell (namely, a, b, c and α, β, γ). This approach empowers the model to understand the crystallography interplay among space groups, formulas, and lattices. Unlike the first strategy of MLM, this technique obliges the model to not only understand crystallography and group symmetry, but also to incorporate formula and elements in order to reconstruct the coordinates. In contrast to masked language modeling, this approach enables MatInFormer to learn via crystal system characterization, relationships between lattice parameters, and also take into account the composition of the material. For example, if the crystal system token indicates a [hexagonal] system, the model needs to predict the lattice parameters adhering to the geometric characteristics of a hexagonal system (a = b ̸ = c, α = β = 90 • , γ = 120 • ). For the pretraining process, we utilized multi-task prediction, implementing a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) regression head with six outputs for all the lattice parameters. The pretraining hyperparameters for the LPP strategy are given in Table For the third pretraining strategy, the MLM and LPP methods combined together. We mask 25% of the space group tokens and the model is required to predict the lattice parameter using rest of the tokens. Using such a strategy we are able to capture the relationships between space group tokens in addition to using the available crystal information that has not been masked to predict the lattice parameters. The pretraining hyperparameters for the MLM + LPP strategy are given in Table In the pretraining stage, the transformer encoder is coupled with a 2-layer MLP regression head. Depending on the pretraining objective we choose the loss function. To evaluate the performance of MatInFormer and ascertain the efficacy of our pretraining strategies, we fine-tuned it on several downstream property prediction tasks. We assessed MatInFormer's performance using the Matbench suite, as well as the HOIP, 58 hMOF 47 datasets. During fine-tuning, our primary inputs were the "Formula" and "Space Group" tokens. Depending on the specific dataset, we supplemented these with informatics tokens. When fine-tuning, we utilized the weights from the pretrained transformer encoder. For a comparative analysis, we also benchmarked against a model trained from scratch, that was initialized with random weights. For the final property prediction, we used the [CLS] token coupled with a prediction head consisting of 2 MLP-layers with SiLU 59 activation. For the Matbench tasks, we adhered to the standard 5-fold cross-validation protocol. For the hMOF dataset, we maintained a 70%/15%/15% train/validation/test split, mirroring the approach taken by MOFormer. Here, the additional informatics tokens included topology, volume of the unit cell, number of atoms, and porosity. Furthermore, we benchmarked against the HOIP dataset, To evaluate the model performance on materials property prediction, we use 8 datasets from the Matbench suite. Moreover, we also benchmark hMOF datasets about CO 2 and CH 4 absorption for different pressure settings, shown in Table Wrenformer. Among the baselines, Wrenformer is primarily used for comparison since we use the same transformer architecture and share the same level of coordinate-free information. And for hMOF, we compare our result to CGCNN, MOFormer, and Stoichiometric-120. and hMOF result is shown in Table Table JDFT2D (JDFT) Formation Energy eV per atom hMOF The results for Matbench are shown in Table MatInFormer has an architecture similar to Wrenformer, it still performed better without using detailed Wyckoff positions and representations. This improvement suggests that our model benefits from the Roberta encoder. Additionally, tokenizing space group tokens to provide crystallography information and symmetry properties directly enhances the model's performance. These results indicate that MatInFormer has some state-of-the-art results for coordinate-free models. When we compare MatInFormer to structure-agnostic models like Roost, the performance improvement is clear. MatInFormer showed improvements of 12.62% for GVRH, 11.71% for KVRH, and 23.63% for formation energy. We also pretrained the MatInFormer using three different strategies. We observed that when MatInFormer was pretrained using Masked Language Modeling (MLM), its performance declined compared to when trained from scratch for some datasets. During the MLM pretraining, random space group tokens are masked and the model is trained to predict those mask tokens with other space group tokens. For example, the models need to predict the crystal system "Orthorhombic" and point group "mm2" for the given space group symbol "Pmm2". However, formula tokens will stay the same since there is no way to predict the formula for a given space group and result in only crystallography information being captured by the model. We noticed that the MLM objective did not help improve performance greatly on downstream tasks. One possible reason for this might be that the space group tokens mainly focus on the geometric properties of the crystal system, and don't really capture the crystalline materials composition. Given the observed limitations with MLM, we then pretrained the model via Lattice Parameter Prediction (LPP), where the model has to not only learn the information about the rules of the crystal system but also needs to consider the impact of formula tokens. Finally, aiming to leverage the strengths of both approaches, we adopted a hybrid strategy that combined both MLM and LPP for pretraining. We found that employing the LPP and MLM + LPP pretraining strategies significantly enhanced the performance of the baseline MatInFormer. For instance, using the LPP strategy led to an average improvement of 5.36%, with the jdft2d, phonons, and band gap datasets showing notable improvements of 13.28%, 11.83%, and 8.09%, respectively. Similarly, the MLM + LPP strategy yielded an average improvement of 4.45%, with the maximum performance gains again observed in the jdft2d, phonons, and band gap datasets. However, when we pretrained another model using the LPP strategy on a larger dataset with OCP 57 data, the average improvements reduced to 2.36%. This decrease could potentially be attributed to the presence of unrelaxed structures in the OCP data, which implies that the lattice parameter values are suboptimal, making pretraining to predict them less benefical. When comparing the pretrained MatInFormer to structure-based models like CGCNN, MatInFormer outperforms in 6 out of 8 tasks after being pretrained using Lattice Parameter Prediction. Unlike CGCNN, MatInFormer processes only the space group tokens and the formula tokens. This indicates that there is potentially a lot of information for models to tap into, beyond just atom distances, angular data, and the extensive feature engineering employed by many structure-based GNNs. The space group captures the patterns and symmetries in crystallography, which some GNN models may not effectively harness. Even though MatInFormer achieves performance comparable to GNNs for some tasks, the performance gap between structure-based GNNs and other models lacking atomic distance and angle information is stark, particularly for Perovskites dataset.. The MAE of our model aligns with that of structure-agnostic models like Roost. MatInFormer's weaker performance suggests that perovskite formation energy might depend more on detailed structural attributes, such as atomic positions, than on just formulas or elements. While Wrenformer slightly outperforms MatInFormer by incorporating additional Wyckoff position embeddings, the MAE for these models is still notably higher than that of structure-based GNNs The size of the pretraining data directly influences the performance on downstream tasks. We evaluated the downstream performance using two distinct pretraining datasets. The first dataset contains 642,459 samples, while the second, larger one comprises 997,528 samples. The added difference in the second dataset is the inclusion of OCP 57 data. To understand the impact of dataset size on performance, we pretrained two models using the LPP strategy and assessed their downstream performance. We observed that models pretrained without the OCP data showed better results. As detailed in Table To explore the representations learned by the pretrained models, we visualized the representation learned by the pretrained models using lattice parameter prediction strategy. To plot these representations in a 2-D space, we applied t-SNE 69 dimension reduction on the CLS token from the last encoder layer. The t-SNE plots are shown in Figure To better understand the patterns in the t-SNE plots, we note that materials primarily cluster based on their crystal system. This suggests that our model can roughly classify crystal structures using just the formula and space group. However, several scattered points appear around the edges of the t-SNE plots. This scattering can be attributed to the inherent difficulty of predicting lattice parameters for models that don't rely on coordinates. The challenge is amplified given that our pretraining datasets range from simple substances, like pure metals, to complex structures like hMOFs, which can contain between 1 to 20 elements and have unit cell volumes that can be hundreds to thousands of times larger. Comparing two different plots for the pretraining dataset 1 and pretraining dataset 2, we observed that the datasets pre-trained with Open Catalyst Data exhibited more scatter points on the periphery, whereas most of the data clustered in another plot. This could potentially be attributed to the large amount of data from Open Catalyst having the same formula and space group but varying structures, as some of them are distorted structures. This phenomenon is not only evident in the t-SNE plots but also results in inferior performance on the downstream task, as indicated in Table We assessed the performance of MatInFormer for gas absorption in hMOF using various informatics tokens and compared its results to those of CGCNN, MOFormer, and Stoichiometric-120. To understand the influence of different informatics tokens on the model's efficiency, we conducted ablation studies specifically for hMOF. The results (MAE) for gas adsorption of hMOF are presented in Table To highlight how MatInFormer compares with other baseline models, we plotted the MAEs of different models based on their average performance in Figure To gain further insights into our model, we analyzed the attention patterns by visualizing attention scores for a randomly chosen example, hMOF-5035957. These scores, shown as We observe that some tokens have particularly strong attention signals. Heads 1, 10, and 12, for instance, heavily focus on the formula tokens. Moreover, heads 7 and 11 seem to focus to porosity fractions. Additionally, some of the heads distribute their attention across the space group tokens or evenly spread their attention across all tokens, capturing a more generalized representation of the material. For the downstream tasks, the regression head is coupled with output of the [CLS] tokens. We further analyzed the attention weights of the [CLS] token, the detailed visualization is shown in Figure In this study, we developed MatInformer, a coordinate-free transformer framework designed for materials property prediction. MatInformer achieves excellent performance on many different property prediction tasks even without explictly considering structural information. Another advantage of our model lies in its ability to maintain consistent memory use, regardless of the growth in crystal size, similar to other structure-agnostic models. The pretraining strategies that we devised such as predicting lattice parameters, enables the model to gain insights into crystallography, leading to marked improvements in downstream tasks. When applied to hMOF, we investigate the influence of different features through an ablation study, considering informatics tokens like topology, unit cell volume, and porosity. The We adapt the Grid Point Approach(GPA) from porE 1