We present a generalization of AEMD approach, routinely applied to estimate thermal conductivity, to the more general case in which Soret and Dufour effects determine a coupled heat-mass transfer. We show that, by starting from microscopical definitions of heat and mass currents, conservation laws dictates the form of the differential equations governing the time evolution. In particular, we focus to the well specific case in which a closed-form solution of the system is possible and derive the analytical form of time-evolution of temperature and concentration scalar fields in the case in which step-like initial profiles are imposed across a rectangular simulation cell. The validity of this new generalized expression is finally validated using as benchamrk system a two-component Lennard-Jones liquid system, for which generalized diffusivities are estimated in different reduced temperature and density region of phase diagram. Thermal transport in fluids is a subject of great interest, both for fundamentals physics and applications Several computational techniques have been devised to the aim of quantifying the magnitude of thermal and mass coupling transport coefficients, hereafter referred to as Soret and Dufour coefficients, based on Equilibrium or Non-Equilibrium approaches and formulated in terms of Onsager coefficients. In the first case, by properly taking into consideration the microscopically observed correlation between mass and heat fluxes, Green-Kubo based approaches have been successfully used to estimate the coupling parameters In this study, we present a novel approach not requiring long simulations based on a generalization of the well-established Approach to Equilibrium methodology extensively used for thermal conductivity calculations in solid systems. We focus on the simultaneous diffusion of mass and thermal energy in a model binary mixture, and we provide a physically sound formal device, which we prove to be theoretically robust, easy to implement, and computationally efficient to estimate coupling transport coefficient. We proceed under the less restrictive conditions to establish a formal description of the relaxation towards equilibrium of an initial non-equilibrium profile of tem-perature and mass density. By generating the relaxation dynamics through a computer simulation, we get information on the coefficients governing the strength of heat/mass coupling. Our model binary mixture is described by the Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential, which is general enough to cover a plethora of possible real liquid mixtures. The paper is structured as follows. In Section II the phenomenological picture of the transport phenomena (Fourier regime, Fick regime, Soret/Dufour coupled regimes) is sketched, and the constitutive hypothesis of our model, with no assumptions except for the liquid and binary nature of the mixture, are presented. In Section III, the very general hypothesis previously stated are used in order to describe the relaxation of an imposed steplike temperature and density gradient in a Lennard-Jones binary liquid. The conditions and approximations introduced to formally treat the coupled regime are kept at minimum, with the only aim to allow the derivation of an analytical form for the solutions. By introducing the concept of generalized diffusivity a decoupling of the partial differential equations is eventually achieved. In this context, the solution for the transient evolution of the spatially averaged temperature difference and concentration differences is worked out. In Section IV the computational framework allowing the actual generation of temperature and concentration profiles is presented: the numerical implementation is performed using an equimolar mixture of LJ fluids as benchmark system. Here we as well present and discuss the results of our simulations, namely the estimate of thermal diffusivities, diffusion coefficients and the coupling parameters: as byproduct of the assessment of the method, the demonstration of the absence of a rectification effect in a Lennard Jones liquid mixture is eventually achieved. The phenomena we address in this paper are namely the Soret and Dufour effects. We understand that we will consider fluid systems, i.e. systems that can carry a mass current. It is common knowledge that if a temperature gradient is present in a homogeneous and isotropic sample, a corresponding heat flux is established and the relation linking the temperature gradient ⃗ ∇T to the corresponding heat current ⃗ J q is linear where dQ represents the amount of heat flowing from high to low temperature regions per unit cross section dA in unit of time dt along the direction marked by the unit vector n. When this equation is obeyed we will address the situation as Fourier regime where the coefficient κ is the thermal conductivity of the system. A similar relation exists in the case of a nonhomogeneous system, at constant temperature, if the mass density ρ is non uniformly distributed: in this case, a mass current ⃗ J m arises, taking the form where ⃗ v is the velocity in the fluid with local ρ density. When this equation is obeyed, we will refer to Fick regime. More interestingly, in fluid systems, it is found that a heat current arises if a density gradient is present, as well as a mass current can take place if a temperature gradient exists. This is tantamount to state that heat and mass transport are not independent but coupled. In the first case, the effect is called Dufour effect, in the second one, Soret effect. The magnitude of these effects is usually very small and they are in fact very difficult to observe experimentally since other phenomena, like natural convection Our object of study, consists in non-reactive [13] binary mixtures in the liquid phase. Therefore, considering a fixed volume Ω, it is assumed that two chemical species, hereafter referred to as species 1 and species 2, are contained within it. Thus, for the i-th species, the number N i of particles with mass m i is fixed. Next, we define the number density of particles n i and the mass density ρ i = m i n i as follows: where M i = m i N i is the total mass of the i-th species contained in the volume Ω, both densities remain constant over time. Since the system is in the liquid phase, each particle has non-zero velocities ⃗ v i . Therefore, given a closed surface Σ completely contained within the volume Ω, we define the mass flux ⃗ J m,i due to the i-th species through the surface in terms of the mass density ρ ′ i in the volume V ′ enclosed by Σ. It is straightforward to show that a conservation law must hold Similarly, because of the particle motion, a flux of kinetic energy (which is to say, a heat flux ⃗ J q,i ) is strictly related with the mass flux: by defining the specific heat capacity of the i-th species as C v,i , a second conservation law is thus found where ρ ′ i,q = C v,i ρ i T is the heat density related to the flux of the i-th species. Eqs. ( Stressing the fact the in this study we will focus on case (b), it is apparent that in order to obtain a set of equations describing the dynamics of relaxation toward equilibrium, explicit expressions for the fluxes ⃗ J q,i , ⃗ J m,i in terms of observable, macroscopic variables must be adopted. To this aim, by non-equilibrium thermodynamics arguments developed in the linear response regime, Onsager demonstrated where L qq , L qμ , L μμ are the Onsager coefficients, while μ i is the chemical potential associated with the i-th species. In general, the chemical potential μ i is a function of the ρ ′ i and can thus vary in time as well as in space. However the exact form of this dependence crucially depends on the specific interaction among the components of the system, and must thus be assumed depending on the case. We will this issue below. In the case of a binary mixture, the system in eq.( is introduced, the constraint w 1 = 1 -w 2 must hold. Therefore, as also reported by Zimmermann From a phenomenological point of view, an equivalent but more informative formulation of the eq.( In this derivation, the chemical potential μ is the chemical potential of the binary mixture, defined as μ = μ 1 /m 1 -μ 2 /m 2 . We stress here, since it will be important in what follows, that μ vanishes if ρ 1 +ρ 2 is homogeneous The physical meaning of each coefficient is enlightened by examining some specific limiting situations. If no chemical forces are present, but a temperature gradient is applied, the system eq.( It is thus clear that D T has a critical role in determining a coupling between mass and heat transfer: this is particularly evident in non-equilibrium steady state situations where a temperature gradient is fixed among the mixture but the mass fluxes are free to relax. Under this hypothesis, provided that mass density is homogeneous, at equilibrium ⃗ J m = ⃗ 0 and from eq.( where S is called the Soret coefficient. Physically, the Soret coefficient determines the magnitude of the concentration gradient arising from the presence of the imposed temperature gradient (Soret effect). It is also found that a reciprocal effect, i.e. the inset of a temperature gradient as response for an imposed concentration gradient can be observed: this effect, which is the necessary consequence for the presence of a coupling term, is called Dufour effect. The starting point for the transient analysis of the temperature T (⃗ r, t) and density field ρ ′ (⃗ r, t) in the case of a coupled mass and heat transfer is the formulation of thermal current ⃗ J q and diffusion current ⃗ J m as derived by Trimble and Deutch In principle, the evaluation of the parameters involved in eq.( By combining the conservation laws stated in eq.( where α T = κ/C v ρ ′ is the thermal diffusivity. In order to obtain the evolution of the mass density field, an expression for the chemical potential must be adopted. Here we use the fact that the system we are treating is a Lennard-Jones liquid. Assuming the leading order of all the main possible models where R is the gas constant while μ 0 and ρ ′ 0 refer to the chemical potential and mass density evaluated at an arbitrary reference point (μ 0 can be eventually also set to zero). Under eq.( In the most general case, the system formed by eq.( where α T is the thermal diffusivity, α D = D is the mass diffusivity (or diffusion coefficient), while β 1 , β 2 can be properly defined as coupling parameters responsible for Soret and Dufour effect, respectively. Indeed, the system formed by eq.( The basic idea at this point, is to proceed using a standard analytic technique allowing to restate the eqs.( where A matrix of coefficients can be diagonalized by performing the transformation D = S -1 AS. By indicating with λ 1 , λ 2 the eigenvalues of A and with v the vector resulting from S -1 w, eq.( where the eigenvalues are in the form Under the hypothesis of a uni-dimensional heat/mass transport (which, without loss of generality, we assume along the x axis) in a rectangular simulation cell with length L simulated in periodic boundary conditions in all the three dimensions, the separation of variable methods allows to found a solution for v 1,2 (⃗ r, t) in the form where c 1,2 (m) coefficients are fixed by the initial profile ⃗ v(⃗ r, 0). A natural choice is to build the initial v 1,2 (⃗ r, 0) by imposing across the simulation cell step-like temperature and concentration profiles. Formally, we thus have where the concentration of species 1 is normalized to 1. The initial conditions set for ⃗ w are then imposed to ⃗ v by performing the linear transformation ⃗ v = S -1 ⃗ w. At this stage, coefficients c 1,2 (m) are then fixed by using the Fourier series expansion of sign(x) allowing to define an analytical expression for the evolution of the temperature and density time evolution. In particular, the evolution of the temperature and concentration differences between the two regions [-L/2, 0] and [0, L/2] of the simulation box are where ∆T (0), ρ ′ (0) denote the initial temperature and concentration difference, respectively, and a(m) = 2m + 1. It is worth to note the strict analogy of the resulting equation for T in eq.( In this perspective, the eigenvalues λ 1,2 of the A transport coefficients matrix can be physically interpreted, if a coupling is present, in terms of generalized heat/mass diffusivities. A possible way to link this formal picture with the phenomenological Soret coefficent S, describing the strength of thermophoresis phenomenon, is to recast the system in eq.( where r qq , r μμ , r qμ are the Onsager resistivities, which can be easily worked out from eq.( In this framework, the Soret coefficient is written as the ratio between the thermodiffusion coefficient D T and mass diffusivity D m in the steady state regime Under the approximations previously stated on (i) the form of chemical potential and (ii) the form of the system (16), the approximate form is found IV. COMPUTATIONAL SETUP Classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were performed using the LAMMPS software package. The system of interest is an equimolar Lennard-Jones liquid mixture composed of component 1 and 2, differing for the values of the LJ potential parameters (ε 1 , ε 2 , σ 1 , σ 2 ) and the masses m 1 , m 2 . The values of the parameters and the masses are chosen in order to assure that both the pure phases as well as the mixture could simultaneously exists FIG. The system contained a total of 86,000 atoms setting the initial density to ρ * = 0.8. An equal number of component 1 and 2 atoms were created in order to obtain a step-like concentration profile along the L x direction of the rectangular simulation cell. Periodic boundary conditions were applied in all directions but L x . In order to prevent mass and heat diffusion before a complete equilibration of the system, two regions with width 2σ 1 and encompassing the entire cross section of the simulation cell were created at the interfaces of component 1 and 2. Velocities and forces acting on the particle inside these two regions were kept to zero during the equilibration, which proceeded as follows. The initial configuration is generated in its solid fcc phase and then minimized using the conjugate gradient (CG) algorithm until the pressure is 0. The bi-component system is then liquefied by a 10,0000-step NVE run at T * = 5. Subsequently, a 500,000-step NPT run is performed using Nosé-Hoover thermostat and barostat until average temperature and density are equilibrated at T * = 0.8, ρ * = 0.8, respectively. The step-like temperature gradient is finally created by a 100,000 step NVT run. After this stage, which closes the equilibration run, all the atoms in the simulation cell are evolved in a NVE run. The number of steps was chosen to be sufficient to obtain a significant reduction of ⟨ρ 1,2 ⟩ and ⟨T ⟩, being both these quantities evaluated during the run. The thermal and mass diffusivities were calculated by fitting the concentration and temperature profiles obtained from the AEMD simulations using Eq.( In order to better estimate the β values, for each mixture two additional separate runs were performed by setting (a) no initial thermal gradient (Fick regime) and (b) no initial concentration gradient (Fourier regime), the latter condition being realized by simply allowing a complete spatial randomization of the two components before monitoring. In order to increase statistical significance of the obtained results, ten simulation for each mixture and for each transport regime were performed by varying the initial velocities and thermostatation run length. The monitored time evolution of the average temperature and concentration differences (in adimensional LJ units) are schematically depicted in Fig. From analysis of Fig. By repeating the set of calculation using the same initial concentration profile but with initial T 1 , T 2 reversed (i.e. setting as cold the simulation half-cell that was set hot in the calculation for obtaining data in Table In this paper, we reported a derivation of an approach to equilibrium method to estimate the coupling parameters of a binary LJ liquid. We have shown that, by combining the very general mass and energy conservation laws with the thermodynamics of non-equilibrium forms of heat and mass currents, a general system to formally decouple the transport phenomena can be found, if generalized diffusivity are introduced. Moreover, in the context of uni-dimensional flows and step-like initial profiles of temperature and mass density, a very simple solution for the evolution of the profiles can be found in terms of a sum of exponential. By applying this method to a LJ binary mixture, we provided a sound assessment of the method, comparing the results with the ones obtained with non-equilibrium techniques, and obtained as well the demonstration that no rectification effects seems to arise if initial temperature gradient is switched.