Soliton molecules, bound states of two solitons, can be important for the informatics using solitons and the quest for exotic particles in a wide range of physical systems from unconventional superconductors to nuclear matter and Higgs field, but have been observed only in temporal dimension for classical wave optical systems. Here, we identify a topological soliton molecule formed spatially in an electronic system, a quasi 1D charge density wave of indium atomic wires. This system is composed of two coupled Peierls chains, which are endowed with a Z 4 topology and three distinct, right-chiral, left-chiral, and non-chiral, solitons. Our scanning tunneling microscopy measurements identify a bound state of right-and left-chiral solitons with distinct in-gap states and net zero phase shift. Our density functional theory calculations reveal the attractive interaction of these solitons and the hybridization of their electronic states. This result initiates the study of the interaction between solitons in electronic systems, which can provide novel manybody electronic states and extra data-handling capacity beyond the given soliton topology. With the development of information technology, it has become crucial to process vast amount of information dispationlessly In a simplified model, two adjacent Z 2 solitons in an electronic system with opposite signs of the phase shift in the same wire can have an attractive interaction Here, we identify a soliton molecule appearing in a model quasi 1D charge density wave (CDW) insulator of In atomic wires on the Si(111) surface by scanning tunnelling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS) measurements and DFT calculations. This system features three different types of solitons and the soliton molecule is composed of two different types of chiral solitons in one wire with, characteristically, a net zero phase shift and a hybridized in-gap state, or a molecular state of solitons. The surface layer of one monolayer of In atoms on Si(111) is composed of an array of two zigzag In chains packed between Si chains with a 4×1 unitcell (×4 is perpendicular to the wires, see Supplementary Fig. While a non-chiral soliton is very mobile to hinder the STM observation, chiral solitons are well trapped by pin-ning defects or tend to aggregate into a 2D domain wall due to the interwire interaction We perform DFT calculations to verify the structure model with two solitons coupled. Since the consideration of a huge structure with many coupled chains, a few defects and a few solitons shown in Fig. The very fine atomic structure within the molecule may need further refinement in the DFT calculation, since it does not include the defects and solitons in the neighboring chains due to the technical limitation. The existence of two solitons in proximity, however, does not guarantee the formation of a soliton molecule. What is essential is the intersoliton interaction or the molecular level formation in electronic states. Figure In order to understand this characteristic in-gap LDOS feature, we go back to the DFT calculation for the structure shown in Fig. Discussion We finally note on the stability of the soliton molecule. All molecular cases observed are neighbored by solitons and defects in neighboring wires; the soliton molecules are sandwitched by defects/solitons in two neighboring wires or in proximity with defects/solitons in one of neighboring wires (Supplementary Figs. The present work discovers a topological soliton molecule in spatial dimension while a non-topological soliton molecule in temporal dimension was observed in optical systems. The formation of a soliton molecule leads us beyond the topological and algebraic struc-ture of individual solitons extending the functionality of solitonic systems for informatics with low energy consumption and high data capacity. The experimental and microscopic studies of defect-soliton and soliton-soliton interactions are in its infant but has great potential for the discovery of novel manybody electronic states of diverse composite topological excitations. The experiment was conducted in an ultra-high vacuum system equipped with a commercial cryogenic STM system. The In/Si(111)-(4×1) surface was prepared by depositing one monolayer of indium atoms onto a Si(111)7×7 surface kept at 600 K, which was cleaned by flash heatings at 1500 K DFT calculations were performed by using the Vienna ab initio simulation package 