A novel original method of determination of stresses and critical resolved shear stresses (CRSSs) using neutron diffraction was proposed. In this method, based on the crystallite group method, the lattice strains were measured in different directions and using different reflections hkl during uniaxial deformation of magnesium alloy AZ31. The advantage of this method is that the stresses for groups of grains having similar orientations can be determined directly from measurement without any models used for data interpretation. The obtained results are unambiguous and do not depend on the models' assumptions as in previous works. Moreover, it was possible for the first time to determine the uncertainty of the measured CRSS values and local stresses at groups of grains. The used methodology allowed for the determination of stress partitioning between grains having different orientations and for an explanation of the anisotropic mechanical behaviour of the strongly textured alloy. Finally, the CRSS values allowed for the validation of the type of intergranular interaction assumed in the elastic-plastic self-consistent model and for a significant reduction of the number of unknown parameters when the model is adjusted to the experimental data. Magnesium alloys, due to their unique properties such as high specific strength, high thermal conductivity and damping capacity, have been used in many industries. However, the limited ductility and poor formability of Mg alloys at room temperature restrict their wide range of applications All these modifications can significantly affect the deformation behaviour of the newly obtained magnesium alloy. Therefore, it is important to develop test methods to study changes in material properties caused by such modifications. It is particularly important to determine the critical resolved shear stresses (CRSSs) necessary for activation of slip and twin systems, as well as to measure the stresses at polycrystalline grains and to determine the plastic deformation of the grains. It is obvious that knowledge of the CRSS and plastic processes occurring at the scale of polycrystalline grains is necessary to understand and describe material properties such as hardness, hardening and elastic-plastic behaviour at the macroscopic scale. The macromechanical properties of polycrystalline materials were determined by means of mechanical tests and an effort was made to estimate the measurement uncertainty of such values as the stiffness modulus Accordingly, two easy deformation modes are basal slip and tensile twinning. However, the basal slip, having the lowest CRSS, is predominant only in advantageous crystal orientations, when loading force is deviated from the crystal <c> axis and from the basal plane. Therefore, other slip or twin systems must also be activated to accommodate plastic deformation The CRSS values can be estimated on the basis of hardness measurement Another approach to the study of deformation mechanisms in magnesium was proposed using simulations based on the molecular dynamics (MD) method Additionally, compression twinning was observed in nanopillar samples, followed by basal slip inside a formed twin. On the other hand, when tensile strain was imposed along the <c> axis, tensile twinning was activated Acoustic emission is another useful technique for studying the micromechanical behaviour of materials, especially the twinning nucleation process The above discussion shows that, in the case of the nanoindentation method used to determine CRSS, the results are obtained for the near-surface volume, while the results of the acoustic method are rather qualitative. Therefore, the commonly used method for determination of the CRSS value is based on diffraction measurements of the lattice strains during mechanical tests, such as tensile or compression tests. In principle, the CRSSs can be determined directly from the experiment if the stress state in the polycrystalline material is measured at the grain scale. Various methods have been used to measure residual stresses, i.e. stresses remaining in the material after processing An interesting methodology for determination of the grain stresses and then CRSS values was presented in In The method usually used to determine CRSS values and hardening parameters for large statistics of small grains is the TOF (time of flight) neutron diffraction experiment, e.g. For each direction, the measurement is performed using many reflections hkl, i.e., the average strains of the lattice are measured for grain volumes for which the scattering vector is perpendicular to the (hkl) plane. Unfortunately, on the basis of the data obtained in this way, stresses in individual grains or groups of grains cannot be directly determined from experiment and an elastic-plastic model of a polycrystalline material must be used to find the variables characterizing crystallographic slips and the twinning process. Typically, the CRSS values and hardening parameters (for slip and/or twin systems) are varied in the model calculations by trial and error to best match the model lattice strains vs. applied stress relationship with analogous experimental data. The comparison is made for different hkl reflections (i.e., different groups of grains), but only for the two directions of the scattering vector. At the same time, the model and experimental stressstrain dependences are compared. This method was used to study the same extruded magnesium alloy AZ31, initially using the EPSC (elastic-plastic self-consistent) model Another problem with the trial-and-error method is the number of model parameters that are changed in order to fit the calculation results to the experimental data. This is especially important when not all CRSS and hardening parameters are known, and lattice strains are measured in only two directions. Our experience in such data processing has shown that the results obtained are not always unique. Some progress in this aspect was proposed in The above remarks lead to the conclusion that new methods of CRSS determination directly from diffraction measurements deserve attention. The lack of such methods that would give representative and unambiguous results for a large number of small polycrystalline grains (with sizes of a dozen μm or smaller) is the motivation for this work. The aim of the work is to develop a diffraction method based on the TOF neutron diffraction technique, enabling direct experimental determination (without the use of a model) of unambiguous CRSS values. These experimental CRSSs can be then used in the EPSC model to determine the hardening parameters (by the trialand-error method). In this way, the ambiguity of the obtained results and their dependence on the theoretical assumptions of the model is avoided or significantly reduced. The novel methodology for CRSS determination is based on the crystallite group method (CGM), which can be used to determine stresses for groups of grains having a given orientation. Such an experiment seems to be very promising due to the high statistics of the grains for which the measurement is performed. For the first time, CGM was used for the magnesium alloy AZ31 in The values determined in this way will constitute reliable basic data determined for a representative number of polycrystalline grains. The main advantage of the method developed in this work is that the obtained CRSS values are determined in an unambiguous manner together with the measurement uncertainties. Another important goal of this work is to determine, for the first time experimentally, stresses in grains with selected orientations in order to explain the huge difference in the mechanical stressstrain diagrams obtained for various load tests performed in different directions on a sample with a strong texture. Moreover, the measured partitioning of the load between grains will allow us to verify the intergranular interactions in the elastic-plastic model, which can differ from those assumed in self-consistent models (Eshelby type of interaction The studied material was hot-rolled magnesium alloy AZ31, the chemical composition of which is shown in Table To measure the stress components using neutron diffraction, three loading experiments were performed; tensile in the rolling direction (later called RDT) The experimental methodology used in this work allows the determination of the CRSS values based on the measurement of stresses performed for large grain statistics by neutron diffraction. For this purpose, the crystallite group method (CGM) was used The crystallite group method is based on the measurement of the average stress for groups of grains having similar lattice orientations. The measurement of lattice strains is performed in different directions of the scattering vector (along which the lattice strain is determined) using different reflections hkl. The idea is to choose such experimental conditions for which the lattice strains are measured for the selected group of grain. Therefore, the scattering vector is perpendicular to the crystallographic plane (hkl) corresponding to the lattice orientation of this group, i.e., the measurements are done at the so-called poles P(ψ, φ) hkl representing normals to the planes (hkl). The orientations of poles P(ψ, φ) hkl can be presented on a pole figure as shown in Fig. The experimental realization of the conditions described above depends on the technique used. In -selection of scattering angle 2θ to satisfy the Bragg relation for a given hkl reflection coming from the (hkl) plane and corresponding to the chosen pole P(ψ, φ) hkl , -alignment of the normal to selected (hkl) plane along scattering vector by changing sample orientation relative to the laboratory (e.g., the appropriate ψ and φ angles corresponding to P(ψ, φ) hkl pole are set using the Eulerian cradle). For the energy-dispersive diffraction method, e.g., the time-of-flight (TOF) technique used in this work, experimental data for multiple hkl reflections are available simultaneously for a given orientation of the scattering vector and constant scattering angle 2θ (due to a continuous spectrum of wavelength). However, in the used equipment it is not possible to change the orientation of the sample with respect to scattering vector. Therefore, the selection of an appropriate pole P(ψ, φ) hkl must be carried out through: -selection of the reflection hkl from the available diffraction pattern which corresponds to the given (hkl) plane for the chosen pole P(ψ, φ) hkl (all available reflections are measured with the same constant orientation of the scattering vector characterised by given ψ and φ angles), -if more detectors are available the selection of appropriate reflection hkl is repeated for each detector (i.e., for different orientations of the scattering vector). Therefore, the difference between the two techniques consists in the selection of hkl reflections that satisfy the Bragg condition for the selected (hkl) plane. It should also be emphasised that the angular dispersion method (with the Eulerian cradle) allows for a strict selection of the set of P(ψ, φ) hkl poles corresponding to the orientation of the lattice; however, the lattice strains corresponding to the given lattice orientations are measured consecutively and not at the same time. This leads to long measurements during which some (usually small) relaxation of the applied macrostress may occur during plastic deformation. On the contrary, the dispersion energy method used in this work allowed the measurement of lattice strains for many poles P(ψ, φ) hkl simultaneously thanks to the use of a continuous spectrum of wavelength and nine detectors with different orientations relative to the incident beam (scattering vector 2θ = 90° for all detectors, details are given below). In this way, nine scattering vector orientations are available for a sample fixed in a tensile/compression rig, and each detector simultaneously measures the diffraction pattern with different hkl reflections. Then, each diffractogram is analysed to find reflections from planes (hkl) corresponding to the given lattice orientations. However, it should be emphasised that the directions of the scattering vectors are usually not strictly parallel to the normals to the selected planes (hkl). When selecting the poles, the criterion was adopted that the difference between the normal to the plane (hkl) and the scattering vector should not exceed 5o. To determine the stresses for given groups of grains with selected orientations (Figs. The sample was a 2 cm long bar with a square cross section of 4 mm per side. The experimental setup used at the TKSN 400 diffractometer is shown in Fig. The coordinates of this orientation in the pole figure are shown in Fig. It should be emphasised that in all experiments presented in this paper (RDT, RDC and NDC), the x 3 axis corresponding to the central point of the pole figure was chosen as parallel to the direction of the applied load, which simplifies both the analysis and the presentation of the results. The orientations of the sample directions RD, TD and ND (rolling direction, transverse direction and normal direction) in relation to the x i axes are given in Table and their visualisation is showed in Fig. The important goal of this work is to determine experimentally the stresses for selected groups of crystallites, both those which are very numerous due to crystallographic texture, but also those which are very few and do not play a significant role during the deformation process. The stress evolution for a given grain orientation was determined using the crystallite group method Where the σ ij CR tensor is defined always with respect to the x i system of coordinates (see Figs. 5 and 6), and < d > hkl and < d > hkl 0 are the interplanar spacings measured in the direction of the scattering vector (given by angles ψ and φ) using hkl reflection for the sample under applied load and for the initial non-loaded sample, respectively. F ij R (hkl, φ, ψ) are the so-called X-ray stress factors or diffraction elastic constants calculated by the Reuss approach It should be emphasised that lattice strains for twins cannot be determined directly from the measurements due to the lack of twin orientations in the initial non-deformed sample. Therefore, the values of < d > hkl 0 (needed in Eq. 1) for twin orientations were recalculated from an interpolation method that used the interplanar spacing available in the initial sample and measured with different detectors. In the calculations presented in Appendix 2a, the standard uncertainties of the values < d > hkl 0 determined in this way were estimated. This approach was previously used in The uncertainty analysis of the stresses determined in this work is described in detail in The F ij R (hkl, φ, ψ) factors were calculated from the ODF presented in Fig. The first analysed experiment was the tensile test performed in the rolling direction (RD). In Fig. shown in In the second and the third experiments, the sample was compressed in the ND and RD directions, respectively. The set of reflections used for lattice strain measurements is shown in Table Having determined the evolution of the σ ij CR stresses for grains having different orientations during three different modes of deformation, the resolved shear stresses (RSS) for different slip and twin systems can be calculated. Then by analysing the behaviour of chosen RSS for specific grain orientations during three different tests, the CRSS values for these systems can be found. For this purpose, the following rules to find out the active slip or twin system were applied: -a potentially active system is one for which the RSS takes the maximum value among all symmetrically equivalent slip systemsthis system is activated when its RSS reaches the CRSS value (Schmid criterion), -when the system is activated, the RSS on this system starts to grow more slowly or does not change significantlythe RSS value for the active system is considered as the CRSS value, -if the evolution of the RSS on more than one system indicates their activation at the same sample load, another experimental test should be analysed to select the system actually activated, -the slip systems for which the values of the RSS calculated from measured tensor σ ij CR are very low, i.e. less than about 10 MPa (or lower than zero in the case of twin system), are treated as inactivethis concerns systems for which the Schmid factor calculated for the uniaxial applied stress equals zero. Using the above rules, the analysis of the measurement results was carried out considering the potential possibility of activation of the slip and twin systems during the three conducted experiments when plastic deformation begins. The behaviours of the transverse stresses and shear stress σ 23 G' (which is expected, similarly as in the RDT experiment) for this grain orientation are caused by interaction between grains; therefore, their evolution should be explained by the model (cf. Section 4.2). -In the case of the tensile test performed in the RD, the basal slip system cannot be activated in the grains having A and B orientations because the load applied to the sample is parallel to the basal plane, leading to zero value of the Schmid factor for macrostress Σ RD . The RSS on the tensile twin system is negative, therefore twinning cannot occur. The other slip systems can be active for such grain orientations. On the other hand, the basal system and all other systems can be activated for C orientation. -During the compression test in the ND, the only potentially active system for the orientations A and B are the pyramidal <c+a> systems for which the Schmid factor is not equal to zero. The RSS for twinning is negative, therefore twinning cannot occur. The other systems are not activated due to the zero value of the Schmid factor when uniaxial Σ ND stress is perpendicular to the slip plane (as for the basal system), parallel to the slip plane (as for the prismatic system) or perpendicular to slip direction (as for basal, prismatic and pyramidal <a> systems). For the D, F and G orientations, all slip systems including the basal system can be active. -In the case of the compression test in the RD, the RSS on tensile twin system is positive and significant for the orientations A and B. This gives a chance to find out the value of the CRSS for the twinning process. The RSS evolution for G' orientations are also considered and, in this case, all slip systems can be active. Moreover, for the tensile twins (T-orientation), the Schmid factor calculated for the Σ RD stress is close to zero for the basal, prismatic, and pyramidal <a> systems, while for the tensile twin system the RSS is negative. Therefore, in grains having T orientation, only the pyramidal <c+a> systems can be activated. Considering the above remarks, initially the evolution of the maximum RSS (among all symmetrically equivalent systems) for the basal system in the tilted orientations were analysed. The tilted orientations are those for which the <c> axis is not perpendicular to one of the directions RD, TD or ND and the Schmid factor is not zero for the basal system. A common feature of such orientations is that the basal system can be activated, while for the A, B and T orientations it is inactive due to the zero value of the Schmid factor. It was found that after the onset of plasticity, the grain stress for the tilted orientations is always lower than the macroscopic value, i.e., these grains are softer than e.g. A, B and T orientations (cf. Figs. and this value was used in further analysis (cf. Table Therefore, the intersection of the regression lines fitted below and above the trend change can be identified as the point at which the RSS value equals the CRSS value. Additionally, the uncertainty of the CRSS value obtained in this way can be estimated by considering the maximum difference between the intersections of the extreme lines corresponding to the uncertainty range for both fitted lines. The values of the CRSS with their uncertainties for the first and the second order pyramidal <c+a> systems activated in grains A and B during the NDC experiment are given in Table Table Finally, the CRSS for the twin system can be determined from the RSS evolution occurring during compression along the RD. In this case, the orientation B is considered because the Schmid factor for the twin system in this orientation is the highest among all other orientations considered. As shown in Fig. Voce law used in the modified EPSC model. In this work, a modified EPSC model based on the idea of where: Γ g is the total shear strain on all active slip systems, τ 0 s is the current value of initial critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) on slip/twin system s in grain g, while τ 1 s , θ 0 s and θ 1 s are phenomenological hardening parameters for the given slip/twin system s (equal for all grains) which must be found out from available experimental results and/or a model. Self-consistent calculations The initial CRSS (τ 0 g,s ) for the slip systems and tensile twin system were determined directly from experiments, as described in the previous sections. However, other parameters of the Voce law describing hardening of slip and twin systems (Eq. 2) cannot be found out without the help of a crystallographic model. Therefore, the experimental τ 0 g,s values (or values close to them within the uncertainties) were used as input data for the EPSC calculations, while the hardening parameters of the Voce law were adjusted to fit the model lattice strains to the experimental ones (measured in the direction of the applied load) and macroscopic stress-strain curves, simultaneously. It should be emphasised that the same set of parameters of the Voce law was applied for the three tests analysed in this work (Table where T ijkl gg,α is the modified interaction tensor used to calculate the strain rate localization tensor A ijkl and the T ijkl gg tensor is calculated for the Eshelby spherical inclusion embedded into a homogeneous medium characterised by the macroscopic tangent modulus tensor L ijkl . This means that the differences in the strains between grains are enlarged in comparison to those calculated for the spherical Eshelby inclusion by factor α, i.e., in this assumption the modified strain localization tensor A g is given by: where I is a fourth rank identity tensor, and Δl g = l g -L is the difference between the tangent modulus tensors computed for the grain (l g ) and the matrix effective modulus (L) Therefore, the interactions between grains in the modified model are from those obtained by the model towards the Sachs approach (assumption of homogeneous stresses and free strains). It should be emphasised that the above assumption is necessary to modify the properties of grain interactions to fit the model to the experiment because the original EPSC model does not correctly predict the processes occurring during elastoplastic deformation of the studied textured Mg alloy. The twinning phenomena can be included into the model in various ways. In this work, twinning is described using two different approaches: -"Continuous approximation" means that when the RSS reaches the CRSS value, a twin grain is formed with the same stress state and CRSS as that of its parent grain, but with a new crystal lattice orientation. The twin grain then grows with increasing shear strain on the twin system, thus reducing the parent grain volume. -In the case of "threshold approximation", when the RSS reaches the CRSS value, the twin system is activated, but no twin is formed yet. The parent grain is subjected to deformation in the same way as in the case of crystallographic slips, i.e., the state of stresses of the parent grain and CRSS on its slip systems change. Twin grains are formed, and their orientations are changed with respect to the parent after the total volume fraction of all twins w g,twin = 23%. -In both approaches, the volume fraction of twins is proportional to the total shear strain Γ g,twin on all twin systems in grain g , i.e., twin fraction w g,twin = Γ g,twin 0.13 ⁄ , It should be emphasised that the only difference between "continuous" and "threshold" approximations is that in the latter one the twinning is postponed and after the offset of w g,twin = 23%, the same procedure is applied. The assumption introduced for the parent grains is that the grain stress does not increase when the twin system is active. This means that during twinning, which is approximated by a crystallographic slip on the twin system, the parent grain is perfectly plastic. The self-hardening for the twin system is equal to zero, while the twin slip causes the linear hardening of other systems in the parent grain (hardening is described by one parameter of the Voce law, i.e., θ 0 given in Table The comparison of the model prediction with the experimental results obtained for three different tests are shown in Figs. It should be emphasised that the results of the diffraction measurement of lattice deformations correspond to the sample load corresponding to the lower curve. Also, the model of elastic-plastic deformation should be adjusted to the lower curve. Some disagreement between the predicted and experimental lattice strains is observed in the case of the tensile test in the RD (Fig. This means that the shift to the Sachs model is possibly greater than it was assumed in the modified model with α = 1.2 (this was also suggested in the paper The above-described approximations (continuous and threshold) were used to predict the twinning process during the compression test in the RD. For both approaches, the model results were well adjusted to the experimental results with the same work hardening parameter 0 and slightly different CRSS values (τ0), which are 1-3 MPa lower than the experimental one. In Fig. When the model parameters are established, the stress evolution for different grains can be calculated and compared with the experimental results. Such a comparison is shown in Figs. In general, a very good agreement between experimental and model data was found for the three performed tests and different grain orientations. A significant disagreement was found only for the stress σ 33 C (C orientation) during the tensile test in the RD and for σ 11 A (A orientation) during the compression test in the RD. It should be emphasised that in the above comparison, the experimental data were determined for grain groups (using CGM), while the model results were calculated for a given (single) crystal lattice orientation. Thus, the agreement between the experiment and the model prediction, obtained in most cases, means that the stress tensors determined by the CGM method represent well the grain stresses for given lattice orientations. To study the partitioning of the load between grains, the evolution of the grain stresses in the direction of applied load together with the macroscopic stress are shown in Figs. It should be emphasised that an interesting interplay between the grain stresses occurs, giving the macroscopic sample stress which is an average over all grain stresses. The macroscopic plot obtained by the model is perfectly fitted to the experimental points, and the stress distribution between grains of different orientations is also well predicted by the model (at last qualitatively in the case of orientation A). In Fig. The mechanical behaviour of grains was described in the previous sections. However, it should be emphasised that the macroscopic properties of the sample depend not only on the properties of grains but also on the interaction between them as well as on the number of grains having specific orientations (characterised by texture). The advantage of the diffraction method is the possibility of measurement of texture evolution due to twinning and slips on crystallographic planes. Therefore, in this section the changes in texture (ODF) and volume fraction of twin grains, measured using the EBSD method and neutron diffraction, are compared with the modified EPSC model. The ODFs were determined from EBSD measurements for the samples subjected to different tests (Fig. Thanks to the stress evolution measurements for different grain groups, it was possible for the first time to determine experimentally the stress distribution between crystallites having different lattice orientations with respect to the applied load. There are four characteristic groups of grains: hard, intermediate, soft, and those for which the twinning phenomenon occurs. Hard grains are those for which the plastic process takes place much later, by activation of the pyramidal slip systems <c+a> showing the highest CRSS value, while the other slips and twinning cannot be activated due to the nearly zero and negative RSS values. Soft grains are those grains in which basal slip having the lowest CRSS value is activated, while the intermediate grains are those for which the prismatic <a> and / or the pyramidal <a> systems are activated, and other slips and twinning remain inactive. In the fourth group of grains, the twinning phenomena can occur, leading to the saturation of grain stress regardless of the slip systems activity. It is well known that the partitioning of stresses between the grains plays a key role in the macroscopic response of the sample depending on the combination of the type and direction of the applied load with a sharp crystallographic texture. It should be emphasised that in the present work the partitioning between different groups of grains was for the first time determined qualitatively, directly from diffraction experiment. It was shown that the macroscopic behaviour of the sample is always between the high stresses localised at harder grains and low stresses at softer grains (the macroscopic stress is equal to the average over volume of all grains). Due to the different types (compressive or tensile) and orientations of the applied load, most grains with the preferred texture orientations exhibit very different plastic behaviour leading to the macroscopic anisotropy of the sample. As shown in this work, the greatest macroscopic stresses can be achieved when for most crystallites the applied compressive force is parallel to the c-axis, i.e., when the load is parallel to the ND. Due to such geometrical relationships, the value of the RSS greater than zero for A and B orientations can be achieved only for pyramidal slip systems <c+a>, which can be easily calculated from the Schmid law. Therefore, most grains are hard, and the sample is also hard. It has been shown that grains having orientations A and B exhibit higher stresses than macroscopic stresses, while for inclined grains (orientations C and D) the stresses are lower. Different situations take place during the tensile test in the RD, when for the preferred orientations the twin systems remain inactive (RSS is less than zero), the basal system is also inactive (RSS is equal to zero), and the prismatic <a> and/or pyramidal <a> systems activate for the majority of grains (A and B) at an intermediate level of the applied load (much lower than when the compressive load was parallel to ND). Due to the low value of the stress applied to the sample, the RSS values on the <c+a> slip systems are also too low to activate them. This is an intermediate sample response. As a result, the stresses at A and B orientations are higher than the macroscopic value, while the inclined orientations D, E and F exhibit lower values of stresses. In the third experiment (compression in RD), the most complex sample response was observed, and the shape of the macroscopic stressstrain curve is significantly affected by the twinning phenomena. For a small value of the applied load, the twinning process occurred for the preferred texture orientations, leading to saturation of the macroscopic stress-strain curve, i.e., plastic deformation took place without visible hardening. However, as most of the grains jumped to the twin orientations, significant sample hardening occurred as the twin orientation exhibited the c-axis parallel to the tensile load applied along the RD. This means that the orientations of the twin are hard, and the twins can carry the greatest load (higher stress) compared to other grains and macroscopic stress, which has been shown experimentally. The stresses at the T-oriented grains (twins) are better predicted by the modified EPSC model with threshold approximation compared to continuous approximation. In all tests carried out, the lowest stress is always found at inclined soft grains in which the basal system is activated. These grains soften the sample and reduce macrostresses. To check the agreement of the EPSC model with the obtained experimental results, the measured CRSS values were entered into the calculations as input data. After adjusting the model to the experimental data by changing hardening parameters (used in the Voce law), a full qualitative agreement was achieved in terms of the evolution of lattice strains, stresses at particular grains, and macroscopic stresses. It should be emphasised that to achieve a very good agreement between the three experiments and the corresponding model calculations, the assumption of the self-consistent model was slightly modified by shifting the type of intergranular interaction towards the Sachs assumption. It was found that during plastic deformation, the total incompatibility strains are about 20% greater than those predicted by the self-consistent approach, i.e., weaker intergranular interaction takes place comparing to the self-consistent Eshelby type model. The most difficult problem in the conducted analysis concerns hardening related to the twin systems. Two approaches were considered in this work. In the first one, the transformation of the parent grains into twins occurs continuously from the beginning and the twin grains obtain the same stress state and CRSS as the parent. However, it is well known that the twinning nucleation does not occur continuously but rapidly as a change of a part of the parent grain into a twin having a different orientation The evolution of the crystallographic texture was also studied and agreement between the model and experimental texture was found. The evolution of texture was found to be better estimated under the continuous assumption compared to the threshold model. As known from the literature, the mechanism of twinning is not so easy to describe. Therefore, the main problem of this work was the prediction of the twinning phenomena in model calculations. Especially, the criterion of twinning initialisation in the present work (and usually in literature It is worth noting that the twin nucleation process and the stress values at the newly formed twins were not accurately predicted using the EPSC model. Therefore, other methods (e.g., viscoelasto-plastic self-consistent VEPSC model) for simulation of twinning process should be tested using the experimental results obtained in this work. Special attention should be paid to the study of the twin formation process at the beginning of deformation and before the plateau observed on the stress-strain plot. 1) A new experimental methodology based on in situ neutron diffraction measurements of the stresses at the groups of grains was proposed and successfully applied for an 2) The different mechanical behaviours were determined for different groups of grains which can be classified as hard, intermediate, and soft, depending on the orientation of the slip and twin systems with respect to the grain stresses. 3) For the first time, RSS evolutions and then CRSS values were determined directly from the diffraction experiment for all activated slip and twin systems, and the uncertainties of these values were estimated. 4) The experimentally determined CRSS values were used in the modified EPSC model (towards a Sachs model) reducing the number of adjusted parameters. As a result, a set of hardening parameters (Voce's laws) was found for which the predicted lattice strains and macroscopic stress-strain plots are closest to the experimental ones, simultaneously for all tests. 5) After determining all the parameters characterizing the slip and twin systems, the evolution of the model texture was compared with that obtained directly from the experiment. A good agreement between the model experimental lattice strains and macroscopic curve was obtained. < d > 002 0,L2 = x 002 < d > 002 0,L5 and < d > 004 0,L2 = x 004 < d > 004 0,L5 (A2.3) were found. The combined standard uncertainty of the determined interplanar spacing u(< d > 002 0,L2 ) was calculated from standard uncertainties u(x 002 ) and u(< d > 002 0,L5 ) , using the law of propagation of uncertainty (LPU). In the same way, the uncertainty u(< d > 004 0,L2 ) was found. The procedure described above was applied for the data obtained before (ω = 0°) and after sample rotation about the sample axis (α = 90°) (Fig. The procedure is based the normalized goodness of fit (GoF) χ 2 , which is defined as: In the stress analysis performed in this work, the values of lattice strains given by Eq. 1 are fitted to experimental data using the General Linear Least Squares (GLLS) method in which the solution is obtained by applying the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) procedure described by Press et al. 