We investigate the interplay between altermagnetic spin-splitting and nonsymmorphic symmetries using the space group no. 62 as a testbed. Studying different magnetic orders by means of firstprinciples calculations, we find that the altermagnetism (AM) is present in the C-type magnetic configuration while it is absent for the G-type and A-type configurations due to different magnetic space group types. The nonsymmorphic symmetries constrain the system to a four-fold degeneracy at the border of the Brillouin zone with semi-Dirac dispersion. In the case of large hybridization as for transition metal pnictides, the interplay between AM and nonsymmorphic symmetries generates an intricate network of several crossings and anticrossings that we describe in terms of semi-Dirac points and glide symmetries. When we add the spin-orbit coupling (SOC), we find a Néel-vector dependent spin-orbit splitting at the time-reversal invariant momenta points since the magnetic space groups depend on the Néel vector. The magnetic space group type-I produces antiferromagnetic hourglass electrons that disappear in the type-III. When the Néel vector is along x, we observe a glide-protected crossing that could generate a nodal-line in the altermagnetic phase. The SOC splits the remaining band crossings and band anticrossings producing a large anomalous Hall effect in all directions excluding the Néel-vector direction. Until a few years ago, the two collinear magnetic phases were known in condensed matter physics as ferromagnetism and antiferromagnetism displaying completely different properties. Very recently, a new variant of the collinear antiferromagnetism was discovered called altermagnetism (AM) or collinear antiferromagnets with non-interconvertible spin-structure motif pair The AHE is enhanced by avoided crossings, also called anticrossings. While further investigations should be made in order to assure the possession of AHE , AM can produce an AHE along the direction of the Hall vector, but a very limited number of altermagnetic systems are metallic. Regarding technological applications, altermagnets could be assumed as a leading role in realizing concepts in spincaloritronics One of the space groups in which the altermagnetic phase was established is the Pnma space group An example of a material with the Pnma crystal phase is the CrAs compound In this paper, we study the interplay between the altermagnetic properties of the Pnma phase and the nonsymmorphic symmetries using first-principle calculations. The computational details are reported in Appendix A. Investigating different collinear magnetic configurations as the A-type, G-type and C-type shown in Fig. This Section is divided into two subsections with the results without SOC in the first one and the results with SOC in the second one. We report the electronic properties focusing on the interplay between AM and nonsymmorphic symmetries by considering different magnetic orders. The semi-Dirac points generate a large number of crossings and anticrossings that we describe. When we add the SOC in the second subsection, the calculation of the anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) confirms a relatively large value due to the several crossings and anticrossings. In the nonmagnetic phase, the bands are twofold degenerate at any k-vector of the Brillouin zone due to the presence of the inversion-time reversal symmetry. This is the Kramers degeneracy and it is protected under the action of the spin-orbit coupling interaction. The nonsymmorphic symmetries produce additional degeneracy at the border of the Brillouin zone. The Γ and R points are time-reversal invariant momenta (TRIM) points. In the Pnma space group without magnetism, the Γ point has only the Kramer degeneracy, two additional nonsymmorphic symmetries along the SR line produce an eightfold degeneracy at R and S, while X, Y, Z, U and T have degeneracy 4 due to one nonsymmorphic symmetry. When we consider the C-type magnetism, Γ is a TRIM point and it still presents a twofold degeneracy. In this magnetic configuration, the TRIM points R, S and T have fourfold degeneracy due to an additional nonsymmorphic symmetry while all the other high-symmetry points have degeneracy 2. The fourfold degeneracy at the TRIM point R makes this space group one of the few where we can study the coexistence of AM and nonsymmorphic symmetries. We find AM in the C-type magnetic order, but not in the other magnetic orders and this is due to the following reasons. In the space group no. 62, there are 16 different magnetic space groups. 8 of these magnetic space groups can host AM, while the other 8 groups cannot. The BZ for the C-type magnetic order is reported in Fig. We stress the relevant role of the semi-Dirac points in the generation of the band crossings and anticrossings. We focus on the semi-Dirac points at the R point, but they are present at all borders of the Brillouin zone. From the nonsymmorphic symmetries in space group no. 62, we obtain that the energy spectrum at the point R=(π,π,π) is always a semi-Dirac point with the dispersion relations for spin-up and spin-down as : with ε 0 being a combination of the on-site energies and v a combination of the first-neighbor hopping parameters In Fig. Hall conductivity In the non-magnetic case, when we consider the SOC, we have shown, in a previous work It was shown that, in the non-magnetic case, the SOC acts selectively at the TRIM points and Brillouin zone border due to the nonsymmorphic symmetries The spin-orbit acts selectively also along the R 1 -Γ-R 2 path where the nonrelativistic spin-splitting is present. The effects of the SOC for different Néel vector orientations are reported in Fig. The Hall vector in altermagnetic systems with space group no. 62 can lie in all possible directions in principle The presence of AM varies with the magnetic configuration, since the magnetic space group type strongly depends on the magnetic configuration. For the space group no. 62 with magnetic atoms in 4c Wyckoff position, the non-relativistic spin-splitting is present for the C-type magnetic order while it is absent in G-type and A-type magnetic orders. Following a couple of bands with opposite spin from the degenerate Γ point through the glide-protected crossing, we can end up with a finite spin-splitting at the TRIM points R 1 and R 2 , however, there would be another couple of bands that would produce the opposite spin-splitting restoring the zero non-relativistic spin-splitting at the TRIM points. The magnetic space group is type-I when the Néel vector is along y and type-III when the Néel vector is along x or z. A selective removal of the spin degeneracy acts as a function of the magnetic space group at the TRIM points. For example, in the type-I magnetic space group, we find antiferromagnetic hourglass electrons that are not present when the Néel vector is along x or z. When the Néel is along x, we have a glide-protected crossing that could generate a nodal-line in the altermagnetic phase. Due to the semi-Dirac points and glide symmetries, the interplay between AM and nonsymmorphic symmetries produces several band crossings and avoided band crossings, once we apply the SOC these crossings generate a large AHC of the same order of magnitude found in altermagnetic RuO 2 and CaCrO 3 . calculation of the Anomalous Hall conductivity we used WannierTools code, 