In this study, a 6 nm layer of Magnesium Silicate (Mg-Silicate) was deposited on AlGaN/GaN heterostructure by sputtering of multiple stacks of MgO and SiO2, followed by rapid thermal annealing in a nitrogen (N2) environment. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis confirmed the stoichiometric Mg-Silicate (MgSiO3) after being annealed at a temperature of 850°C for 70 seconds. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was employed to measure the root mean square (RMS) roughness (2.20 nm) of the Mg-Silicate. A significant reduction in reverse leakage current, by a factor of three orders of magnitude, was noted for the Mg-Silicate/AlGaN/GaN metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) diode in comparison to the Schottky diode. The dielectric constant of Mg-Silicate (ƐMg-Silicate) and the interface density of states (Dit) with AlGaN were approximated at ~6.6 and 2.0 × 10 13 cm -2 eV -1 respectively, utilizing capacitance-voltage (CV) characteristics. The field of high frequency and power electronics has significantly advanced over the past few decades, thanks to the development of GaN-based high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs). The unique features of GaN material, such as a high breakdown field, high saturation velocity, high thermal conductivity, high electron mobility, and the formation of a two-dimensional electron gas density (2-DEG), make it a superior candidate for high frequency and high-power devices Gd2O3 This study focuses on the formation of Mg-Silicate on AlGaN/GaN hetero-structure by annealing MgO/SiO2 stacks at 850 °C, and an analysis of its physical, structural, and electrical properties. The formation of Mg-Silicate and the stoichiometry of the silicate are confirmed by XPS surface analysis. The average surface roughness of the oxide films is determined AFM analysis. The MIS diode current (I-V) and capacitance-voltage (C-V) characteristics have measured on the fabricated MIS diodes to check the electrical properties of the Mg-Silicate. The Ɛox and interface trap density (Dit) have estimated from the C-V analysis. The AlGaN/GaN heterostructure, grown by Plasma Assisted Molecular Beam Epitaxy (PAMBE) technique, consists of a 2 nm GaN cap layer, a 30 nm Al0.28Ga0.72N barrier layer, and a 0.5 nm AIN spacer layer. It also includes a 160 nm GaN buffer and a 1500 nm AlGaN transition layer grown over 4H-SiC substrate. For the formation of magnesium silicate, a sixtime repeated deposit of MgO/SiO2 (0.5 nm each) stack was deposited using sputtering technique, followed by annealing at 850 °C in N2 ambiance for 70 seconds. The physical characterization of both annealed and un-annealed samples was carried out using XPS, and AFM. The MOS diode fabrication process involved creating ohmic and Schottky contacts. Six layers of MgO/SiO2 stack (0.5 nm each) were blanket deposited on the heterostructure using a sputter tool and subsequently annealed at 850 °C in a N2 environment for 70 seconds to form Mgsilicate. Following this, lithography patterns were utilized to etch Mg-Silicate with BHF to establish ohmic contact. The ohmic contacts at source and drain were formed by depositing a Ti/Au/Al/Ni/Au metal stack in an electron-beam evaporator under high vacuum followed by annealing at 850 °C for 30 seconds in an N2 environment The XPS analysis of Mg-silicate is shown in Fig. The capacitance-voltage (C-V) and current-voltage (I-V) measurements were performed on This study successfully demonstrates fabrication of high-quality Mg-silicate through the annealing of an MgO/SiO2 stacks, characterized by a surface roughness of 2.2 nm, dielectric constant of approximately 6.6. A notable three orders of magnitude reduction in the reverse leakage current was observed in the Mg-silicate-based MOS diode, as compared to the Schottky diode (control sample). An interface trap density of approximately 2.0 ╳ 10 13 cm -2 eV - 1 was estimated. The results suggest the promising potential of Mg-silicate as an alternative gate dielectric for high-performance AlGaN/GaN MOSHEMTs.