Phyllosilicates emerge as a promising class of large bandgap lamellar insulators. Their applications have been explored from fabrication of graphene-based devices to 2D heterostructures based on transition metal dicalcogenides with enhanced optical and polaritonics properties. In this review, we provide an overview on the use of IR s-SNOM for studying nano-optics and local chemistry of a variety of 2D natural phyllosilicates. Finally, we bring a brief update on applications that combine natural lamellar minerals into multifunctional nanophotonic devices driven by electrical control. Natural minerals have interesting physicochemical properties and great potential for different technological applications. Phyllosilicates are a naturally abundant family of sheet silicate minerals comprising clays, micas, chlorites, serpentines, and others, which are all hydrated minerals Within the large family of phyllosilicates, representative specimens such as talc, phlogopite, clinochlore, and serpentine cover the main aspects of the entire family. Talc (Fig. Phyllosilicates on its few-layer (FL) form have been used as substrates and encapsulating media in the manufacture of graphene-based nanodevices All geological specimens of phyllosilicates shown in Fig. To investigate the vibrational properties of phyllosilicate materials, both non-destructive spectroscopy techniques can be used: Raman and Infrared In Fig. In Fig. The Raman spectrum of a bulk-clinochlore sample shown in Fig. As presented in Fig. Standard FTIR spectroscopy is a well-established technique in the study of natural crystals The SINS development, which combines a broadband synchrotron IR source with s-SNOM technique, has overcome the diffraction limit of conventional optics to provide spatial resolution down to tens of nanometers s-SNOM is a well-known analytical modality that combines atomic force microscopy (AFM) optical microscopy for achieving nanoscale spatial resolution for vibrational analysis In early 2010's, F. Huth et al. presented a proof-of-principle of s-SNOM operating with a broadband IR thermal source In the perspective of vibrational identity of FL-phyllosilicates, SINS was a decisive tool for a first approach on the IR signatures of naturally occurring atomic-thin talc flakes. The wide coverage of the synchrotron allowed simultaneous monitoring of in-plane and outof-plane stretching and bending modes in a single SINS experiment Muscovite is a dioctahedral mica, with chemical formula KAl2(Al,Si3)O10(OH)2, and it is among the earliest known vdWs materials that can be exfoliated in high quality to large sizes with atomic flatness, as well as down to 1L Ref. After this experimental study, Chen and coworkers attempted to obtain the in-plane and out-of-plane dielectric functions of mica by COMSOL simulations Phlogopite is a common phyllosilicate within the trioctahedral mica group with chemical formula KMg3(AlSi3)O10(OH)2 from which a solid-solution series can be formed in relation to Fe concentration arising as main impurity We present here SINS measurements on a FL-phlogopite flake to properly describe the phlogopite vibrational assignment at nanoscale. Fig. Clinochlore is a natural layered structured crystal with the chemical formula Mg5Al(AlSi3)O10(OH)8 that belongs to the chlorite group Talc, or also called soapstone, is an insulator (bandgap of ~5 eV) SINS measurements have been applied to ultrathin talc flakes to probe its vibrational fingerprints Natural obtained serpentines have theoretical formula Mg3Si2O5(OH)4, but can be arranged in three main structural forms of serpentine, classified based on their different T-Oc stacking arrangements: lizardite (flat layers), chrysotile (curled layers) and antigorite (corrugated layers) As described in the previous sections, the phonon-polariton of talc can be easily probed by SINS. Moreover, graphene, another natural material, has shown very interesting optoelectronic properties, for instance, controlling light at the nanoscale Flexible plasmonic devices with electrical modulation are of great interest for diverse applications, such as flexible metamaterials and wearable sensors and photonic devices. However, the traditional flexible metal-polymer plasmonic structures suffer from a lack of electrical tunability. Then, Hu and colleagues experimentally demonstrated a flexible, electrically tunable, and strain-independent plasmons based on graphenemica heterostructures Table This review paper brings an update on how SINS has approached the vibrational identity of naturally occurring vdW crystals, mainly belonging to the phyllosilicate class (Table This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518