Deep learning, as a highly efficient method for metasurface inverse design, commonly use simulation data to train deep neural networks (DNNs) that can map desired functionalities to proper metasurface designs. However, the assumptions and simplifications made in the simulation model may not reflect the actual behavior of a complex system, leading to suboptimal performance of the DNNs in practical scenarios. To address this issue, we propose an experiment-based deep learning approach for metasurface inverse design and demonstrate its effectiveness for power allocation in complex environments with obstacles. Enabled by the tunability of a programmable metasurface, large sets of experimental data in various configurations can be collected for DNN training. The DNN trained by experimental data can inherently incorporate complex factors and can adapt to changed environments through its on-site data-collecting and fast-retraining capability. The proposed experiment-based DNN holds the potential for intelligent and energy-efficient wireless communication in complex indoor environments. Metasurfaces, consisting of subwavelength artificial array structures on an ultrathin surface, possess a remarkable ability to fully control the properties of electromagnetic (EM) waves, including their amplitude, phase, polarization, and wavefront structure. This control leads to the generation of exotic electromagnetic responses, such as a negative refractive index With growing interest in exploring new phenomena and more complex applications with metasurfaces, an efficient and accurate metasurface inverse design method has become crucial. Conventional inverse design procedures are usually guided by optimization algorithms Additionally, changes in environments can significantly compromise the performance of a trained DNN or render it ineffective. In this work, we propose an experiment-based deep learning approach for metasurface inverse design to achieve power allocation in complex environments with obstacles. Without the need for sophisticated modeling and time-consuming simulations, we train the DNN directly with experimental data, which can be measured in various configurations of a programmable metasurface enabled by its programmability. Experimentally collected data can inherently incorporate complex factors in realistic situations that are difficult to be included in the simulation model. Our results demonstrate that the experiment-based DNN is effective in controlling the power transmitted toward multiple receivers and can adapt to changed environments through its on-site data-collecting and fast-retraining capability. The proposed experiment-based deep learning scheme offers a promising direction for leveraging real-world data to achieve accurate and efficient metasurface inverse designs for boosting or damping Wi-Fi and 5G signals in complex indoor environments. We aim to control the power transmitted to specific receivers in a complex environment, generally with an obstacle, using a programmable metasurface together with an experiment-based deep learning approach, as shown in Fig. During the training the IDE, the MSE between {I j } and {I j ′ } (IDE combined with the pre-trained FSE) is used as the loss function and no experimental data is needed in this stage. Finally, for any target set of {I j }, the output of the IDE, {φ i }, can now be used as the input of the real metasurface to test whether the experimentally obtained {I mj } is similar to {I j }. We note that due to the inverse design nature of the problem, there may be multiple phase profiles {φ i } that can achieve the same set of target intensities {I j }. The integration of the IDE and pre-trained FSE as an integrated DNN (an autoencoder setting for results instead of design parameters) can help mitigate the nonuniqueness issue The To test the performance of the trained DNN, we first demonstrate three special cases called "001", "101", and "000". The "001" case denotes that the metasurface can manipulate the scattered fields toward one particular probe with a strong signal while the other two probes obtain weak signals. Similarly, the "101" case shows that two probes receive strong signals while the central probe receives a weak signal. The "000" case means minimum or zero target power level for the signals to be received for all the 3 probes. As shown in the black bars in Fig. The above results have demonstrated that our DNN-assisted metasurface is capable of controlling the power to specific receivers on demand in the scenario without obstacles. Normally, a well-trained DNN for the specific scenario may fail to work after the ambient conditions change (the emergence of obstacles, for example). However, our experiment-based DNN can simply adapt to the changed ambient conditions because the DNN can be retrained using experimental data that can be collected within a short time and updated periodically. To demonstrate the adaptivity of the system, a metal frame obstacle is added in between the metasurface and the three probes as shown in Fig. In this work, we use 3 probes with specific locations to collect the experimental training data for the DNN construction. Our scheme also allows for the control of scattered fields in other locations by adding more probes, depending on the number of target users. Furthermore, at the current stage, our system manipulates field patterns in the horizontal plane, as our metasurface only has the degree of freedom to control the phase profiles along the y direction (each column is independently controlled). To further enhance the system's capabilities, power allocation with higher degrees of freedom in space can be achieved by independently controlling each unit cell of the metasurface in two transverse dimensions. In summary, we have proposed the experiment-based DNN approach for power allocation enabled by a programmable metasurface. We directly train the DNN using experimental data, circumventing the need for complex modeling and computationally intensive simulations as training data. The experimental data can inherently incorporate complex factors that can be challenging to simulate or model, leading to more reliable and robust DNN results. Our experimental results demonstrate that experiment-based DNN can effectively control power transmitted towards multiple receivers and can adapt to the changed environments through its on-site data-collecting and fastretraining capability. Our work provides valuable insights into the potential of leveraging real-world data for more accurate and efficient metasurface designs for intelligent and energy-efficient wireless communication in complex indoor environments.