Extensibility is beyond the paradigm of classical soft glassy materials, and more broadly, yield-stress fluids. Recently, model yield-stress fluids with significant extensibility have been designed by adding polymeric phases to classically viscoplastic dispersions Yield stress fluids typically exhibit a reversible transition between a solid-like and a fluid-like state around a critical applied stress. This behavior can originate from several microstructural interactions Designing extensibility into yield-stress fluids is of particular interest in applications such as rapid prototyping and direct-ink writing, where a combination of yield stress and extensibility is beneficial for optimized printing performance Despite the apparent importance of extensible yield-stress fluids, very few studies have reported on the formulation and testing of model yield-stress fluids with significant and tunable extensibility. Only recently, materials based on emulsions have been designed with significant extensional properties In this work, we design, formulate, and characterize a model extensible yield-stress fluid that overcomes the limitations described above. We use a Carbopol microgel suspension, a soft glassy material that is widely used in the literature as a model yieldstress fluid to study microstructural, rheological, and flow physics Carbopol is widely employed to study and model the rheological properties and flow physics of yield-stress fluids. It is a soft, glassy (repulsion dominated) fluid PEO consists of ethylene oxide monomers which are polymerized into linear chains. The samples were made from PEO that comes in a fine powder form (Sigma Aldrich, M v ≃ 4,000 kDa), dissolved in a 19:1 de-ionized water-ethanol co-solvent. Requisite amounts of the powder were dissolved into the co-solvent by vigorously mixing in a beaker with a magnetic stir rod and stir plate at 200 r.p.m. for 12 h and a homogeneous viscoelastic solution was obtained. Polymer solutions are in the dilute regime when chains do not overlap or interact significantly. The semi-dilute regime is when overlap between hypothetical spheres enveloping the chains start interacting directly The swelled Carbopol microgel units form clusters that lead to a glassy state due to their repulsive interactions, with the diameter of each swollen particle O(1) μm The extensible yield-stress fluid (ExYSF) was obtained by mixing the fully prepared Carbopol and PEO formulations. Depending on the target weight fractions of Carbopol Figure As can be seen from the protorheology Shear rheometry was performed on an ARES-G2 strain-controlled, separated motortransducer rheometer (TA Instruments), using a 25 mm parallel-plate geometry, with adhesive-backed 600 grit sandpaper to mitigate wall slip. All tests were conducted at 25 • C using an Advanced Peltier System to regulate the temperature. This was chosen to match the ambient temperature of the room, since controlling temperature in extension experiments is not possible owing to the large aspect ratio (and hence large exposed surface area) of the samples in filament stretching. We use filament stretching extensional rheometry (FiSER) to obtain the extensional properties of our samples The steady shear data for all Carbopol+PEO samples are shown in Fig. From Fig. scaling do not change appreciably for various PEO wt% added to 0.50 wt% Carbopol. Further insight can be gained by fitting this data to the Herschel-Bulkley (HB) model where σ y is the dynamic steady shear yield stress, K is the consistency index, and n is the flow index. An equivalent form of the model, introduced by Dinkgreve et al. At low concentrations, addition of PEO to the Carbopol system may change the effective volume fraction of particles, enhancing interparticle interactions between microgel particles, thus increasing the yield stress compared to the pure microgel system. But this effect is overshadowed by the microgel particles themselves getting heavily jammed and producing a much larger yield stress at higher concentrations. This explains the reason for variation between 0 and 1 wt% PEO for low Carbopol loading, yet a consistent yield stress across this range of PEO concentration at higher Carbopol loadings. We have also found that the first normal stress difference in shear, N 1 , is measurable in our Carbopol samples during steady shear tests. The data is shown in the SI. We observe that N 1 increases with Carbopol loading for a given rate, and for each Carbopol loading, N 1 increases with the addition of 1 wt% PEO. Upon PEO addition, N 1 increased by a factor of 1.5-2 in the range of shear rates where the data was outside the noisy regime. Interestingly, this increase is also comparable to the increase in extensibility (2-3 times increase in failure strains) for Carbopol+PEO when compared with pure Carbopol, as will be shown in the next section. This increase in N 1 suggests that it is correlated to the increased extensibility. To summarize, we find that the steady shear yield stress is only marginally changed upon adding PEO, except at the lowest Carbopol loading, while increasing shear normal stress differences significantly. In the next section, we will study the effect of PEO on the extensibility of Carbopol systems. In FiSER tests, the axial force F z on the end plates can be measured during the filament stretching process, from which tensile stresses and apparent extensional viscosities can be calculated where L b is the filament breaking length, and L 0 is the initial filament length. Similar criteria connected to the filament breaking length L b have also been used in the literature Figure The effect of PEO addition on ε b is consistent across all Carbopol concentrations, as plotted in Fig. This can be rationalized by considering the effective concentration of PEO chains in the Carbopol suspension and the effect of the Carbopol concentration on the yield stress and viscosity. As is evident in Fig. The difference in extensibility due to added PEO shows up both in the kinematics and the dynamics. Using the engineering axial stress during filament stretching, σ e , we can study the effect of added PEO on forces and stresses. This quantity can be calculated using F z (data shown in Fig. The engineering stress data is plotted against engineering strain in Fig. and is a measure of this maximum stress, which increases with added PEO. This is a signature of increased resistance to extensional deformation. Similar to ε b , σ U also increases with c for a fixed PEO concentration, which further supports the reasoning that increasingly confined PEO chains in more concentrated Carbopol suspensions lead to greater extensional stresses. In Fig. Based on the data for ε b and σ U , we can plot each against σ y data from Sec. 3 to get Ashby-style co-plots This section has elucidated the significant effect of adding polymers to Carbopol suspensions: steady shear properties, of which the shear yield stress is arguably the most important, were relatively unchanged upon addition of polymer. Additionally, upon PEO addition, shear normal stress increased by a factor of 1.5-2, which is also comparable to the increase in extensibility (2-3 times increase in failure strains) for Carbopol samples with PEO when compared with pure Carbopol. In the following section, we look at the effect of added PEO on viscoelastic properties of Carbopol, and see if the physics of largely decoupled of shear and extension properties is retained. In this section, we characterize the oscillatory shear rheology of the ExYSF to study the effect of added PEO on the viscoelastic behavior of Carbopol. Each of these tests is aimed at testing if shear viscoelastic properties are significantly affected by addition of the polymer compared to the change in extensional behavior. We show frequency sweeps done in the linear regime (small amplitude oscillatory shear or SAOS) and oscillatory strain amplitude sweeps spanning linear to nonlinear regimes (large amplitude oscillatory shear strain or LAOStrain) . Frequency sweeps were done at a constant strain amplitude of γ 0 = 1%, which was in the linear regime as determined from the strain amplitude sweeps (shown next). The frequency was varied from ω = 0.1-100 rad s -1 , and the results are shown in Fig. Two features of the plots stand out: firstly, the values of G ′ are greater than G ′′ ; tan δ = G ′′ /G ′ < 0.1 for all pure Carbopol samples. This indicates that the material has a predominantly elastic response, which is characteristic of viscoelastic solids such as gels, arrested systems, crowded and jammed suspensions, and soft glassy solids Secondly, G ′ is only weakly dependent on frequency (average log-log slope ln G ′ / ln ω < 0.1). This has also been reported previously for Carbopol and other microgels More detailed viscoelastic data is shown by creep tests in the SI, which show these materials are predominantly solid-like, for stresses below the yield stress, for timescales up to at least 600 s. This duration is longer than 10 s (corresponding to ω = 0.1 rad s -1 ), which is the longest accessible timescale from the SAOS data shown here. The addition of PEO does not significantly change the shapes of the viscoelastic creep compliance curves. In strain sweeps, the oscillatory strain amplitude was varied from γ 0 = 0.01-1000%. All tests were conducted at a fixed frequency of ω = 10 rad s -1 . The results of the strain sweeps are shown in Fig. The effect of PEO on the linear viscoelastic properties of Carbopol can be more clearly seen from the linear regime in the LAOStrain data. We can look at the linear storage modulus at a fixed frequency calculated from LAOS data, as G ′ = lim γ 0 →0 G ′ 1 , and the ratio of the loss to storage moduli, tan δ ≡ G ′′ /G ′ , where G ′′ = lim γ 0 →0 G ′′ 1 . In Fig. Based on the LAOS data, we can compare the metrics in extension to those in shear viscoelasticity. Fig. The data presented in this paper lies in a rather unique regime of rheological behavior. In Fig. such that smaller values of n min give the most extreme regime of shear thinning; 1n min correspondingly approaches 1 as shear nonlinearities become more significant, and approaches zero in the limit of constant shear viscosity. Materials and models that largely follow a constant viscosity in shear, such as the Newtonian fluid model and Boger fluids, are expected to have a value of n min → 1 (see the bottom-right inset in Fig. Among the many possible names for this right edge region, we choose the name "Boger yield-stress fluids" to evoke the connection to Boger fluids that occupy the opposite edge of behavior. The simplest elastoviscoplastic (EVP) models, such as the Saramito model We have shown that it is possible to formulate samples with various ranges of yield stress and extensibility, and these two features can be decoupled to a large extent. However, for certain concentrations of Carbopol, the two effects are more closely coupled; e.g. for 0.25 wt% Carbopol systems, σ y does not follow the general scaling with Carbopol loading c, and this hints at two different microstructural regimes of yielding behavior, which has already been discussed earlier. Investigating the effect of added polymers to microgels in this low Carbopol concentration and the extent of decoupling between shear and extensional properties is an important topic for future work. It must be noted that we have not studied the aging and thixotropy of Carbopol samples with or without PEO. Carbopol is known to show varied degrees of thixotropy and aging In this work, we have formulated a model yield-stress fluid with tunable extensional properties. The extensibility is largely decoupled from the shear properties when doping the base Carbopol microgel particle suspensions with high molecular weight PEO. Adding PEO to Carbopol does not change key rheological properties measured in shear experiments, namely the shear yield stress σ y and the linear viscoelastic storage modulus G ′ , by more than 10-20%, so the elastic nature of Carbopol is not changed much, although the dissipation is increased on adding PEO. On the contrary, properties in extension, such as the extensional strain-to-break ε b , are increased many fold. These results suggest that the addition of PEO does not significantly alter the interactions between Carbopol microgel particles at high loadings, which are responsible for the elastoplastic shear behavior, while the extensional properties are enhanced by the PEO chains, which may be largely limited to the solvent phase. This also exemplifies that it is possible to formulate simple mixtures of complex fluids, approximately superimposing their individual properties to obtain a hybrid material with tunable behavior. While there is some variation of shear properties when varying the extensional behavior of this material system, we consider it minimal compared to multi-component systems in general where significant non-trivial coupling may occur. As such, we consider this Carbopol+PEO system a model fluid which can be used to experimentally study the isolated effect of changing extensibility in yield stress fluids, the fundamental understanding of which will benefit applications ranging from spray coating of fire suppressants 