The puzzling question about the floating of the topological surface state on top of a thick Pb layer, has now possibly been answered. A photoemission study of the interface made by Pb on Bi2Se3 for different temperature and adsorbate coverage condition, allowed us to demonstrate that the evidence reported in the literature can be related to the surface diffusion phenomenon exhibited by the Pb atoms, which leaves the substrate partially uncovered. Comprehensive density functional theory calculations show that despite the specific arrangement of the atoms at the interface, the topological surface state cannot float on top of the adlayer but rather tends to move inward within the substrate. Triggering the migration of a topological surface state (TSS) from a substrate into an adsorbate layer is an important goal as it means the topology-protected properties of a substrate could be transferred to a suitable conventional material. Research fields like superconductivity, Majorana physics or spintronics might strongly benefit from the spin-orbit texture or from the resilience to disorder and defects, inherited from the topological matter The subtle details underlying this phenomenon have not been fully explained. Underpinning of the TSS migration is a transformation of the spin-orbit texture of electronic bands of the substrate and of the adlayer due to matching at the interface. Provided that the spinorbit coupling strength is comparable to other relevant terms of the Hamiltonian describing the topological insulator (TI), The recent studies about Pb on layered TI reported in the literature mainly focus on the superconducting nature of the interface Stimulated by these recent results we undertook an experimental and theoretical study of the Pb/Bi 2 Se 3 interface. Scanning photoemission microscopy (SPEM), spatially resolved X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and angle resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (μ-ARPES) measurements were carried out at the Elettra synchrotron radiation source. Moreover, Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations were performed consid-ering a sharp interface to predict the localization of the TSS in the case of a thin (1 ML) and of a thick (7 ML) Pb layer to unveil the nature of the interface and of its electronic structure as it starts to form. The Bi 2 Se 3 samples are (0001)-oriented single crystals grown by the modified Bridgman method. These samples have been previously characterized by X-ray diffraction. The Bi 2 Se 3 surface was prepared by in-situ exfoliation, in an ultra-high-vacuum (UHV) chamber. Lead was sublimated from a temperature-controlled Knudsen cell. All depositions were performed at liquid nitrogen (LN) temperature with a deposition rate of 0.33 Å/min. We considered 1 ML of Pb equal to 0.286 nm, a value corresponding to the interplane distance along the (111) direction. The measurements were carried out at the Spectromicroscopy beamline Electronic structure calculations were carried out within the density functional theory using the projector augmented-wave (PAW) method In Fig. This result suggests that either the topological protection is destroyed or the TSS is buried under the thick Pb adlayer. To this aim, a Pb wedge was fabricated on the Bi 2 Se 3 substrate, as the TSS migration process may have taken place below the probing depth of the photoemission process. In Fig. The core levels in Fig. Yet, as is well known, when a Pb layer is prepared at low temperature and then brought to room tempera-ture (RT), a diffusion process occurs, inducing a reduction of the surface coverage In the corresponding core level spectra displayed in Fig. Accordingly, the Se-3d doublet in Fig. The evolution of the valence bands and of the loss spectra, as shown in Fig. Some metals, such as Ag or Au, when deposited using the two-step procedure (where firstly the deposition is made at low temperature and subsequently the sample is allowed to return to RT), undergo an improvement of their flatness and uniformity In order to ascertain the influence of the temperature, we deposited further 10 ML at LN temperature, trying to bury again the whole interface. In Fig. With the aim to understand what happens to the interface we used a photon energy of 27 eV so as to increase the bulk sensitivity. The result is shown in Fig. It is remarkable that the maps of Fig. To clarify the interaction of the adsorbed layer with the substrate and reveal how the formation of the Pb/Bi 2 Se 3 interface affects the TSS we performed DFT calculations. Considering 1 ML of Pb(111) placed on top of the Bi 2 Se 3 surface within a 1 × 1 cell we found that the most favored geometry is that when Pb atom is in the fcc-hollow po-sition. The next preferred geometry is the bridge position having total energy higher by 120 meV/cell. The hcp-hollow and most unfavorable top positions follow. However, the Pb ML stability determined in this way cannot be relied upon, since the lateral lattice constant of Pb(111) is by ≈18 % smaller than that of Bi 2 Se 3 and hence the Pb ML placed on the substrate within a 1 × 1 cell is unrealistically expanded. To overcome the huge lattice mismatch we constructed the (6 × 6)/(5 × 5) (briefly 6/5 × 6/5) superlattice models simulating incommensurate Pb/Bi 2 Se 3 interface (Pb(111) -6 × 6 on top of the Bi 2 Se 3 -5 × 5) for which the initial Pb-Pb interatomic distance (3.44 Å) is compressed only by ≈ 1.7 %, with respect to the experimental one (3.5 Å). Three possible (6/5 × 6/5) models, corresponding to A (0,0), B ( Extracting the local interlayer distances within these 1 × 1 rhombuses (averaging the z coordinates in the Se and Bi layers, which also have a small rippling), we constructed the 1 × 1 cells with Pb in bridge and fcc-hollow positions (br-⟨E b ⟩ and fcc-⟨E b ⟩, respectively). The in- plane averaged electrostatic potentials V z for these artificial slabs are shown in Fig. The electronic band structure calculated for the 1 ML Pb/Bi 2 Se 3 interface with the Pb atom in the bridge (1 × 1) position, is shown in Fig. As can be seen in Fig. It is remarkable that the electronic spectrum of the less realistic fcc-(1 × 1) structure, leads to very similar results (Fig. Next, we considered a relatively thick Pb film of 7 ML (Fig. The new TSS with the DP is observed in the middle of the principal band gap (at about -0.35 eV), mostly localized in the second QL, but decaying outwards and penetrating even into the Pb film (Fig. All results reported above lead to a fundamental question on whether a TI made by V-VI layered compounds coupled with Pb, can represent a suitable system to induce the migration of the TSS. Apart from the issues related to the stability of the a nanometric-thin Pb layer at different temperatures, the formation of a WL possibly made of a disordered ternary alloy can strongly affect the electronic structure. Ultimately, even in the case of a sharp model interface, the main condition for the relocation of the TSS in the adlayer, is the absence of an interface potential. A joint theoretical and experimental study of the behaviour of the TSS at the Pb/Bi 2 Se 3 interface was carried out. DFT calculations reveal that the TSS of the substrate escapes the interface region moving downward into the bulk. The detection of the TSS after lead deposition should be attributed to the uncovering of the TI substrate, as a result of surface diffusion of the lead atoms, as demonstrated by the core-level and angle resolved photoemission measurements done for different temperature and adsorbate coverage conditions.