Tunable lasers, with the ability to continuously adjust their emission wavelengths, have found widespread applications across various fields such as biomedical imaging, coherent ranging, optical communications and spectroscopy. In these applications, a wide chirp range is advantageous for large spectral coverage and high frequency resolution. Besides, the frequency accuracy and precision also depend critically on the chirp linearity of the laser. While extensive efforts have been made on the development of many kinds of frequencyagile, widely tunable, narrow-linewidth lasers, wideband yet precise methods to characterize and to linearize laser chirp dynamics are also demanded. Here we present an approach to characterize laser chirp dynamics using an optical frequency comb. The instantaneous laser frequency is tracked over terahertz bandwidth with 1 MHz interval. Using this approach we calibrate the chirp performance of twelve tunable lasers from Toptica, Santec, New Focus, EXFO and NKT that are commonly used in fiber optics and integrated photonics. In addition, with acquired knowledge on laser chirp dynamics, we demonstrate a simple frequency-linearization scheme that enables coherent ranging without any optical or electronic linearization units. Our approach not only presents a novel wideband, highresolution laser spectroscopy, but is also critical for sensing applications with ever-increasing requirements on performance. Introduction. Tunable lasers, which have the ability to dynamically adjust their emission wavelength, have found widespread applications in a variety of industries and scientific fields. For example, as shown in Fig. In all these applications, as well as others, the laser chirp range determines the measurement resolution and spectral bandwidth. However, due to the nonlinearity of laser gain and dynamics, tunable lasers typically exhibit chirping nonlinearity that is particularly deteriorated for a wide chirp range, as illustrated in Fig. To trace the laser chirp rate α(t), a fiber Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) is commonly used to calibrate the instantaneous frequency, e.g. in data processing To trace the laser chirp rate α(t), we use a commercial, fully stabilized, fiber-based OFC (Quantum CTek) as a frequency "ruler" When the laser chirps, it beats against tens of thousands of comb lines with precisely known frequency val- As shown in Fig. Here, we only concentrate on the analysis of β 1 , since β 1 + β 2 = 200 MHz. The dynamics and linearity of β 1 (t) as a function of time are identical to those of the laser frequency f l (t). We process the β 1 (t) signal and extract the instantaneous frequency value as illustrated in Fig. Next we unwrap the sawtooth-like β 1 (t) trace. We select pulses corresponding to f FIR = 3 MHz as markers. As shown in the bottom panel of Fig. Now we use this frequency-comb-calibrated method to characterize totally ten widely tunable, mode-hop-free, external-cavity diode lasers (ECDL), including three Toptica CTL lasers, four Santec lasers, two New Focus lasers, and one EXFO laser. These lasers are all operated in the telecommunication band around 1550 nm, and are extensively used in fiber optics and integrated photonics. For example, Toptica CTL and New Focus lasers are widely used in the generation of microresonator-based dissipative Kerr soliton frequency combs An ECDL typically has two tuning modes, i.e. the wide and fine tuning modes. In the wide tuning mode, the external cavity length that determines the laser frequency is controlled by a stepper motor, enabling a frequency tuning range exceeding ten terahertz. In the fine tuning mode, the external cavity length is controlled by a piezo under an external voltage that determines the laser frequency. In this mode, the laser can only be tuned by tens of gigahertz. Triangular and sinusoidal voltage signals are often used to drive the piezo, and to determine the laser chirp range B and modulation frequency f mod . The average chirp rate is α set = 2Bf mod . First, we characterize these lasers in the wide tuning Figure We further characterized another two Toptica CTL lasers, four Santec lasers, two New Focus lasers and one EXFO laser in their wide tuning modes. The laser chirping performance is investigated within 1550 to 1560 nm bandwidth, and α set is set from 1 to 200 nm/s. Table To show the deviation of laser chirp rate from α(t)/α set = 1, we calculate the root mean square error (RMSE) as where α i is the sample of chirp rate and T is sample number. Besides, the wavelength linearity can be estimated by nonlinearity error 24 δ L = ∆λ max /λ f.s. , where ∆λ max is the maximum deviation of the measured wavelength from its linearly fitted value, and λ f.s. is the fullscale wavelength range. This indicator mainly considers whether the laser chirp is linear, but not whether the average chirp rate α set matches the set value α set . Particularly, Table Based on our frequency-comb-calibrated laser chirping dynamics, we further demonstrate a linearization method for widely chirping laser for FMCW LiDAR. LiDAR can quickly and accurately map the environment, provide insights into the structure and composition, and allow operators to make informed decisions on the protection of natural resources The principle of LiDAR is to project an optical signal onto a moving object. The reflected or scattered signal is received and processed to determine the object's distance from the laser Equation 2 indicates that the distance d can be obtained with fast Fourier transformation on t. The ranging resolution 10 δd of FMCW LiDAR is limited by the chirp range B, as δd = c/2B. High resolution, i.e. small δd, requires a large B of the chirping laser. However, chirp nonlinearity causes a varying α over time. Consequently, the beat frequency ∆f varies as shown in Fig. Here, using our frequency-comb-calibration method, the characterized laser chirp rate α(t) in return allows chirp rate pre-linearization. Again we use the Toptica CTL laser as the example. The laser has optimal performance of chirp linearity when driven by a 50 Hz sinusoidal wave. The chirp range is set to 35 GHz in the fine tuning mode, and α(t) is characterized (see Supplementary Materials). The same characterization of α(t) is performed three times, and the averaged result is used as the pre-linearized chirp rate α c (t). By re-scaling the time axis in Eq. 2 by t ′ = α c (t)t, the laser is pre-linearized and the range profile can be extracted from Eq. 3. The photodetected signal is re-scaled with α c (t). Zero-padding Finally, we proceed a LiDAR experiment without any extra linearization unit. Experimentally, a stainless steel cylinder with an engraved text of 2.8 mm depth on its surface is imaged using our LiDAR setup. The stainless steel cylinder is placed on a 2D translation stage 4 meter away from the collimator. As the translation stage moves, the distance between the cylinder surface and the collimator is continuously measured to produce a 2D ranging map. To highlight the effect of linearization, we measure the surface profile using two methods, i.e. with prelinearization and without any linearization. We emphasize that, the former case only requires a characterized α c (t) as prior knowledge for signal processing, and no OFC nor real-time frequency calibration is used in the ranging experiment. To retrieve the ranging profile, for pre-linearization, the beat signal V (t ′ ) of Eq. 3 is rewritten as V (l ′ ) = cos(2πdl ′ ), where l ′ = ct ′ /2. By fast Fourier transform on l ′ , the space spectrum is obtained, as shown in the top panel of Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated an approach to characterize chirp dynamics of widely tunable lasers based on an OFC. Using this method we have characterized twelve lasers including three Toptica CTL lasers, four Santec lasers, two New Focus lasers, two NKT fiber lasers and one EXFO laser. By comparing the laser's chirp linearity with different settings, the optimal operation condition of each laser is found. For example, the optimal chirp rate of Toptica CTL, New Focus, Santec, and EXFO lasers are α set = 2, 2, 100 and 100 nm/s, respectively. Operating the laser with its optimal setting and pre-linearizing laser chirp, we successfully apply the laser for coherent LiDAR without any extra linearization units. Field-programmable gate arrays (FPGA) to implement multiple FIR filters can be further added to increase data processing speed and reduce the amount of data to be stored by real-time data processing. Our method of characterizing and pre-linearizing laser chirp dynamics is proved to be a critical diagnostic method for applications such as OCT, OFDR, and TDLAS. linearization method. Others declare no conflicts of interest. Data Availability Statement: The code and data used to pro-duce the plots within this work will be released on the repository Zenodo upon publication of this preprint. Supplementary Note 1. Laser chirp dynamics for wide tuning mode For wide tuning mode, we have characterized totally 10 lasers. These lasers include three Toptica CTL lasers, four Santec lasers, two New Focus lasers, and one EXFO laser. The laser chirp dynamics is investigated within 1550 to 1560 nm bandwidth, and α set is set to 1 nm/s, 2 nm/s, 5 nm/s, 10 nm/s, 50 nm/s, 100 nm/s, and 200 nm/s. A summary of different lasers' chirp dynamics with different α set is shown in Table For Santec lasers, when α set is relatively small, the actual chirp rate has main jitter frequencies of 2.06 kHz, 16.04 kHz, 32.08 kHz, 64.10 kHz, 96.15 kHz and 128.17 kHz. These jitters become less and less pronounced as α set increases. Taking into account that the random jitter of the chirp rate is slightly greater at 200 nm/s, RMSE is larger, the optimum α set for the Santec laser is 100 nm/s. In Fig. As shown in Fig. For the EXFO laser, the jitter frequency is enormous at 8.21 kHz, while no other obvious jitter frequencies are observed, as shown in Fig. The results for Toptica lasers are shown in Fig. panel, we manually set the chirp rate α set to 1, 2, 5, and 10 nm/s. The oscilloscope's sample resolution is set to 155 Hz for different α set . The instantaneous chirp rate α(t) within 1 MHz interval is tracked, allowing retrieval of the instantaneous laser frequency f l (t) as well as the wavelength λ(t). In this manner, α(t) can be convert to α(λ) for a better comparison of cases of different α set .