We present technical details on an experimental setup that allows to measure magnetic losses in electrical steel sheets and the movement of magnetic domains on the sample surface simultaneously. The setup is suitable to investigate grain oriented electrical sheets in the polarization range 0.05 T to 1.9 T and at excitation frequencies between 50 Hz and 4 kHz. The screened surface area is 13 mm x 18 mm. Power loss in soft magnetic materials has a negative impact on the economy of industrial societies. Since electrical steel sheets are used in generators, engines, and transformers of all kinds, even a small fraction of losses amounts to a huge total number, if all individual applications are considered together. Therefore from early on, a keen interest existed in the fundamental understanding of loss mechanisms in electrical steel sheets and a strong desire to optimize their properties under AC excitation. To understand loss, it is necessary to study magnetic domain structures. Domains are formed in magnetic materials, because a local energy balance exists between exchange energy, magnetic anisotropy energy, magneto-elastic energy, and stray field energy Magnetization and demagnetization processes of domains originating in domain wall motion and domain flips are a ma-jor causes of power loss in electrical steel sheets. Another mechanism is the induction of eddy currents. Depending on the specific type of steel, these contributions and dependencies on external parameters, such as excitation frequency, sample dimensions, and magnetic polarization vary. Early theoretical models, such as the one developed by Considering all observation techniques, only magneto optical (MO) methods that have been developed only recently, have recording times well below 1 s. Low recording times allow in-situ investigations at frequencies at and above technical frequency of 50/60 Hz. Another advantage of MO techniques are easy handling without elaborated sample preparation techniques as required, e.g. for Kerr microscopy. Here, we present an experimental setup that combines parallel measurement of magnetic loss with fast domain studies of grain oriented (GO) electrical steel sheets. At PTB, a high precision measurement setup exists for well defined polarization and frequency ranges between 0.05 T -2.3 T, and 50 Hz and 1 kHz, respectively. It is optimized for measurements according to standard magnetic circuits, i.e. Epstein frames and single sheet testers (SST) A picture of the magnetic circuit is shown in Fig. The domain tester is a recent development by Innovent e.V. It combines CMOS-MagView technology based on MO indicator films with a fast 8 kHz camera in order to take images of moving domains. A high intensity LED light source is implemented to accommodate exposure times < 200 ms. A MO sensor type A resolving magnetic stray fields perpendicular to the sample surface is mounted inside the senor head. Its MO sensitive layer is made out of ferrimagnetic Bismuthsubstituted iron garnet, which imposes a particularly strong Faraday rotation on passing light. The MO layer is deposited by liquid phase epitaxy on single crystalline substrate, which ensures gray scale imaging of high-resolution. The sensor size is about 13 mm x 18 mm and it is positioned close to the sample surface. Best imaging results are obtained for distances between sample and sensor of only a few μm, because magnetic stray fields decay rapidly with increasing distance. Further specifications of the domain tester are summarized in table 1. In the combined setup, the AC excitation of the loss measurement is synchronize with the high-speed camera by a trigger signal from the PXI system as shown in Fig. The spacial resolution of the sensor is limited by the internal domain size of the MO film and the pixel size of the high speed CCD camera. Therefore, the setup is most suitable to investigate GO electrical steel sheets. Figure Successful tests have been carried out also at higher excitation frequencies of up to 4 kHz. Here, the grey scale contrast is significantly reduced due to shorter integration times of 50 μs and less. We build and successfully tested an experimental setup, where loss measurements and surface analysis on GO electrical steel sheets can be carried out simultaneously. We implemented a domain tester in a fully digital setup for loss measurements. Electrical steel sheets with sample sizes of up to 100 mm width can be investigated in the frequency range up to 4 kHz. With increasing detection frequency of the domain tester, image contrast is reduced due to shorter exposure times. Future work will include efforts for precise calibration of the loss setup. Furthermore, more advanced software tools need to be developed that allow averaging of images as used in stroposkopic surface analysis, e.g. Kerr microscopy by bers of turns depending on the excitation frequency during the measurement. One pair with 100 turns is best suitable for 50 Hz to 200 Hz measurements and the second pair consisted of 50 turns each. Later one is optimized for investigations at 300 Hz to 5 kHz range.