Kohn-Sham density functional theory (DFT) is the standard method for first-principles calculations in computational chemistry and materials science. More accurate theories such as the random-phase approximation (RPA) are limited in application due to their large computational cost. Here, we construct a DFT substitute functional for the RPA using supervised and unsupervised machine learning (ML) techniques. Our ML-RPA model can be interpreted as a non-local extension to the standard gradient approximation. We train an ML-RPA functional for diamond surfaces and liquid water and show that ML-RPA can outperform the standard gradient functionals in terms of accuracy. Our work demonstrates how ML-RPA can extend the applicability of the RPA to larger system sizes, time scales and chemical spaces. For over half a century, generations of researchers have been looking to find ever better approximations for the elusive exchange-correlation (xc) functional of Kohn-Sham density functional theory (DFT). To improve the accuracy of the approximation, one can add more non-local information by climbing up Jacob's ladder of DFT. Given ingredients X for the exchange-correlation functional, one still has to find the actual functional form, that is the map X → E xc [X]. In the analytical approach developed by Perdew and others, 10-12 those maps are found by satisfying exact constraints. The empirical approach pursued by Becke and others We show that these ingredients can be considered to be a non-local extension of GGA. In MLFF, data efficiency can be improved by training not only on energies alone but rather also on atomic forces. (1) However, obtaining accurate exchange-correlation potentials from beyond GGA functionals is generally difficult, and aside from the early work of Tozer et al., this approach has only been applied to simple model systems. ML-RPA achieves its speed-up via bypassing the optimized effective potential equation, substituting the complicated RPA exchange-correlation functional with pure KS-DFT. Further, our efficient plane-wave implementation brings the system size scaling of ML-RPA down to that of standard DFT. Finally, our approach enables self-consistent calculations, force and stress predictions, and even molecular dynamics simulations for molecules, solids and their surfaces. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec. 2 introduces the ML-RPA formalism. In Sec. 3, we briefly discuss the optimized effective potential method and comment on the issue of electronic self-consistency. Results are presented in Sec. 4 and discussed in Sec. 5. Conclusion are drawn in Sec. 6. We adapt the power spectrum representation of atomic environments 31 to electronic densities as follows. The electronic density around each real-space grid point r is expanded into radial basis functions φ nl (described in Supplementary Sec. S1) times real spherical harmonics The cutoff function f cut puts emphasis on nearby densities (r ′ ≤ R cut ), following Kohn's principle of nearsightedness. The expansion coefficients c n00 are the equivalents of rotationally invariant two-body descriptors used in MLFF, thus we write X n = c n00 . In the limit of small cutoffs R cut , the n reduce to the local density as shown in Supplementary Sec. S1. It is interesting that the well-known weighted density approximation 39 can be viewed as the special case where only a single two-body descriptor is taken, compare also the non-local density descriptor introduced by Nagai et al. n , similar to the three-body descriptors in MLFF, Here, σ n relative to the X n . n reduce to the local gradient as demonstrated in Supplementary Sec. S1. In summary, an exchange-correlation functional with X (2) n and X (3) n as its ingredients can be considered as a non-local extension of the generalized gradient approximation. Here, we use 4 radial basis functions, thus in total we have 4 + 4 = 8 density descriptors. A representation based on non-local convolutions of the electronic density has been previously suggested by Lei and Medford, 41 who also showed how the representation can be systematically completed by adding higher body-order descriptors. Likewise, representations of atomic environments for MLFF can be completed via moment tensor potentials 42 or the atomic cluster expansion. The exchange-correlation energy for any GGA functional can be written as where ε x,HEG is the exchange energy density for the homogeneous electron gas of uniform density n, and F xc is the enhancement factor. We use the same form as an ansatz for our ML-RPA model, where X is a supervector containing the two-and three-body descriptors. The map X(r) → F ML-RPA xc (r) is found by kernel regression using a Gaussian kernel, Figure (2) n (r) and three-body descriptors X Here, the kernel width σ is an ML hyperparameter, and the X i B are representative kernel control points chosen from the training data. The corresponding weights w i B are found by solving a linear regression problem. That is, the ML-RPA exchange-correlation energies and ML-RPA exchange-correlation potentials have to agree with exact RPA reference data in a least square sense. The ML-RPA exchange-correlation potentials are obtained by inserting the ansatz (7) into Eq. ( The exchange-correlation potentials provide derivative information for the ML fit as atomic forces do in MLFF, thus improving data efficiency. As the RPA includes information from unoccupied orbitals as ingredients, it sits on the fifth (highest) rung of Jacob's ladder. In the last two decades, the RPA has been successfully employed for a multitude of problems, see Refs. 54 and 55 for reviews. In particular, the RPA is considered a "gold standard" for first-principles surface studies Combining exact exchange and a good description of dispersion interactions makes the RPA also suitable for water and ice. where χ 0 is the Kohn-Sham response function, V is the Coulomb kernel, and we have used a symbolic notation for sake of brevity. As in standard Kohn-Sham DFT, one can obtain the exchange-correlation potential corresponding to the RPA exchange-correlation energy by taking the functional derivative with respect to the electronic density, Plugging in Eq. ( where G 0 is the non-interacting (Kohn-Sham) Greens-function and in the G 0 W 0 approximation. For more details on the implementations of the RPA exchangecorrelation energies and the RPA-OEP method, we refer to Refs. 53 and 37, respectively. Even tough the RPA-OEP method allows in principle to perform RPA calculations selfconsistently, 37 this procedure is seldom carried out due to the large computational overhead. A more common approach is to evaluate the RPA using orbitals from a semi-local DFT base functional ("RPA on-top of DFT", RPA@DFT). That is, RPA@PBE is the ground truth for ML-RPA, and we denote this ground truth in the following as "exact RPA". Unless stated otherwise, all RPA calculations and ML-RPA calculations are thus performed non-self-consistently on-top of PBE orbitals. A ML substitute functional that reproduces only RPA@PBE would already be very useful, we reiterate that RPA@PBE is standard practice. For the calculation of atomic forces, however, it is convenient to perform self-consistent calculations to avoid tedious non-Hellman-Feynman terms. Wherever exact RPA reference forces are required, for instance for phonon calculations, we calculate such non-Hellman-Feynman terms explicitly. As a validation, we used the computationally demanding RPA-OEP method to calculate the equilibrium volume of bulk diamond self-consistently. Fig. We would like to emphasize that this result is not obvious, as the training set covers only PBE densities. To this point, Snyder et al. We use the PAW code VASP (Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package), We Next, we calculate phonon dispersions using the finite displacement method. The advent of chemical vapor deposition (CVD) has encouraged detailed first-principles simulations of diamond surfaces. Specifically, the characterization of ideal crystallographic surfaces has proven useful for the theoretical understanding of CVD grown diamond. The (100) surface is the most relevant crystallographic surface and has been thoroughly studied. Finally, the (110) surface, which is difficult to prepare experimentally, has only recently been fully characterized. where E is the total energy of the surface, E dia and E H 2 are the energies of bulk diamond and the H 2 molecule, and E O is calculated using the water monomer as reference Vibrational contributions to the formation energies due to zero-point motion are neglected. Diamond surface calculations are performed in 2×1 supercells using symmetric slabs. We use 18 surface layers for the (111)-1db surface and 16 layers for the rest. This assures convergence of the surface formation energies to better than 10 meV accuracy. RPA formation energies of diamond surfaces are collected in Table Including calculations of metastable surfaces (see Supplementary Sec. S4), we have assembled a database of 28 RPA surface formation energies in total. It is interesting to use these data as benchmark for other exchange-correlation functionals. Table Table Water with its many anomalies is both an important and challenging system for firstprinciples molecular dynamics simulations. In particular, Yao and Kanai 60 used MLFF to perform RPA-level calculations for liquid water with the inclusion of nuclear quantum effects. They showed that the RPA can well reproduce experimental data for numerous water properties at different temperatures. Due to the small mass of the hydrogen atom, the oxygen-hydrogen radial distribution function (RDF) and especially the hydrogen-hydrogen RDF are significantly altered by nuclear quantum effects. Namely, classical MD predicts an oxygen-hydrogen RDF that is overstructured compared to experimental data, and even more so for the hydrogen-hydrogen RDF. In contrast, the oxygen-oxygen RDF is far less affected, especially for higher temperatures. To perform calculations on liquid water, we add 32 liquid water structures containing 8 water molecules to the ML-RPA training set, as well as 39 structures using larger supercells (31 or 32 water molecules). The structures are again sampled from MD trajectories created by earlier ML-RPA versions. In addition, the ML-RPA training set contains 6 structures sampling the water monomer. Accurate determination of the water RDFs require long MD simulations that are computationally expensive even without nuclear quantum corrections. Thus, we perform classical MDs using 64 water molecules and speed them up by combining ML-RPA with MLFF. That is, we train a machine learning force field "on-the-fly" 32,90 using the energies and forces predicted by ML-RPA. In order to obtain an RPA reference for the radial distribution func- That said, overall both RPA reference results agree well with experimental data. Turning to the water structure predicted by ML-RPA, there are some clear discrepancies from both RPA references. The first peak of g OO is smaller in height, and the second peak is completely missing. The g OH predicted by ML-RPA is also somewhat less structured than the RPA references, but the overall agreement is better than for g OO . Importantly, the discrepancies are mainly due to the actual ML-RPA density functional, since the on-the-fly MLFF is very accurate (see Supplementary Sec. S5). Specifically, atomic forces for all MLFFs trained here exhibit an root mean square error of roughly 30 meV Å -1 , whereas the respective force errors for liquid water due to ML-RPA are roughly 90 meV Å -1 . It is also important to point out that the RPA-MLFF is a single-purpose force field, trained specifically to simulate liquid water in the bulk (and the water monomer). In contrast, the ML-RPA functional is not limited in this way as will be demonstrated in the following section. Finally, we investigated cubic ice, specifically, the I c (a) proton-ordered ice phase as described in Ref. 59 of water and ice. The fact that ML-RPA misses the second g OO maximum, underbinds the water dimer, and provides a PBE-like description of the water hexamers and cubic ice strongly indicates that the current ML-RPA misses some crucial non-local interactions. This is likely connected to the rather small cutoff radius used here for ML-RPA (R cut = 1.5 Å). However, increasing the cutoff is not beneficial for the current ML-RPA, our tests indicate that this diminishes ML-RPA accuracy (not shown). To challenge the extrapolation abilities of our ML-RPA functional, we apply it to the homogeneous electron gas (HEG). The HEG constitutes an "appropriate norm", that is an important theoretical limit that density functionals should fulfill. Due to symmetry, the HEG is completely characterized by the electron density n, or equivalently the Wigner-Seitz radius r s = (3/4πn) 1/3 . Starting with LDA, many successful exchange-correlation functionals are designed such that they describe the HEG exactly, but this is not the case for the present ML-RPA functional. It is important to point out that the ground truth here is the exchange-correlation energy per electron as given by exact RPA. As the RPA is itself an approximation, ε RPA xc,HEG differs from the usual LDA which is based on exact numerical data from Quantum Monte Carlo calculations. The LDA and different GGA functionals differ in the strength of their respective enhancement factors. This results, for example, in the following trend for cohesive energies of solids The same trend is also manifest for surface formation energies and molecular adsorption energies. Traditional routes beyond GGA are metaGGA and hybrid functionals on the one hand, and vdW functionals on the other hand. The RPA itself can be considered as the "gold standard" of vdW functionals. 101 Different vdW functionals tested here generally outperform their respective semi-local DFT base functionals, though the improvement is not always consistent. For example, the rVV10 vdW correction slightly increases the surface energies of the pristine SCAN functional, achieving good agreement with exact RPA (Table 57). On the other hand, SCAN already slightly overbinds the water dimer and gives a somewhat overstructured liquid. Thus, it is plausible that additional binding in the form of rVV10 can only deteriorate the performance of SCAN for water (Supplementary Sec. We reason that the rather small cutoff radius adapted here for ML-RPA is not sufficient to capture the full non-locality that is required for a complete description of liquid water (ML-RPA uses a cutoff radius of 1.5 Å, whereas RPA-MLFF uses a larger cutoff of 6.0 Å). However, simply increasing the cutoff radius is not an option with the current implementation and training database. We repeat that our tests show that a larger cutoff would diminish fit accuracy. Future work could instead focus on the construction of explicitly long-range descriptors as present in non-local vdW functionals or in recent extensions of MLFF frameworks. Here, this point was demonstrated by the poor performance of RPA-MLFF for water clusters (RPA-MLFF has been trained only for bulk water and the water monomer). In contrast, ML-RPA gives consistent if inaccurate predictions, though it has less water training data. We speculate that this is due to ML-RPA descriptors being much more compact, which makes extrapolation more manageable. Specifically, here we used 8 density descriptors for ML-RPA versus 408 atomic descriptors for RPA-MLFF (204 for both O and H). It is worth pointing out that this difference will be exacerbated when more chemical species have to be described at the same time. That is, the number of descriptors in MLFF schemes generally scales unfavorably with the number of chemical species, whereas the density descriptors used for ML-RPA do not depend explicitly on atom type. On the other side, RPA-MLFF is in the present implementation undeniable superior in terms of raw fit accuracy. ML-RPA and RPA-MLFF thus strike different balances between model flexibility and universality. When pushed even further outside of its training set, however, ML-RPA eventually extrapolates as well as demonstrated for the homogeneous electron gas. The obvious but costly solution to the extrapolation problem is the construction of ever larger training databases. A more elegant alternative would be to enforce ML-RPA to obey known exact constraints. Exact constraints have been used in the past to construct successful functionals such as the SCAN functional ("Strongly constrained and appropriately normed"). In this work we have machine learned a substitute density functional based on the randomphase approximation. The ingredients of ML-RPA are density descriptors constructed analogously to the two-and three-body descriptors used for machine learned force fields. These ingredients can be considered as non-local extensions of the local density and its gradient. As a first application, we have constructed an ML-RPA functional for diamond and liquid water. We have demonstrated how such a functional can be used to enable RPA calculations at a larger scale. For a data set of 28 diamond surfaces, ML-RPA surpasses all tested GGA functionals in terms of accuracy and reaches the level of state-of-the-art vdW functionals. For liquid water, ML-RPA is less accurate and falls back to a GGA-level description, which we traced back to an insufficient description of non-local interactions. Our ML-RPA scheme was demonstrated to learn fairly quickly from small amounts of exact RPA data, with the entire data base consisting of less than 200 structures. We credit this data efficiency to the inclusion of derivative information in the form of RPA exchangecorrelation potentials, which are obtained via the optimized effective potential method. This is in close analogy to fitting atomic forces in MLFF. Generally, the tasks of machine learning atomic force fields and machine learning density functionals are closely related. We hope to see continued exchange of concepts and techniques, as we believe that both fields can benefit immensely from such a "cross-fertilization" of ideas. Finally, our machine learning method using optimized effective potentials is general and not limited to the random-phase approximation. For example, beyond RPA theories can be constructed by including vertex correction to the screened Coulomb interaction and/or self energy. One can also envision to extract high accuracy exchange-correlation potentials from accurate coupled-cluster densities via Kohn-Sham inversion. Our method can also be applied to learn hybrid functionals, where large databases can be obtained more easily, thus facilitating large-scale hybrid functional simulations. applications of machine learning in solid-state materials science. npj Computational Materials 2019, 5, 1-36. (31) (a) Bartók For the cutoff function f cut , we use the cosine cutoff proposed by Behler and Parrinello, S1 For radial basis functions φ nl , we use spherical Bessel functions as in Ref. S2, where the q nl are chosen such that the basis functions vanish at r ′ = R cut . Such spherical Bessel functions form a complete basis on the interval [0, R cut ] and fulfill orthogonality relations of the kind For example, in the case of l = 0 one obtains and demanding that sin(q n0 R cut ) = 0 yields the simple expressions Next, we calculate the expansion coefficients c nlm using the orthogonality relations (S4), as well as those for the where we have absorbed the coefficients A nl and the cutoff function f cut to define modified basis functions φnl , Next, we combine the Fourier representation of the density and the plane-wave expansion, S3 e iqr ′ = 4π to rewrite Eq. (S8) as To simplify the equation above, we use the orthogonality relations of the Y m l [Eq. (S7)] and define the spherical Bessel transform, to finally arrive at the concise expression c nlm (r) = i l dq (2π) 3 e iqr n(q) φnl (q)Y m l ( q). (S14) three-body descriptors X n [compare Eq. ( We have verified that this last approximation works well for the application to diamond and liquid water. Generally, however, the validity of the approximation depends on the concrete training set as well as on the radial basis functions used. S4 Here, we use four radial basis functions for both l = 0 and l = 1, thus we have in total 4 + 4 = 8 density descriptors. Note that we use the weight factor σ (3) /R cut in Eq. (S18), rather than (8π 2 /3) 1/4 which would correspond to √ p nn1 . The possibility of using different weight factors for the three-body descriptors was also discussed in detail by Jinnouchi et al. In Eqs. ( That means one can perform the gradient expansion of the density S6 around r where α, β and γ are Cartesian indices and we use the Einstein sum convention. The same limit can also be obtained for fixed cutoff radius by considering artificial weakly varying densities (∇n → 0, in the extreme case, one obtains the homogeneous electron gas). In other words, the dimensionless expansion parameter is r ′ ∇n, and that can be small when either r ′ or ∇n is fixed and the other one goes to zero. We insert the gradient expansion (S20) into the expression for the coefficients c nlm , Eq. S-5 (S8), yielding When evaluating the integral above, the first order term in the gradient expansion vanishes for l = 0. This is due to the anti-symmetry of the integrand. Likewise, the zeroth and second order terms vanish for l = 1. Thus, for the n00 (two-body descriptors), Eq. (S21) simplifies to where we have used Further, the radial integrals give numerical constants, the first being independent of R cut , and the second being proportional to R 2 cut (this can be seen by performing a variable transform x = r ′ /R cut ). The two-body descriptors in the limit of small cutoffs therefore have the expansion [compare Eq. (3) in the main text] Next, we use Eq. (S21) to approximate the l = 1 coefficients c n1α , where in the second line we have plugged in Eq. (S17) for the Y α 1 . To simplify this expression, In the following, we describe our ML scheme in more detail and discuss some challenges inherent to the use of optimized effective potentials (OEP). Further, we will derive analytic expression for the machine learned exchange-correlation potentials v ML-RPA xc and show how they can be efficiently evaluated using FFTs. We begin by briefly motivating our ML scheme via analogy to MLFF. The starting point for MLFF schemes is the atomic density, This atomic density is usually smoothed by replacing the delta function above by a Gaussian. The central assumption in MLFF is that the total energy can by decomposed into a sum of atomic energies ε i , which depend on two-and three-body descriptors (collected in a supervector X atom ), In DFT, the central quantity is the electronic density n. We do not apply smearing to n, as the electronic density is already a smooth object. Analogously to Eq. (S31), one can formulate the assumption that the exchange-correlation energy can be written as an integral of energy densities depending on two-and three-body descriptors (supervector X), We further pull out a factor ε x,HEG (r), such that the enhancement factor F xc is approximated rather than ε xc . In other words, we use the LDA exchange as a baseline for ML-RPA, yielding the ansatz [Eq. (7) in the main text] For the functional form of F ML-RPA xc , we use a Gaussian kernel [Eq. (8) in the main text] where the kernel width σ is an ML hyperparameter, the X i B are representative control points and the w i B the corresponding weights. Combing Eqs. (S33) and (S34), we obtain Evaluating the functional derivative, v ML-RPA xc = δE ML-RPA xc /δn(r), yields a local term from the derivative of n(r)ε x,HEG (r) and a non-local term which stems from the dependence of the descriptors X(r ′ ) on the density n(r) The local term is easily evaluated using δn(r ′ )/δn(r) = δ(r -r ′ ), yielding The non-local term is more complicated, but we will show in the following that FFT can be employed once again for its efficient evaluation. Using Eq. (S34) and applying the chain S-9 rule, we obtain δc nlm (r ′ ) δn(r) . As the descriptors X i (r ′ ) depend on the expansion coefficients c nlm (r ′ ) in a simple algebraic fashion, the complicated non-locality is thus due to the last term only. Inserting the expressions (S13) and (S10) yields where in the last line we have substituted q → -q. Next, we define the intermediate quantities η nlm , which we evaluate numerically via FFT, With the help of the η nlm , we can rewrite Eq. (S38) in the compact form which can be directly evaluated via FFT as well. In summary, Eqs. (S40) and (S41) allow us to evaluate the ML-RPA exchange-correlation potential on all real-space grid points r using a small number of FFTs. Thus, we have avoided the evaluation of double integrals by applying FFT throughout. Therefore, the overall computational cost of evaluating v ML-RPA xc scales only as O(N FFT ln N FFT ) rather than (N 2 FFT ) with respect to the number of real-space grid points N FFT . A potential pitfall in using the OEP method for ML applications is the fact that v RPA xc (r) is in practice determined only up to a constant shift. Inspired by the work of Nagai et al., Thus, the ṽRPA In fitting, we equate the auxiliary potentials with their ML-RPA analogs, ṽML-RPA Thus, any information regarding absolute values of the OEP potentials is circumvented. Similar shifted exchange-correlation potentials occur also in the ML scheme of Tozer et al., To find the weights w i B , we fit to exchange-correlation energies and shifted exchangecorrelation potentials at selected points r k for all structures α contained in the training set. We demand that ML-RPA reproduces the reference data in a least square sense and apply S-11 appropriate weights, yielding the loss function (S45) Here we have introduced a dimensionless weight factor c E , which allows us to balance exchange-correlation energies and potentials. Further, we normalize the loss with respect to system size via dividing by the number of electrons N α e . Likewise, a factor Ω α /N α spars is included for the exchange-correlation potentials, where Ω α is the volume of structure α. From Eq. (S42) it is clear that the shifted exchange-correlation potentials depend linearly on the w i B just as the unshifted ones do. Thus, we can solve a system of linear equations that is obtained via minimization of the loss function (S45) with respect to the w i B , Following Verdi et al., where we multiply the Tikhonov parameter t SVD by the largest singular value σ max . Thus, t SVD is dimensionless and we can more easily compare numerical values of t SVD for different databases. Finally, all ML-RPA hyperparameters are summarized in Table Table To reduce computational cost, the exchange-correlation potential is fitted not on the entire real-space grid but rather at selected representative points r k . These points are represented as red crosses in Fig. (S48) The k-means centers are initialized via farthest point sampling similar to Ref. S12. In further iterations, the centers are updated as averages over all points belonging to their respective clusters as in the standard k-means algorithm. Those points are assigned to the clusters based again on the kernel induced metric. Next, we combine the selected points from all structures and apply the sparsification again to choose the kernel control points X i B , compare blue squares in Fig. In the following, we demonstrate numerically the efficiency of our sparsification scheme. ′ even for structures α on which ML-RPA has been trained on. This means that L 1,v ′ is less prone to overfitting and statistical error. Likewise, atomic forces in MLFF are known to be less prone to overfitting and statistical errors than energies. Fig. As a baseline, the ML-RPA training set contains 41 small molecules from the G2-2 database. Table The basis set incompleteness error also causes a slight underbinding of bulk diamond. The extrapolated values for the equlibrium lattice constant is 3.572 Å, whereas "exact RPA" predicts 3.581 Å. RPA-MLFF is trained directly on total energies and forces from RPA calculations. Since The MLFF used to speed up ML-RPA uses the same descriptors as RPA-MLFF, but is trained on-the-fly S2,S28 at fixed volume using a temperature ramp from 270 K to 370 K and a supercell containing 64 water molecules. In this way, a training set of around 400 structures is created. Thus, the combination of ML-RPA and MLFF allows for significantly more MLFF ground truth calculations, since ML-RPA is orders of magnitude cheaper than exact RPA. Moreover, the stresses predicted by ML-RPA can be seamlessly included in the MLFF training, whereas this would not be as easily possible for RPA-MLFF (RPA stress tensors can be included via finite differences, S29 but this is very expensive). The MLFFs for PBE+TS and RPBE+D3(BJ) are also trained on-the-fly, fit accuracy being similar to ML-RPA (see Table That is, instead of a single data point per structure for E RPA xc , we have additional data for v RPA xc (r) on typically O(10 5 )-O(10 6 ) grid points r. Fig 5 2 3 per H 2 O). For comparison, the equilibrium volumes predicted by PBE and PBE+TS are 30.2 Å 3 per H 2 O and 30.0 Å 3 per H 2 O, respectively. In summation, ML-RPA provides a consistent but somewhat inaccurate description (32) Jinnouchi, R.; Karsai, F.; Kresse, G. On-the-fly machine learning force field generation: Application to melting points. Physical Review B 2019, 100, 014105. (33) Chmiela, S.; Tkatchenko, A.; Sauceda, H. E.; Poltavsky, I.; Schütt, K. T.; Müller, K.-R. Machine learning of accurate energy-conserving molecular force fields. Science Advances 2017, 3, e1603015. (34) Nagai, R.; Akashi, R.; Sasaki, S.; Tsuneyuki, S. Neural-network Kohn-Sham exchangecorrelation potential and its out-of-training transferability. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2018, 148, 241737. (35) Zhou, Y.; Wu, J.; Chen, S.; Chen, G. Toward the Exact Exchange-Correlation Potential: A Three-Dimensional Convolutional Neural Network Construct. The Journal of (37) Riemelmoser, S.; Kaltak, M.; Kresse, G. Optimized effective potentials from the random-phase approximation: Accuracy of the quasiparticle approximation. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2021, 154, 154103. (41) Lei, X.; Medford, A. J. Design and analysis of machine learning exchange-correlation functionals via rotationally invariant convolutional descriptors. Physical Review Materials 2019, 3, 063801. (42) Shapeev, A. V. Moment Tensor Potentials: A Class of Systematically Improvable Interatomic Potentials. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation 2016, 14, 1153-1173. (43) (a) Drautz, R. Atomic cluster expansion for accurate and transferable interatomic potentials. Physical Review B 2019, 99, 014104; (b) Drautz, R. Erratum: Atomic cluster expansion for accurate and transferable interatomic potentials [Phys. Rev. B 99, 014104 (2019)]. Physical Review B 2019, 100, 249901. (44) Grisafi, A.; Fabrizio, A.; Meyer, B.; Wilkins, D. M.; Corminboeuf, C.; Ceriotti, M. functionals of the electronic density. Nature Communications 2020, 11, 1-10. tries. S17,S18,S20-S22 In the following, we briefly comment on the interesting case of oxygenated (111) surfaces, where several (meta-)stable configurations exist that are close in energy. The S-17 * included in the ML-RPA training set