Material science is an important foundation of modern society development, covering significant areas like chemosynthesis and metamaterials. Click chemistry provides a simple and efficient paradigm for achieving molecular diversity by incorporating modified building blocks into compounds. In contrast, most metamaterial designs are still case by case due to lacking a fundamental mechanism for achieving reconfigurable thermal conductivities, largely hindering design flexibility and functional diversity. Here, we propose a universal concept of click metamaterials for fast realizing various thermal conductivities and functionalities. Tunable hollow-filled unit cells are constructed to mimic the modified building blocks in click chemistry. Different hollowfilled arrays can generate convertible thermal conductivities from isotropy to anisotropy, allowing click metamaterials to exhibit adaptive thermal functionalities. The straightforward structures enable full-parameter regulation and simplify engineering preparation, making click metamaterials a promising candidate for practical use in other diffusion and wave systems. Heat energy is the most fundamental energy form, whose widespread existence and huge quantity make heat control particularly crucial for human society. Thermal metamaterials have contributed to uncovering unexpected heat transfer mechanisms due to their extraordinary abilities to manipulate heat flow scattering cancellation Click chemistry Here, we address these key issues and present the design paradigm of click metamaterials for fast realizing thermal conductivity and functionality diversities. We fabricate a click metashell, consisting of tunable hollow-filled cells (THFCs) which are the counterparts of the modified building blocks in click chemistry. It is important to note that the THFCs are not cut from the metashell but are integral to its structure, as depicted in Figure We introduce a design paradigm for click metamaterials, founded on the assessment of the effective thermal conductivity (ETC) of THFC. Initially, we determine the ETC of THFC under varying air fractions, as elaborated in section 2 2.1, and subsequently propose a design strategy that facilitates convertible thermal isotropy. Following this, we calculate the properties of the expanded THFC, leveraging the ETC obtained from a single THFC, as detailed in section 2 2.2. This calculation enables us to attain convertible thermal conductivities ranging from isotropy to anisotropy, thereby allowing flexible manipulation of thermal anisotropy. The insights gleaned from this section lay the theoretical groundwork for the fabrication of metadevices with adaptive thermal functionalities. For adjusting the ETC of natural materials artificially, researchers often employ the effective medium theory where κ 2 is the thermal conductivity of the host medium. p describes the air fraction of the host medium. κ 1 is the thermal conductivity of air. L i (i = a, b) (two-dimensional case) is the shape factor along the x-axis or y-axis, given by In particular, we have L a = L b = 1/2, supposing the air fraction is round. For a three-dimensional case, L c should be introduced as a third dimension and we should consider a spheriform air hole embedded in a cubic object, see Note S1 (Supplementary Materials) As an example, we select a square piece of Aluminum alloy 1060 (236 W m -1 K -1 ) as the host medium. Then we obtain the effective thermal conductivity of the model (shown in Figure we can resort to the map datasets between effective thermal conductivity and air proportion for the purpose of accurate adjustment. So we can equivalently control the effective conductivity of this model by modulating the radius of the round air hole. To exactly modify the radius, we can manufacture several concentric annuli with appropriate thicknesses (e.g. varying thicknesses with equal differences). Then, we put the annuli touched each other into the air hole to resize it, composing a THFC with targeted thermal conductivity, shown in Figure Generally, the click reaction occurring in the procedure of realizing convertible thermal isotropy includes four steps. Firstly, according to the requirement of actual applications, we calculate the thermal conductivity of the metashell. Secondly, we grid the metamaterial region into a series of THFCs, with each THFC holding the calculated thermal conductivity. Thirdly, we consult the collected datasets to obtain the air hole sizes of the THFCs, corresponding to the calculated thermal conductivity. Finally, we adjust the amount of the concentric annulus of each THFC simultaneously, making the air hole with the calculated size. This methodology allows us to regulate the ETC of the metashell without refabricating an entirely new device. We can also realize convertible thermal anisotropy of the metashell by the click reactions: the judicious combination of THFCs with different air fractions. We suppose the thermal conductivity of the metashell is a tensor matrix ) in the cylindrical coordinate system. For anisotropic ETCs, when κ rθ = 0, we consider a 2 × 2 array comprising four neighboring THFCs with distinct air hole sizes to realize the convertible anisotropy of the metashell, which is dubbed expanded THFC hereinafter; see Figure where a = 1/(1 + e 2δθ ) and b = 1/(1 + e -2δθ ). And we have ln(r i+1 /r i ) = δθ to ensure the THFC is quasi-square, where δθ is the central angle of a THFC phase and r i (i = 1,2,. . . ,n) is the inner radius of the i-th annular layer of the structure  where the quaternion is (0, 0, 0, 0) as denoted with the red solid circle in Figure  where the quaternion is (0.6, 0.6, 0.6, 0.6) as denoted by the blue solid circle. Starting from (0, 0, 0, 0), we keep the air fraction of the UL and LL invariant and enlarge the counterpart of the UR and LR until the quaternion is (0, 0.6, 0, 0.6), the κ rr and κ θθ walk directionally along the yellow boundary from the red solid circle to point I. Then we keep the air fraction of the UR and LR invariant and increase the counterpart of the UL and LL until the quaternion is (0.6, 0.6, 0.6, 0.6), the κ rr and κ θθ continue to walk from point I to the blue solid circle. In addition, we can obtain the other two boundaries (red and green boundaries) by appropriate adjustment of quaternion; see Figure Notably, the κ rr and κ θθ of the expanded THFC depend only on δθ and the κ values of its four individual THFCs. Therefore, the whole metashell can be regarded as a periodic arrangement of this 2 × 2 array, whose effective thermal conductivity is position-independent. Finally, we can realize convertible thermal anisotropy on the click metashell by setting the proper quaternion (UL, UR, LL, LR) of each expanded THFC, without loss of generality. For anisotropic ETCs, when κ rθ 0, the ETC tensor ) with an angle θ Click-Metamaterials-Induced Adaptive Functionalities. In this section, we delve into the practical applications of the click metamaterials. The attribute of convertible thermal isotropy enables us to construct an adaptive thermal cloak, constituted of the click metashell, which exhibits adaptive responses to fluctuating background components. Simultaneously, the property of convertible thermal anisotropy in the click metashell allows for a functional shift between various thermal states, including a thermal cloak, thermal concentrator, thermal transparency, and thermal rotator. Consequently, click metamaterials manifest adaptive thermal functionalities, demonstrating their significant potential in real-world applications. To verify the convertible thermal isotropic conductivity of the metashell, we present an adaptive thermal cloak that incorporates this click metashell, allowing it to perform adaptive responses to variable background components. It is well-established that the bilayer thermal cloak can achieve perfect thermal cloaking with only bulk isotropic materials where c is the exradius of the outer layer, and b is the counterpart of the inner layer. Therefore, κ 3 is determined by κ 0 , which indicates the bilayer thermal cloak will not work when the background changes. In this practical case, we improve the bilayer cloak and overcome its shortcomings by substituting the outer layer with the click metashell, featuring tunable isotropic thermal conductivity that satisfies Eqs. Compared to existing chameleon-like Realizing function switching is another significant application of our click metashell, attributable to its flexibility in controlling the degree of thermal anisotropy. For composites whose effective thermal conductivities tensor is  , the multifunctional device can be designed based on the following principle Keep δθ = π 12 . Our metashell can readily achieve the anisotropic ETC required in different applications, as demonstrated in Figure where the κ 0 is the thermal conductivity of the background. In this circumstance, we just need to regulate the ETCs of changing THFCs κ t to comply with Eq.5. For a thermal cloak, we set the air fraction of the LR and LL to zero but vary the counterparts of the UR and UL simultaneously, which lets the ETCs satisfy κ rr < κ θθ . A thermal insulating layer (expanded polystyrene) is attached between the metashell and the central region, which prevents the heat flow to enter the central region. But such an insulating layer doesn't distort the temperature field of the background due to the effectiveness of the metashell. Although thermal transparency can be realized by modulating the ETC of all the THFCs to κ 0 simultaneously, we maintain the binary periodic structure because we can readily achieve function switching from the former stage of thermal functions. Meanwhile, the criteria of realizing thermal transparency can be approximately met by setting the air fractions of the diagonal components within the expanded THFCs to zero but varying the anti-diagonal counterparts [see Figure Consequently, the device is converted into a thermal rotator. Finite-element simulations illustrate the effectiveness of the metashell with different configurations. The periodic arrangement of the expanded THFCs with corresponding structures, as illustrated in Figures The thermal conductivities of the existing metamaterials are either isotropic or anisotropic, and are invariably fixed. This condition results in a significant shortfall in design flexibility and functional diversity. To overcome these limitations, tunable hollow-filled cells (THFCs) with flexible modification are proposed to design the click metamaterials, corresponding to a counterpart of the modified building blocks in click chemistry. We fabricate a click metashell possessing convertible thermal isotropic or anisotropic conductivity, achieved through the adjustment of THFCs. By discretizing the metashell region into THFCs and controlling their air fraction to adjust the effective thermal conductivity, we achieve full-parameter control over thermal conductivity, enabling convertible thermal conductivities from isotropy to anisotropy and flexible control of thermal anisotropy. The effectiveness of our metashell is demonstrated through its application in an adaptive thermal cloak, capable of responding to varying background components. Meanwhile, it can realize function switching in different working scenes, by simply altering the structures of the expanded THFCs. Both simulations and experiments illustrate that our adaptive cloak can perform exact thermal cloaking under different backgrounds, covering a considerably large range of thermal conductivity. Finite-element simulations illustrate our metashell can switch among the thermal transparency, concentrator, cloak, and rotator. Nearly perfect adaptive (to surroundings, or application requirements) functionalities can be achieved readily without exquisite techniques, indicating our advanced scheme is suitable for practical engineering applications. Therefore, the click metamaterials can realize the fast acquisition of thermal conductivities and functionality diversities. Furthermore, it is believed that this scheme could motivate relative research in other fields due to the fundamental technique we used is not limited to a specific physical field. For example, magnetic permeability and electrical conductivity can also be regulated by our method, and a clickreaction-induced adaptive magnetostatic cloak is expected to happen Adaptive thermal cloak. We ensure nearly identical shapes for all THFCs, adjusting their air fractions simultaneously using the concentric annuli previously fabricated to modify the ETC. Keep δr i = r i+1r i = 3 cm, and the arc length corresponding to the central angle of each THFC is about 3 cm, which enables the THFC is quasi-square. The adaptive bilayer cloak is placed in a host square block (background) with a width of 100 mm and a thickness of 2 mm. Then we insulate the upper and lower boundaries and fix the temperature of the left and right boundaries with 333 K and 273 K. Three different backgrounds we used are Brass (H90) (187.6 W m -1 K -1 ), Brass (H62) (116.7 W m -1 K -1 ) and Cr 20 Ni 80 In relation to the pragmatic applications of thermal metamaterials, a substantial challenge exists in the interfacial thermal resistance encountered between different materials, which frequently leads to temperature discontinuity. Here we discuss the effect of interfacial thermal resistance between concentric annuli aiming to change THFCs' air fractions. Interfacial thermal resistance predominantly comprises two distinct components Such an adjustment is quite straightforward to compute 