Recent claim of discovering above-room-temperature superconductivity (T c ≈400 K) at ambient pressure in copper doped apatite Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O has stimulated world-wide enthusiasm and impulse of motion. A lot of follow-up works have been carried out with controversial conclusions. To check whether superconductivity is really present or absent in the material, we need samples which should have a rather pure phase of Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O. Here we report the characterization results from the Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O with a fraction of about 97 wt.% inferred from the fitting to the X-ray diffraction pattern, if assuming Cu 2 S as the only impurity. The resistivity measurements show that it is a semiconductor characterized roughly by a ln(1/T) temperature dependence in wide temperature region without trace of superconductivity. Magnetization measurements show that it has a general ferromagnetic signal with a weak superparamagnetic background. Many grains of the sample show clear interactions with a NbFeB magnet. The detected Cu concentration is much lower than the expected nominal one. Our results show the absence of metallicity and superconductivity in Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O at ambient pressure, and suggest the presence of strong correlation effect. superconductivity, Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O, ferromagnetic, correlation effect Room temperature superconductivity has been regarded as the holy grail of condensed matter physics. Since the discovery of superconductivity by Onnes in 1911, tremendous efforts have been dedicated towards this goal, which has led to the discovery of two families of unconventional hightemperature superconductors at ambient pressure, namely, cuprates and iron-based superconductors Very recently, a Cu doped Pb based apatite Pb 10-x Cu x -(PO 4 ) In this manuscript, we successfully synthesized the Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O samples with a purity higher than 97 wt.% by improving the reaction conditions. The sample exhibits a semiconducting behavior in the whole temperature region. A moderate ferromagnetic feature is detected, and some grains of the sample show clear interactions with a magnet. Our results also exclude the room-temperature superconductivity in present samples. The samples of Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O were synthesized by the solid-state reaction method as used in refs. The crystal structure was evaluated via XRD (Bruker, D8 Advance diffractometer) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The diffraction intensity was obtained over the 2θ angle ranging from 10°to 90°. The Rietveld refinements As depicted in the inset of Figure A comparison of the XRD data between our sample and that from Lee et al. Figure From the analysis mentioned above, the models with a band insulator and the 3D VRH cannot explain the behavior of resistivity data, but the transport data strongly suggest the involvement of strong correlation effect. We must mention that at this moment we cannot exclude the influence of the scattering by the grain boundaries, but this may not change the general argument and needs to be further checked with single crystal samples. From the above analysis, we would conclude that the semiconducting behavior in present sample is governed by the logarithmic temperature dependence which is intimately induced by the strong correlation effect, as proposed by several theoretical studies To explore the magnetic properties of Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O, we measured the dc magnetization M(T) and magnetic hysteresis loops (MHL) by the SQUID-VSM magnetometer, the data are shown in Figure We have successfully synthesized the sample Pb 