The existence of spontaneous magnetization that fingerprints a ground-state ferromagnetic order was recently observed in two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals materials. Despite progress in the fabrication and manipulation of the atom-thick magnets, investigation of nanoscale magnetization properties is still challenging due to the concomitant technical issues. We propose a promising approach for a direct visualization of the domain walls formed in 2D magnetic materials. By interfacing 2D magnet with a transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayer, the strong proximity effects enable pinning the TMD excitons on the domain wall. The emergent localization stems from the proximity-induced exchange mixing between spin-dark and spin-bright TMD excitons due to the local in-plane magnetization characteristic of the domain wall in the magnetic monolayer. A recent discovery of long-range magnetic order in layered van der Waals (vdW) materials Given by intrinsic quantum confinement effects, 2D materials exhibit fascinating properties which emerge at the nanoscale. For this reason, manifestations of ferromagnetism in the vdW structures crucially differ from the properties of their bulk counterparts or thin films of conventional ferromagnets. One of the most striking differences is the physics standing behind spontaneous formation of a domain structure below Curie temperature. The recent theoretical studies An alternative approach takes advantage of optically detected proximity effects which arise upon placing 2D magnets in contact with non-magnetic materials. For materials with coupled spin-valley physics such as transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayers However, these techniques do not resolve the effects at the core of DW where magnetization field gradually rotates across the few nanometer-wide interface separating domains. In this paper we propose an approach which allows for a direct optical visualization of the DWs in the vdW magnets. It implies addressing tightly bound TMD excitons whose small spatial extent promotes them as a high-resolution sensor of local magnetization. Akin to the real in-plane magnetic field Model. -In what follows, we consider excitons in MoSe 2 monolayer placed on top of a 2D magnet, see Fig. where l dw stands for the DW width [23] for the details]: . ( The strength of the in-plane magnetization-induced mixing described by the off-diagonal terms in Eq. ( State mixing and exciton localization on the domain wall. -The exchange-induced mixing at the core of the DW enables exciton localization. The energy and spatial profile for the ground state χ = (χ B (X), χ D (X)) ⊺ of Hamiltonian (2) are shown in Fig. which represents an eigenvalue of the potential energy terms in Eq. ( For the efficient confinement, the trapped state must lie below free exciton energy, which is simply exchange coupling parameters α e,h which can be tuned in a wide range by means of electrical gating and the layer twist angle , is maximized at γ = 1 corresponding to the symmetric exchange coupling. Here ∆ is the energy gap between the unperturbed dark and bright excitons. In this optimal configuration the localization width is about 10 nm, see Fig. Confined excitons can be detected from their photoluminescence signal. The relevant optical response is characterized by the fraction and the radiative recombination rate of the bright state. In turn, the exciton radiative recombination is governed by the modulus of wave function of exciton relative dynamics taken at origin of relative coordinate, i.e. when the positions of the electron and hole overlap Note that characteristics of the DW internal structure affect localization phenomenon as well. The increase of the DW width l dw enhances localization efficiency, c.f. the solid and dashed curves in Figs. Conclusion and outlook. We have demonstrated a new mechanism of the 1D localization of excitons in a TMD monolayer placed in the proximity of the monolayer ferromagnet. The localization emerges at the magnetic domain wall due to the in-plane magnetization which mixes spin-bright and spin-dark excitons. The proposed mechanism is compatible with various combinations of atomthick magnets and Mo-based monolayers, i.e. MoSe 2 , MoS 2 . In tungsten based monolayers the large spin-orbit splitting strongly suppresses the state mixing, preventing thus the formation of an effective trap, and ultimately the localized state. The predicted effect can be employed for the purely optical mapping of the DWs formed in 2D ferromagnets. The proposed experimental scheme is based on a nonresonant optical excitation, implying the formation of both free and localized bright excitons. The emission from excitons pinned on the DW will be redshifted with respect to free excitons, whereas its intensity reduction due to the state mixing will be expectedly negligible. Since the DW-localized exciton emission can be spectrally isolated from the pristine exciton line, one may resort to the photoluminescence imaging techniques allowing deeply subwavelength positioning of the DW. In a recent paper Observation of the proposed effect is generally hindered by the presence of impurities, structural defects, and other undesired side effects. Therefore, the experimental observation requires the use of good quality samples with the minimized number of structural defects, which can be particularly achieved using hBNencapsulated samples. Moreover, the emission from the DW-localized excitons can be easily distinguished from the defect-induced single point emitters due its stripelike shape defined by the structure of underlying magnetic DW. The predicted 1D localization phenomenon opens perspectives for routing of the excitons along the DWs which paves the way towards novel application of vdW heterostructures in spintronics. no. 2019-1246. V.S. acknowledges the support of 'Basis' Foundation (Project No. 22-1-3-43-1). The work of I.C. (developing formalism, numerical analysis, text writing) was supported by Russian Science Foundation (Project No. 22-72-00061).