We investigate magnon-magnon hybrid states using a non-Hermitian two-band Hamiltonian and the concept of wavefunction hybridization. By comparing our model with micromagnetic simulations conducted on a synthetic antiferromagnet with strong magnon-magnon coupling, we successfully reproduce not only the resonance frequencies and linewidths but also the phases and amplitudes of the magnon wavefunction. The hybridization effect influences the dissipation rate, leading to the crossing of linewidths. Additionally, we quantify the magnon hybridization within a magnonic Bloch sphere, which enhances the ability to manipulate hybrid magnons for coherent information processing. The hybrid quantum system based on magnon has elicited significant attention due to its advancements in quantum information technologies Recently, the dynamical phase shift between two magnets has been suggested as a parameter to differentiate the magnon hybrid mode in SAF. The dynamic phase shift at the hybrid mode is neither 0° nor 180° In this letter, we present a novel approach to explore the magnon-magnon hybrid state through the hybridization of magnon wavefunctions. To achieve this, we employ a non-Hermitian two-band Hamiltonian that allows us to determine the relevant parameters. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors obtained from our approach are in excellent agreement with the results obtained from a micromagnetic simulation conducted on a SAF. These results include the resonance frequency, linewidth, precession amplitude, and phase. The non-Hermitian component of our Hamiltonian is constructed based on the frequency-linewidth relationship, which captures the characteristic Gilbert damping behavior. We selected the wavefunctions associated with the AM and OM as our basis sets. The coupling between these modes leads to the formation of a new eigen wavefunction, which is a linear combination of the two basis states. The wavefunction hybridization induces a mixing of the linewidths, resulting in the suppression of one linewidth and the enhancement of the other. The observed phase behavior aligns with theoretical predictions, highlighting the non-Hermitian nature of the wavefunction hybridization. Furthermore, we investigate the evolution of magnon hybridization in a magnonic Bloch sphere as a function of an external field. By analyzing this evolution, we gain insights into the quantitative understanding and characterization of magnon hybridization for magnon-magnon hybrid systems. The phase shift alone is insufficient to fully characterize the hybridization. In We employ a non-Hermitian two-band Hamiltonian to fully characterize the hybrid mode by calculating the magnon energy and wavefunction. Specifically, we determine the eigenfrequencies and eigenvectors through an effective two-band Hamiltonian that incorporates coherent coupling between the magnons where fo, Δfo, fa, and Δfa, are the bare ferromagnetic resonance frequencies and linewidths for OM and AM, respectively. g is the strength of the magnon-magnon coupling. The two-band Hamiltonian for magnon-magnon coupling was the work of Chai et al., positive number, which means the absence of spin pumping. where the complex parameter Δ f f i ∆f ∆f . With the assumption α ≪ 1, the detected resonance frequency is Re f f f f f g . Two branches of hybrid modes are classified as f+ (upper) and f-(lower) branches. Also, we obtain the complex eigenvectors for the hybrid modes in the normalized solutions as (when g 0): The new wavefunction for hybrid mode is a linear combination of |o> and |a> with the complex amplitude Ao and Aa, respectively. The eigenvectors in Eq. ( It links the obscure wavefunction hybridization to the two observed parameters, including the amplitudes Ai (i=1,2) and phase δ. To confirm the validity of Eqs. ( 2(a) and 2(b), respectively. An evident anticrossing of the dispersion curves confirms the presence of magnon-magnon coupling. The coupling strength, denoted as g, is determined as 0.43 GHz. Moreover, an intercrossing of the linewidths has been observed, which aligns with the predictions of Eq. ( Nonetheless, the validity of Eq. ( The eigenvectors were calculated using Eq. ( Overall, the hybridization of magnon wavefunctions leads to asymmetric precessional amplitudes and a phase shift that deviates from 0° and 180°. In the context of a two-band model, the eigenvector (A , A T possesses a two-fold symmetry and can be mapped to a pseudospin vector on a Bloch sphere The aforementioned discussions successfully quantify the modulation of resonance frequency, linewidth, precession amplitude, and phase, thus confirming the validity of the two-band model and wavefunction hybridization in describing the magnon hybrid state. Moreover, the hybridization presents a distinct departure from the explanation of mutual spin pumping for linewidth suppression or enhancement In summary, we propose a non-Hermitian two coupled band model to describe the wavefunction hybridization in magnon-magnon hybrid modes. We select in-phase and out-of-phase excitations as the basis wavefunctions, and the magnon-magnon coupling (c) The magnetization oscillations of m1z (black) and m2z (red) as the total signal, the signal for lower and upper frequencies, respectively. 