We present a many-body GW formalism for quantum subsystems embedded in discrete polarizable environments containing up to several hundred thousand atoms described at a fully ab initio random phase approximation level. Our approach is based on a fragment approximation in the construction of the Green's function and independent-electron susceptibilities. Further, the environing fragments susceptibility matrices are reduced to a minimal but accurate representation preserving low order polarizability tensors through a constrained minimization scheme. This approach dramatically reduces the cost associated with inverting the Dyson equation for the screened Coulomb potential W, while preserving the description of short to long-range screening effects. The efficiency and accuracy of the present scheme is exemplified in the paradigmatic cases of fullerene bulk, surface, subsurface, and slabs with varying number of layers. The description of the electronic properties of a quantum subsystem embedded in a polarizable, or dielectric, environment (a molecular interface, a solvant, an electrode, etc.) remains a central issue in many fields pertaining to solid-state physics, chemistry or biology. Starting from the historical image charge models for electronic distributions close to a metallic surface or within a dielectric cavity, Conceptually close to the historical models of image charges, the polarizable continuum model (PCM) The cost associated with the building of the irreducible electronic susceptibility is usually the bottleneck in time-dependent density-functional theory (TD-DFT) and GW calculations. As a cure, fragments approximations can dramatically reduce such a cost by neglecting wavefunction overlaps between weakly interacting subsystems. These fragment or subsystem approaches have been recently implemented at the GW and BSE levels in the case of systems presenting weakly interacting subunits, including molecular systems, In the present study, we introduce and assess a fully ab initio scheme for embedded GW calculations with hundreds of thousand atoms in the environment. Besides adopting the fragment approximation, we search for an efficient low-rank representation of the susceptibility matrix associated with each fragment, projecting them on-the-fly onto a minimal polarization basis preserving the dipolar, quadrupolar, etc. fragments polarizability tensors. As a result, the size of the Dyson equation for W is dramatically reduced, while preserving the accuracy for the polarization energies at the meV level. We explore the trade-off between accuracy and efficiency in the case of a fullerene crystal, both in the bulk, surface, subsurface and few-layers-slab limits. We very briefly outline the GW formalism, directing the reader to thorough reviews and books for a more detailed account on the subject. Departing from the use of the electronic density in DFT, the GW formalism takes as a central variable the time-ordered one-body Green's function built from input {ε n , φ n } Kohn-Sham eigenstates, namely: where η is a positive infinitesimal and E F the Fermi energy. Relying on perturbation theory to low order in the screened Coulomb potential W, the energy-dependent exchange-correlation self-energy Σ(r, r ′ ; E) can be approximated by the GW operator under the form: with v the bare Coulomb potential and W the dynamically screened Coulomb potential built within the random phase approximation (RPA): + dr 1 dr 2 v(r, r 1 ) χ 0 (r 1 , r 2 ; ω) W(r 2 , r ′ ; ω). Such an equation adopts a self-consistent Dyson-like form that needs to be inverted once the independent-electron susceptibility has been built from Kohn-Sham one-body eigenstates: with { f m/n } level occupation numbers. The cost of calculating this independent-electron susceptibility grows as O(N 4 ) with respect to the number of electrons N in the system. Equivalently, dropping the space variables for compactness, the Dyson equation can be formulated as: with χ the RPA interacting susceptibility: The knowledge of Σ GW allows to correct the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues, replacing the density-based exchange-correlation potential v XC by the GW self-energy: the so-called quasiparticle energies at which the self-energy operator must be calculated. Our implementation leading in particular to fitting coefficients F P (φ n φ m ) = 0 when the φ n and φ m molecular orbitals are non-overlapping. Within this representation, Eqn. 4 rewrites: with coefficients In the fragment approximation, the full system auxiliary basis is simply the union of the subsystem basis sets, while each subsystem density can be expressed in its own corresponding basis. In such a case, the analysis of Eqn. 8 indicates that the joint contribution of two non overlapping subsystems to the representation of the independent-electron susceptibility χ 0 (r, r ′ ; ω) should be zero. Within that limit, the RI-fitted independent-electron susceptibility matrix is thus block diagonal, with blocks corresponding to the constituting subsystems gas phase (isolated) irreducible susceptibilities. Labelling X (I) 0 the block of fit coefficients corresponding to the independent-electron susceptibility of subsystem (I), the Dyson equation for the full system interacting susceptibility coefficients matrix X(ω) (eqn. 6) reads: with V (IJ) the block corresponding to the Coulomb interactions between auxiliary basis elements of fragments (I) and (J). This equation can also be conveniently rewritten: with X (I) g (ω) the block of coefficients for the isolated (gas phase) interacting susceptibility of fragment (I). In this latter formulation, only the off-diagonal Coulomb interactions V (I J) that accounts for inter-fragments coupling are considered (see Fig. A typical calculation that expands MOs over a triple-zeta def2-TZVP basis set For the fragment of interest, for which we want to actually perform a GW correction, we preserve the full auxiliary basis optimized for the corresponding MO basis sets. However, concerning the fragments in the environment, we emphasize that we are mainly interested in their contribution to the reaction field, namely to the induced dipoles, quadrupoles, etc., developed as a response to an electronic excitation in the central subsystem. As such, the full details of the susceptibility in the auxiliary {P} basis may not be necessary. In order to reduce the computational effort of the Dyson equation, we therefore look for an efficient and compact way to represent the interacting susceptibility of the fragments in the environment. We seek a lower-rank approximation to the gas phase interacting susceptibilities g (ω) : where we use a small basis sets {γ}, which could be for example a minimal Gaussian (sp 3 ) 4-orbitals basis per atom in order to mimic the induced charges-and-dipoles models developed in QM/MM techniques. and Once the model "polarization" basis {γ} is fixed, the associated X (I) g set of coefficients can thus be simply deduced by minimizing the error in the screening field ∆v The salient features of this equation is that, since we measure the difference in the reaction field on a set of test functions, we are free to focus on the specific components of the screening field vχv that we want to preserve. Details about the resolution of this equation are given in Appendix A. A naive choice for the test functions {t} could be the set of auxiliary functions {P} used to construct the reference χ (I) g response function. As shown below, this strategy is rather inefficient. The reason for this failure is that we do not intend to use the model susceptibility to perform a GW calculation on fragment (I) itself. Instead, we need it to build the fully interacting screening potential vχv through the Dyson equation (Eq. 10) that couples (I J) fragments, focusing in the end on the central fragment (I = 0 in Fig. A very simple yet successful strategy consists in keeping the test functions localized on the atoms of the fragment (I) for which we seek the model susceptibility, but building the test set {t} out of very diffuse orbitals that will sample the surrounding fragments. The basic idea is that using such diffuse test functions allows to "reach out" for the effect of vχ (I) v on neighboring molecules. The test set can then be completed with the auxiliary basis {P} associated with fragment (I), but down-weighted, in order to keep the emphasis on the diffuse orbitals during the minimization process. More details about this test basis can be found in Appendix B. Simultaneously, the preservation of long range interactions can be guaranteed by enforcing low order Cartesian momenta of the susceptibility through Lagrange multipliers: In the following, we label l max the maximum order m + n + p enforced for a specific model susceptibility. For example, l max = 1 corresponds to the preservation of the fragment neutral monopole, as well as the dipolar polarizability tensor. Imposing such a constraint, along with the use of diffuse test functions, ensures that the reaction field will be well reproduced not only in the vicinity of fragment (I), but in the long-range as well. Imposing higher order polarizability tensors momenta (e.g. l max = 2), can be achieved but with a mild impact as discussed below. So far the choice of the {γ} has been left arbitrary. Contrary to the induced charge-and-dipole models used in semi-empirical QM/MM techniques, we follow here a more automated route. The polarization basis can be obtained as the result of a generalized minimization process, that is we include the {γ} in the minimization process: where the only input choice is now the number N P of γ polarization vectors. In practice, the γ functions are expressed in the {P} auxiliary basis set associated with fragment (I), namely so that the {C γP } coefficients are now the minimization variables. We tackle this somewhat complex minimization problem by iterating over two distinct steps: i) inner optimization of the X (I) g (ω) matrix elements at fixed {γ} (see equation 15), which is solved exactly through linear algebra; ii) outer optimization of the {C γP } coefficients at fixed X In the simplest case where test functions {t} only span the auxiliary {P} set, and in the absence of constraint, the Eckart-Young-Mirsky theorem states that the N P optimal {γ} polarization vectors are similar to those defined in Refs. 69,70, namely the leading eigenvectors of the so-called symmetrized susceptibility. The present minimization formulation allows further flexibility with the introduction of test functions and constraints, allowing on-the-fly design of model dielectric functions for specific purposes, emphasizing short-to-long-range or on-site accuracy. We conclude this Section by emphasizing again that the operations described above (calculations of the reference X (I) g (ω) and X (I) g (ω) matrices, SVD decomposition of related operators, etc.) are performed on isolated fragments, leading to a computational cost that is linear in the number of distinct fragments. In turn, the number of operations related to inverting the Dyson equation for the total screened Coulomb potential, involving interactions between all fragments, is dramatically reduced through reduction of the associated prefactor. As shown below, the optimal polarization basis can be made typically 10 2 times smaller than the original auxiliary basis set, preserving the polarization energy in the meV range, leading to a reduction of the order of 10 6 of the cost associated with obtaining an accurate W operator on the central fragment (I=0). The present subsystem approach with minimal representation of the fragments electronic susceptibility has been implemented in the beDeft (beyondDFT) package. Even though the present scheme allows to compute reaction fields at finite (imaginary) frequencies, following the analytic continuation approach to the dynamical GW self-energy implemented in beDeft, with the screened-exchange term involving a summation over occupied (occp) levels only. Following previous studies, where the index (e) and (g) in GW e/g and COHSEX e/g stand for embedded (e) and gas (g) phases. Such a definition is consistent with standard PCM implementations where the macroscopic dielectric constant is taken to be the optical one in the low frequency limit. Similarly, in standard QM/MM implementations, the semi-empirical atomic polarizabilities are designed to reproduce the fragment electronic polarizability in the static limit. From the knowledge of such a polarization energy P n , calculated at the static ∆COHSEX level, the absolute quasiparticle energy can be obtained as: In the fragment approximation, and in the absence of wavefunction hybridization, such a value yields the energy of the corresponding band center. In other words, while the interacting susceptibility matrix X(ω = 0) of Eq. 10 is defined for the full system, the screened Coulomb potential matrix W = V + VXV entering Eqs. 19 and 20 is only computed explicitly for the corrected fragment. This enables us to save both on memory footprint and CPU time aspects. We start by looking at the evolution of the static dipolar polarizability tensor for a given fullerene, in the gas phase, obtained with the model susceptibility matrix as a function of N P (the number of polarization vectors we keep). Namely, we compute This tensor is a key quantity for the long-range screening effects originating from a given fragment and represents thus a direct measure of the accuracy of the fitted susceptibility. First, we explore the strategy where the test functions {t} are taken to span the auxiliary basis {P} located on the fragment (a fullerene) for which we build the model susceptibility. Relative errors on the (Frobenius) norm of the dipolar polarizability tensor, with respect to a reference calculation using the full auxiliary basis (5700 vectors), are represented in Fig. We now perform the same exercise but adding to the test functions {t} a set of atom-centered diffuse Gaussian orbitals. Such diffuse functions are typically one set of (s,p,d,f,g) orbitals per atom with, for sake of simplicity, the same e -ζr for larger values of N p . The quality of the polarizability tensor obtained with the low-rank susceptibility insures that longrange interactions will be accurately reproduced. We now focus on nearest-neighbor interactions. We study in particular the HOMO/LUMO energy gap associated with a fullerene (in red in Fig. In a standard fragment calculation at the full def2-TZVP/def2-TZVP-RI level, the central C 60 HOMO-LUMO gap closes by ∼0.98 eV due to the enhanced screening induced by the first shell of neighbors. This represents about 60% of the total polarization energy (see Section III B) as compared to a fullerene in a fullerite, namely an infinite fullerene crystal. We now study the effect of reducing the size N P of the polarization basis on the 12 surrounding C 60 . As previously, we start by using test functions taken only in the span of the auxiliary basis {P} of the fragment (a fullerene) whose model susceptibility is fitted. The results are provided on Fig. Similarly to the previous study of the polarizability, we now add diffuse functions in the test basis, with ζ = 0.01 bohr -2 . The related evolution of the error on the polarization energy for the gap is represented in Fig. We further add the constraints (equation The test provided above for the polarization energy originating from the first-nearest-neighbors is the most stringent test. For fragments located farther away, the dipolar component of the reaction field, that we strictly impose, becomes more and more dominant. This is illustrated in Fig. As an additional validation, we plot in Fig. Beyond the small cluster models, we now study the evolution of the gap of a fullerene from the gas phase to a C 60 face-centered-cubic crystal (fcc) environment. We thus want to calculate the closing of the gap by screening effects in the limit of an infinite environment. Such a quantity, labeled ∆Gap below, is also coined the polarization energy. We will consider the cases of bulk C 60 (fullerite) and further of a C 60 at the (111) surface and sub-surface. Experimental photoemission experiments are very much surface sensitive for organic systems, with a limited penetration depth of the input photons or electrons, so that comparison with the surface location is more appropriate. The bulk limit is obtained by immersing a C 60 molecule in a sphere of fullerenes with increasing radius. The surface and subsurface limits are obtained by using half-a-sphere of polarizable fullerenes in the environment. In the absence of wavefunction delocalization (or band dispersion) in the fragment approach, we focus on the peak-to-peak gap, namely the gap between the center of the HOMO and LUMO bands. We emphasize that the absence of permanent ground-state dipole, quadrupole, etc., in fullerene molecules, precludes the influence of any electrostatic crystal field in the ground-state. In the present case of fullerene crystals, the reference X (I) g susceptibility can be constructed for a single fullerene and the resulting fitted X The calculations are performed with the parameters described above, namely keeping the full auxiliary def2-TZVP-RI basis set to describe the susceptibility of the C 60 of interest for which we perform our embedded GW calculation. The same full auxiliary basis set is used for its first-nearest neighbors. For the rest of the environment, namely the second-nearest neighbors and those located farther away, we keep N P = 60 optimized polarization vectors for each fullerene. Diffuse test functions with ζ = 0.01 bohr -2 are adopted with the l max = 1 constraint. We focus on the gap closing (∆Gap) from the gas to the dense phase. Such a polarization energy, originating from the screening by the environment, is described at the ∆COHSEX level as emphasized above. We plot in Fig. In the asymptotic infinite bulk size limit, the gap of the central C 60 is closing by 1.69 eV (orange dashed line) with respect to the gas phase. This can be compared to the polarization energy of the biggest studied system. Our calculations are performed for spheres containing up to 3367 C 60 , representing 202 020 carbon atoms. The gap of such a system closes by 1.58 eV, which represents a difference of 0.11 eV with respect to the extrapolated infinite size value. This highlights the difficulty to capture the polarization energy with an accuracy within the 0.1 eV threshold when limited size environments are considered. In order to compare to the G 0 W 0 @LDA 3.0 eV peak-to-peak gap in a fully periodic bulk calculation performed by Shirley and Louie in their pioneering study, We also compute the asymptotic infinite limit for the gap of one C 60 located at the (111) surface (see Inset Fig. We further compute the polarization energy for one C 60 at the sub-surface (see Inset Fig. The red dashed fit provides an asymptotic infinite size polarization energy of 1.63 eV. This value, closer to the bulk limit (difference of 0.06 eV) than the surface limit (difference of 0.23 eV), tends to show a rapid convergence of the polarization energy with respect to the depth of the considered fullerene. Namely, a fullerene in the subsurface presents properties already close to bulk case. We finally conclude this study by making a connection to periodic slab calculations, namely the traditional approach for the study of surfaces with periodic boundary conditions. Along that line, we converge the polarization energy through the addition of C 60 infinite sublayers, rather than by increasing the radius R of a half-sphere of polarizable molecules. Such a representation can be obtained by creating stacks of disks with increasing lateral radius R 2D , as represented in the Inset Fig. The calculation for the biggest studied system made of 3367 C 60 , amounting to 202 020 atoms as discussed in section III B, required around 8000 total CPU hours distributed on 720 cores. Alternatively, this represent a typical wall-time (time to completion of the run) of approximately 11 hours. Such a calculation was performed using the Irene SKL partition (Intel Skylake 8168 processors, with a base frequency of 2.70 GHz) of the IRENE supercomputer from GENCI-IDRIS. Only 2.5 terabytes of memory were used to study this system, making possible to run such calculation on smaller size computer clusters. Such a small memory footprint was made possible thanks to the small dimension (60) of the polarization basis for each fragment in the environment. Let's stress out here that describing each fullerene by its full def2-TZVP-RI basis, of dimension 5700, would lead to a memory footprint of 2.6 petabytes for each related matrices, with similar requirements for the total Coulomb potential V or the total susceptibility matrix X. It would have been impossible to store any of these big matrices on the 310 terabytes available on the supercomputer used for this study. The present numbers are certainly indicative and may change depending on the chosen parameters, but they illustrate how efficient QM/QM (GW/RPA) calculations can be when using compressed susceptibility blocks for the environment. We have presented a fully ab initio QM/QM embedded GW calculation with a polarizable environment containing up to 200 000 atoms, with total typical CPU timings below 10 000 hours at the def2-TZVP level. Such calculations are made possible by adopting a fragment, or sub-system, approximation. Further, the susceptibility matrices associated with the fragments in the environment are reduced on-the-fly to a very low-rank representation, with block dimensions equivalent to the number of atoms in the fragment. This approach yields to representations even more compact than standard semi-empirical approaches based on polarizable atoms described by onsite {p x , p y , p z } local induced dipoles, namely 1 degree of freedom per site as compared to the 3 degrees of polarizable atoms. Such a reduction allows inverting the Dyson equation for the screened Coulomb potential W with very limited CPU and memory requirements. The present scheme is certainly far from being optimal. The choice of the same localization parameter (ζ) for all (s,p,d,f,g) diffuse channels in the ensemble of test functions can e.g. lead to forthcoming improvements. Our main point was however to show that very simple choices could already dramatically help in constructing model susceptibility operators both extremely compact and accurate in reproducing medium-to-long-range reaction fields. As future directions, the scheme described here above can be merged with subsystem-DFT techniques Finally, the GW formalism allows to define a dynamical dielectric response, going beyond the standard low-frequency limit in the optical range of common PCM or QM/MM approaches. The importance of such dynamical corrections needs to be assessed, calculating the polarization energies within the full GW formalism rather than its static COHSEX limit. Keeping the same notation as in Appendix A, we started by studying the specific problem of N = N cstr , with {γ 0 } = {P}. To be more explicit, we re-index by 0 all matrices which depends directly on {γ 0 }. C 0 being invertible, with rank(C 0 ) = N cstr , there is a matrix S such that A 1 = SC 0 S † , and A 2 = C 0 S † . We search for S such that S The solution S We keep U R = U R 0 + K 0 S To find the other coefficients {C γP }, we use a greedy strategy. We consider only the first and second terms of the left-hand side of the equation A3, so namely A 2 = 0, and write the factorized form of the general symmetric matrix A 1 = S∆S † , with ∆ a diagonal matrix. Independently of ∆, the required coefficients {C γP } defining the optimal directions are only determined by the S matrix. Using the N cstr first directions we have found, given Z cstr = Z -Γ † 0 U R C 0 U † R Γ 0 , and m = max(0, N -N cstr ), we thus search for solutions S Defining J = K † 0 Γ 0 , and using its SVD J = U J Σ J V † J , this problem is equivalent to S (2) opt = argmin S,∆ / rank(S)≤m Using the SVD of V † J Z cstr V J = U 1 Σ 1 V † 1 , and defining Σ (m) 1 the diagonal matrix made of the first m singular values of Σ 1 , the Eckart-Young-Mirsky theorem leads to a solution S The required coefficients {C γP } are given by the columns of K 0 S At the end of the process, the coordinates of the N polarization vectors {γ} in the auxiliary basis, corresponding to the {C γP } coefficients, are given by the columns of U R and of K 0 S 