We study the dynamic coupling of magnons and phonons in single crystals of Fe3GeTe2 (FGT) using inelastic scanning tunneling spectroscopy (ISTS) with an ultra-low temperature scanning tunneling microscope. Inelastic scattering of hot carriers off phonons or magnons has been widely studied using ISTS, and we use it to demonstrate strong magnon-phonon coupling in FGT. We show a strong interaction between magnons and acoustic phonons which leads to formation of van Hove singularities originating in avoided level crossings and hybridization between the magnonic and phononic bands in this material. We identify these additional hybridization points in experiments and compare their energy with density functional theory calculations. Our findings provide a platform for designing the properties of dynamic magnon-phonon coupling in two-dimensional materials. The neoteric exploration of two-dimensional (2D) van der Waal (vdW) magnets has recently extended the philosophy of magnonics and spintronics into the 2D realm This necessitates the exploration of such excitations with various techniques, among which inelastic scanning tunneling spectroscopy (ISTS) emerges as one of the most powerful ones Among 2D magnets In this Letter, we report a prominent coupling between magnons and acoustic phonons in 2D ferromagnetic vdW material FGT detected by laterally resolved ISTS measurements executed with scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) under ultrahigh vacuum and low temperatures Electric resistivity in metals is caused by the inelastic scattering of hot carriers off bosonic excitations of the crystal, i.e. off phonons and in magnetic materials additionally off magnons. In a conventional description of these scattering processes, the dispersion and bosonic density of states of the two are treated separately. While this is usually a good approximation, the situation changes when large magnetocrystalline anisotropies couple the spin and lattice degree of freedom such that they hybridize. Within ISTS, inelastic excitations show up most clearly in the form of peak-dip pairs in the second derivative of the tunneling current w.r.t. the bias voltage, symmetrically located in bias voltage around the Fermi level Bulk FGT has been extensively studied with STM As in previous studies, we find a broad dip in the differential conductivity dI/dU near the Fermi energy (E F ) In elastic tunneling, the differential conductance dI/dU is proportional to the DOS of the electrodes To further confirm the magnetic origin of these excitations, ISTS using spin-polarized STM was employed. In this technique, the STM tip is spin-polarized, such that the tunneling magneto resistance effect (TMR) In the following, we compare ISTS spectra recorded along lines using unpolarized W tips and Cr coated tips. In Fig. This identifies the peaks as magnetic excitations or magnons but does not provide an insight into their energetics. Note that the parabolic dispersion of magnons around the zone center does not produce a peaked DOS, and magnons usually result in a rather smooth ISTS sig- nal around the Fermi energy. The calculation of the DOS based on the three-dimensional parabolic dispersions around the Brillouin zone center predicts a DOS proportional to the square root of magnon energy without any peaks in the low-energy range, see Fig. To treat the effect of phonons, we compute their DOS and dispersion in FGT from ab-initio using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Phonons might lead to sharp van Hove singularities in the meV range, as ab-initio calculations of the phonon DOS, shown in Fig. We predict that in FGT such avoided level crossings with diabolic points cause a high DOS due to hybrid excitaions. In Fig. In summary, strong magnon-phonon coupling has been observed with ISTS for low energies near the Zone center at crossings of the dispersion of acoustic phonons and magnons. Spin-polarized measurements confirm the magnetic nature of these hybrid excitations and domain walls can also be resolved in the inelastic signal. As ISTS is a local technique, it offers the possibility to study confined modes in structured samples. One can imagine that strain engineering allows to localize magnons in bulk or even single layer FGT in form of magnon wave guides or inversely, to use magnetic domain walls for phonon localization. Finally, the hybrid bosonic excitations can lead to a chiral nature of the phonons part with the possibility to guide transport of angular momentum of the lattice. This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the framework of TRR 288-422213477 (Project B06 and B03), CRC 1238-277146847 (Project C01) and the Cluster of Excellence Matter and Light for Quantum Computing (ML4Q) EXC 2004/1-390534769.