The demand for higher data rates in next-generation mobile wireless communication systems (6G) has led to significant interest in terahertz (THz) waves as a highfrequency, broad modulation bandwidth carrier wave. In this study, we propose and demonstrate a wireless data transfer in the 560-GHz band using low-phase-noise THz waves generated by photomixing of a pair of distributed feedback lasers injectionlocking to Kerr micro-resonator soliton comb. Experimental results showed near-errorfree on-off keying (OOK) data transfer at 1 Gbit/s in the 560-GHz band, with a Q-factor of 6.23, surpassing the error-free limit. Also, modulation formats of binary phase shift keying (BPSK) and quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) were successfully used, showing clear constellation diagrams and relatively low root mean squared error vector magnitude (rms EVM) values of 23.9% and 23.6%, respectively. Moreover, data transfer at 0.4 Gbit/s in 16 quadrature amplitude modulation (16QAM) demonstrated clear isolated symbols and achieved a low rms EVM value of 8.1%, complying with the IEEE 802.15.3d standard amendment. These demonstrations highlight the potential of using injection-locked DFB lasers with the Kerr micro-resonator soliton comb to achieve high-quality, high-speed wireless data transfer in the 560-GHz band. These findings contribute significantly to the advancement of wireless communication technology in the THz frequency range and pave the way for the realization of 6G wireless communication systems. Terahertz (THz) wave is expected for a carrier wave in next-generation mobile wireless communication (6G, expected carrier frequency > 300 GHz) because it can be used as a high-frequency, broad modulation bandwidth, carrier wave to largely accelerate the data rate over present wireless communications (5G, carrier frequency = 28 GHz or more) Use of photonic technology in generation of THz wave can suppress the increased phase noise of THz wave. In photonic THz generation, one of the key elements expected to play a crucial role is the optical frequency comb (OFC) such as mode-locked fiber-laser OFC Recently, the on-chip Kerr micro-resonator soliton comb, namely the soliton microcomb, has appeared as a small, simple, and cost-effective OFC In this article, we first injection-lock a pair of distributed feedback laser diodes (DFBs) to two adjacent modes of a 560-GHz-spacing soliton microcomb. The resulting low-phase-noise, high-OSNR, DFB output lights were used for THz generation via photomixing with UTC-PD. Then, we demonstrate near error-free OOK wireless data transmission in 560-GHz by using SBD for THz detection. We further combined this system with binary phase shift keying (BPSK), quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK), and 16 quadrature amplitude modulation (16QAM) to evaluate the signal quality in advanced modulation format. Figure We first evaluated the basic performance of DFB1 injection-locking to μOFC-M1 (namely, OIL-DFB1) and DFB2 injection-locking to μOFC-M2 (namely, OIL-DFB2). We next performed the OOK data transmission of a 1-GBaud baseband signal using 560-GHz THz wave as a wireless carrier. Figure To evaluate the quality of data transmission in advanced modulation using phase and amplitude, we conducted BPSK and QPSK data transmission in a 560-GHz band with intermediate frequency of 5 GHz. Figures Both cases could become error-free with the help of standard FEC technology since the BER values were below FEC limit. We further evaluated the quality of data transmission in 16QAM data transmission in a 560-GHz band with intermediate frequency of 5 GHz. Figure The corresponding EVM was 8.07 %, which is lower than the EVM limit of 15.8% by the IEEE 802.15.3d standard amendment We discuss the difference of Q factor in OOK data transmission with and without OIL. One possible reason for this difference is the presence or absence of ASE background in optical spectrum of two modes for photomixing. Figures We next discuss the effectiveness of the OIL in QPSK. Figure We next discuss the effectiveness of the OIL in QPSK. Figure We demonstrated wireless data transfer in the 560-GHz band using a lowphase-noise THz wave generated by photomixing OIL-DFB1 and OIL-DFB2 with UTC-PD. The injection locking of DFB lasers to adjacent modes of the soliton microcomb improved the OSNR and suppressed ASE background, resulting in a low-phase-noise THz carrier wave suitable for data transfer. In the case of OOK data transfer at 1 Gbit/s, the system achieved near-error-free performance with a Q-factor of 6.23. The introduction of OIL improved the Q-factor compared to the case without OIL. 