The propagation of coherent light in multimode optical fibers results in a speckled output that is both complex and sensitive to environmental effects. These properties can be a powerful tool for sensing, as small perturbations lead to significant changes in the output of the fiber. However, the mechanism to encode spatially resolved sensing information into the speckle pattern and the ability to extract this information is thus far unclear. In this paper, we demonstrate that spatially dependent mode coupling is crucial to achieving spatially resolved measurements. We leverage machine learning to quantitatively extract this spatially resolved sensing information from three fiber types with dramatically different characteristics and demonstrate that the fiber with the highest degree of spatially dependent mode coupling provides the greatest accuracy. The propagation of light through complex media results in behavior that has traditionally been seen as a hindrance to optical systems which should be avoided or compensated for. Precision instruments, such as gravitational-wave detectors, require ultrahigh vacuums to avoid material interactions Waveguides can lead to complex light propagation even in the absence of material inhomogeneity via their discrete transverse modes whose phase relationship varies with propagation. For an optical fiber with a fixed configuration, the resulting output field is inherently deterministic but highly complex in practice due to interference between the many guided modes, interaction with the environment, and mode coupling. Recently, there has been significant interest in understanding and exploiting the transmission of light through multi-mode optical fiber (MMF), due to their inherent ability to transport a greater amount of information than single mode fiber (SMF) Optical fiber sensing can be considered as the inverse procedure to imaging. Rather than keeping the fiber and the surrounding environment static and mapping from the input of the fiber to the output, the optical input is fixed, while a map is built between the fiber's output and the changes to the light propagation through it due to external perturbations. Possible perturbations include temperature, strain, pressure, or even biochemical interactions, all of which can induce optical path length changes in the optical fiber The true power of optical fibers for sensing is multi-point or distributed sensing In this paper, we demonstrate that mode coupling in an MMF is essential for spatially resolving perturbations in the resulting multimode interferometric output. We demonstrate this concept by comparing the performance of three distinctly different MMF architectures for the task of spatially resolved temperature sensing: a graded-index fiber, a microstructured optical fiber, and a sapphire crystal optical fiber. While quantitative and distributed sensing can be achieved for all three fibers, the sapphire fiber displays better longitudinal sensing resolution capabilities due to significant diameter inhomogeneities formed by the crystal fabrication process. This allows spatial information to be more rigorously encoded in the complex interferometric output through mode coupling. This approach opens a new pathway for distributed fiber sensing directly with the raw, complex interference pattern output of MMFs, significantly simplifying hardware requirements and broadening the range of fiber materials that can be deployed. In this paper, we investigate both theoretically and experimentally the ability to perform multipoint fiber sensing directly with the multimode interference in an MMF. We show through the use of an MMF mode coupling matrix theory framework In this framework, the electric field propagating through an MMF with N orthogonal transverse eigenmodes can be expressed as: where e ̂j denotes the unit electric field profile of the j th orthonormal transverse eigenmode, and A j contains the amplitude and phase of this mode. Assuming fixed eigenmodes, the light can be described fully by the vector A, A = (A 1 (z), ... , A N (z)). (2) Propagation of this field through an optical system can be expressed as: where M (t) is an N × N matrix, termed the 'propagation matrix' of the system, which includes the effects of phase accumulation, mode dependent gain/loss, and mode coupling. The propagation of the light through a multimode fiber can be modelled by dividing the fiber into K adjacent sections, the k th section having length L (k) . The k th propagation matrix can be decomposed as: where Λ (k) represents coupling-free propagation, given by , (5) and U (k) and V (k) denote the input and output coupling matrices to and from the k th section respectively. The real part of the exponential arguments in Eq. ( M (t) = M (K) M (K-1) ... M (k) ... M (2) M (1) . (6) Now consider that the k th section of fiber experiences a perturbation, inducing mode dependent optical path length changes and hence phase changes in this section. Such a perturbation can be modelled by a diagonal perturbation matrix Λ ̃ [Eq. ( ]. (7) Hence, the total propagation matrix in the presence of this perturbation is given by Eq. (8) The matrix multiplication U (k+1) * V (k) , represents projection of the field from the modal basis in the k th section to the (k + 1) th section, i.e., mode coupling. If the modal bases are identical, this term reduces to the identity matrix, and no mode coupling occurs. Otherwise, offdiagonal terms will be present. Consider now a longitudinally invariant MMF which experiences no mode coupling. M (t) will be the product of diagonal uncoupled propagation matrices and products of input and output coupling matrices projecting the fiber's modal basis onto itself, each time producing the identity matrix. Hence, M (t) will itself be diagonal, with the j th diagonal element representing the sum of the gain/loss and phase accumulated by the j th mode. In the presence of a perturbation, Λ ̃, the j th phase change will simply be added to the j th diagonal element of M (t) , regardless of which section of fiber the perturbation was applied to. Hence, such a longitudinally symmetric fiber possesses no mechanism by which the perturbation can be spatially resolved. Now consider an MMF with longitudinal variance, and hence coupling between the modal bases of each adjacent section of the fiber. M (t) will no longer be diagonal, as off-diagonal terms representing the coupling of power between modes will be present. As such, it will also be dependent on the order of multiplication of the constituent propagation matrices. Hence in the presence of optical path length changes due to a perturbation, the fiber's output will be dependent on the position of this perturbation along the fiber. Furthermore, the degree to which the fiber's output is sensitive to this spatial information will be dependent on the degree to which adjacent propagation matrices commute, suggesting that stronger mode coupling will more rigorously encode spatially resolved information in the fiber's output. It should be noted that even in the case of strong mode coupling, the transmission matrix can still be diagonal if a particular basis is used, namely the spatial eigenmode basis of the said mode-coupling MMF Any perturbation or length change in this case will distort the total transmission matrix, and thus the defined spatial eigenmode basis no longer holds. Since the physical mode-coupling process between transverse eigenmodes is not dependent on the basis chosen, perturbations at different locations along the MMF will lead to different outputs. It is only for the case of truly propagation-invariant transverse eigenmodes which are free from coupling throughout propagation, that is, in a longitudinally uniform MMF, that sensing information along the fiber will not be encoded. The information encoded by mode coupling is, however, included in the output field in a complex and non-trivial way. We have previously shown that deep learning proves an effective method for extracting single-point sensing information from a complex MMF output In our experiment (Sec. 3), we convert the specklegram to a wavelength domain interference spectrum by splicing the MMF to SMF. This is done for practicality as the spliced fiber connection is stable and compatible with high temperatures. To understand that this approach is equivalent to measuring the specklegram, consider again that Eq. ( Two experiments were performed to demonstrate the spatially resolved sensing concept described in this paper, (1) a localized heating experiment and (2) a distributed sensing experiment. In both experiments we tested the effect of spatial heat distributions on the output of three different optical fiber sensors; a sapphire optical fiber (75 μm diameter, Micromaterials), an in-house fabricated suspended-core fiber (SCF) (10 μm core diameter) The wavelength interference spectra were collected from the fibers using a Hyperion si155 swept source interrogator (Luna Technologies). These spectra existed in the interrogator as 20 000 wavelength points across the 1460-1620 nm range, but were decimated down to 1 000 points for computer memory purposes. Low-frequency Fourier filtering was performed to remove a strong back-reflection from the sensing fiber/SMF splice in the sapphire fiber spectra, and performed on the spectra from the other two fibers for consistency. In the localized heating experiment, represented in Fig. The second experiment, represented in Fig. For the first, localized heating experiment, the changes experienced by each fiber's wavelength intensity spectra I(λ) were quantified using the zero-normalized cross correlation function [ZNCC, Eq. ( where I 0 (λ) denotes the reference intensity spectrum and the bar denotes the average intensity of a given spectra. Two neural networks were employed for the second, distributed sensing experiment: a multilayer perceptron model The two different DNN architectures were chosen to assess the degree to which spatially resolved sensing information was encoded in the wavelength spectra of the fiber outputs, by correlating this with the convergence ability and accuracy of the trained models. That is, the aim of this experiment was not necessarily to produce an accurate temperature sensor, but rather to assess the ability of the fibers in projecting sensing information from the spatial domain to the modal domain and finally the wavelength domain. Hence a weaker model was used to induce greater contrast in its training and performance when trained on outputs from the three fibers, allowing for clearer conclusions to be made. The first set of results are from the localized heating experiment. Wavelength spectra were recorded while the heater was sequentially moved to five equidistant positions along the length of the fibers. The correlation coefficient for each spectrum was calculated against a reference spectrum from the first temperature profile, and the average correlation coefficient value [Eq. ( The results indicate that the recorded spectra from each fiber have different dependencies on the position of the thermal perturbation. It is clearly shown that the spectrum of the sapphire fiber is more dependent on the position of the heater, as indicated by the correlation coefficient continuously decreasing with heater translation. The spectra collected from the SCF and GRIN fiber do not display this dependence as clearly, with the respective correlation coefficients staying closer to unity over the whole range of the fiber lengths. As argued in the theory, weak mode coupling implies that the effect of a perturbation on the fiber's output will only be weakly dependent on the position of the perturbation, leading to similar outputs for the different temperature profiles. In contrast, strong location dependency indicates strong mode coupling, hence the correlation coefficient decreases quicker as the location of the perturbation is shifted. With reference to the specific fibers used, it is the significant longitudinal variance of the sapphire fiber, shown in Fig. The results from the second experiment show the temperature predictions made by the DNNs trained on wavelength spectra from each fiber under different temperature distributions produced by a furnace. To subject the sensing fibers to various temperature distributions, two dimensions of variation were applied. First, data was collected with the fibers in seven different locations relative to the furnace. This was achieved by manually translating the fibers along their fiber axis relative to the furnace. Three of these positions are shown in Fig. As discussed in Sec. 2, mode coupling should be required to perform spatially resolved fiber sensing with an otherwise unaltered fiber. The result we have obtained that the MLP performs accurately when trained on spectra from either of the three fibers suggests that the level of inherent mode coupling present in the two otherwise longitudinally invariant fibers is sufficient to encode spatially resolved sensing information in the spectra, at least to the 15 mm resolution (the distance between sensing points) measured in this experiment. This may be induced by the sensing parameter itself, as temperature variations lead to refractive index modulations. The results from the linear regressor show more clearly a quantitative difference in DNN performance. The model achieves an RMS error of 1.8°C when trained on spectra from the sapphire fiber, 3.6°C for the SCF spectra, and 41°C for the GRIN fiber spectra. The lowercapacity linear model used gives a greater contrast in model performance, allowing conclusions to be made regarding the ability for the model to extract longitudinally resolved sensing information from the spectra from the different models. In agreement with our theoretical framework and the correlation analysis results, the sapphire fiber shows better sensitivity to the position of a perturbation, or in the more general case, the spatial distribution of a perturbation. The results presented support the concept that deep learning can be used to extract distributed sensing information directly from the output of an MMF. The presence of mode coupling facilitates the encoding of this information in the output of the fiber, leading to spatial resolution along the direction of light propagation which may be exploited for sensing. The localized heating experiment demonstrated that the output of the sapphire fiber in the presence of a localized perturbation is more positionally dependent than that of the SCF and GRIN fibers. This is reflected in Fig. We then applied deep learning to decode spatially resolved sensing information from the output of an MMF, comparing the convergence ability and accuracy of the models when trained on spectra from the three fibers. The overall accuracy of the higher-capacity MLP can be attributed to the small amount of unavoidable mode coupling that these fibers possess, as well as the nature of the temperature distributions achieved by the furnace, and how these were far from arbitrary. As such, sufficient distributed temperature information is encoded in the spectra of all three fibers for the DNN to learn. The performance of the linear regressor, however, gives more insight into how clearly each fiber encodes distributed sensing information in their outputs. This low-capacity model is able to extract this information from the sapphire fiber spectra to an RMS error of 1.8°C, half that of the SCF, and 20 times less than that of the GRIN fiber. This is aided by the mode coupling which occurs along the sapphire fiber's length, encoding longitudinally resolved sensing information in the multimode interferometric output, which can be more efficiently extracted through deep learning techniques. Our work has clearly demonstrated that mode coupling is the essential feature that allows spatially resolved information to be encoded in the interferometric output of a multimode fiber. While strong mode coupling from large waveguide inhomogeneities can lead to enhanced distributed sensing capability, we observed that quantitative distributed sensing can still be achieved in relatively longitudinally invariant fibers. This is likely due to inherent manufacturing tolerances and the variations induced by the sensor parameter itself (thermooptic effect in our example). Our method can thus be generally applied to distributed fiber sensing even using commercially available fiber, provided a suitable method of extracting the distributed sensing information, such as deep learning, can be applied. Further, we believe these findings will have wider implications in optical sensing, such as the use of other complex media. Two neural network architectures were used for taking MMF wavelength intensity spectra as their inputs and mapping to 10-point temperature distributions. The first was a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with four hidden layers and ReLU nonlinear activation The deep learning model began the training process with randomized parameters. Then, mini-batches of 64 spectra were randomly selected from the training set and passed through the model. The loss (cost function) of the model was calculated using the mean-squared-error (MSE) metric, and backpropagation performed to adjust the model towards one with a lower loss Backpropagation and stochastic gradient descent was performed using the Adam optimizer The training and validation loss as a function of epoch is shown in Fig. 