Optically active achiral metasurfaces offer a promising way to detect chiral molecules based on chiroptic methods. The combination of plasmonic enhanced circular dichroism and reversible optical activity would boost the sensitivity and provide enantiomerselective surfaces while using a single sensing site. In this work, we use metasurfaces containing arrays of U-shaped resonators as a benchmark for analyzing the optical activity of achiral materials. Although the peculiar optical activity of these metasurfaces has 1 The manipulation of polarimetric properties of light using surfaces has been intensively studied for many years due to the strong effects that can be obtained by using anisotropic plasmonic resonators arranged in metasurfaces. An important polarimetric property is circular dichroism (CD), which finds many applications in sensing of chiral molecules, 1-6 lighting, Ideally, CDOA = CD, and it is recognized that CD is associated with chiral objects. To enhance the interaction of light with chiral molecules, chiral plasmonic resonators have been used. In this work, we experimentally determine the polarimetric response of metasurfaces containing optically active achiral resonators, using the differential decomposition to identify the different origins of the CDOA with respect to the resonant modes excited in the resonators. We then numerically study the near-field polarization properties of the resonators with emphasis on chirality, and discuss the potential relationships between the far-field CD, the presence of local chiral fields, and how these properties could be used for sensing applications. We have used metasurfaces made of arrays of U-shaped resonators. The metasurfaces were obtained using a conventional e-beam lithography process. Clean silica substrates (fused SiO 2 ) were covered with 120 nm PMMA and 20 nm of conductive resist (electra92) to evacu-ate the charges during the e-beam writing. After writing the samples were revealed and then a 4 nm titanium wetting layer followed by a 40 nm thick layer of gold were deposited. A liftoff process was finally performed to reveal the U-shaped resonators. It can be seen in Figure The transmission measurements at normal incidence were made in an optical microscope (Olympus) with a ×10 objective. The light was first filtered with a linear polarizer aligned either parallel to or perpendicular to the bottom arms of the resonators. The metasurface was imaged on the entrance of a fiber connected to two CCD spetrophotometers (400-1000 nm and 1000-1700 nm). The intensity transmitted through the metasurface was then normalized to the intensity transmitted through the glass. The polarimetric properties of the metasurfaces were measured using a spectroscopic ellipsometer (RC2 JA Woolam Company) fitted with focusing probes (numerical aperture 0.017). The samples were placed on a rotating sample holder and aligned with respect to the mechanical axes of the ellipsometer. Measurements of the full transmission Mueller matrix were performed in transmission in the 400-1600 nm range at a polar angle of incidence of 15 o . The sample was rotated by 360 o around the sample normal and thereby measurements were performed with azimuthal angle of incidence every 2.5 o . Simulations were performed using Finite Element Methods (home-made code, see Supporting Information S.I.1). The U-shaped resonators were located on a periodic lattice of pitch 400 nm. The dimensions of the arms were extracted from the SEM images and the thickness was set to 40 nm. The optical constants of gold were obtained by keeping the interband transitions of bulk gold and adding a Drude term damped by a factor 3 to reproduce the effect of scattering at the surface or at grain boundaries. The Ti wetting layer was not included in these simulations. The optical constants of the substrate were those of silica. The polarization properties obtained in the far field were decomposed on a Jones vector, then transformed in Mueller matrix elements using the Jones-Mueller transformation. The experimental Transmission for linear polarization along and perpendicular to the bottom arm of the resonator performed on the metasurface are shown in Figure The observation of optical activity at oblique incidence associated with the magneto-electric coupling of the magnetic mode has been shown at the level of the single U-shaped resonator both numerically and experimentally. The signature of the magneto-electric coupling is clearly visible in the values of the off-diagonal blocks of the Mueller matrix which are not vanishing for light propagating in the plane containing the bottom arms of the resonators (90 o and 270 o ). In particular the elements m 14 and m 41 , related to circular dichroism optical absorption, where t pp ,t ss , t sp and t ps are the transmission amplitude coefficients, it is easily understood that the maximum of the linear dichroism is observed at these modes/wavelengths. Since the resonators are on a square lattice, the scattered light should propagate only in the directions associated with the diffracted orders. The onset of the excitation of diffracted orders yields sharp structures named Rayleigh anomalies in the Mueller matrix elements. The signature of the Rayleigh anomalies was also observed (the calculated Rayleigh lines are shown as full green lines (Air) and green dashed lines (glass) in Figure In addition to manipulating the polarization properties in the far field, optically active achiral metasurfaces can also be used to manipulate the vectorial properties in the near field. Considering the use of such metasurfaces as sensing elements for the detection of chiral molecules, we are interested in normal incidence excitation, where the contribution of the bare metasurface to the measured far-field CD (elements m 14 and m 23 ) would be zero. The ellipticity σ z is directly related to the polarization of the light. The chirality density C is involved in the differential absorption of circularly polarized light by chiral molecules Figure In the near-field of the resonators, both modes exhibit locally chiral light, although these properties average to zero over the whole unit cell. For the chirality density, the values are larger than unity (Figure These spatial distribution of chirality density can be reproduced qualitatively using a point-like dipole model taking into account both near and far fields (Figure In conclusion, from the measured Mueller matrix response of an optically active achiral metasurface composed of U-shaped resonators, we have shown through the differential decomposition that the true optical activity accounted to more that 90 % of the Circular Differential Optical Absorption (CDOA). These observations agree well with the numerically calculated values obtained for ideal samples, hence evidencing that linear birefringence and retardance also contribute to the CDOA. We show that the nearfield exhibits elliptically polarized light even for normal incidence illumination. Very different spatial symmetries at the electric and magnetic resonances are obtained which can be understood using a point-like dipole decomposition of the radiation pattern of the resonators. In particular, we show that the ellipticity and chirality densities exhibit opposite signs at the end of each arms which hints toward the possible contributions of circular and linear dichroisms as reporting quantities of the presence of chiral molecules in the vicinity of the resonators. These results presented here provide new mechanisms and detection schemes for the sensing of chiral molecules based on optically active achiral metasurfaces. and antisymmetric parts of the logarithms of the measured Mueller matrix; the Mueller matrix measured at normal incidence with the CDOA and estimation of the linear retardance effects on CDAO; plot of the azimuthal variations of the element (2,3) of the measured Mueller matrix; the calculated near-field x-, y-and z-components of the electric field; calculated near-field maps at 0°and 15°of incidence.