Physical vapor high-temperature deposition of CdTe thin films is one of the main methods for preparing high-efficiency CdTe solar cells, but high-temperature deposition also has an impact on the internal structure of the film. The difference in thermal expansion coefficients between the substrate and CdTe leads to the generation of internal stress in the CdTe thin film during the cooling process. In this work, we prepared thin films with different substrate temperatures using a homemade GVD device, and observed by SEM that the crystallization quality of the film gradually improved with the increase of substrate temperature, but accompanied by the shift of XRD peak position. We calculated the internal stress situation of the film by the shift amount, and the possible causes of stress generation were speculated by the results of TEM and SAED to be the combined effects of the different thermal expansion coefficients between the substrate and the film and the stacking fault defects inside the film. Cadmium telluride is an important photovoltaic material, with advantages such as ideal band gap width, high light absorption rate, high conversion efficiency and low cost But high-temperature deposition process inevitably has some problems. The high-temperature state will intensify the thermal motion of atoms, making the atoms in the crystal more likely to undergo displacement, diffusion, and rearrangement, these problems will cause more defects in the film. And the thermal expansion coefficients of the substrate and CdTe film are different, the difference in shrinkage during the cooling process will cause internal stress in the film. Therefore, it is very necessary to explore the situation of CdTe films deposited at high temperatures. In this work, a self-made guided vapor deposition(GVD) device was used to prepare CdTe thin films. Under the condition of not using carrier gas, CdTe vapor was self-diffused and sprayed downward in the heated sublimation tube, and finally CdTe thin films were deposited on the surface of different temperature substrates facing up. The effect of high-temperature vapor deposition process on the morphology, crystal plane orientation, internal stress, and defects of CdTe thin films was explored. High-purity cadmium telluride particles (99.99%) were used as the deposition material, and cadmium telluride thin films were deposited on glass coated with SnO 2 :F by a self-made vapor-guided deposition method (Fig. From the perspective of physical chemistry where Ω is the atomic volume, S is the supersaturation of gas phase, the film deposition process means that there is supersaturation phenomenon in gas phase, that is, ∆G V <0, assuming that the radius of new phase nucleus is r, then the bulk free energy will change (4/3)πr 3 ∆G V at nucleation, the interfacial energy between solid and gas will increase 4πr 2 γ, where γ is the interfacial energy per unit area, based on the above obtain the overall free energy change ∆G of deposition process as described by equation ( In the process of gradually increasing the substrate temperature, to prepare CdTe thin films with the same thickness, this work had to gradually extend the time spent in deposition process. As shown in equation ( where τ a represents the average adsorption time of molecules on substrate surface; τ 0 is the inverse of surface parti- cle vibration frequency; E d is the desorption activation energy of material; R is gas constant; T is thermodynamic temperature. When substrate temperature T gradually increases, obviously surface particle vibration frequency gradually increases, that is, τ 0 decreases, therefore average adsorption time τ a of molecules on substrate surface decreases, CdTe molecules are more difficult to stay on substrate surface, reflecting to actual situation is that deposition rate of thin film gradually decreases. And phase transition free energy of gas phase condensing into solid phase can be expressed in form of equation ( where R e is equilibrium evaporation rate of solid phase nucleus at temperature T , and R a is actual deposition rate. When thin film deposits, ∆G V <0, differentiate equation ( The XRD patterns of CdTe thin films grown at different substrate temperatures are shown in Fig. The texture coefficient TC(h i k i l i ) can reflect the orientation of the film, which can be calculated by equation (5) where I(h i k i l i ) is the diffraction peak intensity of the (hkl) plane measured by XRD, I(h o k o l o ) is the standard intensity of the specific (hkl) plane on the PDF card (this work uses the cubic CdTe PDF#15-0770), and N is the number of diffraction peaks. The texture coefficients of the samples under different conditions were calculated After normalizing the (111) plane in Fig. where d is the interplanar spacing, θ is the incident angle, n is the diffraction order, and λ is the incident wavelength. If the position of the diffraction peak changes, the corresponding θ value will also change, resulting in the change of d value. Assuming that the standard diffraction peak position is θ 0 , the corresponding interplanar spacing is d 0 , the current diffraction peak position is θ 1 , and the corresponding interplanar spacing is d 1 , then: therefore, the change of interplanar spacing can be calculated by the following formula: the strain values of different CdTe thin films after cooling can be calculated by the formula: the film stress can be calculated based on the biaxial strain model, where the formula applicable to the cubic phase is for CdTe, C 11 =53.5GPa, C 12 =36.5 GPa, C 44 =19.9 GPa, these elastic constants have been reported in other paper To further observe the internal situation of the film, FIB was used to cut vertically to the surface of the sample with a substrate temperature of 580°C, and the situation near the grain boundary was observed by TEM. Fig. In addition, we found that all twin interfaces point to grain boundaries, which is unfavorable for the preparation of battery devices, it is reported that the twin interface is a carrier transport channel In this work, CdTe films were grown on substrates with different temperatures using a self-made GVD device. As the substrate temperature increased, the grain size of the films showed an increasing trend. From the perspective of physical chemistry, the main reason was that the increase of substrate temperature was accompanied by the decrease of deposition rate, the solid-phase nucleation radius gradually increased, and finally led to the increase of grain size. The film orientation and stress were analyzed by XRD. As the substrate temperature increased, the (111) crystal plane orientation of the film weakened, and the other crystal plane orientations were enhanced to different degrees. The film showed a random orientation trend, which might be related to the lower nucleation barrier of the (111) crystal plane compared with other crystal planes. When the substrate temperature was high enough to reach the energy for other orientations to nucleate, the preferred orientation of the film became worse. However, for CdTe solar cells, the randomly oriented absorber layer was beneficial to light scattering and trapping, which was helpful for preparing high-quality solar cells. As the substrate temperature increased, the transverse stress of the film gradually changed from tensile stress to compressive stress. It was speculated that this might be the result of the combined effect of the thermal expansion coefficient difference between substrate and CdTe film and the stacking fault defects. Therefore, combining these two situations, seeking a suitable thermal expansion coefficient material as CdTe substrate would have a positive effect on reducing the stress influence during cooling process after CdTe film deposition at high temperature. based on the XRD results of each crystal plane, as shown in Table