The alkaline-earth metal orthovanadate Sr3(VO4)2 with the palmierite structure is reported to host a dielectric anomaly as well as a structural phase transition above the room temperature. With V 5+ ions and tetrahedral oxygen coordination, the crystal structure of this compound is not studied in detail from first principles yet. In this work, we perform a detailed analysis of the crystal structure and instabilities of M3(VO4)2 (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) orthovanadates with the palmierite structure using first principles density functional theory. We find that as the M 2+ cation size decreases, a significant structural distortion that changes the symmetry from R 3m to C2/c emerges. This change is accompanied with a rotation of the oxygen tetrahedra. Our calculations also indicate that the polar instability in these compounds is suppressed by these tetrahedral rotations. Perovskites with the chemical formula ABO 3 are one of the most studied families of oxides, in no small part because of their flexibility to host a large number of different cations in both A and B sites. In many early transition metal perovskite oxides, for example the titanates, the details of the electronic structure near the Fermi level is determined by the B cation, while the Asite cation modifies the crystal structure mostly through steric effects. For example, while all three of them are band insulators, CaTiO 3 is a dielectric with large octahedral rotations, SrTiO 3 is a quantum paraelectric, and BaTiO 3 is a room-temperature ferroelectric While the perovskite structure allows different structural distortions, such as octahedral rotations There is an increasing interest in vanadium oxides due to, for example, the promising optical properties of BiVO 3 In this work, we present a first principles analysis of the crystal structure and possible transitions of the alkaline-earth metal orthovanadates M 3 (VO 4 ) 2 (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) with the palmierite-related structures. To the best of our knowledge, there is no systematic study of the crystal and electronic structures of these orthovanadates, even though they have been known for a long time. For example, Ba 3 (VO 4 ) 2 was already well characterized in 1970 First-principles calculations can identify the low temperature crystal structure, as well as metastable hightemperature phases in crystalline materials. In this work, we use a combination of density functional theory (DFT) including lattice dynamics calculations, evolutionary structure prediction algorithms, and group theory to identify the possible structural phases of M 3 (VO 4 ) 2 (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) with the palmierite structure. We show that the lowest energy structures with a single formula unit are derived from the palmierite structure for all three of these compounds, and that all of them have dynamical lattice instabilities with varying strengths. The strongest of these lattice instabilities is in the form of rotation (or tilt) of the oxygen tetrahedra, in a way that resembles the oxygen octahedral rotations commonly observed in perovskite oxides This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we introduce the details of our computational methods. In Sec. III, we discuss the earlier observations of the crystal structures of these compounds, followed by the results of our evolutionary structure search, and lattice dynamics calculations. The DFT calculations are supported by a Landau free-energy analysis in Sec. III D and a bond valence analysis in Sec. III E. We discuss the details of the electronic structure in Sec. III F. We conclude with a summary in Sec. IV. First principles DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (vasp), which uses projector augmented wave formalism For each compound, few of the lowest energy structures obtained from the evolutionary search were further relaxed on a shifted Monkhorst-Pack The wannier90 package There are several experiments that performed structural characterization on the alkaline-earth metal orthovanadates. (See, for example, Ref.'s (2) cations. The isolated VO 4 groups are centered on V sites with 3m symmetry, and hence are slightly distorted from the ideal tetrahedral geometry. Among the four V-O distances, one is shorter than the other three. There are two different alkalineearth metal sites, with different symmetries (3m and 3m) and different coordination environments. Ca 3 (VO 4 ) 2 is observed to have a different structure with R3c An open question about the structure of Sr 3 (VO 4 ) 2 is whether it is polar. The dielectric anomaly is reported to take place well above the room-temperature To find a thermodynamically stable crystal structure without introducing any bias to the prediction, we started by performing an evolutionary structure search using uspex. We considered a unit cell consisting of one formula unit and a population of randomly generated 30 initial structures considering all possible symmetries. On each generation, our calculations kept the best 5 structures from the previous generations and generated 45 new structures. To generate these new structures, the fittest 70% structures of the earlier generations are modified in various ways, while in every generation, a few randomly generated structures are also considered. We then relaxed the structures in several steps with increasing numerical accuracy and decreasing constraints. Structural prediction was considered to be completed if the ground-state structure did not change for 10 consecutive generations. This evolutionary search predicts a Ba 3 (VO 4 ) 2 structure with R 3m symmetry and Ca 3 (VO 4 ) 2 and Sr 3 (VO 4 ) 2 structures with slightly lower R 3 symmetry (Fig. We manually obtain the R 3m structure for Ca 3 (VO 4 ) 2 and Sr 3 (VO 4 ) 2 (respectively 176 and 24 meV/f.u. higher in energy from R 3 structure) in order to investigate the emergence of structural instabilities in all three compounds together. C. Lattice dynamics of M3(VO4)2 In order to identify possible structural transitions and map out possible metastable phases not captured by the evolutionary structure prediction, we performed first principles lattice dynamics calculations on the parent R 3m structure of each compound. The phonon dispersion and the atom projected phonon density-of-states (PDOS) are shown in Fig. Ba The atomic characters of the phononic wavefunctions were obtained from atomic spheres, renormalized to account for interstitial densities, and denoted with green (M ), blue (V), and red (O) colors. DOS suggests that R 3m structure of calcium and strontium orthovanadate have oxygen and M site instabilities. The units of phonon DOS is cm/f.u.. would emerge is not possible, such a small change is expected to give rise to a transition at a few Kelvin at most. So, we conclude that Ba 3 (VO 4 ) 2 has the R 3m symmetry at room temperature, and is likely to remain so down to few Kelvin. Ca 3 (VO 4 ) 2 and Sr 3 (VO 4 ) 2 have much stronger instabilities than Ba 3 (VO 4 ) 2 , especially at Γ and T points, as shown in Figs. The displacements due to these three unstable modes For comparison between T and Γ irreps, all eigenvectors are normalized in the primitive unit cell. The directions of the displacements are shown in Fig. are shown in Fig. and T - 1 correspond to the largest instabilities in the structure, and they cause rotations of the VO 4 units around the c axis of the conventional unit cell as shown in Figs. To obtain the ground-state structure of Sr 3 (VO 4 ) 2 and Ca 3 (VO 4 ) 2 , we looked into all possible combinations of these instabilities, which are listed in Fig. Of the distorted structures, the highest symmetry state where Γ + 2 , T - 1 and T - 3 can coexist is a two formula-unit structure with P 1 symmetry. In order to incorporate all the instabilities, we relaxed the P 1 structure, and found that the instability from the Γ + 2 irrep vanishes and the resulting structure has C2/c symmetry. This structure incorporates instabilities from the T - 1 and T - 3 irreps and leads to an energy gain of 47 meV/f.u. and 263 meV/f.u. for Sr 3 (VO 4 ) 2 and Ca 3 (VO 4 ) 2 , respectively. These energy gains are larger than the energy scale of room temperature, which means that it is likely that these materials would have the C2/c symmetry structure even at room temperature. It is important to note that the evolutionary structure search we performed in Subsec. III B did not predict the structure with C2/c symmetry because it contains two formula units of M 3 (VO 4 ) 2 . The lowest energy structure that doesn't enlarge the unit cell, the R 3 structure which arises from the Γ + 2 irrep, is correctly predicted by the evolutionary search. While there is a polar Γ - 3 instability in both Sr and Ca compounds, it gives rise to a much smaller energy gain (merely 2 and 36 meV/f.u., respectively) than the Γ + 2 or the T -point structural distortions that lead to the C2/c structure. Additionally, the calculation of phonon frequencies in a 2 × 2 × 1 supercell of the C2/c structure with 104 atoms and indicates that the structure is dynamically stable. This result precludes the possibility of a spontaneous polarization emerging in this phase through another dynamic instability. In passing, we note that while the structures we predict for Sr 3 (VO 4 ) 2 and Ba 3 (VO 4 ) 2 correspond to the lowest energy structures, for Ca 3 (VO 4 ) 2 , we find the experimentally reported R3c structure with 7 f.u. to be lower in energy. However, given the closer packing of ions in the palmierite structure, it is possible that this structure may be stabilized in intermediate pressures between the observed R3c and C2/m structures We denote the two components of the T - 3 order parameter as (a, b). Note that since the parent group is trigonal, the two components are not symmetry equivalent, ( Since the free energy expression is depends only on in a 2 + b 2 , it does not have a preferred direction in the phase space spanned by a and b, and hence cannot distinguish between It is either the higher order terms, or coupling with the other order parameter T - 1 that breaks this symmetry. The free energy for T - which is trivial. However, when these two irreps coexist, the Landau free energy expression involves additional cross terms: If we write (a, b) in terms of an amplitude (r) and an angle (φ) where (a, b) ≡ (r cos φ, r sin φ), the free energy expression becomes which depends on the direction of T - 3 . This free energy has six minima with equal energy at φ = nπ/3 for integer n. Even though the sign of c is opposite in three of these minima, all of them are different domains of the same C2/c phase. Thus, the form of fourth-order free energy determines the lowest-energy state to be necessarily C2/c, and only higher-order terms or possibly strain coupling can change the ground-state symmetry. The discussion so far focuses on different structures' stabilities using first principles calculations, but does not provide any insight on the driving force behind these transitions. Octahedral rotations in perovskites oxides are driven by the underbonding of A-site cations, and can be predicted with good accuracy using simple bond valence approaches In the bond valence approach, empirical parameters for each cation-anion pair are used to estimate the valence associated with a bond, and the valences of all bonds that a cation makes are summed to obtain a total bond valence of the cation. The crystal structure that optimizes the bond valence of all cations (i.e. gives the closest value to their nominal valences) is the most favorable one for a compound. The bond valence v ij of a bond between atoms i and j that is of R ij in length is given by where R 0 is an empirical value of the expected bond length, and b = 0.37 Å is an empirical constant The sign of the discrepancy factor determines whether an ion is overbonded or underbonded. The root mean square of all the discrepancy factor in a structure is called the Global Instability Index (GII) The bond valence parameter and the GII have been proven to be very effective tools to explain structural stability of crystals where structural transition leads to a change of local bonding environment The vanadium ions are overbonded in all the structures, and as the size of the M atom decreases, the bond valence increases for the high-symmetry structure. The M atom at the Wyckoff position a is consistently underbonded, and the bond valence decreases with decreasing atom size. These two atoms becomes more stable in the low-symmetry structure. However, the M atom at the Wyckoff position c is overbonded in the high-symmetry structure, and becomes further overbonded in the lowsymmetry structure. This suggests that the bond valence of the V atom and the M atom at cite a play a bigger role in the stabilization of the orthovanadate structure. Overall, the bond valences of the cations do not predict the transition from R 3m to C2/c. The difference of the bond valences of the two phases of Sr 3 (VO 4 ) 2 is essentially zero, and that of Ca 3 (VO 4 ) 2 just 0.02 with the wrong sign: the bond valence is larger in the lower-symmetry structure, which means that the structural distortions would not exist, which is against the DFT results presented earlier. One of the effects that the bond valence model does not capture is the anion-anion repulsion. To incorporate this, we calculated the anion-anion repulsion energy by summing up the reciprocal of all the oxygen-oxygen distances in different structural phases. This term is analogous to the Coulomb repulsion between the O ions treated as point charges. Although this sum diverges, the difference of its value in two different structures, truncated at a large distance, can in principle be used for comparison between structures. The results shown in detail in the Supplemental Material These observations pose an open question about the driving force of the structural distortions in M 3 (VO 4 ) 2 . The large band gap of these compounds (discussed in the next section) implies that complicated covalency effects are likely negligible, and therefore the structural instabilities should be well explained by the bond valence approach, which is clearly not the case. One possibility that explains this discrepancy may be the bond valence parameters used, which can always be improved by the inclusion of more compounds with V 5+ into the data sets used to fit those parameters. Despite the large number of studies on the electronic structure of V 5+ containing transition metal oxides, to the best of our knowledge, there is no first principles study of the electronic structure of M 3 (VO 4 ) 2 . In order to clarify the electronic structure of these compounds, and the types of orbitals that contribute to the bands near the Fermi level and hence determine the optical properties, we perform band structure and Wannier function calculations of all three M 3 (VO 4 ) 2 compounds. For simplicity, we explore the electronic properties in the parent R 3m phase and keep the notation of the kpoints in the Brillouin zone consistent among the compounds. In Fig. Band structure and density of states for R 3m M3(VO4)2 obtained using HSEsol exchange correlation function. The atomic characters of the electronic wavefunctions were obtained from atomic spheres, renormalized to account for interstitial densities, and denoted with green (M ), blue (V), and red (O) colors. Panels a, b, and c correspond to Ba-, Sr-, and Ca-compounds respectively. 4.5 eV even with the underestimation of DFT. The bandgap increases with increasing M -ion radius, and is largest in Ba 3 (VO 4 ) 2 . The separation of the oxygen p and vanadium d orbitals is larger in these orthovanadates than that observed in AVO 3 perovskites, and even larger than that in SrNbO 3 with the more electropositive Nb ion By performing first principles evolutionary structure prediction and lattice dynamics calculations, supported by a group theoretical analysis, we elucidated the crystal structures and possible low temperature or metastable phases of M 3 (VO 4 ) 2 compounds. We showed that the higher valence of vanadium leads to a tetrahedral coor-dination of oxygen ions around the vanadium centers. These oxygen tetrahedra rotate to lower the energy of the crystal structure, which is similar to the ubiquitous octahedral rotations in perovskites. The lowest energy state with C2/c symmetry of Sr and Ca compounds is stabilized through the coupling of a strong unstable T - 3 phonon with another T - 1 mode. We also find that even though there is a polar Γ point instability, it is too weak to give rise to a polar phase at room temperature, and is suppressed by the other instabilities. This suggests that the reported dielectric anomaly in Sr 3 (VO 4 ) 2 likely has an extrinsic origin. All three compounds we studied have large band gaps, which make them transparent throughout the visible range, and opens the way for optics-related applications like other orthovanadates In summary, our study shows that the palmieritederived orthovanadates have a rich structural energy landscape with multiple instabilities and competing phases and, so, this structural family is a prime target for designing new materials with novel functionalities.