Sound in indoor spaces forms a complex wavefield due to multiple scattering encountered by the sound. Indoor acoustic communication involving multiple sources and receivers thus inevitably suffers from cross-talks. Here, we demonstrate the isolation of acoustic communication channels in a room by wavefield shaping using acoustic reconfigurable metasurfaces (ARMs) controlled by optimization protocols based on communication theories. The ARMs have 200 electrically switchable units, each selectively offering 0 or π phase shifts in the reflected waves. The sound field is reshaped for maximal Shannon capacity and minimal cross-talk simultaneously. We demonstrate diverse acoustic functionalities over a spectrum much larger than the coherence bandwidth of the room, including multi-channel, multi-spectral channel isolations, and frequency-multiplexed acoustic communication. Our work shows that wavefield shaping in complex media can offer new strategies for future acoustic engineering. provides binary phase control. The idea is to modify the room environment by wavefield shaping to physically optimize multiple communication channels between various sources and receivers. Up to now, adaptive wavefield shaping has revolutionized the control of light 8-10 , microwave We measure this channel matrix for different configurations of ARMs. The first of its kind, the ARMs modify the reflection phase and function as tunable mirror that on-demand control the phases of the reflected waves, which effectively alter boundary conditions of a portion of the room. Each unit cell of the metasurfaces provides, on demand, a two-state phase shift (0 or ). By driving the ARMs using optimization schemes that target selected properties of the channel matrices, we successfully demonstrate diverse functionalities, including channel isolation and cross-talk elimination, frequency-multiplexed channel conditioning, as well as other, more flexible controls for acoustic communications. In particular, we demonstrate the control of multi-spectral sound fields covering a spectrum much larger than the coherence bandwidth of the room and the striking effect of crosstalkfree simultaneous music playback with two sources, each playing a different music piece. Our work opens broad horizons for future sound-scaping and other acoustic engineering. Channel matrix for acoustic communication in a complex acoustic environment. For each sound frequency f, a channel matrix, denoted H(f) with h ij as entries, directly connects the sources and receivers by R = H ⋅ S, where S and R are the source and receiver vectors. A simple example is Most indoor spaces are complex acoustic cavities, wherein the sound fields are scrambled by reflections and multiple scattering Apparently, both S and R are 2 × 1 vectors, and the channel matrix is 2 × 2 in dimension Our lab is a furnished room with an irregular shape (Fig. According to Shannon's law in information theory, the optimal channel capacity is determined by the singular value distribution of the channel matrix where E = -∑ p k ln p k N k=1 is the Shannon entropy, and p k = σ k /(∑ σ i N i=1 ) are the normalized singular values of H . A higher effective rank indicates a greater number of independent eigenchannels available in the channel matrix. For an N × N channel matrix, the effective rank theoretically ranges from 1 to N. Upon reaching the full effective rank, all p k become identical, indicating that the eigenvectors of H are nearly orthogonal. In this case, the channels are minimally mixed. Therefore, the first goal of our approach is to achieve channel independence by maximizing R eff for a given acoustic configuration. However, channel independence alone is insufficient for acoustic communications because, even with independent channels, the receivers can still concurrently detect signals from multiple sources. This does not pose a problem for telecommunication scenarios because once H is known, such mixing (wave superposition) can be removed by either tailoring the emission or by signal post-processing. However, because acoustic communications commonly involve humans, who obviously lack such signal-processing capabilities, the acoustic channels have to be further optimized to eliminate signal superpositions. For example, in Fig. Obviously, when Eq. ( The two considerations together give an objective function The minimization of G 1 should yield a system that not only reaches maximal channel capacity but also produces channels that offer one-to-one signal delivery between sources and receivers. We denote this condition as optimal channel isolation (OCI). We remark that the minimization of either R eff or w 1 alone is insufficient for achieving OCI, and it is necessary to minimize both of them simultaneously. For example, minimizing w 1 alone, i.e., without enforcing a maximum R eff , can still reduce off-diagonal entries. But there is no guarantee that the diagonal entries have near-equal values. If the diagonal entries differ significantly, the two channels have drastically different signal-to-noise ratios, which is not optimal for communication purposes. For a detailed discussion on this issue and additional experiments, please refer to Supplementary Note 4. Achieving OCI via adaptive wavefield shaping. Because the channel matrix encompasses disordered characteristics of the complex sound field and the multipath transmission of acoustic signals, the only way to control it is to alter the environment. Our previous works have already demonstrated such possibilities by extending wavefront shapinga powerful technique previously used for controlling the propagation of light in multiple-scattering propagationfor airborne sound This change in reflection phases alters the waves that form the disordered sound field in the room, by which the channel matrix optimization is performed. See Methods for more details on the design of the ARMs. Loudspeakers and microphones play the roles of sources and receivers. The channel matrix is determined by experimentally measuring the transfer functions between each loudspeaker and microphone. The spatial separations among the loudspeakers, and among the microphones, are larger than the correlation length, which is about half the wavelength. The distance between any loudspeaker and microphone is larger than the reverberating radius so that direct sound does not dominate the transfer functions (see Methods for more details). First, as a proof of principle, we demonstrate the 2-channel OCI of single-frequency sound at 1300 Hz. This is achieved by performing the ARMs using a climbing algorithm targeting the minimization of G 1 (H). The results of 40 independent realizations with uncorrelated configurations are summarized in Fig. To further show the effectiveness of our approach, we compared the energy delivered by the channels before and after OCI, which can be easily extracted from the entries of the channel matrices. When OCI is attained, the energy delivered by the intended channels is enhanced by 2.11 ± 0.39 folds, whereas the energy involved in cross-talk is reduced to 0.0070 ± 0.0025. Frequency-multiplexed channel conditioning. The success of our approach opens a myriad of possibilities for controlling acoustic communications. Our ARMs can modulate the reflective phases over a broad frequency range. Such a capability enables broadband or frequency-multiplexed control. For example, by using a different objective function G 2 (H) = [N -R eff (H)] + w 2 , where , we can obtain a different kind of OCI: H is maximized in channel capacity, but it takes an anti-diagonal form. For 2-channel cases, it means that microphone 1(2) now only detects signal from loudspeaker 2(1). In addition, we further leverage the bandwidth of the ARMs to achieve frequency-multiplexing of the channels. For example, in Fig. Leveraging the multi-frequency OCI, we are able to achieve the simultaneous crosstalkfree playback of two different pieces of music from the two separate sources. The results are summarized in Fig. In Fig. An experimental example is shown in Supplementary Fig. We remark that the multi-frequency demonstrations are far more challenging to achieve compared to the single-frequency OCI. Because the frequency separations are far greater than the coherence bandwidth of the room, the wavefields are completely uncorrelated and thus the ARMs essentially need to simultaneously control multiple independent degrees of freedom. Flexible multi-user channel conditioning. We next demonstrate the versatile capability of our scheme by studying two cases with unequal numbers of loudspeakers and microphones, which are rather common scenarios. The first example, with two loudspeakers and six microphones, is shown in Fig. We impose the demand that the microphones are separated into two groups, and each group is tuned in to only one loudspeaker, i.e., microphones 1-3 (4-6) wish only to capture loudspeaker 1 (2), and ignore loudspeaker 2 (1). By using the proper objective function, a channel matrix that suits the need is successfully produced, as shown in In the second example shown in Fig. By a successful crossover of multiple scattering media, adaptive wavefield shaping, acoustic metasurfaces, and communication theories, we have achieved effective control of complex acoustic waves. The properties of channel matrices in disordered wavefields play a crucial role. Unlike scattering matrices for multiple scattering media, the channel matrices are typically smallsized random matrices. Their dimensionality is determined not by the complexity of the medium but by the number of sources and receivers. Hence, they obey different sets of statistical distribution laws compared to large-sized random matrices, in which the distribution of singular values can be derived from the Marčhenko-Pastur law By using random matrix theory and probability theory, the statistical distribution of key parameters, such as the effective rank, can be obtained numerically and theoretically, and they agree well with the experimental results. The relevant analyses and results are presented in Supplementary Note The wavefield modulation is achieved by the ARMs. Compared to the previous modulating device based on membrane-type acoustic metasurfaces Its function is not to scatter waves evenly in all directions for the formation of a uniform wave field. Instead, it scatters waves in specific ways designed to intentionally disrupt an already uniform reflected wave field, thereby achieving OCI. Our approach achieves channel isolation through the physical modulation of the complex sound field. This is unlike any traditional strategy that often relies on restricting the sources or the receivers In practical scenarios of acoustic communications, the positions of sources and receivers are often interchanging. When the numbers of sources are equal to the receivers, i.e., the channel matrix is a square matrix, the system has reciprocity once OCI is achieved. In other words, no further optimization is required to handle the exchange of sources and receivers. However, if the numbers of sources and receivers are different, the corresponding channel matrix does not respect reciprocity. For more detailed discussion, please refer to Supplementary Note 1. Our method relies on moderate reverberation. Therefore, for optimal performance, the sources and the receivers shall be greater than the reverberation radius (0.5 m in the existing experimental configuration). If reverberation is weak or even completely absent, direct sound dominates and the effectiveness of our method is compromised. (For instance, this experiment cannot be conducted in an anechoic chamber.) On the contrary, excessively long reverberation time also affects performance by increasing the correlation between the optimal states of two different ARMs, resulting in a reduction in the number of controllable modes and consequently compromising the performance of the reflector. There are several routes that can potentially improve the overall performance of our channeling conditioning approach. First, our results are achieved using a rudimentary climbing algorithm and without prior knowledge of the acoustic environment (other than some of its basic properties). We anticipate that more advanced optimization algorithms can lead to better results and reduce the optimization time. Imaging techniques such as phase conjugation, inversed filtering, together with prior knowledge of the acoustic environment, are also viable routes for improving the outcomes Finally, other active acoustic designs are potentially suitable for achieving similar functionalities in sound-field manipulations The properties of the experimental environment. The experiment was conducted in an irregularly shaped room with furniture inside. The volume of the room is V ≈ 44 m 3 , and the total surface area is A ≈ 78 m 2 (Fig. Using numerical simulations (the ray acoustics module of COMSOL Multiphysics), we estimate the scattering mean free path l ≈ 1.27 m, so the mean interval between two scattering events for a wave is ∆t s = l/c ≈ 3.7 ms. Hence, a sound wave, on average, undergoes roughly 10 scattering events before it decays, such that the resulting field is speckle-like. The spatial distribution of the field amplitude follows Rayleigh distribution, which means the room is a chaotic cavity We have confirmed such properties of the sound field by experimentally raster-scanning multiple planes of the sound fields in the room, as shown in Supplementary Fig. The properties of the channel matrix. The entries of the channel matrix follow the same statistical distribution as the sound field, hence they are modeled using complex random numbers. The singular values of such matrices are not uniform, and in particular, for large random matrices, the distribution of singular values can be derived from the Marčhenko-Pastur law Numerically, we generate the real and imaginary parts of each entry of the channel matrix as Gaussian random numbers. A total of 10,000 different channel matrices are numerically produced and their properties, including R eff , w 1 , and (or) w 2 are recorded for comparison with the experimental values. For 2 × 2 channel matrices, the average R eff is about 1.7, and w 1 is about 1.2, which are indicated in Figs. The design and characterization of the ARMs. The ARMs are based on reflective acoustic metasurfaces that are set against the walls of the room. They are essentially tunable boundaries of the room as an acoustic cavity. The ARMs consist of a square array of identical THRs. There are a total of 200 independent units of THRs. Figure The modification to the channel matrix is achieved by feedback-driven optimizations based on a climbing algorithm. The channel matrix is measured at each step and sent to the controlling PC. The PC computes the relevant parameters, such as the effective rank, then the objective function. Then, the program instructs up to 15 randomly chosen THRs to switch the states, then the channel matrix is measured again. The process is repeated until the objective function converges to the target value. Please refer to Supplementary Note 9 for a detailed algorithm procedure description. At the current stage, the optimization of a 2 × 2 channel matrix at a single frequency typically takes 2-5 minutes. For more complex scenarios, the optimization time will inevitably be longer. The main limitation is the time required for switching the states of control circuits and mechanical structures. To overcome this issue, potential improvements include using advanced control circuits like FPGA for better performance and refining the mechanical parts for faster state switching. More intelligent optimization algorithms can also be applied to reduce optimization time. b Independent, isolated channels can be achieved by wavefield shaping using the acoustic reconfigurable metasurfaces (ARMs), such that loudspeakers and microphones communicate without interference from others. , as shown in Supplementary Fig. Channel capacity refers to the maximum amount of information that a communication channel can transmit error-free during a given time duration. Several factors influence the channel capacity, including the channel bandwidth, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and the modulation scheme. = Tr[HH † ] can be interpreted as the total power gain of the channel matrix H if an equal amount of energy is delivered by each source. Then, for the same input power and SNR, the channel capacity is maximized when all singular values are equal, i.e., σ 1 = σ 2 = ⋯ = σ N , according to Jensen's inequality. Identical singular values also correspond to the maximum effective rank, by using the definition of effective rank [Eq. (1) in main text], The ensemble average of the parameter w 1 can be obtained using a similar method. According to the definition of w 1 [Eq. (2) in main text], w 1 of a 2 × 2 channel matrix is given by is the PDF of the Rayleigh distribution, and Erf(x) = 2 √π ∫ 0 x e -t 2 dt is the error function with t being variable to be integrated over. The PDF of the denominator in Eq. (S11) apparently has the same form. The distribution of w 1 then follows as The distribution ρ w 1 (w 1 ) is plotted in Supplementary Fig. This result agrees well with the experimental values shown in Fig. Here, we provide experimental evidence that optimizing the channel isolation metric at a single frequency does not affect the channel isolation metric at frequencies outside the coherence bandwidth (about ±4.2 Hz) from a statistical averaging perspective. We performed the same experiment as shown in Fig. [Eq. (3) in the main text] at 1300 Hz but provided measurements of the effective rank R eff and diagonalization degree w 1 over a wider frequency range of 500-4000 Hz. The results are shown in Supplementary Fig. (S16) Note that because we require the entire row 4 to vanish, the upper bound of the effective rank of the 4 × 2 channel matrix is ~1.9286, instead of 2. The acoustic reconfigurable metasurfaces (ARMs) are capable of modulating the phase of the reflected wave over a broad bandwidth, which gives rise to the possibility of controlling acoustic channels over a finite band of frequency. In order to verify this capability, we have 3. Figures 3(a, b) compare |h