We study the effects of quantum fluctuations on the transport properties of multiband superconductors near a pair-breaking quantum critical point. For this purpose, we consider a minimal model of the quantum phase transition in a system with two nested two-dimensional Fermi surfaces. Under the assumption that doping the system adds nonmagnetic impurities but does not change the densities of carriers, we include disorder potentials that render both intra-and interband collisions. Interband scattering leads to full suppression of the unconventional s ± superconducting order similar to the effect of paramagnetic impurities in isotropic single-band superconductors. We use the diagrammatic technique of quantum field theory to compute the corrections to electrical conductivity in a normal state due to superconducting fluctuations in the entire low-temperature quantum regime. We show that the sign of the conductivity correction depends on how the quantum critical point is approached in the phase diagram. We contrast our findings to existing approaches to this problem based on the renormalization group, time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau phenomenology, and effective bosonic action field theories. Quantum phase transitions In this paper, we address a particular problem of the pair-breaking quantum phase transition in a multiband unconventional superconductor when the transition temperature T c (x) is suppressed to zero as a function of control parameter x that could be, e.g., chemical doping, externally applied pressure, strain, or magnetic field. The critical value of the control parameter x c at which T c (x c ) = 0 defines the superconducting quantum critical point (QCP). We are primarily interested in transport anomalies at the onset of such a quantum phase transition (QPT). The main question that we answer in this paper is: What are the signatures of quantum superconducting fluctuations in dc conductivity when QCP is approached from a normal metal? This problem has rich history. It dates back to the pioneering work of Abrikosov and Gor'kov For the kinetic coefficients at temperatures sufficiently close to critical, T -T c ≪ T c , transport properties of the metallic phase are dominated by superconducting fluctuations The Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) process corresponds to a new transport channel mediated by the thermally-induced preformed Cooper pairs. The Maki-Thompson (MT) contribution describes the interaction-driven quantum interference of quasiparticles experiencing Andreev reflections on superconducting droplets above T c . The density of states (DOS) mechanism captures the depletion in the single-particle states at the Fermi level once the system is tuned towards T c thus causing the suppression of conductivity. The final contribution (DCR) can be understood as the renormalization of the single particle diffusion coefficient in the presence of fluctuations. A question of what happens with the interplay of these contributions to the conductivity in the quantum critical regime when T c → 0 constitutes to a genuinely complicated problem. It turns out the the answer depends on how the QCP is approached on the x -T phase diagram defined by the control parameter x and the temperature T . In order to properly place our paper in the context of related studies we briefly survey prior results. We will purposefully narrow the scope of this discussion to the two-dimensional (2D) systems while acknowledging that there is equally broad literature devoted to the fluctuational transport in quantum wires (see e.g. There are several examples in the literature when fluctuation-driven transport in superconductors was studied in the quantum regime. Perhaps the most considered model by multiple authors An effective action approach augmented by the renormalization group analysis has led to the conductivity correction δσ ∝ 1/T in the case of a d-wave superconductor In the context of the literature mentioned above, we revisit the problem of quantum transport near the superconducting quantum critical point. It should be noted that all the above-mentioned models of the pair-breaking QPT are dual to each other, therefore the apparent lack of consensus in the final result between the different approaches The presentation is organized as follows. Inspired by the physics of iron pnictides, in Sec. II we formulate the model of an unconventional multiband superconductor that exhibits magnetic and superconducting QCPs. In Sec. III we derive the two-particle Green's function -the propagator in the Cooper channel that captures superconducting fluctuations in the thermal and quantum regimes. In Sec. IV we present a direct linear-response computation of the leading corrections to the normal-state conductivity near the QCP based on the Kubo formula and analytical continuation procedure Motivated by the physics of iron-based superconductors The first term represents the noninteracting part of the model Here ĉpσ (ĉ † pσ ) and fpσ ( f † pσ ) are the single-particle annihilation (creation) operators for each band in a state with momentum p = (p x , p y ) and spin projection σ = (↑, ↓), ξ c (p) = ξ p = p 2 /2m -μ, ξ f (p) = -ξ p are the single-particle energies in each of the two corresponding bands relative to the chemical potential μ, m is an effective mass. The parabolic spectrum is chosen here for simplicity of the subsequent calculations. We also neglect the anisotropy in effective masses for the same reason. These approximations do not limit generality of our considerations and final conclusions. The second term in Eq. ( where we introduced the four-component spinor with the Fourier components The matrix elements of the interaction V ab αββ ′ α ′ are defined according to where σy is the second Pauli matrix and g ab = (1 -δ ab ) g. The sign of g determines whether the superconducting order parameter is s wave or s ± wave. In what follows, we assume that g > 0, which corresponds to the extended s ± symmetry of the superconducting order parameter. Here we obviously ignore the other interaction channels such as ones that may lead to the spin-or charge-density-wave instabilities. This approximation is sufficient to capture the QCP at the end point of the superconducting dome, which is far from the region of parameters in the phase diagram where magnetic interactions play an important role. The third term in Eq. ( The convention c = f , f = c is implied, while R i label coordinates of randomly distributed scatterers. In this expression σz is the third Pauli matrix. The first term in Eq. ( A few comments are in order about the model formulated in this section. With an addition of the interaction, which drives the spin-density-wave instability, the model defined by Eq. ( In part to fill this gap, below we will follow the avenues of Refs. The central quantity in our analysis will be the propagator for the superconducting fluctuations. First we define the single-particle correlation function in the imaginary time formalism [42] with x = (r, τ ). In the Matsubara frequency representation the expressions for the Green's functions, which also include the effects of disorder are given by where is the total scattering rate, and we have omitted the spin index for brevity. The expression for the superconducting fluctuations propagator L can be formally obtained by introducing the two-particle correlation function and developing the perturbative expansion in powers of the coupling constant g ab where Π(q, iω l ) is the response function to the external pairing perturbation χ a Ψ † a↑ Ψ † a↓ + H.c. in each of the two bands, q = (q x , q y ), ω l = 2πT l (l = 0, ±1, ±2, ...) are bosonic Matsubara frequencies, T is temperature. The inverse interaction matrix we choose in the form where λ = ν F g is the dimensionless coupling constant corresponding to the pairing in the s ± pairing channel. For brevity, we take equal density of states and equal pairing constants in each band. This simplification does not limit generality of our results. For the diagonal and off-diagonal elements of the matrix function Π(q, iω l ) we found the following expressions: where ln γ E ≈ 0.577 is the Euler constant and ω D is the ultraviolet cut-off of the theory, which can be absorbed to define T c (see below). Additionally, we have introduced the following auxiliary functions Here ψ(z) is the logarithmic derivative of the Euler's gamma function and D = v 2 F τ t /2 is the diffusion coefficient. In the following it will be convenient to change the basis using the unitary transformation Thus, the expression for the fluctuation propagator in this new basis is Matrix element ( L-1 ) 11 accounts for the fluctuations in the s-wave channel, while the remaining matrix element describes the fluctuations in the s ± -wave channel. Indeed, if we choose λ < 0 then the critical temperature is independent of the interband scattering rate. We can interpret this as a manifestation of the Anderson theorem Inverting Eq. ( where T c0 is the critical temperature of the superconducting transition in a clean superconductor and W = ν -1 F Π aa + Ξ + 1/λ. Note that the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( Thus, we arrive to the following approximate expression for the matrix function, which describes the pairing fluctuations in the two-band model Eq. ( In passing we note that the same expression can be obtained from the semiclassical Usadel equations in the limit of strong disorder when T τ t ≪ 1. Expressions above allow one to compute the critical temperature of the superconducting transition T c as well as the critical value of the pair-breaking rate τ π at a given temperature by setting ln(T /T c0 ) + Ψ (q = 0, iω l = 0) = 0. We find that T c → 0 when τ π reaches the critical value In order to find a finite-temperature correction to τ π , we assume that T τ (c0) π ≪ 1 and expand the digamma functions using the asymptotic expression ψ(z) The "distance" from/to the critical pair-breaking point can now be defined according to Whether the quantum critical fluctuations or thermal fluctuations have a dominant effect on transport will be determined by the relation between parameter |δ QCP (T )| and another dimensionless parameter T τ (c) π (T ). We also introduce the critical scattering rate π . These parameters are summarized in Table Definition Equation Γ t Total scattering rate Eq. ( ∆ QCP Energy gap to the QCP Eq. ( Summary of key parameters of the model. The notation of Γ i defines a particular scattering rate distinguished by a subscript i = 0, π, t, c whose meaning is given in the column of definitions. Each scattering rate can be equivalently rewritten in terms of the corresponding scattering time, namely In this section we present a step-by-step derivation of all the superconducting fluctuation corrections to the conductivity at the one-loop level. We first derive general expressions and then analyze their limiting cases. We demonstrate that our two-band model is analogous to the QPT a realized in the superconducting thin film subjected to the in-plane magnetic field with the orbital effect of pair breaking. When appropriate, we rectify previously made statements about the temperature dependence of various contributions to conductivity that emerge in this theory, and highlight terms that were overlooked in the previous computations. We begin by considering the following correlation function in the Matsubara representation: where Ĵα is the α = x, y component of the current operator. In this definition brackets denote both quantum statistical and disorder average, and Tτ defines the ordering in imaginary time. The dc part of conductivity is then determined by analytically continuing the response function The analytical expression for the Aslamazov-Larkin diagram (Fig. In this expression functions Λ (α) abb ′ (q; ω l , ω n ) represent the triangular blocks each of which consists of three single-particle propagators and two Cooperons, where α (p) is the single-particle velocity in each band. In the band-basis vertex functions (Cooperons) C ab (q, ε 1 , ε 2 ) naturally have diagonal and off-diagonal components. In the basis in which matrix Ĉ is diagonal, its components describe Cooperons in the s-wave and s ± -wave channels correspondingly. It will be convenient to define the components of Ĉ(q; ε 1 , ε 2 ) as Calculation of the triangular block functions Λ abb ′ (q; ω l , ω n ) can be done using the diffusive limit, T τ t ≪ 1, with the following result: It is clear that due to the symmetry properties of the Cooperons C aa = C aa and C aa = C aa , only four out of eight components of Λ abc are independent. Because of this property, prior to performing summations over the Matsubara frequencies in Eq. ( with function K(q; ω l , ω n ) defined by where and We note that function L(q, ω l ) appearing in Eq. ( The remaining steps in the calculation are fairly straightforward. As a result, we find four different contributions to conductivity, so for the Aslamazov-Larkin correction we can write The first two terms originate from performing an analytic continuation and expanding pair fluctuation propagator in powers of ω, while the remaining two appear as a result of the expansion of functions {B RR (q, ε, ω), B RA (q, ε, ω), B AA (q, ε, ω)} with superscripts denoting retarded (R) and advanced (A) parts with respect to the energy arguments in Eq. ( with B(q, ω) = ψ[1/2 + (Γ q -iω)/4πT ]. The function L R (q, ω) is obtained from L(q, ω l ) by performing an analytic continuation to the real frequencies ω l → -iω. The expression in Eq. ( This correction to conductivity accounts for the contribution from the quantum critical fluctuations, which was missed, along with δσ AL 3 and δσ AL 4 , in the earlier studies These expressions are fairly general and apply in a broad range of parameters that define the superconducting phase diagram (Fig. We are primarily interested in the low-temperature limit T ≪ T c0 . In this case we still have to distinguish two distinct regimes. We define the quantum regime when temperature is smaller than detuning from the quantum critical point, namely T ≪ ∆ QCP ≪ T c0 . We define the intermediate thermal regime, when thermal broadening is bigger than the gap to QCP, namely The main results of the calculation for all the AL terms are summarized in Ta- ble II, whereas technical details of the derivation are delegated to Appendix A. It is noteworthy to observe that except for δσ AL 1 all other terms remain finite at T → 0 limit and overall correction is positive of the order of quantum of conductance, δσ AL (T → 0) ∼ e 2 , Fig. We now turn our attention to the diagram, Fig. Here function Σ MT αβ (q; iω l , iω n ) is determined by the following expression: Here we have already performed summations over internal band indices and introduced The next step in the process is the evaluation of the corresponding Matsubara sums followed by an analytic continuation. As customary, we split MT diagram into a regular and an anomalous contributions These two contributions originate from the different combinations of the poles in the momentum integral in Eq. In contrast, the anomalous Maki-Thompson correction has different analytical structure. Specifically, we found the following expression: These expressions can be further analyzed in the limit of low temperatures T ≪ T c0 . We find that the regular contribution survives in the T → 0 limit whereas an anomalous contribution vanishes with the results of the analytic calculations shown in Table quadratically with T . Another nuance is that regular term is weakly (logarithmically) divergent in the ultraviolet of momentum integration. This spurious divergence is due to inapplicability of the diffusion approximation as we are bound by the condition ql ≲ 1, where l is the disorder mean-free path. In Fig. We proceed to compute the corrections from the diagrams shown in Fig. Here the factor of two in front of the sum appears due to spin degeneracy. Function Σ DOS a (q; iω l , iω n ) is given by Here we have performed summations over internal band indices and function λ is defined in Eq. Γc ln Γc ∆ QCP TABLE IV. Asymptotic expressions for the leading temperature dependence of the first and second DOS contributions in a crossover from quantum-to-thermal regimes of fluctuations as extracted from Eqs. ( The remaining steps in the calculation of the correction to conductivity are essentially identical to the ones used to compute the Maki-Thompson correction. Specifically, here we also find two distinct contributions to conductivity, For the first one we find the an expression that coincides with that of a regular MT formula given in Eq. ( The expression for the remaining correction to conductivity is different and reads The details of our analysis of these two contributions in quantum (T ≪ ∆ QCP ) and thermal (T ≫ ∆ QCP ) regimes are provided in Appendix C. In Fig. In this section we discuss the corrections to dc conductivity given by the four diagrams shown in Fig. Since the first two diagrams give identical contributions, we begin our discussion with the first diagram. For this diagram the current-current correlation function has the following analytical expression: In this expression we have already performed the summations over the band indices. The new quantity, which appears here, C(q; ε n + ω ν , ω k -ε n ), represents the Cooperon block (shaded rectangle in Fig. We immediately note that the expression for the Cooperon has two contributions: one which contains the pair-breaking rate, and another one which does not. The calculation proceeds with the computation of the momentum integrals followed up by the summation over the fermionic Matsubara frequencies ε n and subsequent analytic continuation to real frequencies ω ν → -iω. As a result, we find the following expression for the conductivity correction, which we will split into the sum of distinct contributions: The first contribution originates from the first term in the expression for the Cooperon (50), which contains the pair-breaking rate Γ π and is given by Here σ D = 2e 2 ν F D is Drude conductivity and Γ q was introduced earlier inn Eq. The remaining step is to perform the analytic continuation with respect to bosonic frequencies ω k → -iω, which, in the case of the expressions above, is straightforward. In Appendix D we will analyze each of these two contributions in two separate regimes: (i) quantum fluctuations regime, π |) and (ii) thermal fluctuations regime when T ≫ ∆ QCP . Finally, let us compute the contribution from the remaining two diagrams in Fig. Here we adopted the shorthand notation ε n+ν = ε n + ω ν for brevity. T Γc TABLE V. Asymptotic expressions for the leading temperature dependence of the first and second DOS contributions in a crossover from quantum-to-thermal regimes of fluctuations as extracted from Eqs. We have determined that the second term in the Cooperon, Eq. ( The procedure of the analytic continuation for the first of these two terms is straightforward. As for the second one, although it is more involved, it is technically similar to the one performed for the Aslamazov-Larkin correction. Following the analytic continuation procedure with the expansion of the kernel K DCR 3 in powers of ω ν → -iω we find that the conductivity correction from that second term vanishes identically and we are left with the correction originating from the first term in We immediately notice that this correction is a factor of three smaller than The details of this analysis are given in Appendix D and the results are shown in Table Note that the DCR corrections are positive both in thermal and quantum regimes and are weakly ultraviolet divergent in the quantum regime. Now, if we compare all the results in Tables II, III, IV, and V, we conclude that in the quantum regime both MT and DOS contributions are dominant rendering the quantum correction to conductivity to be negative, while in the thermal regime the Aslamazov-Larkin contribution is a leading one and so the corresponding correction is positive. In this paper, we presented a comprehensive microscopic analysis of the leading fluctuationinduced corrections to the conductivity of a disordered multiband metal in the vicinity of the superconducting quantum critical point. In contrast to previous considerations of this problem in different models belonging to the same universality class, which were based on the effective bosonic field theories, we carried out our analysis based on the direct diagrammatic approach, which enables us to retain both fermionic quasiparticles and bosonic modes on equal footing. We find that in the quantum limit of fluctuations the theory is regular in the infrared, in other words as the system approaches the superconducting state from the metallic side, its transport properties do not reflect the proximity of another phase. The corrections to conductivity are regular and practically universal ∼ e 2 /h. We find only extremely weak double-logarithmic divergence in the ultraviolet, which is a simple reflection of the inapplicability of the diffusive limit when the theory is extrapolated to large momenta. The natural cut-off of fluctuating bosonic modes is set by q max l ∼ 1. As a result, the total conductivity correction is negative in T → 0 limit, namely This is a peculiar result as this localizing correction results from the attractive interactions in the Cooper channel. Note that in the classical regime of fluctuations such corrections are always positive All the complications and subtleties of the quantum regime of superconducting fluctuations in the context of transport properties can be traced to their dynamical nature as captured by the vertex corrections. This feature can be best described in the example of the Aslamazov-Larkin process. Indeed, the key element of the AL diagram is the triangular block that consists of three Green's functions and two impurity ladders. This block depends on three frequencies: the injected frequency Ω at which conductivity is calculated, which is set to zero at the end of the calculation to extract the dc limit; the fermionic frequency ε in the loop of Green's functions; and the bosonic frequency ω that defines the pair propagator. In the classical regime of fluctuations, T ≪ T -T c , the pole structure of the pair propagator set the characteristic frequency of soft bosonic modes to {Dq 2 , ω} ∼ T -T c . At the same time, fermionic fluctuations occur at characteristic energies ε ∼ T . Therefore ε ≫ ω and in the calculation of the triangular block all bosonic frequencies can be dropped thus making it to be purely static. The whole block scales linearly with momentum q since it originates from the current vertex. In contrast, near the QCP when T c → 0, all energies are of the same order, ω ∼ ε ∼ T , and this vertex function has a complicated dynamical structure. Upon an analytical continuation, it generates three different vertices in the causal sector (retarded and advanced components) depending on whether energies are on the same or different half-planes with respect to the given branch cut. In the end, expansion over Ω generates additional contributions to the conductivity that do not have a classical analog. The same argumentation applies to all the contributions. We close with a broader perspective on several outstanding problems where an extension of the theory presented in this paper may find useful applications. (i) The applicability of our results is restricted by the perturbation theory in fluctuations. It is controlled by the Ginzburg-Levanyuk parameter, Gi = 1/(ν F D) ≪ 1, which in the 2D case is determined by the inverse of the dimensionless conductance (iii) The next point concerns transport anomalies observed in homogeneously disordered superconducting films and the associated physics of the superconductor-to-insulator transition (SIT). As is known near T c there is a parametrically small temperature window close to the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless temperature T BKT within which the normal state resistance rapidly drops to exponentially small values. Whereas above T c the resistance is governed by the superconducting fluctuations, below T c the resistance is determined by the proliferation of vortex excitations in the order parameter field those dynamics require careful account of a phase relaxation mechanism. The crossover between these regimes is commonly described by the Halperin and Nelson interpolation formula Ref. Then for the first two corrections to Aslamazov-Larkin contribution from the expansion of the fluctuation propagator one obtains Here we are using the following dimensionless notations: , and y q = Dq 2 . The integral over ξ in the expression for δσ AL 1 can be computed approximately employing the diffusive approximation T τ t ≪ 1, which yields The main contribution to the remaining integral over y q comes from the region of small values of y q and so we readily obtain the following estimate: The analysis of the temperature dependence of δσ AL 2 (including a numerical factor) can be somewhat simplified if one makes an additional change of variable ξ = x c η. Then for the first two corrections to Aslamazov-Larkin contribution from the expansion of the fluctuation propagator it obtains Note that the only temperature-dependent term in this expression is an argument of the coth. Clearly, in the quantum regime T ≪ |∆ QCP |, apart from the region when η ≪ 1 the argument of the coth is much larger than one and, therefore, we can approximate coth(πx c η) ≈ signη. Consequently, as a result, the temperature dependence completely drops out from this expression. The remaining integral can be easily computed and we get Now we consider the remaining two contributions to the AL correction, which can be written in the following form: For both of these expressions we repeat the same steps, which lead us to (A5) with the following results: Next, we proceed with the asymptotic expressions in the thermal regime. b. Thermal regime. When T ≫ ∆ QCP we can make an additional approximation for the fluctuation propagator by expanding the logarithm up to the linear order in |Γ -Γ c |. Using the notations of Eqs. (A2) we have Then, the remaining integral over ξ can be carried out by using the series representation for the sinh 2 (πξ). It is also easy to verify that in that expansion it will suffice to retain the first-order term only, i.e. we replace sin(πξ) ≈ πξ since the main contribution to the corresponding integral comes from the region of small ξ. Then, the integration over ξ can be easily carried out with the following result: Clearly, this integral is divergent at the QCP and so its value is accumulated at small y q . One obtains: Thus, we find that the "classical" AL correction to conductivity in the regime dominated by thermal fluctuations is in fact divergent as one approaches the SC QCP. We proceed with the calculation of the second contribution in (A2), which, as we have already mentioned above, accounts for the contribution from the quantum critical fluctuations as it remains finite in the zero-temperature limit. We note that in the calculation of the term which We now turn our attention to the calculation of the asymptotic expression for the anomalous Maki-Thompson correction Here we introduced tan φ ξ = ξ/x q . Since both x c and x q are much larger than unity, we may ignore the dependence of the logarithm in the denominator on ξ, and also approximate φ ξ ≈ ξ/x q . On account of these approximations, we can perform an integration over ξ using Since in our case r = x q ln(x q /x c ) ≫ 1 we may expand the digamma functions in powers of (B9) It is straightforward to verify that the leading contribution to the sum comes from the n = 0 term. Changing the integration variable to η = Dq 2 /Γ c and performing an integration over η gives The asymptotic expression for the anomalous part of the Maki-Thompson contribution can be found similarly to the one which lead to the expression (B7). We can make an additional approximation here for the fluctuation propagator by expanding the logarithm around the quantum critical point Then the expression for δσ MT anom acquires the following form where xq = (Γ -Γ c + Dq 2 )/2πT . We can now evaluate the integral over ξ using formula (B5). In this case, however, the resulting digamma functions is a function of xq , which is small in the thermal regime, so we can approximate x d 2 q (2π) 2 L R (q, -iξ)ψ ′′′ 1 -iξ + x q 2 , (D1) where L R (q, -iξ) is the retarded part of the fluctuation propagator and function x q = Γ q /2πT is introduced for convenience. In this regime the logarithmic digamma function and the expression for the fluctuation propagator can be approximated as follows: Here we introduced a parameter α c = Γ Similar analysis of the second term δσ DCR 1,0 (T ) can be only performed numerically, since the argument of the digamma function ψ(1/2 + Dq 2 /2πT -iξ) is of the order O(1) at long wavelengths and, therefore, we can not use the asymptotic expansion. However, it is straightforward to compute both δσ DCR 1,0;1,π (T ) for any temperature range and we found that its contribution is much smaller than that of δσ DCR 1,π (T ). The n = 0 term in this expansion is equivalent to approximating coth(πξ) with (πξ) -1 , which is relevant for the temperature regime that we consider. This leads to The calculation of the contribution from n ̸ = 0 is done similarly to the one above: we add/subtract to/from the sum in (D7) the n = 0 term. Then the summation over n can be trivially performed. The integration yields exactly the same expression as (D8), but with the opposite sign, so that for the overall correction we find Notably, all the DCR contributions are positive. Table III summarizes main results for the MT term and Appendix B provides further technical details of derivations.