We review the physics and some applications of photonic structures designed for the realisation of strong nonlinear chiroptical response. We pay much attention to the recent strategy of utilizing different types of optical resonances in metallic and dielectric subwavelength structures and metasurfaces, including surface plasmon resonances, Mie resonances, lattice guided modes, and bound states in the continuum. We summarize earlier results and discuss more recent developments for achieving large circular dichroism combined with the high efficiency of nonlinear harmonic generation. quantum light, Natural nonlinear optical activity is substantially more pronounced than linear chiroptical effects due to the high sensitivity of optical harmonics generated by chiral light to the molecular and structural asymmetry. Finally, we conclude with an outlook of several novel opportunities in this rapidly expanding research area. Chiroptical properties of metaphotonic structures composed of isolated nanoparticles or their arrays in the form of photonic crystals and metasurfaces are defined by the meta-atom geometry, lattice arrangement, and material properties. Due to the subwavelength size of individual scatterers, the resonant wavelengths in materials are comparable with the metaatom characteristic size, allowing to control resonance properties via geometry. Here, we briefly overview the most typical resonances in plasmonic and dielectric metastructures, shown schematically in the central panel of Fig. The fundamental modes of subwavelength plasmonic nanostructures are associated with localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs) representing nonpropagating coherent excitations of the free electron density coupled to the radiation continuum. Ordered arrays of plasmonic nanoparticles can host collective lattice modes, which can be generally divided into two classes: localized surface lattice resonances (SLRs), also called lattice surface modes, and nonlocal guided-mode resonances (GMRs). The SLRs originate from the near-and far-field coupling of LSPs of individual meta-atoms via diffractive orders of the lattice. Plasmonic bound states in the continuum (BICs) represent a special class of plasmonic lattice modes with the Q factor which tends to infinity due to destructive interference of radiation of the constituent LSPRs in the far-field. The BICs are associated with non-local bound lattice modes with frequencies lying in the radiation continuum. Dielectric resonant structures emerged recently as a new platform in metaphotonics that allows effective localization of light in a bulk of material and additional degrees of freedom through the generation of artificial magnetic response. An example of SEM image of a high-index dielectric nanocube composed of a lead-halide perovskite Dielectric meta-atoms arranged in ordered arrays provide an additional way of control of chiroptical response via collective lattice modes. Similar to plasmonic lattices, dielectric metasurfaces, photonic crystal slabs and membranes can host highly-localized lattice Mie modes with weak near-field coupling and highly nonlocal GMRs with a large Q factor produced by strong diffractive coupling in the near-and far-field. In the case of GMRs, wave guiding can be realized not in the substrate but in the periodic array itself via collective oscillations of the polarization density. An example of a SEM image of a high-index dielectric metasurface composed of a square lattice of Si disks embedded in a low-index medium is shown on the left of the bottom panel of Fig. The lattice modes of dielectric arrays can transform to high-Q photonic BICs and quasi-BICs under specific conditions, including unit cell asymmetry, parametric tuning, or mode strong coupling. The metasurface supports a quasi-BIC with Q = 200 in the mid-IR wavelength range. In scattering, LSPR, Mie, lattice and quasi-BIC resonances manifest normally themselves with a pronounced feature with an asymmetric Fano lineshape due to interference with broad non-resonant modes, and often termed generically as Fano resonances. Next, we discuss the historical development of studies on nonlinear chiroptical metastructures outlining several primary approaches allowing to achieve and control nonlinear optical activity. One of the first studies of chiral nonlinear response in nanostructured arrays were done in early 2000s for non-resonant metallic metasurfaces. Limited fabrication quality of metallic nanostructures resulted in small nanoscale defects which provided a natural way of achieving three-dimensional nonlinear optical activity. For metallic non-resonant metasurfaces this effect was first shown in a triangle hole-arrayed gold nanostructure, One of the first works demonstrating nonlinear CD in resonant plasmonic metasurfaces was done in 2009 for a metasurface composed of gold G-shaped meta-atoms, Later, it was shown that even pumped by linearly polarised light the gold specially oriented G-shaped nanostructures demonstrate SH hotspots, whose arrangement is dependent on the handedness. One of the pioneering works demonstrating giant nonlinear optical activity in a plasmonic metasurface was done in 2012 for a metasurface composed of a square lattice of split-ring hole resonators. Another prominent concept in nonlinear chiral metaphotonics is Pancharatnam-Berry phase applied for control of harmonic signal polarisation and direction pumped by circular light. The plasmonic platform has several fundamental limitations hindering strong nonlinear chiroptical effects. The major ones are low damage threshold which is essential for high-intensity laser powers needed for nonlinear operation, and two-dimensional geometry, which inherently prevents out-of-plane symmetry breaking required for strong optical activity. Hybrid platforms discussed in the previous section offer an intermediate solution, however, they are limited due to large footprint or similar problems with heating loss. Dielectric metasurfaces and nanostructures offer a favourable alternative to plasmonic nonlinear metasurfaces because of their robustness to absorption losses, and property to host geometrical resonances of a higher-order that exploit the out-of-plane dimension thus providing strong intrinsic linear and nonlinear chirality. In this section, we overview the recent progress in employing dielectric metastructures for enhancement and control of the nonlinear chiroptical response. The field is very young and only a few demonstrations was done so far. We start from dielectric periodic membranes and oligomers of individual nanoresonators hosting GMR and Mie modes, respectively. The concept of engineering the nonlinear response via the macroscopic symmetry of the photonic structure, that we discussed for plasmonic metasurfaces, was recently transferred to dielectric periodic membranes. Recently, the first observation of the nonlinear optical activity of the SH hyper-Rayleigh scattering, that was predicted more than 40 years ago, was achieved with metallic helical structures suspended in solution. The first theoretical concept of applying quasi-BICs in dielectric metasurfaces for enhancement of nonlinear CD was proposed by Gandolfi et al. Another paper In the recent years, we observe a rapid growth of the studied in chiral nonlinear metaphotonics due to refocusing of nanophotonics research from plasmonic to dielectric structures hosting versatile Mie and lattice resonances. We believe that several directions will attract attention in this field in the near future. Below we mention briefly only some of those developments including chiral generation of higher-order optical harmonics, chiral quantum optics, chiral polaritonics, chiral cavities, and topological photonics. High-harmonic generation (HHG) from nanostructured solid materials was observed for the first time only a few years ago, One of the very latest discoveries in chiral metaphotonics is the field of chiral polaritonics, describing formation of polaritons exhibiting chiral features via interaction between chiral quantum emitters and modes of chiral cavities. Using chiral metasurfaces, one can build very different optical cavities depending on the desired functionality. More specifically, different pairs of metasurfaces can constitute chiral metacavities supporting counter-propagating waves of the same circular polarization. Such cavities based on chiral mirrors, posses remarkable excitation selectivity, 99 for example the intensity of helical standing wave excited by incident LCP waves is by more than two orders of magnitude higher than when being excited by RCP waves. Reciprocally, the Purcell factor of a right-handed chiral emitter inside such cavity exceeds by more than an order of magnitude that of a left-handed emitter. Recently, a particular example of such metacavity based on aluminum mirror and a metasurfaces consisting of square lattice of silicon triangular prisms was used to realize chiral electroluminescence from a plain perovskite layer. 