Magnetic chains on superconductors hosting Majorna Zero Modes (MZMs) attracted high interest due to their possible applications in fault-tolerant quantum computing. However, this is hindered by the lack of a detailed, quantitative understanding of these systems. As a significant step forward, we present a first-principles computational approach based on a microscopic relativistic theory of inhomogeneous superconductors applied to an iron chain on the top of Au-covered Nb(110) to study the Shiba band structure and the topological nature of the edge states. Contrary to contemporary considerations, our method enables the introduction of quantities indicating band inversion without fitting parameters in realistic experimental settings, holding thus the power to determine the topological nature of zero energy edge states in an accurate ab-initio based description of the experimental systems. We confirm that ferromagnetic Fe chains on Au/Nb(110) surface do not support any separated MZM; however, a broad range of spin-spirals can be identified with robust zero energy edge states displaying signatures of MZMs. For these spirals, we explore the structure of the superconducting order parameter shedding light on the internally antisymmetric triplet pairing hosted by MZMs. We also reveal a two-fold effect of spin-orbit coupling: although it tends to enlarge the topological phase regarding spin spiraling angles, however, it also extends the localization of MZMs. Due to the presented predictive power, our work fills a big gap between the experimental efforts and theoretical models while paving the way for engineering platforms for topological quantum computation. Topological superconductivity is an exotic state of matter where the condensate of Cooper pairs of electrons spontaneously breaks the U(1) gauge symmetry and simultaneously exhibit a non-trivial topological gap structure To address this problem we developed a first-principles based computational approach serving as a template for detailed analysis of different MZM platforms. This is allowed by the Green's function based solution of the Kohn-Sham-Dirac-Bogoliubov-de Gennes (KSDBdG) equations In what follows, we show first principles calculations performed for Fe chains on top of superconducting Nb(110) host with a single epitaxial Au overlayer, as introduced in Ref. 63, in the superconducting state, where relativistic effects, superconductivity and the complex electronic structure is treated on the same level. Based on previous simple model calculations there are two essential ingredients for the formation of MZMs in spin chains proximitized with s-wave superconductors, a strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC) The density functional theory yielding Kohn-Sham equations is proven to successfully describe materialspecific properties. The concept of superconductivity can be introduced into this theory by treating the superconducting OP as an additional (so-called) anomalous density where σ denotes the Pauli-matrices, and I n being the identity matrix of order n. V eff (⃗ r) and ⃗ B eff (⃗ r) are the effective potential and the exchange field, respectively. ∆ eff (⃗ r) is the effective 4×4 pairing potential matrix due to the four component Dirac spinors. The KSDBdG equations shall be solved self-consistently by assuming that the superconducting host has isotropic s-wave spin-singlet pairing as described by BCS theory The central quantity of our approach, the Green's function, is obtained from the generalized multiple scattering theory (see Supplementary Note 1 for the detailed description of the method) in a self-consistent way. The great advantage of such a Green's function technique For each site of the chain, the method yields the local Green's function matrix {G nn,ab Ls,L ′ s ′ (ε)} (see Supplementary Note 1) where n denotes the sites of the chain; L = (l, m) and L ′ = (l ′ , m ′ ) are composed angular momentum indices; s, s ′ are the spin indices; and a, b corresponds to either the electron-like or the hole-like part of the Green's function. This quantity contains all information about the superconducting ground state involving the description of all the pairing states present in the system. Hence, this allows the calculation of the LDOS, and the energy-resolved OP related to different pairing states as defined later. Such an approach has two major advantages compared to effective models, like the tight-binding approximation. First, there is no further need to fit the electronic structure with artificial tight-binding parameters, which in turn allows for computational experiments with spin chains more easily. Second, it is crucial to have a proper model of the (semi-infinite) superconducting host if one aims to predict quantitatively the localiza-tion length of MZMs. The problem of insufficient modeling the semi-infinite host appears in most tight-binding approximations. These calculations resulted in an unrealistic gap to match the localization of MZMs First, we discuss the results of the first principles calculations in the normal state on the same system introduced in Ref. 63, namely a 19-atom-long Fe chain with 2a (a=330 pm) nearest neighbor distance in the [100] direction as illustrated in Fig. Turning our attention to the superconducting state, first, we confirm the experimental finding Based on tight binding models )⃗ e z ) on site i. This way, the direction of the magnetic moment of the atom in the middle of the chain was fixed to point along the z direction and the neighboring spins were rotated with respect to each other with an angle θ ranging from 0 The DOS (LDOS summed over all atoms in the chain) obtained for the different spirals as a function of the spiraling rotation angle in the fully relativistic case is shown in Fig. It was pointed out previously It is known even from the original work of Kitaev In addition to the electron (and hole) densities, the KSDBdG equations provide us with a recipe to calculate the singlet and triplet OPs. In fact, the appearance of the superconducting state is manifested in the local Green's function matrix as finite elements in the electron-hole offdiagonal block. Hence, all the order parameters related to different pairing states shall be derived based on these elements. First, we define the following LDOS-like quantity to describe the energy resolution of the spin-singlet local OP where Tr L denotes the trace in angular-momentum space, while S s generates the spin-singlet, S s {f (s, ) . The energy-resolved local singlet OP summed over the Fe atoms is shown in Fig. To further analyze the structure of the OP we consider the possibility of induced spin-triplet pairing since artificially constructed heterostructures were already proven to host spin-triplet Cooper pairs The fermionic nature of the electron implies that in the case of triplet pairing, the spatial component of the wave function has to be odd. In the context of a multi-band Hamiltonian for bulk systems, this allows the possibility of Even parity Odd orbital Triplet (EOT) states which has been shown to be responsible for the experimentally observed simultaneous appearance of magnetism and superconducting state in certain materials with the antisymmetrization in angular-momentum space, ))}, and the projections on spin-triplets, T 0 s {f (s, 2 ), while ||M || F denotes the Frobenius norm of matrix M . This quantity accounts for the emergence of IAT pairing and has been plotted in Fig. Band inversion is a key signature of topological superconductivity, which can be observed if one investigates the band structure of infinite chains as a function of momenta. In finite chains it is not possible to observe band inversion in the strict definition of the term, as bands are not present. However, a real space solution and a momentum space solutions of the KSDBdG equations for infinite chains should carry the same information, and one may expect that the signatures of band inversionif found in a k-space solution -also appear in the real space solution. Therefore it is expected that even a finite chain may carry the signatures of topological superconductivity -provided it is long enough -which then can be obtained from a real space calculation of the electronic states. In the superconducting state, the band inversion can be made visible by the construction of antisymmetric quantities with respect to the Fermi level. Based on the particle-hole symmetry, we found two such antisymmetric quantities which provide a clean visual picture of band inversion. One such quantity is the energy-resolved singlet OP, which is known to be antisymmetric A similar visualization of the band inversion can be obtained based on the quasi-particle charge density of states or in short the CDOS. In the superconducting state, assigning a unit charge +e to the electron and -e to the hole, the net quasi-particle charge density of states can be introduced as CDOS(ε) = e (DOS e (ε) -DOS h (ε)) where e is the electron charge. Just as the density of states (DOS), CDOS can be local to a site or summed up for all the sites in the chain. Yet again, according to the particle-hole symmetry, the CDOS is antisymmetric with respect to the Fermi level (ε = 0), namely CDOS(ε) = -CDOS(-ε). In Fig. Another intriguing finding in Fig. To summarize, using first principles-based solution to the Dirac-Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations, we studied linear chains of Fe atoms placed on the surface of Aucovered Nb(110) in the superconducting state. We found that: (i) in agreement with experiments, a ferromagnetic state does not support a minigap around zero energy, (ii) in a spin spiral state however, a minigap emerges at about 20-degree spiraling angle with a spin-polarized zero energy state in it. This state bears all the signatures of being an MZM. It is localized to the two ends of the chain, it is a spin triplet state, and it is in a topological gap. At larger spiraling angles, the gap closes. (iii) We also showed that this state extends to about 4-5 atoms, and they more easily overlap in the presence of spin-orbit coupling. (iv) Moreover, our calculations revealed that the MZMs bear the characteristic feature of non-unitary internally antisymmetric triplet states, which are thought to be responsible for time-reversal symmetry breaking in a large class of bulk superconductors In part 2 of our investigations, we will show that the Majorana Zero Mode we found in the present paper, is quite robust against various perturbations of the magnetic state. We will also explore potential routes to nontopological zero energy edge states, and combine different spin spirals to shed light on other fascinating -and potentially quite useful -phenomena: the shift of MZMs with changing spiraling angles and topological fragmentation as a result of global phase shifts on the chain. where Λ is the strength of the interaction responsible for superconductivity (which can be treated as an adjustable semi-phenomenological parameter), V ext (⃗ r) is the external potential (e.g. the Coulomb attraction from the protons), ⃗ B ext (⃗ r) is the external field, ρ(⃗ r) is the charge density, ⃗ m(⃗ r) is the magnetization density, E 0 xc [ρ, ⃗ m] is the usual (local spin density approximation) exchange-correlation energy for normal electrons. The equations describe the relativistic generalization of BCS theory for inhomogeneous superconductors taking into account their realistic band structure involving magnetism and spin-orbit effects. We use a Green's function based approach exploiting the real-space representation of the resolvent of the KSDBdG Hamiltonian, The Multiple Scattering Theory (MST), i.e. the Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) method [7] gives direct access to the Green's function avoiding the step of calculating Kohn-Sham orbitals. In Ref. [4] this technique was generalised for the solution of the KSDBdG equation with layered structure and in Ref. [8] was further extended with embedding, allowing the treatment of magnetic impurities and nanostructures. In MST, the potential is written as a sum of single-domain potentials centered around each lattice site, n, namely The potentials treated within the atomic sphere approximation (ASA) are zero if r = |⃗ r n | ≥ S n , where S n is the radius of the Wigner-Seitz (WS) sphere that has the same volume as the atomic cell n. In the relativistic case, we search the solutions of the KSDBdG equations in the following form where Q = (κ, μ) and Q = (-κ, μ) are the composite indices for the spin-orbit (κ) and magnetic (μ) quantum numbers; g e(h) Q (z, r) and f e(h) Q (z, r) are the large and small components of the electron (hole) part of the solution, respectively. The spin-angular function is an eigenfunction of the spin-orbit operator K = σL + I, This basis set has the advantage that the corresponding matrix of the spin-orbit operator is diagonal and it also allows an artificial scaling of spin-orbit coupling for testing relativistic effects as described in Ref. [9]. For later purposes the following notations are also introduced: l = l -S k , and S k = κ/|κ| the sign of κ. The magnetic field can be rotated to a local frame such that it points along the ẑ direction. In the normal state it has two advantages: the least amount of coupling occurs between the states with different κ, μ quantum numbers, and there is no need to distinguish the left hand-side and right hand-side solutions. With integration over the angular parts and using the orthonormality of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients the radial KSDBdG equations for arbitrary magnetic field can be written as where The last definition for the pairing potential matrix shows that the pairing interaction couples electrons with κ, μ quantum numbers to holes with κ, -μ quantum numbers. This is the direct consequence of our initial assumption that the pairing acts between Kramers pairs, namely between electrons and their time-reversed pairs (holes). The KSDBdG equations can be solved in a local frame with a predictor-corrector algorithm on logarithmic scale similarly, as it was done for the radial scalar relativistic BdG equations in Ref. 6 and then it can be rotated into the direction of the exchange field. The two most important quantities leading to the Green's function are the single-site t-matrix and the structure constants. Physically, the t-matrix describes scattering on the the single-site potential involving relativistic Andreevscattering, while the structure constants contain all information about the crystal structure. This is one of the most amazing feature of the multiple scattering theory allowing the separation of scattering events and structural information. We shall denote the irregular and regular solutions of the KSDBdG equations inside the WS spheres by J Q (z, ⃗ r) and Z Q (z, ⃗ r) (matrices in electron-hole indices), respectively. The scattering solutions obey the following matching conditions (derived from the Lippmann-Schwinger equations as described in Refs. [4, 6]. where j a Q (z, ⃗ r) and h a Q (z, ⃗ r) are spherical Bessel and Hankel type of solutions for the case of zero potential, respectively, and we introduced the inverse t-matrix, m ab QQ ′ (z) = t -1 (z) ab QQ ′ . As it was described in Ref. 4, the relativistic real space structure constants should be derived from their nonrelativistic counterpart G NR,ee,nm 0,LL ′ (z)δ ss ′ with L = (l, m) and s being angular momentum and spin indices, respectively, by transforming it into the |κμ⟩ basis, while the hole part of the relativistic structure constants can be constructed in the |κμ⟩ * basis using the non-relativistic formula[6] G NR,hh,nm 0,LL ′ (z) = -G NR,ee,nm 0,LL ′ (-z). The following supermatrix formalism can be introduced for the scattering matrices, the matrices of the structure constant and the scattering path operator: where τ (z) can be determined from the single-site t-matrix and the real space structure constant matrix As in the normal state formalism, based on the expansions of the free-particle Green's function, the derivation of the one-particle Green's function is straightforward and leads to the following formula, where θ(x) is the step function and stand for the left solutions of the KSDBdG equations. The formulas given above can be applied to surfaces and interfaces quite straightforwardly following the idea of the so called Screened KKR (SKKR) formalism described in Refs. 10 and 11. In this formalism, it is made use of the 2D periodicity of the layers by introducing 2D lattice Fourier transformed version for the scattering path operator To perform the inverse of the KKR matrix, a special reference system is used to obtain structure constants that are localized in real space. In the supermatrix formalism we used above, the screening transformation, described in details in Ref. [11], can be written in a way that is formally the same as it was presented in Sec. III of Ref. [10]. Thus the formalism can be derived for layered systems with two-dimensional periodicity and applied as the SKKR method prescribes. It should be mentioned that a similar approach was developed for non-magnetic superconducting heterostructures with SOC effects in Ref. 12. The Embedded Cluster Method has been developed within multiple scattering theory to describe finite magnetic clusters of atoms in the superconducting state in Ref. [8], while a similar non-relativistic approach was presented in Ref. [13] to treat impurities embedded into a superconducting host. In the knowledge of the layer resolved Green's function, the impurity problem can be solved by a Dyson equation. It can be shown that it is equivalent to modifying the SPO matrix to take into account the scattering due to the impurities. This is achieved by replacing the inverse scattering matrices t -1 host (z) of the host atoms by those of the impurity or a cluster of impurities t -1 clus (z) to obtain the matrix of the scattering path operator at the impurity sites, τ clus (z) = τ host (z) It -1 host (z)t -1 clus (z) τ host (z) It should be noted that the embedding process requires the calculation of the site off-diagonal elements of the scattering path operator and takes into account all relativistic Andreev scattering events both inside and outside the cluster. By replacing τ (z) with τ clus (z) (and the single-site scattering solutions with their impurity counterparts) in the Green's function formula Eq. ( The density of states (DOS) of the system is defined as where Tr denotes the trace in the electron-hole four-component, in total, eight-component vector space. Restricting the integration to cell n, V n , the DOS can be decomposed into cells and electron/hole components, where D n,a (ε) = -1 π Vn d 3 r Tr G nn,aa (ε + i0, ⃗ r, ⃗ r) (26) with Tr denoting the trace in four-component space only. We denote the above quantity as the local electron/hole DOS (LDOS). In order to calculate order parameters describing the coupling between the electron and hole part of the Green's function, we need to resolve the LDOS by defining local Green's function (GF) matrix in electron-hole space G nn,ab (ε) = -1 π d 3 r Tr G nn,ab (ε + i0, ⃗ r, ⃗ r) . Inserting the real-space Green's function as provided by MST we can further resolve the local GF matrix according to Q = (κ, μ) indices, By integrating the local radial Green's function within the atomic cell we arrive at our central quantity, the local Green's function matrix, with the radial integral matrices, In the above definitions, g (Z/J)n,ab QQ ′ (ε, r) and f (Z/J)n,ab QQ ′ (ε, r) denote the radial parts of the large and small components of the regular/irregular scattering solutions, respectively. After a transformation to the (L, s) ≡ (l, m, s) basis in terms of Clebsch-Gordan coefficients we obtain the matrix G nn,ab LL ′ ,ss ′ (ε). This quantity will be used to calculate the local densities of states and order parameters for embedded chains.