Spin-orbit coupling in chiral materials can induce chirality-dependent spin splitting, enabling electrical manipulation of spin polarization. Here, we use first-principles calculations to investigate the electronic states of chiral one-dimensional (1D) semiconductor InSeI, which has two enantiomorphic configurations with leftand right-handedness. We find that opposite spin states exist in the left-and right-handed 1D InSeI with significant spin splitting and spin-momentum collinear locking. Although the spin states at the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) of 1D InSeI are both nearly degenerate, a directto-indirect bandgap transition occurs when a moderate tensile strain (∼4%) is applied along the 1D chain direction, leading to a sizable spin splitting (∼0.11 eV) at the CBM. These findings indicate that 1D InSeI is a promising material for chiral spintronics. Chirality extensively exists in nature, originating from a symmetry breaking where an object cannot superimpose itself through reflection or inversion operations Bulk indium selenoiodide (InSeI) has a quasi-onedimensional structure consisting of both left-and righthanded chiral nanochains, as illustrated in Figure In this work, through density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we investigate the electronic and spin states a) Electronic mail: liwenbin@westlake.edu.cn of chiral 1D InSeI with left-and right-handedness. Importantly, the band structure of 1D InSeI exhibits significant spin splitting due to the inversion symmetry breaking of the chiral structure. Although the spin states (containing spin up and spin down) are nearly degenerate at the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band minimum (VBM), a sizable spin splitting (∼0.11 eV) could be present at the CBM by applying a moderate amount (∼4%) of tensile strain. The large spin splitting at the CBM suggests that spin-polarized current with chirality dependence could be electrically generated in the strained 1D InSeI. Therefore, our work not only elucidates the effect of chirality on the electronic structure of 1D InSeI, but also demonstrates the potential of 1D InSeI for chiral spintronics. The calculations of the electronic states in 1D InSeI are performed by DFT as implemented in the VASP code The crystal structure of 1D InSeI belongs to the P4 1 (No. 76) space group and exhibits two helical enantiomorphic configurations with left-and right-handedness, as shown in Figure We start the investigation of the electronic states of 1D InSeI by carrying out band structure calculations without the inclusion of spin-orbit coupling (SOC). As illustrated in Figure Given that the chiral 1D InSeI nanochains do not possess inversion symmetry, SOC could have a significant influence on their electronic structures. Hence, we next calculate the electronic states of 1D InSeI with the SOC effect included, as well as investigating their chirality dependence. The comparison of the band structures of 1D InSeI with and without SOC is shown in Figure With the inclusion of SOC effect, the 1D InSeI nanochains remain non-magnetic and the calculated net atomic magnetic moments of In, Se, and I atoms are all zero. However, the individual electronic states can exhibit non-zero spin expectation values due to the spin splitting caused by SOC. We thus calculate the expectation values of the spin operators (S x , S y , and S z ) on the electronic states of left-and right-handed 1D InSeI. The results in Figure The band structures with the ⟨S z ⟩ values of left-and right-handed 1D InSeI are plotted in Figure Figure To further quantify the band energy changes, the DFTcalculated CBM levels of a InSeI nanochain as a function of tensile strain (with the inclusion of SOC) is shown in Figure We have further considered the effect of electrostatic carrier doping on the electronic structure and straininduced band structural change in 1D InSeI, given that in practical devices, a finite amount of charge carriers is present in the system. The effect of electrostatic doping is modeled using the background charge approach, with fully relaxed atomic positions. When the electron doping concentration (n e ) of 1D InSeI is 0.01 electron per formula unit (e/f.u.), corresponding to n e ≈ 1.1×10 20 cm -3 , a number approaching the maximum electron doping concentration of n-type silicon 37 , the change in its electronic structure is negligible, as shown in Figure Although spin splitting occurs at the CBM by applying a ∼4% tensile strain, it is unclear whether 1D In-SeI can withstand the level of tensile strain. Thus, we next explore the intrinsic mechanical properties of 1D InSeI. By applying tensile strains along the chain direction from -1% to 1% with a step of 0.2%, the Young's modulus (Y ) of 1D InSeI is calculated using the formula , where E is the system energy under strain ε. The equilibrium volume V 0 is given by V 0 = πr 2 L, where L and r denote the length along the z axis (chain direction) and the radius of 1D InSeI in the xy plane as measured from the iodine atoms, respectively. The calculated Young's modulus of 1D InSeI is ∼34 GPa, which is much smaller than the average Young's modulus of carbon nanotubes (1.8 TPa) The critical stress and strain corresponding to mechanical failure as determined from the stress-strain curve are 4.7 GPa and 24%, respectively. The intrinsic mechanical failure strain is greater than the strain at which the indirect-to-direct bandgap transition occurs. Apart from the mechanical stability, we also investigate the dynamical and thermal stability of 1D InSeI under mechanical strain. The phonon spectrum of 1D InSeI under a tensile strain of 5%, calculated using the force-constant approach implemented in the PHONOPY code In summary, through first-principles calculations and analysis, we study the effect of chirality on the electronic states of 1D InSeI. We find that spin-orbit coupling in the chiral 1D semiconductor induces chirality-dependent spin splitting and spin-momentum collinear locking in the conduction and valence bands. By applying an external tensile strain of ∼4% along the 1D chain direction, a large spin splitting of 0.11 eV emerges at the CBM along with a direct-to-indirect bandgap transition. These results highlight the potential of 1D InSeI for chiral spintronic and mechano-spintronic applications. We gratefully acknowledge the support by NSFC under Project No. 62004172. The work of W.L. is partially supported by Research Center for Industries of the Future at Westlake University under Award No. WU2022C041. The authors thank Drs. J.-Q. Wang and C. Hu for helpful discussions and the HPC Center of Westlake University for technical assistance. Calculations of the COHP and ICOHP of 1D InSeI; band structures of 1D InSeI under different tensile strains along the chain direction; spin expectation values of the electronic states in 1D InSeI; the effects of electron doping on the electronic structure of 1D InSeI; phonon spectrum and AIMD simulation of 1D InSeI under 5% tensile strain.