Recently, there has been significant interest in harnessing hot carriers generated from the decay of localized surface plasmons in metallic nanoparticles for applications in photocatalysis, photovoltaics and sensing. In this work, we present an atomistic approach to predict the population of hot carriers under continuous wave illumination in large nanoparticles. For this, we solve the equation of motion of the density matrix taking into account both excitation of hot carriers as well as subsequent relaxation effects. We present results for spherical Au and Ag nanoparticles with up to 250, 000 atoms. We find that the population of highly energetic carriers depends both on the material and the nanoparticle size. We also study the increase in the electronic temperature upon illumination and find that Ag nanoparticles exhibit a much larger temperature increase than Au nanoparticles. Finally, we investigate the effect of using different models for the relaxation matrix but find that qualitative features of the hotcarrier population are robust. Metallic nanoparticles (NPs) feature strong and highly tunable light-matter interactions which makes them attractive for applications in photovoltaics and photocatalysis After their generation To gain microscopic insights into hot-carrier relaxation processes, various theoretical approaches have been developed. For example, Dubi and Sivan 10 solved the Boltzmann equation to calculate the steady-state population of hot carriers taking both electron-electron and electron-phonon scattering effects into account. A fully quantum-mechanical approach based on the equation of motion for the electronic density matrix was developed Govorov and coworkers While the aforementioned modelling efforts allowed important insights into the relaxation dynamics of hot carriers, it is important to note that they all employed highly simplified models of the NP electronic structure: they often use simple spherical well models or assume that the nanoparticle's density of states is the same as that of a bulk free electron gas. As a consequence, such models cannot capture hot carriers generated in d bands In this paper, we start from the density matrix formalism developed in To enable the simulation of large NPs, we cast the expression of the hot-carrier population in a basis-independent way and use the Kernel Polynomial Method (KPM) In recent years, KPM and other spectral methods have been established as promising tools to study quantum-mechanical phenomena in mesoscopic systems. For example, they have been used to extract spectral properties The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we explain how the optical properties of the NP, the electronic Hamiltonian and the density matrix are constructed before using these quantities to determine the non-equilibrium steady-state hot-carrier population. In Section 3, we discuss the sensitivity of the hot-carrier population on the values of the relaxation times and then study the dependence of the hot-carrier population on the diameter of spherical Au and Ag NPs. This section ends with a discussion of the temperature increase in illuminated NPs. In this section, we describe our theoretical and computational methodology. For further details, see Ref. The interaction of the NP with light is modeled by considering the effect of a monochromatic external electric field of angular frequency ω given by E ext (r, t) = E 0 cos (ωt -kz) ẑ, where kẑ denotes the wave vector and E 0 is the amplitude. In this paper we are interested in NPs whose diameters range from ∼ 2 nm to ∼ 20 nm, which are much smaller than the typical wavelength of the external electric fields. In this case E ext can be considered uniform inside the NP. This is the quasistatic approximation (QSA). To calculate the total electric field experienced by the electrons inside the NP, it is then sufficient to solve Laplace's equation ∇•(ε(r, ω)∇φ(r, ω)) = 0 for the total electric potential φ, with boundary condition at infinity φ (r, t) = -E 0 z cos (ωt) and appropriate dielectric functions ε(ω) in each region. Here we are only considering spherical nanoparticles for which the analytical solution of Laplace's equation is given by where ε m is the dielectric constant of the environment and the measured dielectric function of the bulk material (either Ag or Au) were taken from Ref. reflects the enhancement of the electric field inside the NP. The potential energy Φ (r, t) of an electron at position r and time t is given by Φ (r, t) = -eφ (r, t), where -e < 0 is the electron's charge. This optical perturbation excites the electron-hole pairs which then interact with phonons and other electrons and relax to a non-equilibrium population under continuous wave illumination. The dynamics of electrons is described by a tight-binding model H = H 0 + Φ (t), where represents the Hamiltonian in the absence of illumination and describes the optical perturbation. Here, c † i,α (c i,α ) denotes the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron in orbital α of an atom at position R i , t αβ ij is the hopping and onsite matrix and the double sum over i and j is typically constrained to a small number of neighbours, making t αβ ij a sparse matrix. The tight-binding models used in this paper are obtained through an orthogonal two-center Slater-Koster parameterization To determine the non-equilibrium population of electrons inside the NP, we solve the equation of motion for the electronic density matrix ρ (t) given by where |n⟩ denotes an eigenstate of H 0 with corresponding eigenenergy ε n and ρ mn = ⟨m|ρ|n⟩. Relaxation effects are described phenomenologically through the matrix Γ mn . Also, δρ mn = ρ mn -ρ 0 mn , where ρ 0 mn = δ nm f (ε n ) is the density matrix before the perturbation has been turned on, given by the Fermi-Dirac distribution f (ε) = 1 + e β(ε-μ) -1 , with chemical potential μ and β = 1/(k B T ) (with k B and T denoting the Boltzmann constant and the temperature, respectively). For all our calculations, we use room temperature (T = 298K). The equation of motion for the density matrix can be solved using perturbation theory assuming a weak monochromatic perturbation Φ (t) = φ ω e iωt + φ † ω e -iωt 11 . The result can be used to calculate the excess density of electrons with energy E, δN relative to the equilibrium value. This yields Evaluating this expression requires knowledge of the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian H 0 . Calculating these quantities using a diagonalization procedure becomes numerically challenging for large NPs of relevance to nanoplasmonic experiments. To study large NPs, it is useful to express Eq. 1 in a basis-independent form. To achieve this, we first assume that Γ can be expressed as a function of the eigenenergies, i.e. Γ nm = Γ (ε n , ε m ). Then, following with Note that Λ (ε, ε ′ ) contains all information about relaxation processes through Γ. The Lorentzian form of the term inside the square brackets ensures energy conservation in optical transitions from ε to ε ′ with a finite linewidth Γ (ε, ε ′ ). The difference of Fermi functions ensures that only transitions from occupied states to unoccupied state are allowed. Ω (ε, ε ′ ) is the energy-resolved optical transition matrix. Importantly, Eq. 2 factorizes the information about statistics and relaxation processes in Λ (ε, ε ′ ) and the information about the singleparticle electron dynamics in Ω (ε, ε ′ ). Typically, Ω (ε, ε ′ ) is the most difficult object to calculate, but once it is obtained, any relaxation matrix can be studied without additional computational cost as a consequence of the factorization. Ω (ε, ε ′ ) is calculated efficiently using the Kernel Polynomial Method 23 in the same way as in Ref In this section, we calculate the steady-state electron population in spherical Au and Ag NPs of different sizes. We also explore different simple models for the relaxation matrix, but find that the gross features of the electron population do not depend on the model for the relaxation matrix. The relaxation matrix Γ (ε, ε ′ ) is one of the central objects in Eq. 2, and its functional form depends on the details of electron-electron and electron-phonon scattering mechanisms. While our approach allows a considerable amount of flexibility in choosing Γ, here we explore a few simple models to understand their effect on the steady-state electron population of spherical Au and Ag NPs. Following 11 , we parameterize the matrix by the energy relaxation time τ ε (τ ε = 1.3 meV for both Au and Ag) and the momentum relaxation time τ p (τ p = 78 meV for Au and τ p = 20 meV for Ag). The momentum relaxation time is obtained from the Drude fit to the optical constants of Au and Ag obtained experimentally To mimic this form for the relaxation matrix, we assign τ ε to transitions which have very similar energies, that is |ε n -ε m | < 20 meV, and assign τ p otherwise. This relaxation matrix is referred to as Γ 1 and given by To test the sensitivity of our results to the numerical values of the relaxation times, we also present results for a relaxation matrix in which the value of τ p is doubled (denoted by Γ 2 ) and a relaxation matrix in which the value of τ ε is doubled (denoted by Γ 3 ). Comparing the results of the three different relaxation matrix we observe that the energy relaxation time mostly determines the overall magnitude of δN : the populations obtained with Γ 1 and Γ 3 (which have the same momentum relaxation time) have the same shape, but differ in their magnitude. This can be understood from Eq. 1, since 1/Γ nn = 1/τ ε enters as an overall prefactor. In contrast, the shape of δN is affected by the momentum relaxation time, especially around the Fermi level. However, we find that the qualitative features of the electron population are the same for all relaxation models and we therefore present results only for Γ 1 in the remainder of this paper. In this section, we explore the effect of NP size on the steady-state population. Fig. eV. For very small nanoparticles (see results for 2 nm diameter), the generation rate exhibits a molecule-like behaviour with many discrete peaks arising from quantum confinement effects. The steady-state hot-carrier population exhibits a similar peak structure as the generation rate, but the relative height of the peaks is different compared to the generation rate: after Figure the carriers are generated, they relax via electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions, losing energy and approaching the Fermi level. For example, electrons are constantly generated at E = 2.2 eV contributing to = 2.2 eV peak in the electron population (see bottom panel of Fig. To quantitatively study the number of high-energy electrons (δN HE e ) and holes (δN HE h ) in the steady-state population, we evaluate δN where E thr = 1.5 eV denotes a threshold energy. The value of the threshold energy is chosen such that the contribution from the high-energy peaks in δN (E) is captured. Fig. eV. Compared to Au, the LSPR region has a smaller overlap with these bands in Ag (see Fig. 3 ), so we expect the high-energy peaks to be sharper in both the generation rate and the steady-state population due to the smaller number of available transitions. This is indeed what is observed in Fig. Because of this sensitivity to the availability of compatible interband transitions in the hot-electron sector, there is a strong size dependency in the number of hot electrons δN HE e to NP size, see Fig. The nanoparticle's temperature is a key ingredient in explaining many chemical phenomena, and the electronic temperature can be estimated from energy dissipation with the heat equation the density of states which varies slowly near the Fermi level, see Fig. To extract an electronic temperature from N (E), we assume that it behaves like an equilibrium population with an elevated temperature T ′ near the Fermi level, i.e. N (E) ≈ f T ′ (E)D(0) (where we now explicitly write the temperature as a subscript to the Fermi-Dirac function). Near the Fermi level, we thus have The new temperature of the NP is then found to be . The increase in temperature as function of the illumination intensity is shown in Fig. The squared field enhancement enters δN (E) explaining the large difference in temperature increase in Ag and Au NPs. We have developed an atomistic approach to calculate the steady-state hot-carrier population in spherical Au and Ag NPs containing hundreds of thousands of atoms. This was achieved by expressing the population in a basis-independent way and using the Kernel Polynomial Method. Relaxation processes are included in this formalism through an energy-dependent relaxation matrix Γ (ε, ε ′ ). We explored different simple models for the relaxation matrix, but found that the qualitative predictions do not depend on this choice. The hot-carrier populations of Ag and Au nanoparticles exhibit similar features, but the number of highly energetic electrons in Ag NPs found to be highly sensitive to the NP size. We explain this observation in terms of Ag's band structure which features an occupied band whose energy relative to the Fermi level is almost exactly the same as Ag LSP energy. Furthermore, the increase of the electron temperature in the NP is estimated and it is found that Ag NPs exhibit a much larger increase as a consequence of strong electric field enhancement inside the NP. The approach developed in this work can be used to study the hot-carrier population in NPs of complex shapes and compositions. This will be the focus of future work.