The report of synthesis of modified Lead Apatite (LK-99), with evidence of superconductivity at more than boiling water temperature, has steered the whole scientific community. There have been several failures to reproduce superconductivity in LK-99, albeit partial successes. Here, we have continued our efforts to synthesize phase pure LK-99, with improved precursors. The process has been followed as suggested by Sukbae Lee et. al., The magnetization measurements on SQUID magnetometer show that LK-99 is diamagnetic at 280K, and there is no sign of superconductivity in LK-99 at room temperature. The sample is highly resistive as well. Moreover, we have also performed first principle calculations to investigate the electronic band structure of the LK-99 near Fermi level. Our study verifies that the Cu doped Lead Apatite (LK-99) has bands crossing at Fermi level, indicating generation of strong correlation in the system. Our results do not approve appearance of superconductivity in LK-99, i.e., Pb9CuP6O25. The scientific community around the world is trying to reproduce the astonishing results of LK-99 (superconductivity near 400K) shown by the Korean group For the synthesis of target sample of LK-99, same protocol has been followed as in ref. Brief procedure is as follows: To synthesise first precursor Cu3P, a freshly bought brown chunk of Phosphorous (P) from Sigma Aldrich is ground with Copper (Cu) powder in Argon filled M-Braun Glove box. The exposure to open atmosphere is strictly avoided. The ground powder is pelletized and vacuum sealed at 10 -5 torr and heated for 48 hours at 550°C, as shown in Fig. Merck is pre-checked by PXRD to ensure the absence of CuO. Further, PbSO4 and PbO being the essential elements for the production of other precursor Lanarkite Pb2SO5 are reacted. The chemical reaction that produces PbSO4 is as follows; Pb(NO3)2 + H2SO4 = PbSO4 + 2HNO3. The resultant, white colour powder is dried in oven, and its phase purity is validated using PXRD 5 . To synthesise Lanarkite, the freshly prepared PbSO4 is mixed with high purity PbO (Sigma Aldrich) and the mixture is put in Alumina crucible. The Alumina crucible is subject to heat treatment as shown in Fig. To determine the correlation effects induced due to Cu doping in Lead Oxi-Apatite, we have performed first principle calculations. For this we use first principle methods based on Density functional theory implemented in QUANTUM ESPRESSO to obtain the electronic band structure and density of states (DOS) of doped LK-99. A system of 41 atoms is simulated on a 4×4×5 grid of Monkhrost-Pack. The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) type ultrasoft pseudopotential with generalized gradient approximation (GGA) is used to account for the electronic exchange and correlation. The wave functions are expanded in a plane wave basis with Gaussian smearing of the width 0.01. For the convergence of self-consistent calculation cutoff is 8.8×10 After confirming, the formation of as synthesized Cu3P and Pb2SO5, both were taken in stoichiometric ratio of 1:1 as in ref. [1, 2] and vacuum sealed in quartz ampoule. After following heat treatment protocol (Fig. Next, we examine the acquired LK-99's superconducting characteristics. As our first test out of curiosity, we checked to see if a permanent magnet is levitated over the obtained LK-99 sample or the vice versa. Fig. Summarily, we have synthesized phase pure precursors of LK-99, as confirmed by the Rietveld analysis of PXRD data. Further, we report successful synthesis of LK-99, following the same method as suggested in ref. 