Numerical simulations have become a cornerstone technology in the development of nanophotonic devices. Specifically, 3D finite-difference time domain (FDTD) simulations are a widely used due to their flexibility and powerful design capabilities. More recently, FDTD simulations in conjunction with a design methodology called inverse design has become a popular way to optimize device topology, reducing a device's footprint and increasing performance. We implement a commercial inverse design tool to generate complex grating couplers and explore a variety of grating coupler design methodologies. We compare the conventionally designed grating couplers to those generated by the inverse design tool. Finally, we discuss the limitations of the inverse design tool and how different design strategies for grating couplers affect inverse design performance, both in terms of computational cost and performance of the resulting device. No matter how efficient individual devices in a photonic circuit are, the circuit can only perform properly if a sufficient amount of power is coupled into the devices that make it up. Coupling has become increasingly important as photonic technology moves towards commercialization and reliably packaging photonic integrated circuits is a key challenge to overcome Grating couplers are a cornerstone device and are one of the main ways signals can enter and exit photonic integrated circuits. As such, making a highly efficient and compact grating coupler is extremely important to the performance of an entire circuit The flexibility grating couplers provide is only as impactful as the device's overall efficiency. Powerful simulation tools, including finite-difference time domain (FDTD) simulations, have allowed researchers and engineers to quickly iterate on efficient grating coupler designs. As researchers explore using techniques such as inverse design and machine learning to optimize coupling efficiency, the potential approaches for optimization have ballooned Plasmonic grating couplers are a less common approach compared to the simpler design of fully dielectric photonic grating couplers We explore different approaches to the design of compact, efficient, plasmonic grating couplers using inverse design to optimize transmission of light signals into photonic circuits. To ensure our designs are as efficient as possible we use an inverse design tool packaged with Ansys Lumerical. The inverse design tool we implement is an optimization method that uses gradient descent and the adjoint method to design an optimized device shape to maximize the figure of merit, which in our case is the device output We used Ansys Lumerical's FDTD simulation software along with its built-in inverse design tool, LumOpt, to complete this work Another improvement to the overall run time of the simulations came from the amount of sampling done when recording the transmission at the output waveguide. When we increased the amount of wavelength data points recorded by the figure of merit monitor, the simulation time for a standard conventional simulation was reduced from hours to minutes. While it may sound unintuitive that allowing Lumerical to record more data allows the simulations to go faster, the larger amount of sampling points helps Lumerical's sampling algorithm interpret the simulation results quicker. Lumerical uses a Fourier transform algorithm and normalization to convert its time-domain simulations to frequency data, which evidently benefits from higher sampling rates. We found that a satisfactory number of data points to records at the output waveguide was 50, which was also recommended by Lumerical. Therefore, 50 data points was used for all the simulations. For many different inverse design tools, the resulting designs and performance depend on the initial conditions used for the optimization In this equation, q is a diffraction order (which we set to 1), and nc is the refractive index of the cladding material (in our case the refractive index of air, 1), l is the free-space wavelength (1310 nm), and q is the angle of incidence of light on the grating (15°). We calculated neff using Lumerical's mode source object to calculate the mode at the output waveguide and give us an effective index (neff) of 1.18. The grating period was calculated to be 1.54 μm. We used this calculation to generate a straight tooth grating coupler as well as a curved tooth grating coupler with ellipsoidal teeth. However, for the curved grating coupler design specifically, there are some secondary parameters present that can greatly affect the performance of the device. Because of this, we adapted an equation originally used to generate the structure for a purely dielectric grating coupler given in Eq. ( This equation gives the lengths for the major and minor axes for ellipses which are the teeth of the curved grating coupler, all sharing a focal point at the origin. The coordinates are given by x and y. In this equation, q represents which tooth is being generated, nc is the refractive index of the cladding material (air), l is the free-space wavelength (1310 nm), and q is the angle of incidence of light on the grating (15°). By changing the coefficient q, we can incrementally generate the axis lengths for subsequent teeth. This equation provided more details for creating the conventional design, but we still needed to manually adjust the secondary parameters such as duty cycle and tooth size. Once again, we used simulations and simple parameter sweeps to tweak these secondary parameters for better performance. Using these methods, we tested a straight tooth grating coupler using Eq. ( When running the inverse design, typically the optimization region matches the overall effective device area, but can produce designs smaller than the initial condition. Because of the behavior of grating couplers, we found that for the fully 3D optimizations we implemented with Lumerical's inverse design tool, we must use the conventional topology as the initial condition for the inverse design. In 2D side view cases, this is often not the case. It is also not the case for a recent work optimizing multilayer silicon photonic grating couplers in 3D We tested variable optimization region sizes by taking our conventional straight tooth grating coupler and running the inverse design twice. The first inverse design had an optimization region that was the same as the conventional device size at 73.67 μm 2 , and the second had an optimization region that was significantly larger at 129 μm 2 . After running the simulations, we found that the inverse design that matched the conventional device size performed better than the larger area. This was surprising to us as we expected having a larger space would mean more design flexibility for the algorithm and better coupling. However, we believe having the parameter space larger than the conventional device provided the inverse design with more ways to get stuck at local minima, resulting in a worse overall design. So, for the rest of our inverse designs, we kept the optimization region sizes roughly the same as the conventional device area. The simulation light source is extremely important because the gratings size shape and general functionality is dependent on the various parameters of the light source, such as angle of incidence, waist radius, wavelength, and distance from the device. For our purposes, we imitated our experimental set up, which in turn emulates the conditions of a device when it is fabricated and packaged for use. This setup consists of a lensed fiber directly above the grating 1.44 μm above the midpoint of the dielectric material, at an angle of incidence of 15°. The lensed fiber has a spot size of 2 μm at its focal point, which we imitate in the simulation. Using a lensed fiber, we can focus down the light before it reaches the grating, allowing us to reduce the size of the device, as opposed to a standard fiber where the spot size on the grating is much larger. However, even with reduced grating sizes, it can be beneficial to allow enough horizontal size to adiabatically convert the mode from the fiber to the waveguide mode. In the case of the curved-tooth grating coupler, the larger size also arose from the equations used to generate the shape of the teeth. Additionally, using the lensed fiber with a slightly over-sized grating coupler gives us tolerance to slight misalignment in an experimental setting. We compare our designs by measuring insertion loss, coupling efficiency, area, time to completion, and bandwidth. The insertion loss is defined in Eq. 3. In this equation, Pout is the power coupled into the output waveguide and Pin is the input power to the device. Coupling efficiency is a percentage representation of how much of the light coupled into the grating coupler. The area was calculated as the effective device region of the taper and teeth regions. The time to completion was calculated by taking the total time of the entire inverse design to show how simulation size and strategy affect the computational cost of the simulation. It is important to note that simulation time can vary greatly based on the computing resources used to complete the optimizations. However, by providing times for both conventional and inverse designs on the same equipment, we can give a sense of how much longer the inverse design takes than conventional design methods. The bandwidth of our devices is calculated using the full-width half-maximum approach where we say the bandwidth is equivalent to the range of wavelengths that allow for half or more of the transmission of the peak wavelength. The topologies for the conventional and generated inverse design straight tooth grating couplers are shown in Fig. Fig. For the straight tooth grating coupler design the inverse design was able to improve the coupling efficiency by more than double. The bandwidths for the conventional and inverse design are relatively similar with the conventional design being slightly larger. However, the conventional straight tooth grating coupler has a transmission spectrum greatly off center from our target wavelength and the wide bandwidth is potentially just a result of the overall lack of transmission. Additionally, the spectrum could probably be made more centered by using some more advanced design techniques (such as apodization), which we ignored as the conventional design was primarily a starting point for the inverse design. In contrast, the inverse designed grating coupler's transmission spectrum has a defined peak close to our target wavelength of 1310 nm and has a more symmetrical gaussian shape. The spectrum is still skewed off-center slightly, likely due to the initial condition of the inverse design. The figure of merit we used for optimization was the overall transmission to the waveguide, and we did not optimize for a center wavelength. In addition, the inverse designed grating coupler has a narrower bandwidth since it was optimized for a narrow range of wavelengths between 1300 nm and 1320 nm. Furthermore, the inverse design added some curvature and slight apodization to the straight teeth which seems to help taper down the light signal more gradually and efficiently. We therefore predicted that if we started from a curved tooth or apodized design that the inverse design would perform better since the initial condition would be closer to an optimal design. We chose to investigate a curved tooth initial condition. From a relative comparison standpoint, the inverse design for the straight tooth design performed much better than the conventional design, however the overall loss and coupling efficiency is still rather low compared to other forms of grating couplers. The grating coupler as seen in The changes in the inverse design for the curved tooth grating coupler design were very different compared to the straight tooth grating. Both the inverse design and the conventional design for the curved tooth grating coupler had essentially the same coupling efficiency with the conventional design having a marginally larger bandwidth. In this case, the inverse design spectrum is slightly off-center compared to the conventional design. Once again, this is likely due to the fact that we did not optimize for a center wavelength in the inverse design, but just for overall transmission. The similarity in efficiency between conventional and inverse designs for the curved tooth grating coupler contradicted our prediction that starting from a more efficient conventional design would produce a more efficient inverse design. The lack of improvement in the inverse design is most likely due to factors outside of the control of the inverse design tool. As previously mentioned, LumOpt, our inverse design tool, can only optimize one non-metallic material. This means that if there are issues with a device design that do not pertain to the shape of the optimized material, the inverse design will be greatly limited in what it can achieve. This is true for our grating coupler designs where the best designs had about 73% of the light from the lensed fiber reflected back upward, and the worst grating coupler design had about 81% of the light was reflected. A plasmonic grating coupler with only dielectric teeth will be inherently limited in how much light it can redirect, since the metal layer will interact with the light more strongly. Thus, no matter how efficient the inverse design is, it cannot completely overcome the physical limitations of the device architecture we choose. While it is possible for the inverse design to allow for less light to be reflected, as we see in the inverse designed straight toothed grating coupler, inverse design is not able to fix any inherent limitations of a design outside of its control. If we had considered etching the metal, we would most likely find much more efficient results like we see in Ayata, et al To achieve better coupling efficiencies, the variables outside of the inverse design tool's control need to be addressed. In the case of the grating coupler, it would be better to stick with a conventional design approach where modifications such as a change in fiber tilt angle can be accounted for easily to update the design. This is reinforced by how long the inverse design took. For essentially the same efficiency we had to wait weeks for the inverse design to finish, whereas in that time we could have been fine tuning a conventional design to potentially surpass what we have now. In contrast, other types of devices do benefit greatly from inverse design because we are primarily optimizing for size and loss. One of the more interesting developments with the inverse designs for both the straight and curved teeth grating couplers were the similarities between them. Both optimizations favored creating curved teeth that had a slight parabolic shape to them. This is interesting considering the vast difference in initial condition between the two designs. It was surprising to us that for the curved initial condition the teeth straightened out to have a slight bend more similar to the inverse design of the straight teeth grating coupler. This is possibly due to the fact that since the design is trying to maximize the power throughput for a specific range of wavelengths, a gentler curve might be better, leading to similar results. The similarity between inverse designed device efficiencies indicates that when using inverse design tools there is limited utility to fully optimizing the design used for the initial condition. For example, the conventional design could be improved using an apodization of the grating period. Since both inverse designs produce a slight apodization for the grating teeth, it is likely not necessary to do so manually if one is using an inverse design tool. However, this observation supports our conclusion that if coupling efficiency is the most important metric, then for certain designs a conventional design approach produces comparable results but has more flexibility, and is a better design method. This is true for the DLSPP grating coupler we considered. These conventional design approaches could also include more advanced design techniques than we considered here, such as the aforementioned apodization. In other instances where factors such as size or bandwidth are more important, then inverse design can still be a useful tool. This is evident in the size of the straight tooth inverse designed device, which is small but still has high efficiency. Compared to other state-of-the-art, inverse designed grating couplers, the size of the designs we produce compare favorably. For example, Sapra, et al design a silicon photonic grating coupler that is 12 μm x 12 μm excluding the taper Although we only performed simulations for this study, we expect that a similar performance can be achieved experimentally. As previously mentioned, we designed the devices using a light source that mimics our experimental setup. Furthermore, the inverse designed devices were optimized with a radius filter of 500 nm to ensure a minimum feature size that can be fabricated using common nanofabrication equipment, such as an e-beam writer. Unfortunately, the radius filter implemented in Lumerical's inverse design tool does not account for the edges of the optimization region. Because of this, both of our inverse designed devices have sharp edges with a radius less than 500 nm at the boundary, which would likely reduce experimental performance for these devices. DLSPP waveguides have been experimentally studied and others have made conventional designs similar to ours Using inverse design, we generated new designs for plasmonic grating couplers using different conventional designs for initial conditions. We compare the inverse designs to the conventional designs to explore the strengths and limitations of the inverse design tool. We reduced the size of the grating couplers, which is normally a disadvantage, by using a plasmonic structure and a lensed fiber to reduce the spot size of the input light beam. The next steps are to fabricate these devices and compare the simulation results against the experimental results with the physical devices. We could also work to improve performance by taking a hybrid approach to the grating coupler, using a highly efficient and standard purely dielectric grating for the coupling and then transitioning the signal to a plasmonic mode for coupling into other plasmonic devices. This would allow us to work around some of the limitations we have in our design structure and the Lumerical inverse design tool, while still preserving the advantages of plasmonics in other types of devices. 2 39:19:59