Charge-carrier transport at the semiconductor-gate dielectric interface in organic field-effect transistors is critically dependent on the degree of disorder in the typically semi-crystalline semiconductor layer. Charge trapping can occur at the interface as well as in the current-carrying semiconductor layer itself. A detailed and systematic understanding of the role of grain boundaries between crystallites and how to avoid their potentially detrimental effects is still an important focus of research in the organic electronics community. A typical macroscopic measurement technique to extract information about the energetics of the grain boundaries is an activation energy measurement. Here, we compare detailed experiments on the energetic properties of monolayer thin films implemented in organic field-effect transistors, having controlled numbers of grain boundaries within the channel region to kinetic Monte-Carlo simulations of charge-carrier transport to elucidate the influence of grain boundaries on the extracted activation energies. Two important findings are: 1) whereas the energy at the grain boundary does not change with the number of grain boundaries in a thin film, both the measured and simulated activation energy increases with the number of grain boundaries. 2) In simulations where both energy barriers and valleys are present at the grain boundaries there is no systematic relation between the number of grain boundaries and extracted activation energies. We conclude, that a macroscopic measurement of the activation energy can serve as general quality indicator of the thin film, but does not allow microscopic conclusions about the energy landscape of the thin film. Organic semiconductors are a core material class at the heart of modern developments of (opto-)electronic devices, including organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs), organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) Monolayer thin films of the organic semiconductor PDI1MPCN2 were fabricated using previously reported solution processes where 0 is the vacuum permittivity, r and dox the dielectric constant and the thickness of the insulator (SiO2), respectively, q the elementary charge, and Von the turn-on voltage of the FET To better understand these experimental results, we performed calculations (described in detail in reference In summary, we have performed a combined theoretical and experimental study about the relationship between the number of grain boundaries and the extracted activation energy in monolayer PDI1MPCN2 thin films. We have shown that, both in experiments on OFETs and through theoretical calculations, the extracted activation energy overall increases with the number of grain boundaries, even though microscopically the grain boundary energetics have not changed. Our work shows that from macroscopic evaluations of the activation energy, one cannot draw conclusions about the true energetics at the grain boundary itself, but the activation energy serves more as a general macroscopic quality indicator of polycrystalline thin films.