The Cu-3d states in the high-Tc cuprates are often described as a single band of 3d x 2 -y 2 states, with the other four 3d states having about 2 to 3 eV higher energy due to the lower-than-octahedral crystal field at the copper sites. However, excitations to these higher energy states observed with RIXS show indications of strong coupling to doped holes in the 3d x 2 -y 2 band. This relaunches a decades-old question of the possible role of the orbital degrees of freedom that once motivated Bednorz and Müller to search for superconductivity in these systems. Here we explore a direction different from the Jahn-Teller electron-phonon coupling considered by Bednorz and Müller, namely the interaction between holes mediated by dd excitations. In 1986 it was widely believed that superconductivity above the then-known limit of 23 Kelvin was not possible. Who could have predicted that, initiated by Georg Bednorz and Karl Alex Müller's discovery, superconductivity in the cuprates would go through the liquid nitrogen ceiling. The consequences for fundamental science and for applications are numerous and will be detailed throughout the tributes in this special issue. In their Nobel lecture A dd excitation is essentially a local orbital flip from arXiv:2308.03401v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 16 Aug 2023 the d x 2 -y 2 ground state to one of the other d j states (j = xy, yz, zx or 3r 2 -z 2 ). From this perspective it is unavoidable that a coupling exists between the holes in the d x 2 -y 2 band and the dd excitations, and that this coupling is in fact very strong. We interrupt the flow of logic to point out a commonality with Bednorz and Müller's intuition, namely that the 3d orbital degrees of freedom could be one of the key ingredients. Instead of coupling the d orbital degrees of freedom to vibrations, we will now consider the coupling between dd excitations and conduction electrons or holes. The question then is whether such coupling contributes to the pairing interaction, and whether this contribution is positive or negative. The possibility that dd excitations in the cuprates could mediate superconducting pairing has been pioneered by Werner Weber and collaborators The question that we want to address is whether the coupling to dd excitations could provide an attractive short-range interaction between the free carriers. We model the problem by considering a 2-dimensional square lattice of atoms. We then dope two additional holes into this lattice, (i) in a configuration where the holes are at infinite distance from each other giving the energy E ∞ , (ii) where they occupy nearest-neighbor sites giving the energy E nn . The energy difference E nn -E ∞ then constitutes the effective interaction energy of a doped hole pair at a nearest-neighbor distance. In the interest of simplicity, we will limit the Hilbert space on each site to two of the 3d orbitals, which is also the minimal model to consider dd excitations. In the hole language, 3d x 2 -y 2 (|a⟩) is the state with the lowest energy, and we represent the other four orbitals at 2-3 eV above the ground state by a single state |b⟩. In this subspace the local Hamiltonian reads where a † (a) and b † (b) are the creation (annihilation) operators for a hole with energy ε a and ε b , respectively, The first term of Eq. ( A hole doped into the Mott-insulating state has the possibility of making virtual excursions to the neighboring sites, which can be either the same orbital a or the orbital b at a higher energy. When we dope two holes and keep them at a sufficiently long distance from each other, there is no interference between their respective virtual excursions, but if they occupy two neighboring sites this changes the pattern of virtual excitations, as is schematically illustrated in Fig. It is convenient to introduce the dimensionless quantities We further note that With these definitions, we express the nearest-neighbor interaction, Eq. (A.21), as a dimensionless quantity A color map of γ nn in the (u, j) plane is shown in Fig. The experimental values of the dd exciton peak observed by RIXS indicate that Ω ab = 2 eV. Following Ghijsen et al. Meanwhile the question "can dd excitations mediate pairing ?" has a non-trivial answer: There exists a set of parameters in the (u, j) plane, for which γ nn = 0 We close by making a speculation if this type of behavior could be realized in a real system, and if so, in which materials. From Fig. It is a well-known fact that the Hund's coupling J is a relatively robust atomic parameter that is only weakly screened in a solid-state environment. In the 3d series, J varies from 0.9 eV (Ti) to 1.5 eV (Cu), in the 4d series from 0.6 eV (Zr) to 1.0 eV (Ag), and in the 5d series from 0.7 eV (Hf) to 1.0 eV (Au) We calculated the effective interaction between 2 holes doped in a 2-band Mott-insulator. We conclude from our study that the coupling to dd excitations (orbital flips) mediates a nearest-neighbor interaction, the sign of which depends on the relative values of the on-site Coulomb repulsion and Hund's-rule exchange. Our analysis demonstrates that exciton-mediated interactions can in principle contribute positively to the pairing interaction, but depending on the parameters it may also lead to the opposite effect. To obtain a precise understanding it is necessary to include in the model the O-2p states and the full set of Cu-3d states. Better candidate materials for observing the type of interactions described here are members of the Ruddleston-Popper series of early transition-metal oxides such as Sr 2 NbO 4 or K 2 WO 4 . This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation through Project No. 179157. Appendix: Details of the exciton mediated interaction 1. The d 1 states In the limit U → ∞, the ground state of the undoped Mott insulator is the direct product of the eigenstates for each site, namely where Ω ab = ε b -ε a . Hole doping causes a finite fraction of the sites to be occupied with 2 holes. For the case of 2 holes on a single site, the subspace with spin S = 0 is spanned by the vectors On this basis, the Hamiltonian for S = 0 is Straightforward diagonalization gives the following set of eigenstates where The corresponding energies are The basis vectors for the S = 1 manifold are For the evaluation of virtual processes where 2 doped holes occupy nearest-neighbor sites, we will need the following d 3 states: When a hole is introduced in the system, it can be "dressed" by creating virtual excitons on the neighboring sites. To estimate the energy saving by these processes, we consider a 2-site cluster where one hole is introduced in addition to the hole already present at each site: where the indices 1, 2 refer to the different sites and the label 1h refers to 1 doped hole. The relevant excited states are The intersite hopping term Ĥt connecting different orbitals a and b is We will need below the matrix elements of the hopping term Ĥt , for which we obtain If we introduce two doped holes on nearest-neighbor sites, as described by the state vector g = 2E ãa;0 = 4ε a + 2U -2∆ J , (A.17) the virtual excitations whereby a hole hops from one of these sites to the other are modified, because the intermediate state on one of the two sites now has 2 doped holes in addition to the hole already present in the undoped state (i.e. 3 holes in total). Specifically these virtual states are J + Ω ab + U -5J (1 ⩽ j ⩽ 4).