Nanomechanical resonator-based sensing devices are used in medical diagnostics based on their high-frequency dynamic behavior. Cantilevers fall into the category of Nanomechanical resonators. It also resembles a resonator whose shape is like that of a nanowire clamped at one end. As the surface-to-volume ratio of a nanowire resonator increases due to scaling down, surface stress plays a crucial role in the mechanical behavior of a resonator. Piezoresistive MEMS cantilevers are used for vapor phase analysis of volatile compounds and gas. Studies were done to address the mass sensitivity issues and fractures associated with bioceramic and nanocomposite coatings-based cantilever resonators. The studies show how the sensing performance can be determined or tuned. Nanomechanical studies of thin films of SiCN on silicon were performed. The sharpness of the tip was found to have an influence on the tip-sample conduction mechanism useful for MEMS applications Due to several benefits, such as their simple geometry (such as a Cantilever beam structure), the ability to use batch fabrication, their suitability for extreme miniaturization, even in the nanoscale, and their high mass sensitivity, MEMS-based resonant sensors have been widely used as biological, physical, and chemical sensors Research into cell biology, tissue engineering, cancer, and diseases may benefit greatly from the characterization of the physical characteristics of living cells, such as their mass and stiffness In this communication, Si-based cantilever MEMS cantilevers were fabricated using lithographic techniques, and the issue of mass sensitivity associated with Cantilever MEMS was addressed Finite Element Analysis of a novel design has been provided. As Silicon-based MEMS sensors have the limitation of operating at high temperatures high temperature-resistant multicomponent hard coatings were deposited. The nanomechanical characterization of these coatings using nanoindentation techniques gave insights into their mechanical strength and toughness. The fabrication process of Si-based Cantilever MEMS was done in a clean room with proper aprons, head covers, face masks, and foot covers following the safety protocols. RCA cleaning of a silicon wafer took place in Wet Etch Bay. RCA 1 cleaning is used for the organic contaminants whereas RCA 2 is done for the metallic contaminants. The RCA 1 cleaning is equivalent to piranha (H 2 SO 4 and H 2 O 2 ) cleaning for removing organic contaminants. The samples were also rinsed in DI water and blow-dried with nitrogen gas. Silicon Nitride (Si 3 N 4 ) was deposited on the silicon substrate by Low-Pressure Chemical Vapour Deposition (LPCVD) in the Diffusion Bay. The equipment had three chambers: Loading: where the samples were loaded in a boat made up of quartz and heated to 500oC. Nitrogen gas was passed and the temperature was further raised to 850 o C. In the process chamber, 120 sccm of dichlorosilane (DSC) and ammonia (NH 3 ) at 300 mTorr were supplied to deposit silicon nitride. After the deposition, the sample was transferred to the unloading chamber and the temperature was lowered again to 500oC by applying nitrogen gas. This Si3N4 thin film formed is called lowstress silicon nitride deposition. Isi-rich rich and mainly used for cantilevers where stiction needs to be avoided. An ammonia-rich high-stress silicon nitride can also be prepared to take 10 sccm of DSC and 70 sccm of ammonia. The LPCVD can operate between 200 -500 mTorr and the temperature can go up to 950 o C. There are four tubes in the LPCVD system: in Tube 1 a reaction with dichlorosilane (SiCl 2 H 2 ) with ammonia take place to form silicon nitride as discussed above. In Tube 2, thin films of Si, Ge, SiGe, a-Si Si-Nanowires, Ge, etc can take place. In this tube some metal contamination is allowed however in Tube 3 no metal contamination is allowed with the same depositing materials as in tube 2. Low-temperature oxide deposition of average 100 nm thickness using silane and oxygen as precursors takes place in Tube 4. Oxidation and diffusion furnaces were also present which can perform dry oxidation (5nm -150 nm) and pyrogenic oxidation (250 nm -1 μm). Phosphorous and Boron diffusion in Si for doping purposes can also be done. The thickness of the Si 3 N 4 thin film was estimated to be around 231 nm in ellipsometry. The thickness measurement is done on the principle of polarization. The film was also found to be an absorbing one with a refractive index of 2. Lithography was then performed as per the following procedures: Substrate cleaning (in acetone and IPA) followed by dehydration bake. A positive photoresist was then coated using spin coating followed by a soft bake. UV exposure was done using a mask designed for cantilevers. The etching can be isotropic or anisotropic. Anisotropic etching corresponds to different etch rates at different crystallographic planes. The chemical wet etch is usually an isotropic etch whereas the as dry etch is usually an anisotropic etch. The reason for making Si 3 N 4 films rather than SiO2 films is: SiO 2 unlike Si 3 N 4 is not a good mask for longer etch duration. The mask used in lithography is made up of soda-lime glass, chrome, and, photoresist. While for labeling the masks more than one label should be used otherwise any rotation may get undetected. Dry etching was using SF 6 which is an isotropic etching as bombarding as well as the chemical reaction takes place. The resist was then removed by O 2 plasmaa process called PR ashing. Dry etching consists of Plasma generation (isotropic), sputtering, reactive ion etch (RIE) and Deep Reactive Ion etch (DRIE). RIE and DRIE are anisotropic etching processes. DRIE is done with C4F8(Scallop) and can etch up to 400 -500 μm. E-beam lithography was shown which uses a PMMA photoresist. The apparatus consists of a laser interferometer is used. The aperture size varies between 7.5 μm to 120 μm. It uses an accelerating voltage of 30 kV producing high-energy electrons which undergo less scattering. Au is used as identification marks. The microscopic inspection was done showing the release of the Cantilevers. An image of the fabricated cantilever is shown in Silicon is not able to withstand high temperatures and is being coated with hard nanocomposite coatings like SiCN which itself has potential applications in MEMS. The parameters of SiCN useful for piezoresistive sensing applications are given in Table Cantilever-based MEMS resonator sensors suffer the problem of un attainment of homogenous mass sensitivity. The intensity of vibration being highest at the free end of the cantilever makes the mass sensitivity highest and reduces as one moves towards the fixed end. The resonant frequency of operation is inversely proportional to the mass., and impulse plays a very significant role in these devices. The schema f spatially non-uniform mass sensitivity of greater than 100% from the free end of the cantilever to the middle of the cantilever can be found in Finite element analysis is performed (ANSYS 2022 R12, ANSYS Inc.) on this novel design using the geometry and mesh distribution, and the directional deformation, total deformation, and minimum principal strain values were determined ( The pedestal structure is however arranged in an array for sensing as shown above which nullifies the effect as one pedestal cantilever compensating for the other. The minimum principle strain was found to be homogenous as well as of higher proportions (red region throughout the surface) indicating the superiority of these structures compared to the conventional cantilevers with one fixed end. Nanoindentation performed at low precession can be correlated to surface electrical properties. Current can pass through the contact region of the conducting indenter and surface. The resistivity offered to the current as a result varies with the forces applied causing plastic deformation. Plastic deformation has been a major contributor to resistivity which is very well established as the dislocation can as scattering centers for the electrons. When two conductors come into contact, the resistance R of the contact region is made up of two parts: R = R c + R f , where R c is the constriction resistance that depends on the material's bulk properties and R f is the contact resistance brought on by the characteristics of surface layers. The contact region's constriction resistance is given by eq 1 [22, 23]. √ where ρ 1 is the resistivity of the indenter material, ρ 2 is the resistivity of the sample material, and A is the contact area. If V is the voltage drop and I is the current in the contact region, then for an indentation depth h, we can have the following relation (eq 2) The resistivity of the diamond which is the indenter material is 0.1 Ω m. SiCN used for MEMS has been reported to have a room temperature resistivity of 5.5 Ω m which leads to the following expression h (V/I) = 1.89. V/I is nothing but the resistance which there is found to vary with indentation depth. If the shape of the contact region is considered as a circle of radius a, then the constriction resistance is given as eq 1, where is the resistivity due to tip and is for the sample. For a circular region, the Rc is given as eq 2 where H is the hardness and F is the force applied [24]. For a Berkovich indenter, the contact region is no longer circular and we take 24.5 h 2 as the contact area which modifies the resistance equation as eq 3. The fractured region or the heavily plastically deformed regions should also influence the electrical properties as they indicate high strain fields surrounding the indentations which should interfere with the free electron flow motion. The force during nanoindentation and the current passing in the contact region vary with time [24]. A higher value of impulse is causing a lower current value hence a higher rate of force application causes an increased dislocation jamming causing a higher scattering of the conducting electrons. High precession indentation at the nanoscale is a means of studying surface features, especially for materials used in MEMS applications. The capacitive controlled loaddisplacement features in a nanoindenter bring into consideration the conductivity phenomenon occurring at the contact point between the probe and the surface. The zeropoint tip defects also influence the electrical properties as there occurs a difference in strain in the case of sharp factory default 3-sided pyramidal Berkovich tip contact and an effective hertzian contact due to tip blunting [29]. This stain is known to affect the resistivity as per Matthiessen's rule which talks about impurity scattering as one of the deciding factors and has correlations with the strain development at the tip-surface contact. The strain field gradients were determined to study the structure inhomogeneities and microstructure. The strain gradients have been found to be very crucial in the proper analysis of obtained values from nanoindentation testing [29-33]. Elastic-plastic strain gradients are given as eq 4 (a, b, c, d) where P' represents the total strain gradient, S' represents the elastic total strain gradient, E' represents the elastic normal strain gradient, and H', the plastic total strain gradient. (4a) We found out the strain field gradients for a Nanoindentation performed on SiCN/Si substrates for the load(P), harmonic stiffness (S), hardness (H), and modulus (E) as given in The red dotted lines represent current flows that constrict at the contact and are modified by indentation according to Matthiessen's rule, which states the contribution of deformation (plastic) in conduction. In addition to Rc, the resistance component affected by mechanical stimulus provided by the indenter is the resistance at the coating/substrate interface R intf , which may not be active at shallow depths of indentation (less than 10% thickness). When employed as a conducting tip and as a MEMS nanoindenter with an integrated AFM cantilever gripper for nanomechanical characterizations such as transducers for biosensing, the tip voltage in Berkovich indenter will be substantially greater. [36]. From the substrate effect, it can be inferred that the coating thickness was about 200 nm as the substrate effect starts after 20 nm i.e 10% penetration (Fig MEMS nanoindenter with an integrated AFM cantilever gripper has been made for nanomechanical characterizations [37]. These micros (μ)-cantilevers act as transducers for biosensing. The cantilever response to biomolecule sensing depends on its mechanical properties determined by the spring constant and resonance frequency which are again functions of cantilever material and geometry. The change in stress occurring at the cantilever surface resulting in bending is expressed as eq 5 [38]. ( ) where E is Young's modulus, ν is the Poisson's ratio. L and t are the cantilever length and thickness respectively. Using the directional and total deformation values from h being the thickness of the total film/substarte system and t being the coating thickness. D is the diameter of the coating considering the shape to be circular in nature. For a film of 2 μm thickness and h being 1 mm. The pedestal cantilever being 14mm in one side can be considered as the value of D. The value of k, the spring constant is taken as the stiffness from the unloading portion of the load depth curve as shown in Fig The limitation of Si in high temperatures has caused alternative materials like SiC, Si 3 N 4 etc to be used in small-scale mechano-electronic devices. MEMS-based Cantilever used for pressure sensors is one of the most important systems which are being fabricated using SiC-based materials. However, apart from the materials point of view, the geometry of the cantilever sensors required modifications to comply with the mass sensitivity effects. Finite Element Modeling of a novel design has therefore been provided which will help in the design of cantilever-based MEMS. The sharpness of the tip was found to influence the conduction occurring between the indenter and the sample material under consideration. The sharper the tip, the lesser will be any fluctuations occurring in strain gradients during the first contact. Prolonged use of a sharp 3-sided pyramidal Berkovich indenter causes tip blunting and therefore for shallow depth the contact is more Hertzian (Spherical) in nature which affects the conduction mechanism by causing an enhanced resistance. The surface stress was determined from Stoney's relation using the deformation obtained from the FEA.