The recent claimed room-temperature superconductivity in Cu-doped lead apatite at ambient pressure are under highly debate. To identify its physical origin, we studied the crystal structures, energy band structures, lattice dynamics and magnetic properties of the parent Pb10(PO4)6O compound, in which two different phases of the LK-99 compound are analyzed in detail. Our results show that the Pb10(PO4)6O compound is an indirect band gap semiconductor, where Cu doping at the 4f site of Pb leads to a semiconducting to half-metallic transition. Two half-filled flat bands spanning the Fermi energy levels are present in the 4f -phase of LK-99, which are mainly formed by hybridization of the d x 2 -y 2 and dzy orbitals of Cu with the 2p orbitals of O. In addition, 6h-phase of LK-99 always has spin polarity at the bottom of the conduction band and at the top of the valence band, making the material a bipolar magnetic semiconductor. Our results are basically consistent with the recent experimental transport properties of LK-99 posted on Introduction Since the discovery of superconductivity in 1911 Under high pressure, the maximum superconducting transition temperature has reached 262 K in yttrium superhydride Recently, a highly anticipated study claimed that room temperature superconductivity has been achieved in copper doped lead apatite materials under ambient pressure A thorough study of the electronic structure of this material is urgent to unraveling the mystery of LK-99. By using density functional theory (DFT), Escares and Barrera found that Cu ions seems to be hosts in the lattice and a nearly flat band emerge around the Fermi level Methods Our DFT calculations were performed by using the QUANTUM ESPRESSO (QE) software package In the optimization of geometry structural, the convergence thresholds for total energy and ionic force were set to 10 -4 Ry and 10 -3 Ry/Bohr, respectively. All geometric structures were fully optimized in our calculations to achieve the minimum energy. Considering the presence of unpaired isolated electrons on 3d orbital of Cu 2+ , the spin polarization in all calculations was switched on when calculating the properties of Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O compound and was contrastively switched off in Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O compound. Density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) was used to calculate the phonon dispersion spectrum. The dynamics matrix and perturbation potential were computed on a mesh of 2 × 2 × 2 q-points centered at the Γ point Results and discussion Fig. In the direction of the c axis, the Pb2 ions, together with the surrounding PO 4 units, contribute to the formation of a cylindrical column centrally positioned around O2 ions, as that illustrated in Fig. The calculated electronic band structure and Orbitalresolved density of states (DOS) for Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O are demonstrated in Fig. Evidently, lead apatite is an indirect band gap semiconductor, with a PBE-predicted indirect band gap of 2.78 eV. This finding confirms well to experimental observed transport properties As that can be seen in Fig. The Orbitalresolved DOS reveal that the valence bands situated below the Fermi level are primarily contributed by the O-2p states, while the Pb-6p states and Pb-6s states exert a minor influence. The conduction band above the Fermi energy is mainly contributed by the Pb-6p state. Moreover, two flat bands below the Fermi level can be observed in the A-L-H-A region. Flat bands have weaker dispersion, which means that flat band electrons are more localized. Localized electrons often lead to strong correlation effects in the system, which in turn lead to novel quantum physical phenomenon, such as high-temperature superconductivity, quantum Hall ferromagnetic states, and so on. values of a = 9.843 Å, c = 7.428 Å and the volume of a unit cell is 623.24 Å3 Figs. In the DOS with spin polarization, the spin-up electron contribution has a positive state density, while the spindown electron contribution has a negative state density. As that demonstrated in Fig. The bands near the Fermi energy level are mainly contributed by d zy and d x 2 -y 2 in the 3d orbitals, which are shown in Fig. Fig. It is noteworthy that the formation energy of the energy-lowest configuration of the Cu ion replacing the 6h site of Pb ion is even lower than that of the energylowest configuration of the Cu ion replacing the 4f site of Pb ion, so it is highly probable that the LK-99 material actually synthesized in experiments The calculated phonon spectra of the 4f -phase Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O compound is shown in Fig. 