We study the effects of magnetization on the properties of the doped topological insulator with nematic superconductivity. We found that the direction of the in-plane magnetization fixes the direction of the nematicity in the system. The chiral state is more favorable than the nematic state for large values of out-of-plane magnetization. Overall, the critical temperature of the nematic state is resilient against magnetization. We explore the spectrum of the system with the pinned direction of the nematic order parameter ∆y in details. Without magnetization, there is a full gap in the spectrum. At strong enough out-of-plane mz or orthogonal in-plane mx magnetization, the spectrum is closed at the nodal points that are split by the magnetization. Flat Majorana surface states connect such split bulk nodal points. Parallel magnetization my lifts nodal points and opens a full gap in the spectrum. We discuss relevant experiments and propose experimental verifications of our theory. Superconductivity in doped topological insulators of Bi 2 Se 3 family was observed in various experiments . To achieve a superconducting state, bismuth selenide is doped with Cu, Sr, or Nb Symmetry-based theoretical investigation shows that the order parameter from the E u representation of the D 3d crystalline group satisfies both experimental observations: spin-triplet pairing and rotational symmetry breaking In topological insulators, the Fermi surface is hexagonally deformed due to C 3 rotational crystal symmetry. This deformation arisies due to cubic in momentum terms in a Hamiltonian that are called as hexagonal warping Singlet superconductivity can be destroyed by magnetization since the Zeeman field pulls apart electrons with the different spins in Cooper's pair Usually, the direction of the anisotropy in the superconducting state of the doped topological insulators is fixed by the some crystal fields that arise due to finite strain in the normal state In this work, we focus on the effects of the strong magnetization with the arbitrary direction in the doped topological insulator with nematic superconductivity. We write down linearized in the order parameter Gor'kov equations for such a system and calculate the critical temperature. For the in-plane magnetization, we found that the highest critical temperature is realized for the nematic order parameter, which direction is orthogonal to the magnetization. In this case, the critical temperature is independent of the value of the magnetization. If magnetization is collinear to the nematicity direction, then critical temperature decreases with the increase of the magnetization. In implies that direction of the magnetization can fix the nematicity direction. Out-of-plane magnetization decreases critical temperature for the nematic state. The chiral state becomes favorable for a high enough value of the out-of-plane magnetization. Overall, the critical temperature of the nematic and chiral states is finite, even for large magnetization values. We study the spectrum of the nematic state with the pinned direction α = π/2 (which is ∆ y ) in details. Without hexagonal warping nematic superconducting state has nodal points at the Fermi energy. In this case, out-of-plane magnetization m z transforms nodal points to the Fermi surface. With hexagonal warping, the spectrum is fully gapped without magnetization. Finite out-of-plane magnetization opens 12 bulk nodal points that come in pairs. Each pair is split by the magnetization. Orthogonal in-plane magnetization m x opens 4 bulk nodal points in pairs. In mixed magnetization, in the Oxz plane, we have 4 of 12 nodal points depending on the projection values of the magnetization on Oz and Ox axes. Parallel in-plane magnetization m y lifts nodal points and opens a full gap in the spectrum. We calculate a tight-binding spectrum and discover that each split pair of nodal points is connected by flat Majorana surface states. We discuss the possible experimental verifications of our work. We describe bulk electrons in a doped topological insulator of Bi 2 Se 3 family by low-energy k • p two-orbital Hamiltonian where μ is the chemical potential, 2m is a single-electron gap at zero chemical potential, Fermi velocities v and v z describe motion in the (ΓK; ΓM ) plane and along ΓZ direction correspondingly, λ describes hexagonal warping. In the general model, there is one more term with the hexagonal warping λ 2 (k 3 y -3k 2 x k y )σ y , see Ref. We describe superconductivity in Nambu-II basis, where the wave function is with ↑(↓),σ,k annihilates (creates) electron with up (down) spin on the orbital σ = (P 1 , P 2 ) with momentum k. Superconducting order parameter from E u representation of D 3d crystalline point group has vector structure with two components η η η = (η x ; η y ). It has the following matrix structure where δx,y = s x,y σ y . We can write the order parameter as η x = η sin(α)e iφ1 and η y = η cos(α)e iφ2 , where φ = φ 1 -φ 2 . Order parameter with φ = 0 is called nematic, which can have arbitrary orientation α. The nematic order parameter has rotational symmetry C 2 , breaking C 3 crystalline symmetry. This order parameter has time-reversal symmetry. When angles φ ̸ = 0, timereversal symmetry is broken. Particularly, order parameter η( 1 ) is called chiral The BdG Hamiltonian in Nambu-II basis is Matrices τ i act in electron-hole space. The Hamiltonian (4) obeys electron-hole symmetry where Ξ = s y τ y K and K is complex conjugation. In the absence of the hexagonal warping λ = 0, the system degenerates with respect to the nematicity direction α. The superconducting gap has two nodal points at the Fermi energy with coordinates k ± μ 2 + η 2 -m 2 /v (-sin α; cos α; 0). In the presence of the hexagonal warping rotational symmetry of the normal phase becomes C 3 , and the spectrum is sensitive to the mutual orientation of the warping and the order parameter We consider the Zeeman splitting due to finite magnetization. It can appear due to the proximity effect from magnetic substrate where m i is the strength of the magnetization along axis i, where i = x, y, z. The magnetization breaks time-reversal symmetry and lifts the twofold Krademer's degeneracy of the ĤBdG . The full Hamiltonian ĤBdG (k)+ Ĥm obeys chiral symmetry Σ-1 ĤBdG (k) + Ĥm Σ = ĤBdG (-k) + Ĥm , where operator Σ = σ z τ z . Thus, each positive eigenvalue E k is accompanied by the partner -E k We calculate the critical temperature of the nematic superconductor as a function of magnetization. For simplicity, we present results only for systems without hexagonal warping λ = 0-including the warping leads to some insignificant enhancement of the critical temperature. See Ref. , where fermionic frequency ω = πT (2n + 1). For holes in the normal state we get Ĝ0,h (-ω, k) = . Anomalous Green's function in the linear approximation is , where trace is taken over spin and orbital degrees of freedom. In the vicinity of the critical temperature order parameter is small. Then, the gap equation can be written in the linearized form: where g is the coupling constant, α, β corresponds to x, y. Integration is performed over the first Brillouin zone, and summation is provided over fermionic Matsubara frequencies ω = (2n + 1)πT . Thus, we obtain two linear equations on η x , η y . Superconductivity appears when the system has a nontrivial solution. Thus, the system (7) should be degenerate, and we get a condition on critical temperature T c . The determinant of the system ( For this geometry critical temperature is defined by (1 The exact solution is chiral ∆ x ± i∆ y for any nonzero Φ od induced by the field ±m z , where m z ̸ = 0. Further, we consider positive magnetization m z > 0. We plot the critical temperature of the chiral phase in Fig. Also, we consider the case when nematic order ∆ x or ∆ y is pinned. In this case, the critical temperature is determined by Φ d = 1. We calculate the critical temperature for pinned nematic order parameter and show it in Fig. The critical temperature slowly decreases towards zero for both chiral and nematic phases as a function of m z . This fundamentally differs from singlet pairing Further, we consider the Zeeman field in (ΓM ; ΓK) plane. We focus on the two orientations along Ox or Oy. Note, we consider a system without hexagonal warping; thus, C ∞ rotational symmetry of normal state presents. In this case parameter Φ od = 0 and Φ xx ̸ = Φ yy . Such a situation allows ∆ x and ∆ y order parameters. We calculate the critical temperature for ∆ y order parameter at both field orientations. In Fig. The state with the higher critical temperature is the most energetically favorable near the critical temperature. So, without warping or pinning fields, the in-plane Critical temperature Tc/Tc0 vs magnetization mz/Tc0. We set μ = 2m and λ = 0. Panel a): We consider three different orientations of the magnetization. For mz, we plot the critical temperature of chiral phase ∆x + i∆y. For mx and my, we fix the order parameter as ∆y. Insert shows the critical temperature of ∆x and ∆y as a function of the mx. Panel b): Critical temperature for s-wave, nematic, and chiral ∆x +i∆y phases as a function of the magnetization mz. magnetization selects the orthogonal direction of the nematicity. In means that for m x magnetization, the most favorable order parameter is ∆ y while for m y most favorable is ∆ x . In the previous section, we have shown that E u superconductivity is robust with respect to magnetization with the magnitude ∼ 10 -100 T c . Now, we investigate how such a magnetizztion influences the bulk spectrum of the nematic superconductor. We show that strong magnetization changes the topology of the Fermi surface. For convenience, we focus on the orientation ∆ y of the order parameter that corresponds to the nematicity α = π/2 since it has the lowest free energy among possible order parameters (3) for zero magnetic field We start from the model without the hexagonal warping (i.e., λ = 0). Without the hexagonal warping, the system has a C ∞ rotational symmetry: simultaneous rotation of the order parameter, and the magnetization does not change physical properties. In the zero Zeeman field, the spectrum has two nodal points (Fig. Fermi surface of the of nematic superconductor E k = 0 with ∆y orientation in dimensionless momentum cooridantes (vkx/m, vky/m). The figure is plotted without the hexagonal warping (λ = 0). The magnitude of the order parameter is η. a) Without magnetization Fermi surface consists of two nodal points. b) Small magnetization mz = η each nodal point to a small Fermi surface. b) Larger magnetization values mz = 3η increase the area of the Fermi surface. c) At mz = 5η, Fermi surfaces merge into two split circles from each nodal point. Now we include the hexagonal warping in our model. We have the full gap for the order parameter ∆ y and in zero magnetization. In contrast with the model without hexagonal warping, magnetization can close the gap only in several nodal points. We consider the model with hexagonal warping and investigate the spectrum for different orientations of the Zeeman field. We set m x = m y = 0 in Eq. ( We apply magnetization m x along the Ox axis. We show spectrum along the set of vectors k in Fig. When m z ≲ m x 8 of 12 nodal points gaped, and the topology of the Fermi surface becomes equal to the case with m x only with 4 nodal points (Fig. Finite magnetization along Oy direction m y opens the full gap in the spectrum without any nodal points (Fig. In this section, we briefly analyze the properties of the surface states on the nematic superconductor with the magnetization along the z-axis. We rewrite our Hamiltonian in a tight-binding approximation with the additional quadratic terms that renormalize chemical potential μ → μ + C i k 2 i and single electron gap m → m + B i k 2 i , i = x, y, z, see Ref. In Fig. We investigated critical temperature of spin triplet E u superconductivity with vector order parameter, that appears in doped Bi 2 Se 3 . We find, this superconductivity exist for large values of the magnetization of about 10-100 T c which is typical for the spin-triplet superconductivity. One of the main results that we can tune the direction of the nematic order parameter by the external magnetization, see Fig. We have shown that magnetization can open nodal points in the bulk spectra. Such opening occurs either for the magnetization along 0z direction, see Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that nematic superconductivity in doped topological insulators is robust against the magnetization. The direction of the nematic order parameter can be tuned by the direction of the in-plane magnetization. Large values of the out-of-plane magnetization favor chiral superconducting state. In case of the pinned nematic state, the magnetization can open nodal points in the bulk spectrum. Such nodal points are split by the Zeeman field. Splitted nodal points are connected through the flat nodal line Majorana surface states. Magnetization parallel to the direction of the order parameter lifts the nodal points.