The lone-pair s states of germanium, tin, and lead underlie many of the unconventional properties of the inorganic metal halide perovskites. Dynamic stereochemical expression of the lone pairs is well established for perovskites based on all three metals, but previously only the germanium perovskites were thought to express the lone pair crystallographically. In this work, we use advanced first-principles calculations with a hybrid functional and spin-orbit coupling to predict stable monoclinic polar phases of CsSnI 3 and CsSnBr 3 , which exhibit a ferroelectric distortion driven by stereochemical expression of the tin lone pair. We also predict similar metastable ferroelectric phases of CsPbI 3 and CsPbBr 3 . In addition to ferroelectricity, these phases exhibit the Rashba effect. Spin splitting in both the conduction and valence bands suggests that nanostructures based on these phases could host bright ground-state excitons. Finally, we discuss paths toward experimental realization of these phases via electric fields and tensile strain. structural inversion symmetry (see Figure For CsGeX 3 , the germanium 4s states are relatively small, so there is ample room for the lone pair to be stereochemically expressed. In the ground state, the lone pair is crystallographically expressed (i.e. frozen in the same direction on all germanium sites), resulting in a polar space group. Using HSE+SOC we have identified ground-state polar ferroelectric phases of CsSnI 3 and CsSnBr 3 with the monoclinic space group P c (#7). The unit cell is similar to the orthorhombic phase, but with tin off-centering and inversion asymmetry driven by coordinated stereochemical expression of the tin 5s lone pairs. In CsSnI 3 , the ferroelectric phase is lower in energy than the orthorhombic phase by 34.6 meV per formula unit, and lower than the non-perovskite "yellow" phase by 7.1 meV per formula unit. In CsSnBr 3 , the ferroelectric phase is lower in energy than the cubic phase by 63.0 meV per formula unit, and lower in energy than the orthorhombic phase by 66.0 meV per formula unit. Relaxed structures for these predicted phases are included in the supporting information. Figure Figure Stereochemical expression of the lone pair requires more space than if the s state remains centrosymmetric. This can be observed in Figure where V 0 is the equilibrium volume of the base phase and V 1 is the volume at which the phases have equal energy. For Ge and Sn, the lowest-energy phase is ferroelectric, so negative ε crit values indicate the amount of compressive strain which, if applied to the ferroelectric phase, would stabilize the centrosymmetric phase. Conversely, for Pb, the lowest-energy phase is orthorhombic, so positive ε crit values indicate the amount of tensile strain which, if applied to the orthorhombic phase, would stabilize the ferroelectric phase. Comparable figures using PBE (shown in Supporting Figure Table Ge Sn Pb Br -3.6% -2.4% +1.4% I -8.3% -1.8% +1.0% The effect of the lone pairs may also be seen in the band structure, plotted for the iodides in Figure To investigate the ferroelectric switching behavior of the CsSnX 3 phases, we begin by finding the transition state for the switching process. We start with the midpoint between the polar phase and its mirror image, then relax via a single-image nudged-elastic-band calculation The transition state is centrosymmetric, so it can also be used as a reference nonpolar state to calculate the spontaneous polarization of the ferroelectric phase using the modern theory of polarization and are closer to the polarization observed in traditional ferroelectric oxides such as BaTiO 3 (27 μC/cm 2 ). , where E B is the barrier energy, Ω is the volume, and P s is the spontaneous polarization. This gives 3.8 MV/cm for CsSnI 3 and 5.9 MV/cm for CsSnBr 3 . Note that these values are upper bounds for the coercive field; experimental values may be significantly smaller and will depend strongly on temperature. A full assessment of the impact of the distorted phase on photovoltaic performance is beyond the scope of this work, but it is clear that the polar distortion can lead to emergent behavior such as the Rashba effect, which can in turn have important implications on optoelectronic properties. For the heavier group-IV elements this leads to Rashba-type spin-orbit splitting. Letting z be the direction of the inversion asymmetry, the Rashba interaction for electrons (and holes) can be expressed through the Hamiltonian ĤR = α R (σ x py -σy px ) . (2) The Rashba energy , where m is the effective mass. While germanium is too light to experience noticeable spinorbit coupling, ferroelectric CsSnX 3 and CsPbX 3 exhibit detectable Rashba splitting in both the conduction and valence bands. This "double-Rashba" character is indicative of a possible bright ground-state exciton that could be achieved upon appropriate nanostructuring. The ferroelectric phase of CsSnBr 3 may have already been found experimentally; a transition to an unknown monoclinic phase has been reported below -26 • C. Calculations were performed in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Visualization and simulated powder XRD spectra were generated using VESTA. The HSE mixing and screening parameters were tuned for each B-site element to reproduce the experimental band gap in the room-temperature phases; Parameters were tuned for CsPbBr 3 , CsSnI 3 , and CsGeBr 3 , and then the same parameters were used for CsPbI 3 , CsSnBr 3 , and CsGeI 3 respectively. Note that for CsPbI 3 , ref. 22 reports lattice parameters in the P bnm space group, which we have recast to P nma to match our calculated structure. For CsGeI 3 , the initial structure was in the R3m space group, but the relaxed structure was Cm. Tests with "standard" HSE parameters (25% mixing and 0.2 Å -1 screening) and the HSE parameters used in ref. 38 (55% mixing and 0.2 Å -1 screening) also found the ferroelectric phases of CsSnX 3 to be the ground states, though the magnitude of the energy difference varied (see Supporting Table Table CsPbBr 3 (P nma) CsPbI 3 (P nma) Theory Expt. Since under tensile strain the ferroelectric structure is lower in energy than the orthorhombic structure, this procedure identifies a metastable ferroelectric phase. Rashba coefficients of 0.11 eV•Å in the conduction band and 0.52 eV•Å in the valence band, suggesting that this metastable phase could be a relevant source of inversion asymmetry in CsPbBr 3 nanocrystals. Perovskite nanocrystals are known to be under tensile strain from