The broadening and polarization of excitonic luminescence in monolayer TMDs largely suffer from inhomogeneity and temperaturean unresolved problem to date. In this work, through few-layer-graphene encapsulation of monolayer WS2, we reduce the interexcitonic energy separation, which then can have a narrow resonance with a specific phonon mode of our choice. The resulting single-step exciton relaxation with the resonating phonon mode significantly suppresses the inhomogeneous broadening, allowing us to achieve the narrowest exciton linewidth of 1.06 meV (which translates to 0.19 meV after deconvolution with the excitation laser linewidth). The single-phonon resonance helps to achieve a high quantum efficiency despite graphene encapsulation. The technique is powerful in tuning the exciton polarization during relaxation by choosing a specific resonating phonon mode. For example, the valley coherence (polarization) improves from ~68% (~40%) to ~90% (~75%) on resonance with 2A 1 ′ and A 1 ′ modes respectively. We further demonstrate a strong polarization reversal on resonance with a chiral phonon mode. Strikingly, the above features remain robust against temperature (up to 200 K) and sample age (few months in ambient condition). The findings will lead to clean excitonic measurements without requiring cryogenic cooling. Introduction: Despite being ultrathin, the monolayers of Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (TMDs) are highly luminescent because of the strongly bound 2D excitons In this work, we overcome these issues by using a simple technique: (a) We sandwich a monolayer WS2 between two few-layer-graphene (FLG) flakes such that the resulting screening makes the inter-excitonic energy separation (Δ ns-1s ; n > 1) approximately equal to an optical phonon energy in the system. (b) Using a tunable laser, we resonantly generate the higher energy excitons (ns), which undergo ultrafast relaxation to the lowest energy 1s state in a single step, by scattering with the resonating phonon mode. As an outcome of this technique, we achieve, (1) high intensity, (2) ultra-narrow linewidth (1.06 meV) exciton peak which also shows (3) a high valley coherence measured by the degree of linear polarization (DOLP ~ 90 %) and valley polarization measured by the degree of circular polarization (DOCP ~ 75 %). These features remain robust till 200 K, making this technique appealing for several experiments and applications. To understand the working principle of this technique, let us revisit the process of exciton generation, relaxation, and light emission from radiative recombination. Initially, the higher energy excitons inside the light cone of the ns band, that resonate with the incoming photon energy (hc λ ex ⁄ ) are generated (Fig. Finally, the excitons inside the light cone of the 1s band recombines radiatively to emit light of energy hc λ em ⁄ . Due to both incoming and outgoing resonance, we expect this single-step scattering to dominate the ns → 1s transition. The implications of this single-step relaxation on emission are discussed in the upcoming sections. Experimental Observations: The emission spectrum of the FLG-WS2-FLG (GWG) stack (Fig. We carry out the excitation (PLE) spectroscopy of this GWG stack and monitor emission from the 1s state. The excitation wavelength is tuned from 570 to 600 nm using a supercontinuum laser source and a monochromator setup (see Methods for measurement details). as compared to the broad and weakly luminescent exciton peak in Fig. External and internal inhomogeneities cause potential fluctuations in the monolayer. The resulting random doping and stark effect lead to a spatial perturbation in the exciton peak position (Fig. The proposed technique relies on exploiting the narrow spectral resonance between the incoming excitation and a specific 1s exciton energy state via scattering with the resonating phonon mode (Fig. On the excitation side, only the energy states in the inhomogeneously broadened ns exciton band, that resonate in energy with hc λ ex ⁄ are excited (green laser spikes, Fig. The experimental demonstration of the above mechanism showing light emission from the specifically populated resonant 1s states is shown in Fig. To support the argument, we perform the emission imaging with 591, 593 and 595 nm excitation wavelengths in Fig. We obtain an average total linewidth of 1.21 ± 0.04 meV (Fig. Enhanced Quantum efficiency in spite FLG encapsulation: The internal quantum efficiency of emission in the proposed mechanism can be written as a product of relaxation (η rel ) and emission (η em ) quantum efficiency: As a result of the ultrafast relaxation rate (γ res ) in M3: Excitons inherit the angular momentum of the electronic bands in the K, K ′ valley. Therefore, an incoming circularly (linearly) polarized light generates exciton in a specific valley (superposition state of both the valleys) The FLG encapsulation in the GWG sample helps to suppress both these effects. First, in mechanism M3, as we selectively choose the phonon mode that dominates the single-step relaxation, the uncontrolled pseudospin randomization during the relaxation process is avoided. For example, the polarization of the incoming light does not change by scattering with the A 1 ′ phonon mode due to the diagonal form of its Raman tensor On the other hand, when the 2A 1 ′ phonon mode dominates the relaxation process, we obtain a degraded DOLP (DOCP) of ~68.3 % (~40%) (Fig. symmetric system (schematically depicted in the inset of Fig. When sample temperature increases, upon relaxation through mechanism M1, the states outside the light cone get populated and start contributing to light emission mediated by phonons (Fig. In the current technique, direct light cone to light cone transition happens from the higher energy band to the 1s band. Therefore, the excitons directly relax to the lowest energy states in the 1s band at all temperatures. As γ r and γ gr (≫ γ nr ) are independent of temperature, the overall exciton lifetime (τ~1 γ r +γ gr ) inside the light cone remains temperature independent in this process. Since phonon absorption process (γ ph,Abs ) is much slower than the net exciton decay rate (i.e., γ ph,Abs ≪ γ r + γ gr ), the excitons can hardly move outside the light cone. Consequently, the excitons do not have enough time to attain thermal equilibrium before radiative recombination (Fig. Exciton polarization degrades with temperature when it relaxes by mechanism M1, because of two primary reasons: (1) Enhancement in the overall phonon scattering rate -As more phonon modes start participating in the exciton relaxation process, the random phase accumulation during relaxation increases with temperature; and (2) Enhanced contribution of excitons outside the light cone -As explained previously, the fractional contribution of excitons outside light cone increases with temperature due to relaxation mechanism M1 (Fig. Discussion: Apart from 1s emission, the resonant Raman scattered photons also energetically coincide with the emitted light, and often it becomes challenging to segregate these two mechanisms We argue that the 1s excitonic emission has the dominant contribution over resonant Raman scattering in the current scenario of dual resonance based on the following observations: (a) We note a significantly lower than 100% DOCP and DOLP in the light output (Fig. k x , k y represents the wave vectors in the reciprocal space. a, t and E g is the lattice constant, hopping amplitude and the quasi-particle band gap for monolayer WS2, respectively. On solving the above matrix, we obtain the eigen energy (eigen wavefunction) of the CB and the VB, that we denote by E c,k (|c, k⟩), E v,k (|v, k⟩), respectively. Secondly, to obtain the exciton eigen energy positions and wavefunctions, we solve the Bethe-Salpeter (BS) equation ⟨vckQ|H|vck ′ Q⟩ = δ kk ′ (E c,k+Q -E v,k ) -(D -X)(k, k ′ , Q) |vckQ⟩ represents an electron (k e = k+Q) -hole (k h = k) pair that forms as basis states of an exciton at Q. D is the direct coulombic interaction between the electron-hole pair states given by: We neglect the exchange interaction X, as it has negligible contribution to the excitonic states close to Q = 0. A is the area of the two-dimensional crystal. The interaction potential V k-k ′ is given by Here q 0 is the elementary charge value, q = |k -k ′ |, and ξ is a fitting parameter denoting the spatial spread in the out-of-plane direction of an electron and hole. The dielectric function ε(q) is given by + r 0 qe -qξ p b = p t = P = (ε ENV -κ) (ε ENV + κ) ⁄ for identical dielectric environment on top and bottom. D is the monolayer sheet thickness, η = √ε ∥ ε ⊥ ⁄ and κ = √ ε ∥ ε ⊥ . ε ∥ (ε ⊥ ) and ε ENV is the effective in-plane (out-of-plane) and environmental dielectric constant of the monolayer TMD. The value of ε ∥ (ε ⊥ ) used in our calculations is 5.01 (6.07). To obtain the exciton eigen energy positions in a monolayer WS2 flake encapsulated in graphene, we use the following fitting parameters to match the Δ 2s-1s with its experimentally obtained value of 31.5 meV: ξ(nm) 6 The excitonic eigen energy positions for the first few bright states are given in the The photons detected at the dual resonance (both absorption and emission resonance) can be obtained through the two possible channels: (a) Resonant Raman scattering: Here the excitation is resonant with the higher energy excitonic states, and the final state after Raman scattering is a vibrational state above the ground state In general, both the Raman scattered photon, and the emitted photon from radiative recombination of the 1s exciton will contribute to the detected light (at 610 nm in our case). Note that, Resonant Raman scattering is an instantaneous process that maintains complete coherence with the excitation source, while the light detected due to the emission process results from a cascade of absorption, exciton scattering by phonon, and emission While both processes can contribute to the outgoing photons, based on the experimental evidence, it is clear that the emission from 1s excitons (process b) is the dominant mechanism in our case as compared to the resonant Raman scattered light (process a). The arguments are as follows: ( Secondly, during the finite stay of the excitons inside the light cone, the polarization of the relaxed excitons suffers due to pseudospin precession around the in-plane magnetic field manifesting due to large electron-hole coulomb interaction in monolayer TMDs. This leads to polarization degradation in the exciton band, as observed in our measurements. This effect is even more pronounced in the case of resonance with the 2A 1 ′ phonon mode. Again, as Raman scattering is not a cascaded (rather, an instantaneous and coherent) process, we expect 100% Thus, the strong deviation from 100% polarization is a direct proof (2) DOCP < DOLP -A characteristic feature of exciton pseudospin in 2D materials In 2D materials, due to the in-plane nature of the magnetic field manifesting due to electron-hole exchange interaction, it is expected that the degree of circular polarization is always lesser than the degree of linear polarization. This is however not the case with the Raman scattered light (100% DOLP and DOCP of the Raman scattered light with A 1 ′ phonon, shown above). As explained in the previous point, we observe DOCP < DOLP for both A 1 ′ and 2A 1 ′ phonon resonance, again suggesting that emission playing a more dominant role than resonant Raman. ( In contrast, when we apply the same technique to a similar stack of bilayer WS2 flake encapsulated in few-layer-graphene (Figure Rather, in stark contrast to the monolayer case, the light intensity is found to be nearly independent of the energetic position of the excitation with respect to the inhomogeneously broadened excitonic emission shape (obtained from 532 nm off-resonant excitation): This difference between the monolayer and the few-layer WS2 is explained using the internal quantum efficiency equation as given in the main text. Here η rel denotes the quantum efficiency of the relaxation process and η em denotes the quantum efficiency of the emission process once the 1s excitons are inside the light cone. It is known that as we move beyond a monolayer system, there are additional lower energy dark states, which increase linearly in number with the layer number (L) (4) Abrupt reduction in peak intensity for L > 1 From the above figures, we observe a significantly reduced peak intensity for L > 1 compared with monolayer samples. If monolayer peak intensity would have been dominated by resonant Raman process, we would expect similar intensity in the few-layer samples as well. This is another evidence that the peak intensity in the monolayer sample is dominated by excitonic emission under dual resonance, and not by resonant Raman scattering. 