Linear elastic fracture mechanics theory predicts that the speed of crack growth is limited by the Rayleigh wave speed. Although many experimental observations and numerical simulations have supported this prediction, some exceptions have raised questions about its validity. The underlying reasons for these discrepancies and the precise limiting speed of dynamic cracks remain unknown. Here, we demonstrate that tensile (mode I) cracks can exceed the Rayleigh wave speed and propagate at supershear speeds. We show that taking into account geometric non-linearities, inherent in most materials, is sufficient to enable such propagation modes. These geometric non-linearities modify the crack-tip singularity, resulting in different crack-tip opening displacements, cohesive zone behavior, and energy flows towards the crack tip. The speed at which cracks propagate is a fundamental characteristic that has implications in various fields such as material design Here, we investigate the minimal requirements for the transition to supershear propagation of tensile cracks using numerical simulations. Our simulations reveal that the presence of geometric non-linearities alone is the primary factor driving supershear crack growth resulting from a continuous acceleration through the transonic speed range. Since such non-linearities are generally present in materials, these findings demonstrate that supershear propagation is an inherent characteristic in dynamic crack problems, independent of the specific material constitutive laws. We consider the most generic and simple model without introducing a non-linear material constitutive law or any additional material parameter. The material deformation is described by a two-dimensional plane-strain tensor E ij , defined as where u i and x i are the i-th displacement and coordinate component (i ≡ x, y), respectively. To easily switch between linear and geometrically non-linear (GNL) cases, we introduce the factor α ∈ {0, 1}. Therefore, for α = 1, E ij corresponds to the Green-Lagrangian strain tensor, while for α = 0, it is its linear approximation, the infinitesimal strain tensor ε ij (see Fig. where δ ij is the Kronecker delta. Notice that, as sketched in Fig. Fracture of the material is modeled using a cohesive approach, where cohesive tractions across the crack plane represent the progressive failure of the material. In our model, see Fig. We examine the behavior of fracture growth in a twodimensional plane-strain system of height H = 102.6 mm and length L = 154 mm mimicking the most common experimental configuration (see Fig. First, we consider the linear elastic case (α = 0). Immediately after the seed crack is introduced, it becomes unstable, accelerates, and propagates through the entire interface (Fig. These results reveal a few important mechanisms for crack dynamics of geometrically non-linear materials. First, simulations at different stretch levels are superimposed when normalized by Griffith's length (see Fig. Next, we focus on the crack-tip opening displacement to determine the mechanisms allowing for propagation through the transonic regime. For the linear case (α = 0), see Fig. To visualize further the modified near-tip fields and the associated energy flow to the crack tip, we compute the Poynting vector The modified energy flux to the crack tip also causes changes to the local dissipation, which manifests itself in the properties of the cohesive zone. From the near-tip Poynting vector fields (see Fig. The present study confirms previous numerical simulations related to the limiting speed of propagating cracks Let us conclude with a discussion on possible directions for future work. The results for the crack-tip opening displacement, energy release rate, and cohesive zone size point toward the conclusion that the elastic field distribution and energy budgeting in the vicinity of the crack tip of a GNL material exhibit completely different behaviors than that of a linear elastic material. Recent attempts to uncover the underlying mechanisms tackled such problems perturbatively Finally, the classical LEFM theory developed over the last century DSK and MP acknowledge support from the Swiss National Science Foundation under the SNSF starting grant (TMSGI2_211655). We thank J. Fineberg and M. Wang for sharing their experimental results Let τ ij denote the true (Cauchy) stress tensor. The equation of motion in the absence of body forces reads: where t+∆t Ω is the body domain in the deformed (actual) configuration at time t + ∆t, t+∆t ρ is the material density in that configuration, and the differentiation is with respect to the deformed configuration. The weak form of Eq. (3) reads Applying integration by parts and divergence theorem, while omitting the boundary terms, we find where e ij is the linear strain tensor in the deformed configuration. Since a body can undergo large displacements and rotations, the above relation cannot be solved directly. It is solved incrementally where the solution at t + ∆t is approximated from already known equilibrium configurations. Thus, it is more suitable to employ the Total Lagrangian (T.L.) formulation where the known equilibrium configuration at t = 0 is considered, and all the kinematic variables are thus computed relative to this initial configuration. The T.L. formulation uses the 2 nd -Piola-Kirchhoff stress measure σ ij , and Green-Lagrange strain measure E ij to formulate Eq. ( where for a geometrical non-linear case Notice that the differentiation is with respect to the initial configuration. A complete derivation of Eq. ( The stress and strain at t + ∆t is expressed as a sum of stress and strain at a previous time t and their incremental change at ∆t, i.e. where ∆ε ij , ∆η ij is the linear and non-linear incremental strains referred to the configuration at t = 0 (for details, see δ t+∆t u i 0 ρ t+∆t üi dΩ = 0 . We employ an explicit time integration (central difference method) along with a predictor-corrector scheme to solve the above equation of motion. The predictor stage is given as : Solving the equation of motion for incremental acceleration ∆ü i : The corrector stage is given as : We employ the Finite Element method to solve the above equations. To ensure numerical stability, we chose the incremental time step ∆t based on the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition: ∆t = 0.05 × h min 0 ρ(1 -ν 2 )/2μ(1 + ν), where h min is the minimum element size, μ is the shear modulus of the material, and ν is its Poisson's ratio. We adopt a discontinuous Galerkin finite element method for cohesive zone modelling where [[x]] = x + -x -represents the jump across the interface (Γ + , Γ -), ⟨x⟩ = 1 2 (x + + x -) represents the average across an interface and n + j is the outward normal from the interface Γ + . The second term in the above equation makes the formulation consistent. The third term is added to make the formulation symmetric, which improves convergence, and the fourth term enforces the displacement continuity. The stabilization parameter θ that ensures that the formulation remains positive-definite. For a linear elastic material, θ depends on the material parameters and the element size h, i.e. θ = θμ(1 + 2ν/(1 -2ν))/h where μ is shear modulus, ν is Poisson's ratio and θ an arbitrarily chosen positive number Here, since we simulate crack propagation along a weak plane represented as Γ f , the above expression is further modified to allow a jump in displacements along Γ f . For fracture along an internal interface Γ f , the modified expression is given as where β = 1 if the average traction ⟨σ ij ⟩n j along the interface Γ f is greater than the critical stress, i.e. represents the crack tip opening displacement δ in Fig. ) represents σ yy (y = 0) in Fig. where g(t ′ ). Thus, replacing the second term in Eq. Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) describes the growth of a crack by an energy balance where Γ is the fracture energy, assumed to be a constant material property, and G is the energy release rate that depends on crack (half-)length a, crack speed c f , and remote load σ ∞ . Under assumptions of time-invariant loading, the dynamic energy release rate G can be related to its static equivalent G 0 via where g(c f ) is a known universal function In a uniformly loaded system, where plane-strain Griffith's nucleation length is L G = 2μΓ/π(1 -ν)σ 2 ∞ , the static energy release rate is given by G 0 = π(1ν)σ 2 ∞ a/2μ. Therefore, the specific crack-tip equation of motion for a uniformly loaded system can be written as: Effect of Fracture Energy The fracture energy value does not affect the crack dynamics (normalized by Griffith's length) both in linear materials, as expected from LEFM, and GNL materials (see Fig. The instantaneous rate of energy flow towards the crack tip through an arbitrary contour Γ is given by where S ji is the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, u i is the displacement, U is the strain energy density, K is the kinetic energy density, c f is the crack speed, and δ xj is the Kronecker's delta operator, which is 1 only along the crack propagation direction x. In Eq. ( 