magnets, an emerging family of two-dimensional (2D) materials, have received tremendous attention due to their rich fundamental physics and significant potential for cutting-edge technological applications. In contrast to the conventional bulk counterparts, vdW magnets exhibit significant tunability of local material properties, such as stacking engineered interlayer coupling and layer-number dependent magnetic and electronic interactions, which promise to deliver previously unavailable merits to develop multifunctional microelectronic devices. As a further ingredient of this emerging topic, here we report nanoscale quantum sensing and imaging of atomically thin vdW magnet chromium thiophosphate CrPS4, revealing its characteristic layer-dependent 2D static magnetism and dynamic spin fluctuations. We also show a large tunneling magnetoresistance in CrPS4-based spin filter vdW heterostructures. The excellent material stability, robust strategy against environmental degradation, in combination with tailored magnetic properties highlight the potential of CrPS4 in developing state-of-the-art 2D spintronic devices for next-generation information technologies. Recent discovery of van der Waals (vdW) magnets has inspired a vast research interest in exploring transformative two-dimensional (2D) spintronic devices capable of delivering novel functionalities, such as ultra-high densities, improved compatibility to device integration, and tailored heterostructure engineering, to next-generation information sciences and technologies. Recently, the emergence of a more robust magnetic vdW material chromium thiophosphate CrPS4 with improved chemical stability provides an appealing platform to tackle the above challenges, expanding the available material scope for 2D spintronic research. We first briefly review the crystal structure and magnetic properties of the vdW material in the current study. CrPS4 has a monoclinic crystal symmetry where each Cr atom is surrounded by six S atoms forming a slightly distorted octahedron CrS6 in a 2D rectangular lattice as shown in Fig. We first utilize NV centers to investigate the layer-dependent static magnetization of the CrPS4 sample. d.c. wide-field magnetometry utilizes the Zeeman effect So far, we have shown the strong even-odd contrast of static magnetization of atomically thin CrPS4 crystals. Next, we use wide-field NV spin relaxometry method Figures In comparison with conventional vdW magnets, a distinct advantage of CrPS4 results from its robust material stability against air exposure, providing an attractive platform for developing practical spintronic applications. In summary, we have demonstrated NV wide-field imaging of layer dependent static magnetization and dynamic spin fluctuations in atomically thin CrPS4 crystals. By fabricating CrPS4-based vdW junction devices, we further report a large tunneling magnetoresistance, which is fundamentally related to different magnetic states of the tetralayer CrPS4 tunneling layer. The observed prominent magneto-tunneling effect, the field controllable magnetic orders, together with the robust chemical stability make CrPS4 a promising material candidate to develop functional 2D spintronic devices for practical applications. Our results also highlight the potential of NV centers in probing nanoscale spin related phenomena in low-dimensional vdW materials, opening the possibility of engineering NV-vdW-magnet-based hybrid quantum systems Author contributions: M.H. performed the NV measurements and analyzed the data with H. L and H. W. J. Z., S. L., and D. D. prepared the devices. S. L. performed the electrical transport measurements. J. G. and N. N. provided CrPS4 bulk crystals. V. W. and B. F. provided theoretical input on the tunneling magnetoresistance measured in CrPS4-based spin filter vdW heterostructures. C. R. D. supervised the project. The authors declare no financial interest.