A recent paper [Lee et al., J Hitherto, milestones of superconductivity research include its discovery by Onnes in 1911, the BCS theory of Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer Lee et al. In any case, the experiments by Lee et al. In this paper, we perform such DFT calculations, focusing on the crystal and electronic structure. The latter can serve at least as a starting point for subsequent many-body calculations. Relaxing the lead-apatite crystal structure, we find very similar lattice parameters as Lee et al. Computational method-For the DFT structural relaxations and electronic structure calculations, we use Vasp Crystal structure-Let us start with the undoped parent compound Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O, a lead apatite with a hexagonal structure (P6 3 /m, 176) identical to that displayed in Fig. Next we study the crystal structure of the putative superconductor Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O. The XRD data of Lee et al. Indeed it was already discussed in The periodic continuation of the single unit cell is shown in the the top view of Fig. When substituting one Pb by Cu, two flat bands cross the Fermi energy, labeled "1" and "2" in Fig. Due to the large Cu-Cu distance (≈10 Å) in the leadapatite structure, the Cu-Cu hopping is extremely small, which explains that these bands are so narrow. For example, the bandwidth of the conduction band near Fermi energy is only ≈120 meV. The small hopping certainly also contributes to the experimental observation that the high temperature metallic phase is a very bad metal with a large resistivity of 0.02 Ωcm at temperatures T ≳ 380 K This suggests that at least a slight doping is required to arrive at a metallic system as observed in experiment While we can definitely say that the low-energy physics of Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O at x ≈ 1 is dominated by predominately Cu bands, the precise arrangement of the Cu atoms and hence the lattice formed by these very Cu atoms is more difficult to predict in DFT. Periodically extending the single unit cells results in a triangular arrangement of the Cu-atoms (blue) in Fig. The triangular lattice we find here is highly frustrated regarding magnetic fluctuations. The large distance and thus small hopping between Cu sites further suppresses the strength of prospective magnetic fluctuations. Also the coupling between the layers is weak: the dispersion from Γ to A is about half of that from Γ to M or X in Fig. Discussion: superconductivity-While we have not performed calculations for superconductivity, we will discuss in the following possible mechanism on the basis of the electronic structure found. That is, two flat Cubands crossing the Fermi energy and two somewhat more dispersive O bands immediately below. In contrast to cuprates, the small hopping and lattice frustration suppress antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations. This strongly speaks against spin-fluctuation as the pairing glue at elevated temperatures. Ferromagnetism is on the other hand known to prevail in flat bands Similarly and competing with ferromagnetic order, superconductivity can arise from flat bands Another possibility, as already discussed in Scenarios of one-dimensional superconductivity What can we learn from our DFT calculations for prospective non-superconducting explanations of the experimental results of Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O [7-9]? The sharp drop in resistivity might also occur from an ordering or structural transition, possibly affecting the lattice of the Cu dopants (at least when seeking to explain the low-T resistivity of the noise level Conclusion-Our DFT calculations and consideration regarding correlation effects put Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O in an ultra-strongly correlated regime, with U/W of O It is a bit puzzling, why Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O with such a large U/W was not a Mott insulator or charge transfer insulator in experiment. A possible explanation is hole or electron doping through some off-stoichiometry (different from x) in experiment. Such an additional doping would put Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O into the class of doped Mott or charge transfer insulators. Note that Pb and Cu are both 2+; hence other dopings x will not change the Cu 2+ oxidation state; Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O remains insualting for all x. This puts O (or P) deficiency or excess as a possible source for such an accidental doping offstoichiometry. Given the synthesis procedure Note added. Independently to our work, three other DFT studies appeared simultaneously on arXiv This supplementary material contains additional density-functional theory calculations regrading the lattices constants, band structure, Wannier projections and DFT+U magnetic calculations. In Section S.I, we provide computational details and DFT structural relaxation results regrading the energetically favorable positions of extra O and doped Cu atoms. In Section S.II, we supplement the main text by showing all relevant partial DOS and charge distributions. In Section S.III, we provide the DFT+U total energies of different magnetic orders in Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O. DFT structural relaxations and electronic structure calculations are performed using the Vasp code To investigate the ground state crystal structure of both Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O and Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O, we need to answer three questions totally: To answer the question (1), we performed a simple check: we calculate the total energy and relaxed lattice constants when the extra O occupies different positions in the units dark red or the three white circles in Fig. To answer the question (2), we construct a 2×2×1 supercell of Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O akin to that shown in Fig. To check whether the spin-1 2 form stable magnetic order, we consider a 2×2×2 supercell that contains altogether 8 Cu ions. We then initialize different magnetic orders, including ferromagnetism (FM), and various types of antiferromagnetism (AFM): AFM-A, AFM-C, AFM-C1 and AFM-G, as shown in Fig. 