A new potential class of nanolaminated and structurally complex materials, herein conceived as the Zigzag IntermetAllic (ZIA) phases, is proposed. A study of the constituent phases of a specific Nb-Si-Ni intermetallic alloy revealed that its ternary H-phase, i.e., the Nb 3 SiNi 2 intermetallic compound (IMC), is a crystalline solid with the close-packed fcc Bravais lattice, the 312 MAX phase stoichiometry and a layered atomic arrangement that may define an entire class of nanolaminated IMCs analogous to the nanolaminated ceramic compounds known today as the MAX phases. The electron microscopy investigation of the Nb 3 SiNi 2 compound -the first candidate ZIA phase -revealed a remarkable structural complexity, as its ordered unit cell is made of 96 atoms. The ZIA phases extend the concept of nanolaminated crystalline solids well beyond the MAX phases family of early transition metal carbides/nitrides, most likely broadening the spectrum of achievable material properties into domains typically not covered by the MAX phases. Furthermore, this work uncovers that both families of nanolaminated crystalline solids, i.e., the herein introduced fcc ZIA phases and all known variants of the hcp MAX phases, obey the same overarching stoichiometric rule P x+y A x N y , where x and y are integers ranging from 1 to 6. A revolution in materials science was undoubtedly achieved through the microstructural manipulation of materials on the nanoscale Transferring the superior properties of nanostructured materials to the bulk scale, a process demanding multiscale materials engineering, is one of the key challenges of contemporary materials science H. Gleiter -the scientist who introduced the term "nanostructured materials" This work focuses on a single member of a potential class of nanolaminated intermetallic compounds (IMCs), herein named the "zigzag intermetallic" phases or simply the ZIA phases. The first candidate ZIA phase introduced in this work is the Nb 3 SiNi 2 ternary IMC, which is considered the H-phase of the Nb-Si-Ni system Initially, arc melting was employed to produce bulk materials made of the Nb 3 SiNi 2 IMC ZIA phase. The microstructure of the as-cast Nb-Si-Ni intermetallic alloy was first studied by SEM with the aid of a backscattered electron (BSE) detector. The compositional contrast of the BSE image in Fig. The homogenization annealing at 1421 K was performed, first and foremost, to investigate whether the four-phase assembly of the as-cast Nb-Si-Ni intermetallic alloy would converge to an alloy with a higher fraction of the Nb 3 SiNi 2 IMC ZIA phase. The annealing aimed also at a first assessment of the thermal stability of the Nb 3 SiNi 2 ZIA phase of interest in this work. The SEM/EDS/XRD analysis of the annealed alloy (Figs. The results of this work contradict the early work of Gladyshevskii et al. A thorough thermodynamic assessment of the Nb-Si-Ni system was only recently conducted -50 years after Gladyshevskii's pioneering work -in a set of works published by dos Santos et al. All 7 samples exhibited triphasic microstructures, each comprising two or three of the four principal phases, i.e., the ternary Laves, μ, T-and H-phases; small fractions of the NbNi 3 IMC or the unknown Z phase were also reported in 3 of the 7 samples. The Z phase is one of three phases with unresolved crystal structure -tentatively designated X, Y and Z -found by dos Santos et al. after annealing select Nb-Si-Ni alloy compositions at 1473 K for 504 h Careful consideration of both the prior attempts by dos Santos et al. The results of CALPHAD calculations of the phase equilibria in the ternary Nb-Si-Ni system at 1423 K (i.e., close to the temperature of isothermal annealing, 1421 K, of the arc-melted alloy), 1523 K, 1623 K and 1723 K are shown in Fig. of the experimentally synthesized Nb 3 SiNi 2 is diamond cubic (Fd 3m, space group 227) In the search for new refractory materials with exceptional properties, both ZIA and MAX phases are nanolaminated crystalline solids that share the same historical roots, dating back to the advent of space exploration in the 1960s Using data compiled by the Materials Genome Project Actinides A groundbreaking impact of the herein proposed ZIA phases is that they actually extend the concept of crystal structure nanolamination much beyond the early transition metal carbides/nitrides known as the MAX phases. As may be seen in the color-coded periodic table of elements of Fig. It is worthwhile noting that in all hitherto reported fcc ternary IMCs now considered as candidate ZIA phases, the electronegativity, χ, of the Z-element is invariably smaller than the electronegativities of both I-and A-elements (Table A unique feature of the ZIA phases is that the I-and A-elements could be chosen from the same group in the periodic table. For example, both the A-element (In) in Na 3 AuIn 2 , and Na 3 AgIn 2 as well as the I-element (Ga) in Mg 3 GaNi 2 belong to group 13. This freedom in the choice of the elements making up the ZIA phases does not characterize the MAX phases, where only two X-elements are allowed (i.e., C or N), and these are not known to be replaced by any of the candidate M-and A-elements. The only known exception of an element that has been rather flexible in occupying the M-or A-site of specific MAX phase compounds is the late transition metal iron (Fe), which belongs to group 8 of the periodic table. More specifically, Fe has been fairly recently reported to form the (Ti 1-x ,Fe x ) 3 AlC 2 solid solutions on the M-site Even though the main objective of this work was to introduce the class of nanolaminated ZIA phases via the experimental synthesis and characterization of its Nb 3 SiNi 2 first candidate member as well as to demonstrate the feasibility of producing phase-pure materials based on the Nb 3 SiNi 2 ternary IMC, an overarching stoichiometric rule governing both the MAX and the ZIA phases was discovered and is proposed here. As pointed out by Goossens et al. in a rather recent review A major challenge addressed in this work was to demonstrate that the synthesis of phase-pure bulk ZIA phase-based materials is feasible. Producing phase-pure bulk materials is a prerequisite for the systematic investigation of material properties (e.g., elastoplastic and fracture behavior; oxidation and corrosion resistance; electrical and magnetic properties; radiation tolerance; etc.) or the possible appli-cations of the ZIA phases and their 2D derivatives, provided that these can be extracted. Even though the production of phase-pure Ni 3 SiNb 2 via arc melting proved extremely challenging, presumably due to the volatilization of Ni and/or its compounds above a certain temperature, the synthesis of quasi-phasepure bulk Ni 3 SiNb 2 via RHP was successful. Similar challenges in producing phase-pure bulk materials have been previously reported in association with the synthesis of specific MAX phases, such as the Zr-and Hf-based MAX phases Nanostructured materials have revolutionized modern materials science, even though their potential is far from being fully exploited for the benefit of the Society. Nanolaminated ceramics, such as the MAX phases and their 2D derivatives known as MXenes, already changed the way we perceive materials design and functionalization on the nanoscale, thereby producing innovative materials that are characterized by a wide variety of unique properties, precisely tailored to the requirements of the targeted applications. Identifying market niches that could use nanostructured materials, including applications in extreme service environments (e.g., high temperatures and pressures, corrosive media, irradiation, etc.), is an important driver towards the commercial deployment of innovative materials with sophisticated nanodesigns and carefully engineered functionalities. In this work, we propose a novel class of nanolaminated crystalline solids, the 'zigzag intermetallic' phases or, simply, the ZIA phases. The herein introduced ZIA phases are characterized by an fcc (Fd 3m, space group 227) close-packed lattice of appreciable structural complexity, while obeying the stoichiometric rule of the 312 MAX phases, i.e., M n+1 AX n with n = 2. The ZIA phases and all known MAX phase orders, including the "hybrid" M 5 A 2 C 3 and M 7 A 2 C 5 ones mentioned above, appear to respect the herein proposed global stoichiometric rule P x+y A x N y , where x and y are integers in the 1-6 range. The first candidate ZIA phase, i.e., the Nb 3 SiNi 2 IMC, is identified as the H-phase of the Nb-Si-Ni system and has been found in bulk samples fabricated by both arc melting (low Nb 3 SiNi 2 content) and RHP (quasi-phase-pure Nb 3 SiNi 2 ). The STEM/SAED characterization of Nb 3 SiNi 2 confirmed the expected diamond cubic crystal structure, revealing a remarkable structural complexity, as reflected in an exceptionally large unit cell made of 96 atoms with nanolayered arrangement. Considering that, apart from the Nb 3 SiNi 2 IMC, other ternary 312 IMCs (i.e., Mn 3 SiNi 2 , V 3 SiNi 2 , Cr 3 SiNi 2 , Ta 3 SiNi 2 , Nb 3 SiCo 2 , Na 3 AuIn 2 , Na 3 AgIn 2 , and Mg 3 GaNi 2 ) with the same diamond cubic fcc lattice have already been experimentally synthesized, it is reasonable to assume that these IMCs constitute an entire class of nanolaminated crystalline solids, herein designated as the ZIA phases. Confirming the nanolaminated nature of the other ternary 312 IMCs is the aim of ongoing investigations. The ZIA phases extend the concept of crystal structure nanolamination beyond the early transition metal carbides/nitrides known as the MAX phases. Despite sharing similarities and the same historical roots with the MAX phases, ZIA phases such as the Nb 3 SiNi 2 IMC are characterized by appreciably more complex crystal structures and, by extension, configurational entropies than ternary MAX phases such as the Ti 3 SiC 2 ceramic. Therefore, the nanolaminated ZIA phases are conceptually positioned, in terms of characteristics and potential applications, between the nanolaminated MAX phases (with unique hybrid metallic/ceramic properties, and proven capability of producing 2D derivatives, known as MXenes, with tailored functionalities) and other dense and complex multicomponent alloys, such as high-entropy alloys (HEAs) characterized by large chemical complexity and remarkable radiation tolerance. This work succeeded in synthesizing phase-pure bulk Nb 3 SiNi 2 via reactive hot pressing (RHP), which is considered an important achievement as the production of phase-pure ZIA phase-based materials is not only a prerequisite for the (mechanical, electrical, magnetic, etc.) property determination of these largely unknown compounds, but also to explore the possibility of producing and characterizing their (potential) 2D derivatives, as well as assessing ways to tailor their properties (e.g., ductility) in an application-driven manner. It is likely that the new class of ZIA phases will create a new ecosystem of nanolaminated/nanostructured (3D/2D) materials with amazing new properties and fascinating applications in diverse technological areas. The first step towards the exploration of this hitherto unexplored ecosystem is the successful synthesis of many materials with high phase purity, starting from the already identified candidate ZIA phases (e.g., Nb 3 SiNi 2 , Mn 3 SiNi 2 , V 3 SiNi 2 , Cr 3 SiNi 2 , Na 3 AuIn 2 , Mg 3 GaNi 2 , etc.) and proceeding with theoretically predicted (e.g., by means of thermodynamic modeling, density functional theory, etc.) but not yet experimentally made IMCs. The second step in this exploratory work should include attempts to produce 2D derivatives of the ZIA phases, as well as ternary hcp IMCs (e.g., Co 3 SiNb 2 , Ni 3 SiNb 2 , Cu 3 SiMg 2 , etc.), in order to find out whether they are also characterized by crystal structure nanolamination, as expected, or not. Conventional vacuum arc melting of high-purity (>99.99%) Nb, Ni and Si elemental raw powders was initially employed to synthesize the 'Nb-Si-Ni intermetallic alloy' with the targeted H-phase Nb 3 SiNi 2 stoichiometry, i.e., 50.0Nb-16.7Si-33.3Ni The thermal and microstructural stability of the as-cast Nb-Si-Ni intermetallic alloy was assessed via an isothermal annealing treatment at 1421 K for 2 weeks (336 h) in a vacuum furnace (ThermoLyne furnace, model 46100). The as-cast alloy samples were pre-encapsulated in a quartz (SiO 2 ) tube, which was pressurized with argon (Ar) gas to 1 atm; both heating and cooling rates were fixed at about 14.2 K/min. The inability to produce a phase-pure Nb-Si-Ni intermetallic alloy by means of arc melting redirected the synthesis efforts in this work towards a powder metallurgical processing route. Quasi phase-pure discs of the Nb-Si-Ni intermetallic alloy were successfully produced via reactive hot pressing (RHP), using hydride and elemental starting powders, i.e., NbH 0.89 (<40 μm, CBMM, Brazil), Ni (Vale, T123TM, 3-7 μm, UK) and Si (A10, 2.1 μm, HC Starck, Germany). To optimize the mixing of the starting powders and improve powder particle contact, the as-received NbH 0.89 powder was first refined by low-energy ball milling in isopropanol for 24 h (Turbula®T2), using WC-6 wt.% Co (WC-6Co) milling balls (diameters of 5 and 10 mm). The refined NbH 0.89 powder was dried in a rotating evaporator (Heidolph 4010) and then mixed with the Ni and Si elemental powders in isopropanol for another 24 h, using WC-6Co balls. The ratio of the NbH 0.89 , Ni and Si powders in the powder feedstock was adjusted to the targeted 3Nb:1Si:2Ni. After mixing, the powder suspension was dried in a rotating evaporator. The powder feedstock was cold-pressed into 'green' pellets (30 mm in diameter, 4-5 mm thickness) under a load of 30 MPa in a graphite die. Exploratory RHP runs were carried out in a hot press (W100/150-2200-50 LAX, FCT Systeme, Frankenblick, Germany). The powder compacts were heated in vacuum (0.4 mbar) at 10 K/min to different sintering temperatures (i.e., 1523, 1623 and 1723 K), where consolidation occurred under an uniaxial pressure of 30 MPa for a dwell period of 60 min. The sintered discs (30 mm in diameter) were allowed to cool naturally by switching off the power supply of the hot-press. Metallographic cross-sections were prepared from all Nb-Si-Ni intermetallic alloy samples produced via arc melting and RHP; all cross-sections were polished to a mirror surface finish with a colloidal silica (OPS) suspension in the final step. The microstructure of as-cast and isothermally annealed samples produced via arc melting was studied by means of a Thermo Fisher Apreo SEM (scanning electron microscope) equipped with an EDX (energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) detector (EDAX Octane Elite Super). Elemental mapping in the RHP samples was done by means of an electron probe microanalyzer (EPMA; JXA-8530F, JEOL Ltd, Japan) equipped with a WDXS (wavelength-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) detector (1-5 eV, 8 eV at Fe-K α , full scanner type spectrometer). EDX elemental analysis (1 SDD/UTW, 129 eV at Mn-K α ) of the identified phases was performed on the same device at fixed conditions (15 kV accelerating voltage, 100 nA beam current). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was employed to identify the phases present in all Nb-Si-Ni intermetallic alloy samples at room temperature. The as-cast and annealed samples produced via arc melting were analyzed on a Bruker AXS D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer, using Cu-K α radiation (40 kV, 40 mA) in a Bragg-Brentano geometry; the XRD spectra were recorded at steps of 0.02 • in the 20-90 • 2θ range. The RHP samples were analyzed on a Rigaku SmartLab SE XRD system with 1D/teX Ultra 250 HE detector, using Cu-K α radiation (40 kV, 40 mA) in a Bragg-Brentano geometry; the XRD spectra were recorded at steps of 0.05 • in the 5-90 • 2θ range, at a scan speed of 0.1 • per min. An FEI Helios 600 dual-beam FIB/SEM was used to lift out TEM (transmission electron microscopy) thin foils from sufficiently large Nb 3 SiNi 2 grains in the arc-melted alloy samples, utilizing the classic lift-out method TEM analysis of the FIB foils lifted out from the arc-melted alloy samples was performed by means of a FEI Tecnai TF30 and a FEI Titan 80/300, both operated at 300 kV. The latter was equipped with an EDAX Octane Elite T EDX detector, and all EDX quantification work was conducted based on the Cliff-Lorimer method Thermodynamic simulations were performed to predict the equilibrium phases at the sintering temperatures of the RHP alloys (i.e., 1523 K, 1623 K, and 1723 K), as well as at 1423 K (i.e., close to the homogenization annealing temperature, 1421 K, of the arc-melted alloy). These simulations were performed with version V2020a of the Thermo-Calc software (Thermo-Calc Software Inc., Solna, Sweden) μ-Nb 7 Ni 6 71.99±0.13 17.17±0.03 10.85±0.07 -1623 H-Nb 3 SiNi 2 53.57±0.15 13.26±0.03 33.17±0.12 -L-Ni 3 SiNb 2 36.25±0.15 17.49±0.04 46.27±0.16 - The term "Nb-Si-Ni intermetallic alloy" is used for this alloy composition throughout the manuscript.