SF 6 is widely used as a gas-insulator in high-voltage power electrical system. Detecting SF 6 leaks using unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-based thermal cameras allows efficient large-scale inspections during routine maintenance. The emergence of lightweight metalenses can increase the endurance of UAVs. Simultaneously controlling dispersion and polarization properties in metalens is significant for thermal camera applications. However, via a propagation phase modulation method in which the phase is tuned locally, it is difficult and time-consuming to obtain enough different nanostructures to control multiwavelength independently while maintain the polarization-insensitive property. To this end, by using a global modulation method, a polarization-insensitive dual-wavelength achromatic and super-chromatic metalens are designed respectively. The working wavelength is set at 10.6 and 12 μm to match the absorption peaks of SF 6 and one of its decompositions (SO 2 F 2 ), respectively. According to the operating wavelengths, only the geometric parameters of two nanofins are required to be optimized (through genetic algorithm). Then they are superimposed on each other to form cross-shaped meta-atoms. In order to control the influence between the two crossed nanofins, an additional term ∆f is introduced into the phase equation to modify the shape of the wavefront, whereby the phase dispersion can be easily engineered. Compared with local modulation, the number of unique nanostructures that need to be optimized can be reduced to two (operating at dual wavelengths) by the Pancharatnam-Berry (PB) phase based global modulation method. Therefore, the proposed design strategy is expected to circumvent difficulties in the local design approaches and can find widespread applications in multiwavelength imaging and spectroscopy. Sulfur hexafluoride (SF 6 ) is commonly used as an electrical gas-insulator in high-voltage and extra-highvoltage system, including gas-insulated-switchgear and gas-insulated-transmission line, owing to its outstanding dielectric properties, which enable it to withstand high electric fields and prevent electrical arcing that could cause equipment damage Metasurface is a two-dimensional (2D) planar structure composed of meta-atoms or meta-molecules with subwavelength size, which can control the optical properties of electromagnetic waves such as amplitude, phase and polarization Compared to polarization-dependent metalenses, polarization-insensitive metalenses are more suitable for realistic applications. Their capability to function effectively with light of any polarization allows for greater versatility and practicality. A variety of methods have been proposed to achieve polarization-insensitive functionality. A straightforward way is to select C4-symmetric nanoantennas, such as square or isotropic circle, to be meta-atoms On the other hand, controlling the dispersion in metalens is equally significant particularly for multiwavelength applications. For highly symmetric (C4 or higher) metaatoms, multiwavelength achromatic focusing have been realized by numerous means, including cascading multiple metalens Normally, the propagation phase can be considered as a local phase modulation, while the Pancharatnam-Berry (PB) phase can be viewed as a global effect For RCP/LCP illumination, if collimated incident light needs to be focused into a spot by PB phase modulation, the phase at position (x, y) in the space must satisfy the following equation where λ is the design wavelength and f is the focal length. Since any polarized light can be decomposed into two orthogonally circularly polarized (CP) one, the phase distribution can be written as follows for the polarizationinsensitive metalens based on the PB phase where a and b are the amplitudes for RCP and LCP light, respectively. They can be tuned flexibly, depending on the required functions of the metalens. The theoretical limits of the focusing efficiency for RCP and LCP light are determined by a/(a + b) and b/(a + b). To realize polarization-insensitive characteristics, a = b = 1. When illuminated by a plane wave, the transmitted electric field intensity on the metalens can be described by, where B is the amplitude of the transmitted light and j is the imaginary symbol of the complex number. Under CP light illumination, the Jones matrix for an anisotropic nanofin rotated around the geometric center by an angle θ can be expressed as where t l and t s are the transmission coefficients along the long and short axes of the nanofin, respectively. If two different anisotropic nanofins rotated by θ 1 and θ 2 respectively are superimposed together to form a cross-shaped meta-atom, its Jones matrix can be described by: t ′ l and t ′ s represent the transmission coefficients of the second nanofin. By defining For RCP illumination, the transmitted electric field of the cross-shaped meta-atom is: and 0 1 represent RCP and LCP light respectively. It can be seen that both RCP with the same phase as incident and LCP with abrupt 2θ 1 and 2θ 2 phases are included in the transmission. As only the phase of the transmitted light with an orthogonal polarization state can be modulated, for a specific wavelength λ, t l (λ) and t s (λ) of the anisotropic nanofin should have a phase difference of π to maximize its polarization conversion efficiency (PCE), i.e., the ratio of the transmission with opposite chirality to the incident. That is, the anisotropic nanofin should meet the condition of a half-wave plate. Besides the polarization-insensitive characteristics, if we also want to control the dispersion property such as realizing achromatic focusing at the two operating wavelengths, we can optimize the geometric size of the two corresponding nanofins at first. They carry the phase information φ 1 and φ 2 respectively as in the following, After the two optimized nanofins are superimposed to form cross-shaped meta-atoms, the transmitted electric field can be expressed as, E (x, y, λ) = B 1 (λ) e jφ1(x,y,λ1) + B 2 (λ) e jφ2(x,y,λ2) , Ideally, if B 1 (λ 1 ) : B 2 (λ 1 ) = 1 : 0 for λ 1 incident while B 1 (λ 2 ) : B 2 (λ 2 ) = 0 : 1 for λ 2 , the shape of the wavefronts and the focal length should be identical at both wavelengths and the system is achromatic. In practice, however, it is impossible to find ideal nanofins to meet the requirements. As shown in Eqs. ( ) should be satisfied for λ 1 (λ 2 ) incident. In the numerical simulations, the building blocks of the metalens are chosen to be Ge nanofins (b) If the two geometrical-parameter-optimized nanofins are directly crossed together, they will interfere each other. This will lead to the wavefronts at the two wavelengths being different and cause chromatic aberration, as schematically shown in Fig. As the two nanofins used to form cross-shaped metaatoms are designed to control their own phases independently, the interaction between them should be able to be compensated by adjusting one of the wavefronts. To make it simple, the metalens is considered to be polarizationsensitive and the compensation part is only added onto the wavefront of λ 1 , thus the phase φ 1 can be expressed as in the following, ) Obviously, both ∆f 1 and ∆f ′ 1 can influence the phase. The compensation part is incorporated into the global phase of the metalens which are realized by rotating the nanofins. Optimized Nanofin 1 (corresponding to λ 1 ) is applied in the metalens. Without loss of generality, we take ∆f 1 /∆f ′ 1 as 0 and 10 μm in the FDTD simulations to investigate their influence. From Eq. ( From Table focus point Fig. To gain insight into the origin of the difference, we then calculate the z-component of the electric field (E z ) along the surface of a cross-shaped meta-atom under different wavelengths and different polarizations. As shown in Fig. As the wavefront shape can be adjusted by ∆f according to Eq. ( In summary, in order to circumvent the disadvantage of the local designing method, in which numerous metaatoms are required to be optimized for dual-wavelength manipulation, we propose a novel strategy to globally design a metalens with characteristics of polarizationinsensitivity and dispersion-controllability at two operating wavelengths by only optimizing the dimensions of two nanofins. The meta-atom of the metalens consists of the two optimized nanofins crossed with each other. The interaction between the two nanofins is controlled by introducing ∆f into the phase equation. The design method is expected to find widespread applications in multiwavelength imaging and spectroscopy. Furthermore, it can be extended to other optical devices that need to modulate multiwavelength and polarization properties at the same time, such as holograms, vortex beam generators, beam shapers, and so forth.