Achieving highly transmitting molecular junctions through resonant transport at low bias is key to the next-generation low-power molecular devices. Although, resonant transport in molecular junctions was observed by connecting a molecule between the metal electrodes via chemical anchors by applying a high source-drain bias (> 1V), the conductance was limited to < 0.1 G0, G0 being the quantum of conductance. Here, we report electronic transport measurements by directly connecting a Ferrocene molecule between Au electrodes at the ambient condition in a mechanically controllable break junction setup (MCBJ), revealing a conductance peak at ~ 0.2 G0 in the conductance histogram. A similar experiment was repeated for Ferrocene terminated with amine (-NH2) and cyano (-CN) anchors, where conductance histograms exhibit an extended low conductance feature including the sharp high conductance peak, similar to pristine ferrocene. Statistical analysis of the data along with density functional theory-based transport calculation suggests the possible molecular conformation with a strong hybridization between the Au electrodes and Fe atom of Ferrocene molecule is responsible for a near-perfect transmission in the vicinity of the Fermi energy, leading to the resonant transport at a small applied bias (< 0.5V). Moreover, calculations including Van der Waals/dispersion corrections reveal a covalent like organometallic bonding between Au and the central Fe atom of Ferrocene, having bond energies of ~ 660 meV. Overall, our study not only demonstrates the realization of an air-stable highly transmitting molecular junction, but also provides an important insight about the nature of chemical bonding at the metal/organo-metallic interface. The central motivation of molecular electronics is to reduce the size of the conventional electronic components by taking advantage of the quantum mechanical phenomena at the atomic scale, along with the structural versatility of molecules. By adopting the revolutionary idea proposed by Aviram and Ratner 1 , various experimental techniques Recently, there are efforts to access the resonant transport regime in biphenyl-porphyrin oligomers (bp-ppo) Here, we focus on ferrocene, a chemically stable molecule at ambient condition, as the primary component of a single molecular device Typical conductance-distance breaking traces of ferrocene (FC) single molecular junction, connected to Au electrodes, is displayed in the left panel of figure The conductance histogram is now considered using traces with and without the molecular features (shown in the Supplementary Information, figure Now we focus on the influence of anchoring group on the conductance behavior of ferrocene molecular junction. Left panels of figures 3a and 3b, respectively, show the conductance-distance breaking traces of amine-terminated ferrocene (1,1′-bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene, abbreviated as FC-NH2) and cyano-terminated ferrocene (1,1′-dicyanoferrocene, abbreviated as FC-CN) single molecular junctions connected to Au electrodes. In contrast to FC, molecular plateaus of FC-NH2 and FC-CN have a broad range of conductance values and subsequent plateaus can also appear in a single trace To compare the evolution of the junction during stretching for the three different types of molecules, characteristic stretching length histograms for each conductance regime (H, M or L) are constructed by considering length from the relative zero position at 0.5 G0 to one order of magnitude below the most probable conductance peak (adopting the procedure mentioned in the references [88,89]). Figures To gain insight into the origin of measured conductance, we now compare experimental results with detailed DFT -based calculations. First, we consider two possible geometries (parallel and perpendicular orientation of FC with respect to the electrodes) and for each geometry, energies at different distances of the electrodes from the central Fe atom are evaluated. Example coordinate files are provided in the Supplementary Information, Section (j). The scale of the energies for different distances is large compared to the thermal energy accessible to the system (see Supplementary Information, figure covalent bonding (see Supplementary Information, section 4f for details). Now, the transmissions for these two geometries are calculated and conductance (G) can be written as, , where e is the elementary charge, V is the bias of the junction and fL/R is the Fermi distribution of the left/right reservoir, at temperature T = 300 K. The distribution of the left and right reservoir is shifted symmetrically by the bias of the junction. The difference between the Fermi distributions is called the transport window. For conductance to be significant, the overlap of the transmission function and the transport window must be non-negligible. The transmission functions for both geometries are displayed in figures 5c-d. In perpendicular geometry, the transport window overlaps with a resonance for bias of about 1 V but does not overlap significantly for infinitesimal bias. The wavefunction responsible for this resonance (see figure In this subsection, we explore the conductance behavior of ferrocene molecule coupled to Au electrode via -NH2 and -CN anchoring groups. Possibility of binding through the chemical anchors of FC-NH2 and FC-CN is clearly evident from the calculated negative binding energies for these two configurations (see Supplementary Information, Table In conclusion, we have demonstrated the resonant transport at room temperature by connecting an organometallic molecule between Au electrodes. By measuring conductance-distance traces for thousands of statistically independent junctions using a mechanically controllable break junction set-up, we observe that pristine Ferrocene binds strongly with the Au electrodes and provides a significant high conductance (~ 0.1-0.3 G0 in the bias range of 20 -400 mV) in the conductance histogram. The density functional calculations suggest that both perpendicular and parallel orientations of the molecule with respect to electrodes are energetically favorable configurations via covalent-like bonding. Transmission curve for the perpendicular geometry reveals a sharp peak near metallic Fermi level which leads to a conductance value closed to the experimentally observed conductance as well as a stronger bias dependence. Whereas similar calculations in parallel geometry shows a conductance in the range of 0.01 -0.09 G0 and having a rather weak bias dependence. We also observed that the inherent rotation of cyclopentadienyl rings of Ferrocene has negligible impact on the transmission curves. Furthermore, to understand the effect of chemical anchors, we performed similar experiment on ferrocene terminated with two different anchoring groups (-NH2) and (-CN). Both molecules display the high conductance peaks like pristine ferrocene in the conductance histogram, along with additional low conductance features. While the perpendicular geometry with Au facing the Fe atom might be responsible for the high conductance peak, the low conductance feature originate mainly due to the multiple binding geometries with the anchoring groups. Through this study we have not only explored the charge transport mechanism through a single organometallic molecule directly coupled to the metal electrodes via metal-metal chemical bond, but also provide a mechanism to exhibit long-range intramolecular transport which is important for next generation molecular devices working at ambient condition. 1 H and Commercially available ferrocene, purchased from LOBA Chemie, was recrystallized from dichloromethane (DCM) by the slow evaporation method at room temperature. These pure orange crystals were used directly for the conductance measurements. 1,1′-bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene was synthesized from 1,1′-ferrocenedimethanol according to literature reported procedure 1,1′-dicyanoferrocene was synthesized from ferrocene according to literature reported procedure We choose MCBJ technique to measure the electrical conductance of three organometallic molecular junction, illustrated in figure Transport calculations are based on the DFT electronic structure of the ferrocene bound to a pair of Au clusters and NEGF formalism. These are implemented in TURBOMOLE The transmission function is also calculated for smaller basis set size, showing that the basis set size is convergeddetails are given in the Supplementary Information. First-principles based density functional theory (DFT) calculations have been used for electronic structure calculations using Quantum ATK 102 . This study uses the spin-polarized generalized gradient approximation (SGGA) of the Perdew -Burke -Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional with double-zeta polarized basis set and a 120 Hartree density mesh cut-off. Geometry optimization for each structure has been performed for forces smaller than 10 meV/Å. The transmission probabilities T(E) of the 2-probe geometry was investigated using the Nonequilibrium Green's Function (NEGF) formalism in conjunction with DFT theory. For the transport calculation, a k-point grid of 3 × 3 × 134 was used with 134 along the transport direction, as no changes in the transmission was detected beyond that limit. S1: Figure In case of break junction experiment, conductance of the junction is measured as a function of electrode separation, starting from few tenths of atom to the breaking of the junction, by a small and constant increment of electrode separation. A complete measurement cycle is called a conductance traces and thousands or even more such traces are collected to look into the junction statistically. Before entering into the next cycle, electrodes are always crashed up to few atoms to delete the memory from previous cycle. In each cycle, junction evolves via series of elastic and plastic deformation leading to a unique configuration, which is beyond to probe experimentally. Thus, statistical analysis of large traces is critically important to identify the most possible scenario. This has been performed by creating conductance histogram 1 which presents distribution of conductance values collected from bulk number of traces. Consequently, when junction exhibits constant conductance values with respect to stretching (i.e. conductance plateaus), many values will add up to a small range of conductance and reflected as a peak in the histogram. Peaks in the histogram are fitted to calculate the most probable conductance values. As mentioned earlier, conductance of the junction is recorded as a function of electrode separation. However, conductance histogram provides only the conductance value, ignoring information related to the conductance in conjugation with electrode separation or distance. 2D conductancedistance histogram 2,3 is thus created to check the correlation of conductance and distance in a statistical manner. 2D conductance-distance histogram is constructed by following the way: first a conductance value is assigned for each as the origin of the distance axis i.e. zero distance point (for our case it is at 2 G0). Each point in the traces is then contributes to one of the 2D bins of the histogram, defined by conductance and distance from the starting point. The resulting histogram can then be considered as a stack of many traces, placed on top of each other and is helpful to determine the most common feature during stretching. Average traces for a conductance peak is prepared by calculating most probable conductance values in a certain conductance range, defined by the two local minima around the peak. This gives an additional information regarding the evolution of the junction. Linear fitting of the average traces yields the slope, useful to get an intuitive understanding about the metal-molecule coupling. Stretching length is defined as the difference between two absolute distance values, corresponding to a conductance Gi (= 0.5 G0; our case) to a desired conductance value Gf. In our case, Gf is assigned at the one order of magnitude beneath the most probable conductance value of the corresponding conductance peak. Stretching length histogram is thus presents the distribution of stretching length, obtained from each traces. Most probable stretching length is calculated by Gaussian fitting of the histogram, which is an indicative of the stability of the junction Correlation analysis, introduced by the Makk and coworkers Where N m δN m n ⁄ (r) = N m n ⁄ (r) -< N m n ⁄ (r) > is the deviation from the mean value. Let's discuss the value ofC m,n along with its physical significance-(i) C m,n 0; Configurations are statistically independent. (ii) C m,n ≠ 0; Configurations are statistically dependent and type of dependency is determined by the sign of the function. Positive values of C m,n leads to the positive correlation and for these cases configurations either appear or disappear together. Negative value of the function indicate negative correlation and more than average counts in one configuration is supported by the less than average counts in another configuration. It may also happen that formation of one configuration resists the formation of other. Further details about the correlation analysis is described in reference 6. Using this method, a correlation map is drawn for arbitrary conductance pairs Gm and Gn. Two axis corresponds to the two conductance values and color illustratesC m,n . The local density of states (LDOS) is calculated as a projection of spectral density operator onto the basis of atomic orbitals of a given atom/ion In our case, since we claim that the transport occurs through the metal-metal bond in the perpendicular geometry, it is reasonable to investigate the LDOS on the iron ion at the centre of the ferrocene molecule. The calculation is carried out in the AITRANSS program. The resultant LDOS in both parallel and perpendicular geometry is shown in Fig. Two considerations should be taken into account when determining the convergence behaviour of the observables derived from the ab-initio calculations. Firstly, we should be certain that the basis sets used to represent the molecular orbitals are sufficiently large so that the states (especially the excited states) can be accurately modelled. Secondly, at room temperatures, the surface of the gold electrodes is not perfectly crystalline. We model this by repeating the calculations with randomly placed ad-atoms (see Fig. The transmission function is calculated in the Landauer-Buttiker approach in the AITRANSS package, as described in the main text. This involves derivation of the transmission function as trace of the matrix product of matrices based on NEGFs of the extended molecule. Dropping the (orbital) indices for certain orbitals allows us to see the transmission function without the influence of the orbitals with given indices. Alternatively, all indices except one can be set to zero, leaving us with a single peak, corresponding to non-interfering transport through single orbital. Numerically, this is done by including a masking matrix Mij, which has entries either 1 or 0, with 1 only at indices with orbitals to be considered for transmission, i.e. Γ