The radiative excitation of the 8.3 eV isomeric state of thorium-229 is an outstanding challenge due to the lack of tunable far-ultraviolet (F-UV) sources. In this work, we propose an efficient two-photon pumping scheme for thorium-229 using the optonuclear quadrupolar effect, which only requires a 300 nm UV-B pumping laser. We further demonstrate that population inversion between the nuclear isomeric and ground states can be achieved at room temperature using a two-step pumping process. The nuclear laser, which has been pursued for decades, may be realized using a Watt-level UV-B pumping laser and ultrawide bandgap thorium compounds (e.g., ThF4, Na2ThF6, or K2ThF6) as the gain medium. Introduction. Thorium-229 ( 229 Th) nucleus exhibits a long-lived isomeric state ( 229* Th) with an ultra-low energy of ω ≈ 8.3 eV above the ground state [1-3], in stark contrast to the typical nuclear excitation energies (keV to MeV) many applications involving 229 Th, including nuclear clock Meanwhile, the energy gaps between nuclear orbital excited states are too large -the second excited state of 229 Th is around 29 keV above the ground state -thus requiring demanding Xray sources. In this work, we propose a nuclear laser based on 229 Th with a two-step two-photon pumping, which could potentially overcome the aforementioned challenges. As the gain medium, we suggest using Thorium compounds such as Na2ThF6, which can provide a high number density of 229 Th and an ultrawide bandgap, E > ω For example, the central frequency of the nuclear laser can potentially be tuned with ultra-fine resolution using e.g., the Mössbauer effect. Further investigation is required to explore the potential applications of the nuclear laser. 229 Th in ultrawide bandgap Th-compounds. The radiative transitions between the isomeric (angular momentum I = 3/2 ) and ground states ( I = 5/2 ) of 229 Th have both M1 (magnetic dipole) and E2 (electric quadrupole) channels. Some detailed information on the isomeric transition, including the selection rules, is summarized in Section 2 in Ref. In this case, the total decay rate of 229* Th is γ = γ [28]). We will use Na2ThF6 as an example. According to our calculations, the electronic bandgap of Na2ThF6 is E ≈ 11 eV (Figure Two-photon pumping via the optonuclear quadrupolar effect. As discussed before, the pumping of the nuclear isomeric excited state is a key challenge for nuclear lasers. In this section, we demonstrate the two-photon pumping of 229 Th based on the ONQ effect Specifically, the nuclear state can be influenced by the nuclear quadrupolar (E2) interaction H = M V , which is an electromagnetic interaction between the nuclear electric quadrupolar moment M and the electric field gradient (EFG) V at the site of the nucleus. External fields can modulate V, which can in turn control the nuclear states. In fact, the gamma-decay through the E2 channel is the consequence of the oscillating EFG of a resonant photon The situation is different when electrons come into play. The electric field generated by electrons can vary by ΔE ≳ 1 V/Å over the atomic scale a , with a the Bohr radius. Hence, the EFG V generated by electrons can reach V ∼ E ∼ 1 V/Å , leading to a strong nuclear quadrupolar interaction (MHz to GHz). When the electronic states are perturbed, the change in the nuclear quadrupolar interaction is proportionally strong. This fact helps explain the fast IC of 229* Th through the E2 channel Particularly, the electronic states can be perturbed by two-photon transitions. This is the origin of various well-known second-order nonlinear optical effects -two photons drive the electronic orbital motions, which in turn generate e.g., electromagnetic waves (sum or difference frequency generation) or phonons (Raman scattering). Similarly, electronic orbital motions can also generate oscillating EFG and hence oscillating nuclear quadrupolar interaction, which can influence the nuclear states. This is the ONQ effect . Here, we focus on the sum-frequency term e , which can pump the electrons to a (virtual) excited state with an energy of ω + ω . Then, the nuclear excitation can be realized by a swap process between the electronic and nuclear excitations -electrons (virtually) jump back to the ground state, while the nucleus jumps to the isomeric state (Figure When ω + ω < E , the electronic transition is virtual, but the nuclear transition can be a real resonant transition when ω + ω = ω . When the laser frequencies (ω , ω or ω + ω ) are resonant with an electronic transition, the electrons can be resonantly pumped to electronic excited states, and the D tensor will be substantially enhanced. In this case, the ONQ effect is in principle equivalent to the EB process For an order-of-magnitude estimation, we only consider the (m, n, l) pair that has ω , ω close to E , which makes a major contribution to D. We also use m n ≈ and [r ] ≈ a , as the spatial distribution of the electronic states is characterized by a . We also , where g = 2 is the electron spin degeneracy. The pumping rate to the isomeric state is R = Population inversion under two-step pumping. While the two-photon process discussed above can pump the isomeric state, it cannot lead to a population inversion, because it only involves two nuclear states. For population inversion, at least one other auxiliary state is necessary [28]). For room-temperature nuclear lasing, we propose a two-step pumping process (Figure Initially, the system is at thermal equilibrium, so the ground state sub-levels have (approximately) the same population (normalized to f = 1), while the isomeric states are empty (f = 0). For the first step of the pumping process, we use a two-photon pumping laser resonant with the |gr, ±1/2⟩ ↔ |is, ±1/2⟩ transition. Provided the pumping rate is large enough (R ≫ γ ), the |is, ±1/2⟩ state will have almost the same population (f = ) as the |gr, ±1/2⟩ state when the pumping saturates. Then, we switch to a second pumping laser resonant with the |gr, ±1/2⟩ ↔ |is, ±3/2⟩ transition, which again equalizes the final population ( f = ) on these two states. This results in the population inversion between |is, ±1/2⟩ (f = ) and |gr, ±1/2⟩ (f = ), and nuclear lasing between these two states would start when the laser resonator is tuned on resonance. A greater population inversion can be achieved if a multi-step pumping sequence is used (Section 3.2 in Ref. [28]). A caveat is that the two-photon pumping rate R should be faster than the nuclear spin relaxation, which tends to equalize the population among nuclear spin sub-levels at room temperature and destroy the population inversion. Considering that the nuclear spin relaxation rate is usually on the order of Hz at room temperature MHz in Na2ThF6), so that it can be resonant with just one nuclear transition at a time. Experimental setup and performance of the nuclear laser. Next, we discuss the basic experimental setup of the nuclear laser. We assume the gain medium (e.g., Na2ThF6) has a volume V = Sl, with S the cross-sectional area and l the length. The total number of active 229 Th nuclei is N = f ρ V, where ρ is the number density of 229 Th, while f ≈ 1 is the Lamb-Mössbauer factor (also known as the Debye-Waller factor) hereafter, but we have not optimized these parameters. The gain medium is thus a nanowire of size 1μm × 1μm × 1mm. Actually, nanowire lasers have been demonstrated before based on electronic transitions The performance of the nuclear laser can be evaluated using the semi-classical rate equations (details in Section 4.1 in Ref. [28]). A typical time evolution of the output power P is plotted in Figure [28], we also show that the losses and temperature rise in the gain medium are minor and would not influence the operation of the nuclear laser. Here we would like to remark on some potential challenges in constructing the nuclear laser proposed in this work. First, the nuclear lasing requires fast pumping of the nuclear isomeric state, so a ∼ 4.1 eV UV-B laser with narrow linewidth and high power, which are assumed to be 10 kHz and 1 W in the discussions above, would be necessary. Such a laser would be challenging to build. But we expect it could be easier than building an ∼ 8.3 eV F-UV laser. Additionally, our proposal implicitly assumes that the isomeric transition energy ω is known with high precision, which has not been realized yet. Fortunately, ω has been measured with increasing precision In summary, we propose a two-photon pumping scheme to populate the long-lived nuclear isomers 229* Th based on the ONQ effect in solid crystals. This pumping scheme could be used in nuclear clocks based on 229 Th as well. We further propose a nuclear gamma-ray laser (as this emission originates from nuclear isomeric transition) that utilizes ultrawide bandgap 229 Thcompounds as the gain medium and a two-step, two-photon scheme to achieve population inversion at room temperature. Pulsed nuclear lasing should be realizable with a Watt-level pumping laser. The nuclear laser with narrow linewidth might be useful for various applications in e.g., nano-imaging, nuclear clock, and quantum information processing.