This work focuses on the fabrication of niobium through silicon vias (TSV) superconductors interconnects. The effect of supercycle of sequential oxidation and chemical etching process on the through-etch wall quality was investigated. It was experimentally shown that the use of supercycle in the fabrication process leads to significant improvement of the TSV wall quality and removal of the defect type -scallops. After 12 times repetitions of supercycles a dissipative bonding of superconducting strips on the front and back side of the sample is observed. The critical current density of such coupling is 5x10 4 A/cm 2 . The critical ratio of substrate thickness to hole diameter at which electrical coupling is formed is 3 : 1. Interest in superconducting quantum computing has increased dramatically in recent years, mostly due to the potential of increasing the computing processing power of such devices in connection with classical processors Designing and fabricating large scale superconducting circuits with addressable, low noise cross-talk switching for all circuit elements is a complex task. Superconducting qubits are sensitive to fabrication defects, which limits the yield and reproducibility of the final device. Both aspects require optimised device and process design. Modern superconducting applications and devices require an increase in the integration density to combine them with silicon CMOS technology, which is mostly used as the controlling part. To achieve this coupling, through-silicon-vias integrated packaging techniques are being developed, which allow multiple layers of crystals to be logically interconnected. A similar technology has long been used in CMOS devices There are different technological approaches for forming layer-to-layer interconnects. One approach suggests fabricating 300 μm deep channels using aluminium with an aspect ratio of 6:1, to interconnect a CMOS crystal with qubit layer The integration of superconducting qubits with superconducting TSVs with high aspect ratio and 200 μm depth is demonstrated in The main technological challenges in implementing superconducting interconnections are to eliminate wall roughness from etching of high aspect ratio silicon structures and conformal deposition of metal inside these channels without breaking the conductive layer. In this paper, we present for the first time, a method to fabricate niobium-based superconducting interconnectors formed by a high aspect ratio etching (Bosch process), thermal oxidation and chemical etching "supercycle" followed by conformal Nb sputtering. The combination of these techniques allows us to achieve ultra-smooth TSV channel walls with further conformal niobium layer deposition to form a superconducting interconnect in an interposer layer. With this approach, we have fabricated a TSV chip that can be integrated into future qubit assemblies and other cryoelectronic devices, where 2 or more chips levels can be used. A prototype of the fabricated structure is shown in Figure For the fabrication of the superconducting TSVs, 460-μm-thick and double-side polished silicon wafers are used. The fabrication process started with a 3.8-μm-thick thermal silicon oxide forming operation, which would later be used as an etch mask for the Bosch process. SiO2 layer, was patterned by laser lithography using 5 μm AZ4999 photoresist and then etched by anisotropic plasma chemical etching process in C4F8 gas. Main parameters of process are: 5 sccm flow for 35 minutes with ICP power 1500 W and DC bias more than 90 V. The etching rate in this mode is 110 nm per minute. Holes with sizes 80, 100 and 150 microns are formed in thermal silicon oxide. After the etching operation, the surface was cleaned from photoresist residues using oxygen plasma. For deep silicon etching, a three-step Bosch process is used, involving deposition of a protective polymer layer in plasma C4F8 gas, opening the bottom of the formed structure with high DC bias (above -100V) in plasma SF6 gas and the final isotropic etching of silicon using the same gas. Preliminary to the Bosch process, the substrate surface was stripping in oxygen-argon plasma mixture for 1 minute with DC bias near -320 volts. The duration of each step in Bosch process, including the polymer deposition, bottom breakthrough and etching steps ranged from 2 to 4 seconds and were determined experimentally for used thicknesses of silicon wafers. The last 100 etch cycles were carried out using a LF generator at the bottom opening step to avoid notching the effect, with an DC bias -150 volts. Also, due to the increased aspect ratio, the etch cycle time was increased by 0.5 seconds in the last 100 μm of etching. Simultaneously with the TSV channels in the Bosch process, thorough lithographic marks were formed, for subsequent reverse crystal alignment. A schematic of the main steps of fabrication process shown in Figure After the Bosch process, the structures were cleaned in oxygen plasma from the passivation residue and the mask silicon oxide layer was removed in BOE solution. Further steps in the fabrication of TSVs can be combined in a "supercycle", which includes sequential thermal oxidation at high temperatures in water vapour and chemical etching of the formed oxide to completely remove the scallops on the walls. To achieve the lowest roughness in the TSV channels, three wafers were experimentally compared with 3, 9 and 12 repetitions of supercycle. The supercycle consists of the following technological operations: chemical cleaning of the silicon wafer after the Bosch process which includes treatment in Peroxymonosulfuric acid solution (H2O2/H2SO4 = 3/7, t = 10 min, T = 120 о C) and peroxide-ammonia solution (H2O/H2O2/NH4OH = 5/1/1, t = 10 min, T = 75 о C); thermal oxidation in water vapour at T = 1000 о C. The thickness of the obtained silicon oxide is 300 nm; etching of thermal SiO2 in BOE buffer solution (t = 20 min). The process of etching the oxide in BOE buffer etchant (ammonium hydrodifluoride NH4FHF) is based on the following reaction: SiO2 + 6HF → H2SiF6 + 2H2O, where H2SiF6 is water soluble. A schematic representation of the supercycle is shown in Figure After deposition of the superconducting layer, a contact pattern was formed on both sides using 950 -nm thickness S1809 photoresist. The image of the resulting contacts is shown in Figure In the first stage, the resistance of the structures was measured at room temperature to determine the quality of the Nb TSV interconnections. TSVs with hole diameters of 80 and 100 μm had resistances much larger than calculated. Samples with a diameter of 150 μm matched the calculated resistivity, indicating that the contact between the layers was formed. The temperature dependence of the contact resistance with TSV was measured in a Gifford-McMahon closed-cycle cryostat. The temperature was measured with a temperature controller on calibrated diode thermometer. Resistance measurement was carried out with a Keithley 2460 precision source-meter at a bias current of 1 μA. Our possible assumption of such resistance values for 80 μm and 100 μm holes is related to the formation of native oxide layer after first Nb deposition in the middle of the channel where overlap of the two metal layers occurs. Figure Also, current density measurements were made at the lowest achievable temperature of 2.4K, which was 5x10 4 A/cm 2 . The current densities obtained are not record values, but for most applications the current density is not important value as it absolute value in dissipative current flow. High-aspect, superconducting 460 μm deep niobium interconnects fabricated by a combination of Bosch process methods and super cycles of thermal oxidation and chemical etching were demonstrated. This method allows superconducting layer-based TSV interconnects to be integrated into standard CMOS manufacturing processes, which will improve packing density for future advanced cryo-electronics applications. Electrical characterisation of the fabricated crystals showed a critical current density of 5x10 4 A/cm 2 at 2.4 K. The proposed technology of using a sequential oxidation and etching process makes it possible to substantially eliminate the influence of scallop-type wall defects. It is important to note that the use of thinner substrates will result in significantly improved performance. It has been empirically shown that the critical ratio of substrate thickness to hole diameter is ~3 : 1, at which point the TSV channel walls are conformally coated.