Despite their highly anisotropic complex-oxidic nature, certain delafossite compounds (e.g., PdCoO2, PtCoO2) are the most conductive oxides known, for reasons that remain poorly understood. Their room-temperature conductivity can exceed that of Au, while their lowtemperature electronic mean-free-paths reach an astonishing 20 m. It is widely accepted that these materials must be ultrapure to achieve this, although the methods for their growth (which produce only small crystals) are not typically capable of such. Here, we first report a new approach to PdCoO2 crystal growth, using chemical vapor transport methods to achieve order-of-magnitude gains in size, the highest structural qualities yet reported, and record residual resistivity ratios (>440). Nevertheless, the first detailed mass spectrometry measurements on these materials reveal that they are not ultrapure, typically harboring 100s-of-parts-per-million impurity levels. Through quantitative crystal-chemical analyses, we resolve this apparent dichotomy, showing that the vast majority of impurities are forced to reside in the Co-O octahedral layers, leaving the conductive Pd sheets highly pure (1 ppm impurity concentrations). These purities are shown to be in quantitative agreement with measured residual resistivities. We thus conclude that a previously unconsidered "sublattice purification" mechanism is essential to the ultrahigh low-temperature conductivity and mean-free-path of metallic delafossites. Complex oxide materials have proven to be fertile ground for the discovery of new physical phenomena and the advancement of technologically important device function, the ABO3 perovskites being a prime example The electronic structure of metallic delafossites is similarly noteworthy. Taking PdCoO2 as an example, the established R-3m structure of the 3R polymorph The edge-shared CoO6 octahedra also have short Co-O bond lengths and large crystal field splitting, stabilizing low-spin (S = 0) Co The above attributes, particularly the exceptional low-T mean-free-path and simple hexagonal Fermi surface, have enabled a remarkable string of recent achievements with bulk crystals of PtCoO2 and PdCoO2. These include observations of: various forms of quantum oscillation The current work seeks to elucidate some of the above through advances that are thus far absent from the PdCoO2 literature: improvements in bulk crystal growth in terms of mechanistic understanding, crystal size, defect density, and purity; more extensive structural and chemical characterization; and comprehensive trace impurity analysis. The latter is particularly conspicuous in its absence from the metallic delafossite literature, likely because the premier methodinductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) -typically involves acid digestion. Metallic delafossites such as PdCoO2 and PtCoO2 are unusually stable in extreme pH, however Here, we first elaborate on a new crystal growth method for PdCoO2 based on chemical vapor transport (CVT), for which a simple mechanism is proposed. CVT is then compared to the established metathesis/flux method and is shown to enable orders-of-magnitude gains in crystal size and mass, the highest structural quality yet reported, and record RRR. Nevertheless, particleinduced X-ray emission (PIXE) and low-T magnetometry suggest significant impurity concentrations. Enabled by microwave digestion methods, the first comprehensive trace impurity analyses of metathesis/flux-grown and CVT-grown PdCoO2 crystals were thus performed by ICP-MS, with remarkable conclusions. Specifically, these metallic delafossite crystals are definitively not ultrapure in a general sense. Standard metathesis/flux crystals typically have 250 ppm metalsbasis impurities; CVT crystals are purer but still harbor 50 ppm impurities. Through a detailed crystal-chemistry-based analysis, however, we show that the vast majority of these impurities must populate Co-O octahedral layers, while as few as four elements can conceivably substitute for Pd. The concentration of these elements is of order 1 ppm, 100 times lower than the total impurity concentration, which is shown to be in quantitative agreement with the measured residual ab. We thus propose that a "sublattice purification" mechanism is central to the extraordinary low-T conductivity of metallic delafossites, enabling ultrahigh purity in the conductive Pd/Pt sheets, largely unaffected by substantial impurity concentrations in the CoO6 octahedra. As noted in the Introduction, metathesis-based flux growth has become standard for single-crystal PdCoO2 and PtCoO2 While such crystals have enabled exciting advances As shown in Fig. With CVT growth established to provide substantial improvements in PdCoO2 crystal size and mass, and with improved defect density suggested by the lattice parameters, it is important to more rigorously assess structural quality and purity. Preliminary prior characterization established single crystallinity via two-dimensional single-crystal X-ray diffraction Wide-range specular high-resolution X-ray diffraction (HRXRD) was also performed on 001oriented crystals (Fig. Turning to chemical characterization, Fig. Electronic transport is an excellent relative probe of total defect and impurity densities, and thus T-dependent ab measurements were made on the new CVT-grown crystals. It is essential to acknowledge at this point that such measurements are nontrivial for single-crystal PdCoO2 Top-contact geometries such as those shown in the inset to Fig. Based on the above procedures, presented in Fig. While some fraction of this Curie-tail magnetism no doubt arises from surface contamination, this is a second indication, along with PIXE data (Fig. For this reason, and to augment the chemical characterization in Figs. As alluded to in the Introduction, ICP-MS-based trace impurity analysis on PdCoO2 is complicated by the extraordinary acid etch resistance of metallic delafossites Analysis of the distribution of the detected impurity elements casts much light on this issue. To this end, we first elaborate a simple classification scheme for the various substitutional elemental impurities that can be accommodated in PdCoO2. Fig. The critical point here is that, very unlike ABO3 perovskites for example, there is a massive asymmetry in the number of elements that can conceivably populate A vs. B sites. This arises because the B-site in metallic ABO2 delafossites involves a common cation valence in oxides (3+) and a common coordination with O 2-(octahedral); this is as in perovskites, which can accommodate much of the periodic table on the B site. The A-site in metallic ABO2 delafossites, on the other hand, involves a relatively uncommon valence in oxides (1+) and a far less common coordination with O 2-ions (linear, see the structure in Fig. Considering this in more detail, as shown in Fig. The situation on the B site is very different. As shown in Fig. CVT-grown PdCoO2 crystals on to the classification scheme in Figs. The middle and bottom panels of Table The conclusion from the above is that the prototypical metallic delafossite PdCoO2 is by no means ultrapure in general. Total metals-basis impurity concentrations decrease from 250 ppm in metathesis/flux crystals to 50 ppm in CVT crystals, but remain substantial. Crystal-chemical principles, however, dictate that the great majority of substitutional impurities must reside on the Co site, the relatively rare valence and coordination on the Pd site resulting in few elemental impurities (particularly Cu, Ag, and Pt) being capable of substitution. Sublattice purification ratios of 1% thus arise, limiting the substitutional impurities on the Pd site to 1 ppm. Our simple conclusion from these findings is that the electronic conduction in metallic delafossites such as PdCoO2, which is strongly restricted to Pd d states at the Fermi level Directly addressing a question posed in recent work The above picture is predicated, however, on two key assumptions: that the 1 ppm deduced impurity concentrations in the Pd planes are sufficiently low to facilitate the observed residual ab and mean-free-paths, and that the significant impurity concentrations in the BO6 octahedral planes have sufficiently little impact on conduction in the Pd sheets. The first assumption can be addressed using the 2D unitary scattering approach recently applied by Sunko et al., which was validated in irradiated metallic delafossite crystals Based on this, our deduced residual ab of 4 nΩcm would require a 2D defect density of 6  10 9 cm -2 in CVT-grown PdCoO2. Remarkably, this is in striking agreement with our determined Pdsheet impurity density, which corresponds to 5  10 9 cm -2 based on the 1.9 ppm of A-site impurities in Table Density functional theory (DFT) calculations provide further support for the above. These were performed (see Methods) on PdCoO2 lightly-substituted with Pt, Fe, and Al, i.e., a known impurity on the Pd site and two prevalent impurities on the B site. 3 × 3 × 3 supercells containing a single substituent atom were employed, i.e., 3.7% concentrations, as a computationally-tractable approximation to the dilute limit. Unfolding of supercell bands was used to determine the effect of these impurities on the band structure and density-of-states (DOS) within the PdCoO2 primitive cell. Fig. Similarly, the average bond length in AlO6 octahedra differ by 0.5% from the CoO6 octahedra in pristine PdCoO2, much more than for the Fe case (0.02%). Figs. It should be emphasized that the above analysis focuses on substitutional impurities. While interstitial impurities should also be considered, the delafossite structure is unlikely to host interstitial sites in which the ions in Fig. In summary, this work establishes CVT as a highly promising approach to bulk single crystal growth of PdCoO2, with potential applicability to other metallic delafossites such as PdCrO2 and PdRhO2. Compared to standard metathesis/flux methods, CVT generates orders-of-magnitude gains in crystal size and mass, along with the highest structural quality, highest purity, lowest magnetic impurity concentration, and highest RRR yet reported. Nevertheless, the first detailed trace impurity analysis of PdCoO2 single crystals by ICP-MS reveals that, contrary to the naïve view, these metallic delafossites are not generally ultrapure; standard metathesis/flux methods result in 250 ppm impurity concentrations, falling to 50 ppm in CVT crystals. Simple crystalchemistry-based analyses show that the vast majority of these impurities are forced to reside in the Co-O octahedral planes, however, only a small fraction being capable of substituting for Pd (typically a total of 1 ppm of Cu, Ag, and Pt). The "sublattice purification ratio" is thus 1%, resulting in ultrahigh purity in the Pd planes in which electronic conduction takes place, largely unaffected by the impurities in the CoO6 octahedra. This sublattice purification mechanism is therefore central to the ultrahigh low-T conductivity of metallic delafossites, resolving the apparent contradiction that they appear impure from magnetometry yet highly pure in electronic transport. These results significantly demystify the outstanding low-T conductivity and mean-free-path in metallic delafossites, setting the stage for further advances with this extraordinary materials class. As an example, the analyses in Refs. The momentum-conserving scattering is unlikely to be electron-electron scattering at the temperatures of interest PdCoO2 crystals were grown by two methods: the established metathesis/flux process Minor unreacted Pd and Co3O4 phases were often detected in these products by PXRD (see Supplementary Information Section B). The largest crystals found in the products were 0.8  0.6 mm 2 laterally and 0.017 mm thick (Fig. For CVT, 1 g of coarse-grained PdCoO2 product from the above metathesis reaction was mixed with ~120 mg of PdCl2 powder, then loaded and vacuum sealed (at 10 -6 Torr) in quartz ampoules. Ampoules were then placed in a two-zone tube furnace with the reagents at one end of the ampoule (Fig. Optical microscope images of crystals were acquired with a Zeiss Axiovert A1 MAT inverted microscope, while SEM was performed in a JEOL JSM-6010PLUS/LA. EDS data were taken with an EDS detector integrated in the SEM, at 20 kV accelerating voltage. PIXE spectra were acquired in a MAS 1700 pelletron tandem ion accelerator (National Electrostatic Corp.) at 50 μC dose from a 4 MeV He 2+ beam; PIXE data were analyzed using GUPIXWIN Single crystals for electronic transport were first cleaved into bar shapes (Fig. For trace impurity analyses, ethanol-washed crystals were microwave digested in aqua regia (a 1:3 mixture of 70%-concentrated trace-metal-grade nitric acid (Ricca) and 36%-concentrated tracemetal-grade hydrochloric acid (Fisher Scientific)), or concentrated nitric acid, in sealed teflon pressure vessels. A CEM MARS 5 microwave digestion system was employed, reaching 200 °C and 15 bar for 2 h. Solutions were allowed to slow cool to room temperature overnight before serial dilution and analysis; no visible solid remained. Trace element analysis in a Thermo Scientific iCap TQ triple quadrupole ICP-MS system was performed by standard addition methods using SPEX CertiPrep and ThermoFisher Scientific multielement standards. Internal standard sets included: Sc, Y, Ir for alkali metals, alkaline-earth metals, non-precious transition metals, metalloids, and heavy metals; Sc, Y, Bi for precious metals; V, Rb, Cs, Bi for Sc, Y, and rare-earth elements. ICP-MS analytical details for each element are listed in Table First-principles density functional theory calculations were performed with the Quantum ESPRESSO package using norm-conserving pseudopotentials, with the exchange-correlation energy approximated by the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functional total concentrations of elements known to adopt the A-site in ABO2 compounds that also fit the Pd site in PdCoO2. Second column: total concentrations of elements known to adopt the A-site in ABO2 compounds that do not fit the Pd site in PdCoO2. Third column: total concentrations of elements that fit the Co site in PdCoO2. Fourth column: total concentrations of elements known to adopt the B-site in ABO2 compounds that do not fit the Co site in PdCoO2. Fifth column: concentration of all other elements measured (i.e., those not in columns 1-4). Sixth column: Total of all prior columns. Middle panel. Concentrations of the only elements (four) that are known to adopt the A-site in ABO2 delafossites and also fit the Pd site in PdCoO2. Bottom panel: Concentrations of the seven most prevalent elements that fit the Co site in PdCoO2. CVT Setup and Optimization. As noted in the main text, while CVT has not been reported for PdCoO2, there are several reasons to consider this growth approach, including the fact that PdCoO2 decomposes A CVT process was thus designed based on the known properties of PdCoO2, PdCl2, and CoCl2. CVT growth of Co3O4, Pd, and PdO using PdCl2 as a transport agent have been reported at growth temperatures in the 400-1000 °C range PdCoO2 in the ampoule's cold end through the reverse reaction. The choice of transport agent was also considered, i.e., whether to use PdCl2, PdBr2, or PdI2, for example. For PdCoO2 growth, the co-stability of halides of Co and Pd is essential. PdBr2 and PdI2 have very low decomposition points (250 and 360 °C, respectively As shown in Fig. A 50 °C temperature difference was chosen for most growths in this work. Smaller differences, such as 30 °C, led to slow crystal growth rates and incomplete transport in 13 days, while larger differences, such as 60 °C, led to smaller crystal sizes, likely indicating too high a transport rate. Most growths were done with 710/760 °C cold/hot zone temperatures (such as the ampoule in Fig. CVT Mechanisms. Based on the above, and on additional observations below, various conclusions can be reached regarding the mechanisms of CVT growth. The growth starts with the initial conditions in Fig. or partial thermal decomposition of PdCl2) will be transported to the empty ampoule end, as Pd is known to transport via Cl2 from cool to hot At the start of this period, as explained above, the growth zone (Zone 1) can be expected to contain Pd crystallites (whether there originally, or transported from Zone 2). These Pd crystallites may then act as nucleation centers for PdCoO2 crystal growth. Notably, the interatomic distance within the (111) planes of Pd is 0.275 nm Offset Correction and Signal-to-noise Ratio. As noted in the main text, the very low residual value of the a-b plane resistivity (ab) in PdCoO2 single crystals renders low-temperature (T) transport measurements challenging. Specifically, signal-to-noise ratio becomes an issue, as do instrumental offsets. These issues were alleviated in this work through the study of relatively long bar-shaped crystals (Fig. in tandem with a preamplifier/channel scanner (a Lakeshore 3708). Currents of 10 mA were employed and self-heating was rigorously ruled out by estimations of the (very low) deposited power, and careful low-T checks of resistance vs. current and resistance vs. T at various excitation currents. The resulting noise performance is illustrated below and in the data of Figs. With respect to offsets, which are critical given the 20  residual resistances, these were first carefully characterized via parallel measurements of zero-resistance superconducting V thin films. The latter were Si/Si-N/V(100 nm) films deposited in ultrahigh vacuum in a molecular beam epitaxy system. As shown in the inset to Fig. Offset measurements were made both with and without the preamplifying channel scanner. Table Considering the data without the preamplifier first, measurements of RADBC and RDACB were found to be near identical, at -0.4 to -0.3  for Contact Set 1 and 0.3 to 0.7  for Contact Set 2. Such findings are representative. Over many measurements, using different wire and contact sets, different bridge ranges and currents (10 mA was used in Table Thus, regardless of whether the preamplifier was included, offsets from zero resistance could be kept to a workable ±1-2 μΩ. Based on the above characterization of offsets in the measurement setup, PdCoO2 single-crystal measurements were made two ways. First, for the residual resistance measurement at 4 K on the CVT-grown PdCoO2 crystal in the inset to Fig. and RDACB(T) were measured, as shown in Fig. As noted in the main text, the large c-axis/a-b-plane resistivity ratio (c/ab) of PdCoO2 single crystals 9,12-15 provides a second measurement challenge. Specifically, the top-contact geometry used here, while convenient, must lead to some level of additional systematic error due to some inevitable current flow along c-axis directions. Finite element current flow and voltage drop simulations were thus performed using COMSOL Multiphysics. For these simulations, samples with dimensions close to the crystal in Fig. For the purposes of initial illustration, Figs. Further quantification of the extent of underestimation of the RRR was achieved by running additional top-contact simulations that reproduce the observed RRR of 440. This was done by finding the required true value of residual ρab to reproduce the experimental results, while keeping the 300-K value of ρab (which is dominated by phonon, not impurity, scattering) constant. (In the absence of additional information, ρc was also maintained at the same values as in prior simulations). As shown in Table If we were to assume some reduction in ρc, which is likely based on the higher purity, then the ρab needed to reproduce the measured top-contact RRR would increase. The RRR estimate of 670 should thus be viewed as an upper bound for the true value, yielding 440 < RRR < 670. Table Various measured 3.9-K resistances of Si/Si-N/V(100 nm) films. The results shown are averaged over 10-60 measurements, on two contact sets; the uncertainties listed are resulting standard deviations. The excitation current was 10 mA. Shown are RADBC, RDACB and their average (see text above for definitions), both without (left) and with (right) the preamplifying channel scanner. Table Shown are 300-K and residual low-T values of the PdCoO2 a-b plane resistivity, c-axis resistivity, their ratio, and the Cu contact resistivity 