Al0.68Sc0.32N (AlScN) has gained attention for its outstanding ferroelectric properties, including a high coercive field and high remnant polarization. Although AlScN-based ferroelectric field-effect transistors (FETs) for memory applications have been demonstrated, a device for logic applications with minimal hysteresis has not been reported. This study reports on the transport characteristics of a MoS2 negative capacitance FET (NCFET) based on an AlScN ferroelectric material. We experimentally demonstrate the effect of a dielectric layer in the gate stack on the memory window and subthreshold swing (SS) of the NCFET. We show that the hysteresis behavior of transfer characteristics in the NCFET can be minimized with the inclusion of a non-ferroelectric dielectric layer, which fulfills the capacitance-matching condition. Remarkably, we also observe the NC effect in MoS2/AlScN NCFETs arrays based on large-area monolayer MoS2 synthesized by chemical vapor deposition, showing the SS values smaller than its thermionic limit (~36-60 mV/dec) and minimal variation in threshold voltages (< 20 mV). The advancement of integrated circuit designs has heavily relied on the principles of Dennard scaling to maintain a constant power density as transistor dimensions continue to decrease. , where 2.3k B T q is the thermionic limit at 300 K (~60 mV/dec), and C s and C ins are the semiconductor and gate insulator capacitance respectively. As suggested by Equation ( Additionally, AlScN demonstrates excellent thermal stability of ferroelectric properties, maintaining its ferroelectricity over 1,000 °C . Here, we report NCFETs using few-layer and monolayer MoS2 channels and an Al0.68Sc0.32N ferroelectric material in the gate-dielectric stack. MoS2 is used for the semiconducting channel due to its near-constant channel capacitance enabling steep switching over large current ranges. Figure Figure The MoS2/HfOx/AlScN NCFET exhibits negative drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL), since the Ids values are higher for Vg values smaller than Vth when measured at drain-source voltage (Vds) of 0.1 V vs. 1.0 V (Figure The NDR effect is believed to be caused by the negative DIBL effect and/or the self-heating effect resulting from large drain current and voltage in the NCFET Given Equations ( FeFET devices (without dielectric interlayers) exhibit sub-thermionic SS switching behavior (Figure On the other hand, CVD-MoS2 NCFET with a 2 nm thick interlayer of AlOx results in a nearly hysteresis-free transfer curve (Figure Additionally, the NCFET exhibits an Ion/Ioff exceeding ~10 Similar to the observations in the mechanically exfoliated samples, thicker dielectric interlayers lead to reduced hysteresis, though maintaining a steep SS below 60 mV/dec becomes challenging. The AlOx/AlScN-based NCFET follows a similar trend, necessitating a 2 nm thick dielectric layer to achieve minimal hysteresis (~20 mV). As an interlayer, HfOx can surpass AlOx in achieving steeper SS in NCFETs at the same thickness due to higher k. By utilizing the calculated CFE from Figure 