Absolute value measurements of turbulence amplitude in magnetically confined hightemperature plasmas can effectively explain turbulence-driven transport characteristics and their role in plasma confinements. Two-dimensional phase contrast imaging (2D-PCI) is a technique to evaluate the space-time spectrum of ion-scale electron density fluctuation. However, absolute value measurement of turbulence amplitude has not been conducted owing to the nonlinearity of the detector. In this study, the absolute measurement method proposed in the previous study is applied to turbulence measurement results in the large helical device. As a result, the localized turbulence amplitude at n e = 1.5 × 10 19 m -3 is approximately 3.5 × 10 15 m -3 , which is 0.02% of the electron density. In addition, the evaluated poloidal wavenumber spectrum is almost consistent, within a certain error range, the spectrum being calculated using a nonlinear gyrokinetic simulation. This result is the first to the best of our knowledge to quantitatively evaluate turbulence amplitudes measured by 2D-PCI and compare with simulations. Energy and particle transport in magnetically confined plasmas usually exceeds the predictions of neoclassical transport, and the turbulence-driven anomalous transport plays an important role in the plasma confinement. The relationships between the transport channels (particle flux Γ j and heat flux Q j ) and turbulence (density fluctuation ñ j , temperature fluctuation Tj and electric field fluctuation Ẽ θ in the poloidal direction θ) are described as follows Here, n j , T j , B φ , and k b correspond to the density, temperature of particle species j, magnetic field in the toroidal direction φ, and Boltzmann constant, respectively. The ensemble mean, denoted by ⟨• • • ⟩, indicates that each transport cannot be explained by only one of the fluctuations. However, it is not practical to measure all kinds of fluctuations simultaneously, making it difficult to understand turbulence-driven transport in high-temperature plasmas. Electron density fluctuation is a particularly important turbulence because it contributes to both transport channels. Moreover, it is relatively easy to measure, thus, various diagnostic techniques have been developed and installed to the high-temperature plasma devices Recently, two evaluation methods have been proposed. Z. Huang et al. proposed a method to acquire only the AC component, which is the scattered light due to turbulence, and estimate its absolute value by comparing it with known sound wave measurements In this study, the absolute value of the turbulence profile at LHD is evaluated applying our proposed method In this section, our proposed method The wave passing through the density fluctuation is expressed as where E 0 is the incident beam amplitude and φ is very small, thus, it can be replaced by the intensity change as expressed on the right-hand side. Here, the first and second terms stated in parentheses on the right-hand side correspond to the nonscattered and scattered components, respectively. However, in eq. (2.1), the phase change involving fluctuation information cannot be detected because they are imaginary components. Then, to convert an imaginary part into a real part, as expressed in eq. ( Finally, the nonscattered and scattered components are detected as intensity change as follows. 3) The first and second terms on the right-hand side correspond to the AC and DC components of the output voltage (V AC and V DC ) of a MCT detector. The phase change φ can be obtained from -V AC /2V DC . However, a MCT detector has nonlinear I-O characteristics as shown in Figure Here, F is a function of I-O characteristics as shown in Figure where e, c, ε 0 , and m e are the electric charge, speed of light, electric constant, and electron mass, respectively. Figure LHD絶対値計測 152264 t = 4.47 Recently, a study comparing the transport in LHD and the Wendelstein 7-X (W7-X) was conducted The absolute values of the turbulence profile is evaluated according to Figure 1. The absolute value of the line-integrated electron density fluctuation amplitude ñe L(m -2 ) in each channel are evaluated as shown in Figure Here, as the beam diameter is sufficiently small compared to the plasma size, the turbulence amplitude should be constant among all channels (44/48 channels in operation) in the absence of local spatial structure. However, as shown in Figure Figures A quantitative comparison of the turbulence levels evaluated as shown in Figure Figure In this study, we aimed to evaluate the absolute value of the ion-scale electron density fluctuation profile measured by 2D-PCI in LHD using the absolute value evaluation method proposed in a previous study. The target plasma is ECRH plasma with n e = 1.8 × 10 19 m -3 used for comparison with W7-X results reported in a previous study. Consequently, the electron density fluctuation amplitude in the ECRH plasma with n e = 1.8 × 10 19 m -3 is 3.5 × 10 15 m -3 , which is 0.02% of the electron density. In addition, the evaluated wavenumber spectrum at ρ = ±0.5 is in good agreement with the spectrum calculated using nonlinear gyrokinetic simulations, indicating that the evaluated absolute value in this study is reasonable. Unfortunately, 2D-MCT is hard to come by. Therefore, a method to obtain a spatial profile by rotating the radial localization mask is implemented 