Machine Learning facilitates building a large variety of models, starting from elementary linear regression models to very complex neural networks. Neural networks are currently limited by the size of data provided and the huge computational cost of training a model. This is especially problematic when dealing with a large set of features without much prior knowledge of how good or bad each individual feature is. We try tackling the problem using dimensionality reduction algorithms to construct more meaningful features. We also compare the accuracy and training times of raw data and data transformed after dimensionality reduction to deduce a sufficient number of dimensions without sacrificing accuracy. The indicated estimation is done using a lighter decision tree-based algorithm, AdaBoost, as it trains faster than neural networks. We have chosen the data from an online database of topological materials, Materiae. Our final goal is to construct a model to predict the topological properties of new materials from elementary properties. Topology is a modern branch of mathematics that emerged in the early 1900s The surface states are protected by time-reversal symmetry in the case of TIs, and various crystal symmetries in the case of TCIs However, looking at the Materials Project In recent years ML has taken the world by storm, finding a plethora of applications in every field possible like image and speech recognition Data from Materiae FIG. A flowchart of the methodology followed to construct predictive models using neural networks is illustrated in Fig. Materials Project As the intention is to train models using elemental properties as features, similar materials related by site substitutions are grouped together, and separate models are made for individual groups. For this purpose, we do a broad classification based on their space group (SG), number of sites (N s ), and number of distinct sites (N d ) of the compounds. To ensure that models are trained upon sizeable populations, the number of TIs is checked from Materiae for each group, and ones with sufficiently large numbers are chosen, as tabulated in Table For the sake of being stricter on the condition of substitutions, the sites are also checked by their Wyckoff positions, considering transformations between them. Atoms with the same Wyckoff positions across different materials are considered substitutions of each other. The different sites and considered Wyckoff schemes are tabulated in Table The ideal data distribution is usually a normal curve. Most predictive models have better accuracy when applied to normal distributions. A power transformer transforms the data to have zero-mean, unit-variance satisfying the condition. The Yeo-Johnson method As discussed earlier, a total of 12 features for each site are considered, i.e., 24 features for binary materials and 36 features for those with three N d . Such a considerably large number of features makes it hard to train a neural network in a reasonable time. Choosing to train on such a vast number of features also has the potential to confuse the final model if too many non-correlated features are provided. For this reason, a principal component analysis (PCA) The scikit-learn package provides different PCA meth-ods, using different kernels like linear, polynomial, exponential, etc. Kernels help project the linearly inseparable data onto a higher dimensional space where they might be linearly separable. The implementation of PCA with kernels is called kernel principal component analysis (KPCA) While PCA can construct the best dimensions for use, it provides no useful information for determining the number of dimensions to be chosen. For this purpose, a decision tree-based model The PCA-transformed dataset of each system is used to train Adaboost models, starting from a single dimension to twenty dimensions. Using the same data to learn the parameters of a prediction model and testing the model is usually considered a mistake. This is because we can not be confident about the predictions on yet unknown data. Hence, some of the available training data is actually held out of the training set to make a test set to be used for validation. A common practice is to do a k-fold cross-validation Neural networks are chosen as the final model we train to output predictions of topological materials due to their generally high complexity and accuracy. Their primary disadvantage is the model training cost, but once trained, the predictions can be churned out quickly and en masse if needed. A Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) To validate our predictions, we have adopted the same method as the Materiae website, which uses the SymTopo package. It is to be kept in mind that their theory only works for nonmagnetic materials. Additionally it performs a hard-check on number of electrons in the DFT calculation, only accepting an even number of electrons. This property is masked by our methodology due to the initial transformation and PCA of our original features. Materials that are not included in Materiae are picked up from Materials Project and checked for the former two conditions. Features are generated for the ones that pass. Previously trained power transformer, PCA transformation and MLP prediction are applied in that order. Positive outcomes from our predictions are then tested using SymTopo for further validation and reported. The steps followed for predictions are represented as a flowchart in Fig. The count of different kind of materials as output from SymTopo are listed in Table Table To conclude, we have construced different MLP models with various accuracies calculated over a five-fold crossvalidation method. In the process, we have demonstrated the viability of using dimensionality reduction to reduce the number of features used to train the neural networks, significantly reducing the training times. We have also proposed a method using decision tree-based models to help select the number of dimensions that should be chosen from the PCA analysis. All of this now allows us to make predictions about topological properties of new proposed materials related to our chosen systems by site substitutions much faster and to scan a much larger materials space with very little computation. The predictions have been verified using the algorithm used to generate the training data in the first place. We expect the method to extend to more systems as more data becomes available. Furthermore, the use of dimensionality reduction to reduce training times appears to be an independent property that might be extensible to more ML applications beyond the particular application presented in this paper.