A new variant of the superconducting fulleride Rb3C60 is presented, with 3 He atoms encapsulated in the C60 cages. The 3 He nuclei act as sensitive NMR probes embedded in the material. The superconducting and normal states are characterised by 3 He NMR. Evidence is found for coexisting vortex liquid and vortex solid phases below the superconducting transition temperature. A strong dependence of the spin-lattice relaxation time constant on spectral frequency is observed in the superconducting state, as revealed by two-dimensional NMR utilising an inverse Laplace transform. Surprisingly, this phenomenon persists, in attenuated form, at temperatures well above the superconducting transition. Reactions of fullerene C 60 with alkali metals give rise to a wide range of salts called fullerides, which consist of negatively-charged C n- 60 anions (n ∈ {1 . . . 6}) separated by positive alkali metal cations Despite their relatively high transition temperatures T C and upper critical fields (H C2 ), alkali metal fullerides have generally been understood as s-wave superconductors following conventional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory NMR is a valuable technique for studying superconductors both in their normal and superconducting states. The shape and position of the NMR spectrum and nuclear spin-lattice relaxation time (T 1 ) provide information about electronic interactions and magnetic field distributions inside the material, and also as direct probes of superconducting parameters such as the band gap Each molecule of fullerene C 60 is a symmetrical carbon cage enclosing a central cavity with an internal diameter of ∼ 3.4 Å. Supramolecular complexes known as endofullerenes may be formed, in which each fullerene cavity accommodates a single atom or molecule. These complexes are denoted A@C 60 , where A is the endohedral species. Noble gas endofullerenes such as He@C 60 and Xe@C 60 were first synthesized in very low yield by high-temperature methods The availability of endofullerenes by molecular surgery suggests the possibility of creating endofullerides through the reaction of an endofullerene with an alkali metal, generating materials in which endofulleride anions such as A@C 3- 60 are separated by alkali metal cations. Endofulleride salts such as Rb 3 (H 2 @C 60 ) and Rb 3 (H 2 O@C 60 ) have been synthesised and studied by solid-state NMR, both in the metallic and superconducting states Endofullerides with A= 3 He are particularly attractive for NMR investigations, since the 3 He nucleus is spin-1/2, has a large gyromagnetic ratio, no quadrupole moment, and should lack chemical shift anisotropy when located at the centre of a symmetrical C 60 cage. The zero natural abundance of 3 He ensures the absence of background signals from the sample container, probe parts, etc. which can be a significant nuisance factor for other nuclides The endofullerene 3 He@C 60 used in the synthesis of the endofulleride Rb 3 ( 3 He@C 60 ) was prepared as in NMR experiments were performed at 14.1 T on a Bruker AS 600 WB magnet equipped with an AVANCE NEO console and fitted with an Oxford Instruments Spectrostat flow cryostat. A cryogenic 3 He/X probe designed by NMR Service GmbH and tuned to the 3 He Larmor frequency of 457.401426 MHz was used. A detailed description of the construction and NMR performance of the probe is given in section 1 of the SI. The experiments used a 3 He radiofrequency amplitude corresponding to a nutation frequency of ∼32 kHz at ambient temperature. A nutation frequency of ∼26 kHz was used below 35 K to prevent probe arcing. A Quantum Design (QD) Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS) SQuID magnetometer was used to collect DC magnetic susceptibility versus temperature data between 5 and 300 K in zero-field-cooled warming and field-cooled cooling modes in an applied magnetic field μ 0 H of 2.5 mT. In order to probe the superconducting transition of Rb 3 ( 3 He@C 60 ), the magnetic susceptibility of the sample was measured as a function of temperature at an external applied magnetic field μ 0 H of 2.5 mT, well below the lower critical field μ 0 H C1 = 11.4 mT of Rb 3 C 60 Field cooled (FC) and zero field cooled (ZFC) measurements of the DC susceptibility of the Rb 3 ( 3 He@C 60 ) sample are presented in Figure The shielding fraction extracted from the ZFC curve is about 27% and the Meissner fraction extracted from the FC curve is about 7%. Low superconducting fractions such as these are commonly observed in fulleride superconductors. Politis et al. 3 He NMR measurements on the endofulleride Rb 3 ( 3 He@C 60 ) were performed at temperatures between 15 K and 290 K. The series of spectra is shown in Figure At room temperature, the 3 He resonance of Rb 3 ( 3 He@C 60 ) is shifted from that of 3 He@C 60 by +25.9 ppm (i.e. in the direction of less shielding, or higher absolute frequency). This shift is a superposition of a chemical shift due to the local electronic environment of the endohedral 3 He atoms, and a Knight shift due to hyperfine couplings with the conduction electrons in the high-temperature metallic phase. For comparison, the 13 C nuclei of Rb 3 C 60 experience a shift of +60 ppm NMR spectra below 24 K are broadened and shifted to low frequency (high shielding), relative to those obtained at higher temperatures, as seen in Figure The 3 He shift, evaluated as the shift of the centre of mass of the NMR spectrum relative to the 3 He@C 60 spectrum, is shown for temperatures between 15 K and 290 K in Figure The temperature-dependence of the 3 He shift above T C is unexpected. As explained in Section 1 of the SI, this shift cannot be due to instrumental effects. The shift is a superposition of the chemical shift and the Knight shift. The Knight shift is expected to be temperature-independent for metallic conductors within the Pauli approximation The superconducting transition temperature of 24 K is lower than the 30 K indicated by the susceptibility measurements (Figure Figure The T 1 values plotted in Figure In the normal state, under the Pauli approximation and in the absence of strong electron correlations, the T 1 at a temperature T is related to the Knight shift K by the Korringa relation where the Korringa constant S is given by and μ B is the Bohr magneton, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, k B is the Boltzmann constant and γ n is the gyromagnetic ratio of the nucleus. For 3 He, the value of S is ∼ 4.54 × 10 -7 s K. ) and their error bars. The data points below 24 K are fit to an Arrhenius function (red line), yielding an energy gap 2∆ of (109 ± 6) K. The data points above 24 K are fit to a straight line (dashed blue line) corresponding to a best fit Korringa product of (T1T ) -1 = 0.0024 (s K) -1 . (b) Korringa product (T1T ) -1 as a function of temperature. If the Knight shift is independent of temperature, as expected for a normal metal, the Korringa product (T 1 T ) -1 is temperature-independent. This hypothesis is tested in Figure In the superconducting state, for a superconducting energy gap 2∆, the relaxation rate can be modelled using an Arrhenius law Fitting the relaxation data below T C to a function of this form, we obtain an energy gap 2∆ of (109 ± 6) K. This yields a 2∆/T C of 4.5 ± 0.8, which agrees with the value of 4.1 estimated using 13 C NMR by Tycko et. al. The peak splitting and multi-exponentiality in the recovery curves below 21 K was explored further by examining the frequency dependence of the T 1 across the NMR spectrum at low temperature. The inverse Laplace transform (ILT) is a numerical analysis technique which decomposes an input signal into individual exponential decay components. It is often used in NMR to analyse samples with overlapping spectral features that are unresolvable in the frequency domain on the basis of their T 1 and T 2 relaxation behaviour Figure The spectral frequency-dependence of T 1 is not seen at 290 K (Figure Pennington et al. The mechanism of the frequency-dependent T 1 is not known at the current time. Nevertheless, the detection of an unusual effect that is very strong below T C but which persists in an attenuated form over a wide temperature range above T C is potentially significant. The phenomenon is reminiscent of superconducting fluctuations at temperatures much higher than T C , recently detected by transport measurements on K 3 C 60 A novel "endofulleride" material Rb 3 ( 3 He@C 60 ) was synthesised, and the structure and bulk magnetic properties of the parent fulleride were shown to be essentially unperturbed by the presence of the endohedral 3 He atom. The 3 He nucleus was used as an NMR probe in both the normal and the superconducting states of the material, and minor deviations from ideal Knight shift and Korringa behaviour were observed in the normal state, consistent with prior literature on Rb 3 C 60 . Superconducting state measurements display features in the 3 He NMR spectrum which are consistent with known features of vortex dynamics, such as the apparent co-existence of a vortex solid and vortex liquid phase. Similar behaviour has been observed by 13 C and 87 Rb relaxation and 2D exchange experiments in Rb 3 C 60 but not in fullerides. Surprisingly, this was seen to persist even above T C . While recent reports suggest the possibility of superconducting fluctuations above T C in K 3 C 60 Endohedral 3 He has proven to be a valuable and sensitive addition to the existing NMR tools for studying the properties of fullerides. While Rb 3 C 60 is at the limit of conventionally understood superconductivity in fullerides, materials like Cs 3 C 60 and Rb x Cs 3-x C 60 are known to exhibit more unusual properties including strong electron correlations. Introducing endohedral 3 He into such materials raises interesting possibilities for their NMR characterisation. A 87 Rb NMR spectrum of the Rb 3 ( 3 He@C 60 ) sample was acquired at 298 K using a Hahn echo sequence with a nutation frequency of 50 kHz and a full echo delay 2τ of μs, and is presented in Figure S.4. The central transitions of the three sites known in Rb 3 C 60 To ensure that the sample susceptibility as measured by MPMS is not significantly affected by contributions from the glass sample holder, a reference measurement was performed on a blank sample holder of the same geometry as the sample, sealed under 0.25 bar of 3 He gas. The resulting susceptibility is presented in Figure S.5 along with the sample susceptibility measured at the same applied field μ 0 H of 10 mT. While the glass has some measurable susceptibility, this is rather small when compared to the sample the normal state, and negligible when compared to the superconducting state. He relaxation-assisted separation (RAS) NMR spectra of Rb 3 ( 3 He@C 60 ), as described in section 3.3 of the main text, are presented at 30 K,35 K and K below. The T 1 is seen to depend on spectral position, to a similar extent as seen at 60 K in figure7of the main text.