This perspective article provides an overview of recent developments in the field of 3d transition metal (TM) catalysts for different reactions including oxygen-based reactions such as Oxygen Reduction Reaction (ORR) and Oxygen Evolution Reaction (OER). The spin moments of 3d TMs can be exploited to influence chemical reactions, and recent advances in this area, including the theory of chemisorption based on spin-dependent d-band centers and magnetic field effects, are discussed. The article also explores the use of scaling relationships and surface magnetic moments in catalyst design, as well as the effect of magnetism on chemisorption and vice versa. In addition, recent studies on the influence of a magnetic field on the ORR and OER are presented, demonstrating the potential of ferromagnetic catalysts to enhance these reactions through spin polarization. Heavy nonmagnetic metals have traditionally been utilized as catalysts and are not suitable for investigating the role of magnetism in heterogeneous catalysis. However, in recent years, there has been a shift in emphasis towards using simple 3d-transition metals (TMs) as catalysts. Magnetic fields can influence the energy levels of active species by interacting with their spin states, which can affect catalytic properties and alter the selectivity of the reaction. From the theoretical point of view in heterogeneous catalysis the trend of chemical reactivity is often explained in terms of the so-called d-band center model. The concept of the d-band center model was borrowed from a much older and original model of chemisorption, namely the Newns-Anderson model, which described the interaction of an adsorbate level ε a in a state |a > with a continuous set of states |k > via the Hamiltonian is given by, 19 Where the first term refers to the adsorbate energy and the second term describes the metal states. The third term describes the coupling between the two (V ak =< a| Ĥ|k >). The above Hamiltonian can be solved using Green's function approach. Introducing the Green's function, , we obtain the chemisorption energy as, Here It can be shown that at that limit, the Newns-Anderson model translates to an effective two-level problem where one level corresponds to the adsorbate and the other corresponds to the d-band center (ε d ) of the metal. In general, the poles of the chemisorption energy correspond to the energy levels of the electronic states of the adsorbate and the substrate. If we consider the poles of the Eq.2, and the use the values of ∆ and Λ (ε) stated above, we get, The energy levels ε ∓ describe two distinct energy levels of the metal-adsorbate system which are similar to the bonding and anti-bonding levels of H 2 molecule.This is the scenario of the dband center model, however, there are differences: Newns-Anderson model does not include an explicit orthogonalization term to account for the overlap between the metal and adsorbate states (< a|k >), while in the d-band center model an orthogonalization is included, something which was also considered earlier by Gimeley et. al. Where S =< Ψ d |Ψ a > is the overlap mentioned in the above. Thus ε d-band center Thus, the Newns-Anderson model assumes that the adsorbate state is localized and does not interact with other states on the metal surface. However, for certain adsorbates, this assumption breaks down because their electronic states can interact strongly with the metal surface states and the d-band center model therefore should be more appropriate. The chemisorption energy can be written as (within the d-band center model), Here V and f is the fractional occupation of the state ε d . The above expression is derived from the basis that the adsorbate level has two electrons. Therefore, one can obtain the chemisorption energy in the case when the adsorbate level is empty, According to this model, the variation in the adsorption energy from one TM surface to another , where the wavefunctions Ψ dσ and Ψ aσ satisfy respectively For a given adsorbate level ε a we get (supposing that the adsorbate is spin-unpolarized) Bonding orbitals: Down spin: Antibonding orbitals: Down spin: Thus, if we consider that ε d↑ is lower in energy compared to ε d↓ , then the energy gain due to the formation of bonding orbitals and the repulsive energy due to the formation of antibonding orbitals can be different for up spin and down spin. The authors considered a general situation where adsorbate has N unoccupied orbitals and M occupied orbitals. The chemisorption energy was obtained using a similar procedure was done for the spin unpolarized case and can be expressed as The as . Now, let us consider the effect of spin-polarization on the same surface. Let us consider now the same adsorbate interacts with the same metal surface but in a magnetically polarized state. The chemisorption energy in this case will be, Norskov approach for the ferromagnetic surfaces like Fe, Co, Mn, etc while for the unpolarized surfaces both the models give the same results. Bhattacharjee et al. also proposed a descriptor that can be used instead of the standard d-band center model, which is an occupation-weighted sum of the d-band centers for the majority and minority spin electrons and is associated with a shift proportional to the exchange split of metal and is given by, Here It is interesting to note that the above descriptor was recently used to formulate the effective energy barrier for ion migration in halide perovskites The spin-corrected d-band center model offers an insightful explanation for the observed disparity in hydrogen-metal binding strength between ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic Fe surfaces. where E S+A , E S , and E A are respectively energy of the surface with adsorbate, the energy of the surface, and the energy of the adsorbate alone. These energies are obtained with the standard DFT-based approaches. For example, for the surface, the total energy is given by Here, the universal functional F[ρ S ] is a sum of the electronic kinetic energy T[ρ S ], classical Coulomb repulsion energy U[ρ S ], and quantum exchange-correlation energy E XC [ρ S ] functionals. ρ S being the electron density and v ext is the external potential. For the spin-polarized system, the total energy is The mathematical expression for chemisorption energy ∆E( f ,V, ε dσ ), derived from Eq.1 and expressed in Eq.7, lacks an explicit representation of the correlation effects. This omission arises from the absence of an electron-electron correlation term in H d of the model Hamiltonian, H = H d +H a +H ad , (By inclusion of correlation effect, H d would be, where U represents the on-site Coulomb energy term usual for the Hubbard model, and N is the number of sites. Within the above d-band center models, the correlation effects manifest indirectly through ε dσ , which is usually determined via density functional theory-based calculations and used as input for the calculation of chemisorption energy ∆E. These calculations incorporate exchange and correlation effects through E XC [ρ] as mentioned above. However, for the transition metal oxide catalysts usually used in OER and ORR, one may need to consider the effect of the strong electron correlation c. Even for metallic systems, it may be necessary to go beyond the one-electron picture, as suggested by the recent work of Jans et al, While the above study reports that chemisorption affects band ferromagnetism by collapsing the exchange splitting close to the Fermi level, there are other studies that report the opposite behavior. In certain 3d transition metals, chemisorption may affect the Stoner criterion for the appearance of magnetism, where the interface between metallic thin films and C60 molecular layers modifies the states of metal in such a way that they can overcome the Stoner criterion, resulting in the emergence of ferromagnetic behavior at room temperature in non-ferromagnetic materials. ] considered to be greater than zero to allow a nonmagnetic surface to become ferromagnetic, which otherwise fails to satisfy Stoner's criterion. D a (E F ) is the DOS of the adsorbate at the Fermi energy and Σ(E) describes the self-energy due to the interaction between the adsorbate and the metal surface. Another essential element of the magnetism reliance on the reactivity of the catalysts can be visualized using the magnetic field, particularly in oxygen-based electrochemical processes such as ORR and OER. used constrained density functional theory formalism to investigate the role of spin orientation on the reactivity of ORR intermediates on a ferromagnetic electrode surface. Where "*" represents the adsorption site, and they showed that the strength of binding for these reaction intermediates (O*, HO*) depends on their relative spin orientations with respect to the magnetization of the electrode. The authors suggest that oxygen-based electrochemical reactions can be controlled through an applied magnetic field and demonstrate this possibility by studying an ORR on a PdFe (001) surface using a new concept called spin orientation dependent overpotential. The adsorption energy was calculated using: The concluding theme we wish to discuss is a significant and intriguing concept in heterogeneous catalysis: The scaling relationships, which pose a constraint in the engineering of catalysts for crucial reactions such as Oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalysts. where E ads (AH x ) is the adsorption energy of the species AH x , E ads (A) is the adsorption energy of the species (A), γ is the scaling factor or slope, and ξ is the intercept. The scaling relationship is derived from the concept of effective medium theory and the d-band center model: (1) Effective medium theory predicts an optimal electron density n 0 that results in the lowest energy position for an atom. The task of developing efficient electrocatalysts using non-precious metals is a complex challenge, as optimal catalytic materials necessitate a balance in bonding with key intermediates. As already mentioned, the usual scaling relationship Here, ∆E 1 ads and ∆E 2 ads denote the respective adsorption energies of species 1 and 2. It is postulated that on a densely packed surface, the slope, γ, relies on the ratio of the valence electrons' number of the adatoms attached to the surface, Further, equation-14 on magnetic bimetallic TMs must obey the following constraints, expressed by equation-16 below instead, ∆E The magnetic moment is pivotal in estimating adsorption energy and, consequently, in the linear scaling relation for atomic adsorbates and their hydrogenated species on bimetallic surfaces. The intercept C Y is positive for all the elements except N and F with which ∆E O has a negative slope. β Y is the usual intercept. It should be remembered that the ε slab d is negative and It is interesting to note that, the functional form of the above slope obtained by the compressed sensing approach suggests that one can tune it by changing the surface descriptor such as magnetic moments. The fact that the slope depends on surface descriptors such as magnetic moments suggests that for ferromagnetic surfaces, one must consider factors beyond the valency of the adsorbate. The standard scaling relationship suggests that if two adsorbates have the same valency, the slope γ should be equal to one. However, this may not be valid in the case of a magnetic surface, as these two molecules could change the exchange-correlation energy of the metal surface in different ways due to chemisorption and therefore the slope could be different than one. The original scaling relationships were demonstrated , Here J represents the exchange coupling constant, which quantifies the strength of the exchange interaction between surface moments m S j and the adsorbate moment m a . j represents the number of magnetic atoms on the surface with which the adsorbate interacts. Furthermore, if the surface has a non-trivial magnetic arrangement (such as A-type or G-type AFM order), the role of surface moments could be even more prominent as pointed out by some recent studies. Anderson model to study the dynamic behavior of paramagnetic molecules such as O 2 on metal surfaces. While previous studies have successfully used this model to study hydrogen atoms, expanding its application to paramagnetic molecules is a promising direction. previous studies have shown that nonadiabatic effects are pronounced near the spin transition point, making the nearadiabatic approximation insufficient. Remarkably, this suggests that the spin transition has a significant impact on the nonadiabatic energy transfer and system dynamics during adsorption. The spin transition, which denotes the shift of the ground state of the system from the spin-polarized to the non-polarized state, is characterized by a transformation of the solutions into spin-dependent adsorbate states, which evolve from distinct solutions to degenerate ones. By examining the timedependent Newns-Anderson model in the context of paramagnetic molecules, we can unravel the complex interplay between spin dynamics and nonadiabatic effects and shed light on the behavior of these systems at the atomic level. Although not covered in this article, it is worth highlighting another area where 3D transition metals are being explored: single-atom catalysts. Ni and Fe SACs showing improved catalytic activity for CO evolution. 