We present a theory describing the single-ion anisotropy of rare earth (RE) magnets in the presence of point defects. Taking the RE-lean 1:12 magnet class as a prototype, we use first-principles calculations to show how the introduction of Ti substitutions into SmFe 12 perturbs the crystal field, generating new coefficients due to the lower symmetry of the RE environment. We then demonstrate that these perturbations can be described extremely efficiently using a screened point charge model. We provide analytical expressions for the anisotropy energy which can be straightforwardly implemented in atomistic spin dynamics simulations, meaning that such simulations can be carried out for an arbitrary arrangement of point defects. The significant crystal field perturbations calculated here demonstrate that a sample which is single-phase from a structural point of view can nonetheless have a dramatically varying anisotropy profile at the atomistic level if there is compositional disorder, which may influence localized magnetic objects like domain walls or skyrmions. The unique magnetic properties of lanthanide elements originate from their partially-filled 4f shells A key target in permanent magnet development is a high maximum energy product (BH) max , which in turn requires a high coercivity (resistance to demagnetization by external fields). Although a large MCA is a prerequisite for a large, shape-independent coercivity RE magnets typically only achieve 5-35% of their theoretical limit Kronmüller's analysis is a top-down approach, which posits that an inhomogeneity induces a variation in the anisotropy according to an assumed analytical profile. However, computational magnetics is now focused on bottom-up simulations, whereby magnetization reversal and domain wall motion are treated as phenomena emerging from atomistic properties As an example, we consider how an ASD simulation based on a classical spin Hamiltonian should be modified to include a point defect, the smallest possible inhomogeneity. In ASD, each magnetic atom contributes to the total energy based on the orientation of its magnetic moment ê = (sin Θ cos φ, sin Θ sin φ, cos Θ) Both d 0m l (Θ) and A l are known quantities: d 0m l (Θ) is a function related to the associated Legendre polynomials Point defects, and their effects on the MCA, are particularly important in the "1:12" class of RE-TM alloys (2 ,0 ) (2 ,1 ) (2 ,2 ) (4 ,0 ) (4 ,1 ) (4 ,2 ) (4 ,3 ) (4 ,4 ) (6 ,0 ) (6 ,1 ) (6 ,2 ) (6 ,3 ) (6 ,4 ) (6 ,5 ) We have therefore focused on SmFe 12-x Ti x , an exemplar 1:12 alloy for which high-quality single crystal data exists We now describe our approach. In CF theory, the potential V (r) experienced by the RE-4f electrons is expanded in terms of atom-centred functions, which here are the complex spherical harmonics Y lm , i.e. V (r) = lm V lm (r)Y lm (r). The radial functions V lm (r) are then combined with the 4f electron charge density n 4f (r) and integrated, to construct the CF coefficients B lm The perturbations show two general features: first, that the largest changes occur at the 2a site closest to the substituted Ti, and second, that the largest changes are in the l = 2 coefficients. The same behavior occurs when the Ti is substituted at an 8j or 8f site The strong l-and interatomic distance dependence of the CF perturbation brings to mind the Laplace expansion of the Coulomb potential and suggests that the Ti substitution might be efficiently modeled as a screened point charge We have previously calculated ⟨r l ⟩ = r l+2 n 4f (r)dr with self-interaction-corrected DFT We note that the use of analytical models is hardly a new idea in CF theory Having established the model, we now consider its predictions. Since equation 2 is an electrostatic model, the principle of superposition applies, such that introducing multiple substitutions has an additive effect on the CF coefficients. At SmFe 11 Ti stoichiometry, two of the 24 TM sites in the conventional cell are occupied by Ti atoms, on average. It is a simple matter to generate the 276 possible configurations (many of which are not unique), and use equation 2 to evaluate the perturbation to the CF. The predicted effect on the (2, 0) coefficient is shown in Fig. To verify these predictions, we took a subset of the 276 configurations and calculated the CF coefficients using DFT. The resulting ∆A 20 ⟨r 2 ⟩ values are shown as stars in Fig. Similarly good agreement is found for other coefficients, e.g. ∆A 22 ⟨r 2 ⟩ [21]. We stress the independence of the training set in Fig. According to our calculations, if two Ti atoms occupy 8i sites close to Sm, the perturbation to the CF will be so large that it will almost destroy the single-ion anisotropy. Therefore, it is crucial to know how the dopants are distributed. We calculated the energies of all possible arrangements of Ti atoms within the conventional cell of the analogous material YFe 11 Ti, and like previous calculations and experiments on 1:12 systems found that the Ti atoms overwhelmingly prefer 8i sites. Importantly, we also found the most coefficient is also substantial. It is important to realize that, assuming that the Ti dopants are uniformly distributed across a set of Wyckoff sites, the value of ∆B lm averaged over all Sm sites will be zero unless m = 0 or ±4. Physically, this averaging process is equivalent to treating all of the Sm atoms as a single entity-a magnetic sublattice-with a single, common magnetization direction, and is valid when comparing to measurements of macroscopic phenomena of bulk crystals, e.g. measurements of magnetization like in Ref. and it was argued that the dopants affected these through modification of the exchange interaction. However, the CF perturbation due to dopants was not considered, and it is important to revisit this phenomenon using our new approach. We have focused our discussion on magnetocrystalline anisotropy, but it is important also to quantify the effect of Ti substitutions on the RE-TM exchange. Using the DFT formulation of the disordered local moment picture (DFT-DLM We have applied the point charge model to another atomistic defect: the RECo 5 "dumbbell" whereby an RE atom is substituted with a Co 2 pair pristine SmCo 5 has very strong uniaxial anisotropy, with the prolate electron cloud pointing along the c-axis and has a substantially reduced A 20 ⟨r 2 ⟩ (50%) compared to SmCo 5 As a summary, we set out our proposed scheme to carry out ASD simulations of localized magnetic phenomena in the presence of point defects. First, the Hamiltonian of the host material is constructed, taking advantage of the widening literature of CF coefficients and exchange constants for pristine systems. Next, distributions of point defects are generated, which may be totally disordered, partially or fully ordered; the defect distributions might be built based on atom probe tomography data, particularly when such measurements correlate with substantial variations in coercivity Ideally, the ∆Z parameters should be obtained by fitting to DFT calculations, but we stress their physical meaning as being the effective charge of the defect. Therefore, an order of magnitude estimate for ∆Z could be obtained from a relatively simple DFT calculation on the defective system, obtaining the charge e.g. through a Bader analysis Computational Details: CF coefficients were calculated within DFT using the Y-analogue formalism as described in Ref. The structural parameters of the SmFe 12 cell (a, c = 8.497, 4.687 Å, x 8i = 0.359, x 8j = 0.270) were taken from previous DFT (generalized-gradient approximation) calculations * christopher.patrick@materials.ox.ac.uk