An ideal proton exchange membrane should only permeate protons and be leak tight for fuels. Graphene is impermeable to water and poorly conducting to protons. Here, we chemically functionalized monolayer graphene to install sulfophenylated sp 3 dislocations by diazotization. Selective to protons, transmembrane areal conductances are up to ~50 S cm -2 , which is ~5000 fold higher than in pristine graphene. Mounted in a direct methanol fuel cell, sulfophenylated graphene resulted in power densities up to 1.6 W mg -1 or 123 mW cm -2 under standard cell operation (60 o C), a value ~two-fold larger than micron-thick films of Nafion 117. The combination of sp 3 dislocations and polar groups, therefore, allow the creation of hydrophilic ion paths through graphene and unveils a novel route to rationalize transmembrane hydron transport through 2D materials. One-sentence summary. Opening proton channels in graphene by sulfonation. Next to long-term stability an ideal and optimized proton exchange membrane needs to fulfil two main criteria: proton permeability and selectivity. Within methanol fuel cells, the first ensures a high power density, while the second prevents fuel cross-over between the electrodes, which deteriorates catalyst performance and, thereby, drastically lowers performance. Pristine graphene Protons However, the ion transport distance in these systems is currently, particularly in laminated structures To open pores enabling transmembrane ion transport in graphene Pore and pore-like defects have also been realized via bottom-up approaches including chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth of amorphous carbon Here, we introduce sp 3 lattice dislocations paired with sulfophenyl groups on the basal plane of single-layer graphene via a diazotization strategy(40) using 4sulfobenzenediazonium (4-SBD) as a reactant (Fig. Meanwhile, side reactions might also occur: 4-SBD can react with an already grafted aryl group (at the ortho position) either via a radical or azo-coupling mechanism, both of which might result in oligomerization To eliminate the influence of intrinsic defects and to understand proton transport through the sole sulfophenylated sites on graphene (now abbreviated SO3 -graphene), we first used single crystals of mechanically exfoliated graphene. We measured the proton current through free-standing graphene supported over a 1μm diameter circular aperture in a ~30 nm thick custom-made SiN chip (Fig. Importantly, at the nanometer scale, HRTEM images of graphene after 4-day and 6-day of SBD treatment did not show the apparition of large >1 nm pores (Fig. Next, we studied 4-SBD reactivity with graphene covered with a spin-coated Nafion layer (Fig. The power output did not increase further with a prolonged 4-SBD reaction time. Instead, it decreased to 44.9 ±17.3 mW cm -2 after a 6-day treatment, again in line with our hypothesis of the oligomerization of the sulfophenyls after 4 days of treatment. Subsequently, we monitored the power density for a range of operating temperatures ranging from room temperature (rt) to 70 o C (Fig. To establish a correlation between areal proton conductance and DMFC performance (i.e., power density; and in the next section also fuel crossover rates), we first investigated how the membrane resistance of SO3 --graphene correlates with the operating temperature of the fuel cell. Fig. Therefore, the equivalent conductance per graphene area in the DMFC is 30.9 ±2.3 S cm -2 , a value ~19.1 S cm -2 lower than exfoliated graphene (Fig. Tables * to whom correspondence should be addressed: w.zhang@lic.leidenuniv.nl, g.f.schneider@chem.leidenuniv.nl This PDF file includes: 1. 4-sulfonatobenzenediazonium (4-SBD) synthesis. All solvents and reagents were obtained from commercial sources (Sigma Aldrich and Merck) and used without further purification unless stated otherwise in the respective method section. 1 H, 13 C, and 19 To prepare 4-SBD in salt form with tetrafluoroborate as counterion, a suspension of sulfanilic acid (2.00 g, 11.5 mmol, 1.0 eq) in 48% aqueous tetrafluoroboric acid (4 mL, 30.3 mmol, 2.6 eq) was cooled to -5 °C. While stirring a pre-cooled aqueous saturated solution of sodium nitrite (1.20 g, 17.3 mmol, 1.5 eq) was added dropwise to the reaction mixture. During the addition, it became increasingly difficult to maintain stirring which was solved by adding 4 mL of cooled ultrapure water. After this, the reaction mixture was stirred at -5 °C for 5 h after which the product was isolated by filtration. The collected precipitate was washed with ice-cold diethyl ether, ice-cold diethyl ether/methanol (4:1 v/v), ice-cold ethanol and dried overnight under vacuum to yield 4-SBD as a white solid (2.43 g, 9.94 mmol, 77 %). The compound was stored at 4 °C. To confirm the reactivity of 4-SBD at any time, a solution of 4-SBD (1 mg ml -1 ) in 0.1 M aqueous HCl was mixed with dimethylaniline to obtain methyl orange, a common pH indicator. After mixing, the colorless mixture rapidly turned red or yellow depending on the pH, which is indicative of methyl orange. Mixing a solution of 4sulfophenolic acid, the major degradation product of 4-SBD, with dimethylaniline did not result in any color change. 2. Proton (ions) conductance measurements of exfoliated graphene before and after 4-SBD treatment. The 4-SBD solution (1 mg ml -1 ) was prepared by sonicating 50 mg of the 4-SBD molecule (synthesized in section 1) in 50 ml of aqueous 0.1 M HCl for 5 mins. Unless mentioned otherwise, all the treatment with 4-SBD uses an as-prepared solution of 1 mg ml -1 . Current-voltage curves of exfoliated graphene were obtained using an Axopatch 200B patch clamp system(1). We prepared exfoliated graphene using scotch tape(2, 3) and transferred monolayer flakes to a SiNx/Si chip using wedging transfer(4). Fig. Additionally, the SiN chip used was fabricated by directly etching a 60 nm SiN membrane deposited on a Si wafer with the backside etched to create a 1 μm aperture. For ion selectivity measurements, we first determined the proton selectivity over chloride by setting concentration gradients on the two sides of the graphene. As shown in Fig. where g ! is the normalized conductance to the proton, G ! is the measured conductance, and σ ! is the bulk conductivity of solution i (σ ! of 0.1 M solutions at method with width = 0.5 Å, height = 0.1 kJ mol -1 and deposition frequency of Gaussian hills every 100-time steps The Collective Variable used for describing the proton traveling from the sulfophenylated sp 3 functionalization into the water bulk is defined as the distance from the center of mass of the oxygens of the sulfonic group to the oxygen atom of the hydronium where d ! = |r ! -r # | is the distance between oxygen atom i and the center of mass of the oxygen atoms belonging to the functional group, and n # is the hydrogen coordination number of the functional group. The switching function f(n # ) included in the Collective Variable is given by: where the coordination cutoff n ( is a parameter whose value depends on how many excess protons are present in the system. Large-area high-quality single-crystalline graphene samples were epitaxially grown on Cu(111) foils via the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) measurement (JEM-2100, at 200 keV electron energy) were also conducted on the asobtained graphene samples, which were transferred onto TEM grids (3 mm in diameter) without polymer transfer medium. As shown in Fig. (Raman spectroscopy, XPS, AFM, and HRTEM) Raman spectra were recorded on a WITec confocal Raman spectrometer with a 457 nm laser and a 100× objective under 1.5 mW laser power. For Nafion/graphene samples, we spin-coated a Nafion solution (~5% D521 from Fuelcellstore) on single-crystalline graphene on a copper foil at 2000 rpm for 1 min followed by baking on a hotplate at 60 o C for 30 mins to fully remove the solvent. Then, the Cu film was etched away by floating the copper/graphene/Nafion stack on an 0.5M aqueous solution of ammonium persulfate (APS, from Sigma-Aldrich) in a glass petri dish. Nafion/graphene was then rinsed by transferring the film onto the water-air using a squeezing bottle through the top surface of the graphene. Then the graphene/wafer was baked at 120 o C for half an hour to further improve the adhesion between the graphene and SiO2 surface. Next, a drop of isopropanol (~5 μl for 1 cm -2 of graphene) was added on top of the sample to avoid the direct surface tension force when dipping the sample into a 4-SBD solution. Then the samples were immersed in the 4-SBD solution. Before the Raman characterization, samples were rinsed in ultrapure water several times and dried in air. Mapping of the intensity ratio (2D peak and G peak, I2D/IG) confirmed that the functionalization is uniform over the single-layer area. While the reactivity of the multilayer is suppressed, indicated by a very low D peak intensity (Fig. For the defect density, though there were reports to conduct quantitative estimation via ID/IG and the size of vacancy, the estimation is based on the vacancy-like defects In our samples, no D' peak was not found and this further proved that the sulfophenyl groups were covalently grafted to graphene via sp 3 distortion. the adventitious carbon state as close as possible to 284.8 eV; despite that, charge the correction of the spectra to lower BE (≈1.8 eV) were made afterward (Fig. Interestingly, for the graphene samples immersed in solutions containing 1 and 0.1 mg/mL of SBD, the sp 3 C/sp 2 C ratios increase with the concentration of the solution and with the content of SO3 -detected at the near surface of the graphene samples. A 4-SBD treatment with 10 times less concentrated solution (0.1 mg ml -1 ) leads to a reduction of the XPS peak intensities demonstrating that there are 1.5-3.7 times fewer SO3 -groups grafted to the graphene basal plane (Table For the quantitative chemical analysis and the binding energy (BE) shifts, spectra were analyzed with CasaXPS (version 2.3.19PR1.0) and the Scofied relative sensitivity factor (R.S.F) Lorentzian "LA(1.2,2.5,5)" for the sp 2 carbon. The fitting methodology has been inspired by the work of Biesinger , which was also observed for the powder SBD precursor (Fig. AFM images were recorded using a JPK NanoWizard Ultra Speed microscope and the obtained data was processed using the JPK SPM Data Processing software. All experiments were performed using a silicon probe (Olympus, OMCL-AC240R3) with a nominal resonance frequency of 70 kHz. The images were all scanned and recorded (with a resolution of 1024x1024 pixels) in intermittent contact mode in the air at room temperature. For each incubation time, three individual regions were recorded and the surface roughness was calculated from the combined three regions. The AFM characterization was conducted with graphene on the TEM grid to allow the characterization over free-standing graphene, which is prepared by the following steps. A droplet of isopropanol was added to the TEM grid (carbon film on top), and a piece of flat graphene/Cu film was gently put on the droplet (graphene side on bottom). Then, the sample was dried at room temperature. After the drying out of isopropanol, the sample was flipped over and floated on 0.5 M APS solution to fully etch away Cu film. Then the sample was floated on ultrapure water for 20 mins and this procedure was repeated for 3 times. The as-prepared sample was floated on 0.1 M HCl to preclude the influence of water and HCl on the graphene morphology (shown in Fig. Then the samples were treated with 4-SBD (1 mg ml -1 in 0.1 M HCl solution) in the same manner mentioned above for a specific time, followed by the rinse of 0.1 M HCl after treatment. Graphene-based membranes were prepared with a porous polycarbonate (PC) membrane as a support (Nuclepore track-etch membrane with a pore diameter of 3 μm, Whatman), and a proton-conducting ionomer (Nafion dispersion D521, Fuelcellstore) was used as a stabilizer to prevent direct contact between the graphene lattice and electrodes. To prepare the membrane, CVD graphene on Cu (1.2 by 1.2 cm2) was first spin-coated with the Nafion solution (D521) at 2000 rpm for 1 minute and then baked at 80°C for 30 minutes on a hot plate. The Nafion/graphene/Cu was then placed on a piece of PC membrane, and the Cu was etched by floating the Nafion/graphene/Cu/PC sample on a 0.5 M APS solution in a petri dish. The resulting Nafion/graphene/PC composite membrane was rinsed and stored in 0.1 M HCl before being fixed between two PTFE gasket sheets using soft replica rubber (Reprorubber Thin Pour, Flexbar Machine Corp.). A Nafion solution was drop-casted twice onto the backside of the PC support, followed by baking at 80°C for 30 minutes each time (to act as a mechanical contact buffer during assembly of the fuel cell and following the compression from the electrodes). The anode, with a Pt/Ru loading rate of 4 mg cm -2 , and the cathode, with a Pt loading rate of 4 mg cm -2 (Fuelcellstore), were then put on the sides of the MEA before the measurements. DMFC measurements were carried out using an electrolyzer from Dioxide Materials, with a titanium anode plate and a cathode made from 904 L stainless steel. The cells were operated using a methanol/water mixture at a flow rate of 30 ml min -1 passing through the anode. To ensure the reliability of all measurements, all cells were started with 5 rounds of CV scanning from 0 to 1.5 V at a speed of 10 mV s The performance of a DMFC is influenced by methanol crossover in three major ways: it can poison cathode catalysts, reduce methanol efficiency, and decrease cell voltage due to a mixed potential at the cathode. To assess the membrane's properties, we investigated the methanol crossover behavior of an SO3 --graphene membrane. Methanol crossover rate (J , ) is caused by three major effects: gradient diffusion resulting from concentration differences, electro-osmotic drag, and hydraulic pressure based on liquid pressure, which can be expressed as follows: Where D is the diffusivity of water in the membrane, δm is the membrane thickness, ∆C is the concentration difference, n is the electro-osmotic drag coefficient, I is the current density, F is Faraday's constant, Km is the permeability through the membrane, ρ is the density of water, ΔP is the difference of liquid pressure, μ is the viscosity of the liquid, M 8 ' & is the molecular weight of water, α is the overall coefficient where Icrossover is the methanol crossover current, Icrossover,limit is the limit current obtained from crossover current measurements, Ishortcircuit is the short circuit current of DMFC and I is the working current To further compare the fuel efficiency among samples, we also converted the methanol crossover current information by and calculated the fuel efficiency with I of a DMFC measured under 200 mV and Icrossover calculated from eq.3 under 200 mV. We observed that the fuel efficiency at 200 mV was due to the maximum power output being achieved around that voltage and the DMFC operating at an optimal state. Therefore, we characterized the methanol crossover by oxidizing the methanol at the cathode. The methanol crossover current was measured by linear sweep voltammetry from 0 to 1.2 V against the cathode and anode at a scan rate of 5 mV s -1 with a methanol flow rate of 30 ml min -1 at the anode and nitrogen flow at the cathode. The limiting current is taken as an indicator of the methanol crossover rate. suggesting that the temperature has a more significant impact on activity than the methanol crossover rate. Additionally, the negligible variation in methanol crossover for samples treated with 2 to 4 days of 4-SBD at different temperatures indicates that the selective pathway dominates. For samples with 5 and 6 days of treatment, the variation with different temperatures is more significant since the selective pathway is partially blocked by the oligomerization of the diazonium compound. The different methanol crossover rates also explain the temperature dependence of the cell performance, as mentioned above. Fuel efficiency at 200mV (η200mV), which is close to the potential at maximum power density, is a practical Parameter to evaluate the fuel cell performance After 4 days 4-SBD treatment for single side, the increase in conductance of CVD graphene is 30.9 -6.9 = 24.0 S cm -2 . After 84h 4-SBD treatment for both sides, the increase in conductance of exfoliated graphene is 50.0 -0.1 = 49.9 S cm -2 .