The excitation of quasi-particles near the extrema of the electronic band structure is a gateway to electronic phase transitions in condensed matter. In a many-body system, quasi-particle dynamics are strongly influenced by the electronic single-particle structure and have been extensively studied in the weak optical excitation regime. Yet, under strong optical excitation, where light fields coherently drive carriers, the dynamics of many-body interactions that can lead to new quantum phases remain largely unresolved. Here, we induce such a highly non-equilibrium many-body state through strong optical excitation of charge carriers near the van Hove singularity in graphite. We investigate the system's evolution into a strongly-driven photo-excited state with attosecond soft X-ray core-level spectroscopy. Surprisingly, we find an enhancement of the optical conductivity of nearly ten times the quantum conductivity and pinpoint it to carrier excitations in flat bands. This interaction regime is robust against carrier-carrier interaction with coherent optical phonons acting as an attractive force reminiscent of superconductivity. The strongly-driven non-equilibrium state is markedly different from the single-particle structure and macroscopic conductivity and is a consequence of the nonadiabatic many-body state. Optically-induced electronic phase transitions in strongly-driven condensed matter systems manifest from an out-of-equilibrium state, such as the optical excitation of phonons and their nonlinear coupling to electronic states Here, we will identify such change of the electronic phase in a light-induced out-of-equilibrium state where the spectral function is related to the self-energy through A(k, E) = -2IΣ(E nk )/ [(E -E nk -RΣ(E nk )) For instance, a 3-dimensional (3D) Fermi-liquid with carrier-carrier scattering is characterized by a rate τ nk (E), which scales quadratically with energy 1/τ ~(E -E F ) 2 32 . Since the exact scaling depends on the dimensionality of the studied electronic system, this allows us to denote the type of quasi-particle interactions and the electronic single-particle band structure Briefly, XAFS provides access to a wide range of electronic states ( This equation resembles Eqn. (1), and indeed such a relation between IM(E) and IΣ(E nk ) has been predicted Where 1 + λ(E) = m * /m e is the mass enhancement that arises through many-body interactions and is related to the thermalization rate through a Kramers-Kronig transformation We infer the sample's intrinsic n-doping and Fermi energy at 285.1 eV from a fit of the absorption spectrum to a room-temperature Fermi-Dirac distribution multiplied by the density of states; see SI for details. To extract the dynamic evolution of carriers and their many-body physics, we leverage the direct mapping between measured core-level soft X-ray spectrum and unoccupied density of states with the broadband soft X-ray pulse after optical excitation with a two-cycle (11.3-fs) near-infrared pump pulse with a central energy of 0.7 eV. Figure The measurement shows that although the pump pulse can only excite carriers along the K-G direction [see SI], multi-photon absorption We now employ the sensitivity of XAFS to graphite's many-body response, together with the ability to separate the carrier dynamics from the renormalization of the single-particle density of states through the fit, to reveal the underlying quasi-particle excitations. Our model of the transient XAFS signal further accounts for carrier-induced changes to the density of states and allows us to separately identify contributions of carrier temperature, Fermi-edge position, and shift of the VHS at each pumpprobe delay; further details are provided in the SI. A comparison of the transient changes in the density of states between the three measured fluence cases, shown in Fig. Finally, we leverage the similarity between the self-energy and the single particle density of states In contrast to holes, we attribute the rather peculiar scaling of electrons to carrier occupation near the VHS, where the bands are essentially flat. The electron relaxation rate increases further from the Fermi level for weak optical interaction due to strong electron-electron and electron-phonon scattering Increasing the fluence to 81.4 ± 5 mJ/cm 2 , the conductivity increases by one order of magnitude to 10G 0 . We observe an entirely different behaviour for electrons. For fluences of up to 22.8 ± 1.4 mJ/cm 2 , transitions into the flat bands near the VHS are apparent as peaks in the optical conductivity around 1eV above the Fermi level. But, for the most strongly-driven system, at 81.4 ± 5 mJ/cm 2 , σ follows a Drude-like behaviour with values approaching the ones of holes and only a kink near the VHS. We contrast the observed behaviour under weak optical excitation against data in graphene. In graphene, a frequency-independent optical conductivity of πG 0 /4 arises from massless Dirac carriers near the K-point This work investigates the non-equilibrium many-body dynamics of semi-metallic graphite under extreme photo-doping with attosecond soft X-ray core-level spectroscopy. We find a surprising enhancement by one order of magnitude of the optical conductivity and pinpoint it to excitation in flat bands. This behaviour is explained by the interplay between intense optical fields, large photodoping, and a small density of states at the K-point with considerable optical phonon energies that block the relaxation into low energetic states. Further, flat bands at the VHS suppress carrier-carrier interactions, and carrier relaxation through coupling with optical phonons becomes the dominant relaxation channel. Consequently, under extreme optical excitation, carrier relaxation is nearly energy independent, leading to a predominant 2D electronic carrier system with a suppressed interlayer hopping We recorded the raw CCD image for each acquisition in a pre-defined region of interest (ROI), which was identical for τpp, τ0, and τp. First, all ROIs for a delay step are summed, and then each ROI is then added together to obtain the 1D spectrum for each delay step sequence τpp, τ0, and τp. The detector's dark and thermal noise are removed from each spectrum. To remove the possible residual pump background, the 1D τp spectrum is multiplied by 15/4 to account for the reduced integration time, then subtracted from τpp spectrum. To account for possible slow drifts in the SXR flux, despite the 40second integration windows, we normalize to the energy range between 200-280 eV before carbon Kedge for τpp, τ0, and τp, and we apply a 3-pixel boxcar average. These traces are taken to calculate the differential transmission (ΔT = T pp -T 0 ) normalized to the probe only spectrum, ΔT/T 0 . From the differential transmission spectrum, we can obtain the change of absorption (ΔA) through: -ln ( ΔT T 0 + 1) = ΔA. We used following identity ΔT T 0 = I 0 e -α pp d -I 0 e -α 0 d I 0 e -α 0 d = e -Δαd -1 , with the attenuation coefficient α and sample thickness d. The time-and energy-dependent absorption spectrum, A(E, t), is described by the product of the calculated density of states, DOS(E, t), and a Fermi-Dirac distribution, FD(E, T(t)). Changes to the DOS are accounted for by a shift, δ, and stretching of the energy axis by a. Finally, the fitted spectrum is convoluted with a Voigt function, σ(E, t), to account for the detector resolution through a Gaussian broadening of at least 250 meV, and the core-hole lifetime through a Lorentzian with width of 150 meV, A(E, t) = σ(E, t) * [1 -FD(E -E F (t), T(t))]DOS(a(t)(E -δ(E, t)) ) We separately apply this function to the unpumped and pumped spectra and minimize the difference between the fit and measured values at each recorded energy channel using a least-square method. More details can be found in the supplementary information.