We have investigated the effects of lead (Pb) additions (x) up to 40 wt.% (x = 0-0.4) on the structure, electrical properties, and magnetic properties of FeSe0.5Te0.5 superconductor. The samples were prepared by the solid-state reaction method and were characterized by various techniques. The parent compound (x = 0) showed the onset temperature Tc onset of 15 K, and zero-resistance temperature, Tc offset of 12 K. The addition of Pb enhances the metallic characteristics of FeSe0.5Te0.5, but both Tc onset and Tc offset are decreased to the lower temperature with the broadened transition width. The Tc onset is nearly the same (10.3 K) at higher additions, such as x = 0.3 and 0.4, but zero resistivity is not observed up to 7 K. Microstructural analysis and transport studies suggest that for x > 0.05, Pb additions weakened the coupling between grains and suppressed the superconducting percolation, leading to a broad transition. More importantly, the inclusion of a relatively small amount of Pb (x = 0.05) increased the critical current density, Jc, in the entire magnetic field, which might be attributable to better phase uniformity as well as good grain connectivity. The iron-based superconductor (IBS) was discovered in 2008 Cr The 11-family is also free of rare earth elements and hazardous components. As a result, FeSe is attractive for a variety of applications, including superconducting tapes, wires, and superconducting magnets A recent study When FeSe with a tetragonal PbO-type structure is synthesized at roughly 460°C, it is claimed to undergo a phase change toward a hexagonal-NiAs structure. FeTe, on the other hand, with the same tetragonal crystal structure, is stable up to 930°C. The substitution of Se atoms within FeSe with Te would subsequently be expected to stabilize the tetragonal phase at a synthesis temperature at or above 460°C Chemical addition is commonly used to improve superconducting properties by increasing superconducting phase crystallization, accelerating superconducting grain intergranular interaction, or introducing pinning centers In this paper, we report a detailed study of the structure, microstructure, and the superconducting properties of FeSe0.5Te0.5 under the influence of Pb additions (x = 0-0.4). These samples were characterized by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), microstructure, resistivity, and magnetic measurements. The addition of Pb improved the metallic behavior of the parent compound. The microstructural analysis revealed that for x > 0.05, there was no improvement in the grain connections and enhancement of impurity phases with Pb additions. It is found that the transition temperature (Tc) is reduced with the Pb-additions, which could be due to the reduced concentration of Te in the FeSe0.5Te0.5 structure. Besides, a small amount of Pb addition can improve the critical current properties. We have prepared polycrystalline FeSe0.5Te0.5 samples by using the solid-state reaction method. In the first step, the purity of the starting reagents, i.e., Fe powder (>99.5% purity, Alfa Aesar), Se (99.99% purity, Alfa Aesar), and Te (99.99% purity, Alfa Aesar) were mixed according to the stoichiometric ratios of FeSe0.5Te0.5, which were well-mixed in an agate mortar for 15-20 min. Then, these well-mixed powders were cold-pressed into discs under 6000 Kg of uniaxial pressure and sealed into an evacuated quartz tube with a pressure of less than 1.3 Pascal. The evacuated quartz tube is used to minimize the oxygen atmosphere inside the tube to the precursors and also helps to seal the tube. The prepared ampoules were heated at 600°C for 11 h in a box furnace. In one batch, we prepared around 14 grams of FeSe0.5Te0.5 sample, and the resultant powder was reground into a fine powder. To prepare 2 g sample for each Pbcomposition, the prepared FeSe0.5Te0.5 powder was mixed with 5 wt% (x = 0.05), 10 wt% (x = 0.1), 20 wt% (x = 0.2), 30 wt% (x = 0.3), and 40 wt% (x = 0.4) Pb (99% purity of Pb powder). The mixed powder of Pb/FeSe0.5Te0.5 was pressed into cylinder pellets under 6000 Kg of pressure, which were sealed again into the evacuated quartz tube. Further sintering of these pellets was performed at the same temperature of 600°C for 4 h followed by furnace cooling to room temperature. The final pellets had a diameter of ~12 mm with a thickness of ~2.5 mm. All chemical manipulations were performed into an argon-filled glove box. This process was used to prepare several samples from different batches, all of which demonstrated high consistency in terms of superconducting properties. The obtained samples were measured by the powder X-ray diffraction method (XRD) and carried out on the Rigaku SmartLab 3kW diffractometer filtered Cu-Kα radiation (wavelength: 1.5418 Å) and a Dtex250 linear detector were used. The profile analysis, the quantitative values of impurity phases (%), and the lattice parameter analysis of the measurement results were performed using Rigaku's PDXL software and the ICDD PDF4+ 2021 standard diffraction patterns database, and also from Rietveld refinements on the XRD data employing the Fullprof software suite Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded for each prepared sample FeSe0.5Te0.5 + xPb which are shown in Figure The obtained lattice parameters of FeSe0.5Te0.5 polycrystalline (a = 3.7950 Å, c = 5.9713 Å) are nearly identical to those reported for FeSe0.5Te0.5 single crystals (a = 3.815 Å, c = 6.069 Å) and polycrystalline (a = 3.7909 Å, c = 5.9571 Å) Elemental analysis of a polycrystalline sample using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) offers the opportunity to measure the stoichiometric composition of the elements. For each sample, the EDX and the area of mapping were measured. The elemental mapping for the parent compound with x = 0 and the Pb-added sample with x = 0.05 and 0.1 is shown in Figures Images of backscattered scanning electron microscopy (BSE-SEM, revealing chemical contrast) of the various polycrystalline FeSe0.5Te0.5 samples with various Pb additions have been performed. Microstructural analysis was performed on well-polished surfaces by using micron sandpaper without lubricants. Backscattered electron (BSE) images of FeSe0.5Te0.5 (x = 0) and FeSe0.5Te0.5 + xPb from low to high magnification are shown in Figures Figure Interestingly, the residual resistivity (ρ0) value is around 0.3 mΩ-cm for x = 0 and 0.7 mΩ-cm for x = 0.05, but with higher Pb additions, its value increased (ρ0 = 0.9 mΩ-cm, x = 0.1; ρ0 = 1.1 mΩ-cm, x = 0.2; ρ0 = 1.6 mΩ-cm, x = 0.3; ρ0 = 2.3 mΩ-cm, x = 0.4;) which might be due to impurity and imperfection scattering at zero temperature. It is observed that Pb-free and 5% Pb-added samples exhibit comparable values of the Tc onset which is a little lower than that of the Pb-free sample. What is more notable is that their Tc offset values are quite different. The Pb added samples exhibit a relatively broad transition with a low Tc offset . Meanwhile, 5 wt% Pbadded sample shows a 1 K lower transition but shows a comparatively sharper transition with a Tc of 13.8 K and a Tc offset of 11.7 K (table On the other hand, the increment of Pb addition exhibits the broadening of superconducting transition with no zero resistance observed in the measured temperature as low as 8 K, which might result due to the increased impurity phase (PbTe) and the decreased superconducting phase. The decrease in the transition temperature Tc could be possible due to the reduced Te concentration in the FeSe0.5Te0.5 composition, as observed from the slightly reduced lattice parameters, as depicted in Figure To better understand the intergrain connections in these polycrystalline samples, we show the temperature dependence of resistivity with respect to various currents (I = 5, 10, and 20 mA) in Figure Interestingly, the Tc offset is more sensitive to the applied current at higher Pb additions (x), implying that Pb additions (x > 0.05) reduce the grain connections due to the enhancement of impurity phases and pores, as evidenced by microstructure and XRD studies. Oe. The ZFC magnetization curve indicates a superconducting transition at 14 K for x = 0, but at 13.3 K for x = 0.05, which is slightly wider than that of x = 0. This single-step transition can be interpreted in terms of the intergranular properties of these samples, as discussed in detail elsewhere To calculate the critical current density Jc, the hysteresis loop at 7 K for x = 0 and 0.05 is measured with the rectangular-shaped sample, as depicted in the inset of Figure It demonstrates that a small amount of Pb added samples enhanced the pinning force in the entire field region when compared to that of the parent compounds (x = 0), which agrees nicely with the Jc enhancement results. Moreover, comparing the Fp values of the parent compound with those reported in the literature In summary, the superconducting properties of FeSe0.5Te0.5 have been studied under the influence of Pb metal additions by structural, electrical, and magnetic characterizations. Our results indicate that the superconducting transition is decreased and the impurity phase is enhanced with Pb addition due to the reduced Fe/Se/Te ratio from the stoichiometric FeSe0.5Te0.5 composition. A microstructural investigation and resistivity studies revealed that superconducting grains have a disc shape and the grain connectivity is reduced with high Pb additions compared to the parent compound. However, the low amount of Pb addition has less effect on the superconducting transition and the improved Jc in the measured magnetic field (up to 9 T) due to the improved grain connections. Pb addition, in conclusion, reduces the superconducting properties of FeSe0.5Te0.5, but a small amount of Pb is effective in improving the intergranular behaviour and the critical current properties. Further work needs to be carried out on the optimization of the amount of very low Pb addition (x < 0.05) and processing parameters with the aim of further improving critical current properties. List of the impurity phases and crystallite size of the main phase in FeSe0.5Te0.5 + xPb samples. The quantitative values of impurity phases (%) and crystallite size of the measurement results are performed using Rigaku's PDXL software and the ICDD PDF4+ 2021 standard diffraction patterns database. List of room temperature resistivity (ρ300K), resistivity at 20 K (ρ20K), Residual Resistivity Ratio (RRR = ρ300K/ ρ20K), the onset transition temperature (Tc onset ), the offset of transition temperature (Tc offset ) and the transition width (ΔT) for FeSe0.5Te0.5 + xPb. Powder X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) of FeSe0.5Te0.5 + xPb (x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4). (b) Experimental and calculated diffraction patterns and their differences for the room temperature X-ray diffraction data for x = 0. Fe1.1Se0.5Te0.5 tetragonal phase was determined as the actual composition of the superconducting phase rather than the nominal composition of FeSe0.5Te0.5. A hexagonal phase of Fe0.6Se0.54Te0.46 (~4-5%) has been also identified, while another hexagonal phase, Fe7Se8, was not included in the refinement due to very weak reflections. (c) Experimental and calculated diffraction patterns and their difference for the room temperature X-ray diffraction data for x = 0.05. PbTe phase was also observed from the refinement which is around 4-5%, but any hexagonal phase was not observed. (d) The variation of lattice constants 'a' and 'c' of main tetragonal phase as function of Pb weight concentration (x). The red hexagonal data point for FeSe0.5Te0.5 is taken from Reference 