The mechanical properties of layered, hexagonal-structured MAX phases often show the combined merits of metals and ceramics, making them promising material candidates for safety critical applications. While their unique mechanical performance largely arises from the crystal structure, the effect of chemistry on the properties of these materials remains unclear. To study this, here we employed two in situ electron microscope small-scale testing approaches to examine the micromechanical properties of Zr3AlC2, and compared the results with the properties of Ti3SiC2: we used micropillar compression tests to measure basal slip strength, and double cantilever beam splitting tests to evaluate fracture energy for basal plane delamination. We observed distinct and systematic differences in these measured properties between Zr3AlC2 and Ti3SiC2, where Zr3AlC2 appeared to be stronger but more brittle at the microscale, and discussed the implications of the results in the selection, design, and engineering of MAX phases for targeted engineering applications. where the basal planes play a central role: they can slip, kink, and delaminate depending on the stress state To understand the micromechanical properties of a certain deformation/fracture mode, it is essential to test single crystals with appropriate orientations under well-defined stress states Zr3AlC2 was synthesised through hot pressing mixed, ball milled, and pre-compacted powders of ZrH2, Al and C (in graphite form), in a FCT Systeme GmbH vacuum hot press using parameters modified from those reported in Ref. Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) was used to extract the crystal orientations of the grains in the samples, in order to pick out grains with desired orientations for micromechanical testing. For micropillar compression tests, the grains of interest are those with their basal planes oriented at ~45° to the sample surface, for activating basal slip during uniaxial compression. For DCB splitting tests, we chose the grains with their basal planes perpendicular to the sample surface, and made the samples such that the notches run along the basal plane. EBSD scanning was performed on a Thermo Fisher Scientific (TFS) Quanta 650 scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with a Bruker eFlashHR (v2) EBSD camera, using a beam acceleration voltage of 20 kV and a probe current of ~10 nA. Fabrication of small-scale specimens for micromechanical testing was achieved through focussed ion beam (FIB) milling on a TFS Helios 5 CX DualBeam microscope, using a FIB acceleration voltage of 30 kV. Beam currents from ~7 nA to ~200 pA were employed for the milling of micropillars and DCBs. Higher beam currents were used to create trenches around samples, thereby enabling real-time visualisation of subsequent in situ testing processes. Lower beam currents (~500 to 200 pA) were used for final tailoring the contour of the samples. The taper angle of the pillars was measured to be ~4.5°. For the DCBs, notches were cut on the top surface of the samples using a line scan at 10 pA beam current. In situ SEM micromechanical testing was performed using a displacement-controlled Alemnis nanoindenter on the TFS Quanta SEM. The micropillars were compressed with a circular flat punch indenter to achieve a (near) uniaxial stress state, while the DCBs were split using a 60° wedge indenter to drive stable crack growth. For the DCB tests, the critical energy release rate in Mode I fracture of the basal plane for the Zr3AlC2 single crystals was extracted using the following equation as per prior work where a is the crack length, and δ and w are the horizontal displacement and width of the beams, respectively. These values were measured from the real-time SEM images recorded during the tests. χ is a correction factor accounting for rotation at the crack tip, and for the material studied it is defined based on the elastic constants as: where a11 = 1/E11, a22 = 1/E33 and a66 = 1/G13, and Eii and Gii are the elastic constants for Zr3AlC2, calculated from the components of the compliance matrix reported in Ref. 2. All the Zr3AlC2 pillars exhibited significant stress drops shortly after yield, whereas the Ti3SiC2 pillars showed only few subtle stress drops and much more stable plastic flow upon further loading. 3. For the Zr3AlC2 pillars, the flow stress levels after the stress drops did not get back to the levels prior to the drops, and this is different to the flow behaviour of the Ti3SiC2 pillars where in most cases the stress levels recovered after dropping. The CRSS for basal slip at this length scale were calculated from the yield stresses and the crystal orientations (hence Schmid factors) of the pillars, and the results are plotted in Figure Upon intrinsically displacement-controlled micropillar compression tests, significant stress drops without recovery of the stress level, could happen in the following scenarios: • The sample plastically deformed through deformation twinning • In metallic samples when dislocations are pinned by solute atoms and therefore require an extra stress for source activation. This might be possible for Zr3AlC2, if local chemical inhomogeneities are present causing lattice distortions, which could retard dislocation motion. To our best knowledge, however, there is no experimental evidence in the literature indicating the presence or absence of such compositional variations in Zr3AlC2, and this could be an interesting topic for future studies through analysis with probe tomography. • When dislocations have to fracture a surface layer before they can traverse it, such as an air-or FIB-induced coating on the pillar surface. Although the thermodynamic stability of Zr3AlC2 was shown in the literature • The sample experienced quasi-brittle failure. In our prior work on an intermetallic compound Therefore, the difference in the extent of stress drops between the two phases motivated us to investigate the potential differences in fracture properties. The mode I fracture behaviour and toughness of basal planes in Zr3AlC2 were studied with DCB splitting tests shown in Figure 