Sintering is an important processing step in both ceramics and metals processing. The microstructure resulting from this process determines many materials properties of interest. Hence the accurate prediction of the microstructure, depending on processing and materials parameters, is of great importance. The phase-field method offers a way of predicting this microstructural evolution on a mesoscopic scale. The present paper employs this method to investigate concurrent densification and grain growth and the influence of stress on densification. Furthermore, the method is applied to simulate the entire freeze-casting process chain for the first time ever by simulating the freezing and sintering processes separately and passing the frozen microstructure to the present sintering model. Many products being used today, from the humble coffee cup to solar cells, undergo the sintering process at some point in their processing chain. While the precise materials properties of a coffee cup might not be particularly important barring liquid leakage, the electrical contacting of solar cells is important for their efficiency In the past two decades, the phase-field method has been used by many researchers The effect of pressure will be investigated first, as it is a comparatively simple investigation. Since sintering and creep are closely related processes, a short excursion to creep is done as well to show the versatility of the model. Next, the materials properties of diffusivity and grain mobility will be varied, effectively representing sintering at different holding temperatures or with appropriate dopings. Special attention is paid to how different transport and growth mechanisms affect each other's influence on the microstructural evolution. In order to investigate the effect of green body geometry, a previously generated particle structure of the freeze-cast process is sintered, showing the experimentally observed anisotropic shrinkage of freeze-cast structures. The results of these investigations are presented first, with the employed phase-field model being succinctly described in Phase-field model and in further references therein. The materials parameters are those of Table Figure Based on prior work The first foray will consider the influence of stress on sintering, as it is quite simple but also important for densification. Pressure is often applied during sintering in order to either speed up densification or to remove isolated/detached porosity by forcefully dissolving the contained gas into the material. In this section the former effect is investigated by considering the effect of the applied stress on the equilibrium concentration of vacancies on grain boundaries. This effect can be easily included in the model of The pressures p ∈ {0, 50, 100, 200}MPa will be considered. The scale of the pressure is based on the magnitude of the capillary pressure O(pc) ∼ O( γs r ) ≈ 100 MPa with the surface energy γs and the particle radius r. The resulting density over time is shown in Fig. Densification and grain growth are intimately related and thus the concurrent simulation of both is of paramount importance for quantitative simulation of sintering. In this section, these coupled processes are investigated by parameter variations of the relevant mobilities. The mobility of an interface is controlled with the inverse mobility τ , for which high values imply low mobility. For the grain-vapor interface a small value of τgv is chosen such that the evolution is diffusion-controlled. For the graingrain interfaces, two different values of the inverse grain mobility τ gb are chosen, with their values also serving as simulation labels: Kinetically suppressed grain growth is achieved with τ gb = 100τgv and unsuppressed grain growth with τ gb = τgv. For each of these mobility variations, different diffusion coefficients will be tested. The base case is that of Table is about 3, with this being varied from about 1/30 to 30 with the employed factors. A qualitative, visual comparison of some of these results is given in Fig. Let us start the quantitative investigation by considering the evolution of surface area with density, as the reduction of surface area is the driving force for densification. It is often observed The simulation measurements in terms of density ρ, grain size G and GB area A gb are collected in Fig. The grain size evolution is depicted in Fig. In order to quantify grain growth with respect to experiments, the grain growth law is evaluated by fitting the grain size G data for G > 13 nm to power laws of the form G = At n , with the plots showing the results being deposited with the supplementary material. The grain size filter is employed to fit only the regime where grain growth is taking place. Exponents ranging from about 1 3 to 4 5 are observed; the experimentally observed range is 1 4 to 1 2 Based on these observations, one may conclude that below a certain ratio of Ds D gb , densification will proceed unhampered by surface diffusion. The coarse spacing of the ratios of the present investigation does not allow a particularly accurate estimate of the critical ratio, but it should be in the interval Let us close the classical consideration by verifying the experimentally observed linear relationship between grain size and the inverse square root of porosity G ∝ 1 √ P An approach which allows a more granular shape description is the calculation of shape factors characterizing individual objects. The factors employed are those of MacSleyne et al. , and thus the distance from this shape is related to how far from the value of 1 the normalized invariant Ωi is. The sphere is chosen as a reference shape and the normalized variants are collected in a vector Ω. In order to summarize the invariants, we introduce the lumped invariant employing the Euclidean norm ΩE = ||Ω|| √ 3 of the vector Ω. The factor of √ 3 stems from the use of the Euclidean norm, such that ΩE = 1 still represents a sphere; the value itself can be interpreted in the same way as the components Ωi. The invariants are separately calculated for the grains, isolated pores and detached pores, with the detached pores forming a subset of the isolated pores. Hence if only detached pores remain, their invariants will be the same as for the isolated pores. The mean of ΩE is plotted over density in Fig. Focus first on the evolution of the isolated and detached pores: At high densities, reached by simulations with high GB diffusivity, both tend to ΩE = 1, which is consistent with curvature minimization. The transitory period shows a non-monotonic behaviour, likely attributable to isolated networks of pores first forming, then splitting into single pores via Plateau-Rayleigh-like instabilities. These instabilities are likely induced via grain boundaries since this is typically faster than instability growth from perturbations. Focus next on the evolution of the grain structures: From the initial somewhat spherical shape, a mostly monotonic decrease is observed, with the speed being related to both interfacial diffusivities and the grain mobility. The dashed black line indicates the cube's invariant, with the solid black line indicating the truncated octahedron's invariant. All simulations pass the truncated octahedron's invariant, but do not converge towards it. One might argue that pore-laden structures have a different invariant compared to the pore-free structure. But even for the base case without grain growth, in which only few pores remain at the end, a value significantly different, i.e. ≈ 1 3 of the distance between a sphere and a cube, from that of the truncated octahedron is observed. Experimental observation of the annealing of dense (≈ 99%) strontium titanate be affected by the initial green body shape in their later stages. This is due to the few leftover grains approximating the original green body shape. Therefore, the grain invariants' values in the later stages with unsuppressed grain growth should not be taken at face value. The plots of the unlumped invariants, generally showing similar trends, are deposited with the supplementary material. Freeze-casting The resulting microstructural evolution over time is shown in Fig. The shrinkage is characterized with the strain in each spatial dimension, which is found to be anisotropic: In the freezing direction, upwards and parallel to the macropore, a shrinkage of about 10 to 13% is observed, but in the directions normal to it, a shrinkage of 16 to 19% is observed. The strain range is due to inhomogeneous strain measurements. Experimental evidence of anisotropic shrinkage after freezecasting exists to the freezing direction. Following Olevsky The present results can be explained by analyzing the anisotropy of the sintering potential, represented by how much GBs deviate from their equilibrium concentration within the simulation. Define the anisotropy factor of a property Π as f (Π) = Π Y Z Π X , i.e. simply the ratio of the property in the Y Z (average over both Y and Z directions) plane, normal to the freezing direction, to the property in the freezing direction X. The anisotropy factor of both the strain and sintering potential are plotted against each other in Fig. e. the average sintering potential σ d in a direction d is the addition of both a volume contribution Nvσiso, acting isotropically, and a surface contribution N d s σ d s , potentially inducing anisotropy. If Nv ≫ N d s , isotropic behavior is observed, which was the case in the previous sections; though if the anisotropic contribution is the same in each direction, this would also result in net isotropic behavior. In the present geometry however, Nv ≈ 2N d s in the Y Z plane since the walls are on average about 6 particles thin. In contrast to this, Nv ≈ 5N d s in the X direction (12 particles) and hence this direction will be affected less by the surface grains, especially compared to the Y and Z directions. Thus, the observed anisotropy of the sintering potential might be due to the phase-field model giving an unwarranted extra weight to particles with exposed surfaces by virtue of their increased sintering potential σ d s . Finally, the increase in the anisotropy of the sintering potential at roughly constant strain anisotropy is due to little to no porosity remaining. This correspondingly magnifies the aforementioned effects, though given that little to no densification is possible anymore, no further increase in strain anisotropy is observed. The non-monotonic behaviour in this final region is mostly due to measurement errors via grain growth, since densification has effectively stopped. Three other confounding factors exist: First, the present geometry only contains a single macropore open to the surrounding vacuum, raising questions of represen- tativeness. Second, within the present phase-field model it was observed that linear chains of particles only achieve particle count independent strain evolution starting from about 16 particles in the chain It could be shown that pressure-assisted sintering and Coble creep can be effectively modelled by the presented phase-field model of sintering. This was shown by comparing the dependence of densification and strain rate on the applied stress magnitude, with the same scaling being found as predicted by theory In total, the results show the versatility and applicability of the phase-field method to the sintering process. Given accurate information about diffusivities and mobilities, it can be employed for quantitative predictions, since all the necessary qualitative features of the sintering process are present. Especially for novel high heating rate sintering processes, the control of the temperature-time curve is critical to avoid grain growth following densification, with experiments being costly and time intensive. Simulations could partially replace these and allow the determination of desirable temperature profiles. However, finding a consistent data basis in terms of diffusivities and mobilities for a single material is still challenging, as these are not only dependent on temperature but also on the grain boundary and surface characters, with impurities as well as dopants also playing significant roles. Future modelling work will investigate variations in how the sintering potential is calculated. Separate from this, a non-conservative evolution of vacancies coupled with other species will be considered. This will enable including gas pressure, and hence pore stabilization, via another conserved species. The rigid-body assumption for individual grains can be relaxed by solving a momentum transport equation while accounting for local strain rates induced by e.g. vacancy absorption. This would allow both volume sinks of vacancies, e.g. dislocations, as well as using an orientation field for resolving grains of different orientation, which in turn could allow the inclusion of atomistically informed interface properties. Phase-field model The model employed in this paper is based on the recent works is solved, with the N values φα representing the surrounding vapor φ0 = φV as well as copper grains of arbitrary orientation φα, α > 0. The evolution of the copper concentration c is indirectly calculated with the chemical potential μ, employing the grand potential formalism The concentration 1 -c can be interpreted to be the vacancy concentration, which is low in the solid and high in the surrounding vapor. The meanings of the remaining terms are described in detail in ∆⃗ ∂c gb ∂t = -c -c gb eq (S) tr Cu = ∆u By applying a bias in μs the effect of pressure on the equilibrium vacancy concentration on grain boundaries c gb eq (S) can be modelled. Furthermore, the effect of uniaxial stress can be approximated by a projection onto the local grain boundary plane ⃗ n αβ : c gb eq (S) = cα(μs + σ(⃗ n αβ )) ( with the unit vector ⃗ vσ describing the direction of stress application. This effectively presumes that grain boundaries with normals aligned to the stress direction experience the full stress, whereas those perpendicular to it experience no stress. This modifies the vacancy absorption rate per grain boundary and depending on the sign of σ can also cause vacancy generation. In the case of an isotropic pressure, this projection can be skipped and the pressure p = σ can be added directly. This approach of adding stress is inspired by Coble's Let us contrast this to the work of Dzepina et al. The parameters of the simulations are given in Table The density of a green body is calculated as described in The grain volume Vα and the equivalent grain size Gα = ( 3Vα 4π ) 1/3 easily follow from volume integrals over the phase-field domain. Integral interfacial areas (surface s, grain boundary gb) are defined by pairwise clamped sums over the appropriate phase φ gb = min([ A gb = 1 l φ gb dV The package cc3d's The central moments of second order μpqr required for the calculation of the moment invariants Ω The Euler characteristic χ is evaluated on a triangle mesh of the vapour phase-field using its definition with the number of vertices V , edges E and faces F of the triangle mesh. Paraview 8 : φs = min([