Topological insulators and semimetals have been shown to possess intriguing thermoelectric properties promising for energy harvesting and cooling applications. However, thermoelectric transport associated with the Fermi arc topological surface states on topological Dirac semimetals remains less explored. In this work, we systematically examine thermoelectric transport in a series of topological Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 thin films grown by molecular beam epitaxy. Surprisingly, we find significantly enhanced Seebeck effect and anomalous Nernst effect at cryogenic temperatures when the Cd 3 As 2 layer is thin. Combining angle-dependent quantum oscillation analysis, magnetothermoelectric measurement, transport modelling and first-principles simulation, we isolate the contributions from bulk and surface conducting channels and attribute the unusual thermoeletric properties to the topological surface states. Our analysis showcases the rich thermoelectric transport physics in quantum-confined topological Dirac semimetal thin films and suggests new routes to achieving high thermoelectric performance at cryogenic temperatures. Topological insulators and semimetals have recently attracted intense research interests due to their exotic bulk transport properties, such as the chiral anomaly and topologically protected surface states shown that the thermoelectric performance of lead selenide (PbSe) can be enhanced by a pressure-driven topological phase transition, where the formation of linear Dirac bands improves the electrical conductivity In addition, topological surface states also contribute more prominently in thin films. In this work, we focus on detailed measurements and modeling of thermoelectric properties of epitaxial thin films of a topological Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 , aiming to isolate the impacts of surface states and quantum confinement. Cd 3 As 2 is an archetypal topological Dirac semimetal that exhibits a three-dimensional linear dispersion relation and topologically protected surface states In addition, Cd 3 As 2 has a lattice thermal conductivity To overcome this limitation, a bandgap can be opened in Cd 3 As 2 through either crystal symmetry breaking or quantum confinement that can be realized in epitaxially grown thin films or heterostructures In this work, we systematically investigate the thermoelectric transport in high-quality Cd 3 As 2 thin films grown by MBE. To resolve the contribution from different conducting channels, we studied samples with varying Cd 3 As 2 thicknesses: 950 nm in the bulk limit, 95 nm in the transition regime, and 25 nm with quantum confinement and prominent contributions from the surface states. Surprisingly, we observed anomalously enhanced Seebeck and Nernst coefficients in the 25 nm sample at cryogenic temperatures. Combining extensive magneto-Seebeck and Nernst effect measurements, detailed angle-dependent quantum oscillation characterization, analytical transport models and first-principles density functional theory (DFT) simulations, we attribute the observed thermoelectric properties to the interplay of bulk and surface conducting channels in parallel. Our work provides a comprehensive understanding of thermoelectric transport in confined topological Dirac semimetal thin films and reveals the rich physics in these systems that can be potentially employed to engineer composite materials for thermoelectric applications. The MBE technique was employed to achieve the epitaxial growth of (112)-oriented Cd 3 As 2 thin films on (111)-oriented GaAs substrates with a 150-nm (111) GaSb buffer layer The measured electrical resistivity of the three samples as a function of temperature is shown in Fig. In contrast, the 95-nm sample shows a more pronounced semiconductor-like behavior with a decreasing resistivity with temperature. Low-field Hall results of the two samples are provided in the Supplementary Note 2 in the SI, indicating n-type conduction that originates from the bulk Cd 3 As 2 states. A very high Hall mobility up to Therefore, the semiconductorlike behavior in the 95-nm sample suggests the onset of bulk bandgap opening due to either weak quantum confinement or strain that breaks the four-fold rotation symmetry around (001) in Cd 3 As 2 protecting the Dirac nodes In Fig. Meanwhile, for the 95-nm sample, the Seebeck coefficient exhibits a similar temperature dependence above 50 K. In the temperature range above 50 K, the Seebeck coefficient of both samples can be well described by our DFT simulation using the bulk band structure of Cd 3 As 2 assuming a Fermi level slightly into the conduction band (details of the DFT simulation are given in Methods and Supplementary Note 3 in the SI). However, around 50 K, a change in the sign of the Seebeck coefficient occurs, suggesting a transition of the dominant carriers from n-type to p-type. At even lower temperatures, we also observed an increase of the positive Seebeck coefficient. Both features cannot be explained by our DFT simulation considering only the Cd 3 As 2 bulk states. More interestingly, for the 25-nm sample, a positive Seebeck coefficient was observed in the entire temperature range, and the Seebeck coefficient showed a metallic feature with a negative temperature dependence above 50 K, contrary to the behavior observed in the other two samples. Strikingly, the Seebeck coefficient displayed a sharp increase below 50 K, peaked at 5 K with a value of nearly 500 μV/K. This surprising behavior was in sharp contrast to the other two samples with thicker Cd 3 As 2 thin films. Furthermore, the distinct behaviors of the Seebeck coefficient in the three samples suggest the existence of contributions from more than one conducting channels in the thinner samples, thereby requiring further investigations as detailed in subsequent sections. In order to comprehensively investigate the underlying mechanisms responsible for the distinct thermoelectric behaviors of the three heterostructure samples with different Cd 3 As 2 thicknesses, we performed systematic measurements of angle-dependent quantum oscillations in both the electrical resistivity (the Shubnikov-de-Haas, or SdH, oscillation) and the Seebeck coefficient of the three samples at 2 K. Quantum oscillations of electrical transport properties as a function of the magnetic field are manifestations of the Fermi surface quantization, where the oscillation frequency as a function of the angle of the magnetic field can provide detailed information of the Fermi surface To further pinpoint the conducting channels corresponding to these quantum oscillation frequencies, we conducted a systematic investigation of the SdH and Seebeck coefficient quantum oscillation frequencies as a function of the angle of the applied magnetic field in all three samples. Figures For the 25 nm sample, it turned out difficult to obtain reliable angle-dependent SdH data with multiple oscillation frequencies. Instead, we found that the quantum oscillation observed in the Seebeck coefficient as a function of the magnetic field is much clearer and provides more reliable extraction of the oscillation frequencies. Therefore, we conducted systematic angle-dependent Seebeck oscillation measurements on the 25 nm sample and the results are shown in Fig. In addition, the 25 nm sample exhibits another high oscillation frequency around 55 T at 0 • field direction, which also appears in the 95 nm sample. The angle-dependent reduction in this oscillation frequency culminating at 90 • field direction implies that this frequency is associated with two-dimensional (2D) surface states, since the Fermi surface associated with the 2D surface states has zero intersection with the magnetic field at 90 • field direction, as illustrated in Fig. Based on the quantum oscillation analysis, we have established that the thermoelectric transport in the 950-nm sample is dominated by the n-type bulk Cd 3 As 2 states, while additional contribution from the surface states play a role below 50 K in the 95-nm sample. In the 25-nm sample, the contribution from the surface states is significant even up to 300 K. To further verify and quantify our interpretation, we discuss detailed magnetotransport measurements, including Hall, Seebeck and Nernst coefficients, and the associated transport models in this section. We focus on analyzing the 25-nm sample here, while data of the 950-nm sample and the 95-nm sample are provided in the Supplementary Note 2 in the SI. All measurements discussed in this section were done with a magnetic field perpendicular to the sample surface. Firstly, the magnetoresistance and the Hall resistivity data (Supplementary Note 2 in the SI) of the 25 nm sample exhibit a typical two-carrier behavior with contributions from two groups of carriers with opposite charge. In particular, a group of higher-mobility n-type carriers dominate the small-field Hall resistivity, while a group of higher-density p-type carriers dominate the large-field Hall resistivity. To simultaneously incorporate the magnetoresistance and the Hall resistivity, we used a two-band Drude model to fit the Hall resistivity ρ xy data as a function of temperature and magnetic field, as shown in Fig. Figure where A = In Fig. The unusual thermoelectric properties of the topological surface states are further mani-fested in the Nernst coefficient of the 25 nm sample, as shown in Figs. In passing, we briefly discuss the possible contribution to the measured thermoelectric response from the GaSb buffer layer, which is a semiconductor and can potentially possess a high Seebeck coefficient. Measurements of a bare GaSb buffer layer are provided in the SI, where it is shown that GaSb becomes insulating below 50 K. In principle, however, the band alignment between GaSb and Cd 3 As 2 at the interface can lead to charge transfer and "doping" of GaSb, increasing its conductivity. However, in extensive previous studies of this system down to very thin Cd 3 As 2 layers, there is no experimental evidence that the GaSb buffer layer affects transport measurements in any way, especially at cryogenic temperatures In summary, we systematically studied the thermoelectric transport properties of epitaxially grown Cd 3 As 2 thin films with different thicknesses. Through detailed quantum oscillation analysis and magnetotransport measurement complemented by DFT simulation and a two-band Drude transport model, we identified contributions from both bulk states and topological surface states. In particular, we revealed unusually large Seebeck and Nernst effect associated with the topological surface states. Our results showcase the complexity of thermoelectric transport in topological semimetal thin films and signal new opportunities to achieve remarkable thermoelectric performances in these emerging material systems. (112)-oriented Cd 3 As 2 films with thicknesses of 25 nm, 95 nm, and 950 nm were grown on 150-nm GaSb buffer layers on GaAs (111)B substrates by molecular beam epitaxy, with similar parameters as described previously Following the GaSb growth, the substrate temperature is reduced to 135°C for the Cd 3 As 2 growth. Cd 3 As 2 flux is supplied from molecular sources at a BEP between 2 × 10 -7 and 5 × 10 -6 Torr. In this study, we utilized a steady-state transport measurement system to measure the electrical and thermoelectric properties. Specifically, a commercial 9 T Dynacool Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design) was used. For the resistivity and the Hall measurements, we conducted six-point probe measurements with the magnetic field perpendicular to the sample (device pictures are shown in the SI). Voltage measurements were carried out using Keithley 2182A nanovoltmeters, while the power supply was provided by a Keithley 6221 current source. The formation of electrical contact was facilitated using silver epoxy. For thermoelectric measurements, temperature readings were obtained using 25 μm T-type thermocouples fabricated through spot welding to minimize parasitic heat loss. It should be noted that the thermocouples' sensitivity deminishes below 60 K, where Cernox thermistors were employed instead. To detect the Seebeck and Nernst voltage, longitudinal and transverse copper voltage probes were used. A 120-Ω strain gauge served as the heater, and the heating power was adjusted accordingly to achieve a temperature rise of 1 ∼ 3 %. Cd 3 As 2 samples were placed on sapphire heat sinks. The magnetic field was swept from -9 T to 9 T with a sweeping rate of 5 mT/s and a customized LabVIEW control code was used to effectively manage experimental control and the data acquisition process. A picture of the experimental setup using a rotation sample stage is provided in the SI. At a rotation angle of 0 degree, the heat flow or current flow was applied along the sample, while the magnetic field was perpendicular to the sample. Angle-dependent measurements taken at 15-degree intervals between 0 and 180 degrees. The magnetic field was swept from -9 T to 9 T, and measurements included SdH oscillations, as well as thermoelectric oscillations (i.e. oscillations in Seebeck and Nernst coefficients at higher magnetic fields). The raw data was fitted using polynomial equations to establish a baseline, which were subsequently subtracted to isolate the oscillations. Following the subtraction, Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) analysis were performed to extract the oscillation frequencies. The FFT range selected for analysis was from 2 T to 8.5 T, as lower field values lead to no discernible oscillations and high noise was observed near 9 Ṫ. For the 25-nm Cd 3 As 2 sample, a comparative analysis was conducted on both Seebeck and Nernst oscillation signals to ensure the presence of the same oscillation frequencies in both measurements. We employed the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) In addition, we compared the experimental angle-dependent quantum oscillation frequencies with DFT calculations. With the Fourier interpolated Fermi surfaces on a Γ-65×65×83 k-point gird, we used the SKEAF package For the 25 nm Cd 3 As 2 sample, the resistivity tensor is described by contributions from the surface carriers (labeled by subscript s) and the bulk carrier (labeled by subscript b), whose longitudinal resistivity and Hall coefficient are denoted by ρ s/b and R s/b , respectively: The parameters obtained from the transverse resistivity ρ yx for the two carriers often fail to accurately replicate the longitudinal resistivity ρ xx due to the absence of consideration for the magnetic-field dependence of the relaxation time in the model 