Classical models of spin-lattice coupling are at present unable to accurately reproduce results for numerous properties of ferromagnetic materials, such as heat transport coefficients or the sudden collapse of the magnetic moment in hcp-Fe under pressure. This inability has been attributed to the absence of a proper treatment of effects that are inherently quantum mechanical in nature, notably spinorbit coupling. This paper introduces a time-dependent, non-collinear tight binding model, complete with spin-orbit coupling and vector Stoner exchange terms, that is capable of simulating the Einstein-de Haas effect in a ferromagnetic Fe 15 cluster. The tight binding model is used to investigate the adiabaticity timescales that determine the response of the orbital and spin angular momenta to a rotating, externally applied B field, and we show that the qualitative behaviours of our simulations can be extrapolated to realistic timescales by use of the adiabatic theorem. An analysis of the trends in the torque contributions with respect to the field strength demonstrates that SOC is necessary to observe a transfer of angular momentum from the electrons to the nuclei at experimentally realistic B fields. The simulations presented in this paper demonstrate the Einstein-de Haas effect from first principles using a Fe cluster. Developing materials for use close to the plasma in a tokamak, where the heat and neutron fluxes are high, is a challenge as few solids survive undamaged for long An example of an improvement based on research into the properties of ferromagnetic materials is as follows. Austentitic Fe-Cr-Ni steels are used in the ITER tokamak Given the importance of ferritic steels in reactor design, it would be helpful to understand heat flow in iron in the presence of strong magnetic fields at high temperature. This is a difficult task. A good heat-flow model must reproduce the dynamics of a many-atom system with complicated inter-atomic forces, whilst also describing the electronic thermal conductivity and the influence of spin-lattice interactions. The spins are not all aligned above the Curie temperature, but they are still present and still scatter electrons. The exchange interactions between spins also affect the forces on the nuclei. Our aim in this paper is to begin the development of such a model, starting from the quantum mechanical principles required to understand electrons and spins. Although a full treatment of the behaviour of the spins and electrons requires quantum theory, various classical atomistic models have been established to investigate spin-lattice interactions. In 1996, Beaurepaire et al. developed the three temperature model (3TM) Langevin spin dynamics (SD), developed in In 2008, Ma et al. In 2012, Ma et al. In 2022, Dednam et al. Despite the efforts invested in classical models of spin-lattice interactions, they exhibit numerous shortcomings, such as the inability to accurately reproduce the measured heat transport coefficients in ferromagnetic materials Experimental work on isolated clusters has improved the understanding of the differences in magnetic properties between atomic and bulk values. Stern-Gerlach experiments have been used to study the magnetic moment per atom of isolated clusters, as a function of the external magnetic field and temperature. These experiments found that the average magnetization as a function of field strength and temperature, resembles the Langevin function, which was initially attributed to thermodynamic relaxation of the spin while in the magnetic field Addressing the physics of iron out of equilibrium -a complicated time-evolving system of interacting nuclei, electrons and spins -in a quantum mechanical framework is such a challenge that we seek first to understand one of the simplest phenomena involving spin-lattice coupling: the Einstein-de Haas (EdH) effect. The EdH effect is, of course, the canonical example of how electronic spins apply forces and torques to a crystal lattice, and has been well studied experimentally. It is perhaps surprising, therefore, that we were unable to find any published quantum mechanical simulations of the EdH effect for bulk materials. This paper builds on previous work, in which we reported simulations of the EdH effect for a single O 2 dimer In 1908, O. W. Richardson was the first to consider the transfer of angular momentum from the internal "rotation" of electrons (i.e., the magnetic moments within the material) to the mechanical rotation of macroscopic objects The ferromagnetic resonance of Larmor precession observed in 1946 by Griffiths In this paper, we describe the implementation of a non-collinear tight-binding (TB) model complete with all features required to capture spin-lattice coupling in iron in the presence of a time-dependent applied magnetic field. The required features are: coupling of the electrons to the lattice, coupling of the electron magnetic dipole moment to an externally applied time-dependent magnetic field, coupling between orbital and spin angular momentum through SOC, and electron exchange. Using this model, we simulate the response of an Fe 15 cluster to a time-varying magnetic field, and analyse the torque on the nuclei due to the electrons. We find that, in a slowly rotating B field, the orbital and spin angular momenta rotate with the field, leading to a measurable torque on the cluster. We also describe the qualitative features of the evolution of the spin and angular momentum, and demonstrate the enhancement of the torque exerted on the nuclei by the electrons as a result of SOC. Thus, this work documents a quantum mechanical model capable of simulating the Einstein-de Haas effect, and reveals the physical mechanisms that set the timescales over which the spins evolve. This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the method used for the calculations. The results of the simulations are discussed in Sec. 3. Conclusions are drawn in Sec. 4. The Fe cluster studied in this work is Fe 15 , in the configuration shown in figure The basis set does not include any s or p orbitals below the 3d shell or any orbitals above it. We use the TB model of Liu et al. where α runs over the spatial atomic orbitals (AOs) on all atoms and σ is a spin index taking the values up (↑) or down (↓). The B field produced by a fixed solenoid reverses its direction when the current reverses, remaining parallel or anti-parallel to the solenoidal axis but changing in magnitude. In our simulations, however, we chose to study a rotating B field of constant magnitude: the B vector traces out a semicircle, from the south pole (-ẑ) to the north pole (+ẑ) of a sphere. There are three reasons we believe that this rotational path better mimics the field experienced by a single magnetic domain in a measurement of the EdH effect. (i) The magnetic field felt by a single magnetic domain within a solid is not in general exactly aligned with its magnetization axis due to the configuration of the other surrounding domains. This symmetry-breaking mechanism is absent when a field with fixed direction is applied to a single domain, the magnetization of which is initially aligned with the applied field. (ii) It is unlikely that the crystal lattice of any single magnetic domain is aligned such that the initial and final fields are exactly parallel to the easy axes of the domain. (iii) The total exchange energy is large even for a small cluster and scales with system size. For the magnetization of an isolated single-domain cluster to reverse its direction in response to a B field that is initially aligned with the magnetization and reverses along its axis, the Stoner moment would have to pass through zero, overcoming a large exchange energy barrier. We deem this scenario unlikely. In a real multi-domain magnet, the spin stays large and rotates rather than passing through ⟨S⟩ = 0. To perform the rotation from the south pole to the north pole of a sphere, the B field is parametrized in spherical coordinates as where θ = ωt, t is the elapsed time, ω = π/T f , and T f is the time at which the simulation finishes. The magnitude B = |B| of the applied magnetic field differs in different simulations. The B field is initially in the -ẑ direction and gradually rotates by 180 • in the xz plane. The simulation is complete when B points in the +ẑ direction. At the beginning of the simulation (t = 0), the molecular orbitals |φ n ⟩ are obtained by diagonalizing the self-consistent ground state Hamiltonian. At later times, the state is calculated from the time-evolved molecular orbitals |ψ n (t)⟩, which are found by solving the time-dependent Schrödinger equation, subject to the initial condition |ψ n (t = 0)⟩ = |φ n ⟩. For times later than t = 0, the time-evolved molecular orbitals are not exact eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian, since the Hamiltonian H(t) depends on time if B(t) depends on time. The time-dependent expansion coefficients d nασ (t) are defined by and satisfy the discrete equivalent of the time-dependent Schrödinger equation, Rewriting this equation of motion in matrix-vector form with (d To solve Eq. ( which is both time-reversible and unitary. In index notation, one step of the time evolution takes the form The calculation of H(t + 1 2 δt)δt/iħ from Eq. ( The initial condition, |ψ n (0)⟩ = |φ n ⟩, implies that the coefficients d nασ at t = 0 are given by The time-dependent one-particle density operator, ρ(t), is defined by Using Eq. ( To describe the EdH effect, the Hamiltonian must include: (i) coupling of electrons to an external time-dependent magnetic field; (ii) spin-orbit coupling; and (iii) Stoner exchange. In electronic structure methods, Stoner exchange is often used in its collinear form, but this is inappropriate for describing spin dynamics as it breaks rotational symmetry in spin space The full Hamiltonian may be partitioned as where H 0 is the basic tight-binding Hamiltonian given by the Oxford model, H B is the interaction with the external field, H SOC describes SOC, and H ex is the vector Stoner exchange term. The Hamiltonian term that describes the interaction of a single atom with an external magnetic field is where μ a is the magnetic moment of atom a, P a = mσ |χ amσ ⟩⟨χ amσ | is the projection operator on to the basis of atomic-like d orbitals on atom a, and m runs over the 5 d orbitals on atom a, μ B is the Bohr magneton, S is the spin angular momentum operator, and L is the orbital angular momentum operator about the nucleus in the Coulomb gauge. This form may be justified by reference to the Pauli equation The spin-orbit coupling term is of relativistic origin and can be derived by application of the Foldy-Wouthuysen transformation to the Dirac equation where m e is the mass of an electron, c is the speed of light, and V (r) is the potential experienced by an electron due to the atomic nucleus and the other electrons belonging to that atom within the central field approximation. The radial part of the SOC matrix element between two AOs in the same shell is a constant, ξ, and our TB model includes only one shell of AOs per iron atom, so Since the gradient of the nuclear potential is largest very near to the nucleus, the spinorbit term can be assumed to couple atomic orbitals on the same atom only. Adding similar terms for every atom in the cluster yields the SOC Hamiltonian used in this work: The Stoner exchange term, which is a mean-field approximation to the many-body effect of exchange, is given by where I is the Stoner parameter (which has units of energy), is the expectation value of the operator P a σP a , and σ is the vector of Pauli matrices. The origin of the Stoner exchange term is described in more detail in The TB model utilizes computationally and experimentally derived parameters. The SOC parameter is calculated to have the value ξ = 0.06 eV, which is approximately 2.2 × 10 -3 a.u., in The nuclei in our simulations are treated as classical particles subject to classical forces, but the forces exerted on them by the electrons are evaluated quantum mechanically using the time-dependent equivalent of the Hellman-Feynman theorem where the density matrix is evaluated according to Eq. ( where q a is the charge of nucleus a, B a and E a are the applied magnetic and electric fields at the position of nucleus a, and v a is the velocity of nucleus a. The classical nuclei experience both an interaction torque, Γ int , due to the quantum mechanical electrons, and a direct torque, Γ N,EM , exerted by the applied electromagnetic field. The total torque acting on the nuclei is the sum of these two contributions: The internal torque is calculated from the Hellman-Feynman forces as and the direct torque is given by The angular momentum of the electrons changes as the external field changes, so Γ int is non-zero. All other expectation values computed in this work are found by taking the trace of the operator multiplied by the density matrix, for example, ⟨L⟩ = tr(ρL), ⟨S⟩ = tr(ρS), ⟨μ⟩ = tr(ρμ). (26) The Ehrenfest equations of motion come in useful when interpreting the simulation results. The algebra required to derive the Ehrenfest equation of motion for the total angular momentum operator, J = L + S, is outlined in the appendix of A typical period of oscillation in an Einstein-de Haas experiment is of order 1 s, but well-converged quantum mechanical simulations require a time step of order 1 a.u. (2.4×10 -17 s). Since simulations of only 100, 000 timesteps (2.4×10 -11 s) are achievable on consumer hardware in a few hours, the necessary computations might initially seem intractable. Fortunately, however, it is possible to simulate long enough to reach the quasi-adiabatic limit, beyond which further increases in the duration of the simulation do not produce qualitative differences in the results. For example, the total change in angular momentum, calculated by integrating the torque through a 180 • rotation of the applied magnetic field, becomes independent of the simulation time, which is also the time taken to rotate the field. The instantaneous torque tends to zero as the duration increases, so we cannot work in the fully adiabatic limit and assume that the wave function is the instantaneous ground state at all times, but the simulation results can nevertheless be extrapolated to experimental timescales. To prove that quasi-adiabatic timescales are attainable for the Fe 15 system, we first characterize the relevant physical timescales. It is shown in the Appendix that the timescale associated with precession of the magnetic moment in the applied magnetic field is where ∆E -μ•B is a typical spacing between energy levels of the magnetic dipole Hamiltonian. For states with the same orbital angular momentum quantum number (m l ) but different spin quantum numbers (m s ), the difference in m s will always be ħ. In this case, ∆E -μ•B = 2μ B B, where we have assumed that the spins lie parallel or antiparallel to B. For an experimentally realistic magnetic field strength of 0.5 T, In SI units, this is approximately 7.1×10 -11 s. We note that the adiabatic wave function for the system makes zero contribution to the final angular momentum of the iron, as the start and end points (B aligned along z) are equivalent. Thus, the leading term contributing to the net angular momentum transfer will be the first order non-adiabatic correction. The torque applied by the magnetic field on the system must rotate the electron magnetic moments (spin and orbit) with the magnetic field for the beginning and end points to both be adiabatic (Born-Oppenheimer) solutions. No moment is transferred to the lattice by conservation of energy, since there is zero change in adiabatic energy between the beginning and the end, with no kinetic energy being acquired by the nuclei. Thus any gain in kinetic energy of the nuclei must be a result of non-adiabatic processes. The adiabaticity timescale associated with the electronic structure of the cluster is where ∆E H 0 , the difference in energy of eigenstates split by H 0 , takes on energy values in the range 0. It is also instructive to calculate the spin-orbit adiabaticity timescale. The eigenvalues of the SOC term are given by (ξ/2)(j(j + 1)l(l + 1)s(s + 1)). In our simulations l = 2, since we consider only d orbitals, s = 1 2 , and j may take the values of 5/2 or 3/2. These two values of j give the SOC eigenvalues ξ and -1.5ξ respectively. Taking the difference between these gives the energy level separation, |∆E SOC | = 2.5ξ = 0.15 eV, which is the only possible energy level transition coupled by SOC. Using, we find that T SOC = 419.3 a.u., which is an order of magnitude larger than the lattice splitting timescale in Eq. ( Although the precession timescale for a B field of 0.5 T, 7.1 × 10 -11 s, is too long to simulate, it is possible to achieve quasi-adiabaticity in a shorter time by applying an artificially large magnetic field. The largest field strength considered in this work is 500 T, for which the magnetic dipole coupling adiabaticity timescale is T p ∼ 3 × 10 3 a.u. This timescale remains greater than the adiabaticity timescales arising from the electronic structure of the crystal (T s = 62.8 a.u.), and from the SOC term (T SOC = 419.3 a.u.). Since the simulations used to draw any conclusions remain quasiadiabatic, and the field strengths considered are not sufficiently strong to reorder the adiabaticity timescales, the results of our simulations are qualitatively similar to the results that would be found had an experimentally realistic field strength been used. Our approach will consider a range of B field strengths to confirm the adiabatic timescales calculated above, and deduce trends in the contributions to the torque as the limit of small B and large T f is approached. To facilitate a gradual build up in the complexity of the effects observed, the results section is split into two parts: Sec. t (a.u.) The simulations without SOC used three different field strengths: B = 500 T, B = 50 T, and B = 0.5 T. The results show the gradual breakdown of the quasiadiabatic rotation of the spin as the applied field is reduced. The simulations with SOC used B = 500 T only, as these were unambiguously in the quasi-adiabatic limit and thus the most relevant to experiment. Unless stated otherwise, the results below are expressed in Hartree atomic units (a.u.). The results shown in this section were all obtained in the absence of SOC, i.e., with ξ = 0 a.u. The effects of exchange and the interaction with the magnetic field were included. The three simulations considered have (i) B = 500 T, (ii) B = 50 T, and (iii) B = 0.5 T. Figure The torque exerted on the nuclei by the electrons, Γ int , is shown in figure In addition to the torque on the nuclei due to the electrons, the nuclei also experience a direct torque contribution from the EM field via the Lorenz force. The effect of the direct electromagnetic torque can be estimated from Eqs. ( which has a magnitude of order where N is the number of nuclei and R c is the mean cluster radius. A field of 0.5 T that reverses its direction over a duration of 10,000 a.u., has ∂B ∂t ∼ 4.3 × 10 -11 a.u. An approximate mean cluster radius of 2.49 Å, gives Γ N,EM ∼ 1.8 × 10 -9 a.u. In figure Since ⟨L⟩ is mostly antiparallel to B, the -μ B ħ ⟨L⟩ × B precession term in Eq. ( Figure graphs of ⟨L x ⟩ (t) and Γ int,x (t): since ⟨L x ⟩ (t) is shaped like the first half of a sine curve, Γ int,x (t) is shaped like minus the first half of a cosine curve. Similarly, ⟨L z ⟩ (t) is shaped like the first half of a cosine curve and Γ int,z (t) like the first half of a sine curve. These observations show that the internal torque on the nuclei is a result of the transfer of orbital angular momentum from the electrons to the nuclei. The transfer could be seen as a manifestation of the Einstein-de Haas effect, but for orbital angular momentum rather than spin. It arises from the rotation of the orbital magnetic moment created by the application of the field itself, and is transmitted to the nuclei via the Coulomb interactions between electrons and nuclei. In the absence of spin-orbit interactions, although the spins rotate, they are decoupled from the lattice and do not exert torques on the nuclei. The torque exerted by the rotating applied field changes the spin angular momentum directly, with no involvement of the lattice. The rapid oscillations appearing in the torque do not arise from the -d ⟨L⟩ /dt term of Eq. ( The results of the B = 50 T simulation are shown in figure In most real solids, the orbital angular momentum is quenched and ⟨L⟩ is approximately zero in the absence of an applied magnetic field. Applying a B field induces an L, which is proportional to B in the linear regime. The proportionality of L and B can be seen in our Fe 15 cluster results when B ⪆ 50 T, although L becomes larger than expected when B is small, presumably because the outermost shell of degenerate states is partially filled and can be occupied by electrons in a manner that produces a finite but small orbital angular momentum at very little cost in energy. For the relatively low magnetic field strengths accessible experimentally, the induced orbital angular momentum is small and the orbital EdH effect discussed in this section (a) t (a.u.) Figure is weak. The spin angular momentum, by contrast, is non-zero even in the absence of an applied magnetic field because of the exchange interaction. In the presence of SOC, the rotation of the spin moment also applies a torque to the lattice and produces the spin EdH effect discussed below. The results in this section include the effects of SOC, with the SOC parameter ξ = 0.06 eV (approximately 2.2 × 10 -3 a.u.) as is appropriate for iron. Figure The second effect caused by the addition of SOC is that the oscillations due to the Larmor precession about the B field, are also visible in the evolution of ⟨L⟩. In figure In the presence of spin-orbit coupling, Eq. ( As a result, the Larmor oscillations in ⟨L⟩ also influence the torque. When averaged over the duration of the simulation, the introduction of SOC more than doubles the magnitude of the interaction torque, as may be seen by comparing figures 2(b) and 5(b). The precession and SOC terms act in opposite directions and mostly cancel each other out, so the interaction torque remains approximately equal to the -d⟨L⟩ dt term in Eq. As explained in Sec. 3.1, ⟨L⟩ is approximately proportional to B when SOC is omitted and B is small. The spin expectation value, by contrast, is determined primarily by exchange interactions and remains substantial even at B = 0. Adding SOC links the spin and orbital angular momenta, allowing the spin to mimic an applied field that polarizes the orbital angular momentum and makes the magnitude of the orbital angular momentum independent of B at low B. Although adiabatic simulations at realistic field strengths are impractical, our quasiadiabatic results allow us to deduce the main qualitative features of the Einstein-de Haas effect on experimental timescales and for experimental field strengths. An experiment with a field strength of B = 0.5 T would have a precession timescale of 47,014 a.u., much less than the period of the oscillatory fields used in experiments, which are typically of order 1 s = 4.1 × 10 16 a.u. It follows that the experimental time evolution is also quasi-adiabatic and that our quasi-adiabatic simulations access the same physics as the experiment. The spin and orbital angular momentum are both able to follow the rotation of the field and reverse their orientations as the field reverses. This generates a measurable torque on the Fe 15 nuclei. If the Fe 15 cluster were not held in place, this torque would cause it to start rotating. Having established that we are able to carry out simulations in the physically relevant quasi-adiabatic regime, we investigate the trends as the magnitude of B reduces towards 1 T or lower, as used in most experiments. For a sufficiently small B field, the simulations fail to remain quasi-adiabatic and the results are no longer relevant to experiment. If we suppose that the quasi-adiabatic breakdown occurs when the simulation duration is smaller than the precession timescale, Eq. ( In figures 6 and 7, we plot the results of simulations for a wide range of magnetic field strengths from B = 250 T to B = 0 T, at a fixed simulation duration of T f = 150,000 a.u. For every field strength considered and every simulation, we calculate the simulation averages of all terms appearing on the right-hand sides of the Ehrenfest equations of motion for d ⟨J ⟩ /dt, d ⟨L⟩ /dt, and d ⟨S⟩ /dt, Eqs. ( where Γ z (t ′ ) is a time-dependent torque contribution. For simplicity, just as in Secs. 3.1 and 3.2, the results obtained without SOC will be described before the results with SOC. 3.4.1. Without spin-orbit coupling Figure Figure The third panel in figure The simulation results with SOC included are shown in figure Several qualitative differences are apparent when comparing figure In the presence of SOC, the magnitude of ⟨L⟩ is much larger due to its coupling to ⟨S⟩, which is large due to Stoner exchange. As a result, the terms in figure Figure Since d⟨Jz⟩ dt is the sum of the averaged torque on the electrons due to the external magnetic field and due to the nuclei, it is also increased in the presence of SOC. This makes sense when comparing the magnitudes of ⟨L⟩ and ⟨S⟩ at t = 0 a.u. in figures 2(a) and 5(a), in which we see ⟨S⟩ (t = 0) is approximately the same in both cases, while ⟨L⟩ (t = 0) is enhanced in the presence of SOC, implying that a greater net change in total electronic angular momentum is required to reverse the sign of ⟨J ⟩ since the average torque over the duration of the simulation is given by -2 ⟨J ⟩ (t = 0)/T f . Figure This work set out to investigate the quantum mechanical origins of the Einstein-de Haas effect in a Fe 15 cluster from first principles, by means of simulation using a non-collinear TB model. It was shown that in a slowly rotating B field, orbital and spin angular momenta can reverse their orientations, leading to a measurable torque on the cluster. Despite the computational challenge of reaching physically realistic timescales for the simulation, the qualitative features of the evolution can be extrapolated by use of the adiabatic theorem. However, the net transfer of angular momentum to the iron is a non-adiabatic process. By analysing the trends of the torque contributions as B becomes small, it has been verified that SOC greatly enhances the interaction torque on the Fe 15 cluster due to coupling to the Stoner exchange-induced spin moment. The enhancement due to SOC is especially pronounced for low magnetic field strengths. This work demonstrated a quantum mechanical model capable of simulating the Einstein-de Haas effect in a ferromagnetic cluster and revealed the physical mechanisms which drive the timescales causing this effect. The tight-binding model employed in this work is not gauge invariant, thus a significant improvement would be to use London Orbitals The couplings can be grouped depending on the magnitude of the splitting |E n -E m |. The smallest differences in energy come from states which are split by -μ • B, which yields the condition where T f is the duration of the simulation. SOC causes larger energy level splittings, with an associated timescale given by The largest energy splittings in the Hamiltonian are due to H 0 , which lead to a separate timescale,