High-temperature superconductivity has been observed in binary hydrides such as LaH 10 at pressures above ∼ 150 GPa. Hydrogen cage structures have been identified as a common motif beneficial for high critical temperatures T c . Efforts are now focused on finding hydride high-temperature superconductors at lower pressures. We present evidence for high-temperature superconductivity in binary La 4 H 23 with A15type structure featuring hydrogen cages at a pressure of P = 95 GPa. We synthesise La 4 H 23 from a lanthanum film capped with a palladium catalyst promoting the dissociation of hydrogen. In resistance measurements, we observe superconductivity with a transition temperature T c ∼ 90 K. In X-ray diffraction on the same sample, we identify the A15-type cubic body centred structure of the lanthanum sublattice. From comparison with earlier XRD and structure prediction studies, we identify this phase with La 4 H 23 . Our study reinforces the concept of hydrogen cages for high-temperature superconductivity. High-temperature superconductivity up to ∼ 250 K has been reported and independently confirmed in LaH 10 at pressures ∼ 180 GPa The A15-type structure (space group P m 3n) is expected to be favourable for superconductivity as it promotes clathrate cages of hydrogen atoms around the body-centred cubic lattice of the metal atoms as illustrated in the inset of Figure Through the donation of electrons from the metal atoms, the hydrogen anitbonding bands can be populated leading to stabilisation of the hydrogen cages and providing an avenue for metallisation and superconductivity Hydride compounds of the A15-type structure have been searched for superconductivity in computational studies, e.g., leading to the prediction of high-temperature superconductivity in LiNi 3 H 23 The A15-type structure has recently been detected in the lanthanum hydride binary system with single-crystal XRD by The successful synthesis of La 4 H 23 is evident from our X-ray diffraction in Figure The XRD data reveal a homogeneous sample without texture. This is visible from both the azimuthal representation of the detector image in Figure At the same time, the angle-integrated XRD pattern exhibits peak intensities as expected for a powder average (Figure The lattice constants extracted from Rietveld refinement provide confidence in the assignment of the La 4 H 23 phase with A15-type La sublattice and suggest a large hydrogen content close to the stoichiometric ratio La:H = 1:5.75 for the La 4 H 23 phase. The lattice parameters (a = 6.191(4) Å, volume per La atom = 29.66 The resistance measurements presented in Figure our experiment below 60 K, where R n is the resistance of the normal state. We have repeated resistance measurements several times including before and after XRD measurements and find the superconductivity to be stable with a slight increase to T c = 95 K between subsequent measurements. We attribute this increase to annealing of the sample at room temperature similar to reports on H 3 S The normal state resistance shows indications of phase instabilities with decomposition exhibiting activated behaviour. If warming the sample above 250 K, the sample resistance increases over time as illustrated in Figure The changes to the sample also induce fundamental change from metallic to non-metallic over time. Over multiple warm-ups to above 250 K, the resistance changes from metallic (dR/dT > 0) to non-metallic (dR/dT < 0). A similar change from metallic to non-metallic has been observed by Guo et al. after the first laser heating and in subsequent decompression runs. In our study, the pressure before and after laser heating remained stable within our uncertainty of ± 5 GPa, therefore the change in the normal state could originate from either small changes in pressure and/or could be time dependent. Equally, the broadening of the superconducting transition and the loss of zero resistance reported by Guo et al. below 100 GPa may be related to sample decomposition. The combination of increasing resistance and change to non-metallic behaviour suggests that part of the sample slowly transforms to a semimetallic or insulating material. In our sample, we have detected La 4 H 23 and elemental La with XRD, both of which may form part of the electrical path sampled by our resistance measurements with La 4 H 23 providing at least a percolative path supporting zero resistance of the high-T c state. Hence, the increase in resistance with time above 250 K could be a conversion of either La 4 H 23 or La to a semimetallic or insulating phase, e.g. LaH 3 which has been reported to become semimetallic at high pressures Further investigations are required to map the stability range of the La 4 H 23 phase including under the influence of excess or deficiency of hydrogen in the DAC. So far, all reported syntheses have employed hydrogen donor materials like NH 3 BH 3 and paraffin. It will be of interest to check if a synthesis in excess molecular hydrogen shows a larger stability range to lower pressures. Further X-ray diffraction that check for superstructures and decomposition are equally desirable but challenging. The suppression of the resistive transition in magnetic field provides further evidence for superconductivity in La 4 H 23 . The transition is suppressed by 13 K in a magnetic field of 12 T as illustrated in Figure The Fermi velocity is estimated as v F = 1.8 × 10 5 m s -1 . This value is lower compared to H 3 S The discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in La 4 H 23 with the A15 structure reinforces that hydrogen cage structures are beneficial for superconductivity. The A15-type structure is so far the prime example of how high-temperature superconductivity can be realised below 100 GPa in a binary hydride material. The XRD analysis suggests that La 4 H 23 is the major phase synthesised at pressures around 100 GPa. This may help forming pure samples in the future to study the intrinsic superconducting properties and hence has the potential to advance the understanding of high-temperature superconductivity in hydride compounds. High pressures were achieved in a DAC machined from MP35N alloy, with diamond anvils of culet diameter 50 μm bevelled at 8 • to a diameter of 300 μm. Gaskets were prepared by pre-indentation of 250 μm steel 301 and insulated with a boron nitride and epoxy mixture. The insulation was indented to a thickness ∼ 30 μm and a sample space of diameter 28 μm was drilled. The anvil with the sample was first coated in 50 nm of alumina to provide a thermal insulation during laser heating and to help prevent diamond embrittlement from hydrogen diffusion. For electrical measurements, five bi-layer tungsten-gold electrodes were sputtered/evaporated directly onto one of the diamond anvils. A lanthanum film of thickness 260 nm was deposited onto the electrodes in a vacuum ∼ 1 × 10 -7 mbar after multiple pre-melts to remove oxide impurities from the La source. The La film was capped with a 5 nm layer of palladium to act as an oxidation barrier, and to catalyse hydrogen diffusion into the La sample Due to the hygroscopic nature of AB, we first purified by sublimation to remove any residual moisture and impurities that would react with the La film. Loading of the AB into the gasket indentation and initial cell closing were done in an inert Ar atmosphere in a glove box with residual O 2 /H 2 O < 0.5 ppm. The sample was pressurised to 95 GPa with NH 3 BH 3 serving as the pressure transmitting medium (PTM). The pressure was determined from the Raman shift of the diamond edge using the Akahama scale as shown in Figure E7 The La film was characterised in resistance measurements prior to laser heating (Fig- The four-point resistance was monitored during heating, where the normal state resistance increased by a factor ∼ 20 indicating chemical reaction between the La film and the AB. No further heating of the sample was carried out after the first observed glowing in order to preserve the electrodes, which likely explains the residual lanthanum observed in XRD. X-ray diffraction was carried out at the I15 extreme conditions beamline at Diamond Light Source with a Pilatus3 X CdTe 2M area detector, wavelength λ = 0.425 Å (sampleto-detector distance 385 mm). The beam was collimated to 20 μm. The calibrant used was LaB 6 . Integration of the powder pattern and removal of spurious reflections were done in Dioptas Electrical transport measurements were done in a four-point configuration with an excitation current of 10 μA using either an SRS SIM921 AC resistance bridge or an SR830 lock-in amplifier. Magnetic field studies were done at the University of Bristol with an Oxford Instruments 14 T magnet. 