Lee et al. reported that the compound LK-99, with a chemical formula of Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O (0.9<x<1.1), exhibits room-temperature superconductivity under ambient pressure. In this study, we investigated the transport and magnetic properties of pure Cu2S and LK-99 containing Cu2S. We observed a sharp superconducting-like transition and a thermal hysteresis behavior in the resistivity and magnetic susceptibility. However, we did not observe zero-resistivity below the transition temperature. We argue that the so-called superconducting behavior in LK-99 is most likely due to a reduction in resistivity caused by the first order structural phase transition of Cu2S at around 385 K, from the β phase at high temperature to the γ phase at low temperature. Superconductors exhibit zero-resistivity and perfect diamagnetism, making them important in applications such as nuclear magnetic resonance, maglev trains, superconducting quantum computing, and lossless power transmission, etc. However, the superconducting transition temperatures of known superconductors at ambient pressure are relatively low. For example, the highest superconducting transition temperature Tc observed in high-temperature cuprates is only around 135 K Recently, Lee et al. reported a material called LK-99, a modified-lead apatite crystal structure with the composition Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O (0.9<x<1.1), to be the first room-temperature superconductor at ambient pressure We notice that the reported LK-99 sample contained a certain amount of Cu2S impurity Cu2S powder was commercially available (Alfa Aesar) (99.5% -325 mesh). The preparation procedure for LK-99 follows the methodology reported in reference The precursor Cu3P and Lanarkite of LK-99 were prepared separately by solid-state reactions. To synthesize Cu3P, Cu powder (Alfa Aesar 99.99%) was mixed with P (Aladdin 99.999%) in a molar ratio of 3:1 inside a glovebox. The mixture was then pressed into a pellet and sealed in high-vacuum quartz tubes. The tubes were heated to 300 °C at a rate of 4 °C/min, and kept at that temperature for 20 hours. Subsequently, the temperature is raised to 900 °C for 10 hours. Finally, the sample was kept at 900 °C for 10 hours. Lanarkite was obtained by annealing a stoichiometric mixture of commercially available Pb(SO)4 powder (Aladdin 99.99%) and PbO powder (Aladdin 99.999%) to 725 °C at a rate of 4 °C/min for 24 hours. (Annealed in the air and in the vacuum will affect Cu2S content in the final products.) Polycrystalline samples of LK-99 were prepared by solid state reactions of Cu3P powder and Lanarkite Pb2(SO4)O powder in a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio. The resulting powders were pressed into pellets and sealed into evacuated fused silica ampoules. The ampoules were annealed at 925 °C (heating rate: 5 °C/min) for 24 hours in a box furnace. After cooling to room temperature, the samples were ground in argon atmosphere, pressed into pellets, and then annealed again at 925 °C for 24 hours. All products were structurally characterized using x-ray powder diffraction (Rigaku) in the Bragg-Brentano geometry, equipped with a Cu Ka x-ray source (λ = 1.5406 Å). Rietveld refinements were performed using TOPAS software. The resistivity was measured using a standard 4-probe method between 2 K and 400 K in PPMS system of Quantum Design Company. To measure transport properties, Cu2S powder was loaded into a metallic die and pressed into a dense pellet. The magnetic susceptibility was measured in temperature range of 2 K -400 K using a SQUID VSM Magnetometer of Quantum Design Company. We synthesized two kinds of LK-99 with different Cu2S content,using different precursor of Lanarkite annealed in the air and in the vacuum, respectively. Both Cu2S and LK-99 phases are observed from the x-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the mixtures. Figure Additionally, a wide thermal hysteresis of 13.1 K is found in the resistivity of Cu2S when comparing the cooling curve and warming curve, indicating a first-order phase transition. Given the sudden drop in resistivity by 3-4 orders of magnitude and the similarities in the near-zero resistance and phase transition temperature with LK-99 Figure Below 100 K, the resistivity increases with decreasing temperature, showing a semiconducting-like behavior. The sharp drop in resistivity and the transition temperature are similar to that observed by Lee et al. In conclusion, we measured transport and magnetic properties of pure Cu2S as well as the mixture LK-99/Cu2S, and reproduce the experimental results of resistivity. We found a sharp drop in resistivity, however, none of them show zero-resistivity. The superconducting-like behavior in LK-99 most likely originates from a magnitude reduction in resistivity caused by the first-order structural phase transition of Cu2S. Email address: # welyman@iphy.ac.cn $ jlluo@iphy.ac.cn