Cavansite is a visually stunning blue vanadosilicate mineral with limited occurrences worldwide, whereas Pentagonite is a closely related dimorph with similar physical and chemical properties, yet is extremely rare compared to Cavansite. The reasons behind Pentagonite's exceptional rarity remain largely unknown. In this study, (a) density functional theory (DFT) is utilized to investigate the electronic structures of Cavansite and Pentagonite at ground state and finite pressures; (b) a two-state Boltzmann probability model is then employed to construct a comprehensive phase diagram that reveals the abundance of each species across a wide range of pressure and temperature conditions; and (c) dehydration characteristics of these two minerals are explored. The present analysis reveals the key factors that contribute to the relative scarcity of Pentagonite, including differences in structural arrangement and electronic configurations between the two minerals. Specifically, it shows that (a) because of the peculiar arrangements of SiO 4 polyhedra, Cavansite forms a compact structure (about 2.7% less in volume) resulting in lower energy; (b) at a temperature of about 650K only about 1% Pentagonite can form; (c) vanadium induces a highly localized state in both of these otherwise large-band-gap insulators resulting in an extremely weak magnetic Since its discovery Although first discovered in Oregon, USA, arguably best samples of these dimorphs are known to originate from Pune (formerly Poona), India In this study, density functional theory (DFT) calculations have been used primarily to explore why Pentagonite may be so rare. Formation energies of these minerals deduced thus, and the resulting phase diagram of their relative abundances, suggest why Cavansite remains dominant in the field. It may be noted that there have been no previous electronic structure investigation on these minerals. DFT calculations were performed using the plane-wave basis set and within the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) generalized gradient approximation Fig. As there are four vanadium atoms, there can be four possible magnetic configurations: one ferromagnetic and three antiferromagnetic. Fig. Although the magnetic coupling among the vanadium atoms appears stronger in Cavansite than in Pentagonite, it is anything but strong in absolute terms. The energy difference between the ground state antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic phases is barely 0.6 meV for Cavansite and 0.1 meV for Pentagonite. The approximate Curie temperature T c can be computed using the formula Here, the effective exchange constant (J ef f ) is taken to be the difference ∆E in total energies of the magnetic phases where z is the number of contributing magnetic atoms in the system (z = 4 in our case) and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Using this, the T c for the magnetic phase transition turns out to be, respectively, 1.32 K and 0.26 K for Cavansite and Pentagonite. This suggests that that the magnetic vanadium ions interact extremely weakly with each other and, for all practical purposes, it would be difficult to experimentally detect any magnetic response in either of the minerals. Energetically, Cavansite is seen to be lower by 0.26 eV per formula unit than Pentagonite. This can be attributed to their structural differences. Both the unit cells are characterized by sheets of Si-O 4 polyhedra in the a-c plane, stacked along the c axis. Also, the Si-O 4 polyhedra form rings when viewed along the longer b axis. Four water molecules per formula unit reside among the voids created by the sheets and the intermediate atoms of calcium and vanadium. However, a few more important differences in the structures of Cavansite and Pentagonite need to be highlighted. In Cavansite, calcium atoms have eight coordinating oxygen atoms: four from SiO 4 polyhedra and four from water. On the other hand, in Pentagonite the calcium atoms have seven oxygen atoms: four from SiO 4 polyhedra and only three from water, with the remaining water molecule hydrogen-bonded with other water molecules and oxygen atoms of silicate sheets. The polyhedral rings in Pentagonite are 6-membered rings while those in Cavansite are larger 8-membered rings joined via smaller 4-membered rings. This rearrangement is also associated with the restructuring of SiO 4 sheets. The reader may notice in Fig. From the ground-state energies, it is therefore reasonable to qualitatively expect that Cavansite will be more abundant than Pentagonite. Yet one cannot ignore the effect of pressure and temperature on their formation. This will be investigated below. Approximate temperature-dependent abundances of a two-state system may be modeled using the following Boltzmann probability model: where p i is the probability of formation of state i (with i, j ∈ {Cavansite, Pentagonite}) at temperature T ; E i is the energy of the state i; and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Because this is a two-state model, it follows that p Cavansite + p Pentagonite = 1. The probability of formation of Pentagonite at zero pressure, computed as described, is shown in Fig. A few caveats are in place here. The two-state Boltzmann probability model (Eq. 2) is a fairly simplistic view of what is arguably an extremely complex system of multiple interacting atomic and chemical units in a cooling-lava non-equilibrium environment. Specifically, this model assumes that there are no competing minerals during the formation of Cavansite and Pentagonite. While atomistic modeling of the cooling of a lava flow is practically impossible, it may be noted that the two-state Boltzmann probability model offers a useful first approximation. To examine the effect of pressure on the formation of Cavansite and Pentagonite, we optimize the unit cells (anisotropically) at a specific target pressure. This is done by setting the target pressure and letting system vary the cell parameters and atomic positions so as to minimize the enthalpy. The enthalpy H is calculated at given pressure P and volumes V as: where E is the total energy. Fig. The fact that Pentagonite displays less compressibility along all axes suggests a high bulk modulus. The bulk modulus is computed by fitting the Birch-Murnaghan equation-of-state Sec. 3.2 and 3.3 examine the effects of pressure and temperature separately. Here, they are combined into a P-T phase diagram. Using Eq 2, we compute probabilities for a range of temperatures and pressures for both the systems. The resulting phase diagram is shown in Fig. Ishida et al The role of water molecules in the structure is now investigate by removing one water molecule at a time and then performing full unit cell relaxations. For each level of (de)hydration, multiple different unit cell configurations are possible. Specifically, for k water molecules per unit cell, there can be 4 k unit cell configurations (k = 0, . . . , 4). All the configurations for each k are systematically generated and fully optimized. Reported here are only the ones with the lowest energy. See Table At this point, the role of van der Waals (vdW) interaction is worth a note . Without vdW corrections, it is known that DFT calculations overestimate typical cell lengths by about 10% compared to uncorrected calculations. This is, of course, expected because non-vdW-corrected DFT functionals do not accurately capture the long-range attractive vdW interaction. In the present context, it is seen that in absence of the vdW correction, the ground state energy of dehydrated Pentagonite is lower than that of dehydrated Cavansite. On the other hand, vdW-corrected calculations predict that Cavansite is the energetically more favourable ground state structure. A conclusive resolution of this issue may be possible only through experiments. The computational analysis and results presented in this paper may have interesting implications to the current understanding of the mineralisation processes leading to the formation of Cavansite and Pentagonite. This is elaborated upon below. Wagholi, Pune, India, is the seat of currently the largest deposits of both Cavansite and Pentagonite. Here, a thick (∼10 m), massive basaltic lava flow is exposed and is quarried for road metal and aggregates. At its base, its contact with the lower lava flow is marked by sporadic patches of flow-top breccia. This highly oxidized, glassy breccia has high porosity and permeability with copious irregular and haphazard vugs and cavities containing heulandite, stilbite, a rare green apophylite, and two generations of calcite. Radiated aggregates or sheaf-like crystals of Cavansite grow on top of heulandite, stilbite and calcite. In 1998, the rarer Pentagonite was discovered to co-occur with its diamorph Cavansite in some of the cavities The findings of the present study suggest the following possibilities about the mineralisation processes that lead to the formation of Cavansite and Pentagonite. (i) It is speculated that Cavansite may have been deposited first by hydrothermal fluids under saturated conditions (which is a common process for zeolite formation in cavities over relevant geological time scales). Pentagonite got deposited only after the temperature in the cavities rose and evaporated the fluid in the cavities at slightly faster rates (explaining relatively small crystal sizes). The top layer of lava mentioned earlier could be one possible reason for temperature rise in the lower layer because of blanketing of the lower layer. (ii) The observed abundances of Cavansite and Pentagonite are explained through two mechanisms which may act separately or in tandem under geological conditions: (a) Through the fundamental physics of these two minerals leading to the probabilities presented earlier (∼1% for Pentagonite and ∼99% for Cavansite in the relevant lava temperature range of 450-650 K. It is speculated that the thick lava flows from Wagholi might have cooled under a similar thermal regime (perhaps even lower) when zeolite mineralisation was initiated in the breccia cavities. One must also remember that breccia are known to experience considerable overburden pressure in addition to the fluid pressure in the cavities. In the P-T phase diagram (Fig. In this work, extensive DFT calculations have been performed to examine the electronic structures, structural properties, and relative abundances of two microporous vanadosilicate dimorphs, namely Cavansite and Pentagonite. This analysis finds that the structural arrangements of SiO 4 tetrahedra as well as the differently-coordinated calcium atoms are responsible for the lower ground state energy of Cavansite at zero pressure and zero temperature. The analysis also computes electronic structures under pressure to mimic field conditions in the lava flows where these minerals are formed. A two-state Boltzmann probability model is used to model the effect of temperature on the relative abundances of the two minerals. This leads to the construction of a comprehensive pressure-temperature-abundance phase diagram for the two minerals. This phase diagram explains why Cavansite is significantly more abundant than Pentagonite. This analysis further suggests that the formation of Pentagonite is assisted by both pressure and temperature although this effect is most pronounced over a limited range of (negative) pressures. This study provides insights into mineralization processes that lead to or contribute to the deposition of Cavansite and Pentagonite in the observed proportions. The DFT calculations presented here also predict a highly localized weak magnetic state due to vanadium atoms that is associated with weak magnetic ordering at very low temperatures (Curie temperatures around 1 K). Hydration in both the minerals is investigated, and indicates that water molecules are somewhat loosely bound to the crystal structure. This work sheds light on both for the geological and material science aspects of vanadosilicate minerals and paves way for further studies of their formation and properties. Frank et al 