Hydrogen as the cleanest energy carrier is a promising alternative renewable resource to fossil fuels. There is an ever-increasing interest in exploring efficient and costeffective approaches of hydrogen production. Recent experiments have shown that single platinum atom immobilized on the metal vacancies of MXenes allows a highefficient hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Here using ab initio calculations, we design a series of substitutional Pt-doped Tin+1CnTx (Tin+1CnTx-PtSA) with different thicknesses and terminations (n = 1, 2 and 3, Tx = O, F and OH), and investigate the quantum-confinement effect on the HER catalytic performance. Surprisingly, we reveal a strong thickness effect of the MXene layer on the HER performance. Amongst the various surface-terminated derivatives, Ti2CF2-PtSA and Ti2CH2O2-PtSA are found to be the best HER catalysts with the change of Gibbs free energy ΔG*H ~ 0 eV, complying with the thermoneutral condition. The ab initio molecular dynamics simulations reveal that Ti2CF2-PtSA and Ti2CH2O2-PtSA possess a good thermodynamic stability. The present work shows that the HER catalytic activity of the MXene is not solely governed by the local environment of the surface such as Pt single atom. We point out the critical role of thickness control and surface decoration of substrate in achieving a high-performance HER catalytical activity. As a carbon-free fuel, hydrogen is a clean energy source and a promising alternative to fossil fuel With the high surface volume ratio, two-dimensional (2D) materials came into the spotlight as a component of various co-catalysts for HER Shaikh et al MXenes, as the graphene-like 2D transition metal carbides, nitrides or carbonitrides, have a superior metallicity with a chemical composition of Mn+1XnTx (n can be 1-4, and Tx is the surface termination) In this work, 12 kinds of substitutional Pt-doped Tin+1CnTx (Tin+1CnTx-PtSA, n = 1, 2 and 3, Tx = O, F and OH) are systematically examined toward the potential HER electrocatalysts by using first-principles calculations. We find that the factor of the thickness of Tin+1CnTx, which has normally been overlooked before, plays a key role in affecting the HER performance. Through a delicate screening, Pt decorated Ti2CF2 and Ti2CH2O2 are predicted to be the promising HER electrocatalysts with an appropriate free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔG*H) of nearly zero. In addition, ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) was performed to prove that the single Pt atom can be stabilized on Ti vacancy. Our work provides a new perspective to design highperformance HER electrocatalysts for guiding experimental synthesis. We perform spin-polarized ab initio calculations to optimize the structure and obtain total energies by the VASP The van der Waals interaction is also considered by the semiempirical DFT-D3 approach where E defect and E pure are the total energies of defect-contained and pure Tin+1CnTx supercells, respectively. n i is the number of removed (with a sign of -) or added (with a sign of +) atoms for the i type element, and μ i is the chemical potential of i type element of its elemental phase. Besides, the binding energies (E b ) of Pt atoms on defect-contained Tin+1CnTx are calculated using the following equation: where E defect+Pt , E Pt , E defect are the total energies of Tin+1CnTx-PtSA monolayer, Pt single atom and Tin+1CnTx with one Ti atomic vacancy. A negative value of E b indicates a stable adsorption of Pt. The HER activities can be evaluated via the Gibbs free energy change of H adsorption ∆G H * using the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) model proposed by Nørskov et al. where ∆E H * can be obtained from the calculations of the total energies of H-adsorbed Tin+1CnTx-PtSA, Tin+1CnTx-PtSA, and isolated H2 molecule. ∆E ZPE is the correction of zero point energy, and ∆S is the entropy difference between the gas H2 and adsorbed H. Both ∆E ZPE and ∆S can be calculated by the vibrational frequency of *H. For example, the vibrational frequency of *H has three eigenvalues: 1429.79, 861.28 and 854.86 cm -1 in the case of Ti4C3H2O2-PtSA. Thus the E ZPE and TS of *H can be calculated by In addition, AIMD simulations are carried out under canonical ensemble (NVT) using the Nosé-Hoover heat bath A 3 × 3 × 1 supercell of Tin+1CnTx (Figure have P-3m1 space group, whereas Ti3C2Tx has P-6m2 space group. The optimized lattice parameters and layer thickness of this series are presented in Table Nørskov et al have revealed that ΔG*H is an effective descriptor for the HER by theoretical and experimental studies To identify the trend of the adsorption of H on Tin+1CnTx-PtSA (n = 1, 2 and 3, T = F and OH), the scaling relation between charge transfer of Pt atoms and ΔG*H is plotted in Figure As shown in Figure The affinity of H toward Pt increases with the amount of negative charge at Pt. The optimal charge of Pt for a thermoneutral adsorption is around -0.3 e and a larger charge transfer from the host sheet to Pt atoms leads to a stronger adsorption of H, deteriorating the HER performance. The above correlation is generally found in other types of substitutionally Pt-doped MXenes with different terminations (see Table Evac is the energy of vacuum level and EF is the Fermi level. The work function is the minimum energy needed to remove an electron from the surface toward a vacuum level. Figure The results indicate that catalytic activity of HER is highly correlated with the local chemical environment of the active site, rather than the global electrostatic properties of the surface of monolayers. Furthermore, we analyze the spatial distribution of charge transfer of the active site through calculating the differential charge density (Figure Strain engineering is an effective approach to modulate the electronic properties for promoting the catalytic performance The calculated ΔG*H increases from -0.05 eV at -2% compressive strain to 0.60 eV at 6% tensile strain on Ti2CF2-PtSA. This indicates that applying strain, though residual strain existing around the edge, can be a viable means for modulating the activity. Solvent effect also plays a non-negligible role on chemical reactions at the water/solid interface Although experimental and theoretical studies have proved that ΔG*H is the best descriptor for the HER, the actual process is more complex than this situation. The HER is a multistep electrochemical reaction Since Ti2CF2-PtSA and Ti2CH2O2-PtSA are proved to be promising for HER catalysts, we next further examine the stability of the adsorbed Pt single atom which is critical for application. Besides, Ti2CO2-PtSA is also examined for comparison. It is important that the Ti vacancies in these MXenes can dynamically stabilize Pt single atom at finite temperature. In our previous study In this work, the catalytic activity of a series of Tin+1CnTx-PtSA co-catalysts is 