We report terahertz spectroscopic measurements of quantum spin dynamics in the spin-1/2 honeycomb magnet Na 2 Co 2 TeO 6 as a function of applied magnetic field with different terahertz polarizations. Distinct field dependencies of the resolved spin dynamics are identified in three regimes, which are separated by two critical fields at B c1 ≈ 7 and B c2 ≈ 10 T. A polarization selective continuum is observed in the intermediate phase, featuring spin fluctuations of a proximate quantum spin liquid. The spin-1/2 honeycomb magnet with bond-dependent nearest-neighbor Ising exchange interaction -the so-called Kitaev interaction -is a remarkable example among the few exactly solvable models of two dimensions The realization of the strong bond-dependent exchange anisotropy is not straightforward in a solid-state material. Transition metal elements with strong spin-orbit coupling, such as 5d Ir 4+ and 4d Ru 3+ ions, in a proper crystal-field environment were proposed Recent theoretical analysis suggested that based on the 3d 7 Co 2+ ions with a high-spin t 5 2g e 2 g configuration, a material realization of the Kitaev honeycomb model should also be possible The long-range antiferromagnetic order stabilized below the Néel temperature of T N ≈ 26 K in Na 2 Co 2 TeO 6 can be suppressed by a relatively large in-plane magnetic field B c2 ≈ 10 -12 T, above which the system enters a spin-gapped state Motivated by these results, we perform high resolution terahertz spectroscopy as a function of applied magnetic field in the ab plane to resolve the spin dynamics of Na 2 Co 2 TeO 6 . Three phases are identified by their distinct field dependence of characteristic spin dynamics. In particular, an intermediate phase between 7 and 10 T is featured by a continuum, which is absent in the lower-and higher-field phases, providing evidence for a possibly dominant Kitaev interaction. High-quality single crystals of Na 2 Co 2 TeO 6 were synthesized by a self-flux method We determine the magnetic excitations below T N ≈ 26 K by measuring transmitted THz spectra at 3 K in the magnetically ordered phase and also at 30 K slightly above T N as a reference. Figure In contrast to the zero-field data, the spectra of the two polarizations in the applied fields are no more identical but exhibit various similarities mainly below B c1 and, more importantly, distinct differences above B c1 . Starting from zero field the absorption band M 3,4 splits into two absorption peaks M 3 and M 4 which soften with increasing fields, whereas the M 5 and M 6 modes shift to higher energies. Above 4 T two more lower-lying modes are resolved, as marked by arrows (M 1 and M 2 ), both of which evolve from the lower-boundary of the low-lying spin-wave excitation First, the M 6 mode hardens more evidently for h ω ⊥ B [Figs. A rather abrupt change induced by the applied magnetic fields occurs at 6 T. While at 5.5 T the low-energy spectra are characterized by four excitation modes (M 1 to M 4 ), at 6 T the spectra are dominated by only two of them, the peak values of which are greatly enhanced. Also the THz polarization plays an important role. While for h ω ⊥ B the M 2 and M 4 modes survive with enhanced intensity above 5.5 T [Fig. The most intriguing dynamic feature appears when the applied magnetic field is further increased, as shown in Fig. For the longitudinal polarization h ω ∥ B [see Fig. These results are summarized in Fig. While below B c1 the dynamics probed via both polarization channels is characterized by sharp magnetic excitation modes, a significant contrast appears above B c1 . For the transverse configuration h ω ⊥ B, an extended magnetic continuum exists at B c1 ≤ B ≤ B c2 , which provides possible evidence for fractionalized excitations of a quantum spin liquid, as expected for dominant Kitaev-type interaction in a honeycomb lattice. In contrast, in the channel of h ω ∥ B, only a sharp absorption M 1 mode is observed in the same field range. It is worth noting that a sharp absorption profile at the Γ point is not an exclusive signature for a long-range magnetic order, but can also be a feature of a quantum spin liquid due to Kitaev-type interaction While the quantum spin fluctuations are enhanced above B c1 leading to the emergence of the dominant magnetic continuum, the system may still maintain a long-range magnetic order by properly accommodating the Zeeman energy, especially with the assistance of inter-layer couplings The second field-induced phase transition at B c2 = 10 T is characterized by the appearance of various magnetic excitations which all harden with increasing field. For h ω ⊥ B [see Fig. By changing the external magnetic field be to perpendicular to a honeycomb bond direction, i.e. B ∥ b (see Fig. To summarize, by performing high resolution terahertz spectroscopy of the quasi-two-dimensional spin-1/2 honeycomb magnet Na 2 Co 2 TeO 6 in high magnetic fields up to 17 T, we reveal three field regimes which are featured by distinctly different field-dependent spin dynamics and separated by two critical fields around B c1 = 7 T and B c2 = 10 T, respectively. While below B c1 and above B c2 the dynamics is characterized by well-defined magnetic excitations, in the intermediate regime B c1 ≤ B ≤ B c2 sharp absorption profile and extended continuum are observed in the longitudinal and transverse polarization channels h ω ∥ B and h ω ⊥ B, respectively, both for the applied fields parallel and perpendicular to the honeycomb bond direction. The systematic spectroscopic characterization of the spin dynamics points to the importance of Kitaev type interaction in Na 2 Co 2 TeO 6 , and provides a benchmark for a quantitative theoretical description of the magnetic properties. Our results motivate further investigation of the characteristic spin dynamics, e.g. in the full Brillouin zone by inelastic neutron scattering or Raman spectroscopic measurements in high magnetic fields. Note added: Recently, we became aware of related work on sodium-occupation disorder enriched magnetic excitations 