The accurate assessment of the local tritium concentration in the tokamak first wall by means of the laser-induced desorption (LID) diagnostic is sought as one the key solutions to monitoring the local radioactive tritium content in the first wall of the fusion reactor ITER. Numerical models of gas desorption from solids used for LID simulation are usually closed with the one-dimensional heat transport models. In this study, the temperature dynamics of a target irradiated by a short laser pulse during LID are analyzed by means of the two-dimensional heat transport model to assess the validity of using one-dimensional approximation for recovering the diagnostic signal. The quantitative estimates for the parameters governing the heat transfer are presented. The analytical expressions for the sample temperature distribution resolved both in time and space are derived. The sensitivity analysis of the obtained relations to uncertainties in the experimental parameters is performed. It is shown that, depending of the ratio between the laser spot radius and heat diffusion length, the one-dimensional approach can noticeably overestimate the sample temperature in the limit of small laser spot radius, resulting in more than 100% larger amounts of tritium desorbed from the irradiated target, compared to the two-dimensional approximation. In the limit of large laser spot radius, both approaches yield comparable amounts of desorbed tritium. Accumulation of tritium in the plasma facing materials of a fusion reactor, such as ITER, is of primary concern for the successful long-term operation of the installation. The administrative safety restrictions bound the total amount of tritium collected inside the vacuum chamber of the machine to around 700 g during the whole experimental campaign. For fusion applications in the ITER tokamak, the LID diagnostic The heat transfer in solids in two-and three-dimensional approximations were considered both analytically Before presenting the analytical results of the study, we first qualitatively assess the importance of different physical processes, involved in setting the heat and particle dynamics in the sample during LID. The LID analysis of a target involves irradiating the sample surface with short laser pulses. The target irradiation mobilizes gas particles trapped in the defects of the material structure, which are then released from the sample and collected by the mass-spectrometer (the secondary light emission of desorbed particles can be also measured). Data on the total amount of particles desorbed from the sample and on the temporal dependence of the particle flux are used to reconstruct the parameters of the gas trapping in the sample. The local concentration of gas in the near-surface layers of a sample is of primary concern, since it determines the total amount of tritium accumulated in the fusion reactor. The schematic of the diagnostic is shown in Fig. FIG. Dynamics of the particle diffusion, trapping in the material and the subsequent release from the defects and from the sample surface are governed by the target temperature T . The characteristic rates of the processes are linked to T through the Arrhenius-like law, S ∝ exp(-E/kT ) (k is the Boltzmann constant) and are thus strongly dependent on the local temperature of the sample. For large values of the activation energy E, even moderate variations in T can lead to large changes in the particle desorption dynamics, resulting in enhanced, or on the contrary, suppressed release of particles from the analyzed sample. In LID experiments, lasers with the characteristic intensity I ∼ 500 -1000 MW/m 2 , laser spot area S ∼ several mm 2 , and the characteristic pulse duration t p ∼ 1 ms are used. The total energy in a pulse, E, is rather small E = ISt p ≲ several Joules. The samples are heated to high temperatures ∼ 2000 -3000 K, nevertheless not exceeding the material melting temperature. The sample surface is not damaged by the pulses and remains solid during the analysis. To describe the temperature of the samples during LID experiments, one-dimensional models The dynamics of the sample temperature are governed by a group of processes, which include the radiation absorption, heat propagation into the material bulk and to the sample surface, and, potentially, to the phase transitions of the sample material. While the first process is responsible for the heating of the sample material, the other ones lead to the sample cooling. In order to construct the model of heat transfer in the target, we assess the importance of each channel of energy redistribution in the material. In LID experiments, the power of the laser is chosen so as to not increase the sample temperature above the melting point and thus prevent the material from melting, evaporation, ablation, etc. For this reason, below we shall assume that no phase transformations take place in the material. As a result, the cooling of the sample results from the energy flow into the material bulk and to the sample surface, where it is re-radiated backwards into the surrounding medium. To assess the effectiveness of the sample cooling by the surface radiation, we consider the Stefan-Boltzmann law, q s = εσT Another important aspect of particle transport in the sample under laser irradiation is the sensitivity of the particle release from the defects to variations in the sample temperature. As already mentioned, the particle de-trapping rate follows the Arrhenius law, R dt ∝ exp (-E dt /kT ), where E dt is the de-trapping energy. Hence, the error in the magnitude of R related to the error in the temperature T can be estimated as ∆R/R = (E dt /T )(∆T /T ) ≡ (E dt /T )δT (δ. . . denotes the relative variation). For traps having E dt ∼ 2 eV and the sample temperature T ∼ 1000 -3000 K (at this temperature, the gas release from the traps becomes effective), we have δR ∼ (8 -23)δT , i.e. even a small error in T can produce a substantial error in the detrapping rates. Thus, to have a reasonable accuracy for R, e.g. δR ≤ 0.25, we must require that δT ≤ 0.01 -0.03, i.e. the temperature field must be reconstructed with the accuracy no worse than several percent. For traps with lower energies, this restriction becomes relaxed, however remains rather stringent. For The schematic representation of the temperature profile in case of the material thermal properties dependent on T . The bounding curves represent the temperature profiles obtained with the thermal properties taken at some constant limiting temperatures T max and T min . eV, one has δR ≤ 0.25, when δT ≤ 0.02 -0.06, which is also below the 10% threshold. The final comment is related to the form of the heat equation. In the general form, it is written as Here, the material density ρ(T ), the specific heat C p (T ), and the thermal conductivity coefficient κ(T ) depend on the temperature, so that the heat equation is, strictly speaking, non-linear. Despite that, it can be cast into a more conventional form resembling the linear heat equation. Indeed, by applying the Kirchhoff transform and introducing the thermal potential θ = κdT = θ(T ), we re-cast Eq. (1) as In this equation g(θ) ≡ θ -1 , ρ = ρ(θ), and C p = C p (θ). By denoting a 2 θ (θ) = 1/(ρC p dg/dθ) as the effective diffusivity for the thermal potential and Q ′ = Q/(ρC p dg/dθ), we straightforwardly re-cast the equation to the linear-like form The derived equation has an important implication. Since it has the form similar to the linear heat equation, in which the thermal properties, κ, C p , ρ, a 2 = κ/(ρC p ) are independent of T , solutions to Eqs. ( Thus to find the analytical solution for the temperature distribution in the sample, we do not need to solve the exact non-linear equation (3). Instead, we can solve Eq. ( To analyze the heat propagation in the sample, we shall use the following linear heat equation for the sample temperature T : Here ρ is the material mass density, C p is the specific heat, and κ is the thermal conductivity of the sample material. In what follows, we shall keep these parameters constant, assuming that they are independent of the sample temperature T . The source Q is the heating source due to the laser irradiation of the sample. The distribution of Q is governed by the Beer-Bouguer-Lambert law, The laser intensity I is the effective intensity of the laser pulse absorbed by the target, taking into the account the reflection of light from the optical elements and the sample surface, i.e. I = I 0 (1 -R), where I 0 is the initial laser pulse intensity, and R is the collective reflection coefficient for the experimental setup. Since I 0 and R can be absorbed into I (they are not used in any other relation other than for I), in what follows we shall keep the above notation for both I and Q. For the spatial distribution of I, we shall use the Gaussian profile where I m is the maximum intensity in the center of the laser spot, r 0 is the effective radius of the spot, and r is the distance from the spot center to the observation point. The effective spot cross-section is given by the relation S = 2π +∞ 0 [I(r)/I m ]rdr = πr 2 0 . The parameter α is the extinction coefficient, defined as where k is the factor associated with the radiation absorption, and λ is the wavelength of the laser light. For the infra-red laser used for LID experiments, having λ = 1064 nm, Hence, we can make the passage to the limit 1/α → 0, and obtain lim 1/α→0 α exp(-αs) = 2δ(s), where δ(s) is the Dirac delta-function (the details of the limit transition are covered in Appendix). The parameter s is the distance measured along the ray, from the surface into the bulk of the sample. The function Y (t) describes the temporal profile of the laser pulse. For LID experiments, it can be assumed to have a trapezoid form, where 0 < ∆ < 1 is the coefficient describing the attenuation of the laser pulse, and H is the Heaviside function. We shall use the cylindrical reference system. The reference point will be located at the laser spot center on the sample surface. The symmetry axis z will be directed normally to the sample surface, which we shall consider flat. The distance r and the angle φ are measured regularly, in the azimuthal plane perpendicular to the axis z. In this reference frame, the sample will be treated as semi-infinite, bounded by the plane z = 0. It will be assumed that the laser light comes to the sample at the normal incidence, so that the distance s in the relation ( where a 2 = κ/(ρC p ) is the thermal diffusivity, P 0 = 2I m /(ρC p ), and we have additionally taken into account the axial symmetry of the temperature profile T = T (r, z, t). The boundary conditions imposed on the temperature profile are: ∂T ∂z (r, 0, t) = 0. The first group of equations describes the thermostat kept at the constant temperature T 0 . The second equation represents the closed boundary, allowing no radiation or other energy sinks at the sample surface. The condition can be imposed not only on the sample surface but also at the thermostat boundary, i.e. ∇T | r,z→∞ = 0, due to the energy conservation condition ∇ • q = 0, implying, in a non-one-dimensional case, the diminishing of the heat flux q = -κ∇T with the distance from the laser irradiated spot on the sample surface. The initial condition is given by To solve Eq. ( The heat equation, boundary and initial conditions are re-cast as The Green's function for the transformed problem is given by the relation (in its writing, the Cartesian representation was used) 53 where x and y are the mutually perpendicular axes in the azimuthal plane. By using the Green's function, the expression for the temperature profile in the integral form can be written as The integration over ζ yields To simplify the obtained relation, we consider an auxiliary integral By introducing the parameters , the exponent argument can be represented as where As a result, we have where where By substituting the relations for I x and I y into Eq. ( By expanding recalling that r 2 = x 2 + y 2 , P 0 = 2I m /(ρC p ), and a = κ/(ρC p ), we finally obtain The derived relation defines the spatial and temporal dependence of the temperature field T . It coincides with the general expression (2.35) given in Ref. 36. In what follows, we shall consider the trapezoid pulse shape profiles and deduce a number of new analytical expressions for the temperature distribution in the sample, other than those covered in Ref. 36. From Ref. 37, the derived expression differs in that it treats the heat transport via the Green's function taking into account the deviation of the thermal front from the spherical shape during the propagation of heat. In comparison to studies that employ the Laplace transform to solve the heat equation, We now recover the well-known expression for the surface temperature in the onedimensional limit. From physical standpoint, the one-dimensional approximation is valid if Hence, the one-dimensional approximation is valid only during the initial stages of the target heating. At larger timescales (e.g. on the order of the LID laser pulse duration), the onedimensional approximation breaks and the heat transfer and temperature dynamics of the target must be treated in the two-dimensional approximation. We re-cast Eq. ( where The obtained relation is, so far, the exact form of the temperature profile. In its deriving, no further assumptions on the pulse temporal shape were made, so it can be equally applied to millisecond or shorter (microsecond, etc.) laser pulses, provided i) the pulse profile is trapezoid, ii) the surface temperature dynamics remains the same (no phase transition, black-body radiation, etc). As a next step, we assess the importance of retaining the dependence of T on the normalized depth λ. From Eq. ( Estimating L ∼ 10 μm, r 0 ∼ 1 mm, t -τ ∼ 1 ms, and using the tungsten thermal properties, one has λ ≳ 16ρ. At larger times, t -τ ∼ 10 ms, the inequality becomes λ ≳ 10 2 ρ. Thus the depth dependence in Eq. ( where As a result, Eq. ( To further simplify the integral relation, we introduce the auxiliary function With its aid, Eq. ( The function F cannot be resolved as a combination of the elementary or special functions, however the power series representation can be obtained. To do that, we expand the exponent in the Taylor series By substituting this relation into (37), after some algebra one finds where The first several polynomial coefficients A n , B n (n = 0 -5) are given below In the opposite, one-dimensional approximation, the general formula ( where Evaluation of the integral yields where s = z/(2a √ t), and erfc(s) is the complementary error function. In the limit ∆ = 0, one has K 1 = 1, K 2 = 0 and G takes the form For the laser spot center (ρ = 0) at times t ≤ t p , we arrive at the know relation 24 It must be emphasized that the relations ( It is also useful to obtain the relation for the maximum temperature T max of the sample. From the integral form of the temperature profile (34), it follows that T max is achieved at the end of the laser pulse. Indeed, for t ≤ t pθ min = 0, θ max ∝ √ t increases with time, and, given that the integrand is positive, the integral grows in time. For t > t p , θ min t→∞ ---→ θ max -0, so that the integral value must diminish with time (the upper and lower bounds tend to each other). Hence, for the maximum temperature of the sample (which is achieved in the center of the laser spot, λ = ρ = 0) we find (60) By using the power series representation (38), (40), this equation is reduced to or, in the explicit dimensional form, In the limit of the small spot radius, r 0 /(2a √ t p ) = α ≪ 1, by retaining terms ∼ α 0 and assuming ∆ < 1, the expression for the maximal sample surface temperature is reduced to i.e., when I m = const, T max is linearly dependent on r 0 and is independent of the pulse duration t p . If the total energy expenditure is conserved in the pulse, i.e. I m r 2 0 = E m = const, then and T max is inversely proportional to r 0 . Similar calculations of T max in the one-dimensional approximation [i.e. by dropping out the θ 2 term in the denominator under the integral sign in (60)] yield As seen, in contrast to the two-dimensional case, T 1D max is independent of r 0 and is proportional to √ t p , when I m = const. For E m = const, one has so that T max grows inversely proportional to r 2 0 . The observed discrepancies between the two limits are the dimensional effect. In the onedimensional approximation, the input energy has only one degree of freedom and flows along a single axis. As a result, for the heat flux q one has q = const. In the two-dimensional case, the energy is redistributed in space. At large distances from the laser spot, as mentioned in Sec. II, the conservation of the energy flow requires that q → 0, since as the total surface, through which the energy flows, grows. For r, z ≫ r 0 , the heated area on the sample surface can be treated as a point, and at large distances from the center of the laser spot, R → ∞, one has q ∝ 1/R 2 R→∞ ---→ 0. In the previous section III, we have obtained the relations for the temperature distribution in the sample, both in quasi-one-and two-dimensional approximations. We now test the derived relations to assess the importance of taking dimensional effects into account and to evaluate the validity of the employed approximations. For the tests, we employ the laser and sample parameters relevant for the LID experiment. Figure The relative error reaching almost 10% in the hot central spot of the pulse found in the 1D case, as mentioned in Sec. II, must have a considerable impact on the desorption dynamics, leading to the overestimation of the gas released from the sample having defects with high trapping energies. Note that the isolines showing the relative error distribution propagate up to the sample surface, where the desorption process starts. This would force the gas desorption and enhance the particle loss from the sample near-surface area. This is in contrast, e.g., to the two-dimensional approximation, which shows the increase of δT with the depth λ rather radius ρ. More details are given in Sec. VI. To further assess the accuracy of the approximations, we reduce the laser spot radius r 0 by around 30%, to r 0 = 0.9 mm. Such a spot radius corresponds to the spot cross-section S = 2.5 mm 2 . The temperature profiles, found in this case by using the previous set of laser and material properties, are shown in Fig. The distributions shown in Fig. As seen, in the 1D case the relative error δT becomes smaller, compared to the case shown in Fig. Since the applicability limit for the one-dimensional approximation is r 0 ≫ l h = 2a √ t, we can expect the increase of the relative error δT for the 1D case as time progresses beyond the pulse duration. Fig. The results are shown in Fig. The demonstrated results were based on using the linear heat equation. However, the thermal properties of the sample depend on the temperature and the sample composition (e.g. metallic films re-deposited on the samples can have thermal properties deviating from the pure material characteristics). In addition, the light absorption by the sample may vary depending on the surface condition, temperature, etc. All these factors can affect the reconstructed temperature distribution in the sample. For these reasons, in what follows we shall perform the sensitivity analysis of the derived results to uncertainties in the transport properties of the sample. As mentioned in Sec. II, we can expect the temperature dynamics governed by the nonlinear heat equation to be bounded by the solutions obtained with the linear heat equation and a set of sample thermal properties taken at two limiting temperatures. Previously, Sec. IV, we have seen that alterations of the material properties with the temperature can lead to noticeable variations between the obtained temperature profiles, up to 10%, cf. the maximal temperatures in Figs. As seen in the figures, the relative error between the pairs of temperature fields does not exceed 5% in the central region of the laser spot, where the temperature takes the highest values and the desorption rates are expected to take the highest values. This error bar complies with the one introduced in Sec. II, indicating that the heat transfer in tungsten can be evaluated by taking the thermal properties of the metal at the constant temperature of 2400 K. Another source of uncertainty is the dynamics of light absorption by the target material. The light emitted by the laser and hitting the sample is partially reflected from the surface. The reflectivity depends on the target temperature, Finally, another source of uncertainty is the depth of the laser light penetration into the sample surface. The extinction coefficient, α, depends not only on the wavelength of the light, but also on the material properties and surface condition (roughness, presence of impurities, etc.). Hence, variations in α may be expected during an actual laser pulse. However, these differences must play a role on short timescales, when the thermal conduction length l h = 2a √ t is smaller or comparable to the attenuation length 1/α, i.e. 2a √ tα ≲ 1 or t ≲ 1/(4a 2 α). For tungsten at T = 1000 K, we have a 2 = 4.3 × 10 -5 m 2 /s, 1/α ≈ 8 nm, and t ∼ 50 μs ≪ t p . Thus, for the laser pulses characteristic for the LID technique, the extinction length for the laser radiation can be taken as infinitely small. As a final test for the demonstrated results, we assess how different approximations for the sample temperature affect the particle desorption dynamics. To describe the particle transport in the sample, we use the set of reaction-diffusion equations for the solute, u, and trapped, y, tritium concentration where D 0 = 4×10 -7 m 2 /s is the diffusion pre-exponent, E d is the diffusion activation energy, ν = 10 13 s -1 is the Debye frequency, u m and y m are the maximum solute and trapped tritium concentrations, respectively, E b is the trap binding energy. The temperature T is evaluated by using either the quasi-one-dimensional (55) or the two-dimensional (38) approximations. The diffusion is considered in the semi-infinite sample, with the material-vacuum boundary located at z = 0 (the reference system for the problem is the same as for the heat transport problem). The sample thickness is L. The boundary conditions imposed on u are u(r, 0, t) = 0, ∂u ∂r r=R = ∂u ∂r r=0 = ∂u ∂z z=L = 0, where R is the radial size of the considered domain. The initial conditions are u(r, z, 0) = 0, y(r, z, 0) = y m , corresponding to the film of the thickness L, completely filled with tritium in the traps. The system (67)-( The total number of particles desorbed from the sample under laser irradiation, N des , found in simulations, are summarized in Table For the laser beam with the medium values of the laser spot radius, r 0 = 1.0 mm, the discrepancies between values of N des grow by approximately 3-4 times. For low-energy traps, the deviation between two limits remains rather small, not exceeding ≈ 16%. The number of particles released from the traps with the large binding energy differ by 42%. The situation completely changes in case of the small-radius laser spot, r 0 = 0.5 mm. In this case, even for low-energy traps, E b = 0.5 eV, the difference between two values of N des in the one-and two-dimensional approximations reaches 66 %. For high-energy traps, the difference increases up to 251 %, i.e. to an almost four-fold ratio. Thus, from the demonstrated results, it is clearly seen that one-dimensional approximation is applicable only in case of the sample irradiation by the laser beam with a sufficiently large radius. For small-radius beams, the application of the one-dimensional approximation can lead to large errors in the temperature fields, resulting in significant errors in the number of particles desorbed from the sample under irradiation, compared to the full twodimensional approach. As a result, the dimensional effects must be taken into account to accurately resolve the particle desorption dynamics under sample irradiation by focused laser beams. In this study, we have analyzed the conditions, under which the temperature field dynamics in a sample under laser pulse irradiation characteristic for the LID diagnostic can be treated either within quasi-one-dimensional or two-dimensional approximations. The qualitative consideration of the heat propagation in the sample was given. The analysis showed that if the laser spot radius is comparable to the heat diffusion length on the laser pulse timescale, the heat transport in the sample should be treated by taking the dimensional effects into account. The rigorous mathematical analysis of the problem allowed obtaining both one-and twodimensional representations of the temperature profile resolved in time. By using these relations, it was demonstrated that depending on the laser spot radius the temperature distributions in the sample taken in the two opposite limits may differ from each other. Herein the one-dimensional approximation for the temperature profile overestimates T , and the discrepancies with the two-dimensional limit grow as the spot radius is diminished. For the test problem of tungsten heated by a laser pulse, The sensitivity analysis of the derived relations to experimental uncertainties in the values of the material thermal properties, radiation absorption and reflection parameters was performed. It was shown that for modeling temperature dynamics of the irradiated sample during LID the values of the material thermal properties defined at some intermediate temperature between the maximum and minimum temperatures of the target can be chosen. For tungsten, this temperature was estimated as ≈ 2400 K. Herein the obtained temperature profile deviated from the distributions, obtained by using the tungsten thermal properties at the limiting temperatures of 1000 K and 3000 K, did not exceed 5%. Finally, the derived relations were applied to modeling tritium desorption dynamics from a sample, characterized by two different trap binding energies, E b = 0.5, 2 eV. It was demonstrated that in case of the sample irradiation by a laser beam with the large radius r 0 = 1.5 mm yielded the comparable amounts of tritium desorbed from the sample. The deviation between the found values of N des did not exceed 15%. With the decrease of the laser spot radius to r 0 = 0.5 mm, the discrepancies between the values of the total number of particles desorbed from the sample increased. For traps with low binding energies, E b = 0.5 eV, the difference between two measures reached ≈ 66%. In case of traps with a large binding energy, E b = 2 eV, the total number of desorbed particles in the quasi-one-dimensional approximation was higher than its two-dimensional counterpart by almost 3.5 times, indicating the importance of accurately resolving the temperature profiles in sample irradiated by focused laser beams. Herein it can be envisaged that in the rigorous one-dimensional approximation the total number of particles desorbed from the sample will be overestimated even further compared to the quasi-one-dimensional approach due to the estimation of the desorption rates at distances r > 0 with the temperature profile in the center of the laser spot. Thus, accounting for the dimensional effects in the description of the particle release from the sample under pulsed laser irradiation is of high importance for the successful interpretation of the LID diagnostic data.