The tradeoff between precision and performance in molecular simulations can nowadays be addressed by machine-learned force fields (MLFF), which combine ab initio accuracy with force field numerical efficiency. Different from conventional force fields however, incorporating relevant electronic degrees of freedom into MLFFs becomes important. Here, we implement an equivariant transformer that embeds molecular net charge and spin state without additional neural network parameters. The model trained on a singlet/triplet non-correlated CH2 dataset can identify different spin states and shows state-of-the-art extrapolation capability. Therein, self-attention sensibly captures non-local effects, which, as we show, can be finely tuned over the network hyper-parameters. We indeed found that Softmax activation functions utilised in the self-attention mechanism of graph networks outperformed ReLU-like functions in prediction accuracy. Increasing the attention temperature from τ = √ d to √ 2d further improved the extrapolation capability, indicating a weighty role of nonlocality. Additionally, a weight initialisation method was purposed that sensibly accelerated the training process. The need to expand the scope of molecular dynamics simulations has accelerated the resolution of the historical tradeoff between accuracy and efficiency in calculating interatomic forces. Attention temperature In this section, we detail key CMRET componets, i.e., embedding, radial basis function (RBF), interaction block, and output layer. The CMRET net takes atomic numbers and Cartesian coordinates as input. To achieve a wavefunction representation, the total charge and total spin are supplemented as vector feature prior to embedding. The network overview scheme is shown in Figure The embedding layer first maps the atomic number z to the ground state electron configuration (from 1s orbital to 7f orbital) x embedded of the element, which then is passed through a linear layer, i.e., s ∈ R Natom×F is the scalar feature of the included atoms, in which F is the number of atomic features (defaulting to 128). R Figure Two different radial basis functions are implemented in CMRET: a Bessel type where d cut is the cut-off radius, d ij = ∥⃗ r ij ∥ = ∥⃗ r i -⃗ r j ∥ is the pair-wise distance between atom i and atom j, and n is an integer number n ∈ [1, N basis ]. The Gaussian type RBF is defined as where β n and μ n are trainable parameters: all β values are initialised as ( N basis 2 ) 2 (1e -dcut ) -2 and μ n ∈ {μ 1 , μ 2 , μ 3 , ..., μ N basis } in which for ∀i, j ∥μ i -μ j ∥ = (1-e -dcut )/N basis as initial values. The value of N basis defaults to 50 in CMRET. A cosine cut-off function, i.e., is operated onto the RBF to create the edge feature as The attention mechanism, discussed below, allows for non-linear mixing of the basis functions relative to the basis vectors of the coordinate frames, allowing to naturally incorporating an angular dependency. The attention layer follows the design of scaled dot-product self-attention 21 mechanism, i.e., where σ is the attention activation function and τ is the attention temperature (τ > 0). A multi-head attention mechanism is also implemented in our model (4 heads as default). This module is parallel to the scalar-level message-passing block (i.e., CFConv block), which is expected to capture the long-range interactions outside the cut-off range defined in Equation (4). In the normal continuous-filter convolution introduced in SchNet, where ⊙ represents the element-wise product, ∥ is the concatenation operator over feature dimension, and A cutoff function φ is used to smooth the potential. Scalar features s 1 , s 2 and s 3 are generated by equally splitting s. The Interaction block utilises an equivariant topology similar to Torchmd-NET 10 when updating the scalar feature and vector feature. However, instead of filling the initial vector feature ⃗ V 0 ∈ R Natom×3×F with zero matrix elements, we embed the information of molecular net charge and spin into the feature: where ⃗ 1 is an all-one matrix. The atomic interaction is separated into local interaction (modified continuous-filter convolution) and non-local interaction (self-attention). The visualised scheme is shown in Figure where ⟨a, b⟩ is the inner product between a and b. Then y i = ResM L(∆s i ). The updated vector feature ∆⃗ v i is where are the weights of linear layers. In our model, we used 6 Interaction layers (T = 6), unless otherwise specified. The output layer consists of three parts: a layer normalisation 23 block, a series of Gated Equivariant 9 blocks (default to use 2 blocks) and two fully connected layers mapping atomic feature number F → 1, i.e., For the pure scalar feature (e.g., total energy, ε HOMO ), the output is simply E = all i s out i ( ⃗ F = -∇E if the forces are required). The electronic spatial extent is where ⃗ r 0 = 1 all i zi all i z i ⃗ r i is the charge centre. The computations of tensor features employ the vector output ⃗ v out from the model. For the calculation of dipole moment, the output is defined as The isotropic polarisability is computed as where ⊗ stands for the outer product, and I 3 is the 3 × 3 identity matrix. A singlet/triplet CH 2 dataset containing 2,000 data points was generated based on DFT calculations at B3LYP The model can be trained on both scalar and vector features, if vector features exist in the dataset. The training loss is defined as where Ŝ and ⃗ V are labelled scalar and labelled vector properties, respectively. The optimiser is Adam 26 with β 1 = 0.9, β 2 = 0.999 and ε = 10 -8 . We found that AMSGrad 27 strategy had negative effect on training results. A cyclic learning rate scheduler 28 (cycle momentum=False) is utilised to guide the learning rate for 2 cycles: during the first cycle the learning rate range was [10 -6 , 10 -4 ], which in the second cycle was reduced to A weight initialisation strategy was developed to stabilise and fasten the training process. We initialised the filter network in CFConv (W e1 and W e2 ) with an uniform distribution, in which the values were chosen between -6/N basis and 6/N basis . All the remaining linear layers before a SiLU activation function were initialised with a normal distribution with μ = 0 and σ = 3/2F . Learning molecular data entails encoding equilibrium geometries as well as not-equilibrium geometries, which can be systematically obtained from molecular dynamics simulation protocols. The reliable prediction of energies and forces sensibly depends on the sensitivity of the learning framework to changes in molecular internal coordinates. To disentangle the contribution of attention layer from output layer, we first performed an ablation of those component individually from the CMRET network, followed by a focused investigation on the role of activation function (σ in Figure We evaluated the effects of attention layer and the structure of output layer on the extrapolation capability of the model on the singlet/triplet carbene dataset. Eliminating the attention layer had a negative effect on the prediction accuracy when the H-C-H was larger than 165°(Figure We tested the performance of our model on singlet/triplet CH 2 set on applying different activation functions in the attention layer, including Softmax (softmax function operating on the last dimension), Softmax2d (softmax function operating on the last two dimensions), and a range of ReLU-like smooth and continuous functions: Swish, From this test we concluded that Softmax function in the attention mechanism improves prediction accuracy, compared to ReLU-like functions. Increasing the attention temperature to τ = √ 2d promotes the generalisation capability of the trained model. We observed that even with more trainable parameters, the multi-head attention models with τ = √ d did not outperform the single-head models. Swish Softmax Softplus GELU Mish Multi-head attention Table The geometries of the molecules in the MD17 dataset were generated via molecular dynamics (MD). While force prediction is improved compared for example to SchNet, it remains slightly inferior to other models on this dataset, in particular for low-symmetry molecules like salicylic acid and its acetylated form, aspirin. The unit of energy is kcal/mol. The unit of force is kcal/mol/ Å. The ISO17 dataset contains MD trajectories of 127 different C 7 O 2 H 10 molecules. The results for known molecules in unknown conformations largely mirror the observation made above for the MD17 dataset, placing CMRET below SchNet on the MAE scale. However, CMRET can much more reliably extrapolate from known to unknown molecules, a feature that is rapidly deteriorating in SchNet and PhysNet. The DES370K dataset 30 consists of 370,959 dimer (charged or neutral) geometries labelled with a series of dimer interaction energies (unit in kcal/mol) calculated at CCSD(T)/CBS level of accuracy. A random sample of 80% of the geometries formed the training set, while the remaining 20% constituted the testing set. We only trained our model on the total CCSD(T) interaction energies (labelled as 'cc CCSD(T) all' in the dataset). Predicted values vs. labelled values are plotted in In this work, we introduced a method to embed molecular net charge and spin without adding network parameters, which can be applied to any equivariant neural network that utilizes vector features (e.g., PAINN, 9 Torchmd-NET, 10 etc.). The purposed model CMRET, employing a modified continuous-filter convolution, achieved higher prediction accuracy on several subset of MD17 and QM9 dataset than recent state-of-the-art models. We showed the importance of selecting proper activation functions and attention temperatures in the self-attention mechanism of the equivariant transformer. We found that a Softmax-based self-attention outperformed a series of ReLU-like functions, deviating from previous works (P. Thölke et al CMRET does not introduce any a priori angular dependency via specific functions. An angular sensitivity is rather achieved via non-linear mixing of the basis functions in the coordinate frames by means of the attention mechanism. The latter allows to capture long-range interaction outside of the cut-off range that informs the creation of edge features. The CMRET network is expected to provide a robust starting point for the study of molecular ensembles, with the explicit inclusion of spin states, as well as periodic solids with spin polarisation. As shown in this work, the spin embedding strategy can be easily transferred to other approaches, including its good extrapolation/transferability behaviour, for comparison and further model development. The superior extrapolation capabilities as well as the flexible learning of intra-and inter-molecular interactions from atomic coordinates, lends CMRET good flexibility for navigating molecular and periodic solid landscapes. The extrapolation capability was limited when the training data was highly correlated, e.g., in short MD trajectories. To reduce the computational complexity, we did not implement higher order message passing in this work. The question whether higher order messages benefit this specific equivariant architecture will be studied in a future work. Access to computational facilities were provided by Supercomputing Wales. All calculations were performed on (Hawk ) at Cardiff University. We thank the Leverhulme Trust for support under Project No. RPG-2020-052. The DFT and HF calculations were preformed via the PySCF 37 package. Our model CMRET is implemented in Py-Torch Testing results on QM9 dataset (metric: MAE). Data of SchNet, DimeNet++, PAINN and Torchmd-NET are from P. Thölke et al . 10 Data of MACE were taken from D.P. Kovacs et al . 35 It took 7 days per task to train our model on single V100 GPU. The best results are in bold. Calculated properties: μ dipole moment; α isotropic polarizability; ε HOMO , ε LUMO energies of HOMO and LUMO, respectively; ∆ε HOMO-LUMO gap; ⟨R 2 ⟩ electronic spatial extent; ZPVE Zero Point Vibrational Energy; U 0 internal energy at 0 K; U, H, G, C v internal energy, enthalpy, free energy and heat capacity at 298.15 K, respectively.