Incorporating both gain and loss into electromagnetic systems provides possibilities to engineer effects in unprecedented ways. Concerning electromagnetic effects in isotropic media that have concurrently electric and magnetic responses, there is in fact a degree of freedom to distribute the gain and loss in different effective material parameters. In this paper, we analytically scrutinize wave interactions with those media, and, most importantly, we contemplate the extreme scenario where such media are anti-Hermitian. Considering various conditions for excitation, polarization, and geometry, we uncover important effects and functionalities such as lasing into both surface waves and propagating waves, conversion of evanescent source fields to transmitted propagating waves, full absorption, and enhancing backward to forward scattering ratio. We hope that these findings explicitly show the potential of anti-Hermiticity to be used in optical physics as well as microwave engineering for creating and using unconventional wave phenomena. Non-Hermitian systems have recently engrossed considerable attention in quantum and classical physics In this paper, we thoroughly investigate electromagnetic wave interactions with anti-Hermitian media and objects. We examine various electromagnetic effects by studying interfaces, slabs with a back mirror, and spherical inclusions, and, also, by taking different polarizations and excitations into account. We demonstrate that as a result of anti-Hermiticity with nonzero gain and loss, the fundamental properties of evanescent and uniform plane waves dramatically change, which engenders interesting wave phenomena including a lasing effect of creating surface waves (as well as propagating plane waves), full polarization conversion, perfect matching and absorption, polarization selectivity, and large backward to forward scattering ratio for small inclusions. The paper is organized as follows: Section II concentrates on the problems mainly associated with planar geometries (interfaces, slabs, and metasurfaces), and Section III considers wave interactions with anti-Hermitian spherical particles. Section IV concludes the paper. We start by considering a planar interface between free space (x < 0) and an anti-Hermitian half-space (x > 0) characterized by the relative material parameters in which χ is a real-valued quantity and j is the imaginary unit, see Fig. These reflection coefficients are defined as ratios of the tangential components of electric fields for TE polarization and of magnetic fields for TM polarization. Here, are the normal components of the wave vectors in the free space and anti-Hermitian half-spaces, respectively, k z is the transverse wave vector component, k 0 = ω √ ε 0 μ 0 represents the free-space wavenumber and n = |χ| is the refractive index of the anti-Hermitian medium. The upper sign in Eq. ( In our study, we always assume k z to be real, meaning that the incident, reflected, and transmitted waves propagate in the z-direction. Depending on the value of k z , the normal components of the wave vectors k 1x and k 2x are either real, corresponding to a propagating wave, or imaginary, corresponding to an evanescent wave along the x-direction. Accordingly, this defines four different cases: An incident propagating or evanescent wave in free space can be transformed into a propagating or evanescent wave in the anti-Hermitian medium. Based on Eq. (2), it is clear that if both k 1x and k 2x are either real or imaginary, the magnitude of the reflection factor r TE,TM is unity for both polarizations. An interesting consequence is the fact that in the case of propagating incident and transmitted waves, although the interface shows full reflection, there is propagation without attenuation into the anti-Hermitian medium. Thus, the propagating wave in the anti-Hermitian medium should not carry power, and the time-averaged Poynting vector needs to be zero. For deeper understanding, we write the TE polarized fields as E = E y e -j(k2xx+kzz) ây and H = (E y /(ωμ 0 μ r ))e -j(k2xx+kzz) (-k z âx + k 2x âz ) and calculate the time-averaged Poynting vector which is ultimately given by where Re[...] and Im[...] are the real and imaginary parts of the expression inside brackets. Equation (3) explicitly confirms that the averaged power density in the anti-Hermitian medium indeed vanishes if k 2x is real-valued. Interestingly, according to Eq. ( If an incident evanescent wave in free space is transformed into a propagating plane wave in the anti-Hermitian medium or vice versa, i.e., k 1x and k 2x are not both real or both imaginary, the reflection factor Eq. ( Let us first assume the case of an evanescent-wave excitation in free space that is transformed into a propagating transmitted wave in the anti-Hermitian medium, meaning that k 0 < k z < |χ|k 0 . We will denote this case as e → p. It follows that k 2x is real and positive, and z -k 2 0 is purely imaginary, where the negative sign ensures decaying fields for x → ∞. Using Eq. ( We immediately see that the reflection factor Eq. ( the reflection factor is zero if χ is positive and has a pole if χ is negative. In the case of zero reflection, the interface shows the remarkable property of perfectly matching an evanescent, exponentially decaying wave to a propagating wave with a constant amplitude. This is not possible using conventional dielectric media, where the reflection coefficient is always of magnitude one in such a case. Moreover, considering a TM polarized wave, the electric field is in general elliptically polarized in free space but linearly polarized in the anti-Hermitian medium, meaning that this interface allows a lossless transformation between elliptical and linear polarizations. This case is illustrated in Fig. On the other hand, in the case of infinite reflection, the interface acts as a laser creating evanescent waves that exponentially decay into vacuum. In other words, an evanescent incident wave matching the condition Eq. ( We confirm these results with a numerical simulation performed with the software tool COMSOL Multiphysics, see Fig. Let us continue with the case of an evanescent-wave excitation that is also evanescent in the anti-Hermitian medium, i.e., k z > k 0 and k z > |χ|k 0 , which we denote as e → e. Both normal components of the wavevectors in free space and the anti-Hermitian medium are negative imaginary and we find the reflection factor for TE polarization as which has unit magnitude. As stated above, inside the anti-Hermitian medium propagating waves do not carry power, but evanescent waves do, which is opposite to the behavior in free space. Consequently, the evanescent wave in free space carries power along the z-direction (the propagation direction), whereas the evanescent wave in the medium carries power along the x-direction (the evanescent direction). For TE polarization, the timeaveraged Poynting vector in the medium given by Eq. ( However, there is an apparent contradiction: Both incident and reflected waves are evanescent and hence, on their own, do not carry power along the x-direction. But inside the medium, depending on the sign of χ, power is flowing in +x-or -x-direction, and due to the continuity of the x-component of the Poynting vector at the interface, there must be a nonzero x-component of the Poynging vector in free space. But how can power flow in the x-direction in free space? The answer lies in the phase of the reflection factor. By superimposing forward and backward evanescent waves, the latter with a phase shift of φ as seen in Eq. ( Numerical simulation results for χ = ±2 for TE polarization are shown in Fig. The case of a propagating incident wave has been discussed in some detail in the literature If the transmitted wave is evanescent, denoted as p → e, k 1x is real and positive and This situation can take place only for |χ| < 1 and for angles of incidence larger than the critical angle of total internal reflection θ c = arcsin (|χ|). The reflection factor Eq. ( and it is always larger than unity for positive χ (μ r gainy) and smaller than unity for negative χ (μ r lossy). As a result, the interface shows gain for positive χ and loss for negative χ, the underlying reason of which was already discussed for the case e → e. Further, the timeaveraged Poynting vector in Eq. ( the propagating to evanescent regime and hence there is no lasing or perfect absorption possible. Finally, the reflection factors for TE and TM polarizations for the four different combinations of incident and transmitted waves are summarized in Table Next, we consider a slab of thickness d, infinitely extended in y-and z-directions, filled by an anti-Hermitian medium. The volume x < -d is free space, and there is a perfect electric conductor (PEC) boundary at x = 0, see Fig. Following an analogous analysis for TM polarization, where we make a field Ansatz for the y-component of the magnetic field and calculate the electric field from ∇ × H = jωε 0 ε r E, we find the amplitude reflection factor Comparing Eqs. (8 and 9), it is evident that fields of TE and TM polarizations behave fundamentally differently in this system. The simple conversion rule between polarization states by changing the sign of χ as in the interface problem is no longer valid, which is because the symmetry of TE and TM polarizations is broken by the PEC boundary. If the incident wave is evanescent (k 1x imaginary), the reflection factor for both TE and TM polarization always has magnitude one, which can be easily verified from Eqs. For grazing incidence k z → k 0 , there are exotic points in the reflection factors for specific values of χ, where the infinite and zero reflection curves intersect. To understand this effect, let us see when the reflection factor for TE polarization Eq. ( where the plus sign is for a pole and the minus sign is for a null. If we assume χ to be finite and not equal to one, we see that the right-hand side of Eq. ( Note that the tangent term tends to both plus and minus infinity at these points, which means that they simultaneously correspond to nulls and poles, according to Eq. Simulation results for a TM polarized plane wave incident under an angle of θ 1 = 10.64 • on the slab for k 0 d = 2 and χ = ±0.06 are shown in Fig. Let us next discuss illumination of a PEC-backed layer by a normally incident wave with k z = 0, meaning that k 1x = k 0 and k 2x = |χ|k 0 . We find the reflection factors from Eqs. where sgn[χ] = |χ|/χ and δ = k 0 d|χ|. For positive values of χ, the reflection factors diverge when δ = (4m+1)π/4, where m = 0, 1, 2. . . . Accordingly, by assuming that χ ≫ 1, the divergence of both R TE and R TM can take place for m = 0 resulting in k 0 d = (π/4χ) ≪ 1, which means that the slab is electrically very thin as compared to λ = 2π/k 0 . If the slab is located in free space, similar divergence of R TE and R TM holds at resonances, and the corresponding value k 0 d = (π/2χ) which grant lasing from the metasurface in the normal direction. In practice, an anti-Hermitian metasurface can be realized as a dense array of small resonant electric and magnetic scatterers. The electric or magnetic gain in them can be offered by some pumping, whereas purely lossy magnetic or electric response arises at the Lorentzian resonance naturally. We have hitherto discussed how to realize anti-Hermitian metasurface lasing in broadside direction. However, one can generalize this theory also for oblique incidence and find poles of the reflection coefficients also for other angles. Concerning this scenario, first, by equating the denominators in Eqs. ( The interaction of light with objects having spherical symmetry, as depicted in Fig. and Here, C sca and C ext are the scattering and extinction cross sections, respectively. The electric and magnetic Mie coefficients appearing in these expressions are given as functions of the primary parameters of the sphere by The Riccati-Bessel functions ψ n and ξ n are expressed as by using the ordinary spherical Bessel (j n ) and Hankel (h n ) functions. It is worth noticing that in the electrical engineering convention that we use in this paper, the Hankel functions of second kind with an asymptotic form exp(-jρ)/ρ as ρ → ∞ must be employed for outgoing spherical waves. Based on these formulas, Fig. Let us investigate how the anti-Hermitian characteristic affects the backward to forward scattering ratio Q b /Q f for optically small particles. At small values of x, we use the dipole approximation, retaining only the terms n = 1. By employing the Taylor expansion of spherical Bessel and Hankel functions, we infer that a 1 = -(2x 3 /3j)(ε r -1)/(ε r + 2) and b 1 = -(2x 3 /3j)(μ r -1)/(μ r + 2). If we substitute these expressions into the ratio given by Q see, e.g., Ref. This is the so-called second Kerker condition If μ r = 1, then ε r = 1 which means that for dipolar non-magnetic spheres zero forward scattering is not possible even for active particles. It was shown that active dielectric scatterers usually provide higher values of Q b /Q f , but this occurs for only larger values of x Another interesting feature in Fig. This work contemplates electromagnetic effects in anti-Hermitian objects with planar and spherical geometries. We have shown the behaviour of both evanescent and propagating plane waves incident on an interface between free space and an anti-Hermitian medium. If incident and transmitted waves are of the same kind (both evanescent or both propagating), the reflection factor is of magnitude one. However, if the a propagating wave is transformed into an evanescent wave or vice versa, both lasing and perfect absorption can occur, depending on the polarization and the sign of the anti-Hermitian parameter. In the lasing case, the lasing mode in free space is an evanescent (propagating) wave for an evanescent (propagating) incident wave. This phenomenon allows for a novel type of thin-layer laser, if the anti-Hermitian medium slab is terminated by an impedance boundary matched to the wave impedance. Of special interest is a possibility of a thin anti-Hermitian sheet creating an evanescent surface lasing mode that is tightly bound to the interface. Another interesting scenario is an anti-Hermitian slab backed by a PEC mirror. We have found that such a slab can act both as a laser and perfect absorber, depending on the slab thickness, polarization of the incident wave, and sign of the anti-Hermitian parameter. For TM polarization, lasing and absorption can seemingly occur at arbitrarily low values of the anti-Hermitian parameter, which is of paramount practical interest. Furthermore, the anti-Hermitian slab can be reduced to a metasurface, allowing for lasing or perfect absorption at an arbitrarily thin anti-Hermitian sheet. Finally, scattering of light by an anti-Hermitian sphere using Mie theory was studied. Within the parameter range analyzed here, the sphere always exhibits gain. This means that, even though microscopically the gain and loss in the medium are balanced, a macroscopic object like a sphere shows an overall gain. Moreover, for small sphere sizes, the backward to forward scattering ratio diverges for χ close to √ 2, which is due to the forward scattering exhibiting a local minimum. Compared to a conventional small dielectric sphere with refractive index of √ 2, the forward scattering in an anti-Hermitian sphere is strongly suppressed.