The adsorption/desorption of ethene (C2H4), also commonly known as ethylene, on Fe3O4(001) was studied under ultrahigh vacuum conditions using temperature programmed desorption (TPD), scanning tunneling microscopy, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and density functional theory (DFT) based computations. To interpret the TPD data, we have employed a new analysis method based on equilibrium thermodynamics. C2H4 adsorbs intact at all coverages and interacts most strongly with surface defects such as antiphase domain boundaries and Fe adatoms. On the regular surface, C2H4 binds atop surface Fe sites up to a coverage of 2 molecules per (√2×√2)R45° unit cell, with every second Fe occupied. A desorption energy of 0.36 eV is determined by analysis of the TPD spectra at this coverage, which is approximately 0.1-0.2 eV lower than the value calculated by DFT+U with van der Waals corrections. Additional molecules are accommodated in between the Fe rows. These are stabilized by attractive interactions with the molecules adsorbed at Fe sites. The total capacity of the surface for C2H4 adsorption is found to be close to 4 molecules per (√2×√2)R45° unit cell. Iron oxides are some of the most abundant materials on earth. Their primary usage is as a feedstock for the steel industry, but their low toxicity, natural abundance, and magnetic properties make them popular in many applications. In catalysis, iron oxides serve as an active component for processes such as Fischer-Tropsch synthesis and the water-gas shift reaction In recent years the field of "single-atom catalysis" (SAC) has emerged as an intensely studied topic in catalysis research, and iron oxides continue to be a common choice of support material Nevertheless, it is often labelled FeOx to reflect that the oxide, and especially its surface, is reduced when the catalyst is activated by heating in CO or H2. In recent years, we have utilized Fe3O4(001) as a model support to study fundamental processes in single-atom catalysis. This work is enabled by a (√2×√2)R45° surface reconstruction, based on an ordered array of subsurface interstitials and vacancies To date, one of the major applications of SAC has been the hydrogenation of alkenes This reaction is usually catalyzed by coordination complexes in solution. The heterogenization of reactions currently performed by homogeneous catalysts is a particularly exciting target for SAC research In this paper, we study how the simplest alkene, C2H4, interacts with the Fe3O4(001) surface. This work follows up on a recent study by Lee et al., The experiments were performed on natural Fe3O4(001) crystals (6×6×1 mm, SurfaceNet GmbH). The samples were prepared in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) by cycles of sputtering followed by annealing at 923 K for 20 min. For the STM experiment we used 10 minutes of 1 keV Ar + sputtering with a target current of 0.8 μA. For the TPD/XPS experiments we used 10 minutes of 1 keV Ne + sputtering with a target current of 1 μA. After every other cycle, the sample was oxidised by exposure to O2 during annealing (2×10 -6 mbar O2, 20 min), which leads to the growth of a pristine Fe3O4(001) surface by migration of interstitial Fe from the sample bulk to the surface Two separate UHV setups were used to carry out the experiments. The STM data were acquired in a two-vessel UHV chamber consisting of a preparation chamber (p < 10 ˗10 mbar) and an analysis chamber (p < 2×10 ˗11 mbar). The analysis chamber is equipped with a Tribus STM head (Sigma Surface Science) and a low-noise in-vacuum preamplifier The TPD and XPS spectra were obtained in a second vacuum system optimized to study the surface chemistry of single-crystal metal-oxide samples. The samples are mounted on a Ta backplate using Ta clips, with a thin Au sheet in between to aid the thermal contact. The sample is cooled using a liquid-He flow cryostat, and can be counter heated to the dosing temperature (60 K) or higher temperatures via resistive heating of the Ta backplate The Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) was used for all DFT calculations Convergence is achieved when an electronic energy step of 10 -6 eV is obtained, and forces acting on ions smaller than 0.02 eV/Å, with the plane-wave basis cutoff energy set to 550 eV. Note that the SCV reconstruction is oxidized with respect to bulk Fe3O4, and that all Fe in the outermost 4 layers are Fe 3+ like. Consequently, there is a small bandgap in the surface layers. The Fe3O4 bulk also exhibits a small bandgap in our setup, and thus represents the sub-Verwey transition (<125 K) phase The average adsorption energy per C2H4 molecule is computed according to the formula where E is the total energy of the Fe3O4(001) surface with adsorbed C2H4, E is the total energy of the clean Fe3O4(001) surface, the E represents the energy of the C2H4 molecule in the gas phase, and n is the number of C2H4 molecules. The average adsorption energy corresponds to the stability of the system and is used as a search criterion to determine the lowest-energy configuration for a given coverage. However, the average adsorption energy is not what is observed experimentally in a TPD experiment. Rather, the peaks in TPD correspond to the energy required to remove the most weakly bound molecule from a given configuration, i.e., the differential adsorption energy. We define the differential adsorption energy accordingly to equation (2): where we assume the system starts with the lowest-energy configuration for n molecules, and the nondesorbing molecules are able to freely relax and reach the new n -1 lowest-energy configuration without hindrance (such as barriers). This assumption should be fulfilled, since the rearrangement of the remaining molecules is limited to rotations and minor relaxations; no major rearrangement is necessary. The calculated C 1s core-level binding energies are calculated in the final state approximation Figure The peaks at higher temperatures, labelled γ-η, originate from the first monolayer. We also observe a desorption signal at 215 K that is already present for zero nominal dose, and does not saturate with increasing coverage. Tests showed that C2H4 desorbs from the Ta backplate at this temperature, so we conclude this to be an experimental artifact originating primarily from adsorption of C2H4 outside the beam spot due to a slight increase of the C2H4 partial pressure during the TPD series. Consequently, we subtracted the spectrum for zero dose from all other datasets shown in Fig. The TPD data for the lowest exposure performed (0.3 molecules per unit cell, which corresponds to 0.075 molecules per surface Fe atom) already contains the η peak at ≈160 K, and the onset of the ζ shoulder. Given the low coverage, these peaks must correspond to defects on the Fe3O4(001) surface. The η peak exhibits the typical behavior for a strongly binding defect site, saturating already at a low coverage and remaining at this intensity as the coverage is increased. The ζ shoulder around 130 K is peculiar for two reasons. First, it exhibits different intensities for different samples. In Figure The ε peak emerges at 115-120 K and shifts to lower temperatures with increasing coverage, eventually saturating with a maximum at 110-115 K for a coverage of 2.2 (±0.2) C2H4 per unit cell. Next, two very sharp peaks, δ and γ, emerge, which saturate close to 3.0 (±0.3) and 4.1 (±0.4) C2H4 per unit cell, respectively. As the coverage increases there is non-zero desorption rate which rapidly shifts to lower coverage (typical for a compression close to monolayer coverage), before the onset of the multilayer peaks. The multilayer region contains two peaks, α and β. The β peak emerges first (blue curves in the inset in Fig. 40. The procedure is based on equilibrium thermodynamics, and builds on the approach pioneered by Kreuzer et al. are equal. The chemical potential of the gas phase can be easily calculated, that of the adsorbates depends on the adsorption energy and the configurational and vibrational entropy of the adsorbate. This allows us to determine the adsorption energies. In our TPD analysis, the adsorbates are treated as a lattice gas (diffusion barrier well above kBT) on a surface containing a distribution of different adsorption sites. As the analysis is based on equilibrium thermodynamics, it requires that adsorbate diffusion is much faster than desorption, to establish equilibrium between the adsorbates. This condition is usually fulfilled for nearby adsorption sites, but not necessarily for different surface areas with a large separation, i.e., large domains or crystallites with different structure. The analysis does not explicitly take interactions between adsorbates into account; nevertheless, short-range repulsion is modelled as the occupation of sites with steadily weaker adsorption energy as the coverage increases. Our model does not include attractive interactions. These are usually recognizable by the experimental TPD peaks being sharper than the simulated ones. The energy and entropy of the adsorbates are influenced by the low-frequency vibrational modes, i.e., the hindered translation and rotation modes, which can be determined by DFT. Specifically, our calculations in the limit of low coverage yield hν = 4.5, 7.8, 11.0, 14.0, 15.8, and 19.1 meV for these modes. Since the influence of the vibrations on the adsorption energies is only about 5%, we neglect the coverage dependence of the vibration frequencies. The results presented here assume Langmuirian sticking with an initial (low-coverage) sticking coefficient of s0 = 1, but the calculated adsorption energies change by less than 3% if we instead assume either a coverage-independent sticking coefficient close to unity (as observed in our experiments during adsorption at low temperatures) or s0 = 0.3. The adsorption energy distribution is obtained from the TPD curve at saturation coverage (i.e., the 4.1 (±0.4) molecules per unit cell), excluding the multilayer peaks. Since the experimental TPD curves show a slight increase of the intensity with coverage at temperatures above 150 K, which we attribute to readsorption of desorbed gas from the sample on the Ta backplate, we have corrected the input for the TPD analysis program by subtracting this linear coverage dependence at high doses (apart from the noise of the experimental data, the black curve at T > 150 K in Fig. The resulting adsorption energy distribution is shown in Fig. The discrepancies between experiment and calculation concerning the γ, δ, and ζ peaks are considered in the discussion. XPS measurements were performed to gain information about the chemical state of the adsorbed molecules and the Fe3O4(001) surface (Fig. Titration of the defect sites at higher temperatures is consistent with the TPD experiments, as desorption from surface defects is assigned to the ζ and η TPD peaks. Thus, diffusion must be sufficiently facile at 78 K for the molecules to locate the defects in the time frame of the experiment. A line of bright protrusions on the Fe rows in the top left of the image corresponds to C2H4 adsorbed on an APDB. The APDB has previously been shown to be an active site for CH3OH adsorption Two different adsorption sites are marked in the image: The cyan circle shows an isolated protrusion located above the Fe row, which corresponds to C2H4 adsorbed atop a five-fold coordinated surface Fe atom in a regular lattice position. This could be due to an unreconstructed unit cell defect Exposing the sample at 78 K to a nominal exposure of 5 L of C2H4 (Fig. The measurement temperature of 78 K falls close to the onset of the TPD desorption peak δ. Since the timescale of STM measurements (many minutes) is longer than that of TPD, the coverage seen by STM will be lower than that in TPD at the same temperature. Therefore, we pumped the cryogen in the cryostat of the STM to reduce the sample temperature to ≈68 K, which should allow to saturate the δ peak. Following exposure to C2H4 (an additional 2.3 L was dosed in addition to that shown in Fig. Some of the molecules appear clearly brighter than others. Images acquired before and after exposure to ethylene on the same sample area, as well as a quantitative analysis of the number of bright molecules and surface defect concentration lead us to the conclusion that the brighter protrusions are due to ethylene adsorbed on surface defects. More details of this analysis can be found in the supporting information (see Fig. A systematic approach was utilized to determine the lowest-energy configurations of the ethylene molecules at relevant coverages on the Fe3O4(001) surface. We utilized the strongly constrained and appropriately normed meta-generalized gradient approximation (SCAN) with the inclusion of van der Waals interactions (rVV10), but a comparison to several alternatives (generalized gradient-based functionals, GGA) with and without van der Waals corrections is included at the end of this section. All other settings of the DFT calculations and convergence criteria are the same for all functionals. The selection of the SCAN functional over PBE was motivated by its demonstrated superior performance on various molecular and solid-state test sets, as reported in the literature The SCV termination of the clean Fe3O4(001) surface has four equivalent five-fold undercoordinated Fe atoms (Feoct) (truncated octahedral coordination, thus named Feoct) and eight surface O atoms per (√2 × √2)R45 ̊ unit cell (two thereof are twofold coordinated, and six threefold). We utilized a (2√2 × 2√2)R45 ̊supercell to explore many different configurations in the coverage regime 1-4 C2H4/unit cell. We also modelled three experimentally observed defects in this surface Searching for the optimal configuration at four molecules per unit cell is complicated by the many possibilities, but it is clear that two molecules adsorb atop Feoct atoms, with the other two molecules adsorbed weakly in between the rows. Two possibilities are shown in Fig. Finally, we turn our attention to adsorption at the surface defects. We find that C2H4 adsorbed at an Fe adatom defect exhibits the strongest adsorption energy of all sites considered here (-0.84 eV). The optimal configuration has the molecule atop the adatom, and the C=C parallel to the surface Fe rows (Fig. We found that the calculated Eads,a value are quite sensitive to the DFT approach chosen. Table Including van der Waals functionals, both semi-local and nonlocal, leads to higher adsorption energies than found experimentally. All functionals yield adsorption energies with a very weak coverage dependence for 1 and 2 C2H4 per unit cell. Among the vdW-corrected functionals, the D2 and SCAN+rVV10 provide the closest match to the experimental value. Table Table Combining the information garnered from the various techniques employed in this work, it is possible to build up a comprehensive picture of how C2H4 interacts with the Fe3O4(001) surface. C2H4 binds most strongly at surface defects such as Fe adatoms, unreconstructed unit cells and APDB's, as seen in the STM image in Fig. As mentioned above, and as noted by Lee et al., The ε TPD peak emerges at ≈0.3 C2H4 per unit cell, and shifts slightly to lower temperature before saturating at approximately 2 C2H4 per unit cell (Fig. Calculations performed using other functionals (see Table Based on the STM, DFT and TPD results, we conclude that the C2H4 molecules prefer to occupy the next-nearest neighbor positions along the surface Fe rows on the defect-free surface. Fig. Next, we turn to the δ and γ peaks, which occur between 2 C2H4 per unit cell and saturation of the monolayer at ≈4 C2H4 per unit cell. These peaks are particularly sharp, and are not well reproduced by the TPD simulation in Fig. Finally, we note some interesting behavior within the C2H4 multilayer. Once saturation of the first layer is completed at 4 C2H4/ unit cell, additional molecules begin to desorb from a peak at lower temperature. This peak has a zero-order line shape typical for multilayer desorption. Once the coverage reaches ≈8 C2H4 per unit cell, the leading edge (and with it the rest of the peak) shifts in its entirety to a higher temperature. This suggests that the structure changes abruptly once the 2 nd layer is completed and the 3 rd layer begins to grow. This might occur because the structure of the two-layer system is defined by the structure of the first monolayer, while the system adopts a more stable 3dimensional crystal structure once additional molecules adsorb on top. In closing, we remark that the similarity of the experimental TPD data between our work and that of Lee et al. We investigated the interaction of a representative alkene, C2H4, with the Fe3O4 Supporting Information. The supporting information for this manuscript contains: List of initial coverages for the TPD series shown in Fig. Sticking co-efficient measurement for C2H4 on Fe3O4(001). TPD data from a second sample showing the effect of sample aging. XPS data for C2H4 on Fe3O4(001) (O1s, Fe2p, C1s). STM images of the Fe3O4(001) surface during exposure to ethylene.