The Silicon Dangling Bond (SiDB) logic platform, an emerging computational beyond-CMOS nanotechnology, is a promising competitor due to its ability to achieve integration density and clock speed values that are several orders of magnitude higher compared to current CMOS fabrication nodes. However, the exact physical simulation of SiDB layouts, which is an essential component of any design validation workflow, is computationally expensive. In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm called QuickExact, which aims to be both, efficient and exact. To this end, we are introducing three techniques, namely 1) Physically-informed Search Space Pruning, 2) Partial Solution Caching, and 3) Effective State Enumeration. Extensive experimental evaluations confirm that, compared to the state-of-the-art algorithm, the resulting approach leads to a paramount runtime advantage of more than a factor of 5000 on randomly generated layouts and more than a factor of 2000 on an established gate library. As the limits of Moore's Law are approached and processing technologies reach the top of the S-curve, there is a growing interest in the Silicon Dangling Bond (SiDB) logic platform, an emerging computational beyond-CMOS nanotechnology The growing interest in the SiDB logic platform has led to proposals from the scientific community for gate and circuit libraries However, physical simulation of SiDBs is challenging: To accurately predict the behavior of a system of n SiDBs, it is necessary to solve a high-dimensional optimization problem that takes into account all relevant physical effects. This involves enumerating up to 3 n charge configurations and checking their physical validity. Due to this exponential runtime complexity, such an algorithm is limited to small instances. In the literature, two approximate algorithms for solving this problem in polynomial time were proposed, namely QuickSim To this end, we propose a novel exact simulation algorithm denoted QuickExact, which is designed with a special focus on runtime efficiency. Our approach utilizes three main techniques, namely 1) Physically-informed Search Space Pruning, 2) Partial Solution Caching, and 3) Effective State Enumeration. Extensive experimental evaluations, that are covering the simulation of established gate libraries as well as random instances, confirm that the resulting approach leads to a paramount runtime advantage of more than a factor of 5000 on randomly generated layouts and more than a factor of 2000 on an established gate library compared to the state-of-the-art algorithm ExGS. To establish this paper as a self-contained work, Section II provides an overview of the basic concepts of SiDB systems and their physical simulation. Afterwards, related work from the literature is discussed in Section III. Section IV constitutes the main contribution of this work as it provides a detailed introduction to the proposed algorithm QuickExact. Section V presents exhaustive experimental evaluations demonstrating the advantages of QuickExact over state-of-the-art techniques. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper. In this section, preliminaries are established that are necessary for the comprehension of the remainder of this work. First, an overview of the SiDB logic platform is given in Section II-A, followed by a comprehensive presentation of the physical simulation of SiDBs in Section II-B. Silicon Dangling Bonds (SiDBs) are created on a Hydrogenpassivated Silicon surface (H-Si(100)-2×1) by utilizing a Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM) with an atomically sharp tip The charge state of an SiDB depends on the charge-transition energy levels, which are shown in Fig. A sequence of BDL pairs, depicted in Fig. In fact, both a BDL wire consisting of eight SiDBs and an OR-gate (with a total size smaller than 30 nm 2 ) have already been realized experimentally by Huff et al. In order to validate the designs of SiDB assemblies and facilitate the advancement of this technology, the utilization of physical simulation is deemed imperative. The objective of such simulation is to accurately simulate the charge distribution of a given arrangement of SiDBs. To this end, electrostatic potential simulation is conducted. The electrostatic potential Vi,j at position i generated by an SiDB in the state nj ∈ {-1, 0, 1} at position j is given by • e where λ tf defines the Thomas-Fermi screening length and εr the dielectric constant, which were experimentally extracted to be 5 nm and 5.6, respectively The expected state of an SiDB layout is determined by the charge configuration with the lowest energy. Therefore, in order to determine said state, Eq. ( Intuitively, this means that an SiDB is preferably neutrally charged when adjacent SiDBs are negatively charged and vice versa. This relation is formally expressed by the following conditions: SiDB-when μ-+ V local,i • qe < 0, SiDB+ when μ+ + V local,i • qe > 0, and SiDB0 otherwise. b) Configuration Stability: If there is no feasible single-electron hop event between arbitrary SiDBs leading to a lowering of the system's total electrostatic potential energy, the charge state fulfills the configuration stability. In other words, if this constraint is not satisfied, there would exist a state of lower electrostatic potential energy that the system would spontaneously converge to. Overall, the charge configuration with the lowest electrostatic potential system energy that is also physically valid, i. e., satisfies metastability, is called the system's ground state. It represents the charge configuration of a given SiDB system at low temperature and, thereby, its physical behavior In this section, the exact SiDB simulator ExhaustiveGS (ExGS) Mastering the complexity of simulation is a critical aspect of any design automation process for SiDB-based logic. However, exact physical simulation of SiDBs is a computationally complex task for which there is only ExGS ExGS enumerates all possible charge configurations of a given SiDB layout, computes the local electrostatic potential and the system's electrostatic potential energy with Eq. ( Example 1. In order to simulate a layout consisting of 32 SiDBs in 3-state simulation (SiDBs are also allowed to be positively charged), a total of 3 32 ≈ 10 15 charge configurations have to be considered and checked for physical validity. Ultimately, an algorithm that is both efficient and exact (i. e., able to find all physically valid charge distributions) is desired. This algorithm is presented in this paper, with the general idea as well as the details elaborated in the next section. In this section, the proposed SiDB simulation algorithm QuickExact is introduced. First, the general idea is outlined in Section IV-A and the techniques that lead to the performance advantage of more than three orders of magnitude compared to state of the art are elaborated, with their precise impact analyzed in Section IV-B. Finally, the implementation details of QuickExact are presented in Section IV-C. To reiterate, ExGS is the state-of-the-art exact physical SiDB simulator. However, it is highly inefficient and is, thus, not applicable to even simulate medium-sized SiDB assemblies like gates. Therefore, there exists a Need for Speed. To simulate efficiently while being exact at the same time, we propose the three techniques: 1) Physically-informed Seach Space Pruning, 2) Partial Solution Caching, and 3) Effective State Enumeration. The following segments elaborate on their respective ideas. 1) Physically-informed Search Space Pruning: If the charge state of d SiDBs (in a physically valid charge distribution) is known prior to simulation, the search space is reduced by a factor of 2 d or 3 d for 2-state and 3-state simulation, respectively. In fact, SiDBs that only weakly interact with other ones, have a tendency to be always negatively charged under realistic μvalues. With respect to the population stability discussed in Section II-B, this can be expressed as the following relation: the i-th SiDB has to be negatively charged for all physically valid charge distributions if the maximal possible local electrostatic potential V local,max ,i at position i is smaller than μ-. This is summarized by the following constraint: According to Eq. (3), V local,i is maximized if each Vi,j is positive. Due to Eq. ( To reduce the search space further by an additional factor of 2 (or 3 for 3-state simulation), a so-called dependent SiDB is selected. It is an arbitrarily chosen SiDB k (but not among the d pre-determined negatively-charged SiDBs) whose charge state is always deduced by the charge states of all other SiDBs in the layout due to the population stability constraint. In other words, when enumerating all electron distributions for the remaining n -d SiDBs in the layout, we can always stop at iteration 2 n-1-d (or 3 n-1-d ), because the final SiDB's charge state is inherently determined by the charge states of all others. Hence, the charge state of SiDB k can be described depending on ni, i ̸ = k as follows: Thereby, it becomes non-imperative to enumerate the charge state of the k-th SiDB, which reduces the search space by another factor of 2 in 2-state (or 3 in 3-state) simulation. Hence, via the introducing of the two Physically-informed Search Space Pruning concepts (detecting negatively charged SiDBs to satisfy population stability and introducing the dependent SiDB) mentioned above, the search space is reduced by a factor of 2 d+1 (or 3 d+1 ) without losing exactness. 2) Partial Solution Caching: As mentioned before, it is runtime-expensive to recompute the local electrostatic potential at each SiDB position every time the charge distribution changes. To reduce the runtime of this calculation step, Partial Solution Caching Algorithm 1: Negative SiDB Detection Input: SiDB layout L comprised of n dangling bonds Input: Physical parameters P = {μ-, μ+, λ tf , εr} Output: A set S of SiDBs that must be negatively charged is introduced. This means that the entire calculation according to Eq. ( This can be conducted as summarized in the pseudocode shown in Alg. 2. The SiDB layout L, the physical parameters P as well as the original and updated charge distributions, D and D ′ , respectively, are used as the algorithm's input. As a first step, all SiDBs that have undergone a change in their charge state are identified and collected as C (Line 1). Subsequently, the local electrostatic potentials of the SiDBs that have remained unchanged in their charge state are updated (Line 4). Thus, the number of SiDBs that have changed in their charge state (i. e., the number of elements in L ∩ C ) determine the number of iteration steps required to update the local electrostatic potentials. 3) Effective State Enumeration: The previously presented technique, Partial Solution Caching, is the most effective when the number of SiDBs that are changing their charge state between each iteration is small (i. e., |L ∩ C | is small). This third technique focuses on the effective iteration of electron distributions such that the least amount of SiDBs change their charge state in each step. Electron distributions D can be interpreted as b-ary digit strings of length n, where b ∈ {2, 3} is the base, i. e., the number of SiDB states. The introduced optimization techniques elaborated on in the previous section, improve the performance of exact physical simulation by several orders of magnitude. For 2-state simulation, the total theoretical performance gain given as the achieved search space reduction is composed as follows: Example 2. Consider an exact 2-state simulation of a layout consisting of 30 SiDBs (n = 30), where five SiDBs (d = 5) are detected to be negatively charged in a physically valid charge configuration. While the state-of-the-art simulator ExGS would require 2 30 simulation steps, using the techniques introduced above allows to conduct the simulations approximately 2 5+1 • 30 ≈ 2000 times faster. The techniques proposed above can be implemented on top of any combinatorial exact physical simulator for SiDBs. In this work, we took ExGS as a basis and realized the proposed concepts on top of it. This led to the efficient physical simulator QuickExact. How QuickExact works as a whole is sketched in Alg. 3. The algorithm starts with an SiDB layout comprised of n SiDBs and the physical parameters P as input. First, all SiDBs that must be negatively charged in a physically valid charge distribution are detected with Alg. 1 as explained before (Line 2). All remaining SiDBs (i. e., SiDBs that can also be neutrally charged) are collected as LS in Line 3. Then, the first SiDB of LS is arbitrarily chosen as the dependent SiDB db. Subsequently, all possible charge distributions of the SiDBs in LS \ { db} are enumerated in Gray code order. To reiterate, this is an efficient way to cover all possible charge distributions by changing the charge state of only one SiDB in each iteration. The local electrostatic potential of the current charge distribution cache is updated with Alg. 2 (Line 8) to check if the physical validity is fulfilled (Line 9). If the charge distribution under consideration is physically valid, it is stored together with its corresponding electrostatic potential energy (Line 11). Ultimately, all physically valid charge distributions with their corresponding electrostatic potential energy are returned (Line 15). To demonstrate the applicability and improved runtime of the resulting tool QuickExact in comparison to the state of the art, an exhaustive experimental evaluation is conducted, whose results are presented in this section. To this end, first the experimental setup is described in Section V-A. Afterwards, the respectively obtained experimental results are presented in Section V-B considering two different classes of SiDB layouts, namely 1) randomly-generated, and 2) established ones from the literature. Finally, the obtained results are discussed in Section V-C. QuickExact has been implemented as summarized in Section IV-C. We compare the performance of QuickExact with ExGS. All code has been implemented in C++ on top of the fiction 2 framework To validate the efficiency and accuracy of physical simulation, it is important to use a wide variety of SiDB layouts. To this end, in the first series of evaluations, 280 randomly-generated layouts with different numbers of SiDBs per layout (ranging from 20 to 33 SiDBs per layout) are used. In a second series of evaluations, all 12 gate layouts from the Bestagon gate library All obtained results are summarized in Table The simulation of the randomly-generated layouts and the established Bestagon library reveals a massive performance advantage of QuickExact compared to ExGS. For randomly-generated layouts, ExGS yields a timeout (one hour) for 120 layouts (40 of them need even more than 24 hours), while QuickExact determines valid solutions to all instances within seconds, resulting in a total runtime advantage of a factor of 5000 compared to the state of the art, ExGS. These results are again confirmed by the simulation of the Bestagon gate library. While ExGS takes about 2000 s to simulate all gates in all configurations, QuickExact takes less than 1 s, again a reduction in runtime of more than a factor of 2000. This runtime advantage in all cases demonstrates the clear benefit that the techniques proposed in this work have on exact physical simulation of SiDBs. We have hereby enabled the obtainment of exact simulation results for large layouts that were previously impossible to process. In this work, a novel approach, QuickExact, for exact physical simulation of SiDB layouts was presented with a special focus on runtime improvement. To this end, three techniques were proposed: 1) Physically-informed Search Space Pruning, 2) Partial Solution Caching, and 3) Effective State Enumeration. In an extensive experimental evaluation, these techniques lead to runtime improvements of up to a factor of 5000 compared to the state of the art, ExGS, as shown on two different sets of SiDB layouts: 1) randomly-generated ones, and 2) established standard gate tiles from the literature. In case of random layouts, ExGS did not yield any results within one hour for 120 of the considered 280 layouts (40 of them need even more than 24 hours), while QuickExact required 75.67 s at maximum. In case of the standard gate tiles, ExGS needed a total of around 2000 s while QuickExact stayed below 1 s, emphasizing its immense performance advantage. To support open research and open data, we plan to make the implementation of QuickExact, all evaluation data, and the test scripts publicly available in case of a positive evaluation of this work. a All runtime values are in seconds b without >3600 rows a All runtime values are in seconds For the sake of simplicity, we assume b = in the following. However, the proposed technique works for arbitrary values of b.