Two-dimensional (2D) materials, with their structural uniqueness, exceptional properties, and wide-ranging applications, show unprecedented prospects in fundamental physics research and industrial applications. 2D β-phase cuprous iodide (β-CuI) is a promising candidate for overcoming the challenges of insufficient P-type transparent conductive materials, with multiple predicted unique properties. Previous experimental results show that β-CuI only occurs at elevated temperatures between 645 and 675 K. Many efforts are made to stabilize β-CuI at room temperature through surface/interface engineering. However, the resulting composites limit the performance and application of pure 2D β-CuI. Here, we demonstrate experimentally that isolated 2D β-CuI single crystals can exist stably under ambient conditions, a high-temperature phase CuI found at room temperature. We validate the simultaneous existence of γ-CuI and β-CuI in the synthesized CuI. The previous neglect of β-CuI crystals can be ascribed to factors including their low content, small dimensions, and lack of ingenious experimental characterization. Moreover, the theoretical calculation further confirms dynamically and thermally stable of the monolayer β-CuI, which has an ultra-wide direct band-gap (3.66 eV). Our findings challenge the traditional understanding of β-CuI as a high-temperature phase of CuI, instead providing a new definition that 2D β-CuI exhibits remarkable stability under ambient conditions. Copper iodide (CuI) has garnered much attention as a highly attractive p-type semiconductor with wide-bandgap and high conductivity, making it an essential component in various fields such as transparent flexible electrodes, thermoelectric devices, p-channel transistors, light-emitting diodes, catalysts, and solar cells With its rough surface, γ-CuI limits the practical application of the material in transparent electronics, whereas β-CuI possesses promising potential as a transparent electronic material in 2D applications The existence of layered β-CuI is confined to a relatively narrow high-temperature range, thereby impeding the progress of experimental investigation and the development of applications for its unique properties. Therefore, this also inspires the development of methods to stabilize β-CuI at room temperature. These methodologies are mainly based on surface/interface engineering, including graphene encapsulation, synthesis on atomically smooth graphite basal plane surfaces using a hybrid electrochemical/chemical method, and deposition on specific substrates via close distance sublimation In this study, we report the experimental discovery of isolated single crystals of 2D β-CuI on a micro-nano scale under ambient conditions. These typical hexagonal crystals were confirmed to be β-CuI by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), TEM-energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (TEM-EDS), selected area diffraction (SAED), and diffraction pattern simulation and analysis. The atomic-resolution imaging of the crystal structure of 2D β-CuI was obtained directly by HRTEM. Our experiments revealed the presence of a Moiré superlattice at the overlap region of the samples, indicating that the observed CuI is a layered crystal with atomic thickness, i.e. 2D β-CuI. Moreover, the theoretical simulation of this superlattice using the Angle theory of phase diagram was consistent with our experimental results. Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations show that monolayer β-CuI is thermally stable at 300 K. Meanwhile, theoretical studies show that monolayer β-CuI is dynamically stable, with an ultra-wide direct band-gap (3.66 eV). According to the Material Project, the monolayer β-CuI crystal structure with P-3m1 symmetry, discovered in this work, is not currently identified as a material that matches experimentally determined crystal structures The moiré pattern is a unique feature of 2D layered materials that arises from the interference effect of atomic lattices, setting them apart from bulk materials More recently, Mustonen et al. measured a lattice constant of 4.19 ± 0.07 Å for a monolayer β-CuI encapsulated in graphene at room temperature using nano-beam electron diffraction As revealed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique, the crystal phase transition of CuI with temperature can be summarized as follows: γ-CuI is stable below 643 K, β-CuI is stable between 645 and 675 K, and α-CuI is stable above 713 K However, this fact alone cannot determine whether β-CuI can exist stably under ambient conditions, as its stability is influenced by multiple factors such as temperature, pressure, chemical environment, etc. The search for metastable materials has predominantly been a heuristic process, relying on empirical observations, intuition, and at times speculative predictions, often referred to as "rules of thumb. Firstly, analysis of the synthesized white precipitate was performed using Powder XRD. In Figure Subsequently, irregular nano-sheets were identified in the TEM analysis, as shown in Figure The unexpected discovery of such high-temperature phase crystals at room temperature prompted us to analyze and discuss the stability of 2D β-CuI through DFT theoretical calculation and AIMD simulation. Firstly, we confirmed the thermally stable of monolayer β-CuI by AIMD simulation. Through a long-term AIMD simulation performed at 300 K, we observed that the crystal maintained a relatively stable structure, as depicted in Figure In summary, 2D β-CuI single crystals on the micro-nano scale were found experimentally under ambient conditions, which challenges the previous understanding of β-CuI. By employing suitable processing techniques, we were able to observe trace amounts of 2D β-CuI more effectively within CuI powder using TEM, enabling us to comprehensively characterize and analyze its morphology, structure, and elemental composition. Under continuous electron beam irradiation in high-resolution TEM mode, the stability of 2D β-CuI crystals was tested and found to be relatively stable, allowing for the acquisition of precise atomic-resolved structure images. Our experiment revealed the presence of a moiré superlattice at the point of sample overlap. The theoretical simulation of this superlattice using the Angle theory of phase diagram was consistent with our experimental results, ultimately providing strong evidence for the atomic thickness of 2D β-CuI. The experimental synthesis and meticulous crystal analysis of CuI have unequivocally demonstrated the concurrent coexistence of two distinct structural forms, namely γ-CuI and β-CuI, within the synthesis process. In addition, there were discrepancies in the identification of different phases in synthesized CuI and CuI podwer by XRD and TEM crystal analysis techniques. Specifically, Powder XRD was unable to detect trace amounts of β-CuI in CuI powders, while TEM techniques were shown to be effective under suitable sample preparation conditions. In addition, AIMD simulations show that monolayer β-CuI is thermally stable at 300 K. Simultaneously, the analysis of the phonon spectra indicates the dynamically stable of monolayer β-CuI. The electronic band structures calculated using the HSE06 functional prove that the monolayer β-CuI has an ultrawide direct bandgap of 3.66 eV. 2D β-CuI has great potential as a P-type 2D ultra-wide band-gap semiconductor and will play a significant role in advancing the development and application of 2D ultrawide band-gap, P-type transparent semiconductors in academia and industry. The discovery of a β-CuI single crystal at room temperature is unprecedented, which will redefine the phase diagram of CuI at various temperatures. Moreover, this small amount of 2D β-CuI is co-existing with a large amount of γ-CuI in the synthesized CuI under ambient conditions. Due to ineffective characterization, the presence of the β-phase structure has been overlooked, resulting in a lack of understanding of many of its properties, particularly the potential differences and misinterpretations regarding the performance and applications of β-CuI compared to γ-CuI. Our discovery of 2D β-CuI under ambient conditions not only provides a material basis to verify the previously predicted novel properties, but also motivates further experimental studies to investigate the unknown properties of 2D β-CuI and develop potential applications.