The electron transport in current-biased superconducting nano-bridges is determined by the motion of the quantum vortex confined in the internal disorder landscape. Here we consider a simple case of a single or two neighbouring linear defects crossing a nano-bridge. The strong anharmonicity of the vortex motion along the defect leads, upon RF-excitation, to fractional Shapiro steps. In the case of two defects, the vortex motion becomes correlated, characterized by metastable states that can be locked to a resonant RF-drive. The lock-unlock process causes sudden voltage jumps and drops in the voltage-current characteristics observed in experiments. We analyze the parameters promoting these metastable dynamic states and discuss their potential applications in quantum devices. Quantum vortices are famous topological objectslines of 2π-phase singularities in the many-body wave function of coherent quantum condensates. In superconductors, where condensed particles are electrically charged Cooper pairs, the phase gradients generate vortex currents circulating around singularities, and producing a magnetic flux. The vortices strongly influence the characteristics of superconductors, limiting their critical currents and fields. In fact, externally applied currents and fields interact with the vortex, forcing it to move. In the vortex centers -cores -the superconductivity is suppressed, and the normal state is recovered. The vortex motion is therefore dissipative, often triggering the transition to the normal state of the entire system. In their motion inside superconductors, vortices interact with various local and extended defects, as well as with other vortices and obstacles. The collection of defects along with other moving and pinned vortices form a potential landscape in which a given vortex evolves. This landscape is generally dynamic and intricate, comprising local minima and saddle points. Consequently, the formation of various metastable states can occur, with their characteristic energies and stability subject to perturbation by external magnetic fields, DC or AC currents. In this work, we focus on the over-critical behaviour of current-biased superconducting nano-bridges (see Fig. The model system is a rectangular superconducting sample representing the central part of a typical nanobridge, as shown in Fig. where A is the vector potential due to magnetic field, J S and J N are superconducting and normal components of the electric current. The GL parameter κ = λ/ξ (λ is the field penetration depth) is taken equal to κ = 4, meaning that the bridge is in the type-II regime (see Methods). The defects, as depicted in Fig. The superconducting part of the bridge is described by ǫ=1, while the defects are characterized by a locally reduced critical temperature T c (r), and are described by a lower ǫ(r). For instance, the linear (grey) defect of width 1×ξ crossing the bridge is characterized by ǫ = 0.5. It represents an extended structural defect -a grain boundary crossing the real sample or an artificial weaklink (possible experimental realizations are discussed in Sec.III). At a given temperature T , this defect is superconducting, but its local critical temperature is 3/4 of the critical temperature T c in the rest of the sample. The two point defects at the edges, presented by black rectangles 2ξ × 5ξ, are characterized by ǫ = 0, that corresponds to a fully suppressed superconductivity. These edge defects appear at the ends of the grain boundaries as a result of a damage caused during the nano-bridge fabrication processes. When simulating the Shapiro step experiments, the microwave illumination is added as an AC-current of amplitude I AC and frequency f AC . The total transport current through the bridge is therefore: The state of the bridge is determined by calculating the voltage V between y = 0 and y = L boundaries for each value of transport current (see Methods). By averaging this voltage over the sample width and time one gets the DC-voltage V measured in experiments. As a starting point, we consider a single linear defect, as shown in Fig. The results of calculations are presented in Fig. rapidly rises as vortices accelerate due to their interaction with the edges and the transport current. In (d), V crosses a local minimum as the vortex velocity drops in a region where interaction with the edge is already sufficiently small, and the transport current is reduced on the scale of ∼ λ. A sharp increase in the vortex velocity due to the vortex-antivortex attraction just before annihilation produces a peak in V (t) at moment (e). The Fourier spectrum of V (t) is presented in Fig. By repeating the calculations for different I DC and time-averaging V (t) , we retrieve V (I DC ) dependencies measured in experiments. The dark green curve in Fig. The SNS-like behaviour of the bridge is further evidenced by simulating its response to microwave illumination. When an AC-current is added, the oscillating voltage V (t) can be locked to the frequency f AC of this external drive, resulting in plateaus of constant voltage on V (I DC ) curve, as shown in Fig. In addition to the integer Shapiro plateaus, the fractional ones are also revealed. These plateaus appear in Fig. In Fig. Concluding this section, it is important to recall pioneering works In experimentally studied nano-bridges, the disorder is rarely represented by only one grain boundary. Most non-epitaxial superconducting films exhibit granularity on a scale of 20-200 nm, which can be significantly shorter than the nano-bridge width W . For instance, nanomeanders studied in The calculated V (I DC ) characteristics in the case of two identical linear defects is presented as a dark green solid line in Fig. By adding a low AC-current, one gets the Shapiro plateaus that also look very similar to the single defect case (brown line in Fig. To understand the origin of this phenomenon, let us consider the dynamics of the system close to the voltage drops. In the specific case of I AC = 0.03, this occurs at I drop DC ≃ 0.076, as indicated by the arrow on the V (I DC ) curve in Fig. The synchronous configuration is not stable itself. Indeed, when a vortex in one line is located under a vortex in the other, the projection of a vortex-vortex repulsion force on a x-axis is zero, and any x-shift of their position gives rise to the x-axis component of vortex-vortex repulsion which drives the system out of this unstable balance towards a more stable checkerboard configuration, Fig. The calculated Fourier spectra of V (t) in the states E 0 and E 1 are presented in Fig. In principle, it could be the usual 1/2 Shapiro plateau, due to anharmonicity. Though, when the AC-current increases and the width of the unusual 2/3 plateau rapidly grows, the plateau 1/2 shrinks and disappears (compare the curves at I AC = 0.02, 0.03 and 0.05 in Fig. Till now we have considered a very idealistic case where the two coupled linear defects were identical. This situation could be realized in artificial stacks of SNS junctions The evolution of Shapiro features in Figs.5,8 with increasing I AC is not trivial. At low AC-excitation, I AC ≪ I DC , conventional Shapiro plateaus are narrow, and no signatures of metastable states are seen. In this regime, the AC-component acts as a probe that locks, at a fixed f AC , onto the spectrum of the vortex motion, solely determined by the main driving (Lorentz) force ∼ I DC . As I DC increases, the vortices move faster, f 1 and f k increase. At some I DC , a given f k gets close enough to nf AC , and the motion locks to f AC ; f 1 remains fixed in some range of I DC . As I DC further increases, the locking effect is lost. This results in a series of integer and fractional Shapiro plateaus visible on V (I DC ) curve at I AC =0.02. When I AC is increased and becomes comparable with I DC , two phenomena appear. The first one is the wellknown enlargement of Shapiro plateaus, due to a stronger locking effect at higher AC-currents. The second one is related to the perturbation of the vortex motion spectrum by the oscillatory force ∼ I AC , whose amplitude becomes comparable to the Lorentz force due to DCcurrent. The combined action of I DC and I AC enables the existence of metastable states. They can be locked to f AC , resulting in jump-plateau-drop features as observed in Fig. In the limit of a dense, on the scale of W , network of defects, one would expect a huge number of apparently chaotically arranged voltage jump-bump-drops to appear on V (I DC ) curves, reflecting a vast number of accessed vortex motion modes and the complexity of the related spectra. The term "chaotic" is justified here due to a high sensitivity of the accessed metastables configurations to external parameters such as I DC , I AC , f AC , the disorder landscape, etc. Indeed, after unlocking from one metastable state, the system can jump down to a more stable configuration or lock up to another metastable state, from the available set. As a result, the position and shape of bumps-drops on V (I DC ) curves would appear arbitrary (see Fig. The revealed voltage drops correspond to a negative dynamic resistance dV /dI(I DC ). The latter has been experimentally observed in periodic pinning arrays subject to a specific external magnetic field The ability to use AC-excitation both as a pump and as a probe opens up interesting possibilities for realization, spectroscopy and control of metastable states in superconducting weak-links. The obtained results demonstrate the potential for designing artificial disorder landscapes to achieve desired responses to AC-amplitude and/or frequency. The general nature of weak-links suggests that there would be multiple ways of experimental realization of these functionalities. One of straightforward routes is to engineer superconducting films with a controlled disorder by using Focused Ion Beam approaches In this work, we numerically studied transport properties of current-carrying superconducting nano-bridges subject to microwave illumination. The granularity of experimentally measured devices was accounted for by introducing one or two linear defects (simulating grain boundaries) which were directed perpendicularly to the applied current. We revealed a rich and complex dynamics of the vortex motion along these defects. Its strong anharmonicity enabled us to lock the spectrum of the system to an external periodic drive, and to obtain both integer and fractional Shapiro plateaus in DC voltagecurrent characteristics. In the case of two close linear defects, the inter-vortex coupling leads to the appearance of collective modes of correlated motion, with multiple stable and metastable states. These transitions are revealed in the current-voltage characteristic as regions of negative differential resistance dV /dI(I DC ). By playing with the external drive amplitude and frequency it becomes possible to pump the system to higher-resistance metastable modes and stabilize it there, in a finite range of DC transport currents. A step out of this range leads to a relaxation to a lower-resistance modes. The ability to control and stabilize different modes of the vortex motion opens up new possibilities for designing superconducting devices with tunable transport properties and novel functionalities. Within the TDGL framework, the temporal and spatial evolution of the complex superconducting order parameter ψ(t, r) can be expressed as where ψ is in units of ψ 0 = |a| b , with a and b being phenomenological parameters of the GL theory. The parameter u=1 is taken since we focus only on vortex motion but not on its nucleation dynamics. The coordinates r = (x, y) are in units of ξ. The scalar potential μ is measured in units of μ 0 = 2eτGL , where τ GL = 4πσλ 2 c 2 denotes the GL relaxation time, and λ is the London penetration depth. The parameter σ corresponds to the normal state conductivity of the material. The variable t is measured in units of τ GL , while the vector potential A is in units of H c2 ξ, with H c2 = c 2eξ 2 representing the upper critical field. The parameter ǫ(r) is associated with the local critical temperature T c (r) through Eq.(2); it enables spatially modulating the strength of the order parameter. In the second GL equation, the total current J has superconducting (J S ) and a normal (J N ) components; it can be expressed in units of J 0 = cΦ0 8π 2 λ 2 ξ as: As TDGL equations are invariant under a gauge transformation, we use the zero scalar potential μ = 0 gauge to eliminate the scalar potential from both equations. For simplicity, we set the order parameter equal to zero ψ = 0 on boundaries y = 0, L. To apply external transport current I tr , we use boundary conditions for the vector potential on boundaries x = 0, W as ∇ × A = H I , where H I = 2πI tr /c represents the magnetic field induced by the transport current. On the other boundaries, we set ∇× A = 0. Additionally, we impose the superconductorvacuum boundary condition n • (∇ -ıA)ψ = 0 on boundaries x = 0, W , where n is the normal vector to the boundaries. The state of the bridge is determined by calculating the voltage V between y = 0 and y = L boundaries for each value of transport current. In the chosen gauge, the electric field is written as E = -∂ t A. The corresponding instantaneous voltage drop V y1,y2 between two arbitrary points y 1 , y 2 in y-direction can be calculated as V y1,y2 (x, t) = - (6) By averaging this voltage over the sample width and time we get the DC-voltage V measured in experiments. To avoid the voltage drops at y = 0, L boundaries, we calculate the voltage inside the bridge where the order parameter is fully restored (ψ = 1), as indicated by the blue dashed lines in Fig. In the model, all non-equilibrium quasiparticle processes are omitted, and for all considered frequencies, the microwave illumination acts on vortices only as an additional periodic Lorenz force. The system of Eqs.(1), with the above-described boundary conditions, was solved using the commonly used link-variable method 