Here we study the effect of electron doping the kagome superconductor CsV3Sb5. Single crystals and powders of CsV3Sb5-xTex are synthesized and characterized via magnetic susceptibility, nuclear quadrupole resonance, and x-ray diffraction measurements, where we observe a slight suppression of the charge density wave transition temperature and superconducting temperature with the introduction of electron dopants. In contrast to hole-doping, both transitions survive relatively unperturbed up to the solubility limit of Te within the lattice. A comparison is presented between the electronic phase diagrams of electron-and hole-tuned CsV3Sb5. The interplay between charge density wave (CDW) order and superconductivity (SC) in the AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) class of kagome superconductors remains a focus of ongoing research Specifically, the coupling between CDW order and SC in AV3Sb5 compounds has been experimentally explored through a number of approaches. These include tracking the evolution of both order parameters as the system is perturbed via chemical pressure In the case of carrier doping, hole-doping has been shown to rapidly drive the suppression of long-range CDW order as well as an accompanying increase in the SC transition temperature (Tc) Here we present x-ray diffraction, nuclear quadrupole resonance, and susceptibility measurements characterizing the electron-doped phase diagram of CsV3Sb5. Our data demonstrate a limited solubility of Te into the CsV3Sb5-xTex matrix before phase separation occurs near x ≈ 0.08 and that Te preferentially occupies the Sb-sites in the V-kagome plane. In contrast to hole-doping, the introduction of electrons results in a relatively weak perturbation to the system-one where the CDW onset temperature is only slightly suppressed and SC is weakly suppressed in a monotonic fashion. The likely dominant driver of the weak suppression of both states is the introduction of disorder via Sb-substitution, establishing a sharp contrast to the hole-doped phase diagram of this system. Powders of CsV3Sb5-xTex were synthesized inside a glovebox filled with argon (water and oxygen levels at < 0.5 ppm) by measuring stoichiometric amounts of elemental Cs (solid, Alfa 99.98%), V (powder, Sigma 99.9%, previously purified using a 1:10 ratio of EtOH and HCl), Sb (shot, Alfa 99.999%), and Te (lump, Alfa 99.999%). For each composition of Te doping, 6 g batches of the starting materials were ball-milled inside a tungsten carbide vial for 60 min in a SPEX 8000D high-energy ball mill. The resulting powders were extracted inside a glovebox, and then ground and sieved through a 106 micron sieve. Powders were then placed inside an alumina crucible, sealed inside an argon-filled quartz tube, and annealed at 550 C for 48 hours. A post-anneal grind and sieve was performed followed by a second anneal at 450 C for 12 hours. The final powders are gray and reasonably air stable. Single crystals of CsV3Sb5-xTex were grown by a self-flux method. Different Te concentrations were targeted by the formula Cs20V15Sb120-xTex , with x = 7.2,9.6. Elements were weighed inside a glovebox to make 4 g batches of fluxes accordingly, each loaded into tungsten carbide vials, and ball milled for 60 min. Precursors were then extracted, loaded into alumina crucibles and sealed inside carbon-coated quartz tubes. Previous attempts at synthesizing CsV3Sb5-xTex crystals were performed inside sealed steel tubes, but were unsuccessful given that elemental Te corrodes steel. The sealed tubes were heated at 900 C for 12 hours and then cooled to 500 C at 2C/hour. Single crystals were extracted manually using IPA. Powder X-ray diffraction data were collected on a Panalytical Emperyan powder diffractometer. Pawley and Rietveld refinements were performed using the software TOPAS-Academic Powders and single crystals of CsV3Sb5-xTex were synthesized in the composition range 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.1. The 300 K structure remains P6/mmmm across this composition range, and the tellurium dopants occupy the Sb1 site in the kagome plane as shown in Figure Lattice parameters derived from Pawley refinements of powder x-ray data are shown in Figure Magnetization data collected at higher temperatures plotted in Figure Our results are summarized in Figure To test this, select single crystals of CsV3Sb5-xTex were measured and their transition temperatures overplotted with those from powder samples in Figure The above results are derived using chemical dopants that avoid the V-sites in the kagome network; however qualitatively similar trends in the evolution of CDW and SC order parameters have been reported in individual studies leveraging V-site substitution. Ti-doped CsV3Sb5 renders a phase diagram qualitatively similar to Sn-doped CsV3Sb5 In conclusion, our results illustrate a strong electron-hole asymmetry to the electronic phase diagram of carrier-doped CsV3Sb5. Electron-doping via Te-substitution in CsV3Sb5-xTex largely preserves the CDW state whereas hole-doping rapidly suppresses long-range CDW order and renormalizes the nature of charge correlations. At lower temperatures, light electron-doping also largely preserves the superconducting state whereas hole-doping creates a nonmonotonic, "double dome" response. We suggest that the slight suppression in the onset temperatures of both the CDW and SC orders observed upon Te-substitution arises from alloy-induced disorder rather than a doping-driven effect and that both transitions are robust to light electron-doping. Our findings motivate a deeper theoretical exploration of electron-hole asymmetries in the carrier-tuned band structure of CsV3Sb5and related compounds as a means of isolating the dominant Van Hove points and other band features responsible for driving electronic order in this family of compounds. 