We present general properties of the optical activity in noncentrosymmetric materials, including superconductors. We derive a sum rule of the optical activity in general electric states and show that the summation of the spectrum is zero, which is independent of the details of electric states. The optical activity has a δ-function singularity that vanishes in normal phases. However, the singularity emerges in superconducting phases, corresponding to the Meissner effect in the optical conductivity. The spectrum decreases by the superconducting gap and has a missing area compared to the normal phase. This area is exactly equivalent to the coefficient of the δ-function singularity due to the universal sum rule. Furthermore, the coefficient is exactly equivalent to the superconducting Edelstein effect, which has not yet been observed in experiments. Thus, this measurement of the missing area offers an alternative way to observe the superconducting Edelstein effect. Optical responses are one of the key research topics in condensed matter physics because they offer valuable insights into diverse material characteristics, such as momentum-resolved electric spectral functions using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, symmetry breaking and associated domains using the Kerr effect and the second harmonic generation. The wide range of optical frequencies, spanning from microwaves to X-rays, enables the investigation of phenomena across an extensive spectrum of energy scales. Recently, terahertz spectroscopy is also attracting attention because important energy scales exist in this regime in condensed matter physics, such as the superconducting gap and collective excitations of magnets Optical responses have also played an essential role in the research of superconductors. It dates back to the observation of the superconducting gap in thin films of Pb using the far-infrared ray in 1956, which gave the first evidence of the superconducting gap In this work, we will extend the study of optical responses to the optical activity in superconductors. The optical activity represents one of the optical responses, and it originates from the spatial dispersion of the optical conductivity, exhibiting the optical rotation, the dichroism, and the birefringence depending on material sym- * shinada.koki.64w@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp metries While there has been gradual progress in theoretical studies about the optical activity in the normal phase, the research in noncentrosymmetric superconductors remains largely unexplored, except for few work In this paper, we show the general properties of the optical activity in noncentrosymmetric systems, including superconductors. First, we discuss a sum rule of the opti-cal activity valid in all systems and reveal that the summation does not depend on material details and electric states in Sec. II. Second, we formulate the optical activity using Green's functions and discuss a no-go theorem stating the absence of a δ-function singularity, meaning that optical activity does not appear in equilibrium in Sec. III. Furthermore, we show a typical optical spectrum calculated in a two-dimensional model, including a Rashba spin-orbit coupling, and confirm this sum rule. Third, we discuss the optical activity in noncentrosymmetric superconductors in Sec. IV. In this section, we formulate the optical activity for superconductors and demonstrate that the no-go theorem is broken. For this reason, the singularity appears, and the optical spectrum of the optical activity is reduced compared to the normal phase. This area is called the missing area and is exactly equivalent to the coefficient of the δ-function singularity because of the universal sum rule. Furthermore, we reveal that the missing area is exactly equivalent to the superconducting Edelstein effect, where a magnetization is induced by supercurrents, which has not been experimentally observed. The relation established here by the missing area provides an alternative way to observe this effect. Furthermore, we also calculate the optical activity in a two-dimensional noncentrosymmetric superconductor to verify the typical behavior of the missing area. Finally, we conclude this paper in Sec. V. In this section, we discuss a sum rule of the optical activity. The optical activity is one of the responses to light and, particularly, is related to the optical rotation and the nonreciprocity due to the inversion symmetry breaking. A similar effect is the magneto-optical effect, which is not included in this paper because inversion symmetry breaking is unnecessary. The optical activity is theoretically described by a spatially dispersive optical conductivity. When applying an electromagnetic wave, electric current, orbital moments and, also, spin moments interact with the light. These responses are described by a general current-current correlation function where the current operator is conjugate to the electromagnetic vector potential and includes spin moments. First, as a preparation, we discuss an exact symmetry of the current-current correlation function Φ μν (q, ω), where q is the wave number and ω is the frequency. The following relationship holds between this correlation function and its complex conjugate as This derivation requires only the hermicity of the current operator (see Appendix A for a detailed derivation). Next, we expand this correlation function by the wave number q and discuss the symmetry of the zeroth order Φ μν (ω) = Φ μν (0, ω) and the first order term Φ μνλ (ω) = ∂ q λ Φ μν (0, ω). Separating the correlation function into real and imaginary parts, we find that the following symmetry relations for the frequency hold: The zeroth order term is even for the real part and odd for the imaginary part, and the opposite relation holds for the first order term. Next, we derive the sum rule. The spatially dispersive optical conductivity is given by Here, D μν is the diamagnetic term, which is real. δ = +0 is an adiabatic factor. Using the equation lim δ→+0 1/(ω+ iδ) = P/ω -iπδ(ω), the optical conductivity is divided into the real part and the imaginary part as Reσ μν (q, ω) Imσ μν (q, ω) Here, δ(ω) is the δ-function and P is the principal value. Similarly, expanding the optical conductivity by q, the real part of the zeroth order term is an even function of ω and the imaginary part is odd, which can be seen from Eq. (2a). The opposite relation is satisfied for the firstorder term shown in Eq. (2b). The zeroth order term is the usual optical conductivity, and the first order is called the optical activity finite only in noncentrosymmetric systems and the main quantity in this paper. For the even functions, we can find the following sum rules. Using the Kramers-Kronig relation, the sum rule for the usual optical conductivity (the zeroth order) is established Next, the sum rule for the optical activity reads (see Appendix A for a detailed derivation) This relation is the first main result of this paper. This equation means that the summation is zero and has universality due to the independence of material details. This property will be important in the following discussion. This sum rule is partially derived in molecule systems In this section, we discuss general properties, such as symmetry constraints and a no-go theorem, and typical behaviors of the optical activity in noninteracting crystals. Response functions are, in general, constrained by time-reversal symmetry, and this constraint is given by the Onsager reciprocal theorem. The optical conductivity satisfies the reciprocal relation Here, M is a time-reversal symmetry-breaking term such as an external magnetic field or a magnetization. Thus, the symmetric and antisymmetric parts of the optical activity behave differently for the interchange of the indices μ ↔ ν as These equations show that the symmetric part σ μνλ is odd and the antisymmetric part σ (A) μνλ is even under the time-reversal operation T . Thus, the symmetric part needs time-reversal breaking (M ̸ = 0), but the antisymmetric part does not. The optical activity is further restricted by the spatial inversion symmetry. The optical activity tensors are odd under the spatial-inversion operation P, therefore, the antisymmetric part vanishes if systems have PT symmetry. Because of the different symmetry constraints of these parts, they are named differently. The antisymmetric part is called the natural optical activity (NOA) and the symmetric part is called the optical magnetoelectric effect. The NOA is mainly composed of the optical rotation and the circular dichroism and has been studied for a long time. It dates back to the first observation in 1811 by Arago, showing that a quartz displayed an optical rotation. The NOA is often used to distinguish chiral molecules because the enantiomers, which are the mirrored states, exhibit the NOA with opposite signs to the original molecules. Furthermore, the NOA is also active in chiral solids, such as Te and Se The symmetric part can be decomposed into a rank-2 axial tensor μνλ and a rank-3 totally symmetric tensor γ μνλ = σ λμν . β μξ corresponds to the optical magnetoelectric response We derive the Green's function formula of the optical activity for the noninteracting systems. The noninteracting Hamiltonian without electromagnetic wave is Here, p and x are the momentum and position operators, respectively, m is the mass of an electron, V (x) = V (x+a) is a periodic potential, and σ is the Pauli matrix representing the spin degrees of freedom. This Hamiltonian is diagonalized by the Bloch wave function |ψ nk ⟩ (k is the Bloch wave number and n is the band index) as H 0 |ψ nk ⟩ = ε nk |ψ nk ⟩. For the following discussion, we define the Bloch Hamiltonian H k = e -ik•x H 0 e ik•x and the periodic part of the Bloch function |u nk ⟩ = e -ik•x |ψ nk ⟩. Then, introducing electromagnetic waves by the vector potential A(x, t), the momentum changes as p → p+eA(x, t) (-e < 0 is the charge of the electron) and the Zeeman term is added. The first-order perturbed Hamiltonian is given by Here, v = i[H 0 , x] is the velocity operator, g S = 2.002 • • • is the spin g-factor, and μ B = e/2m is the Bohr magneton. The generalized current operator J (r), conjugate to the vector potential A(r, t) (r is just the position coordinate, not the operator), is defined as This current operator is the quantity induced by the interaction with electromagnetic waves. Following the dynamical linear response theory given by the Kubo formula, the current-current correlation function using the Green's functions is given by Here, G R/A (k, ω) = 1/(ω -H k + μ ± iΓ) is the retarded/advanced Green function, and we define is the velocity operator of the Bloch Hamiltonian, μ is a chemical potential, and f (ω) = 1/(e βω + 1) is the Fermi distribution function at temperature 1/β. The integral symbol is abbreviated as 3 . We phenomenologically introduce the dissipation effect by assuming a finite Γ. In this calculation, we neglect the diamagnetic term D μν because it does not contribute to the optical activity due to the independence of q. The optical activity is attributed to the first-order term of this correlation function by q, thus, two different contributions appear. One is coming from the spin part in the current operator j μ k,q , and the other is the orbital contribution given by the expansion of the Green's function by q. In the following, we focus on the spin contribution for simplicity and only consider crystal symmetries and dimensions where the orbital contribution is absent. The spin term is given by Then, we obtain the formula of the optical activity σ μνλ (Ω) = Φ μνλ (Ω)/i(Ω + iδ). We discuss a general property, namely a no-go theorem, using the obtained formula (Eq. 13). The optical activity appears to have a singularity at ω = 0 due to the δ-function in Eqs. (4a) and (4b). However, we can prove that this singularity vanishes in the normal phase. In fact, taking the limit Ω → 0, the integrand in Eq. ( , and thus Φ μνλ (Ω = 0) = 0 resulting in the singularity vanishing. This result shows that the optical activity vanishes in equilibrium. However, this is not the case in superconductors as we will discuss later. Next, we calculate the optical activity in a simple model and discuss the typical behaviors. We use a 2dimensional noncentrosymmetric system including the Rashba spin-orbit coupling, however, we note that the optical activity is also expected in other 3-dimensional systems with other types of spin-orbit coupling. This Hamiltonian reads Here, we define ε k = -2t(cos k x + cos k y ) and g k = (sin k y , -sin k x , 0). In this paper, we set the lattice constant a = 1. This model is T -symmetric and belongs to the weak gyrotropic point group C 4v . Thus, the symmetric part of the optical activity vanishes, however, the antisymmetric part is not forbidden. For this symmetry, there is only one finite component σ yzy = -σ zyy = -σ zxx = σ xzx . Figure (Right) shows the frequency dependence of the optical activity σ zxx at zero temperature. In the numerical calculation, we set t = 1.0, α = 0.3, μ = -0.1, and Γ = 0.1. There is a gap of about 0.1 ∼ 0.3 magnitude around the chemical potential μ = -0.1 for direct transitions, not changing the wave numbers k, as seen in Fig. This equation is composed of two parts, the intraband effect and the interband effect. Here, we define the matrix element ε mnk = ε mk -ε nk , and εnk = ε nk -μ. The intraband effect is attributed to the Fermi surface and behaves like the Drude form ∼ τ /(1+(Ωτ ) 2 ) as seen in Eq. ( As discussed in previous studies We formulate the optical activity for superconductors with Green's functions. In this paper, the superconducting state is treated in the mean-field approximation, and it is described by the BdG Hamiltonian in the band representation Here, ) is the Nambu spinor, ∆ k is the pair potential, which is the order parameter of superconductors. We define the transpose of a matrix M as M T and the hermitian conjugate of a matrix M as M † . The current-current correlation function for the generalized current operator (Eq. 11) is given by There are some differences from the formula for the normal state (Eq. 12). First, G is the Green's function for the BdG Hamiltonian, and Σ R/A (ω) represents the self-energy of the dissipation effect. A specific form will be introduced later. Second, the current operator is expanded to the particle-hole Hilbert space as Third, the prefactor 1/2 is introduced to prevent a double counting of the particle and hole degrees of freedom. After a Taylor expansion by q, the first-order coefficient is decomposed into a spin contribution and an orbital contribution. In this paper, we focus on the spin contribution, which is given by Here, the spin operator σθ and the velocity operator in the Bloch basis ṽμ k are different from the normal states. They are defined as Then, we obtain the formula of the optical activity σ μνλ (Ω) = Φ μνλ (Ω)/i(Ω + iδ). In this section, we mainly focus on the spin contribution. Of course, the orbital part, in general, contributes to the optical activity, and this part is studied in previous works investigating the superconducting orbital Edelstein effect and the superconducting gyrotropic current resulting in an additional correction to the optical rotation As discussed in Sec. III C, the singularity due to the δfunction vanishes in the normal state. This result is guaranteed by the identity . However, we will see that a similar identity is not valid in superconducting states. The Bloch velocity operator in superconducting states is described by ṽμ k (Eq. 20), and this operator does not satisfy G BdG , even if the pair potential ∆ k is independent of the wavenumber k. Thus, the integrand in Eq. ( A similar singularity appears in the optical conductivity, and the coefficient corresponds to the superfluid density K νθ is the superconducting Edelstein response coefficient, where the supercurrent induces a magnetization in noncentrosymmetric superconductors (S ν = K νθ A θ or J ν = K νθ B θ ). This response is firstly derived by Edelstein in polar superconductors with Rashba spin-orbit coupling The singularity due to the δ-function is difficult to be directly observed in optical responses. However, it can be exactly measured with the help of the sum rules (Eqs. 5 and 6). These sum rules state that the summation of the spectrum of the optical responses is independent of material details and does not change before and after superconducting transitions. Thus, the regular part in the superconducting state, accessible in optical measurements, appears to have a reduced area. This is called the missing area and is absorbed in the contribution to the δ-function. This exact relation is used to measure the superfluid density and the penetration length by the optical conductivity. This sum rule is called the Ferrell-Glover-Tinkham (FGT) sum rule The discussion of the missing area can be extended to the optical activity. The optical activity also satisfies the sum rule (Eq. 6), which does not change before and after phase transitions. Thus, the following equation is established: Here, we label (n) and (s) for the normal state and the superconducting state, respectively. The left-hand side of this equation represents the missing area, i.e., the difference between the spectral summations of the normal state and the superconducting state at finite frequencies, which is accessible in optical measurements. The righthand side represents the coefficient of the δ-function singularity. As discussed in the no-go theorems, the singularity is finite only in the superconducting state. Thus, the right-hand side includes only the coefficient of the superconducting state. As discussed in Sec. IV B, the coefficient of the δ-function is equivalent to the superconduct-ing Edelstein response that has not yet been observed in experiments. Thus, the missing area measurement gives an alternative way to experimentally determine the superconducting Edelstein effect. Furthermore, we can directly determine the superconducting Edelstein effect only using the optical spectrum in the superconducting phase. The sum rule states that the summation is zero. Thus, the following equation is established: D. Model calculation for the optical activity in a noncentrosymmetric superconductor We analyze an optical spectrum of the optical activity in superconductors to verify the above discussion and the missing area. We consider the same model used in Sec. III C as the normal Hamiltonian H k , and the superconducting paring is uniform singlet. Thus, we set ∆ k = i∆σ y , where ∆ is real. This model is one of the noncentrosymmetric superconductors including the Rashba spin-orbit coupling. Such superconductors are discussed in the surface atomic-layer superconductors on substrates We plot the optical spectrum of the optical activity at various magnitudes of the pair potential ∆ in Fig. Here, H . ρ is the Pauli matrix representing the particle-hole Hilbert space, θ(x) is the step function, and sign(x) is the sign function returning +1 if x > 0 and -1 if x < 0. This dissipation effect is consistent with the normal phase introduced in Sec. III B in the limit ∆ → 0. Figure As discussed in Sec. IV C, the missing area offers the exact measurement of the superconducting Edelstein effect. In this numerical calculation, we can confirm that the relation is valid as seen in Fig. We have investigated general properties of the optical activity in noncentrosymmetric systems, including superconductors. We have derived the sum rule of the optical activity as the property of a two-body correlation function, applicable to general electric states such as interacting systems and superconductors. We have found that the summation is zero, independent of material details in Sec. II. We have discussed the typical behaviors of the optical activity in the normal phase in Sec. III. We have formulated the optical activity using Green's functions and discussed a no-go theorem using the obtained formula. The no-go theorem states that the singularity from the δ-function at the zero frequency Ω = 0 is absent, which means that the equilibrium current is forbidden in normal states. In addition, we have calculated the spectrum of the optical activity using a model, including the spin-orbit coupling and seen that there were two peaks with opposite signs in the spectrum. One peak appears around the zero frequency Ω = 0, corresponding to the Drude peak (∼ τ /(1 + (Ωτ ) 2 )) with finite relaxation time τ . This peak originates at the Fermi surface. Another peak appears at high frequencies and is enhanced around the band gap because its origin is the interband effect. The reason why the two peaks have the opposite sign is that the low-frequency peak from the intraband effect has the constant sign, and the high-frequency peak from the interband effect should show a spectrum with an opposite sign so as to cancel it out due to the sum rule (the summation is zero). Next, we have discussed the optical activity in noncentrosymmetric superconductors in Sec. IV. We have formulated the optical activity in the superconducting state using Green's functions and discussed some properties using this formula. First, we have discussed a no-go theorem. In superconductors, the theorem no longer holds, and the singularity from the δ-function can appear. Second, we have found a characteristic sum rule similar to the FGT sum rule. Due to the existence of the singularity and the universal sum rule (Eq. 6), the spectrum of the optical activity in the finite frequency regime is reduced, and this missing area is equivalent to the coefficient of the singularity (Eq. 22). Furthermore, we have shown the coefficient is equivalent to the superconducting Edelstein effect, which has not been observed in experiments since the first proposal by Edelstein. Our result has shown that the exact measurement of the missing area gives the alternative way of the observation of the superconducting Edelstein effect. We have also calculated the optical activity using a specific model of a s-wave noncentrosymmetric superconductor with a spin-orbit coupling to investigate its typical spectrum. We have found that the missing area originates from the superconducting gap, and that, in the frequency region beyond the superconducting gap, the spectrum asymptotically approaches the normal phase case. Thus, it is sufficient to measure the missing area in the low frequency range about the super-conducting gap. Finally, we comment on the orbital contribution of the optical activity. In this paper, we have focused on the spin contribution. However, the orbital part exists in more general cases as seen in Refs. 