Graphene flow sensors hold great prospects for applications, but also encounter many difficulties, such as unwanted electrochemical phenomena, low measurable signal and limited dependence on the flow direction. This study proposes a novel approach allowing for the detection of a flow direction-dependent electric signal in aqueous solutions of salts, acids and bases. The key element in the proposed solution is the use of a reference electrode which allows external gating of the graphene structure. Using external gating enables to enhance substantially the amplitude of the flow-generated signal. Simultaneous measurement of the reference electrode current allows us to recover a flow-direction-sensitive component of the flow-induced voltage in graphene. The obtained results are discussed in terms of the Coulomb interaction and other phenomena which can be present at the interface of graphene with the aqueous solution. The remarkable properties of two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as high chemical and physical resistance to harsh environment as well as excellent electrical properties, make them a highly interesting subject for many researchers. For more than two decades, 2D materials are the subject of studies that aim to develop novel applications One of the main problems of the systems aimed to measure flow-induced signals is the presence of many electrochemical phenomena which can change the signal diametrically, being up to 2-3 orders of magnitude larger than the flow signal. In our work, we propose a measurement method that allows us to separate different electrical currents, especially those which depend and those that do not depend on the flow direction -thus eliminating the signal of electrochemical origin. This is very promising for the application of graphene flow sensors on the macro and microscale. Epitaxial graphene was grown by Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) or the sublimation method on 4H-SiC insulating substrates The passivated contact pads on the top of the sample are connected to the active area on the bottom part via graphene conductive channels. These channels are made by etching a graphene strip which electrically separates the two leads from the contact pads. This way, the active part of the sample can be immersed into the liquid and at the same time one can avoid an electrical connection between the metallic contacts, which remain above the liquid level (sample in Fig. The measurement system (see Fig. It has been shown that unpassivated metal contacts can lead to unwanted electrochemical effects and should therefore be avoided A typical UII measurement is presented in Fig. As shown in Fig. A set of experimental results obtained for two flow directions (L-left, R-right) for different applied voltages VG between the sample and the working electrode are presented in Fig. The VG dependence shown in Fig. additional voltage control (VG) to obtain measurable effects on a wide range of samples has not been recognized. We think that changing the charge distribution, for example, by using an external voltage, is an essential element to obtain measurable flow effects in such systems. The measured signals IꞱ, like the UII signal from the sample, depends on the parameters of the double layer. This effect can be illustrated by comparing both recorded signals (IꞱ, UII) in one figure (Fig. Both measurements IꞱ and UII differ in the measured unit Ampere and Volt, respectively. To be able to subtract them, these units should be unified. The value of scaling factor α is selected so that the two signals are as close as possible in value. Due to the applied external voltage source and built-in potential differences, sometimes one of the signals needs to be additionally shifted by a certain constant β, so that the value of ΔU is equal to 0 V for lack of flow. The result of the subtraction is shown in Fig. Positive values indicate flow to the right, and negative values indicate flow to the left. We believe that this observation of a direction dependent signal confirms the existence of a drag effect. The changes caused by switching the flow on and off and the change of the flow velocity for UII are at least an order of magnitude lager than the changes for the signal obtained after subtracting the signals UII and IꞱ from each other -ΔU. When considering the use of such a system for a flow sensor that only detects flow velocity or only its appearance, one can rely on the UII value. However, if we need to know the flow direction in addition, we should also use the calculated value of ΔU. The time scale of the experiment in Fig. The signal ΔU also depends on the velocity of the liquid flow. The results of this experiment are shown in Fig. where v is flow rate, and constant a and b are: a = ±1.3 × 10 -4 V and b = 0.2 s/m. In the literature, the topic of dependence of the generated signal on the flow direction in carbon (1) (2) structures (graphene, SWNT) in fluid flow is rarely discussed. There are studies that claim that such an effect does not occur at all In the case of graphene exposed to a flowing liquid, we assume that only the following effects may be responsible for signal generation: phonon coupling, Coulomb interactions and streaming potential. Phonon coupling is also known as phonon wind. In this model, the generation of the voltage is by transfer of momentum from the flowing liquid molecules to the acoustic phonons in the nanotube material and dragging free charge carriers in the nanotube material by phonons (phonons wind) where: ε is the dielectric constant, ε 0 is the vacuum dielectric constant, ζ is the Zeta potential, η is the viscosity, λ is the electric conductivity of solution, Q is the flow rate, L is the vessel length, μ is the viscosity of the fluid , r is the vessel radius. The relations show that ΔP is proportional to the reciprocal of r, which for our macroscopic system without any channel and large distances between electrodes lead to values of ΔP close to zero. The steaming potential Vstr is proportional to ΔP and therefore we can also claim that this mechanism should not play a significant role in our system. In our work, which presents signal generation on a macroscopic scale, we propose an explanation involving Coulomb interaction, the so-called "drag effect". A movement of charged particles in solution, via Coulomb forces, affect the charges inside the graphene, dragging them in the direction of flow. Consequently, this effect is dependent on the direction and velocity of the flowing liquid. The use of additional electrodes allows for better control of the system and the creation of appropriate conditions for the generation of a signal that depends on liquid flow. We show that it is possible to modify these conditions by an external bias voltage. The subtraction of two signals, from the sample and from the solution, allows us to obtain a dependence on both the direction and velocity of the liquid flow. The observed direction-dependent flow signal indicates the importance of the drag effect. The presented results hold great promise for the application of this type of flow sensors, for example, to detect small leakage flows, as well as in microfluidics applications for which a high sensitivity to low flow rates and additional direction sensitivity are of crucial importance.