Harnessing electronic excitations involving coherent coupling to bosonic modes is essential for the design and control of emergent phenomena in quantum materials We endeavour to determine how the electronic excitation spectrum of a representative semiconducting SL TMD is affected by a doped graphene overlayer, as is present in a variety of device architectures These spectra are contrasted with the situation where a graphene layer is placed on top of WS 2 in Fig. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations for the K/graphene/WS 2 heterostructure (see Methods and Extended data Figs. In order to understand the origin of the shake-off bands in the dispersion at K in the graphene/WS 2 heterostructure, we tune the charge carrier density by sequentially increasing the amount of adsorbed potassium on graphene. After each dosing step we measure both the WS 2 conduction band region and the graphene Dirac cone to correlate the evolution of the shake-off bands spectral line shapes with the filling of the Dirac cone. Second derivative plots of the ARPES intensity are shown in Fig. These observations provide further clues on the origin of the shake-off bands. An internal coupling between WS 2 conducting electrons and phonons can be ruled out, because the energy separation of the shake-off bands at high doping exceeds the WS 2 phonon bandwidth of 55 meV 150 and 200 meV with significant electron-phonon coupling. These phonon energies change, however, only by up to 20 meV upon tuning the electron doping To theoretically substantiate this interpretation, we use a generic model consisting of two layers, one with a parabolic electronic spectrum mimicking the occupied WS 2 K-valley and one with the conventional Dirac spectrum of graphene. As justified by our DFT calculations, we assume that the two layers are electronically decoupled, such that the only coupling between them is the long-range Coulomb interaction. Based on this model, we perform random phase approximation (RPA) calculations to evaluate the momentum-dependent and dynamically screened density-density Coulomb interaction matrix W q (ω) in the WS 2 /graphene layer basis. In Fig. In Figs. Coulomb interaction is dominated by screening from the graphene layer as illustrated in Fig. In Fig. within the effective WS 2 K-valley for a graphene doping of n G = 4.7•10 13 cm -2 . In qualitative agreement with the ARPES spectrum, we find a pronounced plasmon polaron band below the original CBM separated by an energy ∆E. In Fig. In all of these linecuts we can identify the main quasiparticle around E -E F ≈ -0.08 eV, and the plasmon polaron bands at lower energies. As the graphene occupation increases, the plasmon polaron band shifts to lower energies, increases its separation from the main quasiparticle peak, and loses intensity. The energy splitting ∆E is plotted as a function of graphene doping n G in Fig. The higher order shake-off bands are missing as a result of the G 0 W 0 approximation and can only be described by taking vertex corrections into account The impact of this finding could be far-reaching, as interfaces between graphene and TMDs have been exploited in various ways: to induce large spin-orbital proximity effects and graphene band structures. The photon beam was focused to a spot-size with a lateral diameter of approximately 10 μm using Kirkpatrick-Baez (KB) mirrors. Electron-doping of samples was achieved by depositing potassium (K) from a SAES getter source in situ. Each dose had a duration of 40 s. After each dose, the Γ -K cut of WS 2 was acquired for 5 minutes followed by a measurement around the Dirac point of graphene for 3 minutes. Efficient switching between these two cut directions was achieved using the deflector capability of the analyser, such that all measurements could be done with the sample position held fixed. In WS 2 without a graphene overlayer, the carrier concentration in WS 2 was estimated using the Luttinger theorem via the Fermi surface area enclosed by the WS 2 conduction band. In the samples with a graphene overlayer, we determined the doping of graphene by directly measuring k F , as shown in Figs. A total of 3 samples were studied, which were a bare WS 2 and two graphene/WS 2 heterostructures on separate TiO 2 wafers such that fresh doping experiments could be performed on all samples. The two graphene/WS 2 heterostructures exhibited twist angles of (7.5 ± 0.3) • and (18.1 ± 0.3) • between graphene and WS 2 , as determined from the BZ orientations in the ARPES measurements. We found identical behaviors with doping and formation of polarons in the two heterostructures, confirming the reproducibility of our results. To study the hybridization and the possible charge transfer between the graphene and WS 2 layers, we performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations using a 4 × 4 WS 2 / 5 × 5 graphene supercell with K doping, as indicated in Fig. In Fig. Ref. showing a graphene Fermi energy of about 0.6 eV in good agreement with the experimentally achieved range. In the upmost valence states around the K-point, we see that the graphene and WS 2 bands hybridize similar to reported band structures on undoped graphene/WS 2 We can consider the WS 2 layer to be weakly doped and the K-valley to be electronically decoupled from the strongly doped graphene layer. Consequently, we can approximate the were set to h WS 2 = 6.16 Å and h Gr = 3.35 Å for WS 2 and graphene, respectively, in accordance with Refs. In order to describe the non-local and dynamic screening of the heterostructure, we calculated the screened Coulomb matrix W q (ω) in the random phase approximation (RPA), neglecting non-density-density terms. Due to the negligible interlayer hybridization, the density-density RPA polarization Π q (ω) is approximately block diagonal, such that for both the WS 2 block Π WS2 q (ω) and the graphene block Π Gr q (ω) we can independently use analytic zero-temperature expressions for a quadratic The bare density-density Coulomb matrix elements were approximated by where d is the interlayer distance and V q is given by V q = 2πe 2 /(Aε q q), with A = (A WS 2 + A Gr )/2 the layer-averaged unit cell area and e the electron charge. ε q is a dielectric function capturing the neglected non-metallic screening channels and is given by with ε = (ε int -ε ext ) / (ε int + ε ext ) and h = h WS 2 +h Gr the total thickness of the heterostructure. The internal dielectric constant is set to the average value of WS 2 and graphene, i.e., The screened density-density Coulomb interaction is finally given as the matrix product W q (ω) = (I -V q Π q (ω)) -1 V q , with I the identity matrix. To explain the experimental observation of plasmon polaron bands in the doped graphene/WS 2 heterostructure we need to theoretically describe the effect of the non-local and dynamic Coulomb interaction on the WS 2 normal state, for which we performed G 0 W 0 calculations. The negligible hybridization between the layers renders both the bare electron propagator G (0) and the G 0 W 0 self-energy Σ approximately block diagonal. As a consequence, one only requires information about the screened Coulomb interaction within the WS 2 layer, (ω), to determine the renormalization of the WS 2 normal state. The self-energy is therefore given by where In spectral representation the sum over discrete Matsubara frequencies can be performed analytically, such that on the real-frequency axis where B q (ω) = -π -1 Im W WS 2 q (ω) -V q and n F and n B are the Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein distribution functions, respectively. To compare to ARPES measurements we calculated the WS 2 spectral-function as In Fig. 