discontinuity of the A 1g phonon, the large phonon-phonon coupling parameters and the large gap ratio, indicate the importance of anharmonic strong phonon-phonon and electronphonon coupling (Dated: The linewidths of all A 1g and E 2g phonon lines including those emerging below T CDW were analyzed in terms of anharmonic symmetric decay Obviously, the ordering vector Q connects two M points (see the green arrow in Fig. More recent ARPES measurements disclose that the small gap may originate from massive Dirac points There are various experimental methods that can be used to attack this issue. One may look for anomalies close to the ordering vector Q in the acoustic phonon branches using either neutron In this paper, we address the open questions as to the states involving the formation of CDW order, including the size and momentum dependence of the electronic gap, the renormalization of phonons, and the evolution of collective modes, by investigating the temperature and polarization dependent inelastic light scattering response in CsV 3 Sb 5 . In particular, in contrast to the AMs found in most of other well-known CDW materials, we found the A 1g AM to be asymmetric in CsV 3 Sb 5 , exhibiting a strong Fano resonance between the conduction electrons and the AM. These results along with the strong anharmonic decay of the two prominent Raman-active phonons and most of the CDW-induced phonons highlight the importance of a cooperation between strong phonon-phonon and electron-phonon coupling in the formation of CDW in CsV 3 Sb 5 . Figure The CDW gap is qualitatively reproduced by the DFT simulations as presented in Fig. Two prominent Raman-active phonon lines are observed saturating at 137.5 cm -1 and 119.5 cm -1 in the zero-temperature limit for A 1g and E 2g symmetry, respectively, as shown in Fig. Both the A 1g and the E 2g phonons show significant renormalization effects at T CDW (see Fig. Although the energies observed upon cooling and heating do not exactly coincide the hysteresis cannot be considered significant. Thus there is no support for a first-order phase transition from the A 1g phonon. The energy of the E 2g line does not exhibit significant changes across T CDW (see Fig. The weak additional lines observed below T CDW are indicated by black asterisks and orange diamonds in Fig. The lines marked by asterisks have weak and conventional temperature dependences and soften by less than 2 % between the low-temperature limit and T CDW (see Fig. These two lines are identified as CDW AM in CsV 3 Sb 5 . The A 1g line broadens by approximately an order of magnitude close to T CDW and assumes a rather asymmetric shape in the range 40-80 K (see Fig. The electronic Raman spectra (cf. Fig. The anisotropy of the gap is substantial and manifests itself in the spectra as a broad intensity distribution and a small but significant difference in the intersection energies. It is not clear why the intensity amplitude (difference between spectra above and below T CDW ) in A 1g symmetry is similarly strong as in E 2g symmetry although only the E 2g spectra project the M points where a gap is expected. Given the complicated band structure of CsV 3 Sb 5 , it is possible that higher-order contributions to the A 1g vertex lend more weight to the M regions than the lowest order vertex (compare Fig. The additional phonon lines below T CDW result from the lowering of the lattice symmetry as spelled out by Wu et al. If one considers a SoD or an iSoD distortion (see the insets of Fig. The lines at 105 cm -1 and 208 cm -1 in A 1g and E 2g symmetry, respectively, have significantly stronger temperature dependences than the other lines appearing below T CDW , and are identified as AMs. Yet, the variation is much weaker than predicted by mean-field theory (see Fig. (i) Impurities lead to a saturation of the AM frequency at approximately the impurity scattering rate Particularly, the A 1g line at 105 cm -1 exhibits anomalies in the line width and shape being incompatible with phonons. Right below T CDW the line width is as large as 50 cm -1 ( More details can be found in Supplementary Materials E). Previously the asymmetry has been interpreted in terms of two superimposed lines having individual temperature dependences to extract the asymmetry parameter 1/|q|. We found that 1/|q| of the A 1g AM becomes maximal at 68 K where the putative transition from 2 × 2 × 2 to 2 × 2 × 4 stacking is expected The Fano line of the AM is unique in CsV 3 Sb 5 and has not been observed in other wellknown CDW materials, such as ErTe 3 We performed a polarization-and temperature-dependent Raman scattering study of the Intriguingly, we identified two CDW amplitude modes having energies of ω A1g AM = 105 cm -1 and ω E2g AM = 208 cm -1 in the low-temperature limit. The A 1g AM couples strongly to a continuum as indicated by the Fano-type line shape displaying the strongest asymmetry at the putative cross-over temperature of approximately 60 K between 2 × 2 × 2 to 2 × 2 × 4 ordering Samples: Single crystals of CsV 3 Sb 5 were grown from liquid Cs (purity 99.98 %), V powder (purity 99.9 %) and Sb shot (purity 99.999 %) via a modified self-flux method Light scattering: The inelastic light scattering experiments were preformed in pseudo-backscattering geometry. The samples were mounted on the cold finger of a 4 He flow cryostat immediately after cleaving. For excitation, a solid-state and an Ar + laser emitting at 575 nm, 514 nm, and 476 nm were used. The inelastic spectra were divided by the Bose factor yielding Rχ ′′ (Ω, T ) = π{1 + n(Ω, T )} -1 S(q ≈ 0, Ω) where χ ′′ is the imaginary part of Raman response function, R is an experimental constant, and S(q ≈ 0, Ω) is the dynamical structure factor For projecting the A 1g and E 2g symmetries RR and RL polarization configurations were used, respectively. In terms of perpendicular linear polarizations x and y, R and L are given by R = 1 √ 2 (x + iy) and L = 1 √ 2 (x -iy), respectively. The configurations with respect to the Kagome plane are shown in Fig. DFT simulations: DFT calculations were performed using VASP where In this equation, μ and ν are band indexes, γ μ k is the Raman vertex at momentum k and band μ, A(k, ω) is the spectral weight at momentum k and energy ω, Ω is the Raman shift energy, f (ω) is the Fermi-Dirac function, ε μ k is the band dispersion, Γ is the energy broadening. A broadening of 0.02 eV was used in the results in the main text. In the calculations, the Raman vertex γ μ k is fixed at a value of 1. Thus, selection rules are ignored for the time being. Phonon calculations were performed using the Phonopy code package In the pristine state, we observed a good agreement between the calculated phonons and those observed experimentally. Based on success by previous studies The unit cell below T CDW is twice as large. ) ) R a m a n S h i f t Ω ( c m -1 ) 