The structure of amorphous silicon is widely thought of as a fourfold-connected random network, and yet it is defective atoms, with fewer or more than four bonds, that make it particularly interesting. Despite many attempts to explain such 'dangling-bond' and 'floating-bond' defects, respectively, a unified understanding is still missing. Here, we show that atomistic machine-learning methods can reveal the complex structural and energetic landscape of defects in amorphous silicon. We study an ultra-large-scale, quantum-accurate structural model containing a million atoms, and more than ten thousand defects, allowing reliable defect-related statistics to be obtained. We combine structural descriptors and machine-learned local atomic energies to develop a universal classification of the different types of defects in amorphous silicon. The results suggest a revision of the established floating-bond model by showing that fivefold-coordinated atoms in amorphous silicon exhibit a wide range of local environments, and it is shown that fivefold (but not threefold) coordination defects tend to cluster together. Our study provides new insights into one of the most widely studied amorphous solids, and has general implications for modelling and understanding defects in disordered materials beyond silicon alone. Amorphous silicon (a-Si) is the textbook example of a disordered material, with a structure that overall resembles Zachariasen's concept of a continuous random network (CRN) of covalently bonded atoms. While the overall structure of a-Si is based on fourfold-connected atoms (N = 4, where N denotes the number of bonded nearest neighbours), there is particular interest in those 'defective' atoms that have fewer (N = 3) or more (N = 5) neighbours in the first shell. In wellrelaxed structural models of a-Si, N is easily determined: the structure shows a clear minimum in the radial distribution function, separating the first (bonded) peak from the second (nonbonded) one, at a distance of about 2.85 Å. The counting of neighbours and therefore the definition of coordination defects is straightforward if the minimum in the distribution decreases to zero; it becomes more ambiguous otherwise, which is most relevant to N = 5 environments. There is also much experimental evidence-for example, from spectroscopy-for the presence of point defects in this amorphous material, emphasising that the structure of a-Si is more nuanced than a simplified all-fourfold CRN description. Our simulations of a-Si are based on a computational approach which we call 'indirect learning' (Fig. Perhaps the most serious assumption made with most current ML potentials is that the total energy of a system of atoms (which is a quantum-mechanical observable) can be decomposed into a sum of local atomic energies (which are not observables). Figure Figure The equivalent correlation plots for N = 3 and N = 4 atoms (Supplementary Fig. The presence of some relatively short fifth-neighbour contacts evident in Fig. We show bond-angle distribution functions (BADFs) and accompanying representative example structures taken from the model in Fig. The boundaries between the classes of 5-fold defects, however, are somewhat fuzzy and this suggests an overlap of types of defect structures, rather than three entirely separate categories, as expected for such a strongly disordered amorphous structure. This observation is consistent with the low energy barriers between structural minima that are observed for 5fold complexes in molecular inorganic chemistry, which often exhibit fluxionality. The correlation between bond distance and local energy in Fig. Figure The structural and energetic landscapes of defects, even for crystalline materials, can be highly complex, and their exploration and understanding requires advanced computational techniques. For example, it was shown recently that relaxations of small-scale defect models often determine incorrect (metastable) defect geometries, and that a more comprehensive exploration of the associated structural and energetic landscape is required even for seemingly simple inorganic crystals. We have previously shown that 2D scatter plots of structural properties (specifically, the 'diamond-likeness') and atomic energies are useful for understanding defects in a-Si. Although the majority of over-coordinated defects in a-Si exist as isolated N = 5 atoms, we find a stronger tendency for those atoms to occur close together than would be expected for a random placement of defects in a CRN. The energy distributions in Fig. The clustering of 5-coordinate defects can be interpreted as causing a reduction in the defective 'surface area'. Our analyses support a comprehensive picture of defects in amorphous silicon. On one hand, 3-fold connected 'dangling-bond' defects are high in energy and do not strongly affect their surroundings. On the other hand, 5-fold connected defects are associated with a broad range of possible structures-which we can understand, at one extreme, as being similar to a trigonal bipyramid with an even distribution of bond distances, and at the other extreme, as being similar to the floating-bond description applied previously. 5-fold defects also have an extended influence on their surroundings, reaching beyond their immediate atomic neighbour environment, which explains their observed tendency to cluster together. Beyond silicon, our study has more general implications for materials modelling. Defects and impurities in solids occur at a concentration of a couple of percent at most, yet they are highly consequential for the performance of functional materials. The structure and chemical bonding of these defects will likely differ markedly from the bulk, requiring a quantummechanically accurate and transferable description of the potential-energy surface associated with defect formation. In the present work, we have showcased how ML interatomic potentials can be used to study rare events in a systematic and statistical way, and how ML-predicted atomic energies can explain the stability of defect environments in one of the most widely studied amorphous materials, viz. a-Si. Qualitatively, this means a step away from idealised CRN models or small-scale simulation systems which (necessarily) contain only a handful of defects, moving towards a fully realistic description of the amorphous state. Structural analysis. The SOAP kernel quantifies the similarity of two atomic environments on a scale from 0 (entirely dissimilar) to 1 (identical up to a defined cut-off radius). 