Two dimensional topological superconductors with chiral edge modes are predicted to posses a quantized thermal Hall effect proportional to the Chern number, exactly half that for chiral topological insulators. However not much work has been done in identifying the quantized heat conductance in the literature, even for some of the standard models of topological superconductivity. Here we introduce a model based on a proximity induced superconducting Bismuth bilayer, and directly calculate the thermal Hall conductance of this lattice model. This model serves as a demonstration of the state of the art possible in such a calculation, as well as introducing an interesting paradigmatic topological superconductor with a rich phase diagram. We demonstrate the quantized thermal Hall plateaus in several different topological phases, and compare this to numerical calculations of the Chern number, as well as analytical calculations of the Chern number's parity invariant. We demonstrate that it is possible to get a reasonable topological phase diagram from the quantized thermal Hall calculations. The technique used can be applied to wide range of models directly in real space. Applying a thermal gradient across an appropriate sample can lead to a non-dissipative thermal Hall current, a phenomenon known as the Leduc-Righi effect Two-dimensional topological superconductors themselves have also seen an explosion of interest, for some early examples see Refs. On the experimental side the situation is rather complicated due to the subtleties in measuring the required thermal currents. Nonetheless impressive progress has been made along this direction looking at fractional quantum Hall states In a two-dimensional topological superconductor, the edge states are often composed of electrically neutral Majorana fermions. As Majorana fermions are each half an electron this is often understood as the reason for the factor of one half difference between the quantized thermal Hall conductance for the chiral insulators and superconductors. However it should be noted that in fact not all chiral bands inside the gap are composed of Majorana fermions. Only those bands which pass through the time reversal invariant momenta can be Majorana fermions, and this number can even depend on the orientation of the edge In our results we find that the quantized thermal Hall effect is always in agreement with the number of chiral bands, and hence the Chern number, and not the number of Majorana fermions. This result is in agreement with calculations performed entirely using bulk states Additionally two-dimensional topological superconductors have been investigated with other standard techniques such as scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy The model which we introduce here is based on bismuth Although it has been shown that for non-interacting fermionic tight binding Hamiltonians it is possible to numerically calculate the thermal Hall conductance This article is organised as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the tight binding model describing the proximitized Bismuth bilayer on which we base our calculations. In Sec. III we demonstrate the analytical calculations of the Chern number parity, as well as the numerical calculations of the Chern number, and their results. Sec. IV compares this to the direct calculations of the thermal Hall conductance. In Sec. V we conclude with a discussion of the results. We start from a Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for the particle and hole spaces on a general two dimensional lattice written in the Nambu basis, Ψj = (ĉ j,↑ , ĉj,↓ , ĉ † j,↓ , -ĉ † j,↑ ) T , where ĉ † j,σ creates a particle of spin σ at site j. We use Pauli matrices ⃗ σ for the spin subspace and ⃗ τ for the particle-hole subspace, the full space is therefore a tensor product between these spaces. However we will adopt the common notation that this is written as τ a ⊗ σ b → τ a σ b and identity matrices are not written at all. The lattice structure is based upon a bismuth (111) bilayer Crucially the Hamiltonians we consider anti-commute with an anti-unitary particle hole operator, {C, H} = 0, where C = e iφ τ y σ y K with K complex conjugation and φ an arbitrary phase. There is no chiral or time reversal symmetry present which means this system is in the D class of the topological periodic table and has a Z invariant The full lattice Hamiltonian, written in BdG form, is The first contribution consist of the onsite terms: μ is the chemical potential, B a Zeeman field, and ∆ a proximity induced s-wave superconducting pairing. The second contribution consists of the intra-plane hopping terms: α is a Rashba spin-orbit interaction, present when inversion symmetry is broken, and t is the usual hopping strength. ⟨j, l⟩ is used to refer to nearest neighbour pairs of sites j and l in each layer, but not between the layers. ⃗ δ jl is the real space vector between sites j and l. Finally the inter layer hopping is ⟨j, l⟩ ′ denotes pairs of sites in different layers, connected by the hopping terms shown as gray lines in Fig. (5) Each entry in this matrix is itself a matrix for the sublattice structure. Labelling the upper and lower layers as U and L, and the sublattice sites in each layer as A and B, the explicit form of the operator is The sublattice matrices are and Both B and ∆ are diagonal in the sublattice space. ⃗ δ j are the nearest neighbour vectors between A and B atoms , (0, 1) . (10) See Fig. where n = 1, 2, . . . N x and m = 1, 2, . . . N y . In this form the time reversal invariant (TRI) momenta are Throughout the rest of this paper we focus on this model. In table I we give the parameters which are used for the different examples contained throughout the paper when considering bandstructures, thermal Hall conductance, and current maps. We demonstrate our results with examples from several different topological phases and focus on parameter ranges which allow us to find reasonable numerical results at the largest system sizes we are able to probe. Examples for the bandstructure showing the edge modes along both zig-zag and armchair edges are shown in Figs. In Fig. One of the main focuses of this article is the quantized thermal Hall conductance, which is proportional to the Chern number, ν ∈ Z. Hence we wish to compare the calculated thermal conductance and an independent calculation of the Chern number. Naturally the calculation of the Chern number also informs us about the rich topological phase diagram of this model. The Chern number for such a complicated model can only be calculated numerically, however we can find an analytical expression for its parity δ = (-1) ν . Both of these can be compared to the band structure, as one expects that the Chern invariant gives the number of chiral propagating modes along the edge of the system due to the bulk boundary correspondence. We remind the reader here that the chiral modes are not necessarily Majorana fermion modes The Chern number, equivalent to the TKNN invariant with the Green's function G ⃗ k,ω = (H( ⃗ k) -iω) -1 and momentum ⃗ k = (k x , k y ). By diagonalizing the Hamiltonian the frequency integral in Eq. ( Performing the frequency integral leaves where Θ is the Heaviside theta function. The momentum integral over the Brillouin zone can be performed numerically, with the matrix multiplication and determination of S also calculated numerically. For the integration we use Romberg's method over the hexagonal Brillouin zone An example topological phase diagram, which contains all points in table I, is given in Fig. There is a relatively simple method for calculating the parity of the Chern number where The order of matrix products here should be understood as tensor multiplication from left to right over the particle-hole, spin, AB sublattice, and finally layer, subspaces. We then find at the TRI momenta a block diagonal Hamiltonian and the parity topological invariant is simply Due to the symmetry of the lattice H( ⃗ Γ 2 ) = H( ⃗ Γ 3 ) = H( ⃗ Γ 4 ) and therefore it is sufficient here to consider just two TRI momenta. When δ = -1 there is a band inversion, i.e. the parity switches between TRI momenta an odd number of times and the system is topologically nontrivial in the sense that the Chern number is odd. For δ = 1 the system is topologically trivial in the limited sense that the Chern number is even. Finally, introducing and for the determinants. See Fig. In the following section we will show how to calculate the thermal current, from which we can find the quantized thermal Hall conductance to compare with the direct calculation of the Chern number. The heat current for a lattice system can be found by defining a local energy term and calculating its rate of change using Heisenberg's equation of motion where the index j labels all sites in the two dimensional lattice and R j is the set of all neighbours of site j. The Hamiltonian has been divided into two contributions, one defined purely onsite, and one which includes all the hopping terms. The local energy current operator is then given by Heisenberg's equation of motion The numerical factors arise as we calculate the commutators using a BdG Hamiltonian. As we are interested in the currents flowing around the edges of our nanoflake we define an edge current operator where the set E contains all sites j for which Ĵj contains terms which cross a line extending from the centre to the edge, see appendix D for an example. Thus it defines the current crossing a particular boundary. In practice we take boundaries which extend from the middle of one edge to the centre of our nanoflake. For the expectation value we find with f (ε n ) the Fermi function. The thermal Hall conductance, which is the thermal current flowing due to a temperature gradient across the sample, can be shown to be equivalent to and the quantized thermal Hall conductance is then For a non-interacting particle-hole symmetric system one can quickly verify that π/12 is the correct expression for the contribution of a single chiral edge band, see appendix A. Evaluation of the commutator Eq. 22, performed using the SNEG library The system is solved on a finite lattice using the pybinding package Again djl denotes the unit vector between sites j and l, and not an operator. To observe a correct, well-developed plateau at the value reflecting the topological invariant of the occupied bands (and the central charge of the underlying effective field theory), one has to meet certain requirements. On the one hand, the temperature has to be smaller than the effective topological energy gap, so as to not excite any bulk states and only probe the edge mode. On the other hand, the temperature has to be larger than the mean ingap level spacing, effectively representing the velocity of the edge modes, which vastly varies among the different phases in the phase diagram. We can summarize these temperature requirements as ∆ eff < T < ∆ eff /∆E g . To make sure that we can find a reasonable plateau in every identified topologically non-trivial phase, we exhaust our High Performance computing (HPC) resources, limiting the lattice to a rectangular flake of size 280a × 262a, where a = 1 is the distance between the first neighbors in one honeycomb layer. This results in our finite size sample containing about 10 5 lattice sites. This is an order of magnitude larger than previously considered in other works The temperature dependence of κ/T in units of the thermal conductance quantum is presented in In an experimental situation, one cannot ignore the presence of phonons in the system, which would complicate the picture. By coupling to the edge mode the phonons start serving as a sink for the heat, and additionally the longitudinal conductance (vanishing in an ideal situation) can exceed the transverse (Hall) conductance. The low temperatures required to observe topological superconductivity can however serve as an aid. The mean free path of phonons in low temperatures is expected to be large enough to achieve ballistic transport of phonons through the bulk. While in this situation a new channel for the heat current appears and the quantization cannot be expected, a careful design of the temperature probing system and contacts can circumvent such problems In this article we have introduced and solved a twodimensional topological superconductor based on a swave proximitized (111) bismuth bilayer. We first calculate the Chern number and find the topological phase diagram as a function of the various possible parameters of the model. This is then compared to the bandstructure along both zig-zag and armchair edges of the model, which can differ in details. As the numerical calculation of the Chern number is numerically costly we then demonstrate how to calculate its parity analytically, and compare this to the Chern number phase diagrams. We then calculate the appropriate expression for the quantized thermal Hall conductance, starting with Heisenberg's equation of motion for a suitably defined local energy operator. We demonstrate that plateaus at the correct quantized values form in the κ/T as a function of temperature in several different topological phases. We also check a topologically trivial phase which nonethe- less has many trivial in-gap bands, to confirm it has zero thermal Hall conductance. Using these results as a basis we then calculate an exemplary topological phase diagram based on the quantized thermal Hall conductance to compare to the Chern number phase diagram and show that even for the complicated model used here it works reasonably well. Here we have solved an interesting topological superconductor model which demonstrates a very rich phase diagram with large Chern numbers. Additionally these results open the way for a widespread theoretical investigation of the thermal Hall effect in many topological superconductors which could be used as the basis for experimental investigations. Furthermore the technique we use is based entirely in real space and therefore easily allows for calculations which consider the role of disorder and edge deformations, which would make interesting extensions to this work. the inter-layer hopping. For changes in α only extremely large values substantially modify the phase diagram, and in general we find it is relatively stable as a function of α. The inter-layer hopping has a more pronounced effect as it must interpolate between a doubled single layer system 