We review well-known signatures of disorder in crystallographic and inelastic neutron scattering data. We show that these can arise from different types of disorder, corresponding to different values of the system entropy. Correlating the entropy of a material with its atomistic structure and dynamics is in general a difficult problem that requires correlating information between multiple experimental techniques including crystallography, spectroscopy, and calorimetry. These comments are illustrated with particular reference to barocalorics, but are relevant to a broad range of calorics and other disordered crystalline materials. * In principle, this formula applies generally, with n being the number of microstates accessible to a system in a phase space including both positions and momenta. Here we will apply it directly only in the case where n represents different, equivalent, positions, for instance in crystallographic disorder models. In the context of barocaloric materials, this is equivalent to assuming that the local shape of the potential well is similar enough in the high-and low-entropy phases that vibrational contributions effectively cancel. Barocaloric materials, which can be switched between low-and high-entropy states by applying pressure, are promising candidates to replace vapour-compression refrigerants. Until recently, such materials were thought to be rather rare; however, work in the past decade has shown that many, perhaps even most solid-solid phase transitions are in principle barocaloric. Such entropy changes are determined by a material's atomistic structure and dynamics, which are revealed in extraordinary detail by modern diffraction and spectroscopy experiments. The results of these experiments are thus a natural place to begin building models of entropy. Unfortunately, however, these data, particularly when taken individually, may give an ambiguous or even misleading picture of contributions to a material's entropy. The purpose of this Perspective is to review pitfalls in interpreting crystallographic and spectroscopic data collected from disordered crystalline materials, with particular reference to modelling entropy directly from these data. In the following two subsections, we outline the two main contributions to entropy we will discuss -vibrational and configurational entropy (Section 1.2) -and present a simple toy model of a phase transition that illustrates the ways in which these forms of entropy can occur (Section 1.3). We then consider the effects of each of these contributions, first on crystallography (Section 2), then on neutron spectroscopy (Section 3). Of course, the problem of relating entropy to structure is relevant far beyond the specific application to barocalorics. In a sense, the entire discipline of materials chemistry is founded on the understanding that the bulk thermodynamics that 1 arXiv:2308.07080v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 14 Aug 2023 govern a substance's stability and reactivity are determined by its atomic-level structure and dynamics. The first step in understanding this relationship is to calculate the internal energy associated with a particular atomic configuration, the realm of quantum chemistry. But when working at constant temperature, as in most practical cases, it is the free energy that must be minimised; in this case, the entropy of an atomic configuration also becomes important and indeed may dominate the free energy difference between competing phases. First, different sorts of entropy require different mathematical formalisms. where k is the Boltzmann constant and n the number of equivalent configurations a structure can occupy. * The vibrational entropy, by contrast, arises from the standard expression for a harmonic oscillator where now n(E, T) is the number of phonons in a particular mode at a given temperature. In practice, many modes will be active and this is more typically used as an integral over the phonon density of states g(E): Second, this description immediately illustrates that there is no clear division between these types of entropy; our perspective may change, for instance, depending on the barrier height between basins (or, equivalently, the temperature). Third and finally, this additive property is a double-edged sword, in the sense that these calculations reduce complex configurations of atoms to single scalar numbers: it is thus easy for errors in different components to accumulate or, conversely, to cancel fortuitously. As a result, it is difficult to judge the accuracy of an entropy calculation, or to troubleshoot it, simply by comparison with the experimentally determined value. Since barocaloric materials require a phase transition between a high-and a low-entropy phase, we consider here a simple model of the entropy in such phase transitions. We assume that the space-group symmetries of the two phases are related by a group-subgroup relationship: in other words, that moving from the low-to the high-temperature phase introduces a specific new symmetry element to the crystallographic structure. In Fig. As a model of the physical origin of such behaviour, anticipated in Figure where the u i represent the displacements of each atom from the centre of its site; κ 2 and κ 4 characterise the double-well potential; J characterises the inter-site "spring" interaction; and the second sum is to be taken over all pairs of nearest neighbours ("n.n.") i and j. In this model, the competition between the site potentials and the nearest-neighbour interactions is encapsulated in the parameter s ≡ κ 2 /8J. If s ≪ 1, the nearest-neighbour interactions dominate over the site potentials; the phase transition is displacive; and the entropy change is entirely vibrational. If s ≫ 1, the site potentials dominate; the phase transition is order-disorder; and the entropy is purely configurational. Despite its simplicity, this model is difficult to analyse in full generality. Two ways of simplifying it are to assume that either the sites or the vibrational modes are independent of one another. Alternatively, this simplification can be avoided entirely by using molecular dynamics simulation to directly sample the relevant region of the potential energy surface. The intensities of Bragg peaks depend on the space and time average of the contents of the crystallographic unit cell. Specifically, they are sensitive to the scattering density within this cell. In theory, this scattering density could be represented in terms of a wide range of possible basis functions. In practice, standard crystallographic models represent it as the sum of ellipsoids, each representing a single atom, as a way of achieving a good fit with relatively few refined parameters. The dimensions of these ellipsoids are the atomic displacement parameters (ADPs); these were earlier called "thermal parameters," but the change of name reflects that these represent displacement from the average site for any reason, including static disorder as well as thermal motion. Inasmuch as they do represent thermal vibrations, however, the choice to model each atom as an ellipsoid is equivalent to taking the (quasi)harmonic approximation. There are well-established methods to determine both the vibrational and configurational entropy from such crystallographic models. The vibrational entropy can be calculated either directly from the temperature dependence of the ADPs (normal coordinate analysis) As an example, consider a hypothetical phase transition that creates a crystallographic mirror plane. In the low-symmetry phase (Fig. First, the split-site model, where the site is on a general position, has nine parameters: three to define the position vector, six to define the ellipsoid, which is represented by a rank-two symmetrical tensor. On the other hand, the single-site model, where the site is on the mirror plane, has only two position parameters (since it is free to move only on the 2D plane) and only four displacement parameters (which can be thought of as the length, width and breadth of the ellipsoid plus a rotation perpendicular to the mirror plane), for a total of only six parameters. The split-site model therefore has three more degrees of freedom, which are available to absorb noise even if they are not required by the true scattering density; it would be expected to give a lower R-value for this reason alone. At the least, therefore, a statistical correction for this effect is required to meaningfully compare these models. As noted above, the relevant formula for configurational entropy is the Boltzmann equation (1). If the two split sites are independent, each will therefore contribute R ln 2 to the entropy, for a total of R ln 4. On the other hand, if (say) steric hindrance prevents the two atoms from being on the same side of the mirror plane at the same time, as suggested by the low-temperature structure (Fig. In summary, even a well-fitting crystallographic model of a disordered phase may be ambiguous as to whether the entropy is primarily vibrational or configurational. We will now see that exactly the same is true of vibrational spectroscopy. A perfect, static crystal has zero entropy, so that entropic contributions must be inferred indirectly from crystallographic data in the ways discussed above. On the other hand, vibrational spectroscopy inherently reveals entropy due to this vibrational motion, which indeed can be calculated as an integral over the phonon density of states (3). In addition, however, further signatures of disorder are often observed in inelastic neutron spectra, which may reveal additional contributions to the entropy. Specifically, in contrast with the sharp, detailed phonon spectra typically produced by ab initio calculations, those measured experimentally display varying degrees of broadening. Broadening arising from the instrumental resolution can be minimised by good instrument and experimental design, but cannot be removed entirely. It is therefore essential to have a good understanding of the resolution to determine whether the observed broadening has an additional physical origin. Historically, the understanding of the resolution ellipsoid on triple axis spectrometers has been very well understood, allowing an optimised data collection strategy and deconvolution from the data. For time-of-flight direct geometry spectrometer measurements, which yield a survey of excitations over a much larger region of reciprocal space, this has been more complicated, but with the development of software like Euphonic, Once the instrumental resolution has been taken into account, any further broadening must have physical significance for the system being studied. As before, it is convenient to divide the potential causes into two main cases, depending on whether the disorder is dynamic or static on the timescale set by the phonon frequency. The static case corresponds more or less directly to the case of configurational entropy discussed above, while the dynamic case will alter the value of the vibrational entropy. As well as this characteristic time scale, phonons also have a characteristic length scale set by their wavelength. Thus long-wavelength, low-frequency vibrations are likely to sample a range of whatever parameter characterises the disorder (for instance, different site occupancies or molecular orientations), while short-wavelength, high-frequency vibrations may instead reflect a particular local configuration of atoms. Once again, there is no clear dividing line between these two origins. Indeed, a common and technologically relevant intermediate situation involves orientational disorder of molecules in crystals, which may be anywhere from frozen to almost unhindered depending on the phase and temperature, and which will couple to the translations involved in vibrational motion. We consider first the case of dynamic disorder. Phonons are quantum-mechanical quasiparticles that arise from quantising the vibrational normal modes of a crystal. Typically, atomic displacements in these modes are small, allowing the potential of the lattice to be written in terms of a Taylor expansion about the equilibrium position. The harmonic approximation corresponds to truncating the expansion at the second order term, valid for many small displacements, resulting in a harmonic oscillator. As noted above, this approximation is equivalent to assuming that the vibrational modes do not interact, and gives excitations with infinite lifetimes and sharp peaks. On the other hand, in systems where the potential is appreciably anharmonic, there will be phonon-phonon interactions which will reduce the phonon lifetime, resulting in broadening in energy. Using lowest-order perturbation theory, it can be shown that this damping is linearly proportional to temperature. Furthermore, in the anharmonic case, the phonon frequency is no longer independent of the mode amplitude, so that a frequency shift with temperature is also expected. Such phonon anharmonicity is significant for many important condensed matter phenomena, including negative thermal expansion, ultralow thermal conductivity, high-temperature superconductivity, and soft mode phase transitions. An in-depth understanding of the microscopic mechanism is thus vital for many applications. Phonon anharmonicity has been explored extensively using inelastic neutron scattering, through the measurement of phonon dispersion curves, phonon lifetimes and phonon densities of states. With no claim to comprehensiveness, we give here a few recent examples. In the thermoelectric PbTe, INS reveals strong broadening and softening with increasing temperature, indicative of substantial anharmonicity. This is amplified by nesting between transverse acoustic and optical modes, which enables more three-phonon scattering channels. affecting the local coordination of the Yb 3 + ions, suggesting that it was inherent structural disorder responsible for the spin-liquid physics (Fig. The effects of static disorder on the vibrational spectra of crystalline materials have been modelled largely in one of two limits of computational difficulty. First, the virtual crystal approximation looks at the average effect of disorder on phonon dispersion, treating the phonon broadening as a perturbation. This typically works well only for low-frequency phonon modes and for low levels of disorder. Alternatively, supercell-based methods allow disorder to be accounted for explicitly, but are restricted by the computational cost of performing phonon (or molecular dynamics) calculations on large simulation cells. In this second case, the cost may be ameliorated by using a cheaper Hamiltonian. For instance, while density-functional theory is practically restricted to relatively small systems, perhaps ∼ 100-1000 atoms, suitably parametrised empirical potentials are far less expensive and can therefore be used to model larger systems. In either case, "unfolding" the supercell phonon modes onto the Brillouin zone of the original crystal -an approach known as supercell lattice dynamics (SCLD) We recently validated this approach against experimental INS data. Adamantane is a barocaloric plastic crystal that undergoes a phase transition at T = 208 K to an orientationally disordered phase, Structural disorder reveals itself with well-known signatures in both crystallographic and spectroscopic data: typically, crystallographic models show large ADPs and atom sites that "may be split", while excitation peaks are broadened. Attempting to determine a material's entropy directly from such data, however, can be dangerous, specifically because configurational and vibrational components are easy to confuse but contribute in very different ways to the total entropy. Of course, diffraction and spectroscopy remain vital tools in characterising disordered phases, including those of barocaloric materials. Certainly, any convincing mechanism for a giant entropy change must be consistent with both crystallography and spectroscopy. One way to be more confident in an analysis of contributions to the entropy is simply to combine crystallographic and spectroscopic data. Another is to cross-reference against additional techniques, for instance diffuse scattering or solid-state NMR. In general, to avoid confusion between different types of entropy, great care should be taken to predict the experimentally observable consequences of a given structural model, and to check that these are in fact distinguishable from those predicted by alternative plausible models. We conclude with a brief look to the future. The problem of deriving entropy from a structural model is in practice less routinely solved than the corresponding problem for energy. There is, however, no fundamental reason why the crystal engineering community could not target a high-entropy structure in much the same way, and with the same accuracy, as is now done to design low-energy states. This would be an extremely important step towards designing functional materials including dielectrics and ionic conductors as well, of course, as calorics.