The projector-augmented wave (PAW) method is one of the approaches that are widely used to approximately treat core electrons and thus to speed-up plane-wave basis set electronic structure calculations. However, PAW involves approximations and it is thus important to understand how they affect the results. Tests of precision of PAW data sets often use properties of isolated atoms or of atomic solids. While this is sufficient to identify problematic PAW data sets, little information has been gained to understand the origins of the errors and suggest ways to correct them. Here we show that interaction energies of molecular dimers are very useful not only to identify problematic PAW data sets but also to uncover the origin of the errors. Using dimers from the S22 and S66 test sets and other dimers we find that the error in the interaction energy is composed of a short range component with an exponential decay and a long range electrostatic part caused by error in the total charge density. We propose and evaluate a simple improvable scheme to correct the long range error and find that even 1 in its simple and readily usable form, it is able to reduce the interaction energy errors to less than one half on average for hydrogen bonded dimers. There are several choices one needs to make when performing total energy calculations at the level of quantum mechanics that affect the quality of result. We often focus on the accuracy of approximations involving Hamiltonian or wavefunction such as Hartree-Fock, or density functional theory (DFT) approximations. However, there are also many numerical parameters that need to be set or approximations that one might use and that affect the energy as well. When using plane-wave (PW) basis set and periodic boundary conditions (PBC) one often approximates core electrons, either by using pseudopotentials (PP) The precision of different PPs or PAW data sets can be assessed by comparison to all-electron results calculated, e.g., with the full potential linearized plane wave scheme (FLAPW) In these tests it was noted that the agreement between PW-PAW calculations and the allelectron reference decreases for molecules containing nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, or sulphur. This is consistent with the results obtained by Lejaeghere and co-workers harder PPs or PAWs need to be used. Binding energies of molecular dimers or molecular solids are often affected considerably by the choice of the PP or PAW data set. For example, for α polymorph of oxalic acid one obtains a binding energy of -1289 meV using VASP's Standard PAWs when using the PBE+vdW TS method. PAWs can be less problematic for other systems. For example, the binding energy changes only by around 4 meV for ammonia crystal, from -459 to -463 meV. Nevertheless, these imprecisions clearly affect the results of benchmarking studies. Clearly, the interaction or binding energies are sensitive to the choice of PPs or PAWs and can be thus used to assess their precision. This approach was already used by Witte and co-workers In this study we analyse the precision of the PAW potentials using interaction energies of dimers in the S22 and S66 sets 2 Methods Overview The plane-wave PAW calculations were performed using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) version 6.2. VASP PAW dataset version) were used. These are denoted by the suffices " h", " h GW", none, " GW", and " s", respectively, in the PAW directory distributed with VASP and their properties are summarised in Tables ST1-ST5 in the Supporting Information (SI). The interaction energies of dimers, E int , were obtained as where E dimer , E mono1 , and E mono2 are the energies of dimer, and the two monomers, respectively. The error of the interaction energy with respect to reference value For the tests of binding energies of dimers in the S22 and S66 databases the structures were used without any structural optimisation. Unless noted, we used plane-wave basis-set cut-offs of 2000, 1600, and 1000 eV for the Hard (and h GW), Standard (and GW), and Soft PAW potentials, respectively. In order to minimize the interactions between periodic images, a large simulation cell with a side of 35 Å was used to gather the data for the S22 and S66 datasets and to perform distance scans. Residual spurious interactions between periodic images were further reduced by using the dipole correction in VASP (IDIPOL=4 tag in INCAR). The all-electron calculations of interaction energies were performed using the Turbomole 44 package, without employing the resolution-of-identity (RI) approximation to reduce numerical errors. datasets. We note that our PBE/AV5Z interaction energies for the S22 dimers are in a very good agreement with the results obtained using a large pc-4 basis set To help the analysis as well as to obtain precise categorization of the considered complexes, we used the symmetry-adapted perturbation theory (SAPT) elst ) and secondorder dispersion (E (2) disp ) interaction energy components which were obtained by localized asymptotically corrected PBE0 XC potential (LPBE0AC) Finally, for analysis, atom-atom interaction energies were obtained by using interacting quantum atom (IQA) where A and B represent atomic basins belonging to the monomer 1 and monomer 2, respectively, as defined by the quantum theory of atoms in molecules (QTAIM). where E AB elstat and E AB XC are the classical electrostatic and XC contributions to atom-atom interactions, respectively. All the PBE/AVTZ and HF/AVTZ densities for the IQA calculations were obtained by Molpro, We start with the errors of the different PAWs calculated for the PBE interaction energies of the S66 dimers, shown in Fig. Standard and Hard PAWs. The Hard PAWs produce results of essentially reference quality, the maximum deviation from the reference AV5Z result is ca. -1.2 meV (see Table The Standard and Soft PAWs have negligible errors only for the complexes 35-51, which are dispersion dominated. The largest errors of Standard and Soft potentials can be seen for the hydrogen-bonded complexes, i.e., complexes 1-23, the errors of the "mixed" complexes are smaller, but still significant. The results of the GW potentials are similar to the non-GW variants and we thus do not include them in Fig. In contrast, the errors somewhat increase for the Hard PAW when PBE is replaced by HF. Overall, the data show that the main cause of the error is likely identical for PBE and HF calculations. Moreover, the GW PAWs are likely more reliable when using other functional than PBE. In Table Hard GW potentials give overall errors between that of the AVTZ and AVQZ basis sets. For the Hard potential the errors are similar to those of the AVTZ basis set when HF energies are calculated. In terms of statistics, the Standard and Standard GW lead to higher average errors compared to the counterpoise-corrected AVDZ values for the S66 database complexes. However, the situation is not so simple as the errors vary a lot between the different dimers and in the following we discuss how the errors depend based on the character of the binding. The subsets that we use are hydrogen bonded (HB), π-π, π-σ, σ-σ, and "others". With few exceptions the HB and others correspond to the electrostatic and mixed groups of Řezáč et al., The errors of the interaction energies for standard and soft PAWs increase when going from the σ -σ to the HB subsets. This strongly suggests that the errors depend on the electrostatic contribution to the interaction energy. In order to quantitatively assess this relation we compared the PAW errors to interaction energy components as obtained by SAPT. This analysis shows a clear correlation between the PAW errors and the electrostatic component of the interaction energy, as illustrated in Fig. -1600 -1400 -1200 -1000 -800 -600 -400 -200 0 E elst ) term obtained with the DFT-SAPT-EXX method for S66 database. The statistical quantities in Table As the errors are the largest for the HB dimers, we now analyse them in a more detail. First, we take dimers with a single hydrogen bond from the S22 and S66 sets and plot the errors for these dimers as a function of the distance between the hydrogen atom and the acceptor atom. The data are shown in Fig. As a final step of the analysis of the S66 data, we considered the errors of bifurcate complexes -dimers with two hydrogen bonds. These are uracil-uracil, acetic acid dimer (AcOH-AcOH), acetamide dimer (AcNH 2 -AcNH 2 ), acetic acid-uracil(AcOH-uracil) and acetamideuracil (AcNH 2 -uracil), which are complexes 17, 20, 21, 22, and 23 in the S66 database. As one can see in Fig. As with the systems with a single hydrogen bond, the errors are clearly larger when the HBs involve oxygen as the donor than when the donor is nitrogen. AcNH 2 -uracil 0.17 -9.12 -42.43 The data obtained for the S22 and S66 sets show a clear relation of the PAW error to the magnitude of the electrostatic component of the interaction and the distance between the dimers. Moreover, the errors are the largest for molecules containing oxygen and nitrogen. To get deeper insight into the errors, we constructed sets of dimers formed by small molecules and performed distance scans of the interaction energy and its error. Each set contains molecular dimers oriented in a way to create a close contact between two specific atoms, such We now consider the errors for the three dimers in which water accepts a HB. The errors clearly increase when going from methane over ammonia to water as the HB donating molecule. This holds for the Standard PAWs and Soft PAW for all the distances and for the slowly decaying component of the Hard PAWs. In fact, the water-methane error has apparently only the short range component, the errors are close to zero above ∼3.0 Å. As the error is a combination of at least two contributions it is useful to analyse the nature of the donor-acceptor interactions in the systems using the IQA approach. The IQA provides information about classical electrostatic contribution to the interaction energy and exchange correlation contribution. The data are shown in Fig. in which the exponential function models the overlap component and the second term corresponds to the dipole-dipole interaction, and a, b, and c are coefficients of the fit and R refers to the intermolecular or interatomic distance. We show an example of the fit using Eq. (Fig. The long-range component of the PAW error comes from the Coulomb interaction and the cause of the error therefore needs to be incorrect density of the monomers. To assess the magnitude of the density errors we considered several molecules from the S22 and S66 test sets and obtained charge density differences (∆ρ) between Soft and Hard or Standard and Hard PAWs. For this comparison we used the approximate all-electron densities printed by VASP by setting LAECHG=.TRUE. in INCAR. Fig. and Soft PAW (bottom) with the isosurfaces showing values of ±0.02 Å-3 . There is a substantial electron density difference around the oxygen atom, the differences are smaller for carbon and nitrogen while the density differences around hydrogens are visible only for the Soft PAW. The density difference for oxygen resembles a p-like function and thus has a dipole moment (see Fig. We define a density error of monomer A as where ρ S A and ρ H A are respectively the densities obtained by more approximate PAW potential "S" (such as Standard or Soft) and a more precise one, such as that calculated using the Hard PAW potential. The density error for monomer B is defined analogously. The error in the density-density electrostatic component of the interaction energy is the additional index compared to Eq. 4 indicates that the first energy is calculated with the approximate density and the second with the precise one. Using the relations for electrostatic interaction of two electron densities (Eq. 4) and for the density errors of monomers A and B (Eq. 5) in Eq. 6 we obtain This can be further simplified if we use an expression for the electrostatic potential created by electron density V H A (r 2 ) = ρ H A (r 1 ) 1 |r 1 -r 2 | dr 1 and define V H B (r 1 ) in a similar way. We obtain The first two terms give the interaction of the density error of one monomer with the potential of the other monomer, the last term then describes the interaction of the two density errors. The last term is likely to be smaller compared to the first two contributions. If we neglect it we obtain which is the first relation that we use to compare to the actual error of different PAWs. This equation can be readily tested for VASP as all the required quantities (electron densities and Hartree potential) can be written by the code and processed by an external program. The form of the error suggests several ways how to estimate it using more approximate means. One possibility is to approximate the electrostatic potential of a molecule by using atom-centered partial charges as where r i are the positions of the atoms and q i are the partial charges. Moreover, the density error can be approximately expanded into atom-centered multipole moments. In this work we use only the dipole moment. Using these two approximations in Eq. 8 gives an approximate formula for the interaction energy error where the indices i and j run over atoms in monomers A and B, respectively, μ i are the dipoles assigned to atom i, and r ij is the vector between atoms i and j. Note that in practice we use point charges obtained for the approximate PAW potentials and not for the more precise PAWs in Eq. 11 as we want to avoid calculations with the precise PAWs. There are several methods that can be used to obtain the atomic charges. We have tested three of them here: Hirshfeld, iterative Hirshfeld, and Bader schemes. The main reason for choosing these approaches is that they are accessible from VASP. Initial tests of the Hirshfeld scheme showed unsatisfactory charges for water (too small). Therefore, we only discuss the results obtained with the iterative version for which we obtained more satisfactory results. From the elements that are present in the S22 and S66 sets (hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen) the density errors are the largest for oxygen and nitrogen and we therefore only set the dipoles of the density error for these atoms in Eq. 11. To obtain the magnitudes of the dipole moments of the density errors for oxygen and nitrogen we calculated the dipole moments of water, formaldehyde, and methylamine using the different PAW potentials. Water was used to obtain dipole error for oxygen with two neighbors and formaldehyde for oxygen with a single neighbor. The magnitude obtained with the hard PAW was taken as reference and the difference for Standard and Soft PAWs was the sought dipole error magnitude. These values are summarised in Table The density errors resemble a dipole directed along an axis of rotation of the molecule (if there is exactly one). To obtain the direction of the dipole error vector we first calculate the sum of normalised vectors to neighboring atoms j We then check the length of v i as a small value indicates that atom i and its neighbors lie approximately in the same plane and the dipole moment of the density error, at least for the molecules considered here, is small. As mentioned above, this can occur for nitrogen, e.g., in uracil. If the length of v is equal or above 0.75, we normalize it and use it as the dipole direction. The final dipole error is then obtained by multiplying the direction with appropriate magnitude. We used the models defined in Eqs. Standard PAW, at least for the hydrogen bonded systems, the reduction of errors is less significant for the mixed and dispersion bonded subsets. The correction based on the iterative Hirshfeld charges is overall less efficient compared to the Bader-based scheme. Specifically, for the hydrogen bonded dimers the iterative Hirshfeld corrections are always smaller than those that use the Bader charges (Fig. To illustrate how the correction scheme performs for binding curves we show data for water-CO dimer with O• • • H contact in Fig. We used interaction energies of molecular dimers to test precision of several PAW data sets supplied with the VASP code. In general, we obtain similar qualitative results as obtained by previous tests, We identify two components of the error: a short range one with an exponential decay and a long-range one with an algebraic decay. The first one is less important for typical bond lengths of weakly bonded dimers, but, of course, it will affect atomisation energies, covalent bond lengths, or very short hydrogen bonds. The long-range error originates from errors in electron density that appear for more approximate PAW potentials (Standard, Soft, . . . ). For the molecules studied here the density errors can be described as a sum of p-like functions centered at a given atom with each function associated with one covalent bond. The total density error than can be mostly p-like, such as for water or ammonia, or have a higher electrostatic moment such as for nitrogen atoms in uracil or for carbon atoms. This shape of the density error suggests a way to correct the error in the interaction energy. The density error can be modelled by atom-centered dipoles that interact electrostatically with the rest of the system. Moreover, the rest of the system can be approximated by atom centered point charges. Even such simple corrections reduce the errors to around one half for most of the hydrogen bonded dimers. They are less efficient for the dispersion bonded dimers where the density errors are typically of a higher multipole, but extension to these cases can be done by, e.g., assigning a density error to each covalent bond. The proposed corrections for the long-range component are simple to implement and can be used to process an output of existing calculations or to correct the energies (and forces) on the fly. The only non-trivial requirement are the point charges, even though the charge density of the system could be used directly as well. Currently, we obtain Bader charges from the all-electron density produced by VASP using an external tool. This is less convenient compared to the calculation of the iterative Hirshfeld charges which can be done directly in the VASP code. Root mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE) and mean error (ME) of Hard, Hard GW, Standard, Standard GW and Soft potentials as well as AVDZ, AVTZ, and AVQZ basis sets with respect to AV5Z basis set on S66 data for PBE functional and HF method. The errors are in meV.