Altermagnets are compensated magnets with unconventional d, g, and i-wave spin order in reciprocal space. So far the search for new altermagnetic candidates has been focused on materials in which the magnetic unit cell is identical to the non-magnetic one, i.e. magnetic structures with zero propagation vector. Here, we substantially broaden the family of altermagnetic candidates by predicting supercell altermagnets. Their magnetic unit cell is constructed by enlarging the nonmagnetic primitive unit cell, resulting in a non-zero propagation vector for the magnetic structure. This connection of the magnetic configuration to the ordering of sublattices gives an extra degree of freedom to supercell altermagnets, which can allow for the control over the order parameter spatial orientation. We identify realistic candidates MnSe2 with a d-wave order, and RbCoBr3, CsCoCr3, and BaMnO3 with g-wave order. We demonstrate the reorientation of the order parameter in MnSe2, which has two different magnetic configurations, whose energy difference is only 5 meV, opening the possibility of controlling the orientation of the altermagnetic order parameter by external perturbations. Altermagnets are a recently predicted class of magnets with d-, g-, and i-wave spin-order in reciprocal space Altermagnets have been predicted to host unconventional responses like the crystal anomalous Hall effect without magnetization It is well established that altermagnets encompass a diverse range of materials 2 . However, thus far, all potential candidates exhibit a magnetic unit cell that is identical to the nonmagnetic one. Although this condition is not necessary, when a collinear compensated supercell magnet (where supercell means that the unit cell is enlarged in the magnetic phase) is constructed by doubling the nonmagnetic unit cell, T τ emerges as a symmetry. Here τ represents a non-integer translation of the magnetic unit cell. The collinear magnet is then a conventional antiferromagnet with type IV magnetic space group (MSG), which does not display spin polarization order in the nonrelativistic electronic structure. However, not all supercell magnets have type IV MSG. In fact, there are examples of documented magnets with magnetic unit cells larger than the chemical unit cell In this article, we identify several magnetic configurations that have been reported by neutron scattering experiments, which are altermagnets with magnetic configurations described by a nonzero propagation vector, meaning that their magnetic unit cells are larger than the nonmagnetic ones. We study the d-wave altermagnet MnSe 2 with two magnetic configurations Spin symmetry classification of collinear magnetic phases -As mentioned above, altermagnets are characterized and classified by their spin symmetries 1 . These symmetries, in contrast to the conventional magnetic symmetries, involve pairs of generally different operations that act in spin and real space where G is a crystallographic Laue group, H is a halving subgroup of G, and C 2 is a two-fold spin rotation with respect to an axis orthogonal to the collinear spin arrangement. The elements of H will connect magnetic sites with parallel magnetic moments, while the symmetries in G -H will transpose the magnetic sublattices, connecting sites with opposite magnetic moments 27 . Methods -The band structure of the presented materials are calculated with density functional theory (DFT), using the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) Both magnetic structures MnSe 2 -I and MnSe 2 -II, are built by stacking three nonmagnetic unit cells along the c-axis but, as it will be described later, the distribution of the magnetic moments is different in each case. Figure Next we discuss the spin symmetries of MnSe 2 -I. The magnetic order does not break inversion symmetry, and therefore the corresponding SPG is already a SLG that can be directly used to identify the collinear magnetic phase. It has the form generate nodal planes in the nonrelativistic band structure. Figure Next we discuss the second magnetic configuration, MnSe 2 -II. Here, the magnetic unit cell is also three times larger than the nonmagnetic one, and the magnetic structure has propagation vectors (0, 0, ±1/3) and (0, 0, 0). However, the distribution of the magnetic moments is different. The comparison of configurations I and II can be seen in Fig. with m z a real space mirror plane orthogonal to [001], which is not a SLG. However, in every collinear magnet the symmetry [C 2 T ||T ] (two-fold spin rotation followed by time reversal) is present in the spin-only group r S , acting effectively as inversion [E|| Ē] in the band structure The SLG of MnSe 2 -II is isomorphic to the SPG of MnSe 2 -I. However, strictly speaking, the groups are not the same because the axes corresponding to the transposing mirrors [C 2 ||m i ] are now [100] and [001], as can be seen in Fig. To corroborate our symmetry analysis, we perform a spin polarized DFT calculation of the band structure for both configurations along the path M, Γ, m y (M )|R, Γ, m z (R), where m y (M ) and m z (R) denote the mirrored points with respect to the nodal planes highlighted in Fig. Supercell g-wave altermagnets AXB 3 -Next we discuss three g-wave altermagnets with the same geometry and spin space group. The materials belong to the family AXB 3 with X being a magnetic transition metal: CsCoCl 3 ] with m a mirror, impose a spin degenerate nodal plane in the nonrelativistic band structure. These planes connect BZ segments with opposite spin polarization (see Fig. Controlling the orientation of the d-wave would make possible to switch on and off spin polarized currents We have also studied three supercell altermagnets with hexagonal unit cells, and isomorphic stoichiometric structures: CsCoCl 3 , RbCoBr 3 and BaMnO 3 . These three candidates have SPG 2 6/ 2 m 2 m 1 m, and hence their band structures contain four spin degenerate nodal planes, with bulk g-wave symmetry. This work is the first report of what we have named supercell altermagnets, materials with a magnetic unit cell larger than the crystallographic one, with spin symmetries that allow for spin splitting of nonrelativistic origin, and spin-momentum locking with d-, g-or i-wave symmetry. We hope this work encourages the search of new altermagnetic candidates, with nontrivial geometries of their magnetic unit cells. Acknowledgments-We acknowledge fruitful discussions with Dominik Kriegner. Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) -TRR 173 -268565370 (project A03) and TRR 288 -422213477 (project A09). TJ, LS, JS acknowledge support by Grant Agency of the Czech Republic grant no. 19-28375X. LS acknowledges the Johannes Gutenberg University Grant TopDyn. TJ acknowledges the support of ERC Advanced Grant #101095925 and the Czech Ministry of Education OP JAK Grant #CZ.02.01.01/00/22 008/0004594. The symmetries connecting the same spin sublattice (elements of H) will be called non-transposing symmetries, while the elements of G-H, connecting sublattices with opposite spin, will be called transposing symmetries. The spin point groups R III S of the altermagnetic class allows for spin split band band structure, even in absence of SOC. However, as the compensation of the magnetic moments is protected by symmetries of the form [C 2 ||g],with g a rotation or rotoinversion, this will imply the relation E(k, σ) = E(gk, -σ) where E(k, σ) is an energy eigenvalue at wavevector k and spin σ. For those wave vectors that are invariant under the point symmetry g, satisfying k = gk (up to a reciprocal lattice vector), the band structure will be spin degenerate. Therefore, the transposing symmetries will define a set of nodal surfaces, and moreover, the spin polarization of the isoenergy surfaces will have well defined d-,gor i-wave symmetry. On the present work, we describe supercell altermagnets with d-wave and g-wave symmetry. One of the challenges of analyzing magnetic systems is that sometimes the periodicity of the magnetic structure differs from the intrinsic periodicity of the nonmagnetic crystal. To overcome this difficulty, and to connect a given magnetic texture which the crystal in the nonmagnetic phase, the concept of propagation vector is commonly introduced where the wave vector k runs over the first BZ of the primitive nonmagnetic unit cell. The Fourier coefficients S k,j represent spatial modes of the magnetic texture at the ion j, with propagation vector k. The propagation vectors are giving us information about the translational properties of the magnetic structure, in relation to the nonmagnetic phase. We will label now the magnetic unit cells as X m . The magnetic unit cell is equal or bigger than the non magnetic one. It is clear that for a commensurate magnetic structure every nonmagnetic unit cell vector can be written uniquely as R n = X m + y α where the vector y α tells us the position of the nonmagnetic unit cell inside the magnetic one. The index α will run over 1, 2, ...M , and the volume of the nonmagnetic unit cell will be contained M times inside the magnetic unit cell. Each label n is well identified with a pair (m, α) and μ nj = μ (mα)j = μ αj , because of the periodicity of the magnetic structure. Inverting the Fourier series of (S3) we get: With S (lat) (k) = Xn e ik•Xm representing a magnetic lattice structure factor, which only depends on the geometrical relation between the magnetic and nonmagnetic unit cells, and S (mag) j (k) = yα μ αj e ik•yα a magnetic form factor, that depends on the magnetic moments inside the unit cell. The set of propagation vectors k of a given magnetic structure will be determined by those wave vectors in which neither of the terms in the last expression vanish. The magnetic cell form factor S (lat) (k) will vanish unless k is a reciprocal lattice vector of the magnetic lattice. This give us a simple rule to see which propagation vectors can be allowed only depending on the geometrical relation between the magnetic and non magnetic unit cells. However, given a particular magnetic configuration, the spin form factor S (mag) j (k) could vanish on those k vectors, further constraining the set of propagation vectors. For example, a zero propagation vector will be absent when α μ αj = 0 for all magnetic atoms j. This would be the case of conventional antiferromagnet with T τ symmetry (time reversal combined with translation) in which the nonmagnetic unit cell is doubled, and the magnetic moments on each subcell are antiparallel. d-wave supercell altermagnet MnSe.-The nonmagnetic unit cell is cubic, and the magnetic one is built by stacking three unit cells in the c-axis. By looking at the magnetic lattice structure factor S (lat) (k), it follows that those k vectors of the nonmagnetic BZ which correspond to reciprocal lattice vectors of the magnetic BZ are (0, 0, 0), (0, 0, 