A series of FeSe0.5Te0.5 bulk samples have been prepared through the high gas pressure and high-temperature synthesis (HP-HTS) method to optimize the growth conditions, for the first time and investigated for their superconducting properties using structural, microstructure, transport, and magnetic measurements to reach the final conclusions. Ex-situ and in-situ processes are used to prepare bulk samples under a range of growth pressures using Ta-tube and without Tatube. The parent compound synthesized by convenient synthesis method at ambient pressure (CSP) exhibits a superconducting transition temperature of 14.8 K. Our data demonstrate that the prepared FeSe0.5Te0.5 sealed in a Ta-tube is of better quality than the samples without a Ta-tube, and the optimum growth conditions (500 MPa, 600°C for 1 h) are favourable for the development of the tetragonal FeSe0.5Te0.5 phase. The optimum bulk FeSe0.5Te0.5 depicts a higher transition temperature of 17.3 K and a high critical current density of the order of >10 4 A/cm 2 at 0 T, which is improved over the entire magnetic field range and almost twice higher than the parent compound prepared through CSP. Our studies confirm that the high-pressure synthesis method is a highly efficient way to improve the superconducting transition, grain connectivity, sample density, and also pinning properties of a superconductor. Iron-based superconductor (FBS) was discovered in 2008 In the last 15 years, numerous investigations for iron-based superconductors have been reported with the applied external pressure studies where the used samples were prepared through CSP To understand the high-pressure synthesis effects on the superconducting properties of 11 family, we have used the high-pressure and high-temperature gas isostatic method (HP-HTS) The chosen composition FeSe0.5Te0.5 samples were synthesized in two ways using the HP-HTS method, as mentioned in Figure Structural characterizations of all prepared samples were performed by the powder X-ray diffraction method (XRD), which is carried out on the Rigaku SmartLab 3kW diffractometer with filtered Cu-Kα radiation (wavelength: 1.5418 Å, power: 30 mA, 40 kV) and a Dtex250 linear detector with the measured profile from 5° to 70° with a very small step of 0.01°/min. We have used Rigaku's PDXL software and the ICDD PDF4+ 2021 standard diffraction patterns database to analyze the lattice parameters, the profile analysis, and the quantitative values of impurity phases (%). Field-emission scanning electron microscope equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDAX) are used for the microstructural characterizations and compositional and elemental analyses of the prepared samples. A vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) attached to a Quantum Design PPMS is employed for the magnetic measurements up to 9 T in the temperature range of 5-22 K under zero-field and field-cooling conditions. During the zero-field cooled (ZFC) process, the bulk sample was cooled down to 5 K in a zero magnetic field, and then the magnetic field was applied to collect the data during the warming process. A closed-cycle refrigerator was used for the zero-field resistivity measurements in the temperature range from 7 to 300 K at different applied currents Table In the next step, HIP-S3 to HIP-S5 used an in-situ synthesis process, as discussed in the experimental part, where samples were directly placed into the HP-HST chamber without any heating process. HIP-S3 heated at 600°C for 11 h at 1 GPa with a sealed Tatube has the main tetragonal phase and about 26% of the hexagonal phase, which are almost identical to those of HIP-S1. HIP-S4 heated at 700°C at 1 GPa for 1 h without Ta-tube using an in-situ process has the same structural pattern as that of HIP-S3 and HIP-S1. It suggests that a higher heating temperature of 700°C for 1 h at 1 GPa has depicted similar behaviour for Fe(Se,Te) heated for a longer heating time at 600°C (HIP-S3) under the same growth conditions. To be more clear, the direct growth of FeSe0.5Te0.5 samples without a Ta-tube at 1 GPa for 11 h (in-situ method) has also been prepared, i.e., HIP-S5 has a slightly higher hexagonal phase than that of HIP-S1 and HIP-S3. A comparative study of HIP-S1 to HIP-S5 prepared at 1 GPa reveals that an ex-situ FeSe0.5Te0.5 sample heated for 1 h (HIP-S1) has almost the same XRD pattern as that of an in-situ processed FeSe0.5Te0. ). However, the results for HIP-S3 and HIP-S5 suggest that FeSe0.5Te0.5 sample sealed in a Ta tube is a more effective way to preserve the tetragonal phase than Fe(Se,Te) prepared without sealing in a Ta-tube at 1 GPa. Nevertheless, the observed hexagonal phase for all samples prepared at 1 GPa is higher than that of parent compounds, which is mentioned in Table Table In the next step, the in-situ FeSe0.5Te0.5 sample has been heated in the HP-HTS chamber without sealing in a Ta-tube at 700 MPa for 11 h at 600°C, i.e., HIP-S6. The depicted XRD pattern in Figure as that of the parent compound. It means that FeSe0.5Te0.5 bulks sealed in a Ta-tube and heated for a short time (1 h) at 500 MPa are suitable for the phase formation of FeSe0.5Te0.5 tetragonal phase through the HP-HTS method, which is also suggested from the growth of FeSe0.5Te0.5 at 1 GPa. To understand the effect of low synthesis pressure (less than 500 MPa), we have prepared two more samples at 300 MPa for 11 h and 1 h, i.e. HIP-S12 (insitu) and HIP-S13 (in-situ), respectively. Interestingly, both samples have the main phase of the hexagonal phase, which is enhanced with heating time, suggesting that this pressure is not suitable for the formation of the FeSe0.5Te0.5 tetragonal phase either for a shortterm or long-term heating process. However, it also implies that a short heating process through HP-HTS is sufficient to complete the formation of the superconducting phase. These structural investigations reveal that the optimum growth conditions through HP-HTS are 500 MPa, 600°C, and 1 h with the sample sealed in a Ta-tube for the tetragonal phase formation of FeSe0.5Te0.5, where it works well for both ex-situ and in-situ processes. The hexagonal phase Fe7Se8 as an impurity phase in the samples is very sensitive to the growth pressure, sintering duration, and heating temperatures. The diffracted tetragonal peaks of the samples prepared by HP-HTS are almost at the same position as those of the parent compounds, as shown in Figure The elemental analysis mapping of these samples has been performed by using the energy dispersive X-ray (EDAX) method, which allows for an understanding of the distribution of the constituent elements inside the bulk sample. The elemental mapping of the parent compound is shown in Figure To comprehend the microstructural analysis of these samples, we have polished bulk samples by using several grades of micron paper, from low grade to extremely fine grade, inside the glove box to reduce any contamination of the samples due to moisture and air. Backscattered scanning electron microscopy (BSE-SEM) has been collected at different magnifications for all these samples to reveal chemical contrast. Figure The variation of resistivity (ρ) with temperature is depicted in Figure Further decreasing the synthesis pressure to 500 MPa, the resistivity behaviour of these prepared samples is depicted in Figures These resistivity measurements suggest that high-pressure synthesis at 500 MPa for a short heating time of 1 h is the best condition compared to other growth pressures applied through the HP-HTS method. In the ex-situ process, the samples sealed in a Ta-tube (HIP-S9) have a 1 K higher Tc onset value with a slightly sharper transition width (~3. To understand the intergrain and intragrain connections, we have measured the temperature dependence of resistivity behaviour under various applied currents To confirm the Meissner effect, we have measured DC magnetic susceptibility (χ = 4πM/H) in both zero-field-cooled (ZFC) and field-cooled (FC) magnetization curves for four samples: the parent compound, HIP-S9, HIP-S3, and HIP-S11, in the temperature range from 5 to 22 K under the applied magnetic field of 50 Oe. The normalized magnetic susceptibility is shown for all samples in Figure HIP-S11 depicts a higher onset transition of 16.1 K, however, has a broader transition compared to the parent compound and HIP-S9. Interestingly, all samples depict the single-step transition, which can be explained by the intergranular properties of these bulk samples, as discussed and reported for other FBS families We have measured magnetic hysteresis loops (M-H) at a constant temperature of 7 K for three HIP samples (HIP-S3, HIP-S9, and HIP-S11) and the parent compound with the rectangular-shaped sample to calculate the critical current density Jc. The measured magnetic loops M(H) for these samples were observed under ferromagnetic effects, which is similar to previous reports based on Fe(Se,Te) samples The enhancement of critical current density is directly related to the pinning force. To analyze the pinning force behaviours for these samples, we have calculated the variation of vortex pinning force density Fp with the applied magnetic field dependence by using the relation Fp = μ0H × Jc, as illustrated in Figure We have summarized the main findings of our study in Figure The room temperature resistivity is presented in Figure Figure This analysis suggests that the ex-situ sample, i.e., HIP-S9, has a low amount of hexagonal phase, half the resistivity of the parent compound, RRR of 1.5, and a slightly (~1 K) higher transition temperature, the shaper transition (ΔT = 3.1 K). Interestingly, this sample has an almost two-times higher critical current density than that of the parent compound in the whole magnetic field region. This suggests that high-pressure growth of an ex-situ processed FeSe0.5Te0.5 sample at 500 MPa and 600°C, sealed in a Ta-tube provides better conditions to improve the superconducting transition and a huge improvement in the critical current density. In-situ processed FeSe0.5Te0.5 samples prepared at 500 MPa for 1 h and sealed into Ta-tubes have the highest transition of 17.2 K and one order of magnitude higher Jc value than the parent compound but are smaller than ex-situ processed HIP-S9. Rest samples have low performance with the superconducting properties due to the formation of the hexagonal phase, which seems to be more sensitive to high pressure and high synthesis temperatures. Figure In summary, we have prepared bulk FeSe0.5Te0.5 through the high gas pressure synthesis technique employing ex-situ and in-situ procedures and studied its superconducting properties with the parent FeSe0.5Te0.5 compound produced by CSP at ambient pressure. Structural analysis suggests that high synthesis pressure for FeSe0.5Te0.5 phase promotes the hexagonal phase, but this hexagonal phase reached its lowest level for the samples prepared at 500 MPa for 1 h with sealing into a Ta-tube. Microstructural analysis confirms that FeSe0.5Te0.5 sample sealed into a Ta-tube is more effective for the enhancement of sample density and the improvement of grain connectivity, although the existence of a hexagonal phase depending on the pressure synthesis conditions reduces the superconducting grain connections. Especially, the bulk samples prepared without sealing into Ta-tubes diminish the grain connections due to the presence of large pores caused by the high gas pressure passing through micro/nanopores. Resistivity and magnetic measurements approve the enhancement of the transition temperature by 2 K for FeSe0.5Te0.5 prepared at 500 MPa. Due to a varied Se/Te concentration or a large amount of impurity phases, other samples had a lower transition temperature than the parent compound. Our studies confirm that the optimum high-pressure growth conditions are 500 MPa, 600°C, a heating time of 1 h, and the sample sealed in a Ta-tube, where the in-situ process is sufficient for the development of the tetragonal phase formation, and the ex-situ process contributes to the improvement of the intergrain connections and also promotes the formation of the superconducting phase. Critical current density and pinning force analysis corroborate that FeSe0.5Te0.5 prepared under these optimum conditions has almost two orders of magnitude greater enhancement of Jc than the parent compound due to the improved grain connections, the enhanced sample density, and the presence of additional pinning centres. We believe that this high-pressure synthesis method will enable the further exploration of Fe(Se, Te) and other FBS materials to improve the sample quality, achieve additional improvements in their superconducting properties, and further the development of their magnetic applications, particularly for superconducting wires and tapes.