We present a comprehensive study on the structure and optical properties of Mnand Co-doped ZnO samples prepared via solid-state reaction method with different dopant concentrations and atmospheres. The samples were structural and chemically characterized via Xray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, and X-ray excited photoelectron spectroscopy. The optical characterization was performed via Raman, photoluminescence, and diffuse photoreflectance spectroscopies. Emphasis was done on the studies of their vibrational properties. The structural data confirm the incorporation of Mn and Co ions into the wurtzite ZnO lattice. It is demonstrated that the usual observed additional bands in the Raman spectrum of transitional metal (TM) doped ZnO are related to structural damage, deriving from the doping process, and surface effects. The promoted surface optical phonons (SOP) are of Fröhlich character and, together with the longitudinal optical (LO) polar phonons, are directly dependent on the ZnO electronic structure. The enhancement of SOP and LO modes with TM-doping is explained in terms of nonhomogeneous doping, with the dopants concentrating mainly on the surface of grains, and a resonance effect due to the decrease of the ZnO bandgap promoted by the introduction of the 3d TM levels within the ZnO bandgap. We also discuss the origin of the controversial vibrational mode commonly observed in the Mn-doped ZnO system. It is stated that the observation of the analyzed vibrational properties is a signature of substitutional doping of the ZnO structure with tuning of ZnO optical absorption into the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum. Oxide-based semiconductors correspond to a broad class of tunable materials with promising applications in different traditional systems and emerging technologies Additionally, due to the huge correlation among, charge, spin, and structure characteristics presented in the oxide semiconductors, several new exciting defect/doping effects may be present in such materials, like insulator-metal transitions Among the oxide semiconductors, zinc oxide (ZnO) deserves the distinction. ZnO is a multifunctional material presenting distinctive properties, such as high electron mobility, high thermal conductivity, wide direct bandgap (~3.3 eV), and large exciton binding energy (~60 meV) Here, the strategy is to add specific energy levels within the ZnO bandgap via doping and/or by introducing proper structural point defects in the system Considering the vibrational properties of TM-doped ZnO, the emergence of additional modes and broad bands in the ZnO Raman spectrum between 450 and 650 cm -1 is often observed under doping. The appearance of these additional modes and bands and their dependence on the dopant concentration is observed for different doping elements, for instance: H Facing these contexts, we present a comprehensive study on the ZnO vibrational properties of Mn-and Co-doped ZnO. The present report aims to give a contribution to the understanding of the origin of the observed additional modes and bands in the ZnO Raman spectrum under doping and/or subject to structural damage. Our results demonstrate that the additional modes and bands are closely related to surface effects and the electronic structure of the system, giving valuable information about the dopant incorporation and the structural defect concentrations. This knowledge opens up further opportunities in the ZnO surface, defect, and bandgap engineering for ZnO functionalization and its application in many important technological devices. Polycrystalline Zn1xMnxO samples with Mn nominal concentrations of xN = 0.002, 0.005, 0.010, 0.015, and 0.020 (0.2, 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2 at.%), and Zn1xCoxO samples with Co nominal concentrations of xN = 0.01, 0.03, 0.05, 0.07, and 0.09 An additional set of mechanically milled Zn1-xCoxO (xN = 0.05) samples was also prepared. The powder mixture (ZnO and Co3O4) was not pressed into pellets and was sintered under the same conditions as the previously presented bulk samples. After sintering, the powder was subjected to high-energy mechanical milling in a planetary tungsten carbide ball mill (RETSCH PM100) at a rotation speed of 500 rpm. A total of 20 g of sample was mechanically milled, keeping the ratio between the masses of the spheres and the powder at ~13:1. Isopropyl alcohol was also added to the powder to optimize grinding. Fractions of the powder were collected after 6, 12, 18, and 24 h of milling. X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), X-ray excited photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and Raman scattering spectroscopy were used to study the incorporation of Mn and Co and the resulting lattice disorder in the ZnO host structure. The XRD measurements were recorded in the range of 2 = 20°80° with steps of 0.02° at 10 s/step by using Cu-K radiation (λ = 1.542 Å) of a Rigaku Ultima IV diffractometer. The microstructure was determined using SEM with a LV JEOL JSM 6510 and a resolution of 3 nm at 30 kV. The elemental distribution and effective dopant concentrations (xE) incorporated into the ZnO structure were estimated by EDS using an Oxford XMAX 50 detector. The analysis of the oxidation states of the elements present on the surface of the samples was performed by XPS using a Scientia Omicron ESCA+ spectrophotometer equipped with an Al-Kα monochromatic X-ray source of 1486.7 eV with 280 W incident power and 50 eV constant pass power mode. The Raman spectra of the samples were performed at room temperature (~ 300 K) and 10 K in backscattering configuration with a Jobin Yvon-Horiba T64000 triple spectrometer (gratings of 1800 grooves/mm). The excitation was performed using 351, 458, 488, 514, and 532 nm laser lines. The laser was focused onto the cryostat through the windows with lenses, giving a spot size of around 100 microns, which is relatively representative for statistical purposes. Diffuse photoreflectance measurements were realized in the range of 350850 nm in a Lambda 1050 Perkin Elmer spectrophotometer. Changes in the density of defects in the mechanically milled samples were estimated by photoluminescence (PL) recorded at 5 K and excited using a He-Cd laser (325 nm). Figure The E2H mode corresponds mainly to vibrations of the O sub-lattice, that in principle is not directly affected by the doping at the Zn sites. A Gaussian fit of the vibrational modes reveals to be more appropriate due to the alloying disorder. From here up to the end of the article, all the presented Raman spectra are normalized by the E2H integrated area. In Figures For both sets of samples, we also observed the emergence of a broadband centered at ~475 cm -1 (AB band) and the presence of additional vibrational modes around 500-550 cm -1 (AMs), forming with the LO mode at ~575 cm -1 , another broadband ranging from 500-600 cm -1 . The LO mode corresponds to the A1(LO) mode since the E1(LO) can only be observed in 90° scattering configuration It can be observed that the intensities of the AB, AMs, and LO mode are considerably more significant for Mn-doped than that for Co-doped samples. Lower Mn concentrations lead to intensities as higher as those produced by larger Co concentrations. For accurately identifying the observed vibrational modes and quantitatively determining the influence of the dopants on the ZnO structure, a Gaussian fit of the Raman spectra was performed for the two sets of samples. Figures Once the broadband was observed under sub-bandgap excitation, they attributed the nature of the broadband to an extrinsic Fröhlich interaction where TO corresponds to the frequency of the TO modes, ɛ0 and ε∞ are the material dielectric constants at low and high frequencies, while ɛM is the dielectric constant of the surrounding media. Considering the calculated dielectric tensor for the ZnO system as presented in Refs. assuming ɛM = 1, and the measured frequencies for the A1(TO) at ~377 cm -1 and E1(TO) at ~410 cm -1 (Figure (3)), Equation ( Therefore, the aspect of the broadband along 500-600 cm -1 observed in our samples, the similarities of the AM1 and AM2 characteristics (intensity relation and frequencies) to those already reported and calculated, lead us to state that these modes are SOP of Fröhlich character induced by the doping and the increase of the surface area due to the existence of grains. To check the Compared to the spectra for the undoped ZnO reference samples, the resonant effect for the doped samples is considerably more significant. With increasing the dopant concentration, the resonant effect is also enhanced (Figures Therefore, the observed resonance behavior confirms the Fröhlich character of the AMs. Moreover, the observed resonance under excitation below the bandgap of ZnO for the undoped and doped samples (Figure Based on our data and in previous reports Besides, considering a relatively high degree of Mn substitutional doping of the ZnO (2 at.%), it is plausible to infer it is possible to observe particular Mn-O vibrational modes in such samples. Julien et al. reported an extensive study on the vibrational properties of Mn oxides Some important and useful information can also be extracted from the spectra obtained under excitation above the ZnO bandgap. The crystallinity and the order of the induced structural defects in our samples can be further evaluated by the electron-phonon interaction, which is very sensitive to the atomic scale disorder. The electron-phonon coupling constant () can be probed under resonant excitation by the number of the measured overtones (n) Therefore, the Mn 2+ incorporation into the ZnO structure inevitably leads to significant structural distortions of the ZnO lattice To confirm the hypothesis of the introduction of electronic states within the ZnO bandgap with Mn-and Co-doping, we performed diffuse reflectance measurements at room temperature in the range of 350 to 850 nm for the undoped ZnO reference samples and the doped samples These results confirm the insertion of dopant electronic states within the ZnO bandgap, which leads to an effective decrease of the bandgap and the intensity enhancement promotion of the Fröhlich modes due to a resonance effect (extrinsic Fröhlich interaction). Once the absorption edge shift is more pronounced for the Mn-doped samples, it can be the reason for the observed relatively higher intensities of the studied modes for this set of samples (Figure These results also lead us to point out that the observation of the broadband along 500-600 cm -1 (AMs and LO) in the Raman spectra of the TM-doped ZnO are signatures of the effective substitutional doping of the structure and the tuning the ZnO bandgap from UV to lower wavelengths up to the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum. To gain more insight into this issue, the effects of the defects on the ZnO vibrational spectra, we also analyzed the vibrational spectrum of a mechanically milled Zn1-xCoxO (xN = 0.05) set of samples. The reduction of the sizes of the grains by fracture during the milling increases the surface/volume ratio, leading to an increase in surface effects. Mechanical milling is also a process that introduces structural defects, mainly on the surface of the powders. Figure To evaluate the impact of the mechanical milling on the electronic structure of the samples diffuse reflectance measurements have been performed at room temperature (350-850 nm) and low temperature (5 K) PL under excitation of a He-Cd 325 nm laser line. the band centered at 3.32 eV is associated with recombination of electrons bound to donor defects with free holes in the valence band (BF) Figure these studies have revealed that the rate-controlling mechanism is the Zn 2+ diffusion, which proceeds via surface at the low-temperature regime However, VO is a deep-donor defect, and its ionization is quite unlikely Besides, the Co3O4 crystallizes in a spinel structure with Co 2+ and Co 3+ located at tetrahedral and octahedral sites, respectively By using MnO as a precursor, Lage et al. recently showed that the incorporation of the Mn into the ZnO lattice takes place mainly at the surface of the ZnO grains with a solubility limit lower than 9 at.% We presented a comprehensive analysis of the structure and optical properties of the Zn1-xMnxO and Zn1-xCoxO samples (Mn-and Co-doped ZnO, respectively), focusing on the usual additional modes observed in the Raman spectral range of 400 to 700 cm -1 . The structural characterization confirms the Mn and Co are substitutionally doping the wurtzite ZnO lattice. With doping, besides the enhancement of the LO mode, the emergence of a broad band centered at ~470 cm -1 (AB) and two additional modes at ~527 cm -1 (AM1) and ~545 cm -1 (AM2) were identified. For the Mn-doped samples, an extra additional mode located at ~517 cm -1 (AMMn) has been found. The experimental results indicate that the AM1 and AM2 are surface optical phonons of Fröhlich character and that the AB band is related to structural disorders promoted by doping. A resonant behavior has been observed in AMMn mode, but we have excluded to address it as a Mn-LVM, contrary to some reports in the literature. We argue that the AMMn undoubtedly corresponds to Mn-O vibrations and that it could be considered as an A1(LO) normal mode of the ZnMnO lattice. The promotion of the AB, AMs (SOPs), and LO mode and their intensity increase with the increase of the dopant (Mn and Co) concentration is explained in terms of three main effects. (i) The doping and the dopant accumulation on the surfaces of the ZnO grains promote the AB and AMs (SOPs) modes due to the introduction of structure disorder/distortions mainly on the surface of the ZnO grains. The intensity of these modes scales with the dopant concentration through the amount of caused structural disorder. (ii) The doping of the ZnO directly influences the grain growth kinetics, leading after sintering to different surface/volume ratios. Situations where grain growth is inhibited (final smaller grain sizes) lead to enhanced modes that are related to surface properties (AMs (SOPs)). (iii) The TM substitutional doping into the ZnO lattice corresponds to the introduction of the 3d levels inside the ZnO bandgap leading to the effective decrease of the ZnO bandgap and increasing the scattering cross section for phonons that are coupled with electrons via Fröhlich interaction and LO mode). In this context, inserting structural defects level inside de ZnO bandgap through ion bombardment or mechanical milling has a similar effect as the TM-doping. Our results give valuable information on the vibrational properties of the TM-doped ZnO and the processing of these samples. It can be stated that the observation of the analyzed modes (activation of the AB and AMs (SOPs) and the enhancement of the LO mode) under doping is a signature of substitutional doping of the ZnO structure with the important and desired tuning of ZnO bandgap from the UV to the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum, and with direct impact on the grain surface properties. Due to the similarities between the reported Raman spectra for other TM elements, besides the Mn and Co studied here, our conclusions can be generalized for the entire TM-doping elements of the ZnO structure. 