Bulk photovoltaic effect, which arises from crystal symmetry-driven charge carrier separation, is an intriguing physical phenomenon that has attracted extensive interest in photovoltaic application due to its junction-free photovoltaic and potential to surpass Shockley-Queisser limit. Whereas conventional ferroelectric materials mostly suffer from extremely low photocurrent density and weak photovoltaic response at visible light wavelengths. Emerging two-dimensional ferroelectric semiconductors with coupled visible light absorption and spontaneous polarization characteristics are a promising alternative for making functional photoferroelectrics. Herein, we report the experimental demonstration of the bulk photovoltaic effect behavior based on the 2D ferroelectric semiconductor α-In2Se3 caused by an out-of-plane polarization induced depolarization field. The α-In2Se3 device exhibits enhanced bulk photovoltaic response in the visible light spectrum owing to its narrow bandgap. It was demonstrated that the generated photovoltaic current density was nearly two orders of magnitude greater than conventional bulk ferroelectric materials. These findings highlight the potential of twodimensional ferroelectric semiconductor materials for bulk photovoltaic applications in a broad spectral region. Photovoltaic energy is regarded as one of the most promising clean energy resources. The pursuit of advanced photovoltaic devices with a high open circuit voltage, high power conversion efficiency, and low-cost fabrication has triggered intense research not only novel materials, but also new photoelectric conversion mechanisms. In contrast to the conversional semiconductor-based photovoltaic effect, which separates photogenerated electron-hole pairs via a PN junction, a bulk material with noncentrosymmetric structure can convert light to electricity that enables the separation of charge carriers via intrinsic polarization electric fileds Recently, BPV has received renewed interest with the development of two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdWs) materials. which allow for the combination of lowdimensional nature and exotic physical phenomena, e.g., nonlinear optical effect In this article, we experimentally demonstrated the BPV effect in a thin graphite/α-In2Se3/thin graphite device. The device exhibited an enhanced BPV photocurrent for different laser wavelengths (457 nm, 514 nm and 633 nm) in visible-light range, which is attributed to its lower-dimensional nature and strong out-of-plane polarization intensity. Our findings suggest that 2D ferroelectric semiconductors have the potential to drive the development of advanced optoelectronic devices. Spontaneous polarization for 2H α-In2Se3. The α-In2Se3 crystal possess two possible stacking configurations, known as hexagonal (2H) and rhombohedral (3R) (Figure As shown in Figure In addition, an electrical transport measurement for a thin graphite/α-In2Se3/thin graphite device is performed. The device's current-voltage |Id|-Vd curve exhibits a hysteretic behavior, suggesting ferroelectricity of 2H α-In2Se3 (Figure Figure Figure In summary, we report a BPV effect in 2D α-In2Se3 device. The short circuit current density of α-In2Se3 is nearly more than 10 2 times larger than that conversion ferroelectrical materials due to the inherent out-of-plane electric polarization in the 2D limit. As a result of narrow bandgap for α-In2Se3, it displays an exceptional BPV response in the visible light region. This research makes 2D ferroelectric semiconductors a desirable option for advanced optoelectronics applications, such as solar cells and photodetectors. Single crystals of α-In2Se3 and bulk of graphite in this work were provided by HQ graphene and NGS Naturgraphit company, respectively. The α-In2Se3 flakes and thin graphite were successively exfoliated and transferred on a SiO2/p-Si substrate. Then, thin graphite/α-In2Se3/thin graphite heterostructures were acquired using an all-dry transfer technique with polydimethylsiloxane(PDMS) stamp in a N2 atmosphere glove box. Metal electrodes were obtained by using laser direct write patterning technique and following electron beam evaporation of Ti/Au (5 nm/30 nm). Afterwards, during the lift-off process, the samples were soaked in NMP at 80°C and maintained for 1 h. Finally, these electrodes were processed with ozone at 80°C for 10 mins. Using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Dimension Icon-GB, Bruker), the device's surface morphology was characterized. Using a Micro-Raman system (Horiba T64000) equipped with a 514 nm excitation laser, Raman spectra were measured. To prevent sample degradation, the laser power is lower than 0.1 mW. In addition, prior to measurement, the system was calibrated using the Raman peak of Si at 520 cm -1 . For SHG spectroscopy, the excitation light was from a mode-locked Ti:sapphire laser operating at ∼800 nm, 76 MHz repetition rate, 150 fs pulse duration, and 40 μW of average power was used. Using a 50x objective lens and a backscattering configuration, the laser was focused on the surface of sample, and the SHG signal was collected by a cooled CCD spectrometer. For the in-plane polarization measurement, the excitation laser was focused at normal incidence on the surface of the sample. For the out-of-plane polarization analysis, the excitation laser was focused at a tilted angle (approximately15°-30°) on the surface of sample. The transmissivity of the optical system was carefully calibrated to determine the absolute power level at the focusing plane. The emission spectrum was normalized according to the square of the focused power. Electrical transport measurement was conducted at room temperature in the vacuum. Keysight source meter (Keithley 4200 Semiconductor parameter analyzer) connected to a cryogenic probe station (CRX-VF, Lake-Shore) was used to measure the I-V characteristics in the dark condition. Photoelectric measurements were conducted in an optical cryostat (Microscopy Cryostat System N2, Cryo Industries) under high-vacuum condition. These devices were illuminated by three different lasers with wavelengths of a 633 nm (He-Ne laser), 514 nm and 457 nm (two diode laser). The laser spot size is approximately 2.5 μm (633 nm), 1.7 μm (514 nm) and 1.6 μm (457 nm), respectively. The laser was focused on sample using a 50X objective. The applied bias voltage and the output current were controlled via a Keithley 2614B electrometer that was connected to the optical cryostat. The open circuit voltage and short circuit current were derived from the current-voltage curves. The temperature-dependent Id-Vd was carried out in the optical cryostat with heating source.