For Y2C3 with a superconducting critical temperature (Tc) ∼18 K, zone-center imaginary optical phonon modes have been found for the high-symmetry I-43d structure due to C dimer wobbling motion and electronic instability from a flat band near Fermi energy. After lattice distortion to the more stable lowest symmetry P 1 structure, these stabilized low-energy phonon modes with a mixed C and Y character carry a strong electron-phonon coupling to give arise to the observed sizable Tc. Our work shows that compounds with the calculated dynamical instability should not be simply excluded in high-throughput search for new phonon-mediated superconductors. Moreover, we have studied the phase stability of the I-43d structure by calculating the enthalpy of different structural motifs of binary compounds containing group IV elements at the 2:3 composition and also exploring the energy landscapes via ab initio molecular dynamics near and out of the I-43d structure. Our results show that the I-43d type structures with C dimers are preferred in the low to medium pressure range. Because of the wobbling motion of the C dimers, there are many local energy minimums with degenerated energies. Thus, the ensemble average of many I-43d-distorted structures with C dimer wobbling motion at finite temperature still gives an overall I-43d structure. Computational search for new phonon-mediated superconducting (SC) compounds has become an active field since the discovery of SC critical temperature (T c ) near room temperature for metal hydrides under high pressure (∼200 GPa) We used quantum espresso (QE) package where E i 's are the total energy per atom of the compound Y 2 C 3 and its constituents, namely, Y in hexagonal closed packed and C in the diamond structure. For ab initio molecular dynamics (MD) and phase stability calculations with different structural motifs, we used Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) In Figure . 1, we first establish that the BCC-type I-43d structure is the ground-state phase in the moderate pressure range. (We will use BCC and I-43d interchangeably.) In Fig. where e ij νk are the displacements obtained for atom type i from the eigenvector of mode ν for k-point k by diagonalizing dynamical matrix, and index j runs to N i as the number of atoms for type i. For Y 2 C 3 in Fig. In addition to the E(V ), We also plot ∆H(p) in Fig. To find out the origin of such instability in BCC Y 2 C 3 , we have calculated the electronic structures. As plotted in Fig. After establishing the electronic origin of the instability in BCC Y 2 C 3 and finding the more stable lowsymmetry P 1 structure, next we calculate EPC in DFPT to explain SC properties. In Figure . 4, we plot the phonon dispersion of the P 1 structure relaxed from eigenmode 4 (∼2.34 meV/atom more stable than I-43d) in (a) with and (b) without the mode-resolved EPC projections. Atomic characters are also similarly projected as in Fig. In conclusion, we find that the high-symmetry bodycentered cubic (BCC) I-43d structure of Y 2 C 3 is dynamically unstable with zone-center imaginary optical phonon modes from C dimer wobbling motion due to the electronic instability from a flat band at the Fermi level (E F ). Once the imaginary modes are stabilized in a more stable low-symmetry structure, under pressure or with a large electronic smearing, these low-energy modes of mixed C and Y characters give arise to strong electron-phonon coupling (EPC) strength determining the superconducting properties. Our work demonstrates the necessity of further exploration in the compounds with imaginary phonon modes. EPC calculations may not always be feasible for the distorted structures due to low symmetry for large unit cells, however, pressure and electronic smearing are the alternatives to stabilize the imaginary phonon modes to study superconductivity. This can open a myriad of opportunities to discover high-temperature superconductors via high-throughput screening. Furthermore, we provide a thorough analysis of the phase stability of Y 2 C 3 . We have considered the different structural motifs of binary compounds containing group IV elements at the 2:3 composition and also explored energy landscapes via ab initio molecular dynamics near and out of the BCC structure. We plot their enthalpy vs pressure to confirm that the BCC-type structures with C dimers are indeed preferred in the low to medium pressure range. Because of the wobbling motion of the C dimers, there are many local energy minimums of the BCC-distorted structures with degenerated energies. Consequently, the ensemble average of numerous BCC-distorted structures with C dimer wobbling motion at finite temperature is expected to yield an overall BCC structure, consistent with what was observed in X-ray diffraction. We acknowledges Dr. Lorenzo Paulatto for the helpful discussion of atom-projected phonon dispersion. This work was supported by Ames National Laboratory LDRD and U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Science, Division of Materials Sciences and Engi-neering. Ames National Laboratory is operated for the U.S. Department of Energy by Iowa State University under Contract No. DE-AC02-07CH11358. Figure 