We present and experimentally verify a matrix approach for determining how to optimally sculpt an input wavefront both in space and time for any desired wave-control functionality, irrespective of the complexity of the wave scattering. We leverage a singular value decomposition of the transport matrix that fully captures how both the spatial and temporal degrees of freedom available to shape the input wavefront impact the output wavefront's spatial and temporal form. In our experiments in the microwave domain, we use our formalism to successfully tackle three iconic wave-control tasks in a disordered cavity: (i) reflectionless transient excitation ("virtual perfect absorption"), (ii) optimal energy deposition, and (iii) scattering-invariant time-varying states. The ability to sculpt the wavefront incident on a scattering system allows for a judicious control of the outgoing wavefront's spatial and/or temporal shape, thanks to the linearity of the wave equation For monochromatic waves, optimal wave-control functionalities are based on measuring the scattering matrix that fully encodes the linear relation between spatial input and spatial output DoFs. In optics, the transmission matrix was initially measured using deformable mirrors capable of spatially shaping the input wavefront to achieve maximal focusing of light traversing a multiple scattering medium Manipulating spatially the incident wavefront also enables a degree of control on output signals in the time domain for incident pulses While these approaches are still limited to spatial incident DoFs, existing optimal spatio-temporal control makes use of both spatial and temporal DoFs on the input side In this paper, we introduce an SVD-based approach enabling optimal spatio-temporal wavefront shaping for arbitrary desired wave-control functionalities. We illustrate the capabilities of our formalism by applying it (i) to achieve reflectionless transient excitation ("virtual perfect absorption", VPA), (ii) to optimally deliver energy at a targeted time, and (iii) to excite timevarying scattering-invariant states. Thereby, we generalize the VPA concept from the single-mode For monochromatic waves with frequency ν, the transport matrix H(ν) describes the linear relation between the N incoming channels x(ν) and M outgoing channels y(ν) as y(ν) = H(ν)x(ν). If all connected channels are consider for both input and output, H(ν) is the system's full scattering matrix S(ν). To extend this monochromatic input-output relation to the time domain on both input and output sides, we consider that the N time signals x n (t m ) are sampled on N tx points within a time interval ∆t x = [0 t c ]. Their spectra x n (ν) are computed on N ν frequencies using the discrete-Fourier-transform (DFT) operator, x n (ν) = D x x n (t), where D x km = e -i2πν k tm / √ N tx . To obtain a single multi-channel spatio-temporal linear relation, we first concatenate these vectors into the single vectors x t and x ν of length N N tx and N N ν . The elements of x t are x tj = x n (t m ) with j = (m -1)N + n. The linear relation between vectors x t and x ν is described by the sparse multi-channel DFT operator Dx of dimensions N N ν × N N tx (see SM), x ν = Dx x t . For N tx = N ν and t c = t max = 1/δν, both D x and Dx are unitary operators. However, in the more general case of t c < t max , they are non-square matrices verifying D † x D x = 1 Ntx and D † x Dx = 1 N Ntx but D x D † x ̸ = 1 Nν and Dx D † x ̸ = 1 N Nν . We apply the same procedure to the M outgoing signals y n (t) measured within the time window ∆t y . Finally, we introduce the N N ν × N N ν multi-spectral block-diagonal matrix S D with the kth diagonal block given by S(ν k ), yielding the following linear relation, where we have defined the operator H = D † y S D Dx . This formulation relates the spatial and temporal DoFs of a coherent input wavefront to the spatial and temporal DoFs of the corresponding output wavefront. Using Eq. (S7), the spatio-temporal input wavefront x giving any arbitrary multi-channel time-varying output signal y T can be estimated using the pseudo-inverse H + of H as x = H + y T . The case of the well-established TR technique Of particular interest is the SVD of H: H = U √ ΛV † . The diagonal matrix Λ directly yields the integral of output intensities over the time interval ∆t y and all ports λ n = ||HV n || 2 = ∆ty [Σ n |y n (t)| 2 ]dt upon injection through all ports within the time interval ∆t x of the spatio-temporal states x n (t). The incident signals x n (t) composing the vector V n are normalized such as ∆tx [Σ n |x n (t)| 2 ]dt = 1. If our transport matrix H is taken to be S, the highest and lowest values of λ n determine the complete range of achievable output reflection, and hence offer a simple method to identify the provably optimal input states for maximal or minimal output reflections. If instead H is a transmission matrix, then λ n corresponds to transmitted rather than reflected intensity instead. We consider the quasi-2D electromagnetic cavity shown in Fig. We coherently record the spatio-temporal output signals with an ultra-wideband multi-channel oscilloscope using a sampling rate of 40 GS/s. For the particular choice of ∆t x = ∆t y = [0 t c ] with t c = 1/(2δν), we display in Fig. We begin by considering reflectionless transient excitation (RTE) of a scattering system. As mentioned above and seen in Fig. The first type, in the first row of Fig. Previous experimental observations of RTE How many VPA states exist for a given transport matrix H? Theoretically, we expect this number to correspond to the number of complex zeros in the upper half of the complex frequency plane. We show in the SM that a VPA state indeed disappears as the corresponding zero crosses the real axis and acquires a negative imaginary part. The total number of poles and zeros can be estimated using Weyl's law erator We now turn our attention to the optimal energy deposition, which consists in delivering the maximum possible amount of energy within the output time interval ∆t y given spatio-temporal coherent control in the input time interval ∆t x . In Fig. By adjusting the definition of the output time interval ∆t y , the same approach can also yield optimal energy delivery at arbitrary times after the transient excitation interval. Two examples in the limit of a short output interval ∆t y = δ(t -t c ) are shown in Fig. The number of transmitting channels is here limited (N = 2) by our electronic hardware. To further demonstrate the interest of our approach, we consider a second 2D cavity of length L = 0.5 m and width W = 0.25 m with two arrays of N = 8 coax-to-waveguide transitions attached on the left and right interfaces (see Ref. Our spatio-temporal matrix formulation takes full advantage of both spectral and spatial DoFs to achieve optimal total transmission at selected times. We show in Fig. Finally, we explore the possibility of exciting states that have the same spatial and temporal input and output patterns, generalizing the recent concept of timeharmonic (monochromatic) scattering-invariant states that have the same spatial input and output patterns We then consider scattering-invariant time-varying The blue line is the incident signal, the red line is the outgoing signal and the green dashed line is the output signal shifted by -∆τ = -8ns. The inset is a zoom of the field on a small interval represented by the dashed black lines in the figure . states in transmission through the larger cavity with N = 8 antennas on each side. The length of the input interval is fixed to 0.3t max and the output temporal interval is now shifted by dτ , ∆t y = ∆t x + ∆τ . We find a maximal similarity coefficient |α| = 0.77 for ∆τ = 0.08t max . The corresponding length c 0 ∆τ = 2.04 m is close to the mean path length of the cavity We have presented a matrix formalism enabling optimal spatio-temporal coherent control of waves in arbitrarily complex scattering systems by taking full advantage of both spatial and temporal DoFs. Our work presents a unifying perspective on many contemporary wave-control techniques (time reversal, wavefront shaping, virtual perfect absorption, scattering-invariant modes) and even generalizes them. Beyond providing fundamental insights, our technique may readily find applications in the microwave and acoustics regimes where the necessary hardware for coherent spatio-temporal wavefront generation is available. Supplemental Material for "Matrix approach for optimal spatio-temporal coherent control of wave scattering" Clément Ferise, 1 Philipp del Hougne, 1 and Matthieu Davy 1 1 Univ Rennes, CNRS, IETR -UMR 6164, F-35000 Rennes, France (Dated: August 8, 2023) We provide here details on the multichannel temporal operator given in the main text. We consider N time signals x n (t m ) sampled on N tx points between 0 and t c . The Fourier transform on N ν frequencies can be expressed in terms of the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) operator, The dimensions of D x is N ν × N tx . When we set δt = 1/(N ν dν) and t c = t max with t max = 1/δν, the operator D x is unitary, meaning that D x D † x = 1 Nν . In the more general case of control over smaller time invervals t c < t max (N tx < N ν ), the DFT operator is non-square. It however still verifies We then seek for a single multichannel linear relation for the N input and output channels. We first concatenate the spectral and temporal matrices into the single vectors x t and x ν of length N N tx and N N ν , given below for N = 2: . . . The elements of x t are therefore x tj = x n (t m ) with j = (m-1)N +n. Using this formulation, we can find a linear relation between x t and x ν . We introduce the sparse multichannel DFT operator Dx of dimensions N N ν × N N tx expressed as (still for N = 2): to get One can easily verify that Dx has the same properties as D x : it is unitary for t c = t max and that D † x Dx = 1 for any temporal interval. However Dx D † x ̸ = 1 for t c < t max . We apply the same procedure to the M outgoing signals y n (t) measured within the time window ∆t y . Finally, we define the block diagonal matrix S D with We finally get Dy y t = S D Dx x t and which is Eq. ( In this section, we demonstrate numerically that the VPA states disappear when a zero of the scattering matrix S crosses the real axis. We consider in the following a single channel N = 1 system but an extension to multichannel systems is straightforward. For a single resonance, the scattering matrix is expressed by a Breit-Wigner formula, Here γ n represents the coupling of the channel to the system and γ a is the absorption linewidth. The reflection coefficient |S(ν)| 2 is shown in Fig. The pole of S is νn = ν n -i(γ n + γ a ) and the zero of S is z n = ν n + i(γ n -γ a ). When γ n > γ a , the imaginary part of z n is positive and the zero is located in the upper complex plane. This zero can then be accessed by sending a monchromatic signal at frequency ν n modulated by an exponentially growing envelope at rate γ n -γ a . This input temporal signal x(t) for an excitation between 0 and t c = t max /2 is directly extracted from the last subspace of the corresponding H = D † y S D Dx matrix. The outgoing energy in such state of virtual perfect absorption is suppressed between 0 and t c . Once the excitation is turned off, the energy stored within the cavity that has not been absorbed is released at rate γ n . The envelopes of input and output signals are illustrated in Fig. However, as γ a increases, zero reflection between 0 and t c becomes impossible for an excitation only within this range. For instance, for γ a = γ n , the zero of S is real, z n = ν n , and the excitation x(t) must be fully monochromatic to be perfectly absorbed with no reflection. This is the condition of coherent perfect absorption found when the absorption decay rate balances the excitation rate S1 . The reflection between 0 and t c for any non-monochromatic signal cannot be suppressed. In Fig. In Fig. In this section we present in details our experimental setup. A sketch is shown on Fig S3 . A 4 × 4 multichannel square cavity (side L = 205.74 mm and height H = 10.16 mm) comprising only two coupled ports to the system is used. Uncoupled ports are obstructed by a metallic plate.The measurement of the 2 × 2 scattering matrix between 8 and 9 GHz is operated with a Vector Network Analyser (VNA) on the two coupled ports of the cavity via coax-to-waveguide transitions with one circulator (Aerocomm J80.160) connected to it. We use circulators on each port to inject and measure the signals with a 4-ports VNA. By applying the SVD-based approach and matrix formalism presented in the main text, we obtain baseband temporal signals with frequencies between 0 and 1 GHz. These signals are first up-converted in the frequency range between 0.2 and 1.2 GHz via a Fourier transform and an inverse Fourier transform successively. The two pseudo-baseband signals (s 1 and s 2 on Fig In Fig. We start by varying the interval length t c . We display in Fig. The temporal responses for four time intervals (t c1 = 0.004t max , t c2 = 0.05t max , t c3 = 0.35t max and t c4 = 0.9t max ) are shown in the four last rows of As explained in the main text, the number of reflectionless states found from the spatio-temporal operator H is theoretically equal to the number of zeros located in the upper complex plane. The total number of zero within the frequency range [f 1 = ω 1 /(2π); f 2 = ω 2 /(2π)] is equal to the number of poles of the scattering matrix and can be estimated from Weyl's law : N ω = ω2 ω1 ρ(ω)dω, where ρ(ω) ∼ Aω/(2πc 2 0 ) is the density of states. Here A is the area of the cavity. In this section, we provide further evidence of the relation between the number of reflectionless transient states and the number of zeros with positive imaginary parts. To do so, we vary the number of channels coupled to the cavity, from N = 2 (corresponding to measurements presented in the main text) to N = 8. In each case, we measure the N × N scattering matrix and obtain τ W (ν). The real part of the Wigner time delay is represented on the first column of Fig. For N = 2, the Wigner time delay comprises positive and negative peaks. We find 18 singular values of H bellow λ = 10 -5 . The small difference from the number presented in the main text is due to the slight changes in the system. This time, all the channels are matched with coax-to-waveguide transitions. For each measurements, N ports are connected to the Vector Network Analyser, the others being in open-circuit states. This pushes the reflective boundaries away from the center of the cavity and so virtually increases its size. For N = 4, the Wigner time delay comprises only one negative peak and 25 singular values below λ = 10 -5 are found. For N = 6, the peaks of τ W (ν) are all positive so that we expect that the number of reflectionless states to be equal to the number of resonances (or poles) with the bandwidth. We find 25 singular values of H smaller than λ = 10 -5 which is in good agreement with Weyl's estimate. [S1] Y. Chong, L. Ge, H. Cao, and A. D. Stone, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 053901 (2010).