We elaborate on unconventional electronic structure methods based on geminals and their potential to advance the rapidly developing field of organic photovoltaics (OPV). Specifically, we focus on the computational advantages of geminal-based methods over standard approaches and identify the critical aspects of OPV development. Examples are reliable and efficient computations of orbital energies, electronic spectra, and vander-Waals interactions. Geminal-based models can also be combined with quantum embedding techniques and a quantum information analysis of orbital interactions to gain a fundamental understanding of the electronic structures and properties of realistic OPV building blocks. Furthermore, other organic components present in, for instance, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) represent another promising scope of application. Finally, we provide numerical examples predicting the properties of a small building block of OPV components and two carbazole-based dyes proposed as possible DSSC sensitizers. Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices and dyesensitized solar cells (DSSC) represent an up-and-coming technology. For instance, their ever-improving cell efficiency (over 19%) However, recent benchmark studies using the IP-EOM-pCCD approach where C is the matrix of eigenvectors, ε is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues (orbital energies), γ pq is the oneparticle reduced density matrix (1-RDM), and F is the so-called generalized Fock matrix (aka Lagrangian), which can be expressed in terms of one-and two-electron integrals, h pr and g prst , and reduced density matrices. In the above expression, the two-particle reduced density matrix (2-RDM) is defined as Thus, to calculate (approximate) orbital energies from orbital-optimized geminal-based methods, the corresponding 1-and 2-RDMs must be reliable. An alternative formulation of EKT, proposed by Ciosłowski and coworkers, 41 uses energy-derivative density matrices. Electronic properties. The power conversion efficiency of OPV devices can be improved by exploiting building blocks that feature a complementary spectral absorption range between the donor and the acceptor and a strong absorption in the visible-near infrared region to ensure a large short-circuit current. To predict such properties through large-scale quantum chemical modeling, we must efficiently and reliably determine the electronic spectra (electronic excitation energies and associated transition dipole moments) and ground-state electronic properties like electronic dipole and quadrupole moments. Optimizing these properties is indispensable for improving charge separation, transport, and overall device performance in organic solar cells. Having computed the lowest excitation energy, also denoted as the optical gap (∆ o ), and the charge gap (eq. ( The EBE denotes the energy required to dissociate an excited electron-hole pair into free charge carriers. Specifically, the exciton is formed in the donor domain of the OSC. At the same time, the acceptor material is meant to provide a way to overcome the corresponding EBE and, hence, separate the charges. Thus, we should be able to predict reliable EBEs for the donor and the donoracceptor interface to steer the efficiency of OPV devices. Most promising geminal theories for excited state calculations are based on the extended random phase approximation Since geminal-based methods exploit two-electron functions as the fundamental building blocks of the electronic wave function, the corresponding molecular orbital basis (used to construct each geminal) is typically localized on just a few centers of the whole molecule. Due to these localized molecular orbitals, the contributions to excited, ionized, or electronattached states feature several contributions (Slater determinants) with small weights. Thus, the underlying electronic structure differs from the conventional picture we obtain when working with delocalized canonical orbitals like those predicted by DFAs. The significant advantage of a localized basis In contrast to the frontier orbital energies, the discrepancies in the lowest-lying excited state energies are much less pronounced if DFAs are concerned, differing by a maximum of 1.07 eV across the investigated functionals (2.08/2.32 for PBE, 2.66/2.75 for PBE0, 3.11/2.88 for CAM-B3LYP, and 2.04/2.23 for SAOP for CBA/CDA, respectively). The first excitation energy further increases in EOM-pCCD+S calculations to 4.76 eV for CBA and 4.36 eV for CDA, respectively. A detailed analysis of the excited state wave function at the EOM-pCCD+S level of theory, considering about 90% of the configurational weights, suggests that the lowest-lying excited state of the CBA dye features around 30% charge transfer character, involving electronic transitions between donor and acceptor units, from which the majority (87%) entails charge transfer from the donor to the acceptor unit (see also Fig. Thus, our numerical examples illustrate that pCCDbased methods can predict accurate molecular properties (HOMO/LUMO energies and charge/band/fundamental gaps). In contrast, the localized nature of the molecular orbital basis allows us to unambiguously identify the domain on which the HOMO or LUMO orbitals are centered. Furthermore, each excited state wave function can be broken down into electronic excitations centered on specific domains, like local or CT excitations. Although such an analysis might initially seem tedious, it is possible to fully automatize the assessment of the excitation characters by assigning molecular orbitals to specific domains. Finally, another challenge of geminal-based methods will be pushing the precision to chemical accuracy, considering environmental effects or dynamical correlation. 