Recent advancements in fabrication techniques have enabled unprecedented clean interfaces and gate tunability in semiconductor-superconductor heterostructures. Inspired by these developments, we propose protocols to realize Thouless quantum pumping in electrically tunable Josephson junction arrays. We analyze, in particular, the implementation of the Rice-Mele and the Harper-Hofstadter pumping schemes, whose realization would validate these systems as flexible platforms for quantum simulations. We investigate numerically the long-time behavior of chains of controllable superconducting islands in the Coulomb-blockaded regime. Our findings provide new insights into the dynamics of periodically driven interacting systems and highlight the robustness of Thouless pumping with respect to boundary effects typical of superconducting circuits. Josephson junction arrays (JJAs) and their intricate many-body physics have captivated the attention of researchers since ground-breaking experiments in the 1990s (see the review These limitations have been mitigated by recent advancements in epitaxial growth techniques In this respect, topological phases of matter are an ideal target for quantum simulations in solid-state platforms due to their intrinsic robustness against disorder, noise, interaction, and possibly dissipation. When combined with a time-periodic driving, one can engineer novel out-of-equilibrium states with no static analogs, known as Floquet topological phases In this paper, we propose an innovative approach that combines a JJA with the ability to finely tune the induced charge on each SC island and the corresponding Josephson couplings. Through numerical simulations of 1D arrays in the Coulomb-blockaded regime, we focus on the long-time behavior of such systems. To investigate this limit, we connect a Josephson junction chain with superconducting leads that act as Cooper pair (CP) reservoirs. We study the effect of the electrostatic repulsion arising from the cross-capacitance between neighboring islands and show that topological pumping is remarkably robust with respect to both the coupling to the leads and nearest-neighbor interactions. Our proposal is qualitatively different from former experiments based on geometrical pumping which rely on optimal control of the pumping protocol (e.g. Ref. The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. 2 we derive a bosonic model from the Hamiltonian of a 1D JJA. In particular, we specialize on two models characterized by nontrivial topological properties: the Rice-Mele (RM) model Recent developments in the epitaxial growth techniques of hybrid SC-SM materials In the following, we consider devices defined by a 1D chain of superconducting islands of sub-micrometer size. For Al islands, the typical critical temperature of such systems is ∼ 1.6K For a neighboring pair of SC islands, the dynamics can be modeled through the interplay of two kinds of interaction; first, the electrostatic interaction determined by the capacitance matrix which describes not only the potential induced on one island by the charge of the other, but also the charges induced in both islands by the surrounding environment. Second, the tunneling of CPs between the two islands which define an effective SC-SM-SC junction where the coherent hopping of CPs is mediated by Andreev states At low temperature, the JJAs can be modeled through a standard quantum phase model (see, for instance, the review Here C -1 is the inverse capacitance matrix of the islands and M is the number of islands in the chain. However, by assuming that the semiconducting environment and the electrostatic gates in the hybrid device effectively screen the charge of the SCs, we reduce the sum to single-island and nearest-neighbor interactions: In this equation, we introduced two customary energy scales: E C = 4e 2 /C self sets the charging energy of a single island, with C self being the sum of all capacitances to the other islands and environment elements; E C C = 4e 2 (C -1 ) j, j+1 determines the electrostatic energy between neighboring islands. We will assume for simplicity that these quantities are translationally invariant, which is the expected behavior for a strong screening imposed by the environment. Weak variations along the chain, however, do not affect our analysis and can be easily accounted for. n g, j is the charge induced in each superconducting island and can be controlled by the surrounding electrostatic gates (see Fig. g j /2e. Here C g j defines the mutual capacitance between the island j and its neighboring side gate. More complex scenarios to account for the charge induced by all electrostatic gates can be easily investigated. The energy scale E C is determined by the geometry of the islands and their electrostatic environment. We consider, as an example, gated devices with Al islands patterned over an InAs 2D electron gas; for rectangular islands of size ∼ 750nm×80nm, the resulting charging energy is approximately E C ≈ 0.125meV≈ h30GHz The coherent tunneling of CPs is modeled by the Hamiltonian Here E J, j is the Josephson coupling between island j and j + 1 and the Peierls phase x is the line integral of the vector potential ⃗ A along a path between island j and j+1, which accounts for the role of the magnetic field when embedding the chain in a closed superconducting loop. Eq. ( When the Josephson energy dominates over the electrostatic terms, the system displays global phase coherence and behaves as a SC, allowing for coherent transport of CPs. Instead, the regime in which the electrostatic interaction E C dominates over the Josephson energies E J, j , results in an insulating phase unless all the induced charges n g, j are fine-tuned close to 1/2. In this scenario, the transport of CPs across the chain is suppressed, as we can consider each island in a Coulomb-blockaded state. In order to devise charge pumping protocols, we consider the regime E C, j > E J, j , E C C, j , and, initially, we neglect the nearest-neighbor electrostatic interactions. We can rewrite the Hamiltonian Ĥ by introducing the operators Σj = e i φj and Σ † j = e -i φj which, respectively, lower and raise the number of CPs in the island j by 1, such that [ Nj , Σj ] = -Σj . We obtain: This expression shows explicitly that the quantum phase model corresponds to a tight-binding Hamiltonian for the CPs. The dispersion of the charging energy of a single island is depicted in Fig. which vanishes for n g, j = 0.5. We rewrite the total Hamiltonian (with E C C = 0) as a tightbinding model of hardcore bosons: This Hamiltonian shows that, in the hardcore limit E C ≫ E J, j , the system can be mapped into a chain of free fermions via a Jordan-Wigner transformation. Any time modulation of the electrostatic gates would translate into a time modulation of the onsite potentials μ j and the tunneling amplitudes E J, j . Hence, by implementing a suitable periodic modulation of these parameters, we expect that the Josephson junction chain is able to reproduce the physics of periodically driven systems of non-interacting fermions. In the following, we will focus on the two most known schemes for the realization of adiabatic Thouless pumping: the periodically driven RM model and HH model. We restrict our analysis to the hardcore boson description but emphasize that the breakdown of this approximation and the effects of onsite interactions in the RM model have been theoretically investigated in Ref. Both models rely on a periodic drive of the onsite potential. We consider a generic time modulation of the side gates with where ω = 2πΩ. Such modulation yields: If μ 0, j ≈ μ is approximately independent of the position along the chain, it plays the role of an overall chemical potential for the hardcore bosons. The static voltages V 0, j can therefore be used to set the average filling of the system. In case of position-dependent variations of the C g j parameters, instead, these voltages can be tuned to reduce the fluctuations of the onsite potentials μ 0, j which, essentially, play the role of onsite disorder in the Hamiltonian The RM model Here we consider a chain with an even number of islands M and open boundary conditions. The instantaneous spectrum of ĤRM in the thermodynamic limit displays two bands with a linear level crossing at E J,1 = E J,2 and μ A = μ B . For μ A = -μ B the ground state is found at halffilling, and it is useful to define the two-component parameter vector The time-dependent single-particle gap is given by | ⃗ h(t)|, and a topological charge pumping is obtained when ⃗ h(t) winds around the gapless point ⃗ h = 0 during one period. To implement Thouless pumping, we adopt a modulation of the kind in Eq. ( we set χ j = (-1) j+1 π/2 and choose modulation amplitudes δV g, j such that δμ is approximately constant along the chain. We observe that a residual μ may reduce the energy gap of the system, but in the limit of adiabatic pumping, it does not affect the pumped charge as long as it remains sufficiently smaller than the single-particle gap at all times. The modulation of the Josephson energies E J, j (V c, j ) is achieved by time-periodic voltages in the cutter gates. In particular, we adopt the following signals: We assume that all junctions in the chain are characterized by the same parameters, such that this modulation approximately results in Josephson amplitudes of the kind where f l r is a linear rectifier function, with f l r (x) = x if x > 0 and f l r (x) = 0 otherwise, see Fig. c , E J, j (t) = 0 for a fraction of the time period and its modulation is clipped below zero [Fig. The time-periodic nature of the Hamiltonian H RM allows us to consider the time coordinate as a second dimension for the momentum, such that we can assign a Chern number C to each The blue curve displays the approximation considered to model the Josephson energies E J, j as a function of the cutter gate voltage V c, j (arbitrary units). The dashed vertical line indicates the threshold V * c below which E J, j is considered zero. Yellow and blue shaded areas schematically indicate the voltage range for the sinusoidal and clipped modulations, respectively. Panels (b) and (c) display the corresponding modulated E J, j (ωt); green and purple curves refer to odd and even junctions, respectively. energy band where the index n = 0, 1 labels the single-particle bands, resulting in an adiabatic Thouless pumping at half filling with average current I = 2eC 0 Ω. The 2D Hofstadter model The equivalent driven 1D Hamiltonian, known as the Harper-Hofstadter model, is obtained by replacing one of the momentum components of the Hofstadter model by the time coordinate and, for hardcore bosons, it reads: The realization of this model in the Josephson junction chains requires exclusively the modulation (8) of the onsite potentials and is obtained by setting a position-dependent phase χ j = Φ j in Eq. The realization of the corresponding pumping scheme does not require a modulation of the Josephson amplitudes. Furthermore, the uniform and constant potential μ can be changed by regulating the voltage offsets V 0, j and be used to set the overall filling of the CPs. The Thouless pumping is achieved when μ lies in either of the band gaps depicted in Fig. So far, we have discussed the modeling of isolated Josephson junction chains. To investigate their transport properties, however, it is necessary to embed these systems in a larger environment. Specifically, our aim is to model the driven transport of CPs across such JJAs. Therefore, the most convenient choice is to include two superconducting leads coupled to the first and last island of the chain (depicted in light blue in Fig. where E L describes the associated Josephson energy which we consider constant in time. By assuming that both leads are described by standard BCS coherent states, we can replace the related phase operators φL/R with classical phases φ L/R . When embedding the JJA in an external SQUID, the phase difference φ = φ R -φ L would correspond to the magnetic flux threading it. We observe that such a phase difference can be absorbed in the Peierls phases θ j, j+1 in Eq. ( In the hardcore limit, the boundary Hamiltonian Ĥb becomes This boundary term violates the conservation of the total number of CPs in the chain, such that, in general, the many-body ground and Floquet states will be superpositions of different particle numbers. Hence, the adiabatic condition no longer involves the single-particle band gap e g but a many-body energy gap E g that depends on the interplay between the charging energies of the SC islands, the Josephson energies of the junctions, and the coupling with the leads. In the following, we will investigate Thouless pumping in short chains coupled to external SC leads to identify experimentally relevant regimes where charge quantization can be observed. In particular, we will focus on the role played by the Josephson coupling to the leads, which breaks particle number conservation, and on the effects of the nearest-neighbor interaction E C C . To this end, we adopt a Floquet description of the driven Josephson chain in the hardcore boson limit. We consider the Hamiltonian ĤRM,tot which describes a RM chain, as defined in Eq. ( Here T indicates time ordering and τ = 1/Ω is the time period such that Ĥ(t + τ) = Ĥ(t). We consider system sizes up to M = 8, compatible with realistic devices in which all islands can be independently addressed by gate voltages, and we numerically diagonalize U(τ) to obtain the many-body Floquet eigenstates {|Φ ν (τ)〉}: where E ν labels the many-body Floquet quasienergies. In the infinite-time limit, for a given phase difference φ, the time-averaged pumped charge per cycle corresponds to with Here Ψ 0 is the state of the Josephson chain at the beginning of the pumping protocol, which we set to the ground state of ĤRM,tot (t = 0, φ), ρ(t) is the density matrix of the system at time t, and 2e∂ φ Ĥ = Ĵ corresponds to the current operator. In the adiabatic limit, the ground state |Ψ 0 〉 of ĤRM,tot (t = 0, φ) has a large overlap with the Floquet state with the lowest energy expectation value where Ĵ (t) is the time-dependent current operator, and |Φ ν (t)〉 are the time-evolved Floquet states within one period. Given the difficulty of accurately differentiating numerically the quasienergies with respect to the external SC phase, due to the many (avoided) level crossings in the Floquet spectrum, we will use Eq. ( the system CPs via a suitable gauge transformation. For small systems, this shift causes a nontrivial dependence of ∂ φ E ν on φ that yields, in turn, a dependence of Q ∞ on the external phase. This is expected to be relevant only for small systems and vanishes completely in the thermodynamic limit, provided the system is in an insulating phase To recover an exact quantization in short chains, it is therefore necessary to average the pumped charge over φ. By following the Thouless construction For systems with periodic boundary conditions conserving the particle number (such that φ is a phase twist in the boundary conditions), this quantity is quantized in the adiabatic limit at half-filling and corresponds, when N ν = δ ν,0 , to the Chern number of the lowest energy band. More in general, Eq. ( In the following, we will consider small system sizes, for which the phase dependence is sizable, and we will investigate the dependence of the pumped charge on the modulation δJ of the Josephson coupling, the coupling E L , and the nearest-neighbor interaction The amplitude δV c of the cutter gate modulation and, consequently, the amplitude δJ in Eq. ( To estimate these effects, we consider the dependence of Q ∞ on δJ for different values of φ (Fig. This dependence on the Josephson energy modulation can be understood by comparing the behavior of populated Floquet many-body states as a function of φ for δJ = 0.5J 0 (sinusoidal waveform) and δJ = 1.2J 0 (clipped waveform). They are shown in the left and right panels of Fig. ) for all values of φ. We conclude that even with small systems (M = 6), the phase dependence is very weak in the clipped regime, and a good quantization can be observed without averaging over the SC phase difference. Besides the dependence of the pumped charge on the external phase φ, it is important to investigate the role of the coupling E L between the edge islands and the superconducting leads. When E L dominates over the other energy scales, the first and last islands are effectively merged with the two external leads and, in practice, the system behaves as a shorter chain. If instead E L is weak compared to J 0 , the transport of CPs across the system is hindered, as the pumped current is faster than the rate of charge transferring to or from the leads. Consequently, the system behaves as an open chain. To examine the interpolation between these two limits, it is instructive to consider the behavior of the system for a clipped modulation δJ > J 0 . In this situation, the onsite potentials μ A/B and E J,1 vanish in the middle of the pumping period, t = (n + 1/2)τ. Therefore, the ground state of the Hamiltonian ĤRM (τ/2) corresponds to the extreme topological dimerized state of the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model, and it displays the typical four-fold degeneracy associated with localized zeroenergy boundary modes. The boundary Hamiltonian Ĥb , however, gaps the SSH edges; the ground states of the first and last islands in this dimerized limit result and are separated by an energy gap E L from the localized excited states in the same islands. Therefore, when E L < J 0 +δJ 2 , 2δμ, it sets the many-body energy gap E g . Notably, the limit E L → 0 corresponds to the isolated RM chain in which the zero-energy SSH edge modes cause transitions between the two energy bands, thereby disrupting the Thouless pumping. Only when E L is sufficiently larger than ω, this non-adiabatic effect vanishes and the quantized pumping can be restored. Fig. The region 0 < E L < J 0 is the most susceptible to non-adiabatic errors since the ratio between the many-body gap and the driving frequency changes continuously between 0 and J 0 /ω. Hence, we expect the pumped charge to saturate faster to Q ∞ = 2e for smaller values of ω. In the adiabatic limit ω → 0, a finite gap opens for any value of E L > 0, leading to the quantization of Q ∞ . However, in a realistic scenario, the driving frequency is finite and sets the average magnitude of the current flowing through the array. Thus, E L needs to be large enough to prevent the CPs from accumulating on one side of the chain, similar to what happens in an open system, suppressing the charge pumping. In the Floquet framework, this can be understood by observing the winding of the quasienergies associated with Floquet states with the highest occupation. When the charge is quantized and the driving is sufficiently slow, there is a clear correspondence between Floquet states and energy eigenstates, leading to an almost perfect fidelity N 0 ≃ 1, for any value of the phase difference φ. Instead, when E L < J 0 , there are multiple Floquet states that display a large overlap with the initial ground state, as shown in Fig. We conclude that, in order to avoid additional non-adiabatic corrections to the pumped charge, E L must be larger than the single-particle band gap of the chain. 1 2 Differently from the most common trapped ultracold atom systems Ĥint has two effects on the chain: a static repulsion, E C C b † j+1 b † j bj+1 bj , and a shift in the chemical potential, -E C C (n g, j-1 + n g, j+1 ), due to the charge of the neighboring islands. In Fig. The HH model contains two main differences from the RM model. First, its implementation does not require modulation of the tunneling amplitudes but only of the induced charges. This makes it more suitable for experimental implementations but, at the same time, more susceptible to finite-size effects since this protocol does not rely on any dimerization. Second, when the Aharonov-Bohm phase Φ is set to 2π/3, the model displays two insulating phases with opposite Chern numbers and filling 1/3 and 2/3. The second equation corresponds to the mapping μ 0, j → -μ 0, j and t → t +τ/2. This symmetry relates states with complementary fillings and implies that the pumped charge changes sign when reflecting n g, j around 1 2 . In particular, this holds for any value E C C , implying that the effect of the interaction is insensitive to the average charge density. To control the filling factor and, therefore, the direction of the current, we tune the offset of the chemical potential μ through the average value of the induced charge during one driving period: Here we consider, for simplicity, uniform C g and V 0 across the chain. To investigate the stability of Thouless pumping in the presence of interactions, we consider the dynamics dictated by the Hamiltonian defined by the Hamiltonians in Eqs. ( We emphasize that for the HH model, averaging over the phase difference φ is necessary to obtain the predicted quantization of the pumped charge since we consider small system sizes (M = 6, 9). This is caused by the winding of the eigenenergies of the populated Floquet states, displayed in Fig. In the data of Fig. We show this irregular behavior in Fig. The analysis presented in the previous sections and the observation of a quantized Thouless pumping rely on several constraints, important in devising an experimental realization of the presented models. The most fundamental parameter in both driving protocols is the frequency Ω. On one side, Ω determines the ideal pumped current I = 2eΩC; therefore, in order to obtain clearly measurable currents (I ≳ 10pA), we require Ω ≳ 300MHz. On the other, the frequency determines the onset of nonadiabatic errors, typically scaling as (hΩ/E g ) 2 . Therefore Ω must be sufficiently small compared to the many-body gaps E g , although the presence of dissipation might mitigate this requirement by suppressing some of the nonadiabatic corrections The RM model has the disadvantage of requiring modulation of both the induced charges and the Josephson couplings. This can be particularly challenging as the cutter gates controlling the Josephson energies may additionally induce charge on the neighboring islands. Such an effect can, however, be compensated with suitable corrections of the voltages V g of the side gates. At the same time, the RM model displays, for M = 6 islands, smaller finite-size effects than the HH model, and, in particular, does not show a strong dependence of the pumped charge Q ∞ on the lead phase φ, especially in the clipped regime. For the same number of superconducting islands, the HH model requires control of only half of the electrostatic gates but displays instead a very strong dependence on the phase φ for M = 6 [Fig. Concerning the scalability of the HH model at flux 2π/q, only q independent voltage signals are needed for SC chains sufficiently uniform, such that the capacitances C g j and charging energies present only minor variations along the system. These q signals need then to be distributed across suitable gate structures. Regarding the averaging over the phase φ, several options can be envisioned. The first possibility is based on introducing a suitable voltage bias V b between the two external SC leads (see Ref. In our analysis of short Josephson junction chains, we did not consider explicitly the role of disorder. For both the RM Hamiltonian (9) and the HH Hamiltonian (13), the onsite disorder corresponds to a position dependence of the time-independent part of μ j in Eq. ( On one side, the ratio E C /E J cannot be too large. Specifically, the standard deviation of the island-dependent E C ng (where ng represents the targeted n g average) must be considerably smaller than δJ and E J in the RM and HH pumping schemes, respectively. Our calculations rely on the CP hardcore assumption E C ≫ E J ; however, numerical investigations A different kind of disorder characterizing JJAs are random variations in the Josephson energies and, in the RM model, differences in the functions E J, j (V c, j ) associated with the junctions along the chain. Also in this case, the related disorder in the hopping terms of Eq. ( Given the accuracy of the lithographic techniques adopted for the fabrication of hybrid JJAs, however, we expect the typical disorder amplitudes in the Josephson energies to be below 10% (see related experimental estimates in Ref. Motivated by recent advances in fabrication techniques, we numerically investigated possible driving protocols to implement topological Thouless pumping in short 1D arrays of tunable Josephson junctions. We considered the JJAs to be in a Coulomb-blockaded regime, where the charging energy of each SC island and the SC gap are the dominant energy scales, allowing us to approximate CPs as hardcore bosons. To study quantized transport in the long-time regime, we connected the array to two grounded SC leads, breaking the conservation of particle number. We used Floquet theory to extract the pumped charge at a small but finite driving frequency in the limit of an infinite number of driving cycles. We focused on two prototypical models for topological quantum pumping, the periodically driven Rice-Mele and Harper-Hofstadter models. For both, we analyzed the role played by the coupling with the SC leads and their phase bias, as well as the effect of nearest-neighbor interactions originating from cross-capacitance between the SC islands. These ingredients are specific to the solid-state implementation of Thouless pumping with JJAs, and they extend the recent analyses of the role of interactions in Floquet topological insulators inspired by ultracold-atom experiments In the RM model, finite-size effects are most easily suppressed in a clipped driving regime where the modulation of the Josephson coupling is tuned such that the SM substrate below the Josephson junctions is depleted at half periods, effectively dimerizing the chain. However, the implementation requires simultaneous tuning of both the Josephson couplings and the charge induced on each island, resulting in a more complicated experimental protocol. The HH model, on the other hand, requires fewer control gates as the Josephson couplings are constant in time. The drawback is that for small system sizes (M = 6, 9 islands) we find that it is necessary to dynamically average over the phase difference of the external leads to obtain a good quantization of the pumped charge. This behavior appears analogous to previous proposals to achieve quantized pumping in short Josephson junction chains Our results suggest that quantized Thouless pumping is experimentally accessible with the recently developed SC-SM JJAs, paving the way for a new generation of experiments investigating topological transport in Floquet systems as an alternative to ultracold-atom approaches. However, there are several further effects worth investigating to improve our analysis. First, one could relax the hardcore boson approximation and allow for a standard onsite repulsion, which has been studied for the RM model with periodic boundaries The appearance of topological bands with nonzero Chern numbers is not limited to Φ = 2π/3 but holds for any rational value of the flux Φ = 2πp/q, with p, q ∈ , which results in up to q non-overlapping bands.