This study suggests an idea that radiation in a periodic leaky-wave antenna (PLWA) should be considered to be produced with the fundamental mode, regardless of whether it is fast-wave or slow-wave. The idea is different from the conventional PLWA theory, which considers it a fact that a PLWA produces radiation with its fast-wave space harmonic when the fundamental mode is slow-wave. To elaborate the idea, it is proved that there is not an eigen-equation like Pythagorean theorem for the fundamental mode in PLWAs. Then a non-uniform structure antenna is designed to show that slow-wave modes can produce leaky-wave radiation. Again it is proved that the difference of the phase constants between a slow-wave fundamental mode and its fast-wave space harmonics has not any effect on the radiation pattern of a PLWA. Moreover, it is clarified that the fundamental mode has a more definite physical significance than space harmonics. Finally, a concept of generalized fundamental modes is proposed without using Fourier expansion. The generalized fundamental modes have the same phase and attenuation constants as any space harmonics, and have physical significance as the conventional fundamental mode. Therefore, it could replace the roles that the space harmonics used to play. about a non-uniform LWA is? In general, there are two types of non-uniform LWAs, namely periodic leaky-wave antennas (PLWAs) A PLWA is no longer a uniform but a periodic structure, in which there are a fundamental mode and space harmonics For the mode in a uniform LWA, there is an eigen-equation like Pythagorean theorem, which governs the three dimensional wave-numbers of the mode. Based on the eigen-equation, it can be concluded that a fast-wave mode cannot produce radiation im a uniform LWA. Is there such a eigen-equation for the fundamental mode in a PLWA, with which the slow-wave the fundamental mode would not produce slow-wave radiation. However, to the best knowledge of the authors, no one has yet proved the eigen-equation for the fundamental mode. On the other hand, there is work demonstrating that slow-wave dominant modes in non-uniform LWAs can produce radiation 1) Slow waves in a non-uniform structure antenna could produce radiation. To verify prerequisite, it is proved in Section II that there is not an eigen-equation like Pythagorean theorem for the fundamental mode, and a non-uniform antenna is L designed in Section III to show that its slow-wave dominant mode can produce leaky-wave radiation. 2) It is proved in Section IV that the difference of the phase constants between a slow-wave fundamental mode and its fast-wave space harmonics has not any effect on the radiation pattern of a PLWA. 3) The fundamental mode has a more definite physical significance than space harmonics. This prerequisite is elaborated in Section V. The paper also proposes a concept of the generalized fundamental modes without using Fourier expansion in Section VI. The generalized fundamental modes and the fundamental mode differ by only a phase factor. Since the generalized fundamental modes can have the same phase constant and attenuation constant as any space harmonic, it is suggested that the generalized fundamental modes could replace the roles that were once played by the space harmonics In Section VII a conclusion is provided. This Section will proof that there is not an eigen-equation like Pythagorean theorem for the fundamental mode. As a result, whether the fundamental mode radiates or not, it cannot be determined based on whether the fundamental mode is fast-wave or slow-wave. Appling Floquet's theorem to a periodic structure like a PLWA, one can write the field in the periodic structure as follows x y z e   EE where the function of the fundamental mode, 0 ( , , ) x y z E , is a periodic function with a periodicity p about the argument z , 0  is the propagation constant of the fundamental mode. Substituting (1) into wave equation, a three-dimensional wave equation for the fundamental mode is as follow Rather than a two-dimensional partial equation that the eigenmode in a uniform transmission structure satisfies, the equation (3) generally is a three-dimensional partial differential equation. The propagation constant 0  depends on the boundary condition on the whole boundary of a unit cell rather than the transverse boundary condition only on its transverse section. Only if the following equation holds, the equation ( Substituting ( The field in ( Consequently, the 0 ( , , ) x y z E cannot be characterized with only a pair of transverse eigen parameters of x k and y k , which are usually determined only by the transverse boundary condition on its transverse section in a uniform structure. In fact, because a periodic structure always has variable cross-sections along its propagation direction, one can not obtain a fixed propagation constant 0  governing the whole periodic structure, because there is not a constant transverse section to enforce boundary conditions. Therefore, there is certainly an inequation for the fundamental mode as follow If a fundamental mode is a slow-wave, namely 0 0 k  , due to inequation (8), the 22 + xy kk cannot be determined to be negative, and the 22 + xy kk might be positive! When the real part of the x k or/and y k is not zero, the fundamental mode has phase variation along its transverse direction, and can produce leaky-wave radiation. As a result, the slow-wave fundamental mode could be responsible for leaky-wave radiation. To demonstrate that the slow-wave dominant mode in a non-uniform structure antenna can produce radiation, this Section introduces a very simple traveling-wave series-fed array antenna, namely slotted dielectric filled waveguide (DFW) antenna. Fig. To simplify the following simulations with CST, without otherwise specified, all the substrates are treated as lossless and the metal is treated as PEC (perfect electric conductor). When the dominant mode TE10 is fed into a DFW, its phase constant  can be calculated as follows where 0  and 0 k are wavelength and wavenumber in air, respectively. Fig. The two-slot DFW can be treated as a two-element array. The radiation pattern of the two-element array can be written as where 0 () F is the radiation pattern of a single slot. Based . The calculated phase delays by All the above results show that slow-wave dominant mode in a non-uniform antenna can produce the leaky-wave radiation. When a PLWA has slow-wave radiation, the fundamental mode is slow-wave. In classic PLWA theory, its pattern characteristics of the PLWA, such as the direction of its main lobe, is usually explained with the fast-wave space harmonic. This Section provides a proof that the difference of the phase constants between the slow-wave fundamental mode and the fast-wave space harmonics has not any effect on the radiation pattern characteristics of a PLWA. The fundamental mode and its space harmonics share the same attenuation constant and different phase constants. The phase of the space harmonic is as follow . Therefore, there are two kinds of phase delays between any two adjacent radiating elements of a PLWA: one calculated using the fundamental mode and the other using fast-wave space harmonics. For a PLWA with N elements, its array pattern can be expressed by where u is the total phase difference of two radiating fields from adjacent two element antennas, and F(u) is a periodic function with a periodicity of 2 . The phase difference based on nth fast-wave space harmonic is as follow Substituting ( where 0 u is the phase difference based on the fundamental mode. Based on the periodic characteristic of F(u), one has 0 ( ) ( ) It means that the difference of the phase constants between the slow-wave fundamental mode and the fast-wave space harmonics has not any effect on the radiation pattern characteristics of a PLWA. On the other hand, the fundamental mode has the same attenuation constant as the space harmonics, but different phase constants. Therefore, it might be possible that the fundamental mode could fully replace the role the harmonics used to play in the classic PLWA theory. Since slow-wave modes in a non-uniform structure antenna can produce radiation, and the difference of the phase constants between the slow-wave fundamental mode and the fast-wave space harmonics has not any effect on the radiation pattern characteristics of a PLWA, it may be reasonable that the fundamental mode rather than its space harmonics, produces the radiation of a PLWA, regardless of whether the fundamental mode is fast-wave or slow-wave. The reason for it is as follows. 1) The fundamental mode has a definite physical significance since it satisfies the boundary condition of a PLWA. On the other, any one space harmonic does not satisfy the boundary conditions individually, so that any individual space harmonic does not exist alone in a periodic structure 2) It would be impossible to tell whether any individual space harmonic radiate or not. Whether or not wave radiates depends on the continuity of the structure boundary. Any individual space harmonic is only part of the overall electromagnetic wave, so it has nothing to do with boundary continuity. Therefore, a space harmonic cannot be used to determine whether a PLWA radiates or not. If one asks what kind of modes can produce radiation, even if the answer to this question is not the fundamental mode, it cannot be a space harmonic, regardless of whether the space harmonic is fast-wave or slow-wave. On the other hand, the fundamental mode satisfies boundary conditions and has a field distribution associated with an actual antenna, and it would be evident to determine whether the fundamental mode radiates or not. Moreover, since the field distribution can also be calculated with simulation tools, the fundamental mode provides a more visual insight than space harmonics. 3) In principle, all space harmonics in a PLWA share the same importance. If two spatial harmonics are different types of wave, saying one fast-wave and the other slow-wave, the radiation of the PLWA cannot be produced/determined by only one and not the other. In addition, since a space harmonic is only part of the entire electromagnetic wave, it is not easy to understand that only several space harmonics can characterize the radiation characteristics of the entire electromagnetic wave. The fundamental mode, however, can fully characterize the entire electromagnetic wave in a PLWA, including the radiation. Since the fundamental mode rather than any space harmonics has a definite physical significance, it is the fundamental mode, not its space harmonics, that produces the radiation in a PLWA even if the fundamental mode is a slow-wave. Besides the minimum periodicity, any one periodic function has any number of other periodicity. Can the fundamental mode have multiple phase constants? The field in a periodic structure can be rewritten in the following form Therefore, ( , , ) gn x y z E is still a periodic function with a periodicity p . Since the formula The phase constants of the generalized fundamental modes are consistent with the phase constants of space harmonics. Accordingly, if wave phenomenon related to phase characteristic in a periodic structure is explained well with a space harmonic, the wave phenomenon would be also explained well with a generalized fundamental mode. Therefore, the generalized fundamental modes could replace the roles that were once played by the space harmonics, and it would be much reasonable than space harmonics due to its physical significance. The introduction of the generalized fundamental modes is based only on the periodicity of the fundamental mode, and is independent of the space harmonics. On the other hand, the generalized fundamental modes also provide a basis for the usability of the space harmonic explanation of radiation. With the help of the generalized fundamental modes, it can be showed why the logic of the space harmonic explanation of radiation is unreasonable but the explanation can be available. In this study, we first prove that there is not an eigen-equation like Pythagorean theorem for the fundamental mode in a PLWA, and design an non-uniform structure antenna to show that slow-wave mode in the antenna can produce leaky-wave radiation. These results suggest an idea that the slow-wave fundamental mode in a PLWA may also produce slow-wave radiation. Secondly, it is proved that the difference of the phase constants between the slow-wave fundamental mode and the fast-wave space harmonics has not any effect on the radiation pattern characteristics of a PLWA. Thirdly, it is clarified that the fundamental mode has a more definite physical significance than its space harmonics. Accordingly, it is much more reasonable to consider the radiation in a PLWA to be produced with the fundamental mode than its space harmonics, regardless of whether the fundamental mode is fast-wave or slow-wave. Moreover, the field in a periodic structure could be expressed as a type of generalized fundamental mode multiplied by a phase factor, which have phase constants as the same as the space harmonics. A generalized fundamental mode has physical significance as the conventional fundamental mode, and could replace the roles that were once played by the space harmonics. The concept of the generalized fundamental mode in one dimensional periodic structures can be extended to two or three dimensional periodic structures, and the extensions are direct and easy. Moreover, because of a common mathematical base, the concept of the generalized fundamental mode could be also applied to periodic structures in solid state physics or other fields.