Bandgaps, or frequency ranges of forbidden wave propagation, are a hallmark of Phononic Crystals (PnCs). Unlike their lattice counterparts, PnCs taking the form of continuous structures exhibit an infinite number of bandgaps of varying location, bandwidth, and distribution along the frequency spectrum. While these bandgaps are commonly predicted from benchmark tools such as the Bloch-wave theory, the conditions that dictate the patterns associated with bandgap symmetry, attenuation, or even closing in multi-bandgap PnCs remain an enigma. In this work, we establish these patterns in one-dimensional rods undergoing longitudinal motion via a canonical transfer-matrix-based approach. In doing so, we connect the conditions governing bandgap formation and closing to their physical origins in the context of the Bragg condition (for infinite media) and natural resonances (for finite counterparts). The developed framework uniquely characterizes individual bandgaps within a larger dispersion spectrum regardless of their parity (i.e., odd vs even bandgaps) or location (low vs high-frequency), by exploiting dimensionless constants of the PnC unit cell which quantify the different contrasts between its constitutive layers. These developments are detailed for a bi-layered PnC and then generalized for a PnC of any number of layers by increasing the model complexity. We envision this mathematical development to be a future standard for the realization of hierarchically-structured PnCs with prescribed and finely tailored bandgap profiles. A bandgap, in solid-state physics, is an energy gap in the electronic band structure in which no electronic states exist In its basic form, a phononic crystal (PnC) is a multilayered composite where the layers self-repeat over an extended spatial domain. Rooted in the origins of periodic structure theory, studies depicting the unique wave propagation properties of PnCs predate the use of the term itself While the applications and utility of these bandgaps in novel and imaginative realizations of PnCs remain an active research area, especially with recent advances in manufacturing and fabrication, the physics underpinning Preprint the existence, formation mechanisms, and evolution of phononic bandgaps show intriguing phenomena which continue to be separately explored. Notable among these is the underlying connection between the dispersion relation of an infinite PnC relating the wavenumber of a wave to its frequency, and dictating the frequency-dependent phase and group velocities of a dispersive medium (of which a PnC is one) Starting with the most general case, we consider a continuum PnC in the form of a one-dimensional rod which consists of self-repeating unit cells, where each cell is comprised of L material layers, as depicted in Figure The dispersion relation of the aforementioned unit cell can be analytically derived via the transfer matrix method (TMM). The transfer matrix T obtains the displacement u and force f at the end of cell i from their counterparts at the end of cell i -1, such that: where T is computed from a series multiplication of the transfer matrices of the individual layers: Starting with the one-dimensional wave equation which describes axial waves in the rod, the transfer matrix of the s th layer T s in Eq. ( where k s = ω/c s denotes the wavenumber within an individual layer, which is a function of the angular frequency ω. A special case of the aforementioned structure is the bi-layered PnC rod (i.e., L = 2), which will be considered here in detail. In such a case, the transfer matrix of a unit cell T = T 2 T 1 is the product of the transfer matrices of the two layers. The resultant T can be simplified by introducing ω s = c s /l s (where s = 1, 2) and two non-dimensional parameters, namely the frequency and impedance contrasts, respectively, as follows: which both range from -1 to 1 depending on the choice of unit cell parameters. By defining an average impedance of both layers z = (z 1 + z 2 )/2 and using the definition of the impedance contrast β, the impedance of each layer can be written as: where + (-) is for the first (second) layer. We also define a non-dimensional frequency Ω = ω/ω 0 , where the normalization constant ω 0 represents the harmonic mean of ω 1 and ω 2 , and is given by: The harmonic mean can be then combined with the definition of α to give: where, once again, + (-) is for the first (second) layer. Using these definitions, the transfer matrix T of the bilayered cell can be rewritten as: where Finally, the dispersion relation can be found from T via tr(T) = 2 cos(q), where tr(T) is the trace of the matrix T (A detailed process outlining the origin of the dispersion relation is provided in Appendix A). Also, q = ql = q R + iq I is the non-dimensional wavenumber of the PnC rod which is a product of the wavenumber q and the unit cell length l, and q R and q I denote its real and imaginary components, respectively. Using Eq. (9a), the dispersion relation is obtained as: Note that a positive or negative value of α or β does not change the resulting dispersion relation as long as their magnitudes remain the same. This fact can be inferred from the dispersion relation in Eq. An interesting feature of the function Φ(Ω) is its association with the frequencies of maximum attenuation inside Bragg bandgaps, which can be found by evaluating the roots of the derivative ∂Φ(Ω)/∂Ω = 0, analogous to lumped PnCs Figure Bandgap limits for odd and even-numbered bandgaps can be found by substituting q = π and q = 0, respectively, in the dispersion relation shown in Eq. ( which amount to a multiplication of two terms, each of which giving one bandgap limit. It is also evident that a bandgap only emerges if the roots of each of these terms are different. Thus, by equating both terms in each equation, the conditions that render a bandgap width equal to zero can be obtained (commonly referred to as zero-width bandgaps for odd and even-numbered bandgaps, respectively. Consider the cases that satisfy Eq. ( for r ∈ N + , where N + are all natural numbers without zero. The second requirement is that such frequencies in Eq. ( Solving for α, we arrive at the following expression: for p ∈ N + , indicating that some odd-numbered bandgaps close when α is a rational number of odd integers. The frequencies at which the bandgap closes can be found by combining Eqs. ( It should be noted, however, that if a specific ratio of α = α n /α d is imposed, only select combinations of r and p will maintain such ratio. In this scenario, not every p ∈ N + is guaranteed to fulfill this ratio of α, and Eq. ( Similarly, we analyze even-numbered bandgaps to find α values at which they vanish. Knowing that sin(αΩ) = 0 must be met for such a case, we have α = 0 and Plugging Eq. ( It should be noted that all rational values of α will close even-numbered bandgaps, occurring at the following frequencies: . In all of the shown cases, even-numbered bandgaps that occur at the frequencies described in Eq. ( As can be observed from the right panel of Figure Following this discussion of the role of rational α values in bandgap closure, it is imperative to understand the different consequences of PnCs with rational and irrational α values that are close in magnitude. Consider two bi-layered unit cells of an identical impedance contrast β = -0.75 with α = 2/3 for the first, which is the rational value that corresponds to the dispersion diagram shown in Figure Consider a finite uniform rod made of one of the two bilayered PnC unit cell layers, that has a sonic speed c s and a length l s . Excluding the rigid body mode at ω = 0, the natural frequencies of this rod in the unconstrained form (i.e., with free-free boundary conditions) can be found by setting the lower off-diagonal element of the transfer matrix in Eq. ( where n s indicates the order of the vibrational mode in the complete set of non-zero natural frequencies. Using Eq. ( Equation ( which, in conjunction with Eq. ( Solving Eqs. ( for odd and even-numbered bandgaps, respectively, and with + (-) denoting the solution for s = 1 (s = 2). Note that if the sign of α flips, the solutions corresponding to the first PnC layer become those of the second layer and vice versa. Interestingly, this discussion of the physical meaning of rational α values also has a connection to the "Bragg condition", as will be derived next. Bandgaps in PnCs are known to be size-dependent and initiate near frequencies described by the Bragg condition, which provides the proportional relationship between the size of a PnC and the wavelength where λ s = 2π/k s is the wavelength. Recalling that k s = ω/c s for rods and rearranging Eq. ( where + (-) is for s = 1 (s = 2). Recalling that a bandgap of a bi-layered PnC can only close if α is a rational number (as proven in Section 3.2), it can be seen that a rational α is guaranteed if the frequencies of the Bragg condition for the individual layers 1 and 2 are matched, i.e., when Ω in Eq. ( thus ensuring that α is a rational number, and further cementing the connection between the Bragg condition and the bandgap closing condition in a bi-layered PnC rod. Specifically, the deformation shape of layer 1 at α = 1/3 becomes that of layer 2 at α = -1/3, and vice versa. Mode shapes calculated via the finite element method are superimposed as dashed lines for validation. It is now established that the Bragg bandgaps of a bilayered PnC close when the Bragg condition frequencies of the two constitutive layers match. As a direct consequence of that condition, the natural frequencies of the bi-layered PnC unit cell become those of the individual layers at bandgap closing. We therefore formulate analytical expressions for the deformational mode shapes of the bi-layered PnC (often referred to as the unit cell Bloch modes To obtain solutions for the coefficients a s and b s , a total of four equations are needed which are found from the displacement and force continuity conditions between the PnC layers. To do so in a bi-layered PnC, we set x = 0 at the interface of the two layers. The displacement and force continuity conditions yield: By using the next interface to get the two remaining equations, we get u 1 (l -l 1 ) = u 2 (l 2 ) and f 1 (l -l 1 ) = f 2 (l 2 ), which can be expressed as u 1 (l -l 1 ) = e iq u 1 (-l 1 ) and f 1 (l -l 1 ) = e iq f 1 (-l 1 ), respectively, by virtue of Bloch's theorem. At the special cases of sin(k s l s ) = 0, these two continuity conditions simplify to: Solving Eqs. ( Equation ( As such, we arrive at two different mode shape equations. The first corresponds to a 1 = a 2 = 1 and b 1 = b 2 = 0, i.e., which, interestingly, is independent of the impedance contrast β between the two PnC layers. The mode shapes in Eq. ( showing that mode shapes from this second solution exhibit an amplitude of zero at the interface between the layers. Upon examining the modes shapes in Eqs. The rightmost panel of Figure The leftmost panel of Figure The observations drawn in sections 3.2 and 3.3 regarding rational and irrational values of α are in fact independent of the chosen value of β. As a demonstration, Figure It is also of interest to understand how bandgap limits behave as the value of β changes at a given α, as shown in Figures The behavior is quite different when observing the evolution of bandgap limits with a varying α at specific values of β, which is depicted in Figure While the bandgap closing conditions derived thus far have been mathematically proven for a bi-layered PnC, it is imperative to likewise demonstrate that similar features emerge in a PnC with an arbitrary L > 2 number of layers. To generalize our findings, consider a multi-layered unit cell of a PnC rod where all of the constitutive layers have distinct mechanical and geometrical properties. Analogous to the theoretical framework developed earlier, the frequencies corresponding to the Bragg conditions of ABS polymer 0 (q) (q) 0 (q) (q) 0 (q) (q) 0 (q) (q) 0 (q) (q) 0 (q) (q) Identical bandgaps at a given PnC Aluminum Steel Brass Magnesium Alloy each of the individual layers can be matched as follows: which can be alternatively written as: such that j = s. To locate the frequencies where bandgaps close, we need to pursue a non-dimensional parameter which is reminiscent of the frequency contrast α in the bi-layered PnC. To do so, a generalized harmonic mean can be introduced as follows: which can be rearranged to read: Next, the frequencies ω s can be rewritten as a function of the j th frequency ω j by using Eq. ( Note that Eq. ( giving the denominator α d = L s=1 n s the same role it played in the bi-layered PnC case, defining the frequency at which a bandgap closes using the equation: The numerator α j = n j , on the other hand, provides the number of branches a linear dispersion relation of an individual layer has between Bragg conditions. A couple of additional remarks can be made: 1. If α d is odd, odd and even-numbered bandgaps located at the frequencies given by Eq. ( However, an even α d will only close even-numbered bandgaps according to the same equation. 2. If the chosen values of n s have a common factor, a cancellation of the common factor is required for Eq. ( Figure The qualitative and quantitative criteria governing bandgap formation, distribution, and closing conditions were established in a generalized class of rod-based phononic crystals (PnCs) undergoing longitudinal deformations. A transfer-matrix-based approach was used to generate the wave dispersion profiles and develop expressions for bandgap limits and frequencies of maximum attenuation. By implementing two non-dimensional contrast parameters, a frequency contrast α and an impedance contrast β, which stem from the parameters of the PnC's constitutive layers, the conditions that lead to diminishing bandgaps were derived in closed form, showing that α being a rational number is a necessary condition for bandgap closing in bi-layered PnCs. Furthermore, it was shown that, depending on the parity of the integer numerator and denominator values of α, the pattern and frequency location of the bandgap closing can be predicted as a function of the rational number α. It was found that the bandgap widths ∆Ω of a PnC with a rational α exhibit a periodic profile, which perfectly repeats itself every time a bandgap closes. This pattern was correlated to the resonances of the individual layers of the PnC, and it was proven that matching the natural frequencies of the individual layers (if they were to be treated as stand-alone entities) forces a bandgap to close at the same frequencies. An additional connection was made between bandgap closing criteria and the physics underlying the mode shapes of the individual layers forming the PnC unit cell at different boundary conditions. The conclusions drawn from the bi-layered case were generalized to a PnC comprised of three or more layers, where it was similarly shown that the dispersion branches of the multi-layered PnC exhibit mirror symmetry about the frequencies at which bandgaps close. In fully analytical terms, it was also proven that the resonance matching condition for bandgap closing is independent of the number of layers forming the PnC's unit cell. Resolving the patterns and formation mechanisms of multi-bandgap dispersion profiles is particularly useful for a wide array of new and exciting topics, given the rising interest in exciting applications that require an understanding of how bandgaps close (e.g., topological transition). In tandem, the need to finely tailor phononic band structures remains highly critical for a broad range of elastoacoustic metamaterials. As such, the developments established herein provide a great asset for bandgap engineering in future configurable and tunable PnCs.