The control of light through all-optical means is a fundamental challenge in nanophotonics and a key effect in optical switching and logic. The optical bistability effect enables this control and can be observed in various planar photonic systems such as * These authors contributed equally to this work 1 Optically nonlinear elements provide unique functionalities of photonic devices allowing for all-optical modulation of light In this paper, we employ high-Q BICs for optical heating of silicon metasurface membrane and enhancing thermo-optical nonlinearity finally reaching the bistability regime. While thermo-optical effects in semiconductor microcavities have been known for long time, they have recently attracted great interest due to the advancements of all-dielectric nanophotonics, which eventually led to the emergence of a standalone field of all-dielectric thermonanophotonics We show that, since thermo-optical bistability regimes rely on a delicate balance between radiative and ohmic losses of the system, BIC metasurfaces offer a unique platform for controlling optical bistablity. In particular, we employ strong dependence of the optical mode linewidth on its wavevector in the vicinity of BIC to control the character of the nonlinear response from bitability regime to optical discrimination regime. Additionally, one can modify the parameters of the hysteresis loop such as hysteresis width and threshold power by balancing the ratio between radiative and non-radiative losses, a unique attribute of BIC in metasurfaces. With that we put forward the nonlinear critical coupling condition for reaching maximal hysteresis width and minimal threshold power, and which is an alternative to the well-known classical critical coupling condition for linear systems. The studied metasurface manifests itself in a rectangular hole array in silicon slab (photonic crystal slab) with membrane configuration that blocks the heat dissipation channel through the substrate and further increases the optical heating efficiency [see Fig. Optical heating of the metasurface. In the chosen spectral range, silicon has non-zero Figure Precise control of the laser wavelength (see also Methods) allowed us to measure the heating characteristics of the membrane for different initial detunings of the excitation with respect to the spectral position of the BIC mode for the chosen angle of incidence. The suspended membrane configuration prevents heat transfer in the direction normal to the surface resulting in efficient heating of the sample. The simulated temperature distribution under the optical excitation is shown in Fig. Experimentally, the temperature increase induced by the laser was determined via two approaches. The first involved monitoring the red spectral shift of another optical mode of the membrane (BIC-2) at ∼815 nm (see Fig. We further perform a more direct experimental demonstration of the bistability by cycling the laser power in increasing and then in decreasing sequence at certain initial spectral detunings between the laser line and the optical mode. Excitation conditions (excitation wavelength and incident angle) for these measurements are illustrated Fig. As an illustration to that, we perform the same experiments for different angle of incidence (k || = 0.4k 0 ), points 5-8 in Fig. As we emphasized above, the nonlinear response of the heated metasurface strongly depends on the excitation angle due to k-dependent radiative losses and coupling strength to the BIC mode. At this point, we devise a strategy for reaching particular parameters of nonlinear The total optical losses of BIC mode extracted from the reflectivity spectra (solid black line). The total (red) and nonradiative (green) losses obtained from fitting the hysteresis loops (hollow circles) and their interpolation curves (dashed lines). response. In the bistability regime, those parameters are the switching powers from cold to hot states (P up ) and backwards (P down ) (see Fig. Engineering of thermo-optical switching implies reaching certain values of these parameters and tradeoffs between them. Our further analysis based on a single mode nonlinear model allows for identifying the hysterersis parameters W h and P up . Introducing the amplitude of the mode a, one can then utilize the coupled mode theory equation for harmonic excitation 38 where ∆ω = ω 0ω is the detuning frequency between the mode frequency ω 0 and laser frequency ω, γ = γ r + γ nr is the total loss rate which is given by radiative (γ r ) and nonradiative (γ nr ) channels of dissipation, and f corresponds to the amplitude of the incident wave (|f | 2 is the power of the incident wave). The nonlinearity of the system then can be taken into account by substituting the intensity dependent mode frequency ω 0 → ω 0 -α|a| 2 , where α > 0 defines the optical nonlinearity of the metasurface. which is a third-order algebraic equation responsible for the appearance of multiple steadystates in the system. Its analysis (see Supplementary Materials) provides one with the explicit expression for the hysteresis loop width W h and switching power P up for a given γ r ,γ nr , ∆ω, and α: We applied this model to describe the experimentally observed bistable BIC-driven optical heating. For that, we found the model parameters ∆ω, γ, and γ r by fitting the experimentally measured hysteresis parameters P up and W h . An example of such fitting is shown in Fig. as a dependence of the respective wavelength detuning ∆λ = λλ 0 (k) on the angle of incidence. In principle, every nonlinear resonator can be driven into the bistable regime if the detuning exceeds this critical value threshold. However, real systems exhibit another important constraint which is the limited excitation power. Indeed, from Eq.3 one can see that the minimal power P cr for reaching bistability (P up (∆ω cr ) = P down (∆ω cr )) is given by which indicates that the required power grows rapidly with losses rate γ. Furthermore, to observe the hysteresis loop, P up should also be within the capabilities of the laser. We plot this power restriction curve P up = P max (which is ≈ 100 mW in our experiments) in Fig. Next, we turn to the analysis of the width of the hysteresis loop. this leads to narrower loops observed in the experiment. The second one is the increase of the excitation power density for lower angles of incidence due to the better focusing and lower losses in the objective. This leads to hysteresis loops observed at higher detuning values. To avoid further complicating the picture, we did not account for this effect in the simulation, which was done for constant power density. In Fig. In this work, we have realised the thermo-optical bistability regime in a metasurface supporting high-Q bound states in the continuum. By varying the spectral detuning between the laser and mode frequency and changing the angle of incidence excitation one can modify the optical response of the metasurface switching it from hysteretic response to optical discrimination regime. Moreover, varied radiative losses of quasi-bound states in the continuum allows to optimize the width of hysteresis loop, which corresponds to the regime of nonlinear critical coupling condition. Fabrication of the membrane Membranes supporting bound states in the continuum were fabricated from silicon-on-insulator substrates with 2 μm silicon oxide layer and 340 nm thick silicon slab on top. The silicon-on-insulator (SOI) substrate consisted of a 2 micrometer buried oxide layer covered with 340 nm Si layer. Arrays of holes were created using standard electron-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching (ICP RIE) techniques. The underlying oxide was etched with buffered hydrofluoric (HF) acid, resulting in a membrane symmetrically surrounded by air above and below. Experimental measurements Initial characterization of the optical mode structure of the membrane was performed with angle-resolved reflection spectroscopy. The membrane was excited through a high-NA objective (Mitutoyo Plan Apo NIR 100x, NA=0.7). The back focal plane of the objective was then imaged on the entrance slit of the spectrometer (Andor Kymera) which allowed to capture the reflectivity maps in "wavelength -angle of incidence" axes in a single shot. Optical heating measurements were performed with a tunable continuous wave laser (Hübner Photonics C-Wave), which we used to excite the membrane at a controlled angle of incidence by focussing the linearly polarized laser beam at a particular point in the back focal plane of the objective. varied radius. Such geometry, on one hand, allows for taking into account the conicity of the structure and, on the other hand, is suitable for the Fourier modal method modelling. The obtained fitting parameters of radiuses agree well with the designed diameter of the holes D = 310 nm. In order to define the hysteresis parameter, we start from Eq. (2): which is a third-order algebraic equation for mode energy |a| 2 , where ∆ω = ω 0ω is the detuning frequency between the mode frequency ω 0 and laser frequency ω, γ = γ r + γ nr is a total loss rate of the mode comprising of nonradiative γ nr and radiative γ r contributions, and the width of hysteresis area is then given by: W h = P up -P down = 4 27 One could see from Eq. 3 that hysteresis width increases with increasing frequency detuning ∆ω. However, in real physical systems this detuning could not be increased unlimetedly and is restricted by maximum available power P max . Bistability regime is reached only when switch power P up is lower than this highest value. Therefore, as soon as power restriction condition is applied to our system, frequency detuning ∆ω max is no longer an independent parameter and should be derived from P up = P max equation for every value of the losses rate. So, in this section we rigorously define the largest possible hysteresis width W h for the case of limited power in terms of radiative versus nonradiative losses ratio, which we refer to as nonlinear critical coupling. By implementing considerations given above and applying Eq. 2,3 we come to following expression: 2 27α term to minimize where the term on the left side should be minimized in terms of radiative losses γ r (we fix the nonradiative part γ nr ) for width maximization by taking the derivative and setting it to zero. Here, as mentioned above, ∆ω max is an implicit loss function determined by the maximum power condition. Finally, after completing mathematical transformations this optimization gives us the following relation between radiave and nonradiative contributionsS for losses: The resulting nonlinear critical coupling condition is depicted by the dotted white line on the map calculated from the hysteresis width Eq. 3 (Fig. In addition, one can note that γ r = γ nr /2 is the same ratio for losses as was discussed for the critical power minimization. That is a logical conclusion in a sense that for fixed maximum pump value the lowest power for bistability appearance provides the broadest range for detuning variations. Therefore, these two approaches give us exactly the same answer.