Understanding the collective behavior of the quasiparticles in solid-state systems underpins the field of non-volatile electronics, including the opportunity to control many-body effects for well-desired physical phenomena and their applications. Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) is a wide energy bandgap semiconductor, showing immense potential as a platform for lowdimensional device heterostructures. It is an inert dielectric used for gated devices, having a negligible orbital hybridization when placed in contact with other systems. Despite its inertness, we discover a large electron mass enhancement in few-layer hBN affecting the lifetime of the π-band states. We show that the renormalization is phonon-mediated and consistent with both single-and multiple-phonon scattering events. Our findings thus unveil a so-far unknown many-body state in a wide-bandgap insulator, having important implications for devices using hBN as one of their building blocks. Hexagonal Boron Nitride (hBN) is an inert layered compound that has gained significant attention for its compatibility with the vast majority of low-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) materials. Few (5-10) layer hBN flakes were exfoliated from bulk material and transferred via a polymer stack onto a substrate of epitaxial graphene on 6H-SiC(0001) (Fig. The number of vdW-bonded hBN layers in the flake was ascertained from low-energy electron reflectivity (LEER) measurements (Fig. The electronic structure of 8-layer hBN on graphene is mapped out at room temperature in Fig. Sudden broadenings of the electronic structure like the ones mentioned are typical hallmarks of electron-boson interactions. A more rigorous analysis of the observed energy renormalization is partially prevented by the faint, linear artifacts that intersect with the hBN π-band at a similar binding energy (blue arrows). Still, their effect is very local in the energy and momentum phase diagram. Naively, these artifacts can be mistaken for the π-band of the underlying graphene layer. However, the graphene π-band is only nearly linear close to the K point, which is found at a radius of approximately 1.7 Å-1 relative to Γ in both graphene and hBN. To better understand the observed peaks and quantify their individual contributions to the overall EPC, their Eliashberg function α 2 F (ω) and corresponding electron mass-enhancement factors λ n were estimated. The former approximates the DOS of the interacting phonon modes present, and the latter quantifies the strengths of their coupling to the electrons. The results, along with the corresponding best-fit to Re Σ ph , have been shown in Fig. Immediately, the two lowest energy features in α 2 F (ω) can be correlated to the peaks 1 and 2 as observed from Re Σ ph . Both signify a strong EPC in the acoustic energy regime, having mass-enhancement factors λ 1 = 0.39 and λ 2 = 0.21, respectively. Such strong coupling to the acoustic modes has already been predicted theoretically in hBN systems thicker than 1 ML. Based on their energies, the observed peaks above the Debye energy cannot be explained by single-phonon scattering alone. Their presence, however, hints at the possibility of multiphonon scattering events. Consecutive electron scattering by multiple phonons has been predicted from theory, suggesting that substantial scattering rates may occur in insulating and semiconducting polar materials. While electron-phonon scattering between the hBN and the underlying graphene cannot be ruled out completely, we can render it unlikely in the present case. Previous ARPES studies of graphene-on-hBN have indicated that coupling of the two materials should lead to large (i.e., Fröhlich) polaron formation at the interface. We conclude that the apparent correspondence between the measured EPCs and scattering with the graphene is coincidental. We reiterate, however, that our MEM analysis was unable to properly distinguish all of the engaging hBN phonon modes. This was in part caused by the achievable instrumental resolution, but primarily by the thermal broadening at room temperature. For instance, further investigating the potential coupling to the lowestenergy modes using a more sensitive method, e.g. helium atom scattering, In summary, we have reported the existence of several EPC processes that renormalize the π-band electronic structure of hBN. Together, they cause an increase in the electron scattering rate and a decrease in energy state lifetime. This may have severe implications for the electron transport in any hBN-adjacent conducting layers, e.g. in vdW heterostructures. Thus, our work not only sheds light on the complex manybody ground state of few-layer hBN; it also provides valuable insight into the possible scattering mechanisms that may hamper the performances of hBN-based electronic devices. respectively. The hBN bandstructure was reconstructed from a series of measured constant energy surfaces (CES, E vs. k x , k y ) obtained in the diffractive plane mode of the same momentum microscope [5, 6]. The bandstructure measurements were restricted to an area within the hBN flake by introducing an iris aperture of ≈ 30×15 μm 2 . Using a He I photoexcitation source (hν = 21.22 eV), CES were acquired at E P = 25 eV with a 0.5 mm entrance slit to the energy filter, yielding energy and momentum resolutions of ∆E = 50 meV and ∆k = 0.02 Å-1 , respectively. Each CES was acquired 10 meV apart and with a k-space field of view of 4.3 Å-1 , i.e. spanning beyond the 1st Brillouin zone of hBN. All measurements were performed at room temperature (≈ 300 K). To assess the presence, shape, and intensity of the anomalous features observed from the hBN ARPES measurements, a two-dimensional (2D) curvature analysis of the Γ -K -M wedge was performed (see Ref. 