The reports of room-temperature superconductivity in Cu-doped Pb-apatite draw intense interests and debates. Herein, based on the density functional theory, we show that the Cu-insertion is thermodynamically stable and further carrier doping can convert the system CuPb10(PO4)6O into metal. The metal conduction is mainly along the one-dimensional (1D) Cu-O chains in the c-axis (out-of-plane). The calculated conductance along the c-axis is larger than the in-plane ones by 2 magnitude orders, indicating the 1D conduction behavior. Moreover, the 1D Cu-O chain is an antiferromagnetic Mott insulator at zero-doping point due to the super-exchange. Further electron/holedoping will erase the anti-ferromagnetism. Therefore, the Cu-inserted system CuPb10(PO4)6O show transport and magnetic features similar to the cuprate superconductors. On the other hand, the Oinsertion can also induce the metallic states, in which the conductance along the out-of-plane direction is higher than the in-plane direction by 6-folds. Our results display the metallization of Pb10(PO4)6O via Cu/O-insertions, and suggesting the conductions along the c-axis might dominate the transport behaviors. The room temperature superconducting has long been pursuing since the first discovery of superconductive mercury in 1911. The BCS theory indicate that the simple pure metal cannot host superconductivity beyond ~40 K due to the limited strength of electron-phonon couplings. The Meissner effect is the other key feature of superconductor, which prevents the variations of magnetic flux cross the sample. So, the superconductor can move around a permanent magnet in stable orbitals, which is insanely different with the diamagnet that will simply slip away from the top of single permanent magnet. In the original reports of LK-99 and later study, In this work, we investigated the electronic and magnetic structures of Pb-apatite with Cu/O insertions, as inspired by the experimental progresses. The DFT calculations on the Gibbs free energies show that the Cu-inserted system CuPb10(PO4)6O is thermodynamically stable. And the CuPb10(PO4)6O is a Mott semiconductor with small gaps and anti-ferromagnetic couplings between Cu ions. Further electron/hole-doping can convert the system into metal, and the conducting states are in the 1D Cu-O chain along the c-axis the out-of-plane direction. The dc conductance in out-ofplane direction is larger than the other directions by two magnitude orders, showing perfect 1D conductions. Moreover, the carrier-doping also suppress the anti-ferromagnetism, revealing many similarities with the high-TC superconductor of cuprate except the lowered transporting dimension. Besides, the O-inserted system can be stabilized by further Cu-substitutions on Pb. The thermodynamically stable Pb9Cu(PO4)6O2 is also metallic and the conductance are nonzero in all direction but the c-axis conductance is larger than the a/b-axis ones by 6-folds. All these results propose the possible mechanism to induce the metal in Pb-apatite with Cu/O insertions. The exotic 1D conductive Cu-O chain with low-dimensional conductance and carrier-density dependent magnetism may shed light to the further study on the superconductivity. In the conventional structure of Pb10(PO4)6O, 25% partially occupied oxygen is located at the origin of the cell presented in Fig. Here we consider four kinds of impurities: 1. the O-insertion in the center to mimic the over oxidations for the sample annealing in air condition (Fig. Fig. To further study the reason for the significantly anisotropic conducting behavior, the carrier distributions in real-space are investigated. For the O-inserted system, Fig. Fig. Fig. For the Cu-inserted system, Fig. Since the metallization of CuPb10(PO4)6O needs further carrier doping, it is intriguing to see the dependence of anti-ferromagnetic exchange couplings on the carrier doping. Fig. Fig. In summary, the thermostability, transport and magnetic properties of the Pb-apatite with four kinds of impurities are investigated. The Cu-insertion is stable and leads to the Mott semiconductor in Pb-apatite and the Cu-O chain is initially antiferromagnetic, in which the Cu ion possesses 1μB magnetic moment. With further carrier-doping, the anti-ferromagnetism is suppressed and Cu-O chain becomes conductive. The conduction shows significantly 1D feature, in which the dc conductance along the Cu-O chain is larger than the orthogonal directions by two magnitude orders. Up to the constant relaxation τ ≈ 10 fs, the dc-conductance of Pb-apatite with Cu-O chain can reach ~10 5 S/m, two magnitude orders smaller than cooper. On the other hand, the system with Oinsertions and further Cu-substitutions also show thermal stability and metallicity properties with the highly anisotropic dc conductance. The easy conducting direction is along the out-of-plane caxis and the σ zz is larger than the other orthogonal directions by 6 folds. The exchange couplings for the O-insertions and Cu-substitutions are complex and weak, hard to produce long-range magnetic orders. The above results provide the possible explanations for the metallic behavior as observed in some experiments, but also suggesting the Cu-inserted system CuPb10(PO4)6O have transport and magnetic properties similar to the cuprate superconductor. Although the results above are far from enough to clarify the superconductor in LK-99, the possible role of impurities effects of Cu/O insertions and especially the 1D Cu-O chain may merit future studies on the system. calculations density functional theory are done with the projector augmented planewave basis, which is implemented in Vienna ab-initio simulation package. The dc conductance are computed via the Boltzmann transporting theorem up to the constant relaxation time approximations: in which τ is the relaxation time, v n α is the diagonal element of velocity operator and f(E n -μ) corresponding to the Fermi-Dirac distributions. The electron temperature T is set to 298.15 K and the BZ-integration for eq. S1 are on the resolution of 0.01 Å -1 . The magnetic coupling energy between ions α and β are computed via the magnetic force theorem: 7 in which Δ is the exchange splitting and G ↑(↓) (E) = (E -H ↑(↓) + iη) -1 is the Green's function of spin-up (spin-down) electrons. H ↑(↓) is the real-space Hamiltonian of spin-up (spindown) electrons, and η is set to 0.0001 eV. The temperature dependent evolutions of magnetizations and the magnetic order temperature are obtained by the Hatree-Fock spin-wave theory Fig. Exchange coupling energies between Cu ions in CuPb9(PO4)6O in unit meV. And the transition temperature for long-range magnetic order. J (0 0 1) J (1 1 0) J (1 0 0) J (0 1 0) Tc 4f-CuPb9(PO4)6O -0.01 -0.15 -0.15 -0.15 <3 K 6h-CuPb9(PO4)6O 0.00 0.019 0 K Fig. 