By expanding the gauge λn(k) for magnon band n in harmonics of momentum k = (k, φ), we demonstrate that the only observable component of the magnon orbital angular momentum On(k) is its angular average over all angles φ, denoted by Fn(k). Although Fn(k) vanishes for antiferromagnetic honeycomb and zig-zag (0 < J1 < J2) lattices, it is nonzero for the ferromagnetic (FM) versions of those lattices in the presence of Dzyalloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interactions. For a FM zig-zag model with equal exchange interactions J1x and J1y along the x and y axis, the magnon bands are degenerate along the boundaries of the Brillouin zone with kx -ky = ±π/a and the Chern numbers Cn are not well defined. However, a revised model with J1y ̸ = J1x lifts those degeneracy and produces well-defined Chern numbers of Cn = ±1 for the two magnon bands. When J1y = J1x, the thermal conductivity κ xy (T ) of the FM zig-zag lattice is largest for J2/J1 > 6 but is still about four times smaller than that of the FM honeycomb lattice at high temperatures. Due to the removal of band degeneracies, κ xy (T ) is slightly enhanced when J1y ̸ = J1x. The past 13 years have seen remarkable advances in the field of "magnonics" Almost all previous theoretical work in magnonics has been based on the Berry curvature, which produces a fictitious magnetic field in the presence of dipole-dipole or Dzyalloshinzkii-Moriya (DM) interactions, both associated with spin-orbit (SO) coupling of a ferromagnetic (FM) insulator requires that a magnon wavepacket centered at r c obeys the equation of motion Therefore, the Berry curvature causes the wavepacket to bend away from the expected direction ∂ε n (k)/∂k for a free magnon with Ω n (k) = 0. Prior to the first observation of the magnon Hall effect in the FM insulator Lu 2 V 2 O 7 where ρ(ε) = 1/(exp(ε/k B T ) -1) is the Boltzmann distribution with zero chemical potential for magnons and c 2 (ρ) is defined in Section V. The above expression includes the effects of the magnon edge currents travelling around the sample as well as the effects of the magnon wavepacket "self-rotation" due to its orbital motion Because of SO coupling, magnons carry both spin and orbital angular momentum. By constructing a Lagrangian that produces the correct equation of motion for the magnetization M i = 2μ B S i at site i, Tsukernik et al. But Tsukernik and coworkers failed to realize that the OAM defined above is not directly observable because, unlike the Berry curvature Ω n (k), O n (k) is not gauge invariant Because H 2 is translationally invariant, a new Bloch function obtained by the transformation also satisfies the above eigenvalue equation. Under this gauge transformation, the Berry curvature Ω n (k) of Eq. ( where the gauge λ n (k) = λ n (k, φ) depends only on the band index n and the two-dimensional wavevector k = (k, φ). Quantities like O n (k) that depend on a gauge λ n (k) cannot be physically observed does not depend on the gauge λ n (k) Regarding the magnon Hall effect as an indirect observation of the magnon OAM, then direct observation of the magnon OAM through the angular average F n (k) should be possible by coupling magnons to other particles and quasiparticles that carry OAM. For example, magnons may couple to chiral phonons In this paper, we demonstrate that F n (k) is the only observable component of the OAM. We then evaluate F n (k) for FM honeycomb (HC) and square zig-zag (ZZ) lattices with DM interaction D. Along with their antiferromagnetic (AF) counterparts, these lattices are sketched in Fig. J > 0 Case studies: HC lattices with (a) FM interaction J > 0 and (b) AF interaction J < 0 with two sites in the magnetic unit cell each; ZZ lattices with (c) FM interactions 0 < J1 < J2 and two sites in the magnetic unit cell, and (d) AF interaction J1 < 0 and FM interaction J2 > 0 and four sites in the magnetic unit cell. The DM interaction D and its orientation is shown by the dashed line. Up spins are solid circles and down spins are empty circles. with the DM interaction -D(S i × S j ) • z oriented along bond i, j with spin S j at the endpoint and spin S i at the starting point of the arrow in Fig. In all four lattices, the DM interactions only act between sites r of the same kind in each magnetic unit cell. For the FM lattices of Figs. 1(a) and (c), the DM interactions act between spins of type 1 or of type 2. Similarly for the AF HC lattice in Fig. OAM was earlier predicted The degeneracy of the FM ZZ bands along the upper left and lower right boundaries of the BZ can be lifted by allowing the FM exchange interaction J n along the x and y axis (J nx and J ny ) to be slightly different. The Chern numbers of the magnon bands for the anisotropic FM ZZ model are then well defined and given by 0 or ±1. There are several purposes served by this paper. The next section extends earlier results for the angularaveraged OAM F n (k). By studying both the FM HC and ZZ lattices, we show that formal results for F n (k) and the Berry curvature Ω n (k) for the two models are quite similar. This paper also provides new results for the tiling of the OAM over all k for both models. Results for the FM ZZ model are completely new and presented here for the first time. This paper is divided into six sections. Section II demonstrates that F n (k) is the only component of O n (k) that is physically observable. Sections III reviews results for the FM HC model. Section IV discusses the FM ZZ model while Section V treats the anisotropic model with J 1y /J 1x ̸ = 1. Section VI compares the predicted magnon Hall effects of the FM HC and ZZ models and contains a conclusion. To focus attention on the FM cases where OAM can be observed, we treat the AF HC and ZZ lattices in Appendices B and C. While the FM lattices exhibit nonzero values of F n (k) when D ̸ = 0, the AF lattices do not: F n (k) = 0 even when D ̸ = 0. Appendix D presents results for the edge modes produced by the anisotropic FM ZZ model. Since dipole-dipole interactions To set the stage for the results provided in the next two sections, we briefly review the spin-wave (SW) formalism for the OAM and Berry curvature, specializing to collinear spin systems. Rotated into the local spin reference frame with zi pointing along the spin direction, the spins Si are given in terms of the Boson SW creation and annihilation operators a i and a † i by Siz = Sa † i a i , Si+ = S ix n iz + iS iy = √ 2Sa i , and Si-= S ix n iz -iS iy = √ 2Sa † i , where n iz = 1 for up spins and n iz = -1 for down spins. Then the Hamiltonian H can be expanded in powers of the Fourier transformed SW operators a (r is one of the M sites in the magnetic unit cell) as H = E 0 + H 2 + . . . with second-order Hamiltonian where the prime indicates that the summation over k is restricted to the first BZ of the magnetic unit cell. The 2M -dimensional vector operators k , . . . a where N is defined in terms of the M -dimensional identity matrix I by The 2M × 2M matrix L(k) can be compactly written where P (k), Q(k), P ′ (k), and Q ′ (k) are M ×M matrices. Because L(k) is Hermitian, These relations will prove useful in the following two sections and in Appendices B through D. Within the quantum SW notation, the semiclassical eigenvalue relation of Eq. ( where Λ(k) = N • L(k) is non-Hermitian. Hence, the Bloch functions |u n (k)⟩ are replaced by the complex matrices X -1 (k) rn , which can be considered the nth eigenfunctions of the 2M × 2M energy matrix Λ(k). In the quantum SW language, the Berry curvature and OAM are given by where is the OAM operator. The normalization condition for the Bloch functions ⟨u n (k)|u n (k)⟩ = 1 is then replaced by the condition for the complex matrices X -1 (k) rn and X -1 (k) r+M,n . With the Berry curvature defined above, the Chern number for band n is given by where k is integrated over the first BZ In the quantum language, each eigenfunction X -1 (k) rn can be multiplied by an arbitrary phase factor so that where the gauge λ n (k) may depend on band index n and k = (k, φ) but not on site r. Of course, λ n (k, φ) must also be a single-valued function of φ so that λ n (k, 0) = λ n (k, 2π). Under a gauge transformation, the OAM changes by in agreement with the semiclassical expression of Eq. ( Following a gauge transformation, the rhs of Eq. ( where we have set The l = 0 component cannot be included on the rhs because it would produce a term proportional to φ, violating the assumption that λ n (k, 0) = λ n (k, 2π). Hence, the appropriate gauge λ n (k) can be used to remove all components of the OAM except for Not only does this prove that F n (k) is observable but it also demonstrates that F n (k) is the only observable component of the OAM. In the absence of DM interactions, the Then, the even components (k) (containing terms of order D 2m+1 ) contributes to the physically measureable F n (k). Since only wavevectors k within the first BZ of the magnetic unit cell enter Eq. ( Most details of the solution for the FM HC lattice sketched in Fig. and We caution the reader that matrix element A ± k , DM parameter d, and anisotropy parameter κ shall be defined differently for the FM ZZ lattice in the next section. Since Θ -k = -Θ k and Γ -k = Γ * k , it can be easily shown that the upper and lower quadrants of L(k) satisfy Eq. ( Magnon energies for bands 1 and 2 are given by where Notice that these energies are simply shifted by the easy-axis anisotropy κ. The magnon band gap is given by The normalized gap is plotted versus k for d = 0 and -0.4 in Fig. Using a particularly simple form for the gauge, we earlier found Unlike the mode frequencies, however, solutions for the OAM are not unique. Since the d = 0 portion of the OAM is not observable, the first terms in the brackets of Eqs. ( and (k)/ħ. Notice that the tiled pattern is both a periodic function of k and a continuous function of k at the boundaries of the first BZ, denoted by the solid lines. The solutions for F 1 (k)/ħ for d running from -0.01 to -0.1 are plotted in Fig. Again correcting a minus sign, the Berry curvatures of the FM HC lattice are given analytically by For the lower band, Ω 1z (k) is plotted in Fig. The FM ZZ lattice is sketched in Fig. where with ξ k = exp(ik x a) + exp(ik y a). Using τ -k = -τ k and Ψ -k = Ψ * k , it is easy to verify that the upper and lower quadrants of L(k) satisfy Eq. ( The magnon energies are given by where As for the FM HC lattice, the magnon bands are just shifted by κ. The gap between the magnons is then given by with a normalized gap (k) and F n (k) are formally quite similar to those for the FM HC lattice in Eq. ( and The pattern O (k)/ħ appear at the k x +k y = ±π/a boundaries of the BZ along (1, -1). These regions become increasingly narrow as r → 1. The observable function F n (k)/ħ for the FM ZZ lattice is plotted in Fig. Since the magnon Hall effect may be observed in the FM ZZ lattice with DM interaction, we also provide results for its Berry curvature. The Berry curvatures along z may be written as which are formally similar to the expressions for the Berry curvatures of the FM HC lattice given by Eq. ( Evaluating the Chern number C n for the FM ZZ model by integrating Ω nz (k) over all k within the first BZ zone, we obtain the surprising result that C n are not well defined. Recall that the Chern numbers for the FM HC lattice are ±1 for all d. The Chern numbers for the FM ZZ model are not well defined due to the degeneracy of the magnon bands at the upper right and lower left boundaries of the BZ. As mentioned earlier, the degeneracy of the magnon bands along the BZ boundaries can be lifted by allowing the exchanges J nx along the x axis to be different than the exchanges J ny the y axis. Earlier results must then be modified by defining J 1x e -ikxa + J iy e -ikya + J 2x e ikxa + J 2y e ikya J t , (51) and The anisotropic FM ZZ model contains three regimes depending on the relative values of ∆J 1 = |J 1y -J 1x | and ∆J 2 = |J 2y -J 2x |, with the constraint that r > 1. For the case ∆J 1 = ∆J 2 = 0 considered in the previous section, the Chern number is undefined and the gap between the bands vanishes even when d ̸ = 0. The Chern number number remains undefined when ∆J 1 = ∆J 2 > 0, although the gap between the bands is then nonzero due to the exchange anisotropy in the x and y directions. For ∆J 1 > ∆J 2 ≥ 0, the Chern numbers C n for the lower and upper bands are -1 and +1 when d < 0 and reversed when d > 0. When ∆J 2 > ∆J 1 ≥ 0, C n = 0. Consequently, the anisotropic FM ZZ model bears some similarity to the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model For simplicity, we now consider the case where ∆J 1 ̸ = 0 but ∆J 2 = 0. Using J 1y /J 1x = 1.5, the normalized gap δ(k) is plotted versus k in Fig. The Berry curvatures of the anisotropic FM ZZ model with J 1y /J 1x = 1.5, ∆J 2 = 0, and d = -0.4 are plotted in Fig. In Appendix D, we construct a ribbon with edges along the zig zags to demonstrate that non-trivial topological edge modes are associated with the model when the Chern numbers are ±1. No such edge modes appear when the Chern numbers are undefined or 0. The magnon Hall effect was first predicted for a FM Kagomé lattice The finite Berry curvatures in both FM HC and ZZ models implies that their thermal conductivities are nonzero. The magnon Hall effect and Li 2 (z) is the dilogarithmic function. To account for the different scaling of the magnon energies ε n (k) = ħω n (k) for the two FM models, we define T = k B T /3JS and κxy = ħκ xy /3k B JS (HC) or T = k B T /2(J 1 + J 2 )S and κxy = ħκ xy /2k B (J 1 + J 2 )S (ZZ) with the dimensionless thermal conductivity given by for both models. To examine the effect of the ratio r = J 2 /J 1 > 1 for the FM ZZ model, we plot κxy ( T ) versus r for several values of d in Fig. The magnon Hall effect has been observed in experimental realizations of the pyrochlore In order to estimate the effect of the partially gapped magnons on the ZZ model, we plot the thermal conductivities with J 1y /J 1x = 1.5 in Figs. Due to the low contrast between different FM exchange couplings, it is difficult to identify materials described by the FM ZZ geometry. Nevertheless, several cases of FM ZZ chains coupled by FM exchange interactions have been discovered: spin-1/2 Heisenberg Vanadium chains in CdVO 3 Edge currents produced by the Berry curvature Direct observation of the angular-averaged magnon OAM F n (k) may be possible in both HC and ZZ lattices by coupling magnons to other particles and quasiparticles. While the dynamics of F n (k) remains unexplored, we speculate that the magnon OAM may appear in inelastic neutron scattering experiments through the angular-averaged S(k, ω), i.e. the powder-averaged S(k, ω), when ω crosses a magnon band and k crosses a peak in F n (k). Alternatively, it may be possible to couple magnons to chiral phonons in either FM honeycomb or zig-zag materials. For example, chiral phonons and their quasiparticle couplings have been observed in the honeycomb structure WSe 2 To conclude, we have studied a new class of materi-als associated with FM ZZ geometries where the effects of OAM are observable. Formally, results for the OAM and Berry curvature for this geometry are quite similar to well-known results for the FM HC lattice. While the magnon bands are not completely gapped and the Chern numbers are not well defined for J 1y /J 1x = 1, those deficits do not significantly impact the magnon thermal conductivity κ xy (T ) in ZZ lattices. Indeed, opening a magnon band gap and producing well-defined Chern numbers by setting J 1y /J 1x ̸ = 1 only modestly enhances κ xy (T ). Although only an infinitesimal difference J 1y /J 1x -1 ̸ = 0 is required to create a magnon gap, FM ZZ lattice materials with J 1y /J 1x = 1 are not topological insulators. Consequently, the usefulness of these materials for specific applications may depend on the lifetime of the edge modes. This appendix considers the HC lattice sketched in Fig. where A ± k = 1 ± d Θ k + κ as in the FM HC lattice but with κ = 2K/3|J|. It is then easy to show that solutions for the eigenfunctions X -1 rn (k) are independent of d. The doubly degenerate magnon energies are simply shifted by the DM interaction. As expected, O n (k) is an odd function of k for any gauge. Therefore, the AF HC lattice does not support an observable OAM and F n (k) = 0. However, the AF HC lattice does support the magnon Nernst effect with a net spin current This appendix treats the AF ZZ lattice with AF coupling J 1 < 0 between chains and FM coupling J 2 > 0 within chains. As seen in Fig. where k , a k , a k , a k , a , and γ n = J n /2(J 2 -J 1 ). The only difference between L 1 (k) and L 2 (k) is that D changes sign. It is straightforward to show that the symmetry relations of Eqs. ( The AF ZZ model then contains 4 magnon bands, which are doubly degenerate with energies , and ω 4 (k) = ω 3 (k). Since the magnon energy does not depend on the sign of d, lower bands 1 and 2 and upper bands 3 and 4 from L 1 (k) and L 2 (k) are degenerate. Additional exchange interactions do not affect the structure of the L n (k) matrices. For example, an exchange interaction J 3 between spin pairs {1, 3} and {2, 4} along the (1, 1) diagonal does not couple the L 1 (k) and L 2 (k) matrices. Nor do any other complex set of exchange interactions or anisotropies. So the partition of L(k) into two 4 × 4 matrices remains unaltered. Numerical calculation of F n (k) reveals that F 1 (k) = -F 2 (k) and F 3 (k) = -F 4 (k) so that the contribution of the two L n (k) matrices with opposite D cancel. Hence, there is no net observable OAM from the two lower or two upper magnon bands. Similarly, we find that the Berry curvatures of bands 1 and 2 cancel, as do the Berry curvatures of bands 3 and 4. The anisotropic FM ZZ model has Chern numbers C n = ±1 when ∆J 1 > ∆J 2 , C n = 0 when ∆J 2 > ∆J 1 , and C n undefined when ∆J 1 = ∆J 2 , all with the understanding that r > 1. In this Appendix, we show that a ribbon cut along the zig zags contains topological edge modes only when ∆J 1 > ∆J 2 . There are three ways to construct a ribbon with width M : with the outer bonds given by the stronger exchange interactions J 2n (M even), given by the weaker exchange interactions J 1n (M even), or with J 2n on one side and J 1n on the other (M odd). In Fig. The differences between the outer and inner bonds are that the outer bonds have different diagonal terms L 11 (k) and L M M (k) because they only couple to interior sites through the weaker exchange interactions J 1n . Also sites 1 couple only downwards to sites 2 and sites M only couple upwards to sites M -1 through those weaker bonds. Notice that the DM interaction alternates directions from the top of the ribbon to the bottom but that its strength remains the same. Results for the modes of this type of ribbon are shown in Fig. 