We have combined the benefits of two catalytic growth phenomena to form nanostructures of transition metal trichalcogenides (TMTs), materials that are challenging to grow in a nanostructured form by conventional techniques, as required to exploit their exotic physics. Our growth strategy combines the benefits of vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) growth in controlling dimension and growth location, and salt-assisted growth for fast growth at moderate temperatures. This salt-assisted VLS growth is enabled through use of a catalyst that includes Au and an alkali metal halide. We demonstrate high yields of NbS 3 1D nanostructures with sub-ten nanometer diameter, tens of micrometers length, and distinct 1D morphologies consisting of nanowires and nanoribbons with [010] and [100] growth orientations, respectively. We present strategies to control the growth location, size, and morphology. We extend the growth method to synthesize other TMTs, NbSe 3 and TiS 3 , as nanowires. Finally, we discuss the growth mechanism based on the relationships we measure between the materials characteristics (growth orientation, morphology and dimensions) and the growth conditions (catalyst volume and growth time). Our study introduces opportunities to expand the library of emerging 1D vdW materials and their heterostructures with controllable nanoscale dimensions. The discovery of graphene has stimulated interested in van der Waals (vdW) bonded materials that can be mechanically or chemically exfoliated to obtain single layer sheets NbS 3 is an interesting TMT due to its extensive library of polymorphs and structuredependent properties Bulk TMTs have mainly been synthesized by chemical vapor transport and flux growth A successful strategy to create 1D nanostructures of semiconductors with controlled sizes and placement on a substrate has been the catalytic process of vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) growth Here we report a modification of the VLS mechanism that enables synthesis of transition metal trichalcogenides, exemplified by NbS 3 1D nanostructures, developed by adapting a strategy of salt-assisted growth that has been demonstrated for other materials, specifically TMDs. The technique is based on the use of VLS catalysts with conventional solid sources for Nb and S that are combined with an alkali metal halide, NaCl. As discussed below, the salt is known to react with transition metal/metal oxides (Nb/NbO x ) to form intermediate products that have lower melting points We show that this hybrid growth strategy, which we refer to as salt-assisted VLS growth, results in high-density 1D materials with sub-ten nanometer diameter and lengths up to several tens of micrometers, the regime in which strongly correlated physics starts to emerge (3). Additionally, using electron microscopy techniques (electron diffraction and atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy) we show that the materials exhibit several distinct 1D morphologies, such as wires and ribbons, and two growth orientations, namely [010] and [100] directions. We present strategies to control the growth of 1D NbS 3 , varying the nanostructure size through the growth time, the 1D morphology through the catalyst size, the growth location via catalyst patterning, and we discuss the effect on growth of the substrate by using both bulk substrate (SiO x /Si, SiN, sapphire) and 2D substrate (few-layer graphene and hexagonal boron nitride). We demonstrate the synthesis of other TMT nanowires, namely NbSe 3 and TiS 3 , using the same approach. Finally, we propose a growth mechanism consistent with these findings based on the relationships we measure between the NbS 3 growth orientation, morphologies, catalyst diameter, growth time, and nanowire dimensions. The dimensions we obtain are within the range needed to display the materials' unusual electron, phonon, and spin transport properties We show in Figure This growth and all others presented below were obtained in the deposition system shown in Fig. Figures Atomic-resolution imaging provides more insight into nanowire and nanoribbon morphology. In Fig. The outline for the rest of our report is as follows. We first present strategies to control the dimensions (length and diameter) and morphologies of salt-assisted VLS-grown NbS 3 . We then demonstrate the growth of NbSe 3 and TiS 3 using a similar approach. Finally, using structural correlations, we propose growth mechanisms for the different morphologies observed in the TMT nanostructures. We find that the nanostructure length can be controlled through the growth time. Figures The diameter of the 1D NbS 3 materials can also be controlled with catalyst droplet size. Figure To understand potential growth mechanisms that could describe the above results, we consider the relationships between the source materials, growth parameters and morphologies of NbS 3 1D nanostructures. We first discuss the possible role of NaCl in VLS growth. We note that our growth is the first to use both NaCl and Au, for any metal chalcogenide (including mono-, diand tri-chalcogenide) growth by CVD. NaCl alone has been shown as an effective growth promoter in the synthesis of 2D vdW materials such as MoS 2 , WSe 2 and NbSe 2 . In our growth of NbS 3 , we postulate that similar reactions between the NaCl and Nb (presumably with an oxide shell, Nb 2 O 5 , since the source was prepared and growth carried out at ambient pressure (52)) generate metal oxychloride products, such as NbOCl 3 which has a moderately low melting point of 200°C However, our EDS results mentioned earlier and shown in Fig. We therefore propose that NaCl in our growth plays two roles. It serves as an evaporation promoter that reacts with Nb precursors to create volatile metal oxychloride intermediates (one possibility being NbClO 3 ), which enhances the mass flux of precursors to enable or accelerate growth at low temperatures (650-750°C). We also suggest that NaCl vapor may adsorb on Au and form a eutectic alloy, creating a reactive liquid surface at which Nb vapor compound(s), such as NbClO 3, and S are incorporated after arriving from the vapor phase to result in NbS 3 nanowires via the VLS mechanism. We now consider the morphologies produced as growth proceeds. In VLS, the growth species have two pathways The second pathway involves either direct impingement onto the sidewall or adatom diffusion from the substrate to some part of the nanowire, followed by diffusion along the nanowire sidewalls and incorporation at any part of the nanowire surface, resulting in growth via the vapor-solid (VS) mechanism We finally discuss the factors that determine whether growth will produce a-NR or b-NW morphologies. In VLS growth (in the most general case, say where droplets are present on an amorphous substrate), the initial nucleation event is the formation of a small crystallite either at the triple phase line or at the droplet surface Based on these discussions we propose that the salt-assisted VLS synthesis of NbS 3 1D nanostructures operates simultaneously with a VS mechanism that appears to contribute relatively more to the growth of a-NRs. We suggest that the morphology that is produced depends on the geometry present at the nucleation event, and this may depend on the anisotropy in surface energies and growth rates for the nucleus. Further studies with sizeselected Au nanoparticles, rather than the dewetted films used here, will enable exploration of the specifics of how the catalyst-related VLS and attachment/diffusion-related VS pathways favor the formation of a-NR versus b-NW morphologies. We have presented a growth strategy that uses an alloy from Au and NaCl as a catalyst to synthesize a variety of 1D vdW materials, NbS 3 , NbSe 3 and TiS 3 , on bulk substrates (SiO x /Si, SiN, sapphire, mica) as well as on van der Waals surfaces (graphene, hexagonal BN). The method we describe, salt-assisted VLS growth, combines key benefits of both vapor-liquid-solid and saltassisted growth processes. We show that the thickness of the Au film that dewets to form the catalytic droplets and the positions at which it is patterned onto the substrate offer the ability to control the size and location of the structures, as is the case in a conventional VLS process. The presence of salt offers advantages of fast growth at moderate temperatures (650-750°C), producing a high yield of NbS 3 nanostructures with sub-ten nanometer diameter and lengths up to several tens of micrometers within a relatively short time (15-45 minutes) compared to growth in the absence of salt. For NbS 3 we describe two distinct morphologies that result from this growth mechanism: b-NWs, straight nanowires in which the growth direction s along the chain direction ([010]), and a-NRs, where dimensions are more variable and growth is perpendicular to the chain direction We believe that our demonstration of this new growth mechanism for nanowires and nanoribbons of transition metal trichalcogenides (NbS 3 , NbSe 3 and TiS 3 ) will expand the ability to grow emerging 1D vdW materials, including their heterostructures, and make use of their properties. Additionally, we propose that our method will also create opportunities to explore nanowire synthesis and nanowire heterostructures in group IV and V heavy-metal compounds (e.g., oxides of Mo, W, Ta, Hf). The synthesis of oxide nanowires of Mo, W, Ta, Hf based on vaporphase synthesis, including VLS, is challenging, mainly because of the difficulty of creating and supplying sufficient vapor pressure of the metal precursors. The results obtained for NbS 3 shows this challenge can be overcome with the presence of salt under appropriate conditions; in this way the reactants can be incorporated into a catalyst particle, as in the case of conventional VLS, to direct the growth of nanowires. Further measurements are required to explore the range of applicability of the salt-assisted VLS process. Going forward, it is important to measure the properties of the grown nanostructures to establish any effects of the catalytic elements present. It will then be possible to understand how the native anisotropy of these synthesized TMT materials governs properties such as conductivity and linear dichroism, and how the defects we see within the self-assembled nanostructures affect their electrical and thermal transport properties. The capability we have demonstrated, to create TMT nanostructures with some control of diameter and growth location, opens opportunities for such studies. We anticipate a greater understanding of the basic science of this versatile class of materials and technological advances as components of quantum devices where precise placement of individual identical nanowires is required (59), for example in nanothermoelectrics or in fault-tolerant quantum circuits. Substrate preparation: SiO x /Si, SiN, a-sapphire and mica bulk substrates are cleaned with isopropanol and deionized water, followed by oxygen plasma (150 mTorr, 5 minutes). To create 2D substrates, few-layer graphene and hexagonal boron nitride were first mechanically exfoliated by a Scotch-tape method, then transferred onto holey SiN TEM grids. Au films are then e-beam evaporated onto the substrates with different thickness 