Antiperovskites are a rich family of compounds with applications in battery cathodes, superconductors, solid-state lighting, and catalysis. Recently, a novel series of antimonide phosphide antiperovskites (A 3 SbP, where A = Ca, Sr, Ba) were proposed as candidate photovoltaic absorbers due to their ideal band gaps, small effective masses and strong optical absorption. In this work, we explore this series of compounds in more detail using relativistic hybrid density functional theory. We reveal that the proposed cubic structures are dynamically unstable and instead identify a tilted orthorhombic P nma phase as the ground state. Tilting is shown to induce charge localisation that widens the band gap and increases the effective masses. Despite this, we demonstrate that the predicted maximum photovoltaic efficiencies remain high (24-31% for 200 nm thin films) by bringing the band gaps into the ideal range for a solar absorber. Finally, we assess the band alignment of the series and suggest hole and electron contact materials for efficient photovoltaic devices. Semiconductors with the perovskite ABX 3 structure (where A and B are cations and X is an anion) have attracted attention as novel photovoltaics, photodetectors, and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Reversing the anion and cation sites results in the antiperovskite, or inverse perovskite, A 3 Y X structure where anions occupy the Y and X sites and cations occupy the A sites. Antiperovskites have been widely studied due to their high ionic conductivity, 1 giant magnetoresistance, 2 superconductivity, A number of studies have computationally screened entire compositional spaces for novel antiperovskite photovoltaics. To date, nitrides have received the most attention, in part due to the preponderance of experimentally known antiperovskite nitride systems (e.g., Heinselman et al. A wide range of quaternary antiperovskites have been screened for single-junction and tandem photovoltaic devices. Sreedevi et al. Clearly, a wide range of antiperovskite nitrides and antimonides have been studied as potential photovoltaics. However, the phosphide antiperovskites -in which phosphorous is coordinated to two A site cations -have received less attention. A recent report from Liang et al. In this work, we use relativistic hybrid density functional theory to investigate the thermodynamic and dynamical stability, optoelectronic properties, and photovoltaic performance of A 3 SbP (where A = Ca, Sr, Ba). An overview of the computational approach taken is illustrated in Fig. Figure All calculations employed Kohn-Sham density functional theory Vibrational properties were calculated within the harmonic approximation using the finite displacement method as implemented in the phonopy package. Finite displacements were performed with a 500 eV energy cutoff, with the converged k-point meshes presented in Table Liang et al. In the cubic P m3m structure, all octahedra are aligned with no tilting present, resulting in a 5-atom primitive cell (Fig. where r A , r Y , and r X correspond to the radii of the A, Y , and X ions of the A 3 Y X structure. A tolerance factor greater than 1 indicates a hexagonal or tetragonal perovskite structure is most likely to form, a value between 0.9-1 indicates a cubic perovskite, between 0.71-0.9 an orthorhombic or rhombohedral perovskite, and a value less than 0.71 is an indicator that alternative non-perovskite structures will be more stable. We calculate tolerance factors between 0.77-0.78 for the A 3 SbP series, strongly indicating that a cubic structure is unlikely. This contrasts with tolerance factors of 0.89-0.92 for the nitride antiperovskites A 3 SbN (where A = Ca, Sr, Ba), which are known to crystallise in the cubic (Ca, Sr) and hexagonal (Ba) perovskite structures. One route to resolving the ground state structure of dynamically unstable phases is Sb P through phonon mode-mapping. In this approach, the structure is displaced along the eigenvectors of an imaginary mode and allowed to relaxed. The phonons are recalculated and the process repeated until no imaginary modes remain. This approach has been successfully applied to discover the complex ground state of bismuth stannate containing 176 atoms. x, y, z denote the rotation of octahedra along that axis and can take values of 0, -, and +, indicating no-tilt, anti-phase tilt, and in-phase tilt, respectively. Accordingly, for perovskite structures, it is often more computationally efficient to distort along each of the 22 modes directly, as it avoids the need for repeated phonon calculations. For each member of the A 3 SbP series, we distort the structure along each of the 22 Glazer tilting patterns, with octahedral rotation angles of 18 • , 22 • , and 31 • along the a, b, and c axes. The tilted structures were relaxed using PBEsol and the symmetry of the resulting structure was calculated. In many cases, the structures relaxed away from their initial distortions, resulting in only 11 symmetry inequivalent tilting patterns. We also tested a number of perovskite-like polytypes including the YMnO 3 (P 6 3 cm), ilmenite (P 6 3 /mmc), rhombohedral perovskite (R3), and hexagonal perovskite (R3c) structures which cannot be obtained through simple rotations of the antiperovskite structure. The full results are presented in Sections S2 and S3 of the Supplementary Information. We find that an orthorhombic perovskite structure (space group P nma with a + a -a -tilting) is the ground state for all members of the A 3 SbP series. In each case, the P nma structure is considerably lower in energy than the cubic P m3m phase, with the distortion resulting in an energy stabilisation of 200 meV/atom (Ca), 149 meV/atom (Sr), and 108 meV/atom (Ba). This P nma structure is one of the most commonly observed in antiperovskite materials, such as in Na 3 OCl 42 and Li 3 OCl. As expected, the lattice parameters of the P nma structures are found to increase in line with the ionic radii of the group 2 elements, with an average increase in lattice parameter of 6% for Sr and 12% for Ba relative to Ca 3 SbP. We also find the degree of tilting away from the perfectly cubic structure increases down the group, with the average tilt angles increasing from 35 • (Ca) to 38 • (Sr) and 40 • (Ba). The increase in tilting is in line with the Goldschmidt tolerance factors of the series, which decrease from Ca to Ba (an indication of greater distortion) as detailed above. An additional element of distortion in the antiperovskite structure is the displacement of the Sb ions (which sit in the voids between octahedra) away from their idealised positions. We find the displacement distance also increases down the group, from 0.56 Å (Ca) to 0.64 Å (Sr) and 0.73 Å (Ba). In Table The band gaps of A 3 SbP calculated using HSE+SOC are presented in Table To understand the trend in the band gaps of the series, we examine the orbital contributions at the band edges. The orbital-projected density of states of Ba 3 SbP, calculated using HSE+SOC is presented in Fig. Table We find that the orthorhombic P nma phase undergoes significant charge localisation compared to the cubic P m3m structure. Primarily, this can be seen in the bandwidth of the upper valence band which reduces from over 3 eV in the cubic phase to ∼1.8 eV in the orthorhombic phase for Ba 3 SbP (Fig. (1-1.6 eV) and thus may be beneficial for photovoltaic device performance. Beyond an appropriate band gap and light charge carriers, strong visible light absorption is essential for efficient photovoltaics. The optical absorption of A 3 SbP calculated using HSE+SOC is presented in Fig. The strength of the absorption can be attributed to the double degeneracy of the highest valence band and lowest conduction band. Ba 3 SbP displays the strongest absorption onset, in part due to the more localised valence band edge which increases the joint density of states. In contrast, Ca 3 SbP exhibits the slowest absorption onset due to its disperse valence band. The absorption for the series is competitive with other thin-film absorbers such as CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 and CdTe, and is considerably stronger silicon due to its indirect band gap. The theoretical efficiency strongly depends on the thickness of the absorber layer and reaches a maximum value of 30% (Ca, Sr) and 35% (Ba) in the high thickness limit. For 200 nm films (as commonly used in thin-film photovoltaics), the efficiency is found to be 24% (Ca), 27% (Sr), and 29% (Ba). This is noticeably larger than predicted for Sr 3 SbN and Ba 3 SbN (20% and 25%, respectively Photovoltaic devices with high performance require electron and hole contact materials with suitable alignments to the valence and conduction bands of the absorber. An efficient alignment prevents open-circuit voltage losses and minimises barriers for carrier diffusion at the interfaces. To provide insight into ideal device architectures, we perform band alignment calculations using a slab-vacuum model. Our calculations aim to understand the "bulk" band alignment -namely, they do not take into account relaxations and band bending at the surface. We calculate ultra-low ionisation potentials and electron affinities of 2.6-2.9 eV and 1.1-1.2 eV, respectively. We find the depth of the conduction band remains roughly fixed down the series, whereas the valence band edge is raised monotonically from Ca to Ba. Our calculated band offsets are roughly 1 eV smaller than those found in the nitride antiperovskites. Valence Band have deep workfunctions (greater than 4 eV) and therefore will not be suitable for the phosphide antiperovskites. Accordingly, ultra-low workfunction electron contact materials such as the semiconducting polymer TPHP(LiClO 4 ) (Φ = 2.2 eV) should be employed. We evaluated the A 3 SbP antiperovskites (where A = Ca, Sr, Ba) as potential photovoltaics using relativistic hybrid density functional theory calculations. In contrast to previous reports, 