Ultrashort laser exposure can push materials to transient highly nonequilibrium states driving their subsequent morphology self-organization stimulated by excited electromagnetic and hydrodynamic processes. Laser processing parameters regulate these processes defining the resulting surface nano-morphologies demanding for diverse applications. Here, upon systematic studies of femtosecond-laser processing of monocrystalline Si in oxidation-preventing methanol, we showed that the electromagnetic processes dominating at initial steps of the progressive morphology evolution define the onset of the hydrodynamic processes and resulting morphology upon subsequent multi-pulse exposure. In particular, under promoted exposure quasi-regular subwavelength laserinduced periodic surface structures (LIPSSs) were justified to evolve through the template-assisted development of the Rayleigh-Plateau hydrodynamic instability in the molten ridges forming quasiregular surface patterns with a supra-wavelength periodicity and preferential alignment along polarization direction of the incident light. Subsequent exposure promotes fusion-assisted morphology rearrangement resulting in a spiky surface with a random orientation, yet constant inter-structure distance correlated with initial LIPSS periodicity. Along with the insight onto the physical picture driving the morphology evolution and supra-wavelength nanostructure formation, our experiments also demonstrated that the resulting quasi-regular and random spiky morphology can be tailored by the intensity/polarization distribution of the incident laser beam allowing on-demand surface nanotexturing with diverse hierarchical surface morphologies exhibiting reduced reflectivity in the visible and shortwave IR spectral ranges. Finally, we highlighted the practical attractiveness of the suggested approach for improving near-IR photoresponse and expanding operation spectral range of vertical p-n junction Si photo-detector operating under room temperature and zero-bias conditions via single-step annealing-free laser nanopatterning of its surface. Surface micro-and nanostructuring represents an important technological procedure allowing to improve basic characteristics of critical materials or even endow them with new functionalities. Bright examples of such material improvement can be readily found in almost all aspects of modern engineering and device fabrication, where appropriate patterning allows to control electrical, optical, biological, tribological and wetting properties of the processed surfaces. Direct laser processing of materials using pulsed radiation represents non-lithographic straightforward technique exhibiting continuously growing importance for both scientific and industrial communities. Such interest is largely boosted by the development of the laser market offering cheaper, high-speed and stable pulsed sources, more precise beam shaping and scanning systems as well as the growth of fundamental understanding of laser-matter interaction via development of computer-aided simulation tools and analysis techniques based on machine learning Apart from a common direct patterning of the surface with a tightly focused laser beam along the computerdefined trajectory, the formation of surface features via laser-driven self-organization phenomena has gained significant research interest during past decades owing to practically attractive simplicity, fabrication scalability and ability of such an approach to create diverse regular or random surface morphologies with characteristic nanoscale footprints Monocrystalline Si (c-Si), a critically important semiconductor widely applied in variety of optoelectronic and nanophotonic devices In this paper, we systematically studied fs-laser processing of c-Si immersed in methanol revealing that the electromagnetic processes dominating at initial steps of the progressive morphology evolution define the onset of the hydrodynamic processes and resulting morphology upon subsequent multi-pulse exposure. In particular, under promoted exposure regular subwavelength LIPSSs were shown to evolve through the templateassisted development of the Rayleigh-Plateau (R.-P.) hydrodynamic instability in the molten ridges creating quasi-regular surface patterns with supra-wavelength periodicity and alignment along polarization direction of the incident light. Subsequent exposure promotes fusionassisted morphology rearrangement resulting in spiky surface with random orientation, yet constant interstructure distance connected with LIPSS. Along with the insight onto the physical picture driving the morphology evolution, our experiments also demonstrate that the resulting quasi-regular and random spiky morphology can be tailored by the intensity/polarization distribution of the incident laser beam allowing to achieve diverse hierarchical surface morphologies with reduced reflectivity in the visible and shortwave IR (SWIR) spectral ranges. In contrast to the well-studied fs-laser texturing of c-Si in air demonstrating similar combination of the electromagnetic and hydrodynamic processes driving morphology evolution, the methanol strongly reduces efficiency the silicon oxidation as well as allows to achieve larger density of nanostructures per surface cite defined by initially subwavelength LIPSSs periodicity. Finally, using the developed single-step fabrication strategy we produced a vertical p-n junction Si photodetector with an active laser-patterned area providing enhanced near-IR photoresponse and expanded operation window without annealing post-treatment under room temperature conditions and zero bias voltage. A. Formation of spiky Si under static irradiation conditions: onset of hydrodynamic processes in LIPSSs We started from systematic studies of the fs-laser ablation of Si in methanol under static (or spotted) irradiation conditions, where laser beams with either a Gaussian-or a donut-shape intensity profiles and variable polarization distributions (further referred to as Gaussian and cylindrical vector (CV) beams) were applied to expose certain sites of the Si surface (Fig. Let us next justify the onset of the R.-P. instability developing in the molten LIPSS ridges with a characteristic period Λ R.-P. ≈ 550-700 nm according to the experimental data (middle panels; Fig. A destabilisation is only possible if it is energetically advantageous for the system. Only such periods of the instability Λ can develop, for which the surface energy decreases upon the shape transformation. No other kinds of energy are considered, since the surface tension dominates on the submicrometer scale. The surface energy of the side surface of a half-cylinder is E 0 = πR 0 lσ and in the final state the energy of the side surface of the half-cone is E 1 = 1 2 πR 1 aσ , where the surface tension of liquid silicon σ ≈ 0.7 ... 0.8 N/m 45 and the side wall of the cone is a = l 2 + R 2 1 . From the conditions that the energy difference must be E 0 -E 1 > 0 and l = Λ R.-P. /2 follows that only periods with Λ R.-P. > 6R 0 are possible. This estimation well fits the experimentally observed periods of the instability ≈ 0.6 ... 0.7 μm at R 0 ≈ 0.1 μm . For the estimation of time t i the instability with a given period Λ R.-P. is needed to develop, we supposed that the gain in the energy due to the reduction of the surface limits the work of the friction forces A = F s , which appears due to the motion of the viscous melt . (1) The term in the brackets in the equation ( Substituting the experimentally observed period of Λ R.-P. ≈ 0.6 ... 0.7 μm we obtain that the instability develops within few nanoseconds that agrees with the experimental assessments of the characteristic solidification time t m during which the Si exposed with a fs-laser pulse remains in the molten state, thus allowing the instability to develop According to the performed analysis, the development of the instabilities with larger periods is evidently limited by the solidification time t m as well as the characteristic LIPSSs morphology (periodicity and ridge size; Eq. ( The observed surface morphologies including regular and destabilized LIPSSs as well as disordered spiky Si can be expanded over practically relevant areas under dynamic irradiation conditions, namely, by scanning the Si surface by a laser beam diameter d at a constant speed ν and pulse repetition rate κ (Fig. Performed analysis also highlights that upon increasing the number of applied pulses electromagnetic processes underlying formation of the ordered LIPSSs are gradually replaced by the hydrodynamic ones that evidently dominate at larger N . Noteworthy, further increase of the number of applied pulses (and/or laser fluence F ) promotes melting and fusion of the neighboring protrusions resulting in increase of their geometric size and corresponding decrease of their density. In fact, increase of the laser fluence F from 0.166 (minimal fluence required to achieve spiky Si at ν =50 μ m/s) to 0.199 J/cm 2 decreases twice the density of the spiky features (from 2.9 to 1.53 structures per μ m 2 ). The increase in the aver- Once the LIPSSs formation governs the subsequent morphology evolution, it is reasonable to suppose that control over the morphology at the initial step (that is largely defined by electromagnetically driven selforganization processes) will substantially affect the resulting relief at the steps when hydrodynamic processes will come into action. To support this deduction, we carried out parametric studies on the Si wafer patterning in methanol using circularly polarized Gaussian-shaped beam under static and dynamic irradiation condition. Such irradiation conditions suppress the efficiency of the LIPSSs formation along a certain direction as well as deepening of the nanotrenches by subsequently incident pulses. This leads to the formation of the shallow LIPSSs with azimuthally varying orientation at N =10 and F =0.16 J/cm 2 (Fig. Similar Si patterning experiments were also carried out with an azimuthally polarized CV beam under dynamic irradiation conditions revealing even broader diversity of the obtained surface morphologies (see Fig. The produced spatially homogeneous surface morphologies were further analysed through the way they interact with the incident unpolarized electromagnetic waves. More specifically, we first compared the average reflectivity of the laser-patterned surfaces produced with a linearly polarized beam in the visible (0.5 -0.7 μ m) and shortwave IR (SWIR; 1 -3 μ m) spectral regions (Fig. Finally, let us highlight additional benefits of the Si laser texturing in methanol. In fact, most of the studies on fs-laser processing of Si was carried out under ambient environment revealing ability to create suprawavelength structures (also referred to as grooves) under accumulated exposure. These structure manifested themselves as a universal phenomenon being observed under diverse experimental conditions (such as visible and IR laser wavelengths Discussed benefits of the liquid-assisted laser texturing of Si highlight practical attractiveness of the developed approach for diverse applications. For example, nanotextured Si surface can be further functionalized with noble-metal films (nanoparticles) to act as a substrate for optical sensing, where the ability to control morphological/optical properties are highly demanded to optimize the device performance for a certain pump wavelength We justified applicability of the developed liquidassisted fs-laser texturing of Si for improvement of the characteristics of the p-n junction Si photodetector. Usually, extending the operation wavelength range and/or enhancement of the absolute photoresponse are the most demanded outputs, that are commonly achieved by nanostructuring-induced near-surface (shallow) junction formation Here, we demonstrated how simultaneous action of electromagnetic and hydrodynamic processes driven by ultrashort multi-pulse laser exposure at the monocrystalline Si interface can be used to control the resulting micro-and nanoscale surface nanomorphology spanning from the regular LIPSSs to quasi-ordered (or randomly arranged) spikes. Our studies clearly showed that the electromagnetic processes (such as polarizationdependent excitation and interference of the surface waves) dominating at initial steps of the morphology evolution define the onset of the hydrodynamic processes and resulting morphology upon promoted multi-pulse exposure. This results in appearance of the quasi-regular morphologies having the surface features defined by the hydrodynamic instability and oriented parallel to the polarization vector of the incident radiation. Our studies add an important brick into fundamental understanding of the interaction of ultrashort laser pulses with the silicon that has been used for a long time as a key benchmark material for such studies. In particular, our results clarify the origin of formation of widely reported supra-wavelength surface features following polarization direction of the incident radiation. From application point of view, our work highlights practical benefits of liquid-assisted laser processing of Si. In a sharp contrast to the well studied processing of Si under ambient environment, methanol not only reduces the efficiency of Si oxidation and removes de-bris from the nanotextured surface without any postprocessing steps but also facilitates formation of the regular plasmon-mediated subwavelength LIPSSs with the periodicity ≈ λ/2 as well as denser quasi-ordered spiky features. Considering wide applicability of silicon in optoelectronics, all-dielectric photonics and optical sensors, such advanced maskless and straightforward nanotexturing procedure is expected to be of high demand for future applications. As a good demonstration of the practical applicability of the developed approach, using direct laser patterning without any post-annealing and cleaning steps we realized the self-powered vertical p-n junction Si photodetector with twice larger photoresponse at subbandgap photon energies and expanded NIR operation range. Monocrystalline Si wafers were placed into a quartz cuvette filled with a methanol and directly processed with a second-harmonic (515 nm) fs-laser (200 fs) pulse generated at 1 kHz pulse repetition rate by a regeneratively amplified laser system (Pharos, Light Conversion). For certain experiments, as-generated linearly polarized Gaussian-shape laser beam was shaped into a CV beam by passing through a radial polarization converter ( S -waveplate; and Then, the ratio of the areas of the Gaussian beam S gauss = πD 2 th /4 and the CV beam for the focusing conditions ( N A =0.13) can be assessed to be S CV /S gauss = 2.2. Structural and morphological features of the laserpatterned surfaces were characterized using SEM device (Ultra 55+, Carl Zeiss) equipped with an EDX modality for chemical analysis. TEM studies (Titan 60-300, Thermo Fisher) were carried out with a thin lamella prepared using using dual-beam (electron/ion) device (Helios 450, Thermo Fisher). Preparation steps include (i) coverage of the sight of interest with a protective Pt layer, (ii) FIB cutting and thinning down to electron transparency and (iii) lamella extraction for TEM imaging. Micro-Raman spectroscopy (Integra Spectra II, NT-MDT) was carried out with a CW laser pump centered at 473 nm. Linearly polarized laser radiation was focused onto the sample surface with a dry microscope objective having NA=0.28. Raman spectra were averaged over at least 20 surface sites for each laser-patterned area. Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) analysis of the SEM images of the LIPSSs and spiky Si produced at variable irradiation conditions was performed with an ImageJ package. The same software was applied to evaluate average density of the self-organized structures using a find maxima tool. Finite-difference time domain simulations were carried out to calculate the absorption (E 2 Im[ ε ], where E is an EM field amplitude and Im[ ε ] is the dielectric permittivity of Si) of the incident laser pulses by the LIPSSs with variable morphologies. In particular, we considered the smooth Si surface having several pitches with a semielliptical profile (depth of 200 nm and width of 150 nm) arranged at the period of 260 nm that is fully consistent with the experimental data. Destabilizations of the grating morphology were modeled either as a local ellipticalshape protrusions decorating the ridges or larger protrusions filling the space between neighboring ridges (Fig. Reflectivity of the laser-patterned surface in the visible (0.5 -0.7 μ m) and SWIR (1 -3 μ m) spectral ranges was assessed using an integrated-sphere spectrometer (Cary 5000, Varian) and Fourier-Transform IR spectrometer (Vertex 80, Bruker) coupled to the IR microscope (Hyperion 2000, Bruker), respectively. Monocrystalline n-type (resistivity of 0.1 Ohm • cm) Si wafer with a lateral size of 6 × 6 mm 2 with an epitaxially grown 2 μ m thick p-type Si top layer (resistivity of 10 Ohm • cm) was laser-textured following the previously described procedure to create a destabilized LIPSS morphology within certain surface areas (Fig. The photo-responsivity of the Si p-n junction devices was probed under room tempereture and zero bias voltage using spectrally tunable laser radiation generated at 80 MHz pulse repetition rate by a femtosecond optical parametric oscillator (TOPOL, Avesta Project LTD.). The output laser beam was shaped by a lens to yield a pump spot diameter ≈ 60 μ m. Different sites of the laser-patterned and pristine devices were probed for statistical averaging of the results. The incident power at the selected wavelength within the spectral range from 700 to 1300 nm was measured by a Ge optical power meter (Newport). The photocurrent was directly captured by a Keithley sourcemeter from the illuminated devices. Photoresponse was calculated as the generated photocurrent divided by the power of incident light. Attenuated laser lines from the TOPOL setup were used to register the photoresponse versus incident optical irradiation power for the patterned and pristine Si p-n junction photo-detectors.