Two-dimensional (2D) Dirac materials have attracted intense research efforts due to their promise for applications ranging from field-effect transistors and low-power electronics to fault-tolerant quantum computation. One key challenge is to fabricate 2D Dirac materials hosting Dirac electrons. Here, monolayer germanene is successfully fabricated on a Ag2Ge surface alloy. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements revealed a linear energy dispersion relation. The latter was supported by density functional theory calculations. These results demonstrate that monolayer germanene can be realistically fabricated on a Ag2Ge surface alloy. The finding opens the door to exploration and study of 2D Dirac material physics and device applications. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have attracted a lot of attention due to their exotic properties and appealing applications since the successful isolation of graphene. Theoretical calculation demonstrated that germanene can adhere to Ag(111) via electrostatic interactions. A scrutinization of the growth of germanium on Ag(111) will be helpful in understanding the formation of germanene. In this work, we employ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and first-principle density functional theory (DFT) calculations to investigate the deposition and growth of germanium on Ag(111) surface. At a low deposition flux, irregular-shaped 2D islands of germanium are formed on the substrate. Upon increasing the deposition flux, the irregular-shaped islands convert to compact 2D islands. These germanium islands are grown in 2D mode, and their differential conductivity is found to be V-shaped around the Fermi level, which is a hallmark of germanene, a 2D Dirac material. The experiments were carried out at a home-made ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber (<1.0×10 -10 millibar) equipped with an STM (Unisoku Co., Ltd.). The substrate was a single-crystal Ag(111), and was cleaned by several cycles of Ar + ion sputtering (1 keV) with subsequent annealing in UHV. The deposition of germanium was done by heating high-purity Ge seeds (Alfa Aesar Puratronic 99.9999%) in a commercial Knudsen cell mounted on the UHV chamber. Subsequently, we annealed the sample mildly (around 450 K) for 5 minutes. The deposition flux was roughly calibrated by the coverage on the substrate. All the STM measurements were made at room temperature. A standard lock-in amplifier was employed for the differential conductivity (dI/dV) measurements by a modulating signal of 50 mV and 773 Hz. The dI/dV spectra shown in this work are all point measurements. Our DFT-based first-principles calculations were implemented using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). An atomically clean Ag(111) substrate is required for the deposition of germanium. Figure The corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) depicted in the inset image of Figure Figure Irregular-shaped domains with two distinct contrasts are visible in the figure. It has been reported that the substitution of very small amount of Ge and Ag to form dark spots due to the smaller radius of Ge than Ag. However, these irregular Ge clusters are not likely crystalline structure hindering the atomic resolution image resolved by STM. To further study the growth of germanium on Ag(111), we increased the deposition flux to 0.062 ML/min, i.e. to about three times larger than that of the previous deposition, keeping all other parameters unchanged. The result of this deposition has been given in Figure It should be noted here that the bright and dark domains in Figure A large-scale image of the brightest areas of Figure Carefully inspecting the STM images, we observe that these 2D islands of bright contrast are indeed always on top of the dark domains that we have already identified as the Ag2Ge surface alloy; that is, these bright 2D domains always grow on top of the domains of the Ag2Ge surface alloy-the dark domains-rather than directly on the pristine Ag(111) substrate. Upon further deposition of germanium, those germanium atoms that had taken the positions of silver atoms at the top surface layer can act as nucleation centers for the growth of 2D islands of germanium-similar to what has been observed for the growth of antimonene on SbAg2 surface alloy covered Ag(111), We observed that the deposition rate could substantially change the nucleation of germanium clusters. At a low deposition rate, Ge atoms can meet each other slowly; they then react with the surfactant Ag2Ge to form the Ge irregular islands. At a deposition rate three times higher than the previous one, the deposited Ge atoms are more mobile to meet and overcome the nucleation barrier to form crystalline growth mode. In a recent study, Yuhara et al. In other words, the germanene-on-monolayer-Ag2Ge and the germanene-on-trilayer-Ag2Ge systems never show a V-shaped curve of density of states near their Fermi levels (see Figure Moreover, we calculated the germanene-substrate binding energy defined as Eb = (Etot-Esub-Eger)/Nger for all possible configurations (see Table In summary, we have studied the growth of germanium on Ag(111), and found the growth mode is crucially determined by the deposition rate. At low deposition rates, Ge atoms form irregular domains, whereas a layer of germanene forms when the deposition rate is three times higher. The V-shaped density of states and corresponding DFT calculations suggest that we are dealing with a germanene layer. This work is helpful to understand the controllable growth of germanene. 