Recently, two arXiv preprints (Refs. 1,2 ) reported signatures of superconductivity above room temperature (SART) and at ambient pressure, striking worldwide experimental research efforts in replicating the results 3-6 , as well as theoretical attempts to explain the purported superconductivity 7-11 . The material of interest has chemical formula Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O, where x ≈ 1, and was named by the authors as LK-99. It belongs to lead apatite family, and was synthesised from two precursors, lanarkite (PbSO4•PbO) and copper phosphide (Cu3P). Here we performed a systematic study on LK-99, starting from solid-state synthesis, followed by characterisation and transport measurements. We did not observe any signatures of superconductivity in our samples of LK-99. In the dynamic field of LK-99, in just three weeks after first preprints, over 3 dozen of follow-up works emerge. And this trend seems to continue increasing. Below we briefly review the state of the art of LK-99 research. Series of DFT calculations The importance of copper nanoclusters for SART is emphasized in one study, based on the author's previous development of resonating valence bond (RVB) theory, so-called atom Mott insulator (AMI) Using tight-binding (TB) calculations, analysis of Berry curvature in flat bands of LK-99 revealed no signatures of magnetism A combination of dynamic mean field theory (DMFT) and four-and two-band TB calculations predicts that LK-99 is a Mott insulator with strong interactions at the flat band Overall, the importance of band flatness and the contribution of copper or oxygen in the electronic structure of LK-99 was highlighted throughout theoretical attempts. Yet more theoretical works to unify the currently dispersed findings are needed to provide a general picture to understand experimental observations on LK-99. In contrast to a flurry of theoretical responses, experimental attempts to reproduce LK-99 synthesis and test for superconductivity are more sporadic. One early attempt to reproduce LK-99 claimed successful synthesis, supported by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) analysis of samples. However, no signs of superconductivity was observed In one preprint, where the authors claimed the observation of superconducting transition at approximately 100 K, with resistance drop following decreasing temperature in LK-99 Further attempts to reproduce LK-99 also show sample inhomogeneity and semiconducting temperature dependence So far, none of the experimental efforts has successfully reproduced SART in LK-99 as reported in the original preprints. Rather, the reported results show a range of diverse behaviour that likely originated from the inhomogeneity of the synthetic LK-99 materials, because of a lack of precise recipe. The ongoing enthusiasm in searching for SART calls for collective efforts in open research to establish unified synthesis routes and characterization standard, for LK-99, and for future quests towards SART. In our work, several attempts to synthesize LK-99 were carried out. The main synthesis route, described in the arXiv preprints In our experiments, lanarkite was first synthesized following the procedure described elsewhere 1,2,33 . Briefly, 1:1 molar ratio of PbO and PbSO4 (first synthesis was carried out with compounds prepared from lead nitrate: PbO -by decomposition at 600°C, PbSO4 -by precipitation with H2SO4; further attempts were made from reagents purchased from commercial sources) were ground in agate mortar to form a fine mixture. Then the mixture was heated at 750°C in an alumina crucible for 24 hours in air. The mixture was left to cool naturally before taking out of the furnace. X-ray diffractometry (XRD, Rigaku Miniflex I) was used to confirm the crystalline structure of the as-synthesized material. Its XRD peaks (Fig. We then synthesized copper phosphide (Cu3P) according to the procedure described before Lanarkite and Cu3P were mixed with compound molar ratio 1:1, as described previously, and loaded directly into quartz ampoules. The ampoules were heated to 925°C in a furnace and kept for 15 hours. After the ampoules cooled down, we found severe cracking or even the total breakdown of the ampoules. To prevent this from happening, we then tried loading the precursor mixture into alumina crucibles, before loading into quartz ampoules for high-temperature reaction. This helped to some extent, to contain the reaction and to reduce the damage to the ampoules from molten reactants. Figure To avoid evaporation of the material from copper crucible, we further modified the synthesis procedure. To this end, we covered the copper crucible with copper cap and filled the ampoule with 0.15 bar of argon for the reaction to take place. Temperature and duration of the reaction were kept the same as above, 925°C for 15 hours. This modification completely prevented evaporation of material outside the crucible and helped to contain reaction completely within the crucible. This also prevented side reactions of precursors or LK-99 with quartz ampoule. The obtained LK-99 was still rather inhomogeneous, Fig. We did not observe either diamagnetic levitation or zero resistance in any of our LK-99 samples. However, in some of the synthesized samples, we found few very small pieces of materials, either black or pink appearance under optical microscope, with strong para-or ferromagnetic response. That is, these samples move, flip, or stand as the magnet moves underneath, similar to those reported in some videos (e.g., as in Ref. 6) in an attempt to replicate LK-99 diamagnetic levitation. We carefully separated these particles and performed EDX analysis on them. As confirmed by EDX, these magnet-responsive particles have iron inclusions (Supplementary Fig. We then fabricated several samples for transport measurements, both the as-grown material, and a ground and pressed pellet from the synthesized LK-99, details are shown in Fig. Figure Overall, the device shows a combination of resistance drop at high temperature, most likely due to structural phase transition of Cu2S, combined with low-temperature semiconducting behaviour of LK-99. In summary, we can conclude that although the synthesis of LK-99 shows XRD features similar to the reported, and EDX data confirm their elemental composition, no signatures of superconductivity are visible. We did observe a drop in the resistance of some of our samples at 380-390 K, which is consistent with structural phase transition of Cu2S in that temperature range.