In this paper, we introduce a new heuristics for global optimization in scenarios where extensive evaluations of the cost function are expensive, inaccessible, or even prohibitive. The method, which we call Landscape-Sketch-and-Step (LSS), combines Machine Learning, Stochastic Optimization, and Reinforcement Learning techniques, relying on historical information from previously sampled points to make judicious choices of parameter values where the cost function should be evaluated at. Unlike optimization by Replica Exchange Monte Carlo methods, the number of evaluations of the cost function required in this approach is comparable to that used by Simulated Annealing, quality that is especially important in contexts like high-throughput computing or high-performance computing tasks, where evaluations are either computationally expensive or take a long time to be performed. The method also differs from standard Surrogate Optimization techniques, for it does not construct a surrogate model that aims at approximating or reconstructing the objective function. We illustrate our method by applying it to low dimensional optimization problems (dimensions 1, 2, 4, and 8) that mimic known difficulties of minimization on rugged energy landscapes often seen in Condensed Matter Physics, where cost functions are rugged and plagued with local minima. When compared to classical Simulated Annealing, the LSS shows an effective acceleration of the optimization process. Minimization problems are ubiquitous in applied sciences, appearing for example in the calibration of machines and power plants The problems we shall focus on can be formulated mathematically as minimize E(θ), for θ ∈ Ω ⊂ R N , (P) under a few hypotheses: (H1) Ω is a closed and bounded box. Such a type of shape domain is commonly seen in practice by experimentalists performing local searches or adjustments around a given parameter value. (H2) The cost function (or objective function) E(•) is continuous on its parameters. When allied to (H1), continuity provides sufficient conditions for the existence of a solution to (P). We remark that further smoothness properties or bounds on higher order derivatives indicate the cost function's sensitivity on inputs; in this paper such information will not be required, nor used. (H3) The parameter space (or state space) Ω ⊂ R N is embedded in a N dimensional space. We shall assume that N is not very high to avoid well-known "curses" that happen during sampling in high-dimensional spaces, namely, high-dimensionality exacerbates the concentration of uniform measures close to Ω's boundary [HTF09, Chapter 2.5]; see also Section 2.2. Hypotheses (H1)-(H3) are realistic and can be seen in many practical applications, as in the fitting of empirical potentials in Molecular Dynamics [SIK + 19] or cases where the cost function is not differentiable, rendering inapplicability of gradient-based optimization methods. Several approaches have been used to solve (P) with varying degrees of success and efficiency. However, most -if not all -of them assume that an indiscriminate number of evaluations can be made. In contrast, the scenarios we are most interested in -common to many of these practical problems -are those where cost function's evaluation (denoted from now on as θ → E(θ)) is expensive, a situation where indiscriminate exploitation of the objective function E(•) becomes prohibitive. The foundation of our study falls on the question of how to use previously sampled elements (ξ, E(ξ)) ξ∈∆⊂Ω in order to accelerate the minimization problem. This approach seems reasonable if we assume that the usage of previously sampled data is cheaper than expensive evaluations at any unseen values, or even an opportunity to save computational time and effort. We have in mind several different cases in which: (i) Evaluations θ → E(θ) demands an extensive amount of computations, as required in high-performance computing tasks; (iii) Evaluations θ → E(θ) can only be obtained after purchase or payment of a consulting fee, at a high cost, as of expert knowledge on a problem. It is clear that high evaluation costs play a crucial role in the architecture of the heuristics proposed in this paper, yet we have no pretension at quantifying -nor constraining -such costs (however, see discussion in Appendix A). We will instead guide the discussion to pursue strategies that reduce the objective function evaluations, an idea that we formalize in our last assumption: (H4) Let H := {(ξ, E(ξ)} ξ∈∆⊂Ω be a family of parameter-cost function evalution pairs. Then, whenever ∆ is finite, any evaluation θ → E(θ) on θ ̸ ∈ ∆ is more expensive than interpolations, or inference functions, constructed using the information in H . Under the hypotheses (H1)-(H4), we shall refer to (P) simply as "Problem (P)". In the literature, optimization methods that advocate for the substitution of a cost function by anotherusually simpler -one, are commonly known as "Surrogate Optimization Methods" and are widely employed in engineering design 1.1 A brief overview of some approaches to the minimization problem. In principle, when no further assumptions on Problem (P) are at hand (for instance, like cost function's convexity), its resolution requires global optimization methods, most of which have a probabilistic nature. In this section, we explain and contrast a few of them, some of which will serve as stepping-stones to the construction of exploratory policies in the Landscape Sketch and Step approach. Let's begin by discussing Genetic Algorithms (GA), which consist of several agents performing direct searches on parameter space in parallel. The outcome of these searches is gathered and ranked, whereby the best states are selected and subsequently perturbed. In this way, somewhat mimicking the biological processes of Natural Selection, a new set of states is generated, and the process starts over. In SA's backdrop one needs to introduce a hyperparameter T > 0, commonly referred to as temperature. The terminology holds with more intuition in models with Physical meaning and concerns the mobility of atoms, which is proportional to the temperature; this will be further discussed below, but for our purposes we only emphasize that T directly impacts how exploratory a policy is. In practice, one allows a per-epoch dependence T i usually known as cooling schedules, which are mostly realized as a monotonic decay over epochs towards a freezing temperature T = 0. For now, we keep the temperature fixed at T . Exploration in Simulated Annealing goes as follows: at first, an initial state θ (1.1b) In the rest of the paper, we shall call this evolution as Simulated Annealing with potential E(•). This type of approach falls in the class of Markov Chain Monte-Carlo methods (MCMC), where one aims to draw samples from a target distribution by designing a Markov Chain that has the very same target distribution as an invariant measure. In our case, at a fixed temperature T , such invariant measure is given by a Gibbs distribution, where Z is a normalization factor rendering a probability distribution over the parameter states; cf. (ii) At high temperatures most transitions are accepted and the landscape E(•) is mostly ignored. In contrast, at low temperatures -close to a "freezing state" T ≈ 0 -only transitions to lower energy states (E(θ i+1 ) ≤ E(θ i )) are accepted. Thus, one can say that the policy becomes greedier as the temperature cools down, while more exploratory as the temperature is high. (iii) Going back to the underlying perturbation (1.1a), if all states are connected (that is, if the underlying Markov chain is "irreducible") then the dynamics halts at the global minima as T ↓ 0, in what is known as freezing; cf. [LPW09, Chapter 3.1]. However, when the perturbation is "too small", freezing can result in agents getting trapped at local minima due to either insufficient agents' mobility or high-energy barriers; this phenomenon is also known as tunneling and is investigated in Section 3.1. In Condensed Matter Physics, such local optima are called metastable states (also referred to as "local optima"). (iv) The design of cooling schedules is very important, but almost an art in itself: from the theoretical point of view, they affect mixing properties of Markov Chains and the convergence towards its invariant measures Remark (ii) allows us to borrow some terminology from Reinforcement Learning theory: from now on, we shall treat cooling schedules as policies and refer to both in an interchangeable way. Computationally, Simulated Annealing relies on extensive evaluations θ → E(θ), requires multiple rounds of simulation using ad-hoc cooling schedules, besides trial-and-error initializations. One of the biggest challenges of minimization is the acceleration of the search for ground states, which usually requires the development of strategies to overcome metastability issues. Multi-agent exploration is one of the most effective techniques to overcome this difficulty: it consists of several agents simultaneously exploring the environment under different policies (that is, exploration at different temperatures); exploration happens in parallel for a certain number of iterations, after which parallelism is broken. Final states (or "best states") are "combined" while the information they carry is "shared", usually by reassigning states to different agents as initial states for a subsequent round of searches. These ideas have been successfully implemented by Replica Exchange Monte Carlo (REMC) methods. (1) i , . . . , Θ (m) i exploring the environment under different temperatures; from the point of view of Reinforcement Learning, these processes can be seen as agents exploring the environment under different policies. In its simplest setting, one defines a set with several states taken by multiple agents at step i, and each element corresponds to a different initial condition that will be used in Simulated Annealing exploration, as explained in (1.1). After q iterations, a permutation Π(•) : {1, . . . , m} → {1, . . . , m} acts on A i+q , exchanging the states of individuals, , which are then reassigned as initial conditions for future exploration. In the end, exploration either halts or a new round of searches is carried out. The ingenuity REMC method involves the construction of the permutation Π(•) in a probabilistic fashion, obeying a detailed balance condition [Iba01, Section 3]. In this way, it allows for faster mixing and faster convergence to the ground state. From a Reinforcement Learning perspective, the REMC method is more successful than SA for several reasons, constantly pushing agents into more exploratory policies at higher temperatures while, simultaneously, fostering the adoption of greedier policies at lower temperatures. In other words, the exploration-exploitation trade-off is balanced out by adopting exploratory strategies that help in circumventing metastability issues. The caveat is that the REMC requires many evaluations θ → E(θ), implying costs proportional to the number of agents and steps required throughout its Simulated Annealing computations. The heuristics suggested in this paper, which we call Landscape Sketch and Step (in short, LSS), is based on techniques of Reinforcement Learning, Stochastic Optimization, and Machine Learning (ML). Roughly speaking, the LSS approach is a metaheuristic for global optimization [BDGG09, Section 2] divided into two parts: (i) a "landscape sketch" phase, where we construct of a state-value function V i (•) (the constructed state-value function at epoch i) and (ii) the design of an exploratory policy that indicates which states shall be taken -or rather, evaluated -next (the "step" phase). Exploration is based on Simulated Annealing The function V i (•)'s role can be seen from multiple perspectives. From the point of view of Surrogate Optimization, it works as a "merit function", an auxiliary tool to indicate candidate points where evaluation should be performed. From the RL point of view, it allows for an informed search strategy, indicating the most promising states to be evaluated by θ → E(θ), without any assurance of whether or not the search's endstate goal has been reached [RN02, Section 3.5]. V i (•) also enhances sampling by biasing the dynamics towards "low probability regions", yielding accelerated minimization of the cost function; The construction of V i (•) happens over time, using data gathered during exploration of the objective function E(•). Let's first define θ * := arg min θ∈Ω E(θ). where V i (•) is a "nice" function, possibly convex. However, θ * is the very (unknown) object we are searching for. Hence, we are forced to "relax" (1.3) by restricting the parameter θ to the set H i containing states previously sampled up to the epoch i, our goal is to ensure that the limit ) is attained. Although (1.6) can be trivially satisfied (for instance, V i (•) := E(θ * i ) would do), or even assured with careful reweighing of parameters, it is convenient to adopt an even more relaxed condition. In fact, we shall use the set {(ξ, E(ξ)| ξ ∈ H i } for interpolation with weights W i (•), biasing values of E(•) Hi close to M i ; in this manner, we shall expect but accept some violations of both properties in (1.6). The trade-off is clear: by deliberately allowing violations in (1.6), we may compromise the dynamics but allow for automated reweighting, an evident advantage, especially when contrasted with ad-hoc weight construction (an issue that other methods, like hyperdynamics, suffer from [TV77, Section 4]). There are several differences between the LSS and other Surrogate Optimization methods. The first and most important of them is the absence of a surrogate model: V (•) plays instead the role of a merit function, being used with the sole purpose of choosing from candidate points where further evaluations θ → E(θ) will be carried out. Second, the generation of candidate points by branching from previous points, a process driven by Simulated Annealing nature with respect to the V (•). The third idea is that of weighting elements not only by their relevance (when compared with M i ), but also with how recently it has been introduced to the queue of active states. This also allows exploration to follows a multi-agent nature, obeying different exploratory policies, which seems more suitable to address the multi-scale nature of many of the corrugated cost functions seem in practice. Although designs of weights that take into account distance to previously evaluated points are seem in the literature, as in Algorithm 1: The LSS approach, in algorithmic format. Result: Find a candidate for minimizer of Problem (P). Data: Start with a set H 0 ⊂ Ω as in (1.4) and a halting condition. while The halting condition has not been reached do . Each element not yet in H i will be evaluated through θ → E(θ); (iv) Aggregate new evaluations to the history set H i , now named as H i+1 ; (v) With the sampled elements in hands and following a pre-defined policy, evolve the set A i to A i+1 ; end Applications of the Algorithm 1 are broad and go beyond the heuristics suggested in this paper. For instance, if at step (v) one simply defines A i+1 as a permutation of A i realized by the action of a detailed balance law that enforces ergodicity, one obtains a variation of the REMC method; see discussion in Section 4. Several remarks are readily available. First, and above all, let's highlight that Simulated Annealing in step (ii) is carried out with potential V i (•), not E(•). In a certain way, we can think of V i (•) as an emulated environment, whereas E(•) is the real one. This replacement is key to reducing expensive evaluations θ → E(θ). Furthermore, thanks to (H4), we precede expensive evaluations θ → E(θ) by several cheaper evaluations θ → V i (θ) with the intention of accelerating minimization (that is, faster decay of E(θ * i )). As said above, the framework of the LSS approach is broad. Yet, to simplify our exposition, throughout the paper we use only two cooling schedules, represented as . Thus, we represent the extended set . In this scenario, the LSS approach can be depicted by the diagram in Figure As depicted in Figure (high) i . In between, an informed search takes place, where Simulated Annealing with potential V i (•) is carried out. During one epoch cycle the number of steps used to construct A (low) i and A (high) i is fixed, but can vary over different epochs or even follow its own schedule; for instance, the number of steps can be small in the initial epochs and grow towards the end. Furthermore, over epochs the parameter space Ω can be shrunk into smaller domains Ω i ⊂ Ω, an evolution that can be controlled by hyperparameters and is referred to as box-shrinking Active states A i and history H i . Construct V i (•) by nonlinear interpolation. Informed search #1 Informed search #2 -Selection prior to interaction with the (real) environment schedules. Therefore, since parameter search happens inside Ω i , we shall call this informed search part of an epoch cycle a within-box search steps; for more details, see Section 2.2.2. Finally, let's clarify the role of A i , which is a subsample of H i known to us as the queue of active states, or simply, as active states. These are states from which further exploration of the environment (Ω i , E(•)) will be carried out. As a queue, A i is endowed with a data structure property: it is a sequence that can grow in size while obeying a "First-In-First-Out" property, that is, the first element added to it is also the first that can be removed. Its elements are tagged by ordered indexes and two operations are allowed: an enqueueing operation, by which elements are inserted into A i with an indexed tag strictly greater than those already in the queue (if the queue is empty, the element takes the index zero), and (whenever non-empty) a dequeueing operation, by which the lowest indexed element is removed from it; cf. [CLRS09, Chapter 10]. In the context of the LSS, we observe that even though A i is not endowed with any thermodynamic interpretation, nor it is a "low dimensional" representation of H i , it plays an analogous role to collective variables in Metadynamics; cf. Through the lenses of Reinforcement Learning, one can say that the LSS approach has a multi-agent nature, where states assumed by agents are our main interest; in fact, active states A i aggregates the parameters we are optimizing for: under a given cooling schedule policy T i , each element in the queue A i is the starting point of an exploratory realization of a Simulated Annealing process with potential V i (•) which, after a predefined number of steps, yields a new sample are "worth" to be evaluated θ → E(θ) is defined in a probabilistic fashion, with a strong bias toward values that are lower or close to M i = E(θ * i ); see Section 2.2. It should be mentioned that even though we are discussing an optimization problem, along the way, it will be more convenient to adopt terminology from Dynamical Systems and Reinforcement Learning (RL). There are several reasons for doing this. First, because the search for a ground state (global minimum) takes place dynamically. Such search requires hyperparameter adjustment along the way, changes that must happen in an automatic fashion due to agents interacting with the environment, learning, finding out strategies to better explore it and, consequently, tuning some hyperparameters accordingly. Second, the multi-agent nature of the LSS approach implies that A i is comprised of several active states that are used concomitantly. Throughout exploration, active states gather and share information about the environment, while consensus guides the selection of the best among them. Last, consensus also drives the decision of where and how new evaluations θ → E(θ) are made; that is the main reason behind the construction of a state-value function. This will help us to carry out informed searches by assigning values to regions in the parameter space, allowing extrapolation -i.e., generalizationto states yet unseen. In this regard, we will borrow some ideas from Artificial Intelligence and Reinforcement Learning. In recent years, there has been a steady growth in the computational capabilities and efficiency of Deep Learning toolboxes; nowadays, it is not uncommon to see industrial state-of-the-art models with millions -if not billions -of hyperparameters. Naturally, optimization of these models with respect to their hyperparameters has become the focus of extensive research The topic of multi-agent systems is discussed extensively in As explained in Section 1.2, ML techniques are very suitable in Surrogate Optimization problems. Indeed, the sequential data gathering in contexts of high-cost objective functions has pushed the development of techniques where surrogate models quickly adjust to the available information, as for instance in Bayesian Optimization With concern to the applications of these techniques in combination, the paper [IAFS17] discusses interesting problems in hyperparameter optimization where, like in Problem P, a black box model has its parameters optimized on a constrained domain. After a thorough discussion of inefficiencies in classical surrogate optimization models, they propose a new hyperparameter optimization method that uses RBF to approximate error surrogates, refining and improving ideas in other papers by some of the authors Outline of the paper. In Section 2 we describe the theoretical background of the model; in Section,3 we describe a few applications, mostly inspired by Material Sciences problems; finally, in Section 4, we summarize our results and indicate future directions of investigation. Notation. The set R N denotes the real-valued, N dimensional Euclidean space. We say that f ( In this section we describe in detail the construction and usage of V i (•), a function used as a state-value function. It is used not as a mean to approximate E(•), but rather to indicate regions in Ω i that are more promising for further searching, prior to evaluations θ → E(θ). This is in sharp contrast with the methods described in Section 1.1 (none of which have an inference step), being cheap thanks to (H4). As described in Section 1.2, the construction of V i (•) is deeply tied to the set H i and can be carried out using any nonlinear interpolation method that weighs data points, aiming at the satisfaction of the inequalities in (1.6) but possibly violating them. There are two auxiliary functions in the backdrop of this construction, weights W i (•) and a ranking-type function R i (•), both of which evolve through epochs, somehow in tandem with the insertion of new elements into H i . From the point of view of RL, R i (•) plays the role of a reward function. Recalling the definition of θ * i in (1.5), we begin by explaining R i (•), a function used to rank elements in θ ∈ H i by assignning higher ratings to evaluations E(θ) closer to M i = E(θ * i ). It is defined as where β is a normalization factor that depends on hyperparameters. Clearly, R i (•) takes values in the range [0, 1] in such a way that R i (θ * i ) = 1. Next, we define a weight function W i (•) over H i by taking into account whether ξ has been evaluated before or not: if it has, we assing an initial weight W i (ξ) = 1, otherwise a value W i (ξ) already exists. Once this step has finished, W i (•) evolves according to a temporal-differencing scheme, Note that initially (2.2) assigns more weight to states that have been recently added to H i , inducing more exploration in the beginning, but adjusting this weight over time by the ranking function R i (•). Moreover, R i weights favorably lower values of E(•). Once weights W i (•) are available, we construct the state-value-type function V i (•) by nonlinear interpolation using a ML model of Supervised Learning type on the set of triplets Finaly, the construction of V i (•) by interpolation takes place at the beginning of epoch cycles, every k-epochs, where k is a hyperparameter. Different ML models imply different qualities of the functional space used for interpolation. Prior to any computation, two issues need to be contemplated: (i) The ML model should scale well on the size of the history. For instance, Support Vector Regression (SVR) with nonlinear kernels scales as O (K 2 ) or O (K 3 ) on an input with size K, which is prohibitive. For that reason we applied the LSS approach with ML models that scale well on the input size: SVR with linear kernels and Artificial Neural Networks. (ii) Despite the model chosen, the LSS approach is constantly collecting a growing history of measurements due to agents' interaction with the environment, a history that is fed to the ML model. Hence, the ML model evolves with a tendency to overfit, especially if a thorough sweep and evaluation over the domain Ω i is carried out. For that reason, it is important to find ways to avoid overfitting by pushing the model away from obsessively searching regions that have already been well explored. We achieved that by selecting ML models among many different architectures or hyperparameters using a multiarmed bandits method with an ε-policy [SB18, Chapter 2], forcing several models to be trained from time to time and keeping a score for each of them, which is updated by temporal differencing as to lower the importance of earlier fittings. Whenever a multi-armed bandits technique is not used, we select, evaluate, and compare different ML models at every k-epochs, selecting the best among them; the LSS approach sticks to the best one among them for the next k epochs. As more information is gathered through exploration, the history H i evolves and gets larger. Still, the question of how to find these points and enhance exploration is yet to be clarified and will be explained next. 2.2 Information sharing and construction of exploratory policies -reaching out the consensus of which states should be evaluated next Extending H i involves choosing new elements in Ω i that will be used to improve exploration of the environment. This is done by selecting a subset A i -referred to as the queue of active states at epoch iwhose construction obeys the following invariants, (2.3) As explained in Algorithm 2 the dynamics of A i precedes and helps to explain that of H i , guaranteeing that the first property in (2.3) holds. Algorithm 2: The dynamics of H i Result: Evaluate θ → E(θ) and store E(θ); Thus, it remains to explain how A i evolves, a process in great part controlled by a few hyperparameters, , e i , and a i+1 , each one of them explained in detail below. 11 The process essentially unfolding in three stages: selection, enlargement, and trimming. (E1) (Selection) Initially, all the elements in A i evolve by Simulated Annealing with potential V i (•) for K (low) steps (resp., K (high) ), following a policy T (low) (resp., T (high) ), yielding a set ). Then, a predefined hyperparameter e i ∈ {1, . . . , a i } is used to set the maximum number of evaluations θ → E(θ) that the model can make, which also sets the number of elements to be chosen from . In fact, we split e i in a random fashion in two parts e , whose construction we clarify in Section 2.2.3. (E2) (Enlargement) The e i elements chosen above are enqueued to A i (which, for now, we represent as A i ) and evaluated by θ → E(θ) if they are not yet in H i . In the end, we compute θ * i+1 := argmin θ∈ Ai E(θ). (E3) (Trimming) Elements of A i are dequeued until a i+1 elements are left. If θ * i+1 is among the dequeued elements and no copy of it is found in the remaining queue, then it is reinserted into the queue. Then, the process of extraction and dequeuing is repeated once more to keep | A i | = a i+1 ; we relabel this queue as A i+1 . Furthermore, it holds that θ * i+1 = argmin θ∈Ai+1 E(θ). Finaly, once A i+1 has been defined, we apply Algorithm 2 to obtain H i+1 . This process is illustrated in Figure (high) i are constructed through Simulated Annealing with potential V i (•), allowing for evaluations θ → E(θ) to be postponed, or rather "curated", before actually happening; in a nutshell and somewhat simplistic way, we can say that "acceleration" of convergence happens due to this step, where both the policies μ (low) (•) and μ (high) (•) play an important role. One can say that, the trade-off between the amount of imprecision (or "lack of knowledge") in the exploration that precedes evaluations θ → E(θ), and the efficiency in the usage of H i , is the core of the computational savings that we are looking for. Further, the invariant on the right of (2.3) holds, thanks to (E3). We must also remark that the constructions of both A i and H i have no parallel in SA or in REMC, described in Section 1.1, since the evolution in the LSS is driven by branching A i out as A (low) i and A (high) i rather than by simple iteration; see Figure A crucial ingredient in the construction of A i concerns the quantification of how concentrated ("clustered") or well distributed inside Ω i its elements are. In fact, this quantity is used to parameterize several smaller pieces that make up the LSS, serving as a proxy for exploration's effectiveness. Indeed, if active states are clustered in the same local basin, better exploratory policies should be adopted. This matter gets even more pressing because A i evolves by branching, which may exacerbate the concentration of active states if left unchecked. On the other hand, whenever active states are not concentrated, greedier policies that push for minimizing E(•) should be pursued. In the literature of Simulated Annealing, there are several alternative approaches to overcoming the concentration of active states, like restarting the search with different initial active states or redistributing active states over the parameter space if they get "too close to each other". Yet, this problem can certainly be avoided if, in the long run, a constant evaluation of the spatial concentration of parameters is carried out. To avoid the above issues, we devote this section to the design of such a measure of concentration, which we denote as C i ∈ [0, 1] and indicates how well distributed within the box Ω i agents are: values of C i close to 1 indicate that particles are becoming clustered; by construction, C i = 1 indicates that concentration takes place in a vicinity of θ * i . For now, we explain the mathematics of the measure of concentration C i in 1D, generalizing it to higher dimensions later on. For the sake of convenience, we shall drop any reference to the epoch index i: we write the concentration as C and the best-known argument at epoch i simply as θ * . At first, consider N agents exploring a box [a, b]. We first split the box in N disjoint equal-sized parts I j , where j ∈ {1, . . . N }. Afterward, we count the fraction of individuals in each of them, stored as μ({j}); clearly, μ(•) is a probability measure. At first, we compare μ(•) with two other probabilities, ν(•) and δ θ * (•); we anticipate that ν(•) is an uniform measure over bins while δ θ * (•) is concentrated in a single bin. We aggregate these comparisons into a convex combination, (2.4) of which each term is explained next. The quantity λ denotes the concentration of particles in the same bin as the best-known parameter θ * , and gets adjusted automatically over epochs. The quantity D (1) (•∥•) is a Kullback-Leiber divergence that compares μ(•) against ν(•), an uniform probability measure over bins, namely, ν({i}) = 1 N . Explicitly, we first define whose maximum is achieved only when all the agents are concentrated in a single bin. After normalization (so as the maximum value is 1), we obtain D (1) (μ∥ν). The second term, D (2) (•∥•), works as a sparsity penalization. It compares μ(•) and the probability measure δ θ * (•), a delta measure concentrated at the bin where θ * is (the best explorer to this point). This is done by using This finishes the derivation of the metric (2.4). We remark that C behaves as a free energy, since its first term is designed to keep μ(•) close to ν(•) -a uniform measure pushing μ(•) toward "thermalization" -in contrast to its second term, which instead pushes μ(•) "far away" from δ θ * (•) -a measure concentrated on the bin where θ * (the first coordinate of θ * i ) is. 12 We finally generalize this metric to high-dimensional domains through tensorization across each dimension. Indeed, recall that at the epoch i, the best known argument is refereed as θ * i and the domain is a box . Now, we define a concentration metric C i,j as in (2.4) by constructing reference measures ν j (•) along the interval [a j , b j ] and δ (θ * i )j (•), where, (θ * i ) j denotes the j-th coordinate of θ * i . Then, the multi-dimensional concentration metric is defined either as the maximum over the concentration at each dimension, C i = max 1≤j≤N C i,j , or as the average of these quantities, It is known that high dimensional uniform sampling is biased toward high concentrations due to the "curse of dimensionality". In that case, it is expected that most active states cluster on the boundaries. For that reason, one needs to add a parameter that deflates such evaluations dynamically, which the LSS achieves by early stopping: a patience parameter p impr accounts for a minimum number of epochs required for the models to show any improvement, otherwise the search stops. If the number of iterations without improvement exceeds p impr , then C i gets deflated by a predefined factor, otherwise it gets inflated upwards by a predefined factor toward the value computed in (2.4). 13 12 According to Information theory, both quantities indicate the transportation cost to take one measure to the other. Although the Kullback-Leiber divergence D (1) (•, •) is not exactly a metric (due to lack of symmetry), it is useful to quantify the distance between two measures. The quantity D (2) (•, •) corresponds to the total variation norm (or "Hamming norm"). When the reference measures are the same, both quantities are related, for instance, by the Czizar-Kullback-Leiber inequality 13 This strategy is acceptable in the field of ML, but lacks Physical motivation. In addition, it may fail in high-dimensional state spaces. A possibly better approach, which somehow generalizes our construction, is that of using a different reference measure, constructed as follows. Initially, consider a partition {I k } k∈B on Ω i , that is, I j ∩ I l = ∅, ∪ k∈B I k = Ω i . Now we construct a variation of the Gibbs distribution (1.2), that accounts for the distance between elements in the partition and the boundary ∂Ω i of Ω i . In the limit T → ∞ this measure converges (in an appropriate sense) to the uniform measure ν(•) used by D (1) i,1 (•∥•). We observe that in (2.7) the temperature T is a hyperparameter that would have to be adjusted over epochs, a requirement that is dropped by working in the limiting case T → ∞, namely, with the measure ν(•). Remark 2.1 (Computational and Physical aspects of concentration) The spatial concentration of active agents can also be investigated by the introduction of an interaction potential; for instance, a potential of the Lennard-Jones type, displaying attraction and repulsion between particles (which, in our case, are agents). This yields an energy space formalism, where spatial concentration is summarized as a 1D measure; in contrast, C i quantifies concentration in the state space. Computationally, assuming that |A i | = N , the LSS approach requires O(N ) computations to calculate the concentration of agents (because it only computes the position of active states relative to the best known minimum θ * i ), whereas the approach using potentials of interaction requires O(N 2 ) computations (because it computes every pairwise distance between elements in A i ). These differences are more significant for large values of N ; it would be interesting to consider and compare different approaches to quantify concentration. As emphasized before, high energy barriers may prevent agents from moving by trapping them around metastable states. Dynamic temperature adjustment is useful to prevent such issues, a technique sometimes referred to as lowering energy barriers. To apply this idea, estimating the amplitude of the barriers seems important. This approach is well known in the literature and has been used in similar contexts In the LSS approach, we estimate the size of the energy barriers as (2.8) This estimator has the advantage of being history-dependent and easily computed, with the caveat that it may possibly overestimate the size of energy landscapes if the parameter space Ω i has been thoroughly swept. We use (2.8) to dynamically adjust policy T where ε > is a small term to avoid division by zero. The reasoning behind the construction is as follows: when active states are not clustered (C i ≈ 0), the first term in (2.9) is dominant, and the policy is not affected by α i . On the other hand, when the set active state is concentrated (C i ≈ 1), we make the second term in (2.9) dominant but proportional to α i . This step is motivated by the second step (1.1b) in Simulated Annealing, where we use the variation in the state-value function V i (•) adjusted by the inverse of the temperature: by taking a state θ ∈ A i and its branched state θ (high) ∈ A (high) i , one expects to have at most (2.10) Thus, adopting (2.9) yields a higher probability of jumping between metastable states, which is exactly what we need to reduce active states clusterization. The selection problem -multi-armed bandits, gold rush, and sampling over the queue It is yet to be clarified how elements from the queue are selected for evaluation θ → E(θ). In the sequel, we refer to this as the selection problem. Throughout this session, we write the triplet (θ, (2.11) subsequent elements can be chosen similarly, from the lowest to the largest. In principle, we can generalize and relax this "greedy" policy approach by using a "multi-armed bandits" technique with ε-policy, where we select elements in in a probabilistic fashion as to assign a higher probability to lowest values of E(θ). However, we readily rule out this possibility because (i) mobility of active states implies that agents can hop between local optimum basins and get clustered; in addition to that, (ii) branching exacerbates accumulation, resulting in redundancy or crowded exploitation, that is, if we always choose the same element θ in (2.11), in subsequent epochs the set of active states A i will be filled with elements in a neighborhood of θ. In summary: if adopted indiscriminately, any multi-armed strategy is doomed to failure. Therefore, a different idea, where each agent is stimulated to explore different regions of Ω i , should be pursued. In a certain way, the strategy we embrace is akin to a gold rush, where the first to reach a mining site takes all, while others are left with nothing yet are free to explore and find gold elsewhere. By nature, this approach parallels the usual exploitation-exploration trade-off in RL, but is better summarized as a competition-cooperation trade-off. An analogous phenomenon can be seen in fish schooling due to limited food resources: individuals cooperate as a group while looking for food, but end up competing once finding it; cf. [KE95, Section 2]. Likewise, in the LSS active agents do not compete against each other, but rather share information. In fact, we are interested in agents' accumulated knowledge of the environment, not their individual values. In order to evolve and accelerate minimization without resorting to evaluations θ → E(θ), we must develop a policy that alternates between selections from , sampling is carried out in two steps: as discussed in (E2), given that e i elements must be evaluated θ → E(θ), e (low) i ∈ N of them will follow policies T (low) , while e (high) i ∈ N of them will follow T (high) police, in such a way that e i = e (2.12) due to the constraints, we immediately obtain e (low) i . In practice, once parameters e (high) i and e (low) i are defined, we first sample elements from A (low) i , a fact that we will come back to later in this section. Parameterization by C i is justified by the fact that small values of C i indicate "well-distribution" of active states A i over Ω i , implying that more exploitation should be pursued and policy derived from simulated annealing at low temperatures should be adopted. Hence, more states from A (low) i should be selected. On the other hand, when C i is high (close to 1), active states A i are concentrated, and a policy to reduce clusterization should be pursued; in that case, as if raising the temperature T (high) i , more elements from the queue A (high) i should be selected. Once the number of elements to be drawn from each set is defined, policies μ (low) (•) and μ (high) (•) are used for selection without replacement from the queues A (low) i and A (high) i , respectively. We detail the construction of each one of these policies next. But before doing so, we need to define some auxiliary nonlinear maps based on a softmax function Softmax(x; η) := e ηxi N j e ηxj , where x = (x 1 , . . . , x N ) ∈ R N . They are N min (x; η 1 ) = Softmax(x; η 1 ), and where , and x max = max 1≤i≤N (x i ); a small factor ε avoids division by zero. Both parameters η 1 and η 2 control the distribution of mass over different states, yielding probability measures from any given vector x ∈ R N . In this paper we shall always take η 1 < 0 and η 2 < 0, which imply that the following properties hold: We are ready to explain both policies. First recall that θ (low) "branches out" from θ through Simulated Annealing with potential V i (•). Then, the policy μ (low) (•) is given as Intuitively, whenever active states A i are clustered (C i ≈ 1), the policy μ (low) (•) is close to favoring elements that show substantial variation at state-value at V i (θ (low) ) when compared to E(θ) evaluated at θ, the state that it branched out from. On the other extreme, C i ≈ 0 indicates that the set of active states A i is not clustered, therefore a greedier selection seems more appropriate. In this case, we use V i (•) as a ranking proxy, favoring lower values of V i (θ (low) ). This establishes the construction of μ (low) (•). Now we focus on the policy μ (high) (•), used to sample elements from A (high) i . Recall that this policy concerns exploration at high temperatures, so a lot of exploration in the active states should be fostered. Initially, one defines a measure of horizontal displacement and θ * i (see Equation 1.6). Then, two quantities are defined: the first is defined as up to a normalization factor that yields a probability distribution that favors values away from θ * i . This probability measure is used for sampling from the queue A (high) i in a biased fashion, favoring agents that display high exploration in amplitude, regardless of the direction it goes. At the end of the day, both probability measures are combined as Before defining (and zero in the complement). This establishes the construction of μ (high) (•). The applications we have in sight concern the minimization of functions plagued with local minima, serving as prototypes of rugged energy landscape commonly seen in Biophysical Systems and Material Sciences [W + 03]. We shall explore a particular example of a function where F (•) : R → R is a real-valued function as depicted in Figure By design, the function F (•) has an abundance of local minima ("valleys") and local maxima ("peaks"), in such a way that v i > v i+1 , for i ∈ {1, .., 5}, (Better rewards) , for i ∈ {1, .., 3}, (Diminishing motivation) (Increasingly harder obstacles) As such, this example embodies some of the main difficulties in the field: the trapping of parameters on local minima and the issue of tunneling; the latter is commonly seen in Physics, where particles do not diffuse due to high energy barriers separating metastable states. Overall, the designs of F (•) and G (N ) (•) are such that particles have to overcome tunneling at higher costs, with progressively smaller "enthusiasm" as they Precisely, , where λ(x) = sin 10πx + π 2 . By construction, the global minimum of this function takes place at x = 0.9. move from the initial position x init = (0.1, . . . , 0.1) towards the global minimizer at x end = (0.9, . . . , 0.9). We have picked an initial state at x init far away from the global minimizer because our goal is to compare different models rather than exploring any space-filling experimental design; cf. Throughout the discussion we benchmark the results of the LSS with several simulated annealing cases with varying size of Brownian step. We have also split the analysis in two parts, first focusing on the 1D problem, then moving to its high-dimensional versions. To begin with, we analyze the LSS in comparison with simulated annealing (SA) under different hyperparameters: SA has been considered with different stepsizes -Li 12.5 , Li 25 , and Li 50 -where L i is a vector with the length of the box Ω i in each direction. The ML models used for nonlinear interpolation of V i (•) varied to contemplate Support Vector Regression models (SVR) and Neural Networks. As explained in Section 2.1.1, we alternate between different hyperparameters formulations -and even among different ML models -using a multi-armed bandits technique. In Figure Curiously, it is interesting to see that ML models yield very different acceleration of the optimization, yet their computational cost differ substantially, an opportunity for choosing a ML model that is both efficient and computationally cheap. Due to this trade-off in model selection, we alternate between two approaches, as explained in Section 2.1.1. Among the LSS models studied, one can see that those not using multi-armed bandits seem to perform better. Last, as pointed out in Section 2.2, we keep track of the concentration as the model evolves, as shown in Figure In the second part of our applications we focus on studying the role that dimensionality plays in the LSS approach. There is a legitimate concern that agents A i concentration exacerbates as dimensionality increases, an issue we aim to curb by the mechanisms described in Section 2.2. Furthermore, by construction, instead of G (N ) (•). The quantity G (N ) (•) has been plotted in Figure Finally, it can be said that the techniques used to curb concentration are too rigid in low dimensions, making the model spend too much time exploring at high temperatures when it could instead spend more epochs and evaluations at low temperatures. While this approach is welcome in high dimensions, it seems to have a backlash in low-dimensional cases. Nevertheless, in all the cases studied, the LSS approach accelerates minimization. We have developed a new global optimization heuristics, the Landscape Sketch and Step approach (LSS), which has been applied in a toy problem plagued with local minima to mimic rugged energy landscapes. The investigation has been restricted box-shaped domains embedded in low-dimensional spaces with dimensions 1, 2, 4, and 8, focusing on cases where cost function evaluation θ → E(θ) is high, an aspect that has been key to the architecture of the LSS. To overcome the latter costs, we judiciously substitute information about E(•) by values of an interpolated function V (•). As pointed out, among its many roles, V (•) works as a state-value function that points out regions in Ω to be probed for posterior measurements θ → E(θ). In that regard, it is worth highlighting the parallels and contrasting differences between our approach and that of the method of Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) Several remarks are needed in regards to Surrogate Optimization methods. Although surrogate modeling using ML models is not new [FSK08, Chapt. 2], the LSS differs from classical approaches in a crucial way: we do not construct a surrogate model for E(•), focusing instead on designing V i (•), that plays the role of a merit function. Still, the latter is not used in a deterministic fashion, but rather to design a sampling mechanism for candidate points A (high) i ∪A (low) i generated by SA; the authors are not aware if this approach is new. The main reason we pursue this approach is the multi-agent nature of the exploratory dynamics, carried out by active states A i . Interestingly, we see similarities in our construction in (2.15) to that in [WS14, Equation 1], where a merit function is designed by the convex combination of a surrogate function and the distance to previously evaluated points (as to enforce exploration). Yet, there is a caveat: while their convex combination is performed by cycling weights over a predefined list of values in the interval [0, 1], the LSS allows for weights to adjust dynamically by taking the spatial distribution of active states over Ω into account. It is clear that a history-based approach to construct V i (•) in an automated fashion has benefits, but it also drawbacks: using V i (•) to extrapolate or generalize to regions not yet seen can be problematic, especially when H i is "small"; moreover, the LSS approach does not aim at reconstruction of energy potential functions, which can be attained by methods like Metadynamics A few words about the motivation behind (H4) may illuminate this assumption, which is reasonable in many contexts, especially when ∆ is a finite set that is "not too large". It has been introduced to accommodate cases like ab initio calculations and Molecular Dynamics, where computations may take hours to be finalized, usually at a high computational cost (like MD simulations performed on multicore supercomputers). The problems we had in mind concern the optimization of parameters in ab initio calculation, where calculations are much more expensive than classical computations; comparatively, the former plays the role of θ → E(θ), while the latter plays the role of θ → V (θ). Iteratively until a halt, parameters could be optimized at a classical model and, every k-steps, evaluation of their fitness could be assessed by the ab initio model. As seen in Section 2.2.2, by analyzing the dynamics of agents in the queue of active states one can adjust policy parameters. In the RL literature, this type of interaction is commonly seen in actor-critic methods; It would be interesting to investigate if the application of more advanced policy gradient methods would be more effective in overcoming issues with large energy barriers; cf. [SWD + 17]. A comparison between the LSS approach and the DYNA method in Reinforcement Learning should be made. The DYNA model [SB18, Chapter 8] was developed to adjust action-value functions dynamically in order to accommodate temporal changes in the environment that an agent explores. On the other hand, the LSS approach is applied in a context where the agent interacts with an environment that remains the same, yet the agent's partial knowledge about the environment grows over time. Nevertheless, the role played by A (low) i and A (high) i in the LSS approach are somehow comparable to that of sampling from a priority queue in the DYNA method and may be equivalent asymptotically as the number of epochs grows; it would be interesting to further investigate this assertion or implement the LSS approach using ideas of the DYNA method. To the authors, it seems that the LSS is just an example of a larger class of models that can adopt a similar strategy, namely, that of using an auxiliary function V (•) modeled on gathered data prior to expensive evaluations θ → E(θ). For instance, one could apply the same technique to REMC. The authors also believe that the usage of a detailed balance condition to mix policies and enhance exploration seems more promising than using probabilistic sampling over queues for the selection of new active states. Last, we must say that we have not explored any type of halting conditions besides early stopping or putting simply putting a cap on the number of evaluations θ → E(θ), fixed in advance as a "budget". A When is it better to use the LSS approach? Counting the number of evaluations using the target potential is tricky because the model starts up by sampling and using classical simulated annealing until a certain number of samples has been collected. Although the number of costly evaluations θ → E(θ) in each epoch i is at most e i , the number of simulated annealing steps required for acceleration is K (low) + K (high) ; cf. Step (E1). This necessity may slow down computations but allows the LSS to perform a better informed search. In the sequel we compare the LSS method with an "equivalent" classical Simulated Annealing, in the sense that all evaluations θ → E(θ) in the LSS are not replaced by fitted potential evaluations θ → V i (θ).l Recalling the hyperparameters defined in Section (2.2) -K (low) , K (high) , e i , a i , the number of evaluations is described below: θ → E(θ) , respectively; ei indicates the number of evaluations θ → E(θ), and finally ai denotes the length of the queue Ai. In a context where fitting costs are negligible, evaluations θ → E(θ) and θ → V (θ) have costs C E and C V , respectively, assumption (H4) can be quantified as Standards to be followed in order to integrate the different programs used in this paper. We compare two types of models: • 100 simulated annealing experiments. • 100 landscape sketch and step experiments with 3 agents each. The number of box searches and within box searches is 10. In both cases, the simulated annealing step is the same for deep evaluations. The LSS also has an exploratory phase that has a step size that varies according to the concentration of particles: under a high concentration of agents, the step size is the same as that of deep explorations, otherwise it is half of such a step size when agents are not concentrated. Hyperparameter tuning of the fitting models. In the Neural Network model there are several network architecture constraints set in advance like the number of hidden layers, regularization rates etc; they are known as hyperparameters. Their values can be tuned in order to maximize the performance of the network during its training phase, mostly taking accuracy or loss metric in consideration. In this work hyperparameter tuning was carried out only for learning rates and dropout rates, using 3 fold cross-validation, where the train set was split in 3 parts of roughly the same size, followed by 3 evaluations, in each of which one of these sets is held out, while parameters are fitted in the other two. Once the training process is over, the accuracy of the model is measured, and the process is repeated with another piece of these 3 sets held aside. This is carried out until the 3 parts are exhausted, and the evaluation is reached as an average. Further investigation on other model architectures -number of hidden layers, larger grid search -are also possible but have not been carried out. The code available on GitHub readily allows such experiments; cf. The optimization of the empirical potential parameters involves multi-platform computations concerning different parts of the model. Machine Learning steps were carried out in Python 3.6. All the Python code has been built using Tensorflow, a Python library well suited for Machine Learning problems [AAB + 15]. First principles based molecular dynamics (MD) simulation based on electronic structure are computationally huge expensive, whereas predefined empirical force field based MD simulations are computationally faster 2 In light of that, perturbations are seen as mutations.3 GA should not be dismissed as a valuable technique. In fact, several optimization methods have been designed based on it; cf. There are several of them, referred to by different names, especially because they have been rediscovered and used in different contexts; cf. These regions are related to the probability distribution derived by the Gibbs distribution, constructed from the energy function whose ground state we are searching for. θ * could be a set, but this detail is not relevant in the following discussion. In the Surrogate Optimization literature, θ * i is called "the incumbent" point. It must be said that the term bias has a dynamical system connotation rather than a statistical meaning. Indeed, we are not interested at constructing V i (•) as a biased estimator to E(•). In the code, we associate these k-epochs intervals with different boxes Ω i ⊂ Ω i , that can also shrink in size. We call these changes box shrinking schedules. This adds flexibility to the parameter search, for boxes may also be designed to shrink over time, reducing the size of the parameter space. For further details, see By this we mean that the elements in the queue A i are in the set H i ; we shall adopt this abuse of notation unapologetically throughout the rest of the paper.11 In all the simulations performed, the sequences e i and a i satisfies e i ≤ a i (otherwise elements would be evaluated but not stored into H i ) and were non-increasing. We assume that |H 0 | ≥ a 0 . If not, we sample Ω i several times, until the selection process is possible. The idea has been used in other contexts, for instance, in the choice of initial points in k-means such that they are as distant from one another as possible; cf. [AV06, Section 2.2]. This number can be easily adjusted, but we set it as 3, the minimum required number for cross-validations with 3 sets to be performed.