Fe 3 C/few-layered graphene core/shell nanoparticles embedded in a carbon matrix are synthesized by a novel two-step surfactant sol-gel strategy, where the processes of hydrolysis, polycondensation and drying take place in a one-pot. The present approach is based on the combined action of oleic acid and oleylamine, which act sterically on the precursor micelles when a densification temperature is performed in a reducing atmosphere. The structural and magnetic evolution of the formed compounds is investigated, ranging from iron oxides such as Fe 3 O 4 and FeO, to the formation of pure Fe 3 C/C samples from 700 oC onwards. Interestingly, Fe 3 C nanoparticles with a size of ~20 nm crystallize immersed in the carbon matrix and the surrounding environment forms an oriented encapsulation built by few-layered graphene. The nanostructures show a saturation magnetization of ~43 emu/g and a moderate coercivity of ~500 Oe. Thereby, an innovative chemical route to produce single phase Fe 3 C nanoparticles is described, and an effective method of few-layered graphene passivation is proposed, yielding a product with a high magnetic response and high chemical stability against environmental corrosion. The advances and developments of magnetic materials have recently focused their attention on magnetic nanocomposites based on carbides and carbon-metal alloys. Commonly such ceramic materials have exhibit noticeable hardness and high chemical resistance A high chemical stability extends the lifetime of the nanoparticles (NPs) and reduces their toxicity in physiological environments, making them suitable for application in biological media: as innovative magnetically controlled nanoplatforms for many prospective biomedical applications Although this material has already spawned a wide field of research involving a large and assorted applications in the steel-based industry In this study, we propose a novel non-aqueous sol-gel synthesis route with OA and OY as surfactants. The role of these precursors is to act as steric agents to control the particle size and as reducing agents with the aim of promoting the carbonization of the precursor micelles instead of its oxidation, advantageously, at very much lower temperatures (~700 °C) Fe 3 C/few-layered graphene core/shell nanostructures were prepared using a novel sol-gel synthesis based on a two-step surfactant strategy. As a first step, 12 mmol of Fe(NO 3 ) 3 .9 H 2 O (Sigma-Aldrich +98%) were dissolved in absolute ethanol (PanReac +99%). The solution was kept under a vigorous magnetic stirring for 15 min at 40 °C (Fig. The resulting solution is magnetically stirred for 24 h (Fig. The densification of the xerogels was carried out in a horizontal tube furnace between 500 and 800 oC under a nitrogen flow of 20-50 cm 3 /min of 99.8% of purity. A heating rate of 5 °C/min was fixed and the system was kept for 1 h at the selected densification temperature (Fig. The crystal structure, composition and volume-weighted average crystallite size of the samples were obtained from Rietveld refinements of X-ray diffraction (XRD) data measured using a PANalytical Empyrean system in a Bragg-Brentano configuration with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.542 Å) in the 2θ range 10-100°. The Rietveld analysis was performed using the software FullProf Suite The magnetic properties of the nanostructured powder were examined with a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) coupled to a physical property measurement system (PPMS model 6000 controller, Quantum Design). Magnetic hysteresis loops were collected at room temperature with a maximum applied magnetic field of 50 kOe. A first aim is to investigate the evolution of the crystal structure and composition, from the first crystalline materials formed after the evaporation of the organic compounds to the stabilization of the single-phase Fe 3 C/few-layered graphene-based nanostructures embedded in a carbon matrix. The existing chemical routes to produce Fe 3 C use organic surfactants such as hexamethylenetetramine Fig. The second thermal region, TR2, is a transition stage for the consolidation of Fe 3 C at 650 °C, and iron oxides are no longer detected (Fig. . Furthermore, we understand that the decomposing reduction of the iron oxide phases is activated through carbon oxidation (2CO + O 2 = 2CO 2 ), preceding the Fe 3 C formation, in which the effective formation of graphite carries a slower kinetics (Fig. The third thermal region, TR3, goes from 700 to 800 °C and evidences the predominance of the single-phase Fe 3 C. It is worth mentioning that in most syntheses related to Fe 3 C, good structural, catalytic, and magnetic properties are obtained, but there is a significant contribution from metallic Fe TEM analyses have been carried out for the optimal densification temperature to obtain single-phase Fe 3 C at 700 °C. Fig. A high-resolution ABF image is presented in Fig. The fast Fourier transformations (FFT) calculated from different areas of the core-shell nanostructure are shown in the insets 1-2 of the Fig. Fig. The devaluated M s values for samples respect to the Fe 3 C are mainly due to the content of excess carbon from shells and matrix, which not being magnetic, both contribute to a decreasing of the M s (emu g -1 ) by the sample mass normalization. Such M s values can be renormalized (M s R ), considering: (i) the compositional percentage from Rietveld analysis in Fig. Regarding the coercivity, it is constant with temperature from 650 to 800 °C with a range value of 440-550 Oe, Table We understand that this work constitutes the first step of this novel one-spot synthesis on the obtention of high purity Fe 3 C/fewlayered graphene core-shell NPs. The products obtained highlight by its purity, controlled growth through carbon matrix, its surface passivated by the few-layered shell, and a good magnetic property making them perfectly competitive and applicable for the whole vanguard proposed applications existent for this nano sized Fe 3 C. In the future we hope to explore this sol-gel approach towards both the higher M s of products reducing the quantity of surfactants introduced till no contaminant phases presence like α-Fe, and explore how the ratio between OA and OY could modulate the NPs morphology. In this report we have successfully stabilized a well-defined Fe 3 C/ few-layered graphene core/shell NPs as a single phase embedded in a carbon matrix by a novel sol-gel synthesis based on a two-step surfactant strategy, gelation, and densification, using OY and OA as surfactants. XRD data reveal the presence of FeO and Fe 3 O 4 between 500 and 600 oC and a small contribution of α-Fe at 650 oC. In turn, the progressive formation of Fe 3 C NPs occurs by carbothermal processes from 600 oC. The optimal densification temperature to obtain the consolidation of the single phase Fe 3 C (cementite) is 700 oC and a gradual crystallization of a tridimensional carbon matrix is identified. The crystallization process of Fe 3 C is due to the effective aliphatic C bonding from the surfactants with the increase of the densification temperature. The STEM analyses show that the particle size distribution is relatively homogeneous with an average particle size of 19.4(1) nm and with nearly spherical shapes. This finding is consistent with the crystallite size calculated by Rietveld analyses is 23.6(5) nm and therefore, the NPs are single crystal. Interestingly, the high-resolution STEM images unveil that the NPs are coated by oriented few-layered graphene, passivating the Fe 3 C core with abrupt interfaces. The magnetic properties, M s and H c , displayed are in a good agreement with their values for the crystalline phases obtained at each temperature. The M s and H c values achieved in the range 750-800 oC are ~ 43 emu/g and ~500 Oe respectively. Considering the large weight contribution of the carbon matrix of ~70%, the M s value of the Fe 3 C NPs is ~138 emu/g. This value is high and close to its theoretical Fe 3 C bulk value of 140 emu/g. Therefore, the two-step surfactant strategy is proposed to be an effective synthesis procedure to obtain competitive and potential magnetic properties displayed by the core/shell nanostructures embedded in a carbon matrix. Jesús López-Sánchez, Elena Navarro, Pilar Marín, César González: Conceived the work and coordinate the research. Alberto Castellano-Soria, Jesús López-Sánchez: Prepared the samples. Cecilia Granados-Miralles, María Varela, Alberto Castellano-Soria, Jesús López-Sánchez: Carried out the structural characterization. Alberto Castellano-Soria, Elena Navarro: Performed the magnetic characterization. All authors wrote and revised the manuscript discussing the results and their presentation. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. (ICTS ELECMI, UCM), support from MCINN grant # RTI2018-097895-B-43. C.G.-M. acknowledges the financial support from MICINN through the "Juan de la Cierva" Program (FJC2018-035532-I).