Crystal Structure Prediction (CSP) is crucial in various scientific disciplines. While CSP can be addressed by employing currently-prevailing generative models (e.g. diffusion models), this task encounters unique challenges owing to the symmetric geometry of crystal structures-the invariance of translation, rotation, and periodicity. To incorporate the above symmetries, this paper proposes DiffCSP, a novel diffusion model to learn the structure distribution from stable crystals. To be specific, DiffCSP jointly generates the lattice and atom coordinates for each crystal by employing a periodic-E(3)-equivariant denoising model, to better model the crystal geometry. Notably, different from related equivariant generative approaches, DiffCSP leverages fractional coordinates other than Cartesian coordinates to represent crystals, remarkably promoting the diffusion and the generation process of atom positions. Extensive experiments verify that our DiffCSP significantly outperforms existing CSP methods, with a much lower computation cost in contrast to DFT-based methods. Moreover, the superiority of DiffCSP is also observed when it is extended for ab initio crystal generation. Code is available at https://github.com/jiaor17/DiffCSP. Crystal Structure Prediction (CSP), which returns the stable 3D structure of a compound based solely on its composition, has been a goal in physical sciences since the 1950s The DFT-based approaches are computationally-intensive. Recent attention has been paid to deep generative models, which directly learn the distribution from the training data consisting of stable structures In this work, we introduce DiffCSP, an equivariant diffusion method to address CSP. Considering the specificity of the crystal geometry, our DiffCSP jointly generates the lattice vectors and the fractional coordinates of all atoms, by employing a proposed denoising model that is theoretically proved to generate periodic-E(3)-invariant samples. A preferable characteristic of DiffCSP is that it leverages the fractional coordinate system (defined in § 3) other than the Cartesian system used in previous methods to represent crystals To sum up, our contributions are as follows: • To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to apply equivariant diffusion-based methods to address CSP. The proposed DiffCSP is more insightful than current learning-based approaches as the periodic E(3) invariance has been delicately considered. • DiffCSP conducts joint diffusion on lattices and fractional coordinates, which is capable of capturing the crystal geometry as a whole. Besides, the usage of fractional coordinates in place of Cartesian coordinates used in previous methods (e.g. CDVAE • We verify the efficacy of DiffCSP on the CSP task against learning-based and DFT-based methods, and sufficiently ablate each proposed component in DiffCSP. We further extend DiffCSP into ab initio generation and show its effectiveness against related methods. Crystal Structure Prediction Traditional computation methods coordinates Equivariant Graph Neural Networks Geometrically equivariant Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) that ensure E(3) symmetry are powerful tools to represent physical objects Diffusion Generative Models Motivated by the non-equilibrium thermodynamics Representation of crystal structures A 3D crystal can be represented as the infinite periodic arrangement of atoms in 3D space, and the smallest repeating unit is called a unit cell, as shown in Figure consists of Cartesian coordinates of the atoms, and L = [l 1 , l 2 , l 3 ] ∈ R 3×3 represents the lattice matrix containing three basic vectors to describe the periodicity of the crystal. The infinite periodic crystal structure is represented by where the j-th element of the integral vector k denotes the integral 3D translation in units of l j . Fractional coordinate system The Cartesian coordinate system X leverages three standard orthogonal bases as the coordinate axes. In crystallography, the fractional coordinate system is usually applied to reflect the periodicity of the crystal structure This paper employs the fractional coordinate system, and denotes the crystal by M = (A, F , L), where the fractional coordinates of all atoms in a cell compose the matrix F ∈ [0, 1) 3×N . Task definition CSP predicts for each unit cell the lattice matrix L and the fractional matrix F given its chemical composition A, namely, learning the conditional distribution p(L, F | A). This section first presents the symmetries of the crystal geometry, and then introduces the joint equivaraint diffusion process on L and F , followed by the architecture of the denoising function. While various generative models can be utilized to address CSP, this task encounters particular challenges, including constraints arising from symmetries of crystal structure distribution. Here, we consider the three types of symmetries in the distribution of p(L, F | A): permutation invariance, O(3) invariance, and periodic translation invariance. Their detailed definitions are provided as follows. Definition 1 (Permutation Invariance). For any permutation P ∈ S N , p(L, F | A) = p(L, F P | AP ), i.e., changing the order of atoms will not change the distribution. The permutation invariance is tractably encapsulated by using GNNs as the backbone for generation Our method DiffCSP addresses CSP by simultaneously diffusing the lattice L and the fractional coordinate matrix F . Given the atom composition A, M t denotes the intermediate state of L and F at time step t (0 ≤ t ≤ T ). DiffCSP defines two Markov processes: the forward diffusion process gradually adds noise to M 0 , and the backward generation process iteratively samples from the prior distribution M T to recover the origin data M 0 . Joining the statements in § 4.1, the recovered distribution from M T should meet periodic E(3) invariance. Such requirement is satisfied if the prior distribution p(M T ) is invariant and the Markov transition p(M t-1 | M t ) is equivariant, according to the diffusion-based generation literature Here, an equivariant transition is specified as p(g where g • M refers to any orthogonal/translational transformation g acts on M in the way presented in Definitions 2-3. We separately explain the derivation details of L and F below. The detailed flowcharts are summarized in Algorithms 1 and 2 in Appendix B.3. Diffusion on L Given that L is a continuous variable, we exploit Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) where β t ∈ (0, 1) controls the variance, and ᾱt = is valued in accordance to the cosine scheduler The backward generation process is given by: where As the prior distribution p(L T ) = N (0, I) is already O(3)-invariant, we require the generation process in Eq. ( To train the denoising model φ, we first sample ε L ∼ N (0, I) and reparameterize L t = √ ᾱt L 0 + √ 1 -ᾱt ε L based on Eq. (2). The training objective is defined as the l 2 loss between ε L and εL : Diffusion on F The domain of fractional coordinates [0, 1) 3×N forms a quotient space R 3×N /Z 3×N induced by the crystal periodicity. It is not suitable to apply the above DDPM fashion to generate F , as the normal distribution used in DDPM is unable to model the cyclical and bounded domain of F . Instead, we leverage Score-Matching (SM) based framework During the forward process, we first sample each column of ε F ∈ R 3×N from N (0, I), and then acquire F t = w(F 0 + σ t ε F ) where the truncation function w(•) is already defined in Definition 3. This truncated sampling implies the WN transition: Basically, this process ensures the probability distribution over [z, z + 1) 3×N for any integer z to be the same to keep the crystal periodicity. Here, the noise scale σ t obeys the exponential scheduler: Desirably, q(F t |F 0 ) is periodic translation equivariant, and approaches a uniform distribution U(0, 1) if σ T is sufficiently large. For the backward process, we first initialize F T from the uniform distribution U(0, 1), which is periodic translation invariant. With the denoising term εF predicted by φ(L t , F t , A, t), we combine the ancestral predictor The training objective for score matching is: where λ t = E -1 Ft ∥∇ Ft log q(F t |F 0 )∥ 2 2 is approximated via Monte-Carlo sampling. More details are deferred to Appendix B.1. Extension to ab initio crystal generation Although our method is proposed to address CSP where the composition A is fixed, our method is able to be extended for the ab initio generation task by further generating A. We achieve this by additionally optimizing the one-hot representation A with a DDPM-based approach. We provide more details in Appendix G. This subsection designs the denoising model φ(L, F , A, t) that outputs εL and εF satisfying the properties stated in Proposition 1 and 2. Let N ] denote the node representations of the s-th layer. The input feature is given by h , where f atom and f pos are the atomic embedding and sinusoidal positional encoding Built upon EGNN Here φ m and φ h are MLPs. The function ψ FT extracts various frequencies of all relative fractional distances that are helpful for crystal structure modeling, and more importantly, ψ FT is periodic translation invariant, namely, After S layers of message passing conducted on the fully connected graph, the lattice noise εL is acquired by a linear combination of L, with the weights given by the final layer: where φ L is an MLP with output shape as 3 × 3. The fractional coordinate score εF is output by: where εF [:, i] defines the i-th column of εF , and φ F is an MLP on the final representation. We apply the inner product term L ⊤ L in Eq. ( Proposition 3. The score εL by Eq. ( Comparison with multi-graph representation Previous methods In this section, we evaluate the efficacy of DiffCSP on a diverse range of tasks, by showing that it can generate high-quality structures of different crystals in § 5.1, with lower time cost comparing with DFT-based optimization method in § 5.2. Ablations in § 5.3 exhibit the necessity of each designed component. We further showcase the capability of DiffCSP in the ab initio generation task in § 5.4. Dataset We conduct experiments on four datasets with distinct levels of difficulty. Perov-5 Baselines We contrast two types of previous works. The first type follows the predict-optimize paradigm, which first trains a predictor of the target property and then utilizes certain optimization algorithms to search for optimal structures. Following Cheng et al. Evaluation metrics Following the common practice Results Table Visualization Figure For our method, we sample 20 candidates for each compound following the setting in Table We ablate each component of DiffCSP in Table During inference, we first sample L T , F T from their prior distributions, acquiring L 0 via p θ1 , and then F 0 by p θ2 based on L 0 . F → L is similarly executed but with the generation order of L 0 and F 0 exchanged. Results indicate that L → F performs better than the F → L, but both are inferior to the joint update in DiffCSP, which endorses our design. We conjecture that the joint diffusion fashion enables L and F to update synergistically, which makes the generation process more tractable to learn and thus leads to better performance. 2. We explore the necessity of preserving the O(3) invariance when generating L, which is ensured by the inner product L ⊤ L in Eq. ( DiffCSP is extendable to ab initio crystal generation by further conducting discrete diffusion on atom types A. We contrast DiffCSP against five generative methods following Results Table 6 Discussions Limitation 1. Composition generation. Our model yields slightly lower compositional validity in Table In this work, we present DiffCSP, a diffusion-based learning framework for crystal structure prediction, which is particularly curated with the vital symmetries existing in crystals. The diffusion is highly flexible by jointly optimizing the lattice and fractional coordinates, where We first introduce the following definition to describe the equivariance and invariance from the perspective of distributions. Definition 4. We call a distribution p(x) is G-invariant if for any transformation g in the group G, p(g • x) = p(x), and a conditional distribution We then provide and prove the following lemma to capture the symmetry of the generation process. Lemma 1 (Xu et al. Proof. For any g ∈ G, we have Hence, the marginal distribution p(x 0 ) is G-invariant. The proposition Proposition 1 is rewritten and proved as follows. Proposition 1. The marginal distribution p(L 0 ) by Eq. ( Proof. Consider the transition probability in Eq. ( where 1-ᾱt for simplicity, and εL (M t , t) is completed as εL (L t , F t , A, t). For the transition probability p(L t-1 |L t , F t , A), we have As the transition is O(3)-equivariant and the prior distribution N (0, I) is O(3)-invariant, we prove that the the marginal distribution p(L 0 ) is O(3)-invariant based on lemma 1. Let N w (μ, σ 2 I) denote the wrapped normal distribution with mean μ, variance σ 2 and period 1. We first provide the following lemma. Lemma 3. If the denoising term εF (L t , F t , A, t) is periodic translation invariant, and the transition probabilty can be formulated as , where u t , v t are functions of t, the transition is periodic translation equivariant. Proof. As the denoising term εF (L t , F t , A, t) is periodic translation invariant (for short PTI), we have εF (L t , w(F t + t1 ⊤ ), A, t) = εF (L t , F t , A, t), for any translation t ∈ R 3 . For the wrapping function w(•), we have For wrapped normal distribution N w (μ, σ 2 ) with mean μ, variance σ 2 and period 1, and for any k ′ , k ′′ ∈ Z, we have For any t ∈ R, we have For the transition probability p(F t-1 |L t , F t , A), we have The transition probability of the fractional coordinates during the Predictor-Corrector sampling can be formulated as where p P , p C are the transitions of the predictor and corrector. According to lemma 3, both of the transitions are periodic translation equivariant. Therefore, the transition p(F t-1 |L t , F t , A) is periodic translation equivariant. As the prior distribution U(0, 1) is periodic translation invariant, we finally prove that the marginal distribution p(F 0 ) is periodic translation invariant based on lemma 1. We rewrite proposition 3 as follows. Proposition 3. The score εL by Eq. ( Proof. We first prove the orthogonal invariance of the inner product term L ⊤ L. For any orthogonal transformation For the Fourier Transformation, consider k is even, we have Similar results can be acquired as k is odd. Therefore, we have ψ FT (w(f j +t)-w(f i +t)) = ψ FT (f jf i ), ∀t ∈ R 3 , i.e., the Fourier Transformation ψ FT is periodic translation invariant. According to the above, the message passing layers defined in Eq. ( . For the lattice denoising term εL = Lε l , we have Above all, εL is O(3)-equivariant, and εF is periodic translation invariant. According to proposition 1 and 2, the generated distribution by DiffCSP in Algorithm 2 is periodic E(3) invariant. In Definition 3, we define the periodic translation invariance as a combination of translation invariance and periodicity. To see this, we illustrate an additional example in Figure Previous works Consider two origin points p 1 , p 2 ∈ R 3×1 and the lattice matrix L, the constructed unit cells by p 1 , p 2 can be represented as are fractional coordinates and which means that the unit cells formed by different origin points actually represent the same infinite crystal structures After proper transformation, we have As which means shifting the periodic boundaries by changing the origin point p 1 into p 2 is equivalent to a periodic translation The Probability Density Function (PDF) of the wrapped normal distribution N w (0, σ 2 t ) is where x ∈ [0, 1). Because the above series is convergent, it is reasonable to approximate the infinite summation to a finite truncated summation And the logarithmic gradient of f can be formulated as , we first sample m points from N w (0, σ 2 t ), and the expectation is approximated as . For implementation, we select n = 10 and m = 10000. As illustrated in Figure We formulate L KL = βD KL (N (μ 3D , σ 2 3D I)∥N (0, I)) for better comparison with the adapted method. β is the hyper-parameter to balance the scale of the KL divergence and other loss functions. To adapt the CDVAE framework to the CSP task, we apply two main changes. Firstly, for the encoder side, to take the composition as the condition, we apply an additional 1D prior encoder to encode the composition set into a latent distribution N (μ 1D , σ 2 1D I) and minimize the KL divergence between the 3D and 1D distribution. The training objective is modified into During the inference procedure, as the composition is given, the latent variable z 1D is sampled from N (μ 1D , σ 2 1D I). For implementation, we apply a Transformer Algorithm 1 summarizes the forward diffusion process as well as the training of the denoising model φ, while Algorithm 2 illustrates the backward sampling process. They can maintain the symmetries if φ is delicately constructed. Notably, We apply the predictor-corrector sampler Algorithm 2 Sampling Procedure of DiffCSP 1: Input: atom types A, denoising model φ, number of sampling steps T , step size of Langevin dynamics γ. 2: Sample LT ∼ N (0, I),FT ∼ U (0, 1). εL , εF ← φ(Lt, Ft, A, t). ). 11: end for 12: Return L0, F0. We acquire the origin datasets from CDVAE For the optimization methods, we apply the MEGNet For P-cG-SchNet, we apply the SchNet C.1 Impact of Sampling Numbers Figure We plot the curves of training and validation loss of different variants proposed in § 5.3 in Figure We utilize USPEX We select 10 binary and 5 ternary compounds in MP-20 testing set and compare our model with USPEX. For our method, we sample 20 candidates for each compound following the setting in Table Apart from L and F , the ab initio generation task additionally requires the generation on A. As the atom types can be viewed as either N discrete variables in h classes, or the one-hot representation A ∈ R h×N in continuous space. We apply two lines of diffusion processes for the type generation, which are detailedly shown as follows. Multinomial Diffusion for Discrete Generation Regarding the atom types as discrete features, we apply the multinomial diffusion with the following forward diffusion process are vectors with all elements setting to one, A 0 is the one-hot representation of the origin composition, and the function C(•) samples the multinomial distribution with the conditional probability and returns the one-hot representation of A t . The corresponding backward generation process is defined as where and εA ∈ R h×N is predicted by the denoising model. We further find that specific for t = 1, A 0 = argmax(ε A (M 1 , 1)) works better. The training objective for multinomial diffusion is L A,discrete = E At∼q(At|A0),t∼U (1,T ) KL(q(A t-1 |A t )||p(A t-1 |A t )) . One-hot Diffusion for Continuous Generation Another approach is to simply consider the composition A as a continuous variable in real space R h×N , which enables the application of standard DDPM-based method And the backward generation process is defined as where μ A (M t ) = 1 √ αt A t -βt √ 1-ᾱt εA (M t , t) , σ 2 A (M t ) = β t 1-ᾱt-1 1-ᾱt . The denoising term εA (M t , t) ∈ R h×N is predicted by the model. The training objective for one-hot diffusion is L A,continuous = E ε A ∼N (0,I),t∼U (1,T ) [∥ε A -εA (M t , t)∥ 2 2 ]. The entire objective for training the joint diffusion model on L, F , A is combined as We select λ L = λ F = 1, λ A = 0 for the CSP task as A is fixed during the generation process, and λ L = λ F = 1, λ A = 20 for the ab initio generation task to balance the scale of each loss component. Specifically, we do not optimize L A on the Carbon-24 dataset, as all atoms in this dataset are carbon. As the number of atoms in a unit cell (i.e. N ) is unchanged during the generation process, we first sample N according to the distribution of N in the training set, which is similar to Hoogeboom et al. The results are evaluated from three perspectives. Validity: We consider both the structural validity and the compositional validity. The structural valid rate is calculated as the percentage of the generated structures with all pairwise distances larger than 0.5Å, and the generated composition is valid if the entire charge is neutral as determined by SMACT We denote the abovementioned discrete and continuous generation methods as DiffCSP-D, DiffCSP-C, respectively. The results of the two variants and the strongest baseline CDVAE on MP-20 are provided in Table On top of DiffCSP-C, we further equip our method with energy guidance And the gradients w.r.t. L, F , A additionally guide the generation process. As the inner product term L ⊤ L is O(3) invariant, and the Fourier transformation term φ FT (f j -f i ) is periodic translation invariant, the predicted energy E is periodic E(3) invariant. That is, E(QL t , w(F t + t1 ⊤ , A t , t) = E(L t , F t , A t , t). structures. We further visualize the generation process of 5 structures from MP-20 in Figure A.1 Proof of Proposition 1 Previous works (e.g. + . In this paper, the scaling invariance is unnecessary since we apply the Niggli reduction Composition-based metrics are not meaningful for Carbon-24, as all structures are composed of carbon. https://github.com/txie-93/cdvae/tree/main/data https://github.com/sparks-baird/mp-time-split http://www.comates.group/links?software=gn_oa https://github.com/atomistic-machine-learning/cG-SchNet https://github.com/txie-93/cdvae https://github.com/hyperopt/hyperopt https://github.com/guofei9987/scikit-opt