Superlattices of correlated oxides have been used to explore interfacial effects and to achieve additional control over the physical properties of individual constituents. In this work, we present a first-principles perspective of the strain and thickness effects in La 2/3 Sr 1/3 MnO3/YBa2Cu3O7 (LSMO/YBCO) superlattices. Our findings indicate that the presence of epitaxial strain and LSMO leads to a reduction of buckling parameters of the interfacial CuO2 planes, as well as the transfer of electrons from LSMO to YBCO. In addition, the change in Cu-3d valence is slightly dependent on the LSMO layer thickness. More interestingly, the in-plane ferromagnetic ground state within the CuO2 planes near the interface is induced due to the local moments centered at the copper atoms. These local moments are decoupled from the charge transfer and, according to our calculations, appear mainly due to the Mn 3d-O 2p-Cu 3d hybridization being restricted to the interfacial region. The induced net magnetic ordering in interfacial copper atoms may have implications in the control of the superconducting state in the LSMO/YBCO superlattices. Atomic precision growth methods and advanced characterization techniques have paved the way for the study of transition metal oxides (TMO's) heterostructures and superlattices. In 2004, most of the scientific interest in TMO's heterostructures was triggered by the discovery of a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) at SrTiO 3 /LaAlO 3 interface The intriguing balance between the competing orders in the cuprates can be affected by the hole density, the number of CuO 2 layers in the structure, epitaxial strain, interfacial coupling, and proximity effects. According to the early work of Chakhalian and coworkers To understand the complex physics that takes place at interfaces between superconductors and ferromagnetic oxides, it is also important to clarify how the charge transfer evolves across the interface. Overall, previous theoretical Motivated by the experimental and theoretical findings mentioned above, we have performed an extensive theoretical investigation of LSMO/YBCO superlattices by means of first-principles calculations. Since LSMO and LCMO are ferromagnetic half-metallic manganese oxides Our findings indicate that epitaxial strain and the presence of LSMO suppresses the buckling distances and angles of the interfacial CuO 2 layers. These structural distortions are accompanied by a transfer of electrons from LSMO to YBCO, which can be explained in terms of electronegativity difference. We also find induced local moments centered at the interfacial Cu atoms, which, in turn, are decoupled from the charge transfer. These local moments lead to an in-plane ferromagnetic ordering and appear mainly due to the Mn 3d-O 2p-Cu 3d hybridization. The paper is organized in four sections. In Sec. II, we present our proposed structural models as well as the employed theoretical approximations. The relaxed structures and structural parameters are discussed in Sec. III A, while the calculated interfacial charge transfer and magnetism are discussed in Secs. III B and III C, respectively. The hybridization between the interfacial Mn 3d-O 2p-Cu 3d states is discussed in Sec. III D. Our conclusions are summarized in Sec. IV. To study the physical properties of (001)oriented LSMO/YBCO superlattices we constructed La 2/3 Sr 1/3 MnO 3 (m u.c.)/YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 (n u.c.) structural models, with m = 3, 6 and n = 2, 4, using tetragonal supercells with MnO 2 -BaO interface termination (plane terminated) (see Fig. The structural parameters addressed in our work are illustrated in Figs. We performed spin-polarized DFT+U In Figs. , where the b is reduced by 0.15 Å at the interface. On the LSMO side, one can notice a stronger suppression of the Mn-O buckling distance for (LSMO) 6 /(YBCO) 2 , in comparison with bulk LSMO, and an increase of the Mn2-O-Mn1 bond angle in both structures (in red). We mention that, according to early studies of Kambee and Ishii The results for the heterostructure (see Appendix A) suggests that the buckling distance b is slightly reduced for the CuO 2 planes at the interface, in comparison with the bulk values, accompanied by an average reduction of the buckling angle φ and that the behavior of θ near the interface also suggests the formation of a magnetic "dead layer". Finally, we investigate how the Sr-doping affects the key structural distortions by comparing the relaxed structures of (LSMO) 3 /(YBCO) 2 and (LMO) 3 /(YBCO) 2 (Figs. We emphasize that when the CuO 2 plane is flat (small b), T c is enhanced, the large buckling values tend to localize the conducting holes in underdoped cuprates, while decreasing the superconducting strength Another important feature of oxide interfaces is the charge transfer between the constituents, which can give rise to different d shell occupancies from those observed in the bulk counterparts. The charge transfer driving mechanisms have been addressed in several previous works In Fig. The effects of Sr-doping on the charge transfer can be analyzed by comparing (LSMO) 3 /(YBCO) 2 and (LMO) 3 /(YBCO) 2 average planar charge densities, as shown in Fig. In the inner MnO 2 layers of (LMO) 3 /(YBCO) 2 , the charge average is smaller than in (LSMO) 3 /(YBCO) 2 , but at the interface, the charge profiles are similar (purple lines in Figs. Having established the structural distortions and charge transfer between YBCO and LSMO, we now explore the obtained DFT+U magnetic ground states for each superlattice. In Fig. For the undoped (LMO) 2 /(YBCO) 2 superlattice (Fig. We also analyzed interfaces forced to be fully ferromagnetic, i.e. without the presence of the "dead layer". These results are presented in Appendix D. We see that the charge transfer decreases, while the magnetic moments induced in the interfacial CuO 2 layers have a small increase of 0.02μ B /Cu when LSMO is completely ferromagnetic. On the right axes of Fig. To summarize, our results indicate that the penetration depth of interfacial local moments is controlled by the manganite thickness and Sr concentration. More importantly, these local moments give rise to an inplane ferromagnetic ordering within the interfacial CuO 2 planes, which competes against the formation of singlet Cooper pairs and may explain the attenuation of T c in heterostructures of manganites/cuprates. It is also important to mention that strain-induced deoxygenation plays an important role in the suppression of the superconducting phase of YBCO in other heterostructures To study the hybridization between the interfacial Mn-O-Cu states, we calculated the projected density of states (PDOS) for the (LSMO) 3 /(YBCO) 2 superlattice. In particular, we focused on the Cu-3d z 2 -r 2 , Mn-3d z 2 -r 2 and O-2p z contributions for the electronic states around the Fermi energy. Due to the charge transfer, we observe that the Cu-3d z 2 -r 2 states in the (LSMO) 3 /(YBCO) 2 superlattice downshift (not shown) by around 0.5 eV in comparison to the same states in the isolated bulk YBCO. To disentangle the effects of the hybridization from the induced band shift due to charge transfer, we show in Fig. As can be noticed in Fig. In summary, we performed DFT+U calculations to investigate the interfacial effects in LSMO/YBCO superlattices. We find that the presence of epitaxial strain and the interface leads to the reduction of buckling parameters (b and φ) in the YBCO layer, compared with bulk values, which is beneficial to stabilizing the superconducting phase. We also observe that the interfacial MnO 2 layers in LSMO transfer electrons to the first CuO 2 planes in YBCO, which increases the Cu-3d occupancy. However, the change in Cu-3d valence only slightly depends on the LSMO thickness. Additionally, we find induced local moments in the interfacial CuO 2 planes, which order in an in-plane ferromagnetic state that competes against superconductivity. These local moments are decoupled from the charge transfer and, according to our calculations, appear mainly due to the Mn 3d-O 2p-Cu 3d hybridization, which can give rise to an orbital reconstruction for the interfacial Cu-3d states. From the manganite side, we observe a reduction in the magnetic moment of the interfacial Mn atoms, which can be connected to a decrease in the FM coupling strength caused by the Mn electron doping, driving the system in the direction of an AFM phase. The formation of a magnetic "dead layer" can be seen as an AFM out-of-plane coupling in the first LSMO layers caused by the structural distortions near the interface, which gives rise to a vanishing magnetization around 3 Å from the interface. Our findings provide the essential ingredients to understand complex phenomena, including suppression of the superconductivity, in YBCO/LSMO superlattices. Appendix A: LMO/YBCO heterostructure For the LaMnO 3 (2 u.c.)/YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 (2 u.c.) heterostructure, we considered realistic thin-film geometries using similar supercells with BaO termination and vacuum separation of 20 Å (see Fig. In Fig. the heterostructure. In this structure, the Cu-3d interfacial occupancies increase by 0.014, which should drive the CuO 2 planes away from the optimal regime (towards the antiferromagnetic phase). On the right panels of Fig. In Fig. 