CaSb2 is a bulk superconductor and a topological semimetal, making it a great platform for realizing topological superconductivity. In this work, we investigate the superconducting upper and lower critical field anisotropy using magnetic susceptibility, and study the superconducting state using muon spin-relaxation. The temperature dependence of transverse-field relaxation rate can be fitted with a single-gap model or two-gap model. Zero-field relaxation shows little temperature dependence when the muon-spin is parallel to the c * -axis, while an increase in relaxation appears below 1 K when the muon-spin is parallel to the ab-plane. We conclude an s + is order parameter considering the breaking of time-reversal symmetry (TRS), which originates from competing interband interactions between the three bands of CaSb2. To explain the direction-dependent breaking of TRS we suggest loop currents developing in the plane of distorted square-net of Sb atoms. When a material enters the superconducting state it breaks U(1) gauge symmetry, and breaking of any additional symmetries is typically an indication of unconventional superconductivity Spontaneous magnetic fields can emerge in noncentrosymmetric superconductors, where the lack of inversion symmetry results in a spin-split Fermi surface due to antisymmetric SOC and a singlet-triplet mixing in the superconducting state CaSb 2 belongs to the family of non-symmorphic antimonides M Sb 2 (M = Alkaline-Earth, Rare-Earth) containing screw rotation symmetry. CaSb 2 is a compensated semimetal Its calculated Fermisurface supports CaSb 2 being a topological nodal-line semimetal Here we report the critical field anisotropy from magnetic susceptibility, estimate the penetration depth and the temperature dependence of the superconducting gap from transverse-field (TF) muon data, and find evidence for TRS breaking below T c in zero-field (ZF) μSR but only when muon spin lies in the ab-plane, showing that a spontaneous field perpendicular to the ab-plane emerges in CaSb 2 . Considering that three bands cross the Fermi level of CaSb 2 , the TRS breaking in ZF-μSR and TF-μSR can be reconciled by considering a complex order parameter such as s + is. The breaking of TRS is detected below ∼ 1 K, which is well below the T c of 1.6 K. The observation of TRS breaking despite the lack of magnetic elements or strong spin-orbit-coupling in CaSb 2 is new, and may be related to the topological nature of the superconducting state arising from the three bands with non-trivial topology crossing the Fermi level. Measurements of the anisotropy of the field-dependent dc magnetic susceptibility around the superconducting transition were performed down to 0.4 K, as shown in Fig. The upper critical field was estimated using the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) relation To estimate the lower critical field μ 0 H c1 (0) we measured the field-dependent magnetization (M ) at different temperatures below the critical temperature in both directions, as shown in Fig. the subtracted data by setting a threshold for deviation from zero where μ 0 H * c1 (0) is the lower critical field at 0 K, where fits are shown with green line in Fig. The typical equations used for estimating the penetration depth (λ) from μ 0 H c1 (0) do not have a solution for the values measured in our experiment. Instead, we esti-mate the μ 0 H c (0) from μ 0 H c1 (0) and μ 0 H c2 (0) with the following equation Here we assume the μ 0 H c1 (0) values for H//c * and H//ab are equivalent to the μ 0 H * c1 (0) measured, without applying any demagnetization correction. This is due to the difficulty of calculating the demagnetization correction for the H//c * . The value of thermodynamic critical field μ 0 H c (0) is expected to be equivalent for both directions, but does not match for the current measurements on our samples. We take the average in both directions and estimate μ 0 H c (0) = 6.0±0.5 mT, as shown in Table where κ GL is the Ginzburg-Landau parameter. We summarize our characterization of the superconducting state based on magnetic susceptibility measure- ments in Table We perform transverse field μSR measurements on CaSb 2 with applied magnetic field perpendicular to the ab-plane, which can be used to determine the temperature dependence of the penetration depth. With the temperature dependence of the penetration depth we can infer properties of the energy gap of the superconducting state of CaSb 2 . For these measurements we extract the field from the precession of muons inside the background silver, which is the most precise way of measuring the applied field. We performed the measurement with applied fields ranging from 1.3 -11.5 mT, and all measurements were performed on samples cooled in the applied field. We employed a beam of muons polarized such that the spin is perpendicular to their momentum, while the applied field is parallel to the momentum. The spin of the muon precesses with a frequency proportional to the local magnetic field, and, upon decay, emits a positron preferentially in the muon spin direction. Typically with a field that is above the lower critical field, we expect a well ordered flux line lattice when using a field cooling procedure. Typical time evolution of the asymmetry for CaSb 2 is shown in Fig. In the mixed state, we have an inhomogeneous field distribution due to the presence of a flux line lattice (FLL), which results in a decay of the precession signal as a function of time. We fit the asymmetry spectra using a two term sinusoidal decaying function where the first term captures the signal from muons stopping in the sample and the second term captures the signal from muons stopping in the silver sample holder. F is the fraction of the signal coming from the sample, while ω 1 and ω 2 are the muon precession frequencies in the sample and the background, respectively. The A term is the total asymmetry and the φ is the initial phase of the muons. (σ sc ) and the smaller, temperature independent, contribution from randomly oriented nuclear dipole moments (σ N ). These two signals are added in quadrature, such that the contribution from the FLL can be obtained as N . The superconducting relaxation rate (σ sc ) indicates the mean square inhomogeniety in the field experienced by muons, ∆B) 2 , due to the FLL where γ μ (= 2π×135.5MHz/T) is the muon gyromagnetic ratio. The Fourier power against internal magnetic field, shown in Fig. From the field dependence of σ measured well below T c at 25 ± 5 mK, shown in Fig. For fields approaching the upper critical field, [H/H c2 = 0.5], the penetration depth can be calculated from the relaxation rate using the Brandt formula where σ sc (T ) is in μs -1 and λ(T ) is in nm. φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum, 2.067 × 10 -15 Wb . We can relate the temperature dependence of the relaxation rate to the penetration depth with The temperature dependence of the energy gap ∆(T, k) within BCS theory where ∆(0) is the gap magnitude at zero temperature, and the g k term accounts for the orientation ( k) dependence of the gap function, which can, for example, be CaSb 2 has a coherence length over normal state mean free path of about 1.78 while in the dirty limit with the relation is the Fermi function, and quantities in brackets are the average over the Fermi surface. Considering previous specific heat measurements showing deviation from single-gap BCS F LL (0, ∆ 0,2 ) where ∆ 0,1 and ∆ 0,2 are the gap values at zero temperature and x is the fraction of gap-1 over the sum of two gaps. We fit the gap using an s + s wave model as shown in Fig. The strong magnetic field dependence of (σ sc ) in CaSb 2 , shown in Fig. The likely presence of multiple gaps along with the possibility of gap anisotropy both can affect the temperature dependence of FLL, and the high field compared with upper critical field used in our TF-μSR experiments make it difficult to makes a definitive statement on the gap symmetry based on our relaxation rate data. The relatively high field used in our TF-μSR experiment makes corrections to extract the penetration depth from the relaxation rate data difficult, due to the likely distortions to the FLL state in our case. Nevertheless, we give an estimate using of the penetration depth λ ab = 426 nm. We compare the superconducting state in CaSb 2 with other known superconductors using the well-known Uemura plot. We plot the superconducting transition temperature against the Fermi temperature for CaSb 2 along with various other superconductors in Fig. and for a 3D system via the relation Having characterized the superconducting state in the presence of a magnetic field, we turn to muon spin relaxation measurements in zero-field (ZF) to search for spontaneous magnetic fields associated with breaking of TRS in the superconducting state. ZF spectra for CaSb 2 collected above T c and at the lowest temperature ∼ 30 mK are shown in Fig. where σ reflects the width of the field experienced by muons due to nuclear dipoles. We fit the ZF spectra with the following relaxation function where A 1 is the sample asymmetry and A BG is the background asymmetry. The exp(-Λt) term represents any additional relaxation in the sample, indicating broken TRS. The zero field muon spin relaxation rates of CaSb 2 with muon spin perpendicular and parallel to the ab-plane show the expected nuclear dipole contribution at temperatures above T c . However, there is a significantly higher Λ at low temperature, but only when the muon spin is parallel to the ab-plane, shown in Fig. We explore possible interpretations for this spontaneous TRS breaking, taking into account its dependence on the muon spin direction and the temperature being well below T c . Triplet pairing in the superconducting state is excluded by a Knight shift that drops below T c More complicated superconducting order parameters and phase diagrams appear in several systems. UPt 3 has multiple superconducting phases and also exhibits TRS-breaking near 1 K, as seen in μSR CaSb 2 lacks atoms with local moment and contains lighter elements than the examples noted above, so local magnetism and strong SOC are unlikely origins of the breaking of TRS. Instead, we suggest the topology of CaSb 2 in the normal state can explain the observation of TRS breaking. The topologically non-trivial Dirac nodal lines in CaSb 2 have been shown theoretically to support topological superconductivity with B g pairing symmetry, which has been termed nodal-line superconductivity In the case of frustration of the order parameter due to competing interband interactions, a phase shift other than 0 and π may be realized. The case shown in Fig. In this Article, we presented magnetic susceptibility measurements of the upper and lower critical field anisotropy of CaSb 2 and studied the superconducting state using muon spin-relaxation. The temperature dependence of transverse-field relaxation can be fitted equally well with a single-gap model or two-gap model. A two-gap scenario is more likely considering the heat capacity In various materials, the onset of TRS breaking coincides with T c under ambient conditions and its detection is independent of the direction of muon spins. Considering the anisotropy and two gap nature of the superconducting state and the emergence of direction-dependent TRS breaking detected at 1 K, we consider s + is as the order parameter to reconcile TF-μSR and ZF-μSR results. We suspect currents being generated on the Sb distorted square-net layer considering the muon stoppage site and the spontaneous fields emerge at T c . Further investigation of CaSb 2 is necessary to clarify the origin of this TRS breaking, and any connection it may have to the band structure topology. Considering that the band structure of CaSb 2 is dominated by Sb atoms sitting at the two distinct sites in the material, investigation of other superconducting M Sb 2 antimonides with similar structures is of great interest. Single crystals of CaSb 2 were grown using an Sb self flux method as described in Ref. DC magnetization measurements were done using a Magnetic Property Measurements System 3 (MPMS3) from Quantum Design, equipped with a 3 He insert. Crystals were aligned to measure parallel to and perpendicular to the ab-plane of the crystals. A quartz sample holder with small amount of gee varnish was used for magnetization measured at temperatures above the superconducting state. A plastic straw was used for measurements with the 3 He insert in the superconducting state. Muon spectroscopy measurements were performed at the M15 beamline at TRIUMF's Centre for Molecular and Material Science, which is equipped with a dilution refrigerator. Multiple crystals were mounted on a silver plate with GE varnish, then the silver plate was attached to a cold finger utilizing copper filled grease for good thermal conductivity in the dilution refrigerator. We further secured the samples with a thin silver foil over the samples before mounting them into the dilution refrigerator. We achieved true-zero field for zero-field (ZF) μSR using the method previously described by Morris and Heffner 