We characterized the formation of vacancies at a surface slab model and contrasted the results with the bulk of lead-halide perovskites using cubic and tetragonal CsPbI 3 as representative structures. The defect-free CsI-terminated (100) surface does not trap charge carriers. In the presence of defects (vacancies), the surface is expected to exhibit p-type behavior. The formation energy of cesium vacancies V - Cs is lower at the surface than in the bulk, while iodine vacancies V + I have a similar energy (around 0.25-0.4 eV) within the range of chemical potentials compatible with solution processing synthesis conditions. Lead-iodine divacancies (V - PbI ) are expected to dominate over lead-only vacancies at the surfaces. Major surface vacancies create shallow host-like energy states with a small Franck-Condon shift, making them electronically harmless (same as in bulk). The spin-orbit coupling contributes to the defect tolerance of leadhalide perovskite surfaces by causing delocalization of electronic states associated with n-type defects and retraction of lowest unoccupied states from the surface due to a mixing of Pb-p x,y,z orbitals. These results explain a high optoelectronic performance of two-dimensional structures, nanoparticles, and polycrystalline thin films of lead-halide perovskites despite the abundance of interfaces in these materials. Electronic-structure approaches to modeling defects in solids allow us to predict formation energies of defects, defect concentrations at finite temperatures, and charge-state transition levels taking into account growth conditions and position of the Fermi energy in semiconductors. Single-crystal lead-halide perovskites (organic and inorganic) have a very low concentration of deep electronic traps, 7 which is attributed to the 'defect tolerance' of perovskite materials supported by numerous models. Stoumpos et al. The literature on the theoretical characterization of defects at the surface of perovskites is rather scarce and patchy. Mosconi et al. Song et al. Here, we perform a study of the most basic intrinsic surface defects (native vacancies) in cubic and tetragonal CsPbI 3 that serve as a computationally more efficient proxy for the structure of hybrid lead-halide perovskites at ambient conditions. We expect that these simple structures share essential properties of defects with more complex hybrid lead-halide perovskites, despite the cubic phase of CsPbI 3 being unstable at room temperature. We identified defect characteristics and types for which SOC can (and cannot) be neglected. (iv) When studying transition energy levels, we differentiate between thermodynamic energy levels and electronic transition levels by imposing limits on the structural relaxation (the Franck-Condon principle Electronic structure calculations were performed using DFT The plane wave cut-off energy was set at the upper limit specified by the pseudopotentials (238 eV). This choice of the cut-off energy gives defect formation energies converged to a precision of 0.1 eV, which was verified using a higher cut-off energy (297 eV) for neutral vacancies in bulk without SOC. The Brillouin zone was sampled using a Γ-centered grid of k points 46 with a mesh density of 2 × 2 × 2 for the bulk 4 × 4 × 4 and 3 supercells, the density of 3 × 3 × 1 and 8 × 8 × 1 for the slab 2 × 2 × 3 and 1 × 1 × 6 supercells, respectively. The k mesh was selected having the zone folding in mind, i.e., the R(1/2, 1/2, 1/2) point with CBE and VBE of the primitive cubic Brillouin zone is folded into Γ in supercells with even multiplicity and into M (1/2, 1/2, 0) in the slab model with odd multiplicity in the lateral directions. Γ and M points are included in our sampling. We tested convergence of the total energy, defect formation energies, and transition energy levels with respect to the k mesh density and concluded that the Γ-only calculations (often practiced in literature for large sizes of supercells) lead to inaccurate results. We also tested accuracy of the total energy computed with a tetrahedron integration method vs a Gaussian smearing of 0.01 eV (employed in this work) and found differences immaterial for defect characteristics. The only dynamically stable structure of CsPbI 3 is the orthorhombic (δ) non-perovskite P nma phase. A relatively tight force threshold was essential for convergence of the total energies (and defect formation energies, eventually) given the large number of atoms in the supercells. Calculations were performed with and without SOC. When SOC was included, the calculation was initialized in a zero spin configuration. A non-spin-polarized calculation mode was selected in the absence of SOC. Relaxation of atomic positions was done without SOC, and the relaxed structures were used in the calculations with SOC without additional force optimization to save computational time. The latter simplification leads to a maximum force still below 0.02-0.05 eV Å -1 after adding SOC. Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof 2006 (HSE06) Thermodynamic properties of defects were analyzed using the PyDEF 2 code where E tot is the DFT total energy, μ is the chemical potential of each atomic species α added to (negative sign) or subtracted from (positive sign) the host cell, E VBE (host) is the VBE eigenvalue of the host cell, ∆E F defines the position of the Fermi energy relative to , and E corr is a correction term applied to E tot (D q ). We included the following corrections: (i) a filling of dispersive states in a finite-size supercell An electrostatic correction for charged defects in a slab is extensively discussed in the literature. 5, ( (The potential alignment term is already included in the E corr term in Eq. (1).) The electrostatic energy resulting from the additional charge q in the periodic model can be expressed as 68 where δρ(r) is the excess charge density and δφ(r) is the electrostatic potential due to the excess charge compatible with periodic boundary conditions and the dielectric function profile imposed by the slab model (see supporting information (SI) Fig. An energy level corresponding to a transition between charge states q 1 and q 2 in the structure with a defect D is expressed as 61 Calculations of the formation energy of ionized defects can be done either adiabatically (i.e., with the structural relaxation) or following the Franck-Condon principle for electronic transitions (i.e., without the structural relaxation). Here we will present and discuss results obtained with both approaches. The VASP output and structure files used in defect calculations are available from the Zenodo repository 71 along with PyDEF 2 output files. VASP-generated PROCAR files were used to analyze the localization of electronic states. The PROCAR output format was modified from the original VASP source code to ensure that the output of k-, band-, and atom-resolved probability densities had at least three significant digits. The prPROCAR.m Octave script from VASPtools (available on GitHub 72 ) was employed to extract the k-and band-resolved participation ratio (PR) data. An atomistic model of the (100) surface (also employed later for studying defects) is shown in Fig. The factor of 9 reflects 3 × 3 supercell multipliers in the lateral plane. The vacuum region of ca. 25 Å prevents any spurious interaction between periodic images in the direction z perpendicular to the surface. We deliberately selected the structure with the inorganic cation (Cs + ) instead of its organic counterparts (e.g., CH 3 NH + 3 ). Organic molecules introduce dipoles that will assume some ordering during the static DFT calculation and can induce a large electric field when misoriented or form domains. Since transport of charge carriers occurs at band edges, it is interesting to explore the spatial distribution of states associated with VBE and CBE in the model with the surface. Figure Our results for |ψ(r)| 2 in Fig. However, the orbital mixing is not required without SOC, thus the CBE state is comprised of only Pb-p x,y orbitals that are not subjected to confinement in the lateral plane of the slab; the Pb-p z states are decoupled from Pb-p x,y states and moved to higher energies within the conduction band and assume the shape expected from the quantum confinement. To elucidate the role of surface reconstruction, we performed a similar analysis of VBE and CBE states on a model without the relaxation of atomic positions (see SI Fig. The |ψ(r)| 2 envelope function profiles for both band edges are nearly identical and closely resemble a 'particle in a box' solution. Thus, the surface reconstruction creates an additional electric field pointing from the surface into the slab that shapes VBE/CBE states, causing an additional repulsion/attraction of |ψ(r)| 2 from/to the surface. It should be noted that details of the surface reconstruction are specific to the cation (Cs in this case). The magnitude and direction of the electric field can be influenced by the size of molecules at the surface and the presence of a dipole moment within the molecule. Here, we will calculate the formation energy of native vacancies according to Eq. ( where μ • is the chemical potential of an element under standard thermodynamic conditions, and ∆μ captures any deviations from the standard conditions. For solid elements, it is sufficient to approximate μ • by using the DFT total energy E tot of their most stable polymorph. The formation free energy of a solid is approximated by enthalpy (∆H f ) at 0 K in our calculations. It can be noted that the final temperature correction is computationally very expensive, while its effect on the formation enthalpy of solids is much smaller than the chemical accuracy of DFT-PBE. Results for the chemical potentials are summarized in Table Our approach to finding the chemical potentials augments the common practice, 10 which involves defining a region of chemical potentials in which MAPbI 3 is stable, while MAI and PbI 2 are not (the brown region in Fig. Next, we discuss similarities and differences in the formation energy of neutral vacancies in the tetragonal vs cubic structure of CsPbI 3 (Table In order to assess the sensitivity of defect formation energies to the selection of exchangecorrelation functional, we performed additional calculations using a hybrid functional HSE06 with and without SOC. Due to the computational intensity of HSE06, we had to use a smaller slab model (2 × 2 × 3). Results for the formation energy of neutral vacancies at the surface are listed in Table For completeness, we list the calculated formation energies of vacancies in lead-halide perovskites available in the literature. However, the data scattering is too large to draw any conclusions. The footnotes of Table We assess the position of energy levels associated with defects relative to the band edges of the defect-free slab model using a transition energy level technique. The goal of this analysis is to find out if electronic states associated with vacancies at the surface of leadhalide perovskites emerge in the band gap (especially deep levels) as those will have an adverse effect on transport properties and can serve as non-radiative recombination centers. As a reference, it is useful to establish the energy levels associated with the creation of an electron or a hole in the defect-free structure, as previously suggested by Hellström et al. Following Eq. ( Here, the asterisk ( * ) implies that the DFT total energy of a charged cell includes the correction term E corr in Eq. ( The potential alignment (-0.08 eV) and the band filling (-0.04 eV) corrections bring the energy level at μ e,v = E CBE -0.07 eV indicating some over-correction in the slab model. We performed additional checks and ruled out the k-mesh density and the structure relaxation (vertical vs non-vertical transitions) as possible causes for the 0.07 eV discrepancy. Thus, the remaining misalignment between μ e,v/c and VBE/CBE indicates the magnitude of ambiguity that can still be present in the analysis of defect energy levels of the slab model. An energy correction δU (q) associated with the spurious electrostatic energy of charged stacked slabs 5,64-67 was evaluated to determine its ability to explain the slight discrepancy between the electron chemical potential μ e,v/c and VBE/CBE. In SI, we provided details on the calculation of the U per for the defect-free tetragonal slab with a charge of q = ±1 (see SI Figs. where we presented both corrected and uncorrected transition energy levels for vacancies in slabs of the tetragonal structure. Table This conclusion is robust with respect to selection of the exchange-correlation functional (see HSE06 data in the footnotes of Table ) transition energy level at the surface of the tetragonal phase. However, the formation energies (Table Our data in Table It should be noted that the energy position of transition levels in lead-halide perovskites is much better reproducible across the literature 8-10,16,26 than the formation energy of defects. The only notable outliers are the work by Du 11 and by Meggiolaro et al. ), do not follow the band edges as if they were localized deep-level states. Meggiolaro et al. Having calculated transition energy levels and formation energy of neutral defects, it is possible to visualize the formation energy of charged defects with respect to the Fermi energy. Results for the cubic phase are presented in Fig. between the concentration of Cs and I vacancies will determine the negative/positive charge of the surface. The calculated formation energies of V - Cs and V + I vacancies at the surface are very close in the p-type region (Fig. The experimental study of Kim et al. So far, we have discussed thermodynamic transition energy levels. When non-radiative transitions occur through deep energy levels, atomic positions do not have time to relax during the fast electronic transition (e.g., the capture of an electron from the CBE by a deep trap). As a result, the thermodynamic and optical transition levels will differ by the value of a Franck-Condon shift, which can be as high as 0.5 eV for a carbon deep acceptor V I E F -E VBE (eV) - ) stand out from the others when calculated at the surface. The thermodynamic energy level of the shallow acceptor V -/2-Pb becomes a deep acceptor for optical electronic transitions, likely due to the loosely bound iodine at the surface (see SI Fig. It can be speculated that defects with a large Franck-Condon shift are likely to become centers of non-radiative recombination. However, it should be noted that the formation energy of the alternative V PbI divacancy at the surface is lower than that of V Pb in the p-type region (Fig. The wave function PR is employed to quantify changes in its localization at band edges. The PR of an eigenstate with the energy E n,k is defined as where |ψ n,k,α | 2 is the probability of finding an electron of the specific eigenstate within a sphere centered at the atomic site α. The summation index α runs over all atomic sites N . The surface slab model has 288 atoms (63-Cs, 54-Pb, and 171-I), and the bulk model has 320 atoms (64-Cs, 64-Pb, and 192-I). The PR has two extremes: (i) PR = N when the wave function is fully delocalized (i.e., uniformly distributed among all N atoms), and (ii) PR = 1 if the wave function is localized on only one of the atoms. Since Cs atoms do not contribute to electronic states at the band edges of lead-halide perovskites, the upper limit of PR will effectively become 226 and 256 for the slab and bulk models, respectively. In defect-free structures, the VBE has a higher PR compared to CBE (Table Energy relative to VBE (eV) ) and ε(V ) at the surface. The results are shown without SOC to compensate for the DFT band gap error. of bulk VBE is nearly identical to the number of Pb and I atoms in the model. This result can be explained by a nearly equal participation of both lead and iodine atoms in the VBE state (Fig. Motivated by the importance of interfaces in layered perovskites, nanoparticles, and polycrystalline thin films, we characterized the formation of vacancies at the surface of a slab model and contrasted the results to the bulk of lead-halide perovskites using cubic and tetragonal CsPbI 3 as model structures. Our slab model is equivalent to the 2D Ruddlesden-Popper structure with six layers. Thus, we anticipate that the results will also be transferable to layered perovskites. The free CsI-terminated surface does not act as a trap for free carriers, since band edge states are not localized at the surface. The surface reconstruction creates an electric field that attracts electrons towards the surface but not strong enough to localize electrons at the surface. There is no significant perturbation of VBE states due to p-type vacancies (V Cs , V Pb , and V PbI ) both at the surface and in the bulk. However, there is a notable attractive potential for electrons towards V I at the surface, especially in the case of the tetragonal phase. Formation energies of vacancies were evaluated with chemical potentials of species tailored to an aqueous solution. The chemical potentials were confined to a rather small region, which eliminated the largest source of uncertainty in previous calculations of defects' formation energies. The surface favors the formation of Cs vacancies, while Pb vacancies are more favorable in the bulk. The formation energy of iodine vacancies at the surface is very similar to that in the bulk. Lead-iodine divacancies (V - PbI ) are expected to dominate over lead-only vacancies at the surfaces. The analysis of charged defects at the surface suggests pinning of the Fermi energy at the VBE and segregation of V - Cs and V + I vacancies (both have a low formation energy of 0.25-0.4 eV). The predominant vacancies in the bulk are V These states fall into the category of delocalized host states perturbed by a screened Coulomb potential and follow band edges when the band gap is renormalized by SOC. There are no major differences between energy levels calculated with and without additional structural relaxation caused by changes in occupancy of electronic levels when transitioning from one charge state to another for dominant defects. The negligible structural relaxation between q ± 1 states indicates a rather small Franck-Condon shift. Defects with a large Frank-Condon shift are likely to become centers of non-radiative recombination. These results explain the high optoelectronic performance of two-dimensional structures, nanoparticles, and polycrystalline thin films of lead-halide perovskites in spite of the abundance of interfaces in these materials. Finally, it should be noted that there is no unique suggestion regarding the omission or inclusion of SOC when combined with DFT-PBE for analysis of defects in this material system. The relativistic electronic structure of CBE in the slab is more resilient to the formation of surface states due to the mixing of Pb-p x,y,z orbitals by the SOC Hamiltonian. Therefore, it is recommended to include SOC in the analysis of the spatial distribution of the wave function for CBE states, also for n-type defects. The formation energy of iodine vacancies is greatly underestimated (by ca. If the periodic slab correction (Fig. a Estimated based on the experimental enthalpy of -0.18 eV/f.u. for the reaction CsI + PbI 2 CsPbI 3 (Ref. e E VBE + 0.02. (5) Komsa, H.-P.; Pasquarello, A. Finite-size supercell correction for charged defects at surfaces and interfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 095505. (6) Freysoldt, C.; Mishra, A.; Ashton, M.; Neugebauer, J. Generalized dipole correction for charged surfaces in the repeated-slab approach. Phys. Rev. B 2020, 102, 045403. (7) Cho, Y.; Jung, H. R.; Jo, W. Halide perovskite single crystals: growth, characterization, and stability for optoelectronic applications. Nanoscale 2022, 14, 9248-9277. (8) Yin, W.-J.; Shi, T.; Yan, Y. Unique properties of halide perovskites as possible origins of the superior solar cell performance. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 4653-4658. (9) Agiorgousis, M. L.; Sun, Y.-Y.; Zeng, H.; Zhang, S. Strong covalency-induced recombination centers in perovskite solar cell material CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 14570-14575. (10) Yin, W.-J.; Shi, T.; Yan, Y. 3 : effects of spin-orbit coupling and self-interaction error. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 1461-1466.