The building climate industry and its influence on energy consumption have consequences on the environment due to the emission of greenhouse gasses. Improving the efficiency of this sector is essential to reduce the effect on climate change. In recent years, the interest in porous materials in applications such as heat pumps has increased for their promising potential. To assess the performance of adsorption heat pumps and cooling systems, here we discuss a multistep approach based on the processing of adsorption data combined with a thermodynamic model. The process provides properties of interest, such as the coefficient of performance, the working capacity, the specific heat or cooling effect, or the released heat upon adsorption and desorption cycles, and it also has the advantage of identifying the optimal conditions for each adsorbent-fluid pair. To test this method, we select several metal-organic frameworks that differ in topology, chemical composition, and pore size, which we validate with available experiments. Adsorption equilibrium curves were calculated using molecular simulations to describe the adsorption mechanisms of methanol and ethanol as working fluids in the selected adsorbents. Then, using a thermodynamic model we calculate the energetic properties combined with iterative algorithms that simultaneously vary all the required working conditions. We discuss the strong influence of operating temperatures on the performance of heat pump devices. Our findings point to the highly hydrophobic metal azolate framework MAF-6 as a very good candidate for heating and cooling applications for its high working capacity and excellent energy efficiency. The building energy demand for energy efficiency has increased in the last two decades. The selection of the refrigerant for an adsorption energy storage device is as important as the selection of the adsorbent, because the synergy between adsorbent and fluid working pairs is a critical aspect of achieving maximum performance. As alternatives to conventional refrigerants, The large amount of synthesized structures makes the assessment of the performance of each working pair challenging from an experimental point of view. Several studies focused on strategies to analyze the performance of alcohol-adsorbent using computational screenings. Erdős et al. Here we propose a novel approach to assess the coefficient of performance or other thermodynamic quantity, such as the heat released during the adsorption process. We apply this method to investigate MOFsmethanol/ethanol working pairs and rely on adsorption data and the consecutive application of mathematical and thermodynamic models. The advantage of this methodology is that it can be applied to either experimental or computational data sets and is also extensible to other working fluids. Another benefit of the analysis proposed here is that we considered a wide range of operating conditions proving that setting the operating temperatures could lead to a significant loss of information about the performance of the process. In short, an AHP cycle consists of four primary parts: an adsorber containing the adsorbent, a condenser, an evaporator, and an expansion valve. The heat pump operates by driving adsorbate between the adsorber, condenser, and evaporator. The cycle can be divided in two parts. In the first part, the evaporator vaporizes the fluid taking heat from a low-temperature source and releasing heat to an intermediate temperature source (adsorption). In the second part, during the condensation of the fluid, the condenser receives heat from a high-temperature source and releases heat to a second intermediate temperature source (desorption). During the cycle, the evaporator, condenser, desorption, and intermediate temperatures play an important role on the performance of the process. Our approach simultaneously screens all these temperatures providing detailed information on the operation of each MOF-fluid working pair. With this work, we want to understand the mechanisms that govern the adsorbate-adsorbent pair that enhances the efficiency of the thermodynamic cycle based on the adsorption equilibrium properties of ethanol and methanol in MOFs. We search for optimal conditions for each MOF-alcohol pair, discussing the limitations of setting the values of operating temperatures on the different energetic properties. We propose a multistep process as a method to assess the performance of MOFs for heating and cooling applications and as a tool for finding the optimal working conditions for each adsorbent-fluid working pairs. This method is tested with five MOFs, namely ZIF-8, ZIF-71, ZIF-90, MIL-140C, and MAF-6, for the adsorption of methanol and ethanol working fluids. The multistep process consists of a combination of molecular simulations, thermodynamical modeling, and in-house algorithms that iteratively analyze the performance of the AHP/ACS process. ZIF-8, ZIF-71, ZIF-90, and MAF-6 are Zn-based Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks (ZIFs), and MIL-140C is Zr-based MOF already used for this type of applications. Adsorption capacity as a function of temperature or external pressure was calculated using Monte Carlo (MC) simulations in the Grand-Canonical ensemble (GCMC) with the RASPA software. The structure of the adsorbents is considered rigid during the simulations, placing the framework atoms in their crystallographic positions. We used the reported crystal structures of ZIF-8, The AHP cycle consists of two steps for adsorption (isobaric adsorption and isosteric heating) and two for desorption (isobaric desorption and isosteric cooling), as represented in Figure The coefficient of performance (COP), used to describe the energetic efficiency, is defined as the ratio between the obtained energy and the input energy. The obtained energy or delivered energy is also defined as the specific heating or cooling effect (SHE or SCE). For heating, the COP is defined as and for cooling Q con and Q ev are proportional to the enthalpy of vaporization (∆H vap ), the density of the working fluid ρ wf in confinement, and the working capacity (∆W), which is the difference between the maximum and minimum adsorption isosteres (W max -W min ). The calculation of the energy needed for regeneration (Q reg ) and the energy released during adsorption (Q ads ) requires the estimation of the enthalpy of adsorption, ∆H vap . The equations that govern the AHP process from a thermodynamic perspective are detailed in the literature, The enthalpy of vaporization is taken from Majer et al., where p 0 is the vapor pressure of the working fluid, q is the mass adsorbed, and ρ wf is the density of the working fluid in the adsorbed phase. We used the Peng-Robinson equation of state [86] The coefficient of thermal expansion, α T , is considered constant for each working fluid. α T has been calculated using the equation The process is schematically represented in Figure Step 1 is to obtain the equilibrium adsorption curves, e.g., adsorption isotherms and isobars. This can be done either experimentally or with GCMC simulations. In Step 2 the input data are processed according to Dubinin-Polanyi theory. This leads to a temperature invariant characteristic curve that allows i) to predict new adsorption curves at any conditions (step 1) and ii) to proceed with the thermodynamic analysis of the system. The application of the DP theory requires inserting pre-processed functions into the algorithm. The most important variables are the density of the fluid in confinement (ρ wf ) and the saturation pressure (p 0 ). Once the characteristic curve has been obtained, the process bifurcates. During Step 3, we calculate the enthalpy of adsorption of the system, which depends on the enthalpy of evaporation of the fluid, adsorption potential, and entropy. The entropy calculation is pre-processed due to its dependency on the thermal expansion coefficient of the fluid in confinement. In Step 4, the isosteric cycle is calculated, estimating the maximum and minimum capacity isosteres for given conditions, i.e., setting T ev and T con and the associate pressures. The calculation of COP for either heating or cooling can be done under different conditions (Step 5). Without optimization, the temperature of the evaporator and the condenser are fixed, and therefore the associated pressures. The COP is assessed as a function of the desorption temperature. Step 6 is the optimization step. Here we scan the operating conditions and associated thermodynamic parameters in subsequence loops. The variation of T ev , T con , and T des are carried out simultaneously, with the only condition of T ev ¡ T con ¡ T des . After the massive data generation, the algorithm computes the COP by setting only one temperature (T ev or T con ) and scanning for the optimal conditions. From this step, a 3D plot per fixed variable is obtained, which allows to choose the operating conditions that provide the maximum performance. Using the same procedure, we calculated other quantities of interest, such as working capacity, specific heating effect (SHE), specific cooling effect (SCE), and heat released to the condenser (Q con ) or the evaporator (Q ev ). We calculated the adsorption isotherms of methanol and ethanol to compare with reported experimental data for ZIF-8, Figure Figures The adsorption isotherms calculated for ZIF-8, ZIF-90, and MAF-6 have a steeped behavior, less prominent for ZIF-71 and MIL-140C. This is due to the strong guestguest interactions of the adsorbates inside the pores, a typical characteristic of hydrophobic materials. These interactions are driven by hydrogen bonds (HB). Figure The structure of the hydrogen bonds changes in confinement, with a competition between molecules of alcohol with one or two HBs (see Figure The low coverage host-guest energy is approximately twice as high for ZIF-71 and MAF-6 as for ZIF-8 and ZIF-90, due to the interaction of the first molecules entering the structures with specific binding sites. Methanol and ethanol first interact with the exposed chlorine atoms of the dichloroimidazole link of ZIF-71. As for MAF-6, the alcohol molecules interact with the aromatic rings of the ligand by electrostatic interactions, where the hydroxyl group aligns with the electrostatic field lines pointing towards the center of the ring. The next stage of our multistep process is the post-FIG. To explore the limits of our approach, we computed the relevant properties of AHP and ACS devices. Figure The COP for the cooling and heating processes using methanol and ethanol allows comparing the performance of the adsorbents. In Figure The effect shown in Figure Figure To compare the results obtained in the five MOFs, Figure The heat energy transferred to the condenser (Q con ) that we show in Figure the adsorbent. From all the data, we selected MAF-6 as the reference MOF because it was the best performing structure. In line with the adsorption isotherms and isobars, MAF-6 shows a pronounced Q con , suggesting the importance of selecting the working conditions. After the step, all curves converge to a similar maximum Q con value, which is the optimal value for each working pair. In line with the previous results, we can use the multistep approach to analyze other relevant properties for heating or cooling applications as a function of the desired conditions. These properties are, for example, the specific heating (SHE) or cooling effect (SCE), the working volume or deliverable capacity (∆W), or the heat released or required by the evaporator (Q ev ). The values for these properties obtained in MAF-6 for methanol and ethanol are shown in Figure We shed light on the mechanisms governing adsorption-driven heat pumps for heating and cooling applications using MOFs and light alcohols. To this aim, we evaluated the performance of five MOFs using methanol and ethanol as working fluids. Adsorption isotherms and isobars, energetic interactions between molecules and adsorbents, and nucleation of the fluids in confinement were calculated from simulation. Adsorption data was processed using mathematical modeling based on the Dubinin-Polanyi theory of adsorption and a thermodynamic model to describe relevant properties for heating and cooling applications. Finally, we proposed a multistep approach to analyze the relationships between performance and operating conditions, which allows describing the optimal working conditions for each adsorbent-fluid pair. All MOFs selected, combined with methanol, show high performance for AHP and ACS applications. The performance coefficients were above 0.8 for cooling and 1.8 for heating. The energy released to the condenser was above 90 kWh/m 3 . The yield associated with ethanol adsorption is lower than for methanol but still significant for MAF-6. This MOF outperforms the other adsorbents studied here for AHP and ACS applications in a wide range of operating conditions. It exhibits COP above 0.9 and 1.9 for cooling and heating, respectively, and Q con and Q ev about 115 kWh/m 3 for methanol. With a pore size of about 18 Å and relatively low density, the hydrophobic MAF-6 exhibits large pore volume and surface area, resulting in a steeped isotherm and large adsorption capacity for light alcohols. Overall, the multistep process proposed here seems to be an efficient tool for analyzing the performance of working pairs for heating and cooling applications. We have proven the importance of removing constraints for apply-ing the thermodynamic model. Establishing or assuming fixed values of certain operating temperatures could lead to misinterpretation of the performance of the working pairs. This is particularly remarkable for systems showing steeped isotherms, which at the same time are desired for these applications. An increase of temperature of a few degrees could decrease by 80% the performance of a working pair. Another advantage of the proposed approach is that it only needs an adsorption isobar or isotherm as input. This approach can be combined with simulation data or experimental measurements since we employed mathematical modeling to post-process the adsorption data. We show that we can simultaneously describe experimental results from the literature with high accuracy and predict various properties involved in heating and cooling applications. Table 