Microacoustic wave devices are essential components in the RF electronics and MEMS industry with increasing impact in various sensing and actuation applications. Reliable and smart operation of acoustic wave devices at low costs would cause a crucial advancement. Herein, we present the enablement of temperature and mechanical sensing capabilities in a Rayleigh-mode standing surface acoustic wave (sSAW) chip device by harnessing an acoustic shear plate wave mode using the same set of electrodes. Most importantly, this mode is excited by switching the polarity of the sSAW transducer electrodes by simple electronics, allowing for direct and inexpensive compatibility with an existing setup. We validated the method in the emergent topic of surface de-icing by continuously monitoring temperature and water liquid-solid phase changes using the plate wave mode, and ondemand Rayleigh-wave deicing with a negligible energy cost. The flexibility for adapting the system to different scenarios, loads and scalability opens the path to impact in lab-on-a-chip, IoT technology, and sectors requiring autonomous acoustic wave actuators. During recent years, Surface Acoustic Waves (SAW) devices have been exploited by research and industry in numerous nano-and macro-scale applications, e.g. in biology, robotics, electronics, printing, and surface cleaning A conventional SAW device, as presented in Fig. Addressing this problem, here we demonstrate that switching the polarity of the IDT electrodes of conventional sSAW devices, as shown in Fig. To prove the concept in a realistic scenario, we present the development and operation of the first smart acoustic de-icing system integrating ultrafast ice detection by PW and reliable ice melting by Rayleigh sSAW. Ice accretion on surfaces is a critical issue for daily life as well as for industrial and large-scale applications The sSAW chip employed in this study has been recently used for successful deicing and anti-icing applications (see Jacob, et al 2023 For testing the PW/sSAW hybrid mode of operation, we first dispensed a water droplet with a diameter of 15 mm on the surface, covering about 15% of the open surface of the chip and mimicking a rain droplet on a sensor surface. Subsequently, we cooled the device from 300 K to 263 K in the controlled environment of a climate chamber. Fig. Third, we showed that the PW sensing can be used to create automated actuation, e.g., for smart de-icing (see Fig. A perfect correlation was apparent between the state of water/ice as directly deduced from the video recording (snapshots i-iv) in Fig. Adding sensing capabilities through PW modes can enable sSAW chips to function for smart applications at low costs and with little or no redesign on the existing layouts. In the reported experiment, an unsupervised deicing on a large transparent surface was demonstrated. However, the suggested method is not restricted to that application. A shear-thickness PW mode primarily depends on the thickness of the substrate and not on other system parameters. Therefore, it would be reproduced on a variety of sSAW chips, which are manufactured on substrates with the same thickness, and might be used in other fields of application. We hypothesize that this shear-thickness PW mode has been so far overlooked and therefore not exploited for sensing along with sSAW actuators because of the narrow band-width of the PW resonance and its appearance outside the typical sSAW frequency range. We hope that this brief report contributes to that other researches may identify and harness the PW mode to extend the capabilities of technologies based on sSAW actuators, especially in sensitive and bio-related applications. The suggested method for sensing is sensitive to any physical changes that cause variation of the substrate stiffness, e.g. temperature, pressure, or change of surface material due to a chemical reaction, and could be applied to any sSAW devices with a range of resonance frequencies higher than the resonance frequency of the PW mode. The field is ample and susceptible for extensive research to examine and improve the PW mode sensing performance in combination with alternative sSAW actuator designs (e.g., including structured and coated substrates) and/or to improve the electronics needed for switching and sensing using simplified circuits. The IDTs were designed for a Rayleigh-type sSAW activation at a frequency of 32.5 MHz, covering only a small area at the sides of the chip (less than 1.5% of the chip area). Details about the IDT structure design and the production process of the device have been described in our previous publication RF frequency was applied to the IDTs using a network analyzer a specialized SAW signal source (BSG F20, BelektroniG GmbH, Germany) through a printed circuit board (PCB) with spring pins contacted with the IDTs pads. The same device was used for receiving and analyzing the S11 curve. A combination of relay (HF-Relay Omron G6K-2F-RF 5V) and microcontroller (Pocket Science Lab) as shown in Fig. The performance of the deicing actuator device was tested in a climate chamber (Binder MKF-56, BINDER GmbH, Germany). A droplet of distilled water was placed at the center of the device using a syringe. Then, it was cooled down by reducing the temperature of the climate chamber until the droplet phase changed to ice. A USB camera was placed inside the environmental chamber and normal to the surface of the device to optically record the droplet phase change during the experiment. 