Here we report on an acoustoelectric slab waveguide heterostructure for phonon amplification using a thin Al0.58Sc0.42N film grown directly on a 4H-SiC substrate with an ultra-thin In0.53Ga0.47As epitaxial film heterogeneously integrated onto the surface of the Al0.58Sc0.42N. The aluminum scandium nitride film grown directly on silicon carbide enables a thin (1 micron thick) piezoelectric film to be deposited on a thermally conductive bulk substrate (370 W/m-K for 4H-SiC), enabling negligible selfheating when combined with the In0.53Ga0.47As semiconductor parameters of large mobility (~7000 cm 2 /V-s) and low concentration of charge carriers (~5x10 15 cm -3 ). A Sezawa mode with optimal overlap between the peak of its evanescent electric field and the semiconductor charge carriers is supported. The high velocity of the heterostructure materials allows us to operate the Sezawa mode amplifier at 3.05 GHz, demonstrating a gain of 500 dB/cm (40 dB in 800 μm). Additionally, a terminal end-to-end radio frequency gain of 7.7 dB and a nonreciprocal transmission of 52.6 dB are achieved with a dissipated DC power of 2.3 mW. The power added efficiency and acoustic noise figure are also characterized. The development of technologically relevant phononic amplifiers utilizing the acoustoelectric effect, which occurs when the electric field of a piezoelectric acoustic wave interacts with a semiconductor charge carrier system, has been ongoing since initial demonstrations in the 1960s. Along with high thermal conductivity, the substrate must support integration with strongly piezoelectric thin films, have a high acoustic velocity for acoustic confinement in the piezoelectric, and have a high resistivity for low radio frequency loss. The electromechanical coupling coefficient, k , of the acoustic mode is a parameter that quantifies the fraction of total energy stored in the electric field, Here we report the characterization of a phononic amplifier at a center frequency of 3.05 GHz that combines both strategies, lower carrier concentration and higher thermal conductivity substrate, to achieve low self-heating. This is accomplished in a material stack of an indium gallium arsenide (In0.53Ga0.47As) epitaxial layer bonded to a substrate of 1 μm thick alloyed aluminum scandium nitride (Al0.58Sc0.42N) film grown on 4H silicon carbide (4H-SiC). An equivalent circuit model 6 can be utilized to express the dissipated DC power required to achieve peak gain in an acoustoelectric phononic amplifier as a function of the semiconductor parameters. According to this theory, the electric field required to achieve peak gain, E , is given by where v is the acoustic velocity, μ is the charge carrier mobility, N is the charge carrier concentration, q is the elementary charge, d is the semiconductor thickness, ε is the piezoelectric permittivity, and ε is the vacuum permittivity. The first term in Eqn. (1), v μ ⁄ , is the field required for the charge carriers to drift at a velocity equal to the acoustic velocity. At this point, no acoustic loss or amplification is achieved. Acoustic gain occurs at fields exceeding v μ ⁄ and theoretically increases up to the field given in Eqn. (1), although experimentally various mechanisms, such as heating effects, where w and L are the semiconductor width and length, respectively. From Eqn. (2), minimizing the charge carrier concentration, N, significantly reduces the dissipated power. The dependence on the mobility, μ, is more complicated in that increasing μ reduces the required field to achieve gain, but also increases the generated drift current at a given voltage. Therefore, it is typically advantageous for μ to be above a certain threshold value. For example, in the devices studied in this work, a mobility of >5400 cm 2 /V-s is required to achieve gain with an applied bias of 10 V or less. Larger voltages both increase the DC power requirements and limit applicability of devices. Beyond the threshold to lower the applied voltages, it is advantageous to increase μ only if the drift current can be minimized through other means. The In0.53Ga0.47As epitaxial semiconductor utilized in this work provides a large charge carrier mobility (~7000 cm 2 /V-s) and a low concentration of charge carriers (~5x10 15 cm -3 ), such that large gain can be achieved with low dissipated power. A strongly guided acoustic mode (Sezawa mode) A camera image of a quarter wafer of fabricated In0.53Ga0.47As/Al0.58Sc0.42N/SiC phononic amplifiers, Al0.58Sc0.42N/SiC acoustic delay lines, and Hall structures is shown in Fig. Of existing models in the literature, the acoustoelectric interaction in this material stack is most accurately described by a perturbative approach 10 which gives the following expression for the acoustoelectric gain coefficient, α α = 1 2 where Z is the interaction impedance, w is the interaction width, ω is the dielectric relaxation frequency, ε is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the semiconductor permittivity, d is the semiconductor thickness, R is the space-charge reduction factor, and H is a term that arises from semiconductor charge carrier diffusion. (3), we can characterize the steady-state temperature rise, ΔT, to achieve acoustic gain. Fig. Figure The measured S21 and S12 as a function of frequency are show in Fig. The data shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have reported on the design, fabrication, and characterization of phononic amplifiers with a center frequency of 3.05 GHz and low self-heating in a material stack of In0.53Ga0.47As/Al0.58Sc0.42N/SiC. We have demonstrated an acoustic gain of 500 dB/cm (40 dB for an 800 μm acoustoelectric interaction length) and a terminal radio frequency gain of 7.7 dB with a dissipated DC power of 2.3 mW. The growth of alloyed Al0.58Sc0.42N films on a SiC substrate is promising for the development of active acoustic wave devices as it provides the ability to achieve thin (1 μm or less) piezoelectric films directly on a thermally conductive substrate with a high resistivity and large acoustic velocity. The combination of material parameters supports both high frequency (>1 GHz) operation and low selfheating. Two critical areas of future study for phononic amplifiers that operate based on the acoustoelectric effect include the exploration of gain compression and saturation output power in addition to a more detailed study of the noise figure to close the gap between the experimental and theoretical values.