We study the effects of compressive and tensile biaxial strain on direct and phononassisted Auger-Meitner recombination (AMR) in silicon using first-principles calculations. We find that the application of strain has a non-trivial effect on the AMR rate. For most AMR processes, the application of strain increases the AMR rate. However, the recombination rate for the AMR process involving two holes and one electron is suppressed by 38% under tensile strain. We further analyze the specific phonon contributions that mediate the phonon-assisted AMR mechanism, demonstrating the increased anisotropy under strain. Our results indicate that the application of tensile strain increases the lifetime of minority electron carriers in p-type silicon, and can be leveraged to improve the efficiency of silicon devices. and holes. In the case of the electrons in silicon, the six-fold valley degeneracy is split, with the valleys along the direction of crystal compression (four in-plane for compressive and two out-of-plane for tensile biaxial strain) lowering in energy. For holes, the valence band maximum is at the Γ-point, so there is no valley degeneracy, however the application of strain reduces the band degeneracy with one and two band(s) lowering in energy under the application of compressive and tensile biaxial strain, respectively. These effects are illustrated in Fig. Our calculation methodology uses eigenvalues, wave functions, and electron-phonon cou-pling matrix elements generated by density functional theory (DFT) and density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) calculations, which we obtain using the Quantum ESPRESSO code We use a relaxed lattice parameter of a = 5.379 Å for the unstrained structure. To obtain the biaxially strained structures, we adjust the in-plane lattice constants (X and Y) by ∓1% and allow the out-of-plane Z direction to relax. This gives us an out-of-plane lattice parameter of 5.420 Å for the compressive biaxial strain condition and 5.337 Å for the tensile biaxial strain condition. We chose to study this magnitude of strain because it is readily achievable in real systems and leads to sizable valley (> 170 meV) and band (> 125 meV) energy splitting for the electrons and holes, respectively (Fig. We calculated the LDA eigenvalues on an 8 × 8 × 8 Brillouin-zone sampling grid and interpolated them to fine grids using the maximally localized Wannier function method To perform our AMR calculations for strained silicon, we applied first-and second-order time dependent perturbation theory in the Fermi's golden rule framework, as outlined in our previous work on unstrained silicon. , where the carrier density n = N V denotes the number of free carriers N per volume V , and C is the AMR coefficient. For direct AMR, we make no assumptions about the Brillouin-zone distribution of the free carriers as a function of strain conditions, and there are therefore no differences in our approach compared to those discussed in Refs. 26 and 41. As we show in the insets of Fig. occupy the lower-energy conduction band valley (while the holes are primarily restricted to the top valence band). Given this information and the assumptions needed for the computational tractability of the phonon-assisted calculations (that the periodic part of the wave functions of carriers are approximately equal to those of the nearest band extremum), we restrict N C valley = 4 for compressive strain and N C valley = 2 for tensile strain. Similarly, we restrict N V band = 2 for compressive strain and N V band = 1 for tensile strain. This captures the effects of strain on the band structure while keeping the calculation computationally feasible. We do not include the effects of spin-orbit splitting in our calculations, as the energy splitting due to strain is approximately 3× stronger, as we discuss above. Using our computational approach outlined above, we report the eeh and hhe AMR rates across the three strain conditions (compressive, unstrained, and tensile) in Fig. As we show, applying strain generally increases the AMR rate, with the exception of hhe under tensile strain. This is largely consistent with previous work on strained germanium, which found that both direct and phonon-assisted AMR increased under strain, though these results coincide with an indirect-to-direct band gap transition in germanium, which we attribute as the cause for the differing behavior. (2) a reduced number of recombination channels. The interplay between these two effects is clearly seen in Fig. over phonon energy and phonon momentum. The integration of these distributions yields the total AMR coefficient. The three-dimensional momentum distribution is shown in Fig. Our results not only provide insights into the microscopic mechanisms governing AMR in strained silicon, but also into the potential application of strain to improve silicon device performance. Indeed, silicon devices are incredibly varied and technologically critical. They encompass diverse electronic and optoelectronic applications from solar cells to transistors, playing a critical role in both our energy and computing infrastructure. In many of these applications, AMR is known to act as a loss mechanism, which reduces their overall efficiency and performance. This is notable in solar cells, transistors, thyristors, and p-n junctions more generally. In summary, we apply our first-principles methodology to investigate the effects of compressive and tensile biaxial strain on Auger-Meitner recombination in silicon. The application of strain alters the electronic structure and leads to an increase in the AMR coefficient in all cases except hhe AMR under tensile biaxial strain, where AMR is reduced by ∼40%. We demonstrate that the effects of strain are non-trivial and give rise to qualitatively distinct behavior for the phonon-assisted AMR process. Our findings inform the application of strain to affect device performance, highlighted by increased minority carrier lifetimes in p-type regions. See the Supplementary Material for additional information on (1) the strain effects on the phonon dispersion (2) the quasiparticle corrections and band gap shifts, (3) the carrier distribution changes under strain, (4) valley analysis of the electrons in the eeh process, (5) three-dimensional plots of the phonon contributions, and (6) distribution of excited carriers. The authors have no conflicts to disclose. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Under the ±1% strain conditions we tested, the valley splitting is strong enough that the vast majority of electrons occupy the low-energy valleys. Figure FIG. We extend our valley analysis of the eeh process in unstrained silicon While we present the AMR distribution over phonon energies and wave-vector magnitudes in the main text, it is also instructive to examine the three-dimensional distribution over phonon wave vectors in Fig. Our methodology also allows us to examine the BZ distribution of the excited carriers. We find that the phonon-assisted distributions under all strain conditions are nearly equivalent for both the eeh and the hhe processes. This finding can be explained because strain affects the energy offsets at the VBM and CBM by ∼150 meV, but the excited carrier is promoted to a state ∼1 eV into the band. Given that the additional momentum provided by phonons allows carriers to effectively access the entire momentum space, we do not expect significant alterations to the excited carrier distributions. On the other hand, the direct eeh process is more strictly bounded by momentum conservation, and given the anisotropy in the starting electron distribution, we do find a consistent anisotropy in the excited electron distribution. We show both the direct and phonon-assisted excited electron distributions for the eeh process in Fig. M. Ieong, B. Doris, J. Kedzierski, K. Rim, and M. Yang, "Silicon Device Scaling to the D. Yu, Y. Zhang, and F. Liu, "First-principles study of electronic properties of biaxially strained silicon: Effects on charge carrier mobility," Physical Review B 78, 245204 (2008).