Recent advances in nonlocal metasurfaces have enabled unprecedented success in shaping the wavefront of light with spectral selectivity, offering new solutions for many emerging nanophotonics applications. The ability to tune both the spectral and spatial properties of such a novel class of metasurfaces is highly desirable, but the dynamic nonvolatile control remains elusive. Here, we demonstrate active narrowband wavefront manipulation by harnessing quasi-bound states in the continuum (quasi-BICs) in phase-change nonlocal metasurfaces. The proof-of-principle metasurfaces made of Sb2S3 allow for nonvolatile, reversible, and tunable spectral control over wavefront and switchable spatial response at a given wavelength. The design principle mainly builds upon the combination of the geometry phase of quasi-BICs and the dynamic tunability of phase-change meta-atoms to tailor the spatial response of light at distinct resonant wavelengths. By tuning the crystallization level of Sb2S3 meta-atoms, the dynamic nonlocal wavefront-shaping functionalities of beam steering, 1D, and 2D focusing are achieved. Furthermore, we demonstrate tunable holographic imaging with active spectral selectivity using our phase-change nonlocal metasurface. This work represents a critical advance towards developing integrated dynamic nonlocal metasurface for future augmented and virtual reality wearables. The past few decades have witnessed substantial progress of metasurfaces in control over the light field through subwavelength elements, as they can be designed with a variety of geometry and materials to generate a tailored optical response in terms of amplitude, phase, polarization, frequency, and other degrees of freedom Despite the exciting advances in nonlocal metasurfaces, the ability to realize flat optical devices with controllable spectral and spatial response remains a significant ongoing challenge for practical applications. In previous works, researchers have realized the control of multiple quasi-BICs by adding successive symmetry-breaking perturbations to a single nonlocal metasurface, allowing for wavefront manipulation at several wavelengths This work employs an emerging phase-change material, antimony trisulfide (Sb 2 S 3 ), in nonlocal metasurfaces supporting quasi-BICs for dynamic spatial and spectral control. By tuning the crystallization level of Sb 2 S 3 , wavefront shaping can be realized at different wavelengths, and the optical functionalities at specific wavelengths can be switched on to off. Compared with the previous tuning mechanism, the approach based on phase-change nonlocal metasurface shows that multiple functionalities can be integrated into a single metasurface with active, nonvolatile, and reversible tunability but without complex patterning, affording more degrees of freedom for light manipulations. As a proof-of-concept, we design the Sb 2 S 3 metasurface supporting the quasi-BIC that is evolved from the symmetry-protected BIC by the dimerization perturbation. The quasi-BIC obeys the selection rules, and the system is capable of shaping wavefront only across the narrow spectral bandwidth of resonance using the geometric phase. By tuning the crystallization level of Sb 2 S 3 meta-atoms, the dynamic spectral and spatial control for functionalities such as beam steering, cylindrical lensing, and radial lensing is demonstrated. Furthermore, the dynamic holographic imaging at distinct wavelengths is demonstrated, showing the great potential of the phase-change nonlocal metasurfaces in optical information storage and encryption. By introducing the meta-atoms made of the phase-change materials into the nonlocal wavefront-shaping metasurface, the active control of wavefront manipulation at narrow spectral bandwidth of the quasi-BIC resonances is realized with the advantage of multistate, reversible, and nonvolatile tunability, which is the first time in active nonlocal metasurfaces. It may lead to new device concepts and find great potential in optical imaging, sensing, and display applications. Figure The proposed phase-change metasurface can manipulate the optical wavefront by choosing a specific wavelength within a broad regime, which is different from the previous nonlocal metasurfaces with only several target working wavelengths. This can be attributed to multilevel spectral control over wavefront in Sb 2 S 3 metasurfaces. The proposed metasurface has more freedoms and higher security for information encryption. For example, the information decoding at a selected wavelength requires an appropriate stimulus to transform Sb 2 S 3 at a given crystallization level, and misleading or useless information will be obtained either for other wavelengths or for other improper crystallisation levels. More importantly, it offers an important solution for wearables and AR devices. For example, it can not only satisfy the need to shape optical wavefront exclusively at selected wavelengths and leave the rest of the spectrum transparent but also bring the flexibility of adaptive control with adjusting the working wavelength of wavefront manipulation. The proposed metasurfaces offer a prototype for potential applications such as information storage and encryption, AR and display technology. To present the operation mechanism of the dynamic control of the spectral and spatial response, we first elucidate the evolution of the quasi-BIC resonance in the metasurface. BICs can be characterized as nonradiating resonant modes in an open system but without coupling FIG. to the radiating channels propagating outside the system Then we consider the dimerized structure consisting of two rectangular holes in Sb 2 S 3 thin film with a thick-ness of 150 nm on the silica substrate, categorized as p2 space group, as shown in Fig. Compared with the common phase-change material Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 , Sb 2 S 3 has a wide bandgap of 1.7 ∼ 2.05 eV, showing much lower, even negligible absorption in the near-infrared regime of interest where m represents the crystalline fraction ranging from 0 to 1 for the multistate intermediating between a-Sb 2 S 3 and c-Sb 2 S 3 , ε a and ε c are the permittivity of a-Sb 2 S 3 and c-Sb 2 S 3 , respectively. Because of the tunable optical constants of meta-atoms, the spectral response of quasi-BIC in Sb 2 S 3 metasurface will vary during these phase transitions. The numerical calculations are performed with the finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) method via the ANSYS Lumerical Suit. As shown in Fig. Of course, the wavefront shaping ability in metasurfaces will be remarkably weakened at the non-resonance wavelengths due to the dramatically reduced transmission efficiency. This makes it possible to switch on and off the spatial response at a specific wavelength by transforming the resonant wavelength into non-resonant via varying the crystallization levels of Sb 2 S 3 . As a result, dynamic wavefront-shaping metasurface supporting a quasi-BIC can be implemented by a rational synthesis of multistate switchable spectral response in the Sb 2 S 3 metasurface with a spatially varying geometric phase profile. Note that Sb 2 S 3 is patterned into nanostructures to construct the nonlocal metasurface instead of the spacer layer in earlier works for active devices As a consequence of the multilevel tunable wavelength of quasi-BIC resonance, the metasurface is able to perform wavefront shaping at different wavelengths. As shown in Fig. Next we consider simple cylindrical metalens for dynamic narrowband focusing, as shown in Fig. where r = x 2 + y 2 is the distance from arbitrary position (x, y), and λ 0 is the target working wavelength. Here, the one-dimensional metalens along x direction for space light focusing is designed, with the phase profile shown in Fig. We proceed to the more complex two-dimensional (2D) spatial control at distinct resonant wavelengths of quasi-BICs. The phase-change metasurface for a radial lens is designed in a simple-to-implement way, which focuses the transmitted LCP component into a specific spot in space, as shown in Fig. The transmission spectra of the designed metasurface for different crystallization states of Sb 2 S 3 are depicted in Fig. In the proposed phase-change nonlocal metasurface, the flexibility to control both the spatial and spectral response can provide abundant degrees of freedom for implementing the narrowband wavefront manipulation in various applications associated with optical information processing. To demonstrate the versatility and high performance, a phase-only meta-hologram is finally designed. Using the same meta-atom library with the lenses above, the information is coded by the geometric phases of Sb 2 S 3 meta-atoms that are exerted to the transmitted converted component on resonance. Here, the phase profile of the image is obtained by the Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm and then encoded by the 2D spatial distribution of the rotation angle of Sb 2 S 3 meta-atoms. The simulated diffraction patterns shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated phase-change nonlocal metasurfaces capable of actively shaping light's spatial and spectral properties in transmission mode. The functionality is enabled by incorporating the phasechange meta-atoms integrated with a nonlocal wavefrontshaping metasurface empowered by quasi-BICs. A systematic design approach is presented by combining the nonlocal design strategies of enhanced light-matter interaction of quasi-BICs and the wavefront-shaping principle encapsulated by the generalized Snell's law in the phase-change metasurfaces. Leveraging spatially varying the polarization properties of quasi-BICs for designer geometric phase profiles, the wavefront-shaping functions for beam steering and space focusing are demonstrated for a narrow spectral regime in Sb 2 S 3 metasurfaces. By switching the state of Sb 2 S 3 between amorphous and crystalline, the wavefront manipulation can be realized at multiwavelength within a broad spectral range, and the spatial response at a specific wavelength can be switched on to off. The presented Sb 2 S 3 metasurface platform can afford multistate, reversible, and nonvolatile tuning of the spatial and spectral response, offering sufficient design freedom to tailor the spatial response at tunable wavelength actively. Furthermore, the dynamic control over a single device's spatial and spectral response enables holographic imaging at selected wavelengths, which may open the door for next-generation compact narrowband imaging for applications such as information storage and encryption and AR/VR.