A major challenge for magnetic skyrmions in atomically thin van der Waals (vdW) materials is reliable skyrmion detection. Here, based on rigorous first-principles calculations, we show that all-electrical skyrmion detection is feasible in 2D vdW magnets via scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and in planar tunnel junctions. We use the nonequilibrium Green's function method for quantum transport in planar junctions, including self-energy due to electrodes and working conditions, going beyond the standard Tersoff-Hamann approximation. We obtain a very large tunneling anisotropic magnetoresistance (TAMR) around the Fermi energy for a vdW tunnel junction based on graphite/Fe 3 GeTe 2 /germanene/graphite. For atomic-scale skyrmions the noncollinear magnetoresistance (NCMR) reaches giant values. We trace the origin of the NCMR to spin-mixing between spin-up and -down states of p z and d z 2 character at the surface atoms. Both TAMR and NCMR are drastically enhanced in tunnel junctions with respect to STM geometry due to orbital symmetry matching at the interface. Magnetic skyrmions In ultrathin transition-metal films, skyrmions have been observed directly using spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), Here, we demonstrate based on first-principles calculations that the NCMR and the TAMR can be very large in 2D vdW magnets, suggesting the possibility of all-electrical detection of magnetic skyrmions. We study both the regime of tunneling across a vacuum gap as applicable to STM as well as tunnel junction devices with non-magnetic electrodes. We predict a giant NCMR for atomic-scale skyrmions in a graphite/Fe 3 GeTe 2 /germanene/graphite tunnel junction. The NCMR results from spin mixing of spin-up and -down states of p z and d z 2 character at the surface atoms. Due to orbital symmetry matching at the interface it is enhanced by orders of magnitude in the tunnel device with respect to that obtained in STM geometry. We find a similar enhancement of the TAMR. These magnetoresistance values are at least one order of magnitude larger than those reported so far for conventional transition-metal interfaces. Fig. We consider FGT/Ge (Fig. Electronic structure and quantum transport calculations were carried out using QUANTU-MATK, 42 which uses the non-equilibrium Green function (NEGF) where R T is the tip position, U is the bias voltage, and n(r, E) is the local density of states (LDOS) of the sample evaluated in the vacuum a few Å above the surface. Even if the STM tip is non-magnetic, the LDOS and thereby the obtained dI/dU signal can be sensitive to the local spin texture due to NCMR, From the energy-resolved vacuum LDOS of the skyrmion core vs. the FM environment (Fig. To go beyond the nanoscale skyrmion (Fig. The corresponding NCMR (Fig. The origin of the NCMR for skyrmions can be understood by analyzing the electronic structure. We find the vacuum LDOS (Fig. For the spin spiral states, we obtain similar conclusions. The variation of the angle θ between adjacent spins leads to a gradual change of the peaks, e.g., the decreasing peak height in the vacuum LDOS at about E F + 0.25 eV (Fig. The physical mechanism of NCMR can be elucidated through the spin mixing effect, mainly driven by interlayer hopping between Fe3-d ↑ z 2 and Fe2-p ↓ z , as well as intralayer hopping between Te2p ↑ z and Te2-p ↓ z . The shift of the d ↑ z 2 peak at about 0.5 eV below E F at the Fe3 atom can be attributed to spin mixing with p ↓ z state peak at E F -0.25 eV of the Fe2 atom (Fig. where G is the retarded Green's function of the central region, and Γ L /Γ R are matrices describing its coupling to left/right semi-infinite electrodes. We propose to consider a TJ-NM created by the graphite/FGT/Ge/graphite junction to detect a skyrmion by all-electrical means (Fig. The transmission for the skyrmion state (Fig. The extremely large NCMR observed in TJ-NM stems from the interplay of the symmetry of electronic states and the spin mixing effect. Due to orbital symmetry matching at the interface of FGT/Ge and the graphite electrodes, C-p z mainly couples to p z orbitals of the surface atoms of FGT/Ge (Te2, Fe3, and Ge2) (see Fig. We have also calculated the TAMR of our tunnel junction (Fig. Note that due to an extremely high computational cost, we are restricted to an atomic-scale skyrmion in our quantum transport calculations for the device setup. The obtained NCMR (Fig. However, the key message of our quantum transport calculations is that the NCMR signal is greatly enhanced in a tunnel device with respect to STM geometry (Fig. To conclude, we suggest planar devices built from 2D vdW heterostructures such as the graphite/FGT/Ge/graphite tunnel junction considered as an example in our work as ideal platforms for reliable all-electrical skyrmion detection down to the atomically thin limit. Very large NCMR and TAMR are observed in our calculations near the Fermi energy, more than one order of magnitude higher than those reported for transition-metal interfaces. The physical mechanism of the NCMR is explained by the interplay between the spin mixing and orbital symmetry matching effects at the interface. Our work highlights the crucial importance of using the NEGF approach for quantum transport on noncollinear spin structures in tunnel junctions, going beyond the TH model. Our proposal opens a new route to realize skyrmion racetrack memories based on atomically thin vdW materials with full-electrical writing and reading. Acknowledgement: This study has been supported through the ANR Grant No. ANR-22-CE24-0019. This study has been (partially) supported through the grant NanoX no. ANR-17-EURE-0009 in the framework of the "Programme des Investissements d'Avenir". Financial support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) through SPP2137 "Skyrmionics" (project no. 462602351) is gratefully acknowledged. We acknowledge CALMIP (Grant 2023-[P21008]) and the North-German Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN) for providing HPC resources. We thank M. A. Goerzen and H. Schrautzer for helpful discussions. Author contributions: D.L. and S. The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/. Computational details, STM tip position and SOC effects on NCMR, the influence of skyrmion size on NCMR in FGT/Ge, the effect of the FM area size on NCMR, orbital-resolved NCMR by the Fe3 and Te2 surface atoms, the spin-mixing effect induced by the Te2 atom, spin-and orbital-resolved LDOS for the Fe3, Fe2 and Te2 atoms, the orbital hybridization effect at the interface between FGT/Ge and graphite electrodes, atom and orbital-resolved LDOS of the FGT/Ge interface for the FM and Sk states, LDOS map, as well as the TAMR calculated by TH in STM geometry and by NEGF in the tunnel junction. LDOS (states/eV) The NCMR obtained in the TH approximation (red) is shown for comparison (same data as in Fig. The NCMR spectrum for spin spirals (SS) is calculated by NCMR = dI/dUSS-dI/dUFM dI/dUFM