Superconducting (SC) tips for scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) can enhance a wide range of surface science studies because they offer exquisite energy resolution, allow the study of Josephson tunneling, or provide spatial contrast based on the local interaction of the SC tip with the sample. The appeal of a SC tip is also practical. An SC gap can be used to characterize and optimize the noise of a low-temperature apparatus. Unlike typical samples, SC tips can be made with less ordered materials, such as from SC polycrystalline wires or by coating a normal metal tip with a superconductor. Those recipes either require additional laboratory infrastructure or are carried out in ambient conditions, leaving an oxidized tip behind. Here, we revisit the vacuum cleaving of an Nb wire to prepare fully gapped tips in an accessible one-step procedure. To show their utility, we measure the SC gap of Nb on Au(111) to determine the base temperature of our microscope and to optimize its RF filtering. The deliberate coating of the Nb tip with Au fully suppresses the SC gap and we show how sputtering with Ar + ions can be used to gradually recover the gap, promising tunability for tailored SC gaps sizes. • Oxide free superconducting STM tips • RF filter optimization Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) allows the study of atomically sharp tunneling junctions at sub-Kelvin temperatures and under large magnetic fields. A versatile feature of STM is that one can choose tip materials with desired properties, including materials for spin-polarized and superconducting (SC) tips. The use of SC tips in STM provides enhanced energy resolution The procedure to obtain SC tips is illustrated in Figure An example of a Nb wire with loop and notch glued to a tip holder can be seen in Figure As with other tips, we use the reflection of the Nb tip in the polished sample surface for the coarse alignment on Au(111) (Figure The SC gap of the Nb tip can also serve as an accessible way to optimize RF filtering and determine the effective energy resolution of an STM setup To determine whether it is possible to recover the Nb apex after crashing into the sample, we first dip the tip a few dozen nm into the Au crystal until the zero bias conductance matches the quasiparticle conductance (Figure To test reproducibility of the tip-cleaving method, we prepared a total of 9 Nb wires. While 7 cleaves showed tips with a superconducting gap, two tips were insulating. Out of the 7 SC tips, four showed a fully gapped spectrum with no zero-bias conductance at 0 mV, whereas three show a smaller gap with finite conductance. Examples of tunneling spectra for different tips after cleaving and first approach on Au(111) are shown in Figure In summary, the vacuum cleaving of Nb-wires allows for a quick and easy way to prepare superconducting tips for STM experiments. We have shown that this method is very forgiving; it generates sharp superconducting tips with fair yield, even before ideal experimental execution. This method is an accessible way to generate a well characterized fully gapped superconducting spectrum in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) STM setup. We showed that these tips can be used to optimize the RF filtering and energy resolution of an STM. By coating the SC tip with Au, we demonstrated how the gap size can be tuned to the experimental requirements by taking advantage of the proximity effect and by gradually changing the size of the Au cluster with Ar + sputtering. 