Chalcogen-based phase-change materials are considered promising candidates for next-generation nonvolatile memory devices GST phase-change memory devices exhibit fast amorphous to crystalline phase switching by electric pulses, * jhish@postech.ac.kr which occur within 100 ns The a-GST structures build s-p hybridized covalent bonding states, while well-ordered crystalline structures build directional p-orbital resonant bonding states, which leads to a stark optical contrast between the two struc-tures The distribution of vacancies in c-GST can be either random or ordered to a certain degree The atomic-scale studies of GST on electronic and structural properties require a substantial size in atomic number and simulation time. Direct AIMD simulations are limited to ∼1000 atoms due to high computational costs We utilized the Neural E(3)-equivariant interatomic potentials (NequIP) model to develop MLPs for GST225 The NequIP potential was constructed with a local cutoff radius r c of 4 Å, including 7.40 atoms on average inside a local environment sphere. The maximum rotation order l max of the feature tensors was set to be 3, as the potentials with l max =3 reproduce the angular distribution function of liquid GST225 at 1100 K better than those with l max =2 (see Supplemental Material for further information on the NequIP training parameters The resulting GST225 potentials simulated properly the melting and crystallization processes (see Supplemental Material for the potential energy change during melting and crystallization To develop the GST225 potentials, we constructed a training dataset using the randomized atomic-system generator (RAG) method While AIMD simulations provide reliable data, they are limited in covering the diverse atomic configurations and thermodynamic ensembles of the potential energy surfaces The RAG method generates the initial structures from randomized lattice structures, species arrangements, and atomic displacements. These initial structures from the RAG sampling are then optimized through 10∼15 iterative steps of force minimization by DFT calculations, resulting in a training set that encompasses a wide spectrum of potential energy states. The resultant RAG dataset covers a broad potential surface, including local minima, which are likely to be missed by AIMD or simple random sampling. Since the RAG scheme constructs efficiently a diverse and comprehensive training set for MLPs, it is particularly useful for complex systems such as liquids, amorphous solids, and defective crystals with less computational loads than AIMD construction. The GST225 RAG dataset comprised 66457 atomic configurations, covering a broad range of structural phases (liquid, amorphous solid, metastable cubic, and hexagonal) with potential energies ranging -4.2 ∼ -3 eV/atom (see Supplemental Material for further information on the RAG dataset and its potential energy plot Our RAG training dataset encompasses an extensive array of configurations, including single elements (Ge, Sb, Te), binaries (GeTe, Sb2Te3), and ternaries, along with a variety of segregated structures, covering a diverse range of stoichiometries and structures. This breadth is validated through t-SNE analysis We employed the linear chain of p-bonding (p-bonding chain) model to analyze the structure of c-GST The p-bonding chain of c-GST in this study was defined as the sequential bonding of cations and anions with restricted bonding connections that are less than 4 Å in length and larger than 135°in dihedral angle. The first peak of the radial distribution function (RDF) of c-GST at 700 K terminates at 4 Å (see Supplemental Material for the RDF and ADF of c-GST at 700 K [28]). Every linear p-bonding chain in c-GST is truncated by two vacancies, and its length is measured by the number of p-bonding units or equivalently by subtracting one from the number of constituent atoms. Notably, the structural network of p-bonding chains is fully determined by vacancy distribution, and thus its distribution can serve as a gauge of the vacancy ordering. The dynamical state of a simple harmonic oscillator can exhibit autocorrelation. Even when the dynamical phase of an oscillator stochastically collapses due to its finite lifetime, autocorrelation can still be picked for a large ensemble. The density of the vibrational states of the oscillators can be calculated by Fourier transforming the velocity autocorrelation functions, where g(ω) is the vibrational density of states (VDOS) for N atoms, γ j (t) the atomic velocity autocorrelation function (VACF), v j (t) the velocity vector of atom j, and ⟨f (τ )⟩ τ represents the ensemble average over τ A long (>10 ps) and large (>1000 atoms) simulation is necessary to obtain a reliably converged VDOS. The frequency shift and linewidth broadening of phonons caused by their anharmonicity can be effectively captured by classical MD simulations. This method provides a reliable distribution of vibrational modes at temperatures above the Debye temperature T D , as guaranteed by the energy equipartition theorem The VDOS of typical crystalline solids is proportional to ω 2 at low frequencies according to the Debye model. The reduced VDOS, g(ω)/ω 2 , is used to investigate the low-frequency dynamics that determines the thermal transport properties. For perfect crystals, no peaks appear in the reduced VDOS below the frequency of a Brillouin peak, which originates from Van Hove singularity by the transverse acoustic (TA) phonons near the Brillouin zone boundaries The potential energies and forces of the RAG configurations were calculated using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) with the projector augmentedwave (PAW) method The annealing of c-GST was simulated to investigate the rearrangement of cations and vacancies. The initial atomic configuration in the annealing simulation was randomly generated by RAG (Fig. After a 100 ns annealing simulation, the c-GST system was transformed into a vacancy semiordered cubic state with the potential energy lowered by 20 meV/atom (Fig. The changes in atomic structures were not noticed from RDF and ADF comparison (see Supplemental Material for the comparison of partial RDFs and total ADFs of c-GST annealed for 10 ps and 100 ns The change in the number and length distribution of the p-bonding chains during annealing was investigated (Fig. We defined the position of vacancies to investigate their distribution and migration. Since vacancies in c-GST are not naturally identified, we defined their positions through the following steps. First, we created an excessive number of vacancy candidates at the 3 Å-prolonged positions along all the p-bonding chains. These candidates were then grouped into thousands of sets, following the rule that two vacancy candidates belong to the same set if their inter-vacancy-candidate distance is less than 2.2 Å. By regarding the candidates within a set as duplicates of the genuine vacancy, we determined the vacancy position as the mean position of all candidates within the set. Faulty vacancies that had any neighboring atoms closer than 2 Å were removed. We note that defining a vacancy and its position in practical c-GST structures, especially at elevated temperatures, becomes ambiguous. Despite the number of vacancies in the ideal c-GST structure being 1382, lattice distortions and atomic migrations in the actual annealing simulation at 700 K resulted in fewer vacancies: 1382, 1252, 1315, 1363, and 1373 vacancies were found at t=0 s, 10 ps, 100 ps, 1 ns, 10 ns, and 100 ns, respectively. See Supplemental Material for an example of the vacancy structure of c-GST The vacancy distribution was investigated using RDF and ADF (angular distribution function) of vacancies (Fig. To analyze the increase in the vacancy-RDF first peak intensity at 3 √ 2 Å and the reduction of the vacancy-RDF second peak intensity at 6 Å in a more specific way, the peak areas were calculated. The mean coordination number of vacancy-vacancy (V-V) duos can be calculated by integrating the vacancy-RDF first peak (Fig. The vacancy-RDF second peak at 6 Å originates from the straight vacancy-Te-vacancy (V-Te-V) trio illustrated in the inset of Fig. The increase in the V-V duo coordination by ∼11% and the reduction of V-Te-V trio coordination by ∼83% serve Change in the number of (a) V-V duos and (b) straight V-Te-V trios during annealing. The insets illustrate example of the V-V duo and V-Te-V trio configurations. The annealing time is given on a logarithmic scale shifted by 100 ps. as evidence of vacancy ordering towards planar vacancy layers. For example, when a Te atom neighbors one vacancy in a direction (e.g., x -axis), the Te atom tends to simultaneously neighbor other vacancies in the other directions (e.g., y and z -axis). On the other hand, a situation in which a Te atom neighbors two vacancies in a single direction on both sides is extremely unfavorable. Migration of a vacancy is equivalent to the positional exchange of a vacancy with a neighboring cation. To determine whether Ge or Sb is more responsible for vacancy migration, we calculated the mean squared displacement (MSD) from the initial RAG configuration during annealing. See Supplemental Material for the species-wise MSD along the annealing The Debye-Waller thermal isotopic factor B iso = 8π 2 3 ⟨u 2 ⟩ was calculated at five time points (10 ps, 100 ps, 1 ns, 10 ns, and 100 ns), where ⟨u 2 ⟩ is the mean squared displacement of ions (Fig. The sensitivity of B Te iso to annealing suggests that the vacancy distribution significantly affects the dynamics of Te lattices. This result is convincing from our finding that vacancies are always surrounded by the nearby Te atoms. It also implies that the thermal B factor of Te atoms could potentially serve as an indicator of the degree of vacancy ordering. We calculated the VDOS of c-GST to analyze its dynamic states through vacancy ordering (Fig. to the tail of the nearby boson peak. The shape of the Brillouin peak does not change as the vacancies become ordered. The normal mode analysis for the boson peak vibrational modes showed that the boson peak consists primarily of the vibrational modes localized at Te atoms (See Supplemental Material for visualization of the atom-wise boson peak intensity , where u i is the polarization vector of the i -th vibrational normal mode, N the total number of atoms, and α= x, y, or z. We found that configuration-averaged value of the atom-projected boson peak intensity g j (ω BP )/ω 2 BP is proportional to the number of vacancies at the cation sites nearest to Te atom j (Fig. These findings support that the disappearance of the boson peak is directly attributed to the vacancy ordering and, in other words, that the structural disorder in c-GST contributes to the development of the boson peak. The boson peak intensity in c-GST appears to be highly correlated with the large thermal factor of Te atoms. A strong correlation between boson peak modes and thermal factors was previously observed in a two-dimensional power-law potential model We constructed a machine-learned GST225 potential using the RAG dataset and simulated 100 ns annealing of c-GST at 700 K. After annealing, the initial RAG configuration of c-GST with vacancy disorder transformed into a vacancy semi-ordered cubic structure with a lowered energy by ∼20 meV/atom. The structural transition was captured by the p-bonding chain model and the vacancy distribution analysis. In the final vacancy semi-ordered configuration, Sb atoms occupied the terminal-cation sites in the p-bonding chains 21% more frequently than Ge atoms. The number of p-bonding chains longer than 16 decreased by annealing, while the number of shorter p-bonding chains increased. The change in vacancy distribution also supports vacancy ordering. Vacancies tend to be located next to Te atoms already neighboring other vacancies, while the configuration of a straight V-Te-V trio is extremely unfavored. Our annealing simulation of 100 ns may not be long enough to achieve vacancy ordering on a full scale, but all observed structural features consistently indicate the progression of layer-like vacancy ordering. We identified several key features accompanying the vacancy ordering. A boson peak develops at ∼0.575 THz due to the vacancy disorder at the initial stages of annealing (t <1 ns) and then gradually disappears as vacancies are ordered. This formation and evolution of the boson peak by the vacancy ordering is in sheer contrast to the common observation that the boson peaks are formed in amorphous materials. The abnormal boson peak in c-GST is attributed to the modes at Te atoms with certain but energetically unfavorable configurations, while the lattice structure retains the cubic symmetry. We note that such a dynamical phase transition without a change in the density or symmetry of the lattice structure is a unique feature of c-GST. The Debye-Waller thermal B factor of Te decreased by ∼19% in the vacancy semi-ordered cubic phase, indicating its correlation with the boson-peak suppression. The observable response of the thermal factor and the boson peak suggests that they can serve as dynamic indicators of the vacancy ordering. Controlling the localized boson peak modes by the vacancy ordering can be an efficient tool for manipulating the thermoelectric properties of the chalcogenides. Our findings by large-scale MLMD simulations provide a microscopic understanding of the vacancy ordering, which can be utilized for developing multilevel memories and neuromorphic devices using phase-change materials. The RAG configuration was chosen as the initial structure for the annealing simulation instead of the c-GST configuration directly crystallized from a-GST since the latter has a more disordered Te lattice structure. The initial RAG configuration was found to be similar to the c-GST structure crystallized from a-GST, as demonstrated by the p-bonding chain length distribution and VDOS analyses (Fig. 