Manganese dissolution during the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) has been a persistent challenge that impedes the practical implementation of Mn-based electrocatalysts including the LixMn2O4 system in aqueous alkaline electrolyte. The investigated LiMn2O4 particles exhibit two distinct Mn dissolution processes; one independent of OER and the other associated to OER. Combining the bulk sensitive X-ray absorption spectroscopy, surface sensitive X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and electrochemical detection of Mn dissolution using rotating ring-disk electrode, we explore the less understood Mn dissolution mechanism during OER. We correlate near-surface oxidation with the charge attributed to dissolved Mn, which demonstrates increasing Mn dissolution with the formation of surface Mn 4+ species under anodic potential. The observed stronger dissolution during the OER is attributed to the formation of additional Mn 4+ from Mn 3+ during OER. We show that control over the amount of Mn 4+ in LixMn2O4 before the onset of the OER can partially mitigate the OER-triggered dissolution. Overall, our atomistic insights into the Mn dissolution processes are crucial for knowledge-guided mitigation of electrocatalyst degradation, which can be broadly extended to manganese-based oxide systems. In the light of globally increasing energy consumption, stable and efficient electrocatalytic energy storage and conversion are paramount for the transition from dwindling fossil sources to sustainable sources owing to the intermittent nature of renewable energy. In this study, we use a pristine nano-sized cubic spinel LiMn2O4 particles as a model system for the OER in alkaline media to investigate the Mn dissolution processes during potential cycling. We used the Pt ring of a RRDE We use a pristine LiMn2O4 powder as a model system for the OER in alkaline media to investigate the Mn dissolution processes during potential cycling. The tunable electronic properties of Mn in LiMn2O4 during OER cycling enable the insightful understanding of OER activity and stability of electrocatalysts. LiMn2O4 has a well-defined crystal structure (Figure Notably, the disk current began to increase prior to 1.4 V vs RHE, whereas Mn ring current started to rise after 1.4 V vs RHE, which is well before the onset of oxygen evolution (above 1.6 V vs RHE). Thus, the disk current before 1.4 V vs RHE has solo contribution of the oxidation of Mn moieties, whereas after 1.4 V vs RHE, current due to Mn dissolution also arises. At voltage above 1.6 V vs RHE, we observed the exponential increase in OER ring current in addition to the Mn dissolution. This implies that the total disk current of the anodic scan arises from catalysis (i.e., O2 detection), corrosion (Mn detection), and Mn oxidation current. The cathodic scans are exponential without any relevant feature. In the later cycle, the Mn dissolution current and Mn oxidation current drastically diminishes with cycling (Figure The CV of subsequent cycles looked similar but with lower current suggesting that Mn dissolution decreases relative to cycle 1 and in later cycles in both regions. While virtually no Mn dissolution current was detected in Region I during later cycles, it was still detected in Region II, which further supported distinct processes I and II. The mechanistic insights from the distinct behaviors of Mn dissolution in Region I and Region II were better understood by Tafel analysis of the Mn dissolution current at the Pt ring (Figure To understand the insights from the two distinct Mn dissolution processes, it is important to investigate both processes independently by experimental design where we investigate only Region I until a steady-state is reached (Figure (detailed analysis in SI, Table Table We performed bulk sensitive X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and surface-sensitive X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) after selected preparation condition of key points in the previously discussed experiments (Table The change in the local structure (mainly averaged interatomic distance) of the selected samples was further tracked by EXAFS (extended X-ray absorption fine structure) at the Mn-K edge. XPS was used to track the Mn, Li and O content and the populations of Mn oxidation states in the near surface region of the samples after selected electrochemical treatment as defined in Table Firstly, wide XPS spectra were recorded (Figure * Down arrows indicate decrease ranging from little decrease ("↓") to strong decrease ("↓↓↓") relative to previous applied key point. * Up arrows indicate increase ranging from little decrease ("↑") to strong increase ("↑↑↑") relative to previous applied key point. The Mn oxidation states were also quantitatively obtained by analysis of the difference in the Mn 3s multiplet splitting (∆EMn3s) from Mn3s HRXPS (Figure Comparison of the qualitative trends from Mn2p, Mn3p and Li1s XPS analysis to the quantitative Mn3s XPS analysis indicated that Mn oxidation was charge balanced by both Mn 2+ (likely tetrahedral) loss The cumulative Mn charge detected on the ring of an RRDE depended clearly linearly on the nearsurface Mn oxidation state where higher oxidation state led to more Mn loss (Figure In this report, we have identified two Mn dissolution processes on the cubic spinel LiMn2O4. Using ex-situ HRXPS, we found surface oxidation with the formation of mixed Mn 3+/4+ with relatively increasing Mn 4+ population with applied potentials and cycling. This aligns with prior research indicating Mn surface oxidation to Mn 4+ beyond 1.2 V vs RHE, occurring even before the OER onset. Region II displayed stronger Mn dissolution with minor surface oxidation changes, suggesting an additional process that makes Mn 4+ . It is plausible that this process is the OER where Mn 3+ is oxidized to Mn 4+ . The OER mechanism of LiMn2O4 has been extensively studied by our group before. It is evident from our research that a thorough understanding of the atomic origins of Mn dissolution mechanisms is vital for effectively preventing electrocatalyst degradation. The role of Mn 3+ and Mn 4+ for stability has been under debate. Rabe et al. found Mn 3+ -based oxide without OER more stable than Mn 4+ -based oxide with OER, Therefore, more robust Mn-based electrocatalysts need to prevent excessive Mn oxidation before and during the OER as we reported for a Mn-Co oxide. We discussed pristine cubic spinel LiMn2O4 particles as an electrocatalytic model for the OER in alkaline media for Mn-based battery materials The comprehensive understanding of Mn dissolution from the LiMn2O4 model system shows the pivotal role of Mn 4+ species in the dissolution process. From correlation between surface electronic properties and dissolution, we concluded that increased population of Mn 4+ species at the surface influences the Mn loss in both identified regions. The increased dissolution trend during OER suggested the formation of additional Mn 4+ from Mn 3+ during OER alongside surface oxidation. This postulation suggests that Mn oxides must be made robust against Mn oxidation of two distinct processes with separate onsets. It must be noted that the OER likely requires some Mn 4+ , which would anticorrelate with stability and activity. Nano-sized (>99%) LiMn2O4 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) was purchased from VWR (≥99.9% stabilized). The electrolyte utilized was 1 M sodium hydroxide Titripur (Merck) solution, which was further diluted to 0.1 M using ultrapure water (Milli-Q with a resistivity of ≥18.2 MΩ). The electrolyte was purged with gases (argon 5.0 and oxygen 4.8) obtained from AirLiquide Alphagaz. Acetylene carbon black was purchased from Alfa Aesar (≥99.9%) and was acid-treated. For all electrocatalytic experiments, we employed an OrigaFlex system, which consisted of three OGF500 Potentiostats (Origalys SAS). Our measurement setup included a RRDE-3A rotator (ALS Japan Co Ltd.) and custom-made electrochemical cells made of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) cylinders. The electrochemical cells were configured in a three-electrode configuration with a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) (ALS Japan Co Ltd., RE-2B) as a reference electrode, and platinum wire as a counter electrode. The RRDE-electrode setup consisted of a 4 mm diameter glassy carbon disk (area= 0.126 cm 2 ) and a concentric platinum ring with inner and outer diameters of 5 mm and 7 mm, respectively. The working electrodes (disk and Pt-ring) were separately polished to a mirror finish using Al2O3-micro polish and cleaned with water and isopropanol. The SCE reference electrode was calibrated daily against a commercial reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE, HydroFlex Gaskatel). The recipe of our experiment has been taken from the our previous publication. The same procedure was repeated for an electrolyte saturated with argon. Subsequently, 10.3 mg of KMnO4 was added to the argon-saturated electrolyte for a final molarity of 1 mM and another CV was performed. For degradation studies, a catalytic ink of LiMn2O4 was prepared by mixing 10 mg of LiMn2O4 powder and 2 mg of carbon black into a 2 mL of tetrahydrofuran (THF) slurry. After 30 minutes of sonication, 10 μL of this suspension was applied on a polished glassy carbon disk, which was then assembled in a RRDE setup. The ink was uniformly spread across the entire disk surface. The electrolyte was also saturated with argon 30 minutes prior to any of the electrochemical measurements in Ar-saturated 0.1 M NaOH Three measurements were carried out by preparing the LiMn2O4 nanoparticles drop-casted over glassy carbon disk electrodes and assembled the RRDE setup. The total oxidation current was recorded on disk, whereas oxygen and manganese were detected on the ring. The ring currents shown here are the uncalibrated current. In our experiments, the disk electrode was conditioned at 1.25 V vs. RHE for five minutes and then CV were performed in the potential window of 1.25 to 1.75 V vs RHE. All measurements were carried out with the scan rate of 10 mV/s and with the rotation speed of 1600 rpm. The oxygen and manganese detection current has been measured by applying the 0.4 V and 1.2 V vs RHE, respectively. All characterization and electrochemical experiments were carried out at room temperature. Subsequently, the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed in the frequency range of 100 kHz to 1 Hz to determine the uncompensated resistance and correct the applied voltage for the ohmic drop. The electrode coated with nano sized LiMn2O4 exhibited a typical uncompensated resistance. We examined the crystal structure of pristine LiMn2O4 particles using θ-2θ X-ray diffraction (XRD) on a Bruker D8 diffractometer equipped with a Cu Kα source. We did not study the electrochemically processed samples using XRD because the available material was insufficient for a clear signal. We investigated near-surface elements and local bonding using XPS measurements on a Kratos Axis Supra instrument, which is equipped with a monochromated Al Kα X-ray source. Wide XPS spectra were performed on all samples with a pass energy of 160 eV and a binding energy step size of 1 eV. We carried out high-resolution (HRXPS) scans on the Mn 2p, C 1s, Mn 3p/Li 1s and Mn 3s edges, using a step size of 0.05 eV and a pass energy of 5 eV. The multiplet splitting of Mn 3s HRXPS peaks (∆EMn3s) were used to determine the oxidation state of Mn. The calibration curve was derived from the ∆EMn3s values of Mn oxides with known oxidation state. 53 All XAS data was collected using an averaged nominal ring current of 300 mA in both transmission and fluorescence modes at the BESSY II synchrotron, which is operated by Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin. At KMC-2, the general used setup was arranged as follows: I0 ionization chamber, sample, I1 ionization chamber or FY detector, energy reference and I2 ionization chamber. The used double monochromator consisted of two Ge-graded Si(111) crystal substrates and the polarization of the beam was linear horizontal. The Fourier transform (FT) of the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) was determined between 44 and 412.1 eV (3.4 to 10.4 A) above the K edge, with E0 values set at 6539 eV for Mn. EXAFS simulation gives the structural information of three of relevant parameters; coordination number (N) which is related to the number of neighboring atoms around the absorber atom, averaged interatomic distance (R) is nothing but the bond distance between the absorber atom and scatterer and Debye-Waller factor (σ) which is associated with the distance distribution in a disordered material. It must be noted that, Mn-O and Mn-Mn co-ordination peak position on the reduced distance scale are approximately 0.3 Å smaller than the true interatomic distances. We performed EXAFS simulations using the SimXLite software. The phase functions were calculated with the FEFF8-Lite program (version 8.5.3) with the self-consistent field option enabled. The used phase functions were simulated using the LiMn2O4 crystal structure from the crystallography open database with ID 1513966. % change in charge in Region II= ((6.64 E-05 μF ̶ 3.50 E-05 μF) / 6.64 E-05 μF) *100 = ~ 47.29% % change in total charge = ((9.15 E-05 μF ̶ 7.06 E-05 μF) / 9.15 E-05 μF) *100 = ~ 23% S17