A computational search for stable structures among both α and β phases of ternary ATB4 borides (A = Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba, Al, Ga, and Zn, T is 3d or 4d transition elements) has been performed. We found that α-ATB4 compounds with A = Mg, Ca, Al, and T = V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni, and Co form a family of structurally stable or almost stable materials. These systems are metallic in non-magnetic states and characterized by the formation of the localized molecular-like state of 3d transition metal atom dimers, which leads to the appearance of numerous Van Hove singularities (VHS) in the electronic spectrum. The closeness of these VHS to the Fermi level can be easily tuned by electron doping. For the atoms in the middle of the 3d row (Cr, Mn, and Fe), these VHS led to magnetic instabilities and new magnetic ground states with a weakly metallic or semiconducting nature. The magnetic ground states in these systems appear as an analog of the spin glass state. Experimental attempts to produce MgFeB4 and associated challenges are discussed, and promising directions for further synthetic studies are formulated. The electronic density of states (DOS), in the vicinity of the Fermi level E f (N (E f )), is crucial for the understanding of many properties of metallic systems. A significant N (E f ) value typically leads to a broad spectrum of unusual and exciting electronic, magnetic, and structural properties. However, such large values of N (E f ) simultaneously destroy the stability of the material, creating difficulties in their experimental synthesis. In some cases, losing initial stability is not a destructive factor, as it can transform the system into a stable magnetic, superconducting, or, for instance, charge density state A physical reason for developing large N (E f ) was discussed in 1953 when Van Hove demonstrated the crucial role of topology in the electronic or phonon band structure The significance of such VHS becomes stronger in systems with lower dimensions Below, we will focus on materials crystallizing in the YCrB 4 (or below 114) structural type. Such type of metal borides was first discovered in a series of RE-T-B 4 systems (RE=rare earth, T=transition metals) in the 1970s The paper is organized as follows. After reviewing the structures of these systems, we perform computational screening and identify α-ATB 4 systems with A=Mg, Ca, Al, and T=V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni, and Co as a possible structurally stable family with VHS of different strengths (below, we call these VHS systems). Then, we show how the change of type of 3d atoms can be used to tune the strength of VHS, which generally can lead to instability of the paramagnetic Fermi-liquid state of density functional and the formation of a new quantum state. This can be a new electronic, magnetic, or structural state. We focus on analyzing only magnetic instabilities and demonstrate the richness of possible magnetic ground states of these systems. Furthermore, we discuss our comprehensive experimental synthetic studies of these materials. While it did not yield the desired MgFeB 4 phase it allowed us to formulate directions for further synthetic endeavors for ATB 4 systems. A. 114 structures 114 systems have two polymorphs, i.e., α-phase with the space group P bam and β-phase with the space group Cmmm. RE-T-B 4 mainly adopts α-phase while RE-Al-B 4 can have both α and β phases The computational screening of stable phases was performed on both α and β phases of ATB 4 . We consider typical 3d and 4d transition metal elements for the T site, including V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Zr, Nb, and Mo. For the A site, we consider Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba, Al, Ga, and Zn, which have relatively large ionic radii. Figure We now focus on stable or metastable α-ATB 4 systems: A is Mg, Ca, or Al, and T is V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni, or Co. Their non-magnetic (NM) electronic densities of states (DOS) are shown in Fig. When the A site is occupied by Al (right column in Fig. VHS corresponds to the regions of the BZ where flat bands are located. In Fig. The position of VHS in these systems is only sometimes precisely at the Fermi level in nonmagnetic calculations. For instance, in AlCrB 4 , the Fermi level is practically in the gap, while the low N (E f ) can also be seen for Al(V, Fe, Co)B 4 and (Mg, Ca)CoB 4 , though the VHS is close to the Fermi level in all these cases. If the rigid band scenario is valid, one can predict that under suitable hole (electron) doping, one can situate the VHS at the Fermi level and study how the corresponding electronic fluctuations would change the ground state. Since the density functional theory allows us to study magnetic instabilities in these cases, we now switch to analyzing such instabilities induced by the VHS in magnetic states. The ferromagnetic instability is defined by fulfillment of the Stoner criteria, which indicates that for systems with 3d atoms, if the value of N T (E f ) is around 1 eV -1 , the system is close to such instability. Figure In the 114 structure, one can consider three types of collinear magnetic order between T atoms. To clarify them, we use <ijk> notation to represent the magnetic orders, where i, j, and k are either F (ferromagnetic) or A (antiferromagnetic). i represents the magnetic order within the dimer between two T atoms. j represents the magnetic order between two dimers in the a-b plane, while k represents the magnetic order between layers of dimers along the c direction. With this notation, there are eight different FM and AFM structures. Figure Next, we analyze the metastable magnetic states in Fig. In MgFeB 4 , CaFeB 4 , and isoelectronic AlMnB 4 , no AFM configurations between Fe atoms in the dimers are found (Fig. Figure Overall, while all nonmagnetic states appear to be metallic, magnetic interactions of density functional theory drive these metals to semiconductors or insulators. In this sense, the physics appears as the Slater metalinsulator transition proposed more than 70 years ago als with metal-insulator transition follow strongly correlated scenarios or Mott behavior. Systems with Slater's metal-insulator transition are unique, and our prediction must be verified experimentally. The absence of magnetic states for Ni, Co, and V systems is most likely related to the fact that significant VHS near the Fermi level is not formed for the atoms of the beginning and the end of the 3d row. We also examine the electron-phonon coupling (EPC) strength in the non-magnetic 114 systems, as metal borides can show phonon-mediated superconductivity However, we cannot dismiss the possibility of a different type of superconductivity pairing in these materials. While compounds with Cr and Mn can be eliminated from consideration of any superconductivity due to the presence of localized magnetic dimer states, the corresponding Fe (with Al) and all Co and Ni systems indeed represent metallic systems with the average value N (E f ) close to the one in iron pnictides superconductors. Besides, the DOSs for all these systems (Fig. Due to exciting, predicted properties, we focused on the MgFeB 4 compound for synthetic exploration. Several factors make the synthesis of the MgFeB 4 phase challenging. Boron is a refractory element that requires a higher temperature to activate. Methods such as arc melting are commonly used to synthesize transition metal borides. In contrast, magnesium is a reactive element with high vapor pressure, T boiling = 1100 • C. This reactivity difference precludes the use of arc-melting or other high-temperature methods. We have recently shown the power of the mixing of refractory materials method when two refractory components are mixed by forming a binary compound via arc melting. The resulting compound is introduced into a reaction with more active components simultaneously and in close spatial proximity Partial mixing of elements may be achieved when binary MgB 2 is used as a source of boron and magnesium. Gillan et al. have shown that the reaction of MgB 2 and metal chlorides may produce corresponding binary metal borides, i.e., MgB 2 +FeCl 2 = MgCl 2 +FeB Hence, we attempted a hydride reaction using MgH 2 as a source of Mg. Unlike ductile Mg, MgH 2 can be effectively mixed with Fe and B, and the released hydrogen may improve boron reactivity. The hydride approach's success was demonstrated by synthesizing several compounds in the Li-Ni-B system Nevertheless, from in-situ data we can conclude that the unknown phases had limited thermal stability, and reactions at temperatures above 820 • C are expected to produce binary FeB. Further identification of these unknown phases solely from powder diffraction data is challenging. Our ex-situ hydride reactions do not yield new phases in any appreciable amounts. Some possibilities for this could be that the unknown phase incorporates silicon from the silica container, whereas for the ex-situ reactions, niobium ampules are used for the reac- tion container. Another possibility is that this phase is metastable, and the slower heating ramp in ex-situ reaction allows for this phase to decompose. The thermodynamics calculations in Supplementary Note 1 suggest the MgFeB 4 is thermodynamically stable in an extensive temperature range. However, the synthesis is likely hindered by the formation of intermediate phases. These intermediates consume much reaction energy, leaving little driving force to form the target MgFeB 4 . Such interplay between thermodynamics and kinetics represents a major challenge to control the solid-state synthesis In summary, using electronic structure calculations, we identified new structurally stable compounds among ternary borides of α-ATB 4 type (A=Mg, Ca, Al; T=V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni, and Co). These predicted systems are characterized by numerous Van Hove singularities in their electronic spectrum formed by the emergence of highly localized quasimolecular states of 3d atomic dimers. Obtained VHS are stronger for electronic occupations near half filling of the 3d band and weaker for the states near the beginning and end of this band. The presence of such VHS, in turn, creates favorable conditions for the development of different types of fluctuations and the appearance of new quantum states. In our case, we analyzed magnetic instabilities. We found the formation of spin glass systems with spin dimers in magnetic semiconducting (or weakly metallic) states that the experiment can verify. The systematic appearance of VHS as a function of the electronic population should be verified by spectroscopic experiments as these localized states are well separated by 1-2 eV. Overall, we demonstrated how to search for the systems with developing Van Hove singularities. The proposed variation of the type of 3d atoms represents a convenient tuning of the VHS strength, which can lead to instability of the original paramagnetic Fermi liquid and the formation of new magnetic states. While producing MgFeB 4 experimentally was found to be challenging, we formulated a promising direction for further synthetic studies. The discovery of these materials would lead to an opportunity to study VHS systems and the possible formation of new quantum states, including unusual magnetic orders, superconducting states, charge density waves, and phase separation effects. First-principles calculations. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method , where E (M x N y B z ) is the total energy of bulk ATB 4 . E(A), E(T), and E(B) are the total energies of A, T, and B ground-state bulk phases, respectively. E d is defined by the formation energy differences with respect to the three reference phases forming the Gibbs triangle on the convex hull (If E d = 0, it indicates the ATB 4 is a new stable phase, and the existing convex hull should be updated. The reference phases in the convex hulls are obtained from the Material Project database The screened phonon frequency was computed by fully self-consistent (SC) calculations in the displaced atomic configurations using the tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections. To compute the unscreened phonon frequency ω, the identical calculation was first performed in the equilibrium configuration, followed by the calculations with the displaced atoms, but with partial occupations fixed as the one in the equilibrium configuration. The detailed workflow of this method can be found in After turning off the furnace, samples were allowed to cool back to room temperature. Powder X-ray Diffraction (PXRD). After annealing, all samples were exposed to air and ground into fine powder using agate mortar. PXRD characterization was performed using Rigaku MiniFlex600 powder diffractometer with Cu-K α radiation and Ni-K β filter (λ = 1.54059 Å). In-situ PXRD was performed at beamline 17-BM at the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory (λ = 0.24110 Å). A mixture of MgH 2 , Fe, and B in a 1.3:1:4 ratio was ball-milled and loaded into a silica capillary with a 0.5 mm inner diameter and 0.7 mm outer diameter. The silica capillary was evacuated and flamesealed such that the total length of the capillary was 50 mm. The capillary was placed vertically in a cell with resistive heating elements and aligned with the X-ray beam. Diffraction data were collected every 60 seconds as the sample was heated and cooled. Due to the reactor design, the thermocouple is slightly removed from the sample. We estimate that the error in the temper-ature is around 20-30 • C. The reported temperature is the measured temperature. FIG. 5. The energy difference and magnetic moment for different magnetic states. The symbols indicate different magnetic orders. The lower panel shows the magnetic order corresponding to different <ijk> notations. Different colors show different elements: Mg (blue), Ca (red), and Al (green). The compounds with V, Co, Ni, and AlFeB4 do not have magnetic solutions.