We propose a simple theoretical model referred to as the two-band model to realize both a large Seebeck coefficient and high electrical conductivity, resulting in a high thermoelectric (TE) power factor (PF). Using the Kubo-Luttinger linear response theory, we apply this model to the TE response of an FeSe thin film reported by Shimizu et al. to show a high PF with strong temperature dependence. The effects of superconducting fluctuations and excitonic correlations are found to not be critical. Because of recent societal needs for energy harvesting technology, the development of high-performance thermoelectric (TE) materials has been a topic of intense interest. The performance of a TE material is characterized by its power factor PF = L 11 S 2 and the dimensionless figure of merit ZT = (PF/λ)T ; the former represents the maximum output, and the latter represents the maximum efficiency. Because the PF and ZT are determined by three intercorrelated physical quantities (i.e., the electrical conductivity L 11 , the Seebeck coefficient S , and the thermal conductivity λ), enhancing the performance of TE materials is difficult. Nevertheless, extensive effort has been devoted to developing materials with enhanced PF and ZT values, and several high-performance TE materials with ZT > 2 have recently been reported. In principle, the PF can be large even for a moderate S if the L 11 is sufficiently high in systems with many valleys with degeneracy, n v , because L 11 is proportional to n v , whereas S is independent of n v . This is not easy to realize, however, and then efforts to find systems with a large (absolute value of) S have been pursued. We then apply it to recent experimental data for an FeSe thin film with a high PF, as reported by Shimizu et al. tical electric field E ⊥ over a wide temperature (T ) range (50 K < T < 300 K). In this section, we explain the KL theory ( § 2.1) and introduce the two-band model ( § 2.2). We explain the KL theory combined with the Green's function method, which enables the TE response to be analyzed fully quantum mechanically. within the linear response to E and dT/dx. Here, L 11 and L 12 are the electrical conductivity and the thermoelectrical conductivity, respectively. Using L 11 and L 12 , we can express S as and can describe the PF by According to the KL theory, L 11 and L 12 are given by where J el and J th are electrical and thermal current operators, respectively. On the basis of the KL theory together with the method introduced by Jonson and Mahan, even for strongly disordered systems (with particular types of both mutual electron interactions and electron-phonon interactions). is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. We introduce a two-band model in two dimensions that is applicable as an effective Hamiltonian for an FeSe thin film in E ⊥ . The Hamiltonian of the band model is given by where 2m H + ∆ are the energy dispersions for the lower and higher conduction bands, respectively, with an energy spacing ∆ (Fig. DOS (arb. unit) Here, ∆ is the energy spacing between the higher-and lower-band bottoms. higher conduction-band electrons with the two-dimensional wavenumber k = (k x , k y ). m L and m H are the effective masses of the lower and higher conduction-band electrons, respectively. g s and g o are the spin and orbital degrees of freedom, respectively. For an FeSe thin film, they are given by g s = 2 and g o = 1. The origin of energy is taken to be the bottom of the lower conduction band. We introduce a retarded Green's function as where Σ R L/H is the retarded self-energy due to several scattering events for the lower/higher conduction-band electrons. In the present study, we adopt the constant-τ approximation with respect to energy E and wavenumber k as and consider electron-phonon interaction and impurity scattering as scattering processes in the system. /τ L/H is assumed to be where the first term with parameter A L/H is the contribution from the electron-phonon scattering; the Bloch-Grüneisen law (the T 5 -law) is assumed, and the second term with the parameter B L/H is the contribution from the impurity scattering, which is independent of T . The density of states (DOS) ρ(E) per unit area in the presence of scattering for the two-band model is expressed as in terms of the retarded Green's function. Here, Ω is the system area. Substituting G R L/H (E, k) in Eqs. ( where θ L/H are defined in terms of the relaxation times τ L/H , Here, the DOS in Eq. ( The spectral conductivity α(E) is described in terms of the Green's functions as where v L/H = k x /m L/H is the group velocity in the xdirection and V is the system volume. The summation with respect to k can be analytically performed; α(E) is eventually given by where d = 4 Å is the distance between the atomic layers in the system. Here, we note that α(E) is independent of the effective masses m H and m L , which is a characteristic feature of two-dimensional electron systems. The results indicate that the present system is a good metal and that the electron-phonon scattering is dominant in comparison with the impurity scattering within the present T region. By contrast, A H < A L indicates that the lower-band electrons are more affected by electronphonon scattering than the higher-band electrons. For reference, A = 5 × 10 -13 eV/K 5 and B = 3 × 10 -5 eV for copper. By substituting the calculated L 11 and L 12 values into Eqs. ( This result is to be compared with the dominant contributions to conductivity, σ 0 , given by Here, σ 0 can be determined from the experimental data 7) (e.g., τE/ = 5 × 10 11 T -5 ); thus, σ ′ is smaller than σ 0 by an order of /τE in the T range except around T c , which then leads to small contributions to L 11 . The contribution of σ ′ to L 12 is also small because σ ′ is weakly dependent on energy in the present case. This fact has been numerically assessed (e.g., the weak T dependence of S with a large value of 350 μV/K for 50 K < T < 300 K is difficult to understand in terms of superconducting fluctuations). The system of present interest, FeSe, is semimetallic with an equal number of electrons and holes when in bulk form; however, in thin-film form, FeSe has more electrons under an applied gate voltage. In such a situation, effects of excitonic correlations, Here, E g is the energy gap between the lower conduction band and the valence band, ∆ is the energy spacing between the bottoms of the lower and higher conduction bands, and ∆ L/H ex is the excitonic order parameter for the lower/higher conduction band. ∆ L/H ex is assumed to be expressed as follows by the mean-field solution in mind: where T 0 is the critical temperature. In the following calculation, we set m = 2.7m 0 , E g = 10 meV, ∆ = 29 meV, and T 0 = 200 K. We also adopted the constant-τ approximation to the self-energy, as in Eq. (10). (See the Appendix for the calculation procedure of the TE response in this system; the calculation is based on the KL theory within the constant-τ approximation.) We now discuss the two special cases of (i) ∆ H ex = 0 and (ii) ∆ L ex = 0 to understand possible effects of excitonic correlations on the lower and higher bands separately. (i) Case of ∆ H ex = 0 Figure Figure We introduced a simple theoretical model, the two-band model, to attain both a large S and high L 11 and thereby obtain a high PF and then applied it to an FeSe thin film under E ⊥ . We succeeded in understanding the recent experimental report by Shimizu et al., Similar candidates with a high PF resulting from the two bands are nanowires and nanotubes with nanosized diameters because their energy bands have sub-band structures as a result of quantum confinement effects along the diameter direction. Notably, the sub-band gap in these candidates is independent of E ⊥ and only μ can be controlled by tuning E ⊥ , in contrast to FeSe thin films. Appendix: Excitonic effects on the DOS and the spectral conductivity In this Appendix, we represent analytical expressions of the DOS and the spectral conductivity for the two-band model incorporating the effects of excitonic correction, which is described by the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( We adopt the constant-τ approximation for the self-energy as where we set τ L = τ v . The DOS is described as in terms of the retarded Green's function G R (E, k) = EI -H(k) -Σ R -1 and can be analytically calculated as and L-v + Θ (+) L-v ) . (A•5) Here, ρ H (E) is the DOS of the higher band without excitonic correlations and ρ L-v (E) is the DOS of the lower conduction band and the valence band including excitonic correlations. z R/A are given by with Im z R ≥ 0 and Im z A ≤ 0. Θ H and Θ (±) L-v are defined as The spectral conductivity α(E) is expressed as in terms of the retarded/advanced Green's functions G R/A (E, k) and the velocity matrix v x = -1 ∂H(k)/∂k x in the x-direction along the temperature gradient of the system. Within the constant-τ approximation, Eq. (A•9) can be calculated as with the contribution from the higher conduction band, and the contribution from both the lower conduction band and the valence band, The DOS and the spectral conductivity for the case of ∆ L ex = 0 are obtained similarly.