A radiative thermostat system senses its own temperature and automatically modulates heat transfer by turning on/off the cooling to maintain its temperature near a desired set point. Taking advantage of far-and near-field radiative thermal technologies, we propose an intelligent radiative thermostat induced by the combination of passive radiative cooling and near-field radiative thermal diode for thermal regulation at room temperature. The top passive radiative cooler in thermostat system with static thermal emissivity uses the cold outer space to passively cool itself all day, which can provide the bottom structure with the sub-ambient cold source. Meanwhile, using the phasetransition material vanadium dioxide, the bottom structure forms a near-field radiative thermal diode with the top cooler, which can significantly regulate the heat transfer between two terminals of the diode and then realize a stable temperature of the bottom structure. Besides, the backsided heat input of the thermostat has been taken into account according to real-world applications. Thermal performance of the proposed radiative thermostat design has been analyzed, showing that the coupling effect of static passive radiative cooling and dynamic internal heat transfer modulation can maintain an equilibrium temperature approximately locked within the phase transition region. Besides, after considering empirical indoor-to-outdoor heat flux, rendering its thermal performance closer to that of passive solar residential building walls, the calculation result proves that the radiative thermostat system can effectively modulate the temperature and stabilize it within a controllable range. Passive radiative thermostats driven by near-field radiative thermal diode can potentially enable intelligent temperature regulation technologies, for example, to moderate diurnal temperature in regions with extreme thermal swings. Compressor-based cooling systems consume about 20% of global electricity to provide suitable room temperatures for various buildings, which further accelerates heating effects and greenhouse gas emissions toward the environment Although passive radiative systems can effectively reduce its surface temperature without energy consumption under high ambient temperature, its static thermal emissivity may result in overcooling in cooler climates, which potentially leads to higher heating costs. To maintain radiative cooler surfaces at temperatures moderate enough for desired residential requirement, dynamic radiative cooling using the phasetransition material vanadium dioxide (VO2) has been proposed recently. VO2 presents metallic or insulating state when temperature is above or below the phase transition temperature (TC), respectively. The VO2-based radiative cooling system will automatically turn on/off radiative cooling based on whether the temperature of cooling system is above or below TC of VO2. Relevant researches of VO2-based switchable radiative cooling systems were recently studied by Ono In this work, we propose an intelligent radiative thermostat system driven by nearfield radiative thermal diode with both top-layer passive radiative cooling and internal heat transfer modulation, which can sense its own temperature and automatically maintains its temperature near a desired set point. The top radiative cooling part is a multilayer photonic structure made of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and silver (Ag), acting as a static passive radiative cooler that provides the sub-ambient cold source. The bottom part is composed of VO2 nanograting and gold (Au) layer, which forms a near-field radiative thermal diode with the top radiative cooler, self-adjusting near-field radiative heat transfer (NFRHT) between two terminals of the diode depending on the phase transition of VO2. The simulation results show that this system can perform static top-layer radiative cooling and keep bottom-layer temperature around a desired set point, corresponding to the variable ambient temperature and constant/variable backsided heat input, without external energy consumption. Therefore, the combination of the static passive radiative cooling and near-filed radiative thermal diode can pave the way for applications of radiative thermostat within energy-efficient buildings and vehicles and energy-intelligent management systems. Here, we propose a composite structure design consisting of a top passive radiative cooler made of multilayer structure of PDMS (thickness h1), Ag (thickness h2), and a VO2-based thermal diode based on the dynamic NFRHT between the top and bottom structures depicted schematically in Fig. Here, ( , ) ( / 2) coth( / 2 is the energy of the harmonic oscillator. The function 0 ( , ) 2 is the spectral transmissivity of the radiative transport between two mediums separated by a gap L. The effective medium approximation is utilized to obtain the effective dielectric properties of the bottom VO2 nanograting structure , where QF and QR represent the forward and reverse heat fluxes between two terminals of thermal diode, respectively where, Qnet,cooler and Qcooler are the net cooling power and radiative power of the top radiative cooler made of PDMS and Ag thin films, respectively. Qnr represents the nonradiative power, including heat conduction and convection. Qamb and Qsun is the incident thermal radiation from atmosphere and the incident solar energy absorbed by the top radiative cooler. Qdiode is the heat flux between the top radiative cooler and the bottom grating structure. Tamb, Tcooler, and Tgrating are the temperatures of ambient, the top radiative cooler, and the bottom VO2 grating respectively. Qcooler is given by In the equation, defines the spectral radiance of a blackbody at temperature T. The non-radiative heat transfer Qnr between the top radiative cooler and ambient air is given by: where, hnr represents the non-radiative heat transfer coefficient induced by natural air heat conduction and convection where, ( , , )  l  f corresponds to the absorptivity of the atmosphere. In addition, Qsun(Tcooler) represents the solar irradiation absorbed by the top radiative cooler, given by: sun cooler sun AM1.5 sun cooler 0 where, IAM1.5(λ) is the spectral irradiance intensity of solar irradiation at AM 1.5 and θsun stands for the direction of the incoming sunlight net,grating diode cooler grating input where, Qinput indicates the heat input from the internal space to the backside of VO2 , ). Here, the heat capacitance of the radiative cooler (Ccooler) and the grating structure (Cgrating) will consider the contribution of each component of the structures, as described in the literature The thermal performance of the radiative thermostat system is evaluated by calculating the top radiative cooler and the bottom VO2 grating structure (φ = 0.2) temperatures, respectively, in response to the recorded 24-hour outdoor weather data. Here, we use the ambient temperature The top radiative cooler can yield the temperature drops at sunrise, noon, and sunset over 8 K, which does not change in response to the ambient temperature, even causing it to overcool in the cold ambient environment, such as from 12:00 AM to 9:00 AM and 06:00 PM to 12:00 AM, respectively. On the other hand, the bottom VO2 grating temperature firstly drops rapidly below 293 K due to the NFRHT across the thermal diode, where the top radiative cooler provides a huge sub-ambient cold source. But due to the heat transfer inhibition induced by reverse-bias thermal diode, which restrains heat flow from the bottom grating to the top radiative cooler, the bottom grating temperature cannot drop significantly as much as that of the top cooler. Then, from 6:00 AM to 12:00 AM, the temperature of VO2 grating maintains an equilibrium temperature (about 293 K) approximately locked within the phase transition region, which presents a small temperature fluctuation. Meanwhile, when the grating temperature rises over 293 K due to the backsided heat input, the thermal diode turns to the forward bias enhancing heat flow from the grating to the top cooler, which then results in the grating temperature back below 293 K. Besides, as the cooler temperature rises close to 293 K with the ambient temperature, the grating temperature will be immediately close to the cooler temperature due to the heat dissipation of forward-bias thermal diode, where the huge difference between the grating and ambient temperatures reaches a peak of about 10 K. Therefore, the temperature change of the bottom grating over this 24-hour period clearly exhibits the radiative thermostat performance, resilient to the surrounding environment. As a comparison, a hypothetical integrated radiative cooler is assumed without internal NFRHT, which processes the same materials, structural parameters and outer thermal conditions as the proposed radiative thermostat. It is clearly seen from Fig. Meanwhile, the inset figure demonstrates time-dependent temperature evolution of the top radiative cooler and the bottom grating of thermostat system within one fluctuation period. When the temperature changes of the top cooler and the bottom grating emerge the opposite trends, further indicating the dynamic thermal modulation effects of thermal diode. When the grating temperature drops rapidly below 293 K due to thermal diode enhancing heat dissipation, the cooler temperature will rise rapidly by a certain percentage, because of the different specific heat capacities of these two parts. On the contrary, when the grating temperature is below 293 K, thermal diode suppresses heat dissipation and then the grating temperature will slowly increase based on backsided heat input. Meanwhile, the top cooler temperature will slowly decrease due to passive radiative cooling effect. Therefore, to compare with a hypothetical integrated passive radiative cooler, the internal thermal diode plays a significant role in radiative thermostat performance. In summary, we present an intelligent radiative thermostat system driven by nearfield radiative thermal diode for near-room-temperature thermal moderation. Our radiative thermostat system can moderate temperature swings with respect to passive radiative cooler with fixed thermal emissivity, resulting in both daytime and nighttime cooling in hot climates and keeping warm in cold ones at a pre-set phase transition temperature. The top radiative cooler in thermostat system can achieve passive radiative cooling based on its own thermal emissivity, which can provide the bottom structure with sub-ambient cold source. The bottom structure of the thermostat can moderate its temperature swings with the phase transition temperature, which forms a near-field radiative thermal diode with the top cooler, realizing the dynamic heat transfer modulation between the bottom structure and the top cooler. We also simulate the empirical indoor-to-outdoor heat flux, rendering its thermal performance closer to that of passive solar residential building walls, and demonstrate that the proposed intelligent thermostat system can effectively modulate the temperature and stabilize it within a controllable range. Therefore, our designed intelligent radiative thermostat has the potential to greatly improve energy savings worldwide.