Magnetism plays a key role in the emergence of topological phenomena in the Weyl semimetal Co3Sn2S2, which exhibits a ferromagnetic (FM) interactions along the c-axis of the crystal and an antiferromagnetic (AFM) interactions within the ab plane. Extensive studies on the temperature dependence of the magnetism with the magnetic field along the c-axis have uncovered a number of magnetic phases. Currently, the nature and origins of the reported magnetic phases are under debate. Here we report on magnetic field orientation effects on the magnetism in Co3Sn2S2. The shape of the hysteresis loop of the Hall resistance at a fixed temperature is found to change from rectangular to bow-tie-like as the magnetic field is tilted from the c-axis towards the ab plane, resembling that reported for magnetic fields along the c-axis as the temperature approaches the Curie temperature from below. Unlike their temperature-dependent counterparts, the newly observed bow-tie-like hysteresis loops show exchange bias. Our results showcase the contribution of the in-plane AFM interactions to the magnetism in Co3Sn2S2 and demonstrate a new way to tune its magnetic phases. They also shed light on the temperature-dependent magnetic phases occurring in the magnetic field along the c-axis of the crystal. Recently, Co3Sn2S2 was discovered to be a Weyl semimetal Experiments at low temperatures confirm that c-axis of the crystal is the easy axis of magnetization and a field of H = 23 Tesla is required to fully orientate the Co magnetic moment parallel to the kagomé plane at T = 2 K As the first confirmed intrinsic time reversal symmetry-breaking Weyl semimetal, Co3Sn2S2 has launched extensive investigations on its magnetic order Currently, experiments revealing possible magnetic phases focus on thermal effects, with magnetic fields applied along the c-axis of the crystal. Although extensive investigations have been conducted, the nature and origins of these possible magnetic phases, particularly the contribution of the in-plane AFM structures, have been widely debated Our measurements were conducted on two crystals grown by a self-flux method As indicated by the resistance versus temperature curve presented in Fig. The bow-tie-like structure of the hysteresis loops in Co3Sn2S2 at T > TA was understood as the interplay of two terms in the free energy in a minimal Landau model, one favoring a FM structure M = ±M0, and another favoring in-plane AFM structures M = 0 Since AFM structure was also detected in μSR measurements at T > TA Our key findings are displayed in Fig. The rectangular shape stays unchanged even at an angle as large as  = 84.5 (Fig. The bow-tie-like structures eventually vanish when the magnetic field is within about 2 of the ab plane (see Fig. The evolution of the shape of the Rxy(H) loops with the magnetic field orientation is further illustrated by the angle dependence of the switching fields, as presented in Fig. The switching of spins in an ordinary ferromagnet is often caused by nucleation and motion of domain walls separating regions of opposite uniform magnetizations. The values of the associated switching fields depend on the angle  between the magnetic field and the magnetization easy axis, following the Kondorsky relation As presented in Fig. Recent neutron scattering experiments In summary, we investigated magnetic field orientation effects on the magnetism in the newly confirmed ferromagnetic Weyl semimetal Co3Sn2S2. We found that tilting the magnetic field from the c-axis towards the ab plane at a fixed temperature can induce a change in the magnetic phases similar to that which occurs when the temperature is swept up to the Curie temperature while keeping the magnetic field aligned along the c-axis, as referred from the change (from rectangle to bow-tie-like structure) in the shape of the Rxy(H) hysteresis loops. Furthermore, the bow-tie-like Rxy(H) hysteresis loops observed near the ab plane can exhibit exchange bias, underscoring the significance of the AFM interaction for the magnetism in Co3Sn2S2. Our results demonstrate a new way to tune the magnetic phases of Co3Sn2S2 and shed light on the origin of the bow-tie-like structures in the hysteresis loops measured in the magnetic field along the c-axis. 