The structure of solid oxygen has been studied at pressures from 50 to 140 GPa using static structure search methods and molecular dynamics simulations with density functional theory and a hybrid exchange functional. Several crystalline structures with space group symmetries Pnma, P 21/m, Pm and P 63/mmc have been identified as candidates for the ζ phase of oxygen at 0 K. Within the hybrid exchange functional framework and at 300 K temperature, Pm is shown to be energetically most favorable above 111 GPa. A comparison with experimental X-ray diffraction, spectroscopic and superconductivity measurements is provided for all competing structures. Oxygen is in many ways a unique element: fundamental, abundantly available on Earth, and the only known diatomic molecule that carries a magnetic moment The ε-phase, which remains stable across a wide range of pressures, has attracted a lot of interest, encompassing both theoretical investigations Although the structure of the ε phase is experimentally known We recall that the lowest-enthalpy structure for the ε phase was initially predicted to be Cmcm and not the experimentally determined O 8 (ε-C 2/m). In addition, DFT calculations within GGA initially suggested that the ε-ζ transition occurs at approximately 40 GPa, in contrast to the experimental value of 96 GPa. These discrepancies were recently resolved by independent theoretical studies The present study is focused on the ε-ζ transition and determining the structure of the ζ phase. Several new candidate structures for the ζ phase are found using the Universal Structure Predictor Evolutionary Xtallography (USPEX) code Electronic structure calculations and structural relaxations were performed within DFT using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Search for new structures were conducted for 16 and 24 atoms at 35 GPa and 150 GPa using the USPEX code It is well know that GGA (DFT) underestimates the electronic band gap. Therefore, the HSE06 functional The space groups of the new structures were identified with the FINDSYM code Note that theoretical generation of the ε-O 8 structure above 50 GPa using the PAW method implemented in VASP is impossible, as the structure spontaneously converts to the metallic ζ-C 2/m In addition to the previously suggested C 2/m and C 2/c candidate structures for the ζ phase Figure After inclusion of the HSE06 hybrid functional in the geometrical optimization, the relative stability of the candidate structures changes significantly. The modified enthalpy curves are shown in Fig. To determine thermodynamic stability at finite temperature, we have performed constant-volume first principles molecular dynamics (FPMD) simulations at densities corresponding to pressures of about 116 and 140 GPa and temperature of 300 K for P 2 1 /m, Pnma, Pm, P 6 3 /mmc and ζ-C 2/m. Equilibrium was established within the first 2 ps of the simulations and data was collected in the following 5 ps. The enthalpies of all structures, H = U + P V , were obtained directly from the FPMD at the level of DFT-PBE, with U and P as statistical averages of the instantaneous energy and pressure. HSE06 corrections to the enthalpy were then made as ∆H HSE = ⟨E HSE -E P BE ⟩ P BE , where E HSE and E P BE are HSE and PBE energies, respectively, of atomic configurations taken from the FPMD trajecto- ries, and ⟨• • • ⟩ P BE indicates statistical average within the PBE-FPMD ensemble. To obtain the Gibbs free energy, G = H -T S, the entropies, S, of all structures were computed by integrating their vibrational density of states assuming a harmonic partition function. The vibrational density of states were obtained by Fourier transforming velocity autocorrelation functions from the FPMD trajectories. The relative HSE-corrected Gibbs free energies of the relevant structures are shown in Fig. Note that the differences among the Gibbs free energies of the candidate structures are more significant than the 0 K enthalpy differences, which allows us to draw stronger conclusions for their stability. Based on the HSE06-corrected Gibbs free energy data presented in Fig. In what follows, we compare properties of the energetically most competitive structures to experimental measurements of ζ-oxygen phase. Simulated powder X-ray diffraction patterns for the HSE06-relaxed P 2 1 /m, Pnma, Pm, ζ-C 2/m and P 6 3 /mmc at 116 GPa are shown in in Fig. Metallic oxygen in the ζ phase has been found to be superconducting with a measured Raman measurements on the ζ phase In summary, we have performed first-principles crys- tal structure searches identifying several new candidate structures for the ζ phase of oxygen. DFT calculations with a hybrid exchange functional (HSE06), which correctly predicts the ε phase and the insulator-to-metal transition of oxygen at 0 K, significantly alter the relative stability of these structures compared to DFT-GGA. Even bigger effect has the inclusion of finite-temperature effects. The final energetic ordering is established from Gibbs free energies calculated using molecular dynamsimulations performed at room temperature and with HSE06 corrections at the level of thermodynamic perturbation theory. Based on this analysis, the equilibrium structure for the ζ phase of oxygen is a nearly hexagonal close-packed structure with the Pm symmetry and a 24 atom-unit cell. Comparison with available experimental data shows a reasonable agreement with X-ray and Raman measurements -as good, if not better, than that of the previously proposed C 2/m structure. Nevertheless, the agreement is not perfect. Higher resolution measurements will be useful for validating our prediction. A possible difficulty in collecting high quality experimental data probably comes from the presence of a mixed-phase state, as reported in Raman studies 