The exploration of topological states in photonic crystals have inspired a number of intriguing discoveries, which in turn provide new mechanisms for the manipulation of light in unprecedented ways. Here we show that light can be effectively guided and trapped at the shifted photonic crystal interfaces (SPCIs). The projected band gap of SPCIs, which depends on the shift parameter, is characterized by a Dirac mass. Interestingly, the SPCI with zero Dirac mass is a glide-symmetric waveguide featured with gapless interface states that exhibit excellent transmission performance even in the presence of disorders and sharp corners. Moreover, placing two SPCIs with opposite Dirac mass together results in a photonic bound state due to the Jackiw-Rebbi theory. Our work provides an alternative way towards the design of ultracompact photonic devices such as robust waveguides and cavities as well as the cavity-waveguide coupled systems that can serve as high-performance building blocks of miniature integrated topological photonic circuits. Introduction.-The past decades have witnessed the rapid development of various topological states in photonic systems In this letter, we demonstrate that shifted photonic crystals interfaces (SPCIs) can support both gapless interface states and in-gap bound states, which can have potential applications on robust light guiding and trapping. When the shift parameter equals to half lattice constant, the SPCI with a nontrivial Wannier configuration support gapless interface states that can be utilized as a waveguide featured with excellent transmission performance even in the presence of sharp corner. Moreover, when two SPCIs with opposite shift parameters are placed together, the in-gap localized states emerged as the Jackiw-Rebbi solitons of the gapped interface states. Finally, we discuss the coupled waveguide-cavity systems formed by the SPCIs-induced waveguide and localized states, showing that such systems can serve as elementary units for tunable, high-performance integrated photonic circuits. SPCIs.-We start from a two-dimensional PCs with circular air holes arrayed in square lattice in a dielectric background [see Fig. which, as an analog of the Kramers theorem fermions, guarantees that all bands are doubly degenerate and forming pairs at k x = π/a. Such gapless interface states protected by the synthetic Kramers theorem exhibit excellent performance in guiding waves [also see in Fig. Topological light trapping.-On the other hand, when g ̸ = ±a/2, the synthetic Kramers theorem in Eq. 1 is no longer valid and hence, the degeneracy of two interface bands at k x = π/a will be lifted. As expected, two interface bands separated by a frequency gap emerge in the bulk band gap for the case of g = 0.3a [see the dashed colored lines in Fig. In general, there are two configurations of the mass domain-wall systems. As depicted in Fig. Topological coupled cavity-waveguide systems.-As an example, we propose a coupled cavity-waveguide (CCW) system by combining the SPCIs-induced waveguide and PBS in a single systems [see Figs. are almost remain unchanged compared to the cases that without perturbations in Figs. 4(e) and 4(f), implying that the coupling at resonant dip does not interrupted by nearby defects. In contrast, for the conventional CCW system with perturbations, the normalized electric field patterns in Fig. Conclusion.-To conclude, the SPCIs that simply formed by gliding the PC are proposed to guide and trap light. The SPCIs are closely rely on the shift parameter g. We demonstrate that SPCIs with g = ±a/2 forms a GSWG and exhibit excellent performance on the ability of guiding waves even in the presence of sharp bends and disorders. Moreover, placing two SPCIs with opposite Dirac mass results in a PBS due to the Jackiw-Rabbi mechanism, which can be acted as a photonic cavity mode. Our work provides an alternative way towards the design of ultracompact integrated photonics.