We present a theory for plasmonic crystal instability in a semiconductor field-effect transistor with a dual grating gate, designed with strong asymmetry in the crystal elementary cell. Under the action of a dc current bias, we demonstrate that Bloch plasma waves in the resulting plasmonic crystal, formed in this transistor, develop the Dyakonov-Shur instability across the entire Brillouin zone. By calculating the energy spectrum of the plasmonic crystal and its instability increments, we analyze the dependence of the latter on the electron drift velocity and the extent of the structural asymmetry. Our results point to the possibility of exciting radiating steady-state plasma oscillations at room temperature, in transistors with asymmetric gate arrays that should be readily implementable via standard nanofabrication techniques. Long-range coherence of the unstable plasma oscillations, generated in the elementary cells of the crystal, should dramatically increase the radiated THz electromagnetic power, making this approach a promising pathway to the generation of THz signals. The design of efficient tunable on-chip sources of terahertz (THz) electromagnetic (EM) radiation remains a challenging technological problem. Such sources are one of the key required elements of nanoscale, beyond-6G, wireless communications systems, with potential applications ranging from wireless networks-on-chip Plasmonic TeraFETs use the instability of collective plasma oscillations in the two-dimensional (2D) electron channel of a transistor to generate EM radiation. The channel (or some portion of it covered by a gate) functions as a plasmonic cavity, reflecting plasma waves at its opposite ends. Dependent upon the specific reflection conditions at these boundaries, interference of plasma waves travelling back and forth can lead to a buildup of the plasma-wave amplitude in the cavity. As first predicted by Dyakonov and Shur Previous experimental studies have demonstrated signatures of the Dyakonov-Shur (DS) instability in transistor-based plasmonic cavities and have also revealed the presence of THz EM radiation The most promising approach to increase the radiated power from plasmonic sources is to design transistors in which a suitable periodic modulation of the electron channel is introduced. This idea has long motivated the study of transistors with "grating-gate" geometries In spite of the many studies that have addressed the issue of plasmon generation in transistors incorporating different gate-array geometries The transistor design that we propose is shown schematically in Fig. When electron-electron interactions are the dominant source of scattering within the system, plasmonic excitations in the gated sections of the 2D electron channel can be described in the hydrodynamic approximation. Neglecting the influence of random electron scattering (i.e., assuming that ≫ 1 where is the plasma frequency and is momentum relaxation time), the relevant hydrodynamic equations for the local electron-fluid density ( ( , )) and velocity ( ( , )) are the continuity equation and the Euler equation: Here, ( , ) is the electric potential in the channel, andand * are the electron charge and effective mass, respectively. To solve Eq. ( In these expressions, ( , ) = -( + ) is the plasmonic current in a channel of width , while ( , ) = is the voltage distribution within the plasma wave. The wavevectors , = /( ± ) describe acoustic plasma waves propagating with ( ) and opposite to ( ) the electron drift, at respective velocities + and -. = / * is the velocity of the acoustic plasmons in the gated 2D channel in the absence of drift In the ungated sections of the transistor channel (where ≫ ) the plasma eigenfrequencies are well separated from those in the gated sections (if both sections are of comparable length). Consequently, we are able to restrict our analysis to frequencies close to those of the gated plasmons. In this limit, plasma oscillations in the ungated regions of the channel, having much higher frequency, are not excited. In our equivalent-circuit diagram (Fig. The boundary between gated and ungated sections of the channel represents a region of special interest. As shown in , where = (1/ )ln( / )~1 is a geometric factor The generic plasma dispersion equation for the 1D plasmonic crystal can be written using the Bloch theorem and the transfer matrix connecting the values of and at opposite sides of the crystal elementary cell where ∈ [-/ , / ] is the Bloch wavevector and = + is the length of the elementary cell (see Fig. where = /( (1 -)), = 1/ is the characteristic impedance of the plasmonic TL where , = 1/ , . The transfer matrix can be written in terms of the matrices in Eqs. ( By substituting Eq. ( In the next section this equation is solved numerically, allowing the conditions for plasma-wave instability to be found. We have solved Eq. ( Motivated by experiments such as that of In Fig. | ′′|. The growth occurs due to the dissimilar reflection experienced by the drifting plasma waves at the asymmetric boundaries of each gated cavity. The asymmetry of these boundaries (and of the reflections that they generate) finally results in a net transfer of the kinetic energy carried by the drifting plasmon into radiated EM energy. While this situation holds when the drift is from the boundary with low terminal impedance to that with high impedance (i.e., when > 0), reversing the direction of the drift results in attenuation of the plasma waves If we consider how the behavior of the system evolves with increasing dc bias, corresponding to increasing Mach number, Figs. 2(b) -2(d) show that ′′ systematically becomes more negative as is increased to 0.5, corresponding to strengthening instability. Although not included here, our numerical analysis shows that ′′ reaches its most negative values at ~ 0.9, before dropping back towards zero at →1. In the results presented in Fig. It is evident from the results of Fig. From inspection of the upper panel of Fig. Although not shown here, it should also be pointed out that the instability persists in the symmetric limit at = 1 once ≳ 0.1. However, in this case the instability only develops over some narrow ranges of the Bloch wave vector and therefore requires very precise phase-matching -12 -conditions between the elementary cells. The plasma instability in symmetric arrays was first considered in Ref. In order for the plasmonic effects that we have discussed to be observed in practice, there are important experimental conditions that should be satisfied. Firstly, we require that ≫ 1, where 1/ is the momentum relaxation rate due to phonon and impurity scattering. In addition, to ensure the coherent growth of the plasma oscillations, the condition | ′′| > 1/2 should also be satisfied In conclusion, we have proposed a design for a TeraFET with an asymmetric gate-array structure, which should be realizable in conventional III-V-based heterostructure systems. Central to the design of these devices is the introduction of deliberate asymmetry, which is implemented through the inclusion of a narrow gate that serves to break the symmetry within the basic cell of the plasmonic crystal. We have demonstrated that the DS instability in the current-biased transistor is dramatically amplified in the asymmetric elementary cells, reflecting the coherence of plasma oscillations across the entire crystal. By calculating the energy spectrum of the plasmonic crystal and its instability increments, we analyzed the dependence of the latter on the electron drift velocity and the extent of the structural asymmetry. Our results point to the possibility of exciting steadystate plasma oscillations at room temperature, in arrays whose gate asymmetry should be readily implementable via standard nanolithography (as in Fig. 