Recently, the quantum spin-Hall edge channels of two-dimensional colloidal nanocrystals of the topological insulator Bi 2 Se 3 were observed directly. Motivated by this development, we reconsider the four-band effective model which has been traditionally employed in the past to describe thin nanosheets of this material. Derived from a three-dimensional k • p model, it physically describes the top and bottom electronic surface states at the Γ point that become gapped due to the material's small thickness. However, we find that the four-band model for the surface states alone, as derived directly from the three-dimensional theory, is inadequate for the description of thin films of a few quintuple layers and even yields an incorrect topological invariant within a significant range of thicknesses. To address this limitation we propose an eight-band model which, in addition to the surface states, also incorporates the set of bulk states closest to the Fermi level. We find that the eight-band model not only captures most of the experimental observations, but also agrees with previous first-principles calculations of the Z 2 invariant in thin films of varying thickness. The band inversion around the Γ point, which endows the surface-like bands with topology, is shown to be enabled by the presence of the additional bulk-like states without requiring any reparametrization of the resulting effective Hamiltonian. Topological insulators (TIs), and more generally topological materials, have experienced a massive surge in interest in the last decade due to their excellent prospects for energy-efficient electronics, spintronics, and transport applications Within the vast landscape of topological materials, bismuth selenide (Bi 2 Se 3 ) is often quoted as a prototypical threedimensional TI It thus appears that the effective four-band model obtained in this way does not provide a complete understanding of the physics in the entire regime between 1 and 6 QLs. Here, we demonstrate that some of the oscillations predicted by the aforementioned theoretical studies are spurious, and disappear when one takes into account not only the gapped surface states closest to the Fermi level, but also the first set of bulk conduction and valence states. The resulting eight-band Hamiltonian is not only capable of describing the physics in a broader range of momenta, but also reproduces most of the experimental findings and features of ab initio calculations. Our results show that the three-dimensional continuum model for topological Bi 2 Se 3 can be successfully used even in the ultrathin limit of 1 QL, and also elucidates the crucial role of the bands further away from the Fermi level, which are usually neglected. This article is organized as follows. In Sec. II we present a general description of Bi 2 Se 3 nanosheets by starting from the 3D bulk model, and compare the features of the fourband model for the surface states with our novel eight-band model including also the bulk states closest to the Fermi level. In Sec. III we analyze the topology of the eight-band model by studying the interplay between the different bands. In Sec. IV we validate our model by comparing its topological properties with those calculated from first principles as well as with the most recent experimental results. Finally, in Sec. V we summarize our work and give an outlook on potential future research. Our starting point is the k • p Hamiltonian for threedimensional Bi 2 Se 3 derived in Refs. Here, ε 0 ( k, s and τ are the Pauli matrices in the spin and orbital spaces, respectively, and I s and I τ are the identity matrices in these respective subspaces. Here and below, k ≡ (k x , k y ) denotes the in-plane momentum, with k ≡ | k |. We employ the parameters of the paper by Zhang et al. We are interested in thin nanosheets of only a few QLs. This geometry breaks the translational invariance in the zdirection and thus we must solve the model of Eq. (1) after substituting k z → -i∂ z . It is customary to employ hard-wall boundary conditions for the wave functions at both surfaces, Ψ(z = ±L z /2) = 0, with L z the nanosheet thickness. To obtain a low-energy effective model, one first solves the Hamiltonian at the 2D Γ point k = 0. The solutions to this problem are described in detail in Refs. Note that, of course, one can in principle also solve the full 3D model above at arbitrary k, without needing to resort to an effective model (cf. FIG. As 3D Bi 2 Se 3 is a TI, the spectrum obtained from the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Previous works on the model considered here have always assumed that projecting on the topological surface states alone is enough to obtain an accurate low-energy model for any thickness. However, as we show here, this introduces some issues and in particular the topology of the resulting model does not align with experimental findings and density-functional theory (DFT) calculations. At the 2D Γ point, the Hamiltonian decouples into two sub-spaces of opposite spin, and its spectrum contains four electronic surface states close to the Fermi level. These states have well-defined spin and parity, so we denote them by |S ± , ↑ (↓)⟩, where the label S indicates that they are surface states There are two subblocks with ξ = ±1, sometimes called the hyperbola index, as the Hamiltonians H eff 4-band,± ( k) resemble those at the K and K ′ points of graphene but shifted to the Γ point. Here, however, we choose to call ξ the spin-orbit parity (SOP), as the product of spin times orbital parity in each subspace is precisely ξ if we identify ↑ (↓) with +1 (-1). Furthermore, σ are Pauli matrices that couple the basis states (|S + , ↑⟩ , |S -, ↓⟩) for ξ = +1 and (|S -, ↑⟩ , |S + , ↓⟩) for ξ = -1, and I σ stands for the identity in each of these subspaces of fixed SOP. We note that, even though the states in the doublets (|S + , ↑⟩ , |S -, ↓⟩) and (|S -, ↑⟩ , |S + , ↓⟩) have opposite spin, σ is not directly the physical spin operator, as the wave functions of the up and down spin states in each subspace are not equal. Instead, they correspond to two distinct hybridized orbitals, so that σ is more appropriately understood as a pseudospin that mixes the orbital and spin degrees of freedom. Each 2 × 2 subblock has two bands with dispersions The corresponding eigenstates are where k ± = k x ± ik y and N c,v ξ k is readily found by normalizing the eigenstates to unity. The Chern number of these states is given by C ξ c,v = ∓ ξ 2 (sgn Δ + sgn B). This is nonzero only when Δ and B have the same sign. Physically, this may be understood from the fact that the topology arises from a band inversion, which in the four-band model is driven by the combined action of Δ and B. The fact that the band inversion leads to a topologically nontrivial phase is rooted in the parity flip that takes place as one goes from the Γ point to large momenta. Due to the inversion, the valence band around Γ has opposite parity to that when k → ∞. This argument was first formalized by Fu and Kane The Hall conductivity of each subspace is then σ ξ v provided that the Fermi level stays within the gap with decreasing thickness. The superposition of two opposite Hall conductivities causes the total σ x y to vanish, but if the individual conductivities are nonzero the system is in a QSH phase. However, strictly speaking this QSH effect is in terms of the pseudospin of the underlying basis, and not in terms of the z-direction component of the real electronic spin. This can be easily seen from the fact that each 2 × 2 subblock mixes up and down spins, contrary to the prototypical Bernevig-Hughes-Zhang model for the QSH effect, in which the two subspaces separately describe spin-up and spin-down electrons Similarly, the edge states of this Hamiltonian at the boundaries of a finite sample also present a nontrivial spin texture along the vertical direction. An analysis of these edge modes reveals that the physical spin is always perpendicular to the momentum along the edge. More precisely, there is a nonvanishing projection in the z-direction, whose average over the nanosheet thickness is in general nonzero. Furthermore, the spin in the direction perpendicular to the edge and parallel to the nanosheet has a nontrivial texture along the vertical direction, but its average over z vanishes. Finally, the spin in the direction parallel to the edge is identically zero for all z. Consequently, we recover the well-known QSH picture, realized now in terms of the z-averaged vertical component of the real electronic spin. We emphasize that this is not necessarily clear a priori, given that the underlying basis mixes the up and down components as explained above. A sketch of the situation is shown in FIG. where ṽF = v F √ 1 -D 2 /B 2 is a renormalized Fermi velocity which is lower than that of the surface states, and E Γ is the energy at the one-dimensional Γ point k x = 0. We note that all of this is valid only if |D | < |B|, as otherwise the global energy gap disappears and no edge states are found. The form of Eq. ( son is that the parameters Δ and B, which together determine the topology, have opposite signs for 4 and 5 QLs, a regime where both experiments We have demonstrated that projection on the surface states alone is not enough to obtain accurate results for the lowenergy physics of Bi 2 Se 3 nanosheets. We now proceed to include in this projection also the first set of bulk states that arises from solving the model at the two-dimensional Γ point, which we denote by |B ± , ↑ (↓)⟩. As we explain below, this is enough to solve all issues present in the previous model. One can show that the effective Hamiltonian always decouples into two separate subspaces, which are related by TRS. This is a consequence of the TRS in combination with the mirror symmetry with respect to the xy-plane, as the latter enforces a definite parity for the individual components of the Γ-point wave functions under the operation z → -z. In other words, the spin-orbit parity ξ is always a well-defined quantum number in the presence of both TRS and planar mirror symmetry. For our combined eight-band Hamiltonian we choose the basis ) . ( Due to the TRS, we focus on the analysis of the first 4 × 4 subblock, with SOP ξ = +1. Its Hamiltonian reads where with I ∈ {S, B}, ε I 0 ( k) = C I + D I k 2 , and M I ( k) = M I -B I k 2 . All parameters (M I , A I , B I , C I , D I , a, b, c, d) depend on the thickness L z and together determine the topology of the corresponding nanosheet. It is important to realize that their numerical values are unambiguously determined from the initial set of parameters of the 3D bulk Hamiltonian, thus not requiring any further adjustments. In FIG. We have computed the spectrum of each subspace separately on a ribbon along the x-direction. The width in the y-direction is taken as L y = 100 nm and we solve the continuum model by substituting k y → -i∂ y and employing hard-wall boundary conditions for the wave function at the edges. The results for 1-5 QLs are plotted in FIG. To determine the topological protection of the aforementioned edge states it is necessary to compute the Z 2 invariant of the system, as the total 8 × 8 Hamiltonian lies in class AII We have numerically computed the EMCNs of the four bands of each subspace. The total Hall conductivity is then (e 2 /h) i C ξ i , where the sum runs over the occupied bands. In the range between the gap closings at L z = 2.51 nm and L z = 5.02 nm, we find that the EMCN of the UVB is zero, whereas that of the LVB band is nontrivial and equal to ±1 in each subblock. The Hall conductivity is thus nonzero and we have accordingly found that edge states are present. For L z < 2.51 nm and 5.02 nm < L z ≤ 6 nm, we actually find that both occupied bands of each subblock have opposite unit EMCNs. Thus, the total Hall conductivity vanishes and there is no spin-Hall current. For completeness, we have also explicitly calculated the Z 2 invariant directly by analyzing the Pfaffian of the matrix z acts on the surface-bulk degree of freedom, σ z acts on the pseudospin defined in Sec. II A (generalized to surface and bulk orbitals), and K is the complex conjugation operator. The topological invariant is determined by analyzing the phase of P( k) along a contour C that encloses precisely half of the Brillouin zone, or in the case of our continuum model, half of the infinite momentum plane. The Z 2 invariant is then given by Choosing C to be formed by a line integral over k x and an irrelevant semicircular path around the upper half plane with k → ∞, we can simply analyze P(k x , k y = 0). This is plotted in FIG. The results for the EMCNs determined above can now be explained in an intuitive manner. We refer to the picture of FIG. 3. Band structure of a ribbon of width L y = 100 nm and 1 to 5 QLs in thickness for the subspace with SOP ξ = +1, as given by the eight-band model. All parameters used arise directly from the projection of the 3D states at the Γ point. The top row depicts the surface or bulk character of the bands for 1 to 5 QLs, that is, whether the corresponding states predominantly live in the outer or inner QLs, respectively. The edge states, only present between 3 and 5 QLs, are colored according to their localization on the ribbon. The bottom row depicts the spin polarization along the z-direction for 1 to 5 QLs. Despite not being fully polarized, the edge states still have a nonzero average spin in the z-direction, as explained in detail in Sec. II A. One must keep in mind that there is another subblock whose band structure is related by TRS to the one shown here. Hence, the spins and velocities of electrons in the time-reversed subspace are opposite, giving the usual QSH picture but with a partial spin polarization. 4. Pfaffian of the matrix A( k) for 1 to 6 QLs in the eight-band model. In the cases of 3, 4, and 5 QLs, the Pfaffian changes sign twice along the contour, giving ν = 1, while the other cases are trivial. Note that our model has rotational symmetry and thus the Pfaffian's zeros, if any, form a circle enclosing the origin of the (k x , k y )-plane. However, at larger momenta there is now an avoided crossing (AC) between the UVB and the LVB. This causes the spin of the UVB to flip again, while also reversing that of the LVB. Thus, the LVB ultimately acquires a nontrivial twist when going from k = 0 to k → ∞, while the UVB remains trivial because its twist is undone at the AC. The same happens for 3 and 5 QLs. As a result, there is no net twist of the UVB and its EMCN is accordingly zero, while the net spin flip of the LVB results in a nontrivial EMCN. In contrast, for 1, 2, and 6 QLs, the closing of the gap undoes the band inversion at the origin. However, the AC remains, resulting in the spin twisting once for every band, but oppositely between the UVB and the LVB. The result is that the occupied bands have nonzero but opposite EMCNs, leading to a vanishing Hall conductivity, in agreement with our calculations. In fact, this intuitive understanding becomes rigorous by virtue of the parity argument by Fu and Kane We have now understood how the direction of the spin can be used to read off the topology of the bands in the effective model. However, one has to be careful regarding the nature of the ACs involved in the process. While these are sources of Berry curvature and thus affect the EMCNs, they are actually an artifact of the effective model, which employs a finite number of bands. This can be seen by including even more bands: as we increase the size of the effective model, the ACs remain very localized but shift to larger values of k. In the limit of an infinite number of bands these will have disappeared and one recovers the smooth band structure arising from the solution to the 3D model at arbitrary k. However, the band inversion of the LCB and the UVB close to Γ (at around k x ∼ 0.4 nm -1 in FIG. In view of the above, the effective model is physical only in the region before the ACs take place. This means that the EMCNs do not actually correspond to the Chern numbers of the model with infinitely many bands, as they include the effect of the unphysical ACs. To remedy this, we introduce the PCNs. These must be calculated via the above spin-flip counting procedure, but only in the region before the first AC. Then only the physical band inversion contributes, if present. Note that, in any model with a finite band number, the PCNs cannot be calculated by integration of the Berry curvature as the result will not be quantized due to the truncation of the momentum space. The PCNs, as calculated via spin flips, are guaranteed to be the same as the Chern numbers of the infiniteband model. It then follows that for 3, 4, and 5 QLs the UVB has a unit PCN while that of the LVB is trivial, that is, the effective-model picture is essentially reversed. Furthermore, for 1, 2, and 6 QLs all bands have trivial PCNs. However, note that the physical Hall conductivity remains unchanged with respect to that of the effective model because it is given by a sum of Chern numbers. Thus, it does not matter if it is calculated with the EMCNs or the PCNs, because each AC oppositely affects both involved bands. The Z 2 invariant calculated via the Pfaffian is similarly correct in both cases, since it simultaneously includes the effect of all occupied bands. We stress that the inclusion of the bulk states at the Γ point is essential to reach our conclusions regarding the PCNs. As said before, there is no band inversion around Γ in the effective fourband model for 4 and 5 QLs, i.e., all Chern numbers are trivial in this case. The eight-band model is thus the minimal model that contains all the topology, which can now be understood as follows. Firstly, there is a band inversion between the LCB and the UVB that endows these bands with nontrivial PCNs. In the region where this inversion takes place, both of these bands are essentially fully surface-like, as seen from FIG. Finally, in Overview of the features of the four-and eight-band models discussed in the main text. Here, ν is the topological Z 2 invariant, and edge states are found only when it is nontrivial and there is a global energy gap, that is, all valence bands go to negative energies when k grows large. Comparison of the four-band and eight-band models with the exact solution of the 3D model. The panels show a distinctive artifact of the four-band model, namely that the valence band is not inverted for 4 QLs and higher, and thus goes up in energy for large k. In the case of 4 and 5 QLs, this is fixed by the eight-band model, whose valence bands go down in energy as desired. For 6 QLs and thicker, the eight-band model also presents this artifact. However, the topological invariant of this larger model remains the same as that of the eight-band model, which cannot be said when going from the four-band to the eight-band model. the model for more than 3 QLs, and must therefore be included. We note that for 6 QLs the UVB is not inverted, leading still to the absence of a global gap, as seen in FIG. In a recent experiment In this article we have investigated the effect of the nanosheet thickness on thin films of the 3D TI Bi 2 Se 3 . Whereas previous studies had already shown a dimensional transition from a 3D to a 2D TI, the theoretical description in terms of an underlying k • p Hamiltonian was unsatisfactory. Indeed, the emergent effective 2D model for the surface states can only describe the experimentally observed QSH phase at 4 and 5 QLs if its parameters are adjusted appropriately a posteriori. This amounts to disregarding the values that naturally arise from the projection in favor of a different set of parameters taken from experiment. In this work we have shown that this becomes unnecessary upon the inclusion of bulk states further away from the Fermi level. Our extended eight-band model precisely captures the topological properties computed via ab initio calculations in the whole range of 1 to 6 QLs, and is close to the experimental findings except for 3 and 6 QLs. We find that the band inversion of the surface-like bands, which determines the presence or absence of topology, can only be observed upon the inclusion of additional bulk-like bands. This provides a new and more complete picture that is missing if one simply reparametrizes the surface bands of the four-band model. This observation, which to the best of our knowledge has not been reported before, constitutes one of the main points of this article. Despite the very good agreement of our eight-band model with a recent experiment and previous DFT calculations, two brief comments are in place. Firstly, we have found that the UVB is not inverted in the regime of intermediate thicknesses of 6 QLs and beyond. Hence, a quantitative analysis of this regime would require projection onto a higher number of states. Note, however, that their inclusion does not further change the topology, i.e., the topological properties can be fully explained by the eight-band model. Secondly, our results for 3 and 6 QLs seem to clash with the recent experimental efforts involving Bi 2 Se 3 nanocrystals in a way which indicates that both gap closings take place at a slightly larger thickness. It is important to note that in this article we have employed the 3D bulk parameters as fitted from ab initio calculations. To further test our eight-band model it would thus be desirable to directly input the parameters from experimental studies of bulk Bi 2 Se 3 . We expect that more precise knowledge of the bulk parameters will account for this discrepancy, as the values of L z at which the gap closes are quite sensitive to the former. Our model is in principle not restricted to Bi 2 Se 3 , but also applicable to Bi 2 Te 3 and Sb 2 Te 3 if we use the appropriate pa-rameter values. Experimental research in all of these materials would thus be a useful benchmark for our eight-band model as well. In the future we want to test our eight-band model in more general settings geared towards potential practical applications. One interesting possibility in this regard is heterostructures, in particular those involving a superconducting substrate which induces a proximity effect on the Bi 2 Se 3 slab. Another intriguing avenue for which our combined surfacebulk Hamiltonian is especially well suited involves hybrid excitons, where an electron on the surface is coupled to a hole in the bulk, or vice-versa. This system has been the subject of a recent experiment 