We study the quantum dynamics of interstitials and vacancies in a two-dimensional Wigner crystal (WC) using a semi-classical instanton method that is asymptotically exact at low density, i.e., in the rs → ∞ limit. The dynamics of these point defects mediates magnetism with much higher energy scales than the exchange energies of the pure WC. Via exact diagonalization of the derived effective Hamiltonians in the single-defect sectors, we find the dynamical corrections to the defect energies. The resulting expression for the interstitial (vacancy) energy extrapolates to 0 at rs = rmit ≈ 70 (rs ≈ 30), suggestive of a self-doping instability to a partially melted WC for some range of rs below rmit. We thus propose a "metallic electron crystal" phase of the two-dimensional electron gas at intermediate densities between a low density insulating WC and a high density Fermi fluid. Despite its prime importance in the field of condensed matter physics, some basic aspects remain unsettled concerning the physics of the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) at intermediate densities where various forms of "strongly correlated electron fluids" can arise. The ideal 2DEG is governed by the simple Hamiltonian with a single dimensionless parameter, r s = a 0 /a B , characterizing the ratio of the typical interaction strength to the kinetic energy. Here, a 0 = 1/ √ πn is the average interparticle distance, n is the electron density, and a B = 4πεħ 2 /me 2 is the effective Bohr radius. The phases of the 2DEG in the weak and strong coupling limits are well-understood: it forms a paramagnetic Fermi liquid (FL) for small r s (weak coupling) and a Wigner crystal (WC) for large r s (strong coupling) Apart from the charge ordering, there is another subtle issue regarding the magnetism. In the FL regime, the paramagnetic state seems to be most favored In this paper, using the semi-classical instanton approximation, we carry out a comprehensive study of the quantum dynamics of an interstitial and a vacancy de-FIG. We first review the standard semi-classical instanton method as applied to the ideal 2DEG (1) in the large r s limit. The exact partition function of the (fermionic) 2DEG is ⟨P r 0 , P σ| e -βH |r 0 , σ⟩ = δ σ,P σ ⟨P r 0 | e -βH |r 0 ⟩ , where r(τ ) ≡ {r i (τ )} are the positions of N electrons in imaginary time, r 0 ≡ {r i (τ = 0)} are their initial positions, σ ≡ {σ i = ↑, ↓} are their respective spin indices, and β = 1/k B T is the inverse temperature. The sum over N ! permutations, P, of the coordinates and the sign factor (-1) P encode the fermionic exchange statistics. For bosonic particles, one should merely substitute (-1) P → +1. The 2DEG Hamiltonian (1) does not act on the electron spins, hence the δ σ,P σ factor in the second line above. The third and fourth lines are the path integral representation of the N -electron propagator. The action is rescaled to make the r s dependence manifest by introducing dimensionless coordinates, r ≡ r/a 0 , and dimensionless imaginary time, τ . Correspondingly, β ≡ βE * is a dimensionless inverse temperature, where E * ≡ e 2 /(4πεa B r 3/2 s ). The path integral measure is also defined as an integration over the dimensionless coordinate r(τ ). The minimum potential energy V 0 = min rV (r) is subtracted for later convenience We approach this problem using a semi-classical instanton approximation, which is asymptotically exact in the r s → ∞ (strong coupling) limit. In Sec. II A, we briefly review the semi-classical derivation of ringexchange processes in the WC. In Sec. II B and II C, we consider tunneling processes involving a single interstitial and vacancy, respectively, and derive the corresponding effective Hamiltonians describing their dynamics. The application of the semi-classics to a bosonic system is addressed in Sec. II D. In the r s → ∞ limit, the classical ground state manifold consists of a triangular lattice WC with 2 N -fold degeneracy in spin states. The lifting of this degeneracy and the nature of the resulting magnetic order is determined for 1 ≪ r s < ∞ by WC ring-exchange processes. Various ring-exchange processes correspond to distinct instanton solutions of the action and can be calculated via the dilute instanton approximation where the semi-classical calculation gives a leading-order large r s asymptotic expression for J a . Here, Pa is the permutation operator corresponding to the permutation P a , and can be decomposed as a product of two-particle exchange operators. The two-particle exchange operators, in turn, can be written in terms of spin operators as P(i,j) = 2( ⃗ S i • ⃗ S j + 1 4 ). To illustrate how this works, recall the familiar problem of the semi-classical calculation of the tunnel splitting in a symmetric double-well potential ⟨-r 0 | e -βH |r 0 ⟩ ∼ |ψ(r 0 )| 2 e -βE0 sinh(β∆), In viewing this same problem from the path integral perspective in the semi-classical limit, one first solves for the instanton path-the smallest action path that begins at the bottom of one well and ends at the bottom of the other. The net duration (in imaginary time) of this tunneling event is of order ω -1 0 . We then sum over multiple such instanton events to obtain an expression of the same form as above, where the diagonal (off-diagonal) propagator in Eq. 8 (Eq. 9) contains all the terms with an even (odd) number of events. Expanding these expressions in power series, one sees that the typical number of tunneling events is ∼ β∆ and the mean imaginary time interval between them is of order ħ/∆. Note that in the semi-classical limit ħ/∆ ≫ ω -1 0 , the instantons are dilute and hence effectively non-interacting (see Fig. where the subscripts designate the number of instanton events. The analysis is somewhat more complicated but structurally similar for the present problem. Consider the propagator ⟨P a r 0 | e -βH |r 0 ⟩ where r 0 is an initial WC configuration and P a is the permutation corresponding to a particular ring-exchange process [see Fig. where S a ≡ S r (a) (τ ) with the trajectory r (a) (τ ) satisfying δS r (a) (τ ) = 0, and δr(τ ) ≡ r(τ ) -r (a) (τ ) is the fluctuation coordinate. Fluctuations are treated within a harmonic approximation around the semi-classical path. In Eq. ( where the prime denotes that the zero eigenvalue must be omitted in the calculation of the determinant. Note that since an instanton is a localized object with a characteristic size ∆τ = Ω -1 , one can neglect the exponentially small correction from its tail provided βħΩ ≫ 1. On the other hand, the diagonal propagator in the zero instanton sector ⟨r 0 | e -βH |r 0 ⟩ | 0-inst can be obtained by making a harmonic approximation of V around r 0 : Normalizing the propagator in the one instanton sector by that in the zero instanton sector, as in Eq. ( where A a is called a "fluctuation determinant," calculated in the normalized coordinates with r s = 1, and the β → ∞ limit is implicitly taken in the end. In the second line, the extra factor of r 1/4 s comes from the normalization of the determinant Hence, A a (17) (and also S a ) are dimensionless numbers with no r s dependence. In Eq. ( details of the numerical calculation of S a and A a . For the ring-exchange processes illustrated in Fig. Tunneling processes involving a single centered interstitial (CI) defect [Fig. Eq. 16. Note that four hopping processes have smaller actions than those of exchange processes and hence are more important when r s ≫ 1. The effective Hamiltonian in the presence of a dilute concentration of interstitials is (corrected from Ref. where f † jσ (c † n,σ ) is the creation operator of electrons that live on the WC sites j (triangular plaquette centers n) FIG. and the U = ∞ condition precludes any double occupancy. σ, σ ′ = ↑, ↓ are the spin indices that are summed over. a ∈ (CI ex.) denotes one of the exchange processes involving an interstitial shown in Fig. The classical vacancy defect has D 2 symmetry instead of the full D 6 symmetry of the underlying triangular lattice The resulting effective Hamiltonian describing the dynamics of vacancies can be written straightforwardly as follows. First, corresponding to each orientation α of a vacancy, we introduce a (hard-core) bosonic operator b † i,α that suitably relaxes the positions of the WC electrons near the vacancy site i to the associated configuration that minimizes the (classical) Coulomb energy. The operator that creates a vacancy in the WC at site i with orientation α is thus f i,σ b † i,α . Then, with the definitions b the effective Hamiltonian in the presence of a dilute con-centration of vacancies is where , and f † i,σ is again the creation operator of an electron living at the WC site i. The first term describes on-site orientation-mixing processes corresponding to ∆; the second term describes vacancy hopping processes in the ±e 1 directions; and the third (fourth) term describes vacancy hopping processes in the ±e 2 (±e 3 ) directions, which can be related to the second term by C 6 (C 2 6 ) rotation [see Fig. For Coulomb-interacting bosonic particles, one merely needs to substitute (-1) Pa → +1 in H wc eff In this section, we present the results of a finite-size exact diagonalization study (up to 3 × 6 ± 1 electrons) of the derived effective Hamiltonians in the single-defect sector. The maximum kinetic energy gain for an interstitial is calculated by obtaining the ground state of H i eff Here, we have neglected terms corresponding to higher order perturbative corrections (i.e, higher powers of r ) from phonon anharmonicity as well as higher order corrections to the semi-classical instanton approximation. We calculated C 1,i and C 3/2,i for supercells up to size 28 × 28 + 1; extrapolation to an infinite supercell size gives C 1,i = 0.0769 and C 3/2,i = -0.295 For the vacancy, the on-site orientation-mixing term ∆ is the largest energy scale in the range of 20 ≤ r s ≤ 100, as shown in Fig. Here {σ} wc are the spins of the WC electrons, and the slash in A A f i,σi denotes that the corresponding operator is omitted from the product. The projection of H v eff (20) to the isotropic single vacancy sector is straightforward, and yields where In the presence of N v isotropic vacancies, one substitutes 2∆ → 2N v ∆. The (1 -n i ) factor locates the vacancy, where n i = σ f † i,σ f i,σ , and ⟨j, k⟩, ⟨j, k, l⟩ and ⟨j, k, l, m⟩ are the 2, 3, and 4 sites neighboring the vacancy location i participating in the corresponding ring-exchange processes (j, k, l, m themselves are also nearest neighbors). J ′′ 2,v , J ′ 3,v , J 6,v are much smaller than other terms in H v eff and hence will be ignored. By solving H v eff | ∆ where, again, the neglected terms correspond to higher order perturbative and non-perturbative corrections. We calculated C 1,v and C 3/2,v for supercells up to 24×24-1; extrapolation to an infinite supercell size gives C 1,v = 0.1094 and C 3/2,v = -0.368. Whereas our result for C 1,v agrees with Ref. The semi-classical expressions for the interstitial (vacancy) energy vanishes around r s = r mit ≈ 70 (r s ≈ 30), indicating a possible instability of the WC to interstitial self-doping for r s < r mit (Fig. Our predicted value of r mit ≈ 70 is larger than r * melt ≈ 31, where r * melt is the value below which-according to existing variational calculations-the energy of the paramagnetic Fermi liquid becomes smaller than the energy of a WC (with a particular assumed antiferromagnetic order) As discussed in the next section, an interstitial forms a large magnetic polaron in a WC, so the MeC phase occurring near r mit (Fig. Finally, the transition to a fully melted Fermi fluid occurs when the energy of the MeC phase crosses that of the liquid phase. Existing variational quantum Monte Carlo estimates of the critical r s involve comparing the energy of the liquid to that of the insulating WC. If, as we have suggested, the MeC has lower energy than the insulating WC in an intermediate r s regime, it would presumably be stable against quantum melting at somewhat higher densities (smaller r s ). Thus, this carries with it the likely implication that r melt < r * melt ≈ 31. Here, we discuss the magnetic correlations induced by defect hopping processes Distinct interstitial hopping terms induce different magnetic correlations in the underlying WC. The character of the dominant magnetic correlations induced by each hopping process is determined by the parity of the smallest spin permutation it induces Interestingly, the interstitial dynamics induces nontrivial spin polarization 2S z tot /N e , as shown in Fig. In the presence of small antiferromagnetic WC exchange interactions, a single interstitial can only delocalize in a finite region, forming a large magnetic polaron of size ∼ a 2 0 t/J On the other hand, it is known that the dynamics of a single hole in the U = ∞ Hubbard model on a nonbipartite lattice leads to some form of antiferromagnetism By controlled doping of a WC in the presence of a smoothly varying weak external periodic potential, one can obtain the defect-doped commensurate WC phase as a stable ground state, as the following reasoning shows. Consider a weak commensurate potential that has minima -W < 0 at the triangular lattice WC sites. When the density is tuned away (but not too far away) from the commensurate value, the defect-doped commensurate WC has an energy per electron ∆E comm /N ≈ -W + E def |δ| + O(W |δ|, δ 2 ) as compared to the pure incommensurate WC, where δ is the ratio of defect electrons to the total number of electrons, and E def = E i (E v ) is the energy of an interstitial (vacancy) defect in the absence of the external potential. Therefore, for a range of doping -W/E v < δ < W/E i , the system will form a defect-doped metallic WC phase that is commensurately locked to the external potential. Such a phase, in turn, is characterized by defect-induced magnetic correlations with much higher energy scales than the exchange processes of the pure WC. Therefore, one expects that the magnetic energy scale increases as one moves away from the commensurate filling. Such a proposal may be experimentally tested in certain Moiré systems that support a commensurately locked WC phase Before concluding, we remark on the effect of small quenched disorder on the phase diagram (Fig. We thank Boris Spivak for initial insights which led to this investigation and Akshat Pandey for collaboration on a previous work. We appreciate Veit Elser, Brian Skinner and Shafayat Hossain for interesting comments on the draft. K-S.K. acknowledges the hospitality of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where this work was completed, and thanks Aidan Reddy, Seth Musser and Yubo Paul Yang for helpful discussions. I.E. acknowledges Eugene Demler, Hongkun Park, Jiho Sung, Pavel Volkov, Jue Wang, and Yubo Yang for helpful discussions on related work. K-S.K. and SAK were supported in part by the Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, under contract DE-AC02-76SF00515 where Eq. A9 defines normal mode frequencies and eigenmodes at each time slice k. Note that at intermediate times k ̸ = 0, M , ω n,k is in general complex. At the end in-tervals k = 0, M , one substitutes δr -1 2 → δr 0 = 0 and δr M + 1 2 → δr M = 0 in the above expressions. (Note that as β → ∞, the propagators at the end intervals approach zero exponentially. However, as we will see below, such contributions cancel when calculating A a as we are calculating the ratio between two F s.) F r (a) (τ ) can finally be computed by integrating over the intermediate fluctuation coordinates Here, M (a) is a real symmetric block tridiagonal matrix, e i,j is the M ×M matrix with 1 at the (i, j)-th entry with all other entries 0, ⊗ is the Kronecker product of two matrices and A Finally, one needs to divide Eq. A18 by the (formally diverging) zero mode contribution to F [r (a) (τ )] = det -∂ 2 τ + V ′′ r (a) (τ ) -1/2 . For this, we numerically find the smallest λ such that 1 F λ [r (a) (τ )] ≡ det(-∂ 2 τ + V ′′ r (a) (τ ) -λ) where the left hand side is calculated similarly as in Eqs. (A7-A13) with the substitution V ′′ (r k ) → V ′′ (r k )λ. The fluctuation determinant is then obtained as nomena, Oxford University Press (2021). [26] The interaction between defects is small in proportion to a polynomial power of 1/d, where d is the distance between them, and can be neglected if the defect concentration is dilute enough. [27] Note that the tunnel barrier for t11 is anomalously smaller than that for any other processes, implying that the dynamics of the vacancy is predominantly unidirectional in the rs → ∞ limit. Such a peculiar defect dynamics has also been predicted to occur in solid helium [28] E. For example, for St 1 = 0.098 and rs = 100, √ rsSt 1 = 0.98 ≲ 1. [31] Our results for C1,i and C 3/2,i agree with Ref. [32] Our calculation is performed in a hexagonal supercell as opposed to that of Ref. [33] The possibility of a quantum crystal in which the particle density per crystalline unit cell is different from an integer value was originally conceived of in Ref. 