By simultaneous Co and Ca-doping we were able to obtain an EuFe 2 As 2 -based compound with superconductivity appearing above the antiferromagnetic order of Eu 2+ magnetic moments. However, as soon as the antiferromagnetic order appears a re-entrance behavior is observed -instead of zero resistivity and diamagnetic signal down to the temperature of 2 K. By investigating magnetization, ac susceptibility and electrical transport properties of Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 and comparing them to previously studied Mössbauer effect and neutron scattering measurements of this and similar compounds an explanation of such behavior is proposed. Understanding of the relationship between magnetism and superconductivity in high-temperature superconductors is one of the remaining problems of the solid state physics. While superconductivity and magnetism are considered antagonistic phenomena, on the contrary there are several groups of materials exhibiting both properties simultaneously It was shown, that by suppression of the spin density wave (SDW) order (associated with the magnetic order on the Fesublattice) superconductivity in M Fe 2 As 2 (where M = Ca, Ba, Sr, Eu) compounds can be achieved. This can be a result of partial chemical substitution at either the M Due to the presence of the localized magnetism of Eu 2+ ions, we find the EuFe 2 As 2 -based compounds as one of the most interesting among the iron-based pnictide superconductors. In our previous study we focused on the properties of either Co or Ca doped EuFe 2 As 2 compounds Nevertheless, we believed that in the case of already superconducting systems, superconductivity can be enhanced The single crystals of Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 were grown using the Sn-flux method. High purity elements Eu:Ca:Co:Fe:As:Sn in nominal ratios 0.6:0.4:0.5:1.6:2:30 were inserted in an alumina crucible placed in a quartz tube, than evacuated and flame sealed. The ampule was heated with approximately 100 • C /h heating ratio up to 1100 • C and held at this temperature for about 10 h, to enable proper dissolving of the components. The crystals grew while the solution was cooled with 1-2 • C /h ratio down to 600 • C. At this stage the liquid tin was decanted from the crucible. The remanent Sn was dissolved using diluted hydrochloric acid. The chemical composition of the grown single crystals was determined using EDS spectroscopy. The crystal structure and phase purity of the samples was characterized by powder Xray diffraction (XRD) using X'Pert Pro powder diffractometer equipped with a linear PIXcel detector and CuKα radiation. To determine the properties of Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 we measured electric transport (resistivity, magnetoresistivity and Hall effect), magnetization and ac susceptibility in 2-300 K temperature range and in external magnetic fields up to 9 T. Measurements were performed for fields applied parallel and perpendicular to the crystallographic c-axis (except Hall effect measurements where fields were only applied parallel to the c-axis). Electric transport and magnetization were investigated using Quantum Design's Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) platform. Resistivity (and magnetoresistivity) was measured using the 4-point technique. Silver electrodes were attached to the sample's surface with DuPont silver paste. The measurements were carried out in fields both parallel and perpendicular to the c-axis, while the ac electric current I = 10 mA with a frequency of 47 Hz was always applied parallel to the ab-plane. For Hall effect measurements additional two contacts were attached on the ab-plane. To determine the Hall voltage U H taking into account the error due to the misalignment of the Hall-electrodes, the voltage on the Hall-electrodes was measured while the sample was in magnetic field parallel and antiparallel to the c-axis. The Hall voltage was than calculated as , where U H,180 • and U H,0 • are the voltage values measured while the sample was rotated by 180 • and 0 • , respectively. The ac susceptibility was measured by applying a driving field of μ 0 H ac = 10 mT with a frequency of 1 kHz using the Oxford Susceptometer or the PPMS with the ACMS option. In this contribution we present results obtained for one single crystal (unless stated otherwise), however all measurements were also performed for different crystals obtained from the same batch. Therefore, our conclusions are also based on the results obtained from these additional measurements. Chosen additional results are discussed in more detail in Supplementary Materials Temperature dependence of (zero-magnetic-field) resistivity normalized to resistivity at 300 K ρ/ρ 300 K (T ) of Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 is presented in Fig. However, the most interesting behavior is observed below ∼ 12 K, where the resistivity first rapidly decreases (due to the superconducting transition) and just before zero resistivity is reached, a re-entrance of resistivity is observed, i.e., the resistivity increases with decreasing temperature and a resistive state is re-established. Measurements carried out in external magnetic fields (see Fig. Moreover, it should be noted that resistivity values below the "re-growth" are smaller than values expected from extrapolation of normal resistivity above 12 K (cf. dashed line in inset of Fig. From resistivity (magnetoresistivity) measurements onset of the superconducting transition was determined as the temperature at which the resistivity starts to decrease rapidly, the data points are presented on Fig. Hall effect measurements were carried out in fields of 5 and 9 T, the respective temperature dependencies are presented in Fig. where χ V (T ) is the temperature dependent volume susceptibility (in SI units) calculated from magnetization . The fitting of Eq. 1 to the experimental data in 250-300 K temperature range is presented as a solid line in Fig. The Hall coefficient is negative over all investigated temperature region, which suggests electrons as majority carriers in Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 . While it is known that iron based superconductors are multi-band systems, where e 0 = 1.6 • 10 -19 C is the value of elementary electric charge; while carrier mobility equals: where carrier conductivity σ is defined as inverse resistivity Field dependent magnetization measured in several temperatures is presented in Fig. Depending on the direction of applied magnetic field, the initial slopes of M (H) are distinctly different with a higher slope value for measurements performed in fields applied parallel to the c-axis (cf. Fig. where N A is the the Avogadro's constant, k B -the Boltzmann's constant, μ 0 -permeability of free space, θ p -the paramagnetic Curie temperature (or Weiss temperature), μ eff -effective magnetic moment (in Bohr magnetons μ B ), and χ 0 -the temperature independent component of susceptibility. The fitting parameters are summarized in Fig. While the Weiss temperature θ p is positive, a ferromagnetic interaction is expected. However, as shown for EuCo 2 As 2 The Neél temperature was determined using the Fisher's method The temperature dependence of ac susceptibility was measured in external magnetic fields applied either parallel or perpendicular to the c-axis. The ac susceptibility measurements turned out to be a very sensitive technique, showing where most parallel and (c, d) perpendicular to the c-axis measured using a driving field of 10 mT with a frequency 1000 Hz, data for subsequent fields are intentionally shifted along y-axis by -1 unit for better visibility differences between individual crystals were observed. Nevertheless, the differences were in quantity not the quality of the results. In Fig. The temperature dependent real part of susceptibility χ ′ (T ) measured at zero-magnetic-field exhibits a broad maximum at around 12 K (cf. Fig. For measurements with the driving field H ac applied parallel to the c-axis, at T c = 12 K, χ ′ (T ) decreases rapidly and for some samples adopts negative values for a narrow 1-2 K temperature range (cf. Fig. For both measurements -in parallel and perpendicular field -an additional broad maximum is observed in the real part of susceptibility, starting from around 12 K and shifts to higher temperatures with increasing magnetic field. Comparing susceptibility measurements to the magnetoresistivity data, we associate the sharp peak in χ ′′ (T ) and the dip (or only change of slope) of χ ′ (T ) with the appearance of superconductivity. The broad maximum starting at 12 K, and shifting to the lower temperatures with increasing magnetic field, can be explained by the antiferromagnetic transition while the maximum that shifts to higher temperatures is most likely associated with the formation of the ferromagnetic component -due to the reorientation of the Eu 2+ magnetic moments as a result of applied magnetic field, which is consistent with the magnetization measurements. Based on these result transition temperatures were determined. Using the Fisher's method, transition temperature to the antiferromagnetic order T N was determined from the real part of ac susceptibility. The T N (H) data points are summarized in Fig. The transition line in the T -H magnetic phase diagram between the paramagnetic (where the magnetic moments of Eu 2+ are paramagnetic) and antiferromagnetic states -thus the H * cr field -was determined as the high temperature maximum in the χ ′ (T ). Based on the experimental results a magnetic phase diagram of Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 was constructed and is presented in Fig. For this system several magnetic phases can be distinguished: paramagnetic; paramagnetic with SDW order of Fe 2+ magnetic moments; superconducting; canted-antiferromagnetic (C-AF) and field induced ferromagnetic (FI-F) of Eu 2+ magnetic moments. Below T SDW = 80 K the system exhibits a SDW order of Fe 2+ magnetic moments, therefore the system is truly paramagnetic only above this temperature and all other phases coexist with the SDW phase. One should note, that although the field induced ferromagnetic state is present for fields applied parallel as well as for fields applied perpendicular to the crystallographic c-axis, the microscopic order is remarkably different, i.e. for fields higher than H cr (or H * cr ) the magnetic moment of Eu 2+ ions are aligned on the direction of the applied magnetic field -for H ∥ c the magnetic moments are parallel to the c-axis and for H ⊥ c the magnetic moments are perpendicular to the c-axis. Although, as expected, by simultaneous Ca-doping the T N could be decreased and simultaneously T c increased compared to the Eu(Fe 0.81 Co 0.19 ) 2 As 2 , the zero-resistivity and diamagnetic signal are destroyed as soon as the Eu-magneticsublattice orders antiferromagnetically. This behavior is especially interesting when comparing presented results to the Co-doped systems with 0.075 < x(Co) < 0.2, such as Eu(Fe 0.81 Co 0.19 ) 2 As 2 , in which superconductivity appeared below T N , therefore in an already antiferromagnetically ordered state To explain why superconductivity can coexist with Eumagnetic order in some of the Eu-122 systems (excluding Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 ), we extend the previously proposed interpretation It was proposed by Klemm et al. Superconductivity can be destroyed as a result of a paramagnetic pair breaking effect (PPB effect) or an orbital pair breaking effect (OPB effect). While the PPB effect depends only on the intensity of the magnetic field (the greater the field, the greater the pair breaking), the contribution of the OPB effect in layered superconductors with high spin-orbit scattering rate will also strongly depend on the direction of the magnetic field. In short, the OPB effect is not present when the magnetic field is parallel to the superconducting layers, on the other hand when the field is applied perpendicular to the superconducting layers the OPB effect is maximal. The Co-doped EuFe 2 As 2 -based systems are layered superconductors with a high spin-orbit scattering rate, however due to the magnetic moment of Eu 2+ even with no external magnetic field applied, the superconducting layers are exposed to a magnetic field. Since the magnetic moments are canted from the ab-plane, there are two magnetic components: parallel and perpendicular to the superconducting layers. Depending on the composition of the compound, the contribution of the components will be different. When By applying an external magnetic field the magnetic moments of Eu 2+ can be "rotated" with the final form of an field induced ferromagnetic (FI-F) order. Here again one should note that the FI-F order is contrasting between the situations at which the field is applied parallel and perpendicular to the c-axis. Consequently, when the field is applied perpendicular to the c-axis the OPB effect is minimal, both because the external magnetic field and the magnetic moments of Eu 2+ are parallel to the superconducting layers, and so superconductivity is mostly destroyed due to the PPB effect. On the contrary, the OPB effect is maximal when the field is parallel to the c-axis, especially above H cr , when also the magnetic moments of Eu 2+ are perpendicular to the superconducting layers. We have investigated magnetic and electrical transport properties of Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 compound and compared its properties to similar members of the EuFe 2 As 2based family. Depending on the temperature and magnetic field applied, Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 undergoes multiple phase transitions. With decreasing the temperature we observe a transition from (i) paramagnetic state to (ii) spin density wave order of Fe 2+ followed by (iii) superconducting transition and (iv) canted-antiferromagnetic order of Eu 2+ magnetic moments. With application of an external magnetic field the Eu 2+ magnetic moment reorient and (v) field-induced ferromagnetic order can also be observed. For graphical presentation a magnetic phase diagram was constructed (see Fig. The parameters calculated from electrical transport data are comparable to those obtained for other Co-doped EuFe 2 As 2based compounds. By simultaneous Co and Ca-doping we were able to obtain a compound with superconductivity appearing above the antiferromagnetic order of Eu 2+ magnetic moments. However, a re-entrance behavior was observed -instead of zero resistivity and diamagnetic signal down to the lowest temperatures. We show that this behavior is a result of simultaneous coincidence of few effects -the anisotropy expected for layered superconductors Although according to EDX analysis the samples had more or less the same compositions, the properties moderately varied between crystals: (i) we observed different critical temperatures for subsequent transitions and (ii) the impact of the phase transition on observed physical properties were different for different samples (e.g. the resistivity drop at T c was not always to zero). Nevertheless, we can show that qualitatively the samples are the same, and observed properties can be explained with the same physical model. Consequently, even small differences in concentrations distribution (not detectable by e.g. EDX) can have a big impact on the properties of the compound. To demonstrate these conclusions we show some example results. For comparison, temperature dependencies of zero field ac susceptibility of several crystals grown from the same batch are presented in Fig. Similarly, in Fig. FIG. Based on the experimental results a magnetic phase diagram of Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 was constructed and is presented in Fig. The data points were determined as follow. From magnetoresistivity measurements the critical temperature T c and reentrance temperature were estimated. The T c (full blue stars in Fig. The temperature transition to the antiferromagnetic state and the field-induced ferromagnetic state were determined from magnetization and susceptibility measurements. One way to determine the Neél temperature is by using the Fisher's method The transition from the antiferromagnetic to field induced ferromagnetic state is clearly observed in the field dependence magnetization data as the point at which the M (H) dependence saturates, the "crossover" field H cr was determined from the minimum in the field dependence of second derivative of magnetization d 2 M/dH 2 (cf. Fig. Taking extrapolation of H c (T c ) (based on the T c onset in ρ B (T ) points in Fig. As can be seen, at 8 K, the lowest temperature the upper critical fields can be compared, anisotropy Γ is approximately 1.4. As implied in the main paper Graphical representations of the magnetic order of a single magnetic moment of Eu 2+ ion (orange solid arrow), its component parallel to the c-axis (light blue dashed arrow), external magnetic field (green dashed-dotted arrow) and total magnetic component parallel to the c-axis (dark blue solid arrow) in comparison to the magnetic phase diagrams of Eu . When magnetic field is applied perpendicularly to the c-axis (Fig. Another observation that can be made from Fig. 1 /C 3.18 • 10 -10 3.74 • 10 -10 Rs in m 3 /C -3.30 • 10 -7 -3.42 • 10 -7 n in 1 /m 3 1.96 • 10 28 1.67 • 10 28 μH in cm 2 /V•s 0.41 0.51 comparing Eu 0.73 Ca 0.27 (Fe 0.87 Co 0.13 ) 2 As 2 and Eu(Fe 0.81 Co 0.19 ) 2 As 2 (or other Eu-122 systems with 0.075 < x(Co) < 0.