Shear localization in slowly-driven bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) is typically accompanied by a sharp drop in the bulk stress response as a signature of the plastic yielding transition. It is also observed that the sharpness of this elastic-plastic dynamical transition depends on the extent of local chemical and microstructural orders, as well as the glass preparation protocol ( ie. thermal annealing). Here, we investigate sheared multi-element BMGs in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and demonstrate that glass aging, implemented through a hybrid Monte-Carlo(MC)-MD process, sharpens the elastic-plastic transition through a distinct crossover, seen in strain patterns that gradually shift from diffuse features in as-quenched samples to localized (yet system-spanning) patterns in well-annealed glasses. This effect of glass aging on the elastic-plastic transition is found to be correlated to the inherent interplay between aging-induced icosahedra ordering and co-operative formation of shear transformation zones. The observed crossover is quantified through a measure of the age-dependent susceptibility to plastic rearrangements, exhibiting strong (anti-)correlations to local ordering features, and the corresponding spatial correlation length grows with the aging timescale. Plastic yielding in slowly sheared metallic glasses (below the glass transition temperature T g ) typically occurs via localization of intense, irrecoverable deformation, yet without crushing or crumbling within the bulk. Microstructurally, this flow is attributed to emergent shear transformation zones (STZs) Amorphous metals have the capability to undergo plastic flow mediated by STZs, contributing significantly to their ductility In this paper, we investigate the precise characteristics of the inherent SRO-STZ interplay and relevant atomistic mechanisms that influence the nucleation dynamics of shear bands in concentrated and chemically complex BMGs. Previously Simulations & Protocols -The details of the hybrid Monte Carlo (MC) -Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations, in this work, are given in the Supplementary Material (SM) Further, we measure the softening modulus h min , defined as the maximum rate of the macroscopic average stress drop at every age t age as in Fig. Results -Figure We now turn to the characteristics of microstructural ordering and the interplay with shear bands in the specific, for clarity purposes, deforming metallic glass CoNi-CrFeMn . The color maps in the insets of Fig. Next, we consider the atoms with icosahedral ordering and we carry out a cross correlation analysis between associated squared non-affine displacements and the number density ρ ico . The scatter data of D 2 min and ρ ico in Fig. with fractal dimension d f . The mean cluster size is defined as S = s n s s 2 / s n s s. We also define the (squared) correlation length ξ 2 = 2 s r 2 s s 2 n s / s s 2 n s , based on a weighted average that is associated with the radius of gyration r 2 s = s i=1 |⃗ r i -⃗ r 0 | 2 /s of a cluster of size s. The evolution of fractal dimension d f with strain is illustrated in Fig. Conclusions -The present study of sheared BMGs has brought new insights into the underlying correlations between aging, structural ordering, and strain localization. We have presented direct evidence that the annealing process plays a pivotal role in controlling the sharpness of the shear-induced elastic-plastic transition, leading to a crossover from diffuse deformation features in as-quenched samples to localized shear-band-like patterns in well-annealed deforming glasses. Our findings suggest that the observed crossover is rooted in the interplay between aging-induced icosahedral ordering and collective formation of STZs. This observation has been quantified via probing several order parameters coupled with measurable dynamical and structural metrics. This includes fluctuations in the atoms' propensity to plastic rearrangements as well as spatial variations in the local density of icosahedral clusters. By analyzing connected networks of soft rearranging regions, we extracted relevant length scales that evolve across the yielding transition and exhibit significant variations with the sample's age. Our findings contribute to a better understanding of the complex interplay between structural order, aging, and plasticity in metallic glasses. This knowledge has implications for the design and optimization of metallic glasses for various engineering applications, whereas the control over strain localization and ductility via preparation protocols may be crucial. Kamran Karimi 1 and Stefanos Papanikolaou Molecular dynamics simulations were carried out in LAMMPS The interatomic forces were derived from the modified embedded atom method (MEAM) potential with the input parameters associated with the principle elements obtained from min as a measure of deviations from affine trajectories of atoms imposed by an external (homogeneous) shear Here the second-ranked deformation tensor F and the (rigid) translation vector ⃗ F 0 correspond to an affine transformation. The squared nonaffine displacements for atom i is defined as 