Image denoising, one of the essential inverse problems, targets to remove noise/artifacts from input images. In general, digital image denoising algorithms, executed on computers, present latency due to several iterations implemented in, e.g., graphics processing units (GPUs). While deep learning-enabled methods can operate non-iteratively, they also introduce latency and impose a significant computational burden, leading to increased power consumption. Here, we introduce an analog diffractive image denoiser to all-optically and non-iteratively clean various forms of noise and artifacts from input imagesimplemented at the speed of light propagation within a thin diffractive visual processor that axially spans < 250, where  is the wavelength of light. This all-optical image denoiser comprises passive transmissive layers optimized using deep learning to physically scatter the optical modes that represent various noise features, causing them to miss the output image Field-of-View (FoV) while retaining the object features of interest. Our results show that these diffractive denoisers can efficiently remove salt and pepper noise and image renderingrelated spatial artifacts from input phase or intensity images while achieving an output power efficiency of ~30-40%. We experimentally demonstrated the effectiveness of this analog denoiser architecture using a 3D-printed diffractive visual processor operating at the terahertz spectrum. Owing to their speed, power-efficiency, and minimal computational overhead, all-optical diffractive denoisers can be transformative for various image display and projection systems, including, e.g., holographic displays. Image denoising is a fundamental problem encountered in various fields, such as computational imaging and displays Over the past several decades, numerous algorithms have been developed for image noise removal. Here, we report an analog diffractive image denoiser (Fig. We demonstrate the capabilities of this analog diffractive image denoiser framework on both phase and intensity images, mitigating salt and pepper noise and low-sampling related spatial image artifacts. Our analyses show that these all-optical denoisers successfully filter out various types of image noise or artifacts at the input using a thin diffractive processor that axially spans <250, while achieving a decent output power efficiency of ~30-40%. For a proof-of-concept, the presented diffractive denoiser framework was also experimentally validated at the terahertz spectrum for removing salt-only random noise in intensity input images using 3D-printed diffractive layers optimized via deep learning. This physical image denoiser framework presents a rapid and power-efficient solution for all-optical filtering of image noise or artifacts, and can potentially be used for holographic displays and projectors operating at different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. In this manuscript, the terms "diffractive visual processor", "diffractive image denoiser", "diffractive optical network", and "all-optical image denoiser" are interchangeably used. Figure Figure where ρ ∈ {0.1,0.2,0.4}) compared to a conventional diffractive imager trained without noise (i.e., P tr = 0). For instance, the denoising performance of the diffractive model trained using P tr ~U(0,0.2) demonstrates superior performance for phase-encoded test images created with P te = 0.1,0.2, and 0.4, achieving average PSNR improvements of 0.65, 1.47, and 1.90 dB, respectively, when compared to the diffractive imager trained without noise, P tr = 0. A similar conclusion can be drawn for all-optical filtering of the intensity-encoded noisy images reported in Fig 2c . The diffractive image denoiser trained using P tr ~U(0,0.2) exhibits an improved denoising performance when compared to the baseline diffractive imager (P tr = 0), achieving average output image PSNR improvements of 0.83, 1.39, and 1.45 dB for different noise levels of P te = 0.1,0.2, and 0.4, respectively. These numerical results reported in Fig. In addition to salt and pepper noise, we also designed diffractive image denoisers to mitigate image artifacts stemming from the Monte Carlo-based low-sampling image renderings, as depicted in Fig. These results reported in Figs. 2-3 demonstrate the internal generalization capabilities of the trained diffractive denoisers as the test images (although never seen before) were acquired from the same dataset (tiny quickdraw). To explore the external generalization of the all-optical denoisers to different datasets containing images with distinct spatial features, we conducted additional tests using Fashion MNIST and EMNIST image datasets One of the essential characteristics of all-optical image denoisers, as well as other diffractive visual processors, is their output diffraction efficiency. In the previously demonstrated results reported so far, the all-optical image denoising performance of these diffractive models was achieved without employing a training loss term to penalize low diffraction efficiency at the output FoV. To understand the trade-off between the output diffraction efficiency and the image quality, we conducted additional analysis reported in Fig. For an experimental proof-of-concept of the presented technique, we built a 3-layer diffractive image denoiser that was trained for noisy intensity images with salt-only noise, with the noise probability (P tr ) uniformly sampled from the interval U(0,0.2). As depicted in Fig. We introduced a deep learning-enabled diffractive image denoiser framework capable of addressing various forms of noise inherent to different input types, e.g., phase or intensity images. In our analyses, the all-optical denoisers were used to remove both salt and pepper noise and the spatial artifacts originating from the Monte Carlo low-sample image renderings that are typically addressed using nonlinear filters and deep neural networks running on GPUs. The presented diffractive image denoisers successfully filter out these different types of noise at the input using analog processing of the input object waves; this process effectively couples out the characteristic modes that statistically represent the noise features using the sub-wavelength phase structures of the diffractive layers optimized through deep learning. These phase structures are also optimized to cause minimal optical loss and aberrations for the traveling waves that represent the characteristic modes of the input objects. In this sense, the diffractive image denoiser can be considered a smart analog spatial mode filter composed of successive phase gratings with a lateral pitch of ~/2. Additionally, these all-optical image denoisers do not consume any power during the filtering operation except for the illumination light that diffracts through passive layers. Regarding the output diffraction efficiency, our findings reveal that these analog image denoisers can achieve e.g., ~30-40% power efficiency without significantly compromising their image denoising performance. The presented diffractive image denoising framework was also demonstrated experimentally, using a 3D-printed diffractive model, successfully removing saltonly noise from input images as illustrated in Figs. In our analyses and results, the denoising capabilities of the diffractive denoisers have been demonstrated for the salt and pepper noise and the low-sampling artifacts of Monte Carlo image renderings. Especially for real-time imaging applications, the removal of noisy Monte Carlo renderings is a critical challenge, which has led to the development of various deep learning-based digital image denoisers On the other hand, there are also limitations of the presented approach. First, fabricating a multilayer diffractive visual processor with phase elements densely packed with a lateral feature size of ~/2- is challenging, especially for visible and IR wavelengths, due to the tight alignment and fabrication requirements. To mitigate these challenges and develop 3D fabrication processes optimized for diffractive network models, there have been various efforts to fabricate 3D diffractive networks operating in the visible and IR wavelengths A second limitation of the presented approach is that we only considered monochromatic illumination that is spatially coherent. While this assumption can be justified for certain applications that utilize, e.g., holographic image projection/display set-ups, it is also possible to extend the design of all-optical image denoisers to operate under spatially and temporally incoherent light. Diffractive optical networks, in general, form diffraction-limited universal linear transformers between an input and output FoV, and can be trained using deep learning to operate at various illumination wavelengths In summary, we presented power-efficient and ultra-high speed all-optical image denoisers that filter out input image noise in the analog domain without consuming any power except for the illumination source. The success of all-optical image denoisers can inspire the creation of alloptical visual processors crafted to solve various other inverse problems in imaging and sensing. An all-optical image denoiser contains a series of diffractive surfaces l = 0,1, ... , L -1, each of which is located at a different axial position z l . The field transmittance of each diffractive surface T l (x, y) that is used to modulate the coherent wavefield U l (x, y) is stochastically optimized using deep learning where τ(λ) = n(λ) + jκ(λ) is the complex refractive index of the optical material, n a = 1 refers to the refractive index of the medium (air in our case) surrounding the layers, and H l (x, y) represents the thickness profile of the corresponding diffractive surface, which is defined as where O l (x, y) is an auxiliary variable array used to compute the thickness value for each (x, y) point between [h b , h m ]. O l (x, y) and consequently the thickness profile H l (x, y) for each diffractive layer l are jointly optimized using deep learning to obtain field transmittance function T l (x, y) for each surface [50]- To mitigate the impact of potential misalignments in the physical implementation of a diffractive processor, error sources were integrated into the forward model during the training of the diffractive design that was experimentally demonstrated. These error sources are modeled by 3D displacement vectors, D l = (D x , D y , D z ) corresponding to the difference in the position of diffractive layer l, from its ideal location, where D x , D y , and D z were defined as uniformly distributed random variables, where ∆ x , ∆ y , and ∆ z represents the maximum displacements along the x-, y-, and zaxes, respectively. Thus, the position of the diffractive layer l at i th iteration L (l,i) is defined as L (l,i) = (L x l , L y l , , L z l , ) + (D x (l,i) , D y (l,i) , D z (l,i) ). ( In our numerical results, we used 72,000 randomly selected images from the quickdraw dataset To analyze the external generalization of the trained models, we also tested the resulting diffractive designs with unseen images from datasets different from the tiny quickdraw dataset including 14,400 EMNIST handwritten letters test images (interpolated to 32 x 32 using bicubic kernel) and 10,000 Fashion MNIST test images (scaled by 0.8 and interpolated to 32 x 32) For the experimentally demonstrated design, the EMNIST dataset was used, which was split into two sets containing 80,000 training and 8,800 validation images. These datasets, along with the EMNIST test dataset (14,400 images) were interpolated to 20 x 20 pixels and used for the optimization and evaluation of experimentally-tested diffractive image denoiser. Without loss of generality, the contrasts of the images were inverted to facilitate the 3D fabrication of noisy objects in our experiments. The smallest feature size of a transmissive diffractive layer and the sampling period of the propagation model were chosen as 0.5λ. Input and output FoVs of the diffractive image denoisers were 16λ x 16λ (32 x 32 in pixels). In addition, the size of each diffractive layer was chosen as 64λ x 64λ (128 x 128 in pixels). The window size of the propagation model was defined as 256 x 256 in pixels, and the matrices representing the FoVs and the diffractive layers were padded with zeros to avoid aliasing. In the numerical simulations, the material absorption was assumed to be zero (κ(λ) = 0), which is a valid assumption considering the overall thickness of our diffractive processor, axially spanning < 250. The axial distance between two consecutive planes was chosen as 40λ. The phase coefficient function of each layer θ l (x, y) = 2π λ (n(λ) -n a )H l (x, y) and consequently the field transmittance function T l (x, y) were stochastically optimized using deep learning. θ l (x, y) were initialized as 0 for each layer. A monochromatic THz illumination source (λ = ~0.75 mm) was used in the experiments. Input/output FoVs were determined to be 40λ x 40λ (3 cm × 3 cm) and the size of each diffractive layer was selected as 66.67λ x 66.67λ (5 cm × 5 cm). The diffractive feature width of the layers and the sampling period of the propagation model were chosen as ~0.667λ. The pixel size at the measurement plane was ~1.33λ, which is equivalent to the noise feature size at the input FoV. To accurately fabricate the transmissive diffractive layers and the noisy/clean input objects, the complex refractive index of the 3D-printing material τ(λ) was measured as ~1.6518 + j0.0612. During the training of the experimentally-tested diffractive image denoiser, the thickness profile of each trainable layer H l (x, y) was optimized in the range [0.5 mm, ~1.65 mm] that corresponds to [-π, π) for phase modulation. For experimental testing, a 3-layer all-optical image denoiser was trained, fabricated, and tested. The axial distance between the input plane and the first diffractive layer was set to ~13.34λ. The other axial distances between successive layers were chosen as ~66.67λ. To have a misalignment-resilient design, the positions of the layers and the object were randomly shifted during training following the vaccination strategy outlined in Eq. 5. The maximum axial and lateral misalignments ∆ x , ∆ y , and ∆ z were chosen as ~0.26λ, ~0.26λ, and ~0.5λ, respectively. The thickness profiles of the trained diffractive surfaces and noisy/clean input objects were converted into STL files using MATLAB and they were fabricated by using a 3D printer (Objet30 Pro, Stratasys Ltd.). The schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. 