We report on a novel material obtained by modifying pristine YBCO superconductor in solid phase synthesis via simultaneous partial substitution of Ba by Sr and O by Se. The intended stoichiometry was originally YBa 2-x Sr x Cu 3 O 7-x Se x with various values of x, among which x ≈ 1 yielded the best results. Simultaneous application of EDX and EBSD confirmed that Se atoms indeed enter the crystalline lattice cell. The detailed XRD analysis further confirmed this conclusion and revealed that the obtained polycrystalline material contains 5 phases, with the major phase (>30%) being a cuprate YBa 1.4 Sr 0.6 Cu 3 O 6 Se 0.51 . Following XRD analysis, we applied a newly developed approach which enabled us to determine the ionic positions and occupations in the cuprate phase. The obtained superconductor demonstrates unique properties, including i) two superconducting transitions with T c1 ≈ 35 K (granular surface phase) and T c2 ≈ 13 K (bulk granular phase) With the progress in science and technology the discovery of the phenomenon of superconductivity was inevitable: sooner or later helium would have been liquefied, and resistivity of metals been tested at liquid helium temperatures, which actually has been done by Kamerlingh Onnes in 1911 Anionic substitutions in copper oxides are much less explored experimentally, though theoreticians have predicted interesting features (see, e.g., Our results are obtained on polycrystalline ceramic samples. Initial stoichiometries with x = 0, 0.5, 0.75 and 1 were explored. The most drastic changes compared to x = 0 took place in samples with x = 1, which will be solely described in this article. About a dozen pellets were prepared quite reproducibly (the details are presented in Methods). Their morphology is shown in Fig. Quantitative EDX exploration requires flat surfaces of the material, which is not the case for the flakes in Fig. The most accurate, last row in Table X-ray diffraction indeed confirms this conclusion and provides very valuable information about the position of atomic constituents in the crystalline lattice. The results of XRD analysis are shown in Fig. After performing Rietveld refinement, the ratio of phase contribution to X-ray scattering was identified as 30.6 : 26.0 : 24.9 : 13.7 : 4.8 at.% for phases 1 through 5 shown in Table Phase 1, YBa 1.4 Sr 0.6 Cu 3 O 6 Se 0.51 , is basic for this research. Substantiation of the choice of one of three most probable models and consecutive analysis of them are described in Methods. The improvement of structural analysis criteria (such as R-factors, R1/wR, the extrema of difference Fourier synthesis, ∆ρ max /∆ρ min ) takes place with each next model. Model 1: no Se in any oxygen position Se partially replaces O. For these modeling steps, we found consecutively R1/wR = 0.98/0.90 → 1.09/0.93 → 0.87/0.73 and ∆ρ max /∆ρ min = +0.30 / -0.48 →+0.36 / -0.54 → +0.17 / -0.30 e/ Å3 . Final model has common criteria for accuracy based on 20001-point profile expressed by R p = 1.32%, wR p = 1.92%, GOF = 3.14, which confirms high enough reliability of the performed structural analysis Possible contribution of other phases is mentioned in Discussion. Figure The data presented in Fig. The AC susceptibility χ ′ (T ) (Fig. The second superconducting phase, which is responsible for the reentrant diamagnetism in Fig. The comparison of major curve in Fig. where y is the actual Se content in YBa 2-x Sr x Cu 3 O 7-x Se x (which, as follows from Table as J = 1 (we adopted the electron gyromagnetic ratio g = 2). Presence of positive Curie-Weiss temperature typically indicates ferromagnetism at T < θ CW . However, as follows from Fig. Numerous explanations have been suggested for understanding the mechanism of curves similar to ones shown Fig. From a theoretical point of view, the magnetic moment (or magnetization M = B -H) of a superconductor is determined by a superfluid current j s : Thus, theoretical attempts to explain the effect ought to modify the traditional, Meissner-type behavior of these currents j s (r, t) in a drastic manner to switch from the diamagnetic to the paramagnetic response. These attempts can principally be classified into two categories of models, the first of which is based on currents spontaneously flowing in superconductors in absence of an external field H ext . This field orients the randomly distributed local moments M i so that ⟨M i ⟩ > 0. The second category of models depends on more geometrically complex current patterns (in presence of H ext ) than envisioned by the ordinary theoretical approach. Because of the granular structure (Fig. The depth of the first diamagnetic transition (with an onset at 30-35 K), normalized to the paramagnetic signal, is drastically reduced. That is, for the same amount of contributing mass of YBa 2-x Sr x Cu 3 O 7-x Se x , the diving amplitude of the first diamagnetic signal is much smaller (by a factor of 6 to 7). This can be explained by the idea that the first transition is related with the supercurrents flowing on the surface of the granules as well as the intergranular trajectories (the latter have been essentially destroyed by milling and subsequent application of the glue). As a result, the effective volume able to conduct screening superconducting currents is reduced. At the same time, the upturn amplitude is smaller only by a factor of two. Importantly, the temperature of upturn also did not change; most likely, this is because the second superconducting transition takes place inside of the granules and is not significantly impacted by the granular size reduction and the granules separation. Overall, one can conclude that spontaneous currents due to the π-junctions, while being very elegant and possibly applicable to other systems, are not the cause of the Wohlleben effect in our material. Flux compression looks more feasible. This model as formulated by Koshelev and Larkin Using expressions ( One can expect the higher-T c phase to be on the surface of individual granules (with the lower Se content), while lower-T c phase (more rich with Se content) is inside the granules. This structural order is similar to the In-Sn-composition studied by Chu et al. The heat capacity measurements and related results (Fig. Figure Thus, we have an anomaly, which is shown in Fig. Prior to proceeding to it, we will mention that the higher T c transition, the T c1 -phase, is also visible in the top inset to Fig. Magnetic field-induced quantum phase transitions have been reported in heavy-fermion In the case of quantum criticality, nearly degenerate ground states exist not only at very low (ideally zero) temperatures, but reveal themselves over a range of temperatures. Variation of external or internal parameters may cause border-crossing between the phases on phase diagrams. In the case of the second order phase transition, the system may possess a set of quantum critical points (QCPs) at certain values of tuning parameters To understand the relationship of the heat capacity anomaly of the bulk phase with the quantum criticality, one should take into account that C el (H)/T ≡ γ(H) ∝ n(H), where n is the charge carrier density. If at H > H 0 (where H 0 ≃ 7 T) n(T ) decreases with the temperature then a non-Fermi liquid behavior takes place: in Fermi liquids, n (and γ) does not depend on temperature. This kind of effect caused by application of strong magnetic fields was reported and explained by the fluctuating pair field and PG, which causes the downturn via the border crossing due to the doping Appearance of CDW reduces the density of charge carriers. This is associated with the creation of electron pockets An alternative explanation involves the incommensurate SDW Here, T max c is the value of T c at the optimal doping for our material. The CDW condition 0.08 < p < 0.16 For pure single-crystal measurements, involvement of quantum criticalities yields peculiarities in resistivity ρ. For example, a drastic upturn takes place at PG when superconductivity is fully suppressed In general, simultaneous doping of mother substance YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 by Sr and Se provides more flexibility in modifying this remarkable system than mono-element substitution. The price to pay for this flexibility is multiphase nature of the sample. However, after this study, one can try to target more precisely the composition YBa 1.4 Sr 0.6 Cu 3 O 6 Se 0.51 with the adjusted initial stoichiometry -a fair task for future experimental research. Also, explaining why its properties are drastically different from the isomorphic YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.51 would be very challenging for the theory. In summary, we obtained striking anomalies delivered by simultaneous double substitution of Ba by Sr and O by Se in a pristine YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 superconductor. Simultaneous application of EDX and EBSD proved that Se enters into the crystal lattice of the superconducting phase of polycrystalline heterogeneous material. Two superconducting transitions are revealed. One phase, with T c1 ≈ 35 K, and the second one, with lower T c2 ≈ 13 K. The latter phase, YBa 1.4 Sr 0.6 Cu 3 O 6 Se 0.51 constitutes the majority of the superconductor. The second transition, most likely is caused by the granular surface of the same substance with less amount of Se on the surface of granules. Heat capacity explorations proved the d-wave nature of the main phase, as well as the existence of electronic Schottky anomaly in it. Susceptibility measurements revealed magnetic clusters below the Curie temperature ≈ 4 K. These magnetic moments, related with Se ligands of Cu, are reported for the first time. In view of provided XRD information on crystallographic positions of elements in superconducting phase, fruitful theoretical exploration should become possible, as it happened with As vacancies in LaO 0.9 F 0.1 FeAs 1-δ (δ ≈ 0.06) Polycrystalline samples were prepared via standard solid-state synthesis routes. Powders of Y 2 O 3 , SrCO 3 , BaCO 3 , CuO and SrSe were mixed in stoichiometric proportions to form, after calcination, initial composition YBa 2-x Sr x Cu 3 O 7-x Se x (x = 0, 0.5, 0.75, 1). After thorough mixing (hand mixing in sapphire mortar for 40 -50 min per 400 mg of total constituents, or, alternatively, combination of initial 10 min of hand mixing with 4 × 5 min of mechanical mill mixing (in plastic vials with agate balls), the mixture was calcined at 900 0 C for 100 min in KSL-1100 furnace in air, then re-ground, milled again, and pelletized for the second thermal treatment, which was done at 950 0 C for 30 min. It was then continued at 650 0 C for 80 min. Though the elemental composition of synthesized samples may be different from the initial targeted stoichiometry, we still call the resultant composition as YBa 2-x Sr x Cu 3 O 7-x Se x . Several pellets were prepared, with diameter 4 mm, height 1.5 mm for resistivity and magnetic measurements, and with diameter 1.5 mm and height 2 mm for heat capacity measurements. The most interesting features were discovered in case of the initial stoichiometry with x = 1, so only this case is being discussed in this report. For quantitative EDX analysis, ion milling was performed. The sample surface was polished so as to avoid the undesired self-absorption which affects proper outcome for light elements (O and Se in particular). For this task, the fine-ground powder was suspended in isopropyl alcohol, and dropped into a gap between a stainless steel holder and aluminum foil touching it as shown in Fig. The cutting by ion knife was arranged in Hitachi Broad Ion Milling System, IM4000Plus, which cut the structure horizontally, providing a polished surface for microanalysis (Fig. A Hitachi SU5000 variable pressure field emission scanning electron microscope (VP-FESEM) with Oxford Instruments EDX and EBSD under AZtec software was used for simultaneous EDX/EBSD analysis with electron beam focal diameter ∼ 1 -10 nm which is suitable for the proposed task since it is comparable with the size of the lattice cell. During this stage of exploration, no ion polishing was applied. Instead, in order to avoid self-absorption, we changed the incidence angle of the electron beam until a Kikuchi pattern appeared (Fig. Diffraction experiments were performed with polycristalline samples in accordance with the data given in Table Qualitative phase analysis was performed with the code HighScore Plus 3.0e Refinement of structural models of these phases was performed using Jana2006 software Assuming that (at low temperatures) the heat capacity in our samples has three major contributions, we can write where C el (T ) stands for the electronic contribution containing both the normal part γT and the superconductor part, C ph (T ) = βT 3 characterizes the phonon contribution, and the last term is the Schottky anomaly, which, in case of the simplest two-level gap ∆ tl can be represented as At the first stage, the phonon contribution was subtracted from the experimental data 3 . For that task, C(T )/T was plotted as a function of T 2 . Since the Schottky contribution ( The characteristic superconducting behavior is restored by the subtraction of the Schottky contribution For the theoretical modeling (Fig. 3 It is worth to mention that our heterophase substance contains "parasitic" contributions to the heat capacity of the superconducting Phase 1. At T = 15 K, the C/T of major phases 2 -4 are (in mJ/(K 2 g-at) units): ∼ 1 for BaSeO 4 where: T /T c ≡ t; ξ/T c ≡ x; ∆(T )/T c ≡ δ(t); ε/T c ≡ ξ 2 + ∆ 2 /T c = √ x 2 + δ 2 . In Computation of C el (T )/T based on ( where E Sch = E i exp(-E i /T )/ exp(-E i /T ), The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Full code that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. a This fact also indicates that the Curie-Weiss behavior is a property of the superconducting phase in our heterophase sample. Interestingly, in addition to the electron pockets on the Fermi arcs, experimental evidence is obtained in favor of two nearby hole-type pockets