We present a multiscale theoretical framework to investigate the interplay between diffusion and finite lattice deformation in phase transformation materials. In this framework, we use the Cauchy-Born Rule and the Principle of Virtual Power to derive a thermodynamically consistent theory coupling the diffusion of a guest species (Cahn-Hilliard type) with the finite deformation of host lattices (nonlinear gradient elasticity). We adapt this theory to intercalation materials-specifically Li 1-2 Mn 2 O 4 -to investigate the delicate interplay between Li-diffusion and the cubic-to-tetragonal deformation of lattices. Our computations reveal fundamental insights into the microstructural evolution pathways under dynamic discharge conditions, and provide quantitative insights into the nucleation and growth of twinned microstructures during intercalation. Additionally, our results identify regions of stress concentrations (e.g., at phase boundaries, particle surfaces) that arise from lattice misfit and accumulate in the electrode with repeated cycling. These findings suggest a potential mechanism for structural decay in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 . More generally, we establish a theoretical framework that can be used to investigate microstructural evolution pathways, across multiple length scales, in first-order phase transformation materials. First-order phase transformation materials undergo an abrupt change in lattice geometries at critical temperature, stress, or composition values. In intercalation compounds, a type of first-order phase transformation material, lattices deform abruptly and often anisotropically when guest species (e.g., ions, atoms, or molecules) are inserted into the material Symmetry-lowering phase transformations generate complex microstructural patterns, see Fig. At present, mesoscale models predict phase transformations in intercalation materials using guestspecies composition (e.g., Li-ion) as the order parameter Researchers have developed phenomenological methods that couple strain and composition fields within a single framework Our central aim is to establish a thermodynamically consistent framework that couples the diffusion of guest-species with the finite deformation of host lattices in phase transformation materials. To this end, we use the Cauchy-Born Rule and the Principle of Virtual Power to systematically derive the form of the free energy function and the governing equations for the diffusion-deformation model. We adapt this theoretical framework to intercalation materials by introducing specialized constitutive equations to capture the electrochemical operating conditions. We next solve this theoretical framework using a mixed-type finite element formulation based on Lagrange multipliers and calibrate the model to a spinel-type Li 2x Mn 2 O 4 electrode as a representative example. Our results yield fundamental insights into the interplay between Li-diffusion and heterogeneous lattice deformations in Li 2x Mn 2 O 4 during phase transformations. In line with experimental observations, our simulations successfully predict the geometric features of the finely twinned domains, and microstructural evolution pathways, and quantitatively estimate the macroscopic material response (e.g., voltage curves, stress distributions) during a galvanostatic discharge half cycle in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 . Additionally, our simulations reveal significant interfacial stresses at phase boundaries and particle surfaces, which suggest a potential mechanism for failure in Li 2x Mn 2 O 4 . Broadly, our results highlight the use of our modeling framework to investigate and design crystallographic microstructures in first-order phase transformation materials. In this section we use the Cauchy-Born Rule Consider a body occupying a region Ω in three-dimensional Euclidean space R 3 in the reference configuration. Let x be the position of a point on Ω in this reference configuration. We describe the deformation of this body as a function χ : Ω → R 3 , in which χ(x, t) denotes the position of point x in the deformed configuration. Given any deformation χ, we describe the deformation gradient ∇χ as a matrix of partial derivatives with components, We use F to denote this deformation gradient, i.e., a rank-2 tensor F = ∇χ and the gradient operator ∇ is calculated with respect to the reference configuration. Please note, in this work, we denote vectors and tensors using bold lower-case and upper-case Roman letters, respectively. We denote the components of these vectors and tensors, with respect to a Cartesian basis, using upper-case (lower-case) indices in the reference (deformed) configuration. A vector with a hat is a unit normal vector (e.g., n) in the reference configuration. In the continuum theory of crystalline solids, the Cauchy-Born rule, relates the movement of atoms in a crystal to the overall deformation of the body. That is, consider the body Ω as described above, and at each point x ∈ Ω, there is a Bravais lattice that defines the crystalline arrangement of atoms. This Bravais lattice is an infinite set of points in three-dimensional space that can be generated by the translation of a single point o through three linearly independent lattice vectors {e 1 , e 2 , e 3 }. In the reference configuration, the unit cell is defined by lattice vectors e • i and deforms according to the deformation gradient: We define the Green-Lagrange strain tensor as in which I is the identity matrix. The strain tensor in coordinate notation is given by The Cauchy-Born rule gives an exact correspondence between these structural transformations of individual lattices and continuum microstructures at a material point. For example, in first-order phase transformation materials (i.e., materials undergoing displacive-type of transformation), we describe the structural transformation of lattices using a positive-definite symmetric matrix U Fig. During phase transformation, the tetragonal variants rotate and fit compatibly with each other forming energy-minimizing deformations called twin interfaces. That is, two lattice variants described by transformation matrices U I and U J satisfy the Hadamard jump condition (or the Kinematic compatibility condition): for a given rotation matrix Q and vectors a ̸ = 0 and n, see Fig. Here the reference cubic lattice is represented by I, rotation matrices by Q and Q ′ , and vectors b ̸ = 0 and m. These martensite-like microstructures describe energy-minimizing deformations that reduce coherency stresses at the phase boundary and, arise from the multi-well structure of the energy landscape. We discuss this in detail in section 6.1. In our recent work Fig. A cross-sectional view of the twin interface shows a twin-plane K = (0.7570, 0, 0.6534) Consider any spatial region P inside the reference body Ω, with an outward normal n and a boundary ∂P. The diffusion of species (e.g., Li-ions in batteries) across this boundary ∂P is accompanied by a change in the species concentration c(x, t) and characterized by a flux j(x, t). That is, the rate of change of the chemical species across P is given by Using the Divergence theorem over the integral we have, Note that the choice of P was arbitrary, and therefore the local mass balance law is as follows ċ = -∇ • j. (9) The principle of virtual power states that there exists a fundamental power balance between the external power W ext (P) expended on P, and the internal power W int (P) expended within P. To obtain the expressions for external and internal powers, we follow (10) In Table Please note that in Eq. ( We assume that at any given time, the fields χ, F, and c are known, and we consider the fields χ, Ḟ, and ċ as virtual velocities. We specify each of these virtual velocities independently and keep them consistent with Eq. ( We define a generalized virtual velocity list V = ( χ, F, c) that is consistent with Eq. ( The external and internal power expenditures, respectively, are: From Eqs. ( Power Balance: Given any spatial region P, W ext (P, V) = W int (P, V) for all generalized virtual velocities V. (16) Frame-Indifference: Given any spatial region P and any generalized virtual velocity V, To deduce the outcomes of the principle of virtual power, we assume that Eqs. ( Let us assume c = 0. For this choice of the generalized virtual velocity V, the constraint in Eq. ( We systematically simplify Eq. ( Here ∇ s = (I -n ⊗ n)∇ is a surface gradient operator and Γ = ∂P. Eq. ( and the local macroscopic force balance: The principle of frame-indifference Eq. ( in which V * is the generalized virtual velocity in the new frame. In this new frame, ξ is transformed to ξ * , and F, ∇ F are transformed according to Eq. ( The frame-indifference requirement in Eqs. ( Since P is an arbitrary part of the reference body Ω, we have Note that this change in frame can be arbitrary and we can proceed in two ways. First, we assume a time-independent rotation, Q = 0, and we have: As Eq. ( and the microstress ξ is invariant Second, we assume a change of frame satisfying Q = I, such that Q is an arbitrary skew tensor. With this assumption, we obtain and the stress T R F ⊤ is symmetric, Here T R represents the classical first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, Y represents the third-order stress tensor that is conjugate to the higher-order deformation gradient. Eq. ( We next analyze the microscopic counterparts of the macroscopic force balance. We consider a generalized virtual velocity with χ = 0 and an arbitrary virtual field c. By substituting these fields into the external and internal power expenditures, Eqs. ( Eq. ( Eq. ( and the microscopic force balance: Overall, Eqs. ( We next derive the free energy imbalance under isothermal conditions. Let ψ represent the Helmholtz free energy density of the system per unit volume and μ represent the chemical potential of the diffusing species in the reference configuration. By neglecting the kinetic energy of the system, we have: Using the power balance property W ext (P) = W int (P), Eq. ( Using the mass balance from Eq. ( In Eq. ( At this point, we define a dissipation density D per unit volume per unit time: Please note that all quantities in Eq. ( We next consider the constitutive forms for the free energy density ψ, the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor T R , the third-order stress tensor Y, the net chemical potential μ net , and the vector microscopic force ξ, and the species flux j. Following the free energy imbalance derived in Eq. ( Substituting the constitutive forms in Eq. ( This above inequality holds for all values of F, ∇F, c, and ∇c, which, in Eq. ( In Eq. ( Recalling the definition of μ net = μ + π in Eq. ( We note that the form of the chemical potential in Eq. ( Finally, we write the constitutive form of the flux of the diffusing species j in Eq. ( in which M is a mobility tensor. Substituting Eq. ( The inequality in Eq. ( The theory presented in section 2 is general and applicable to all first-order phase transformation materials, undergoing a symmetry-lowering lattice transformation. We next adapt this theory for intercalation materials, by introducing special constitutive equations that are relevant for modeling the Cahn-Hilliard type of diffusion and couple it with the structural transformations of lattices. We now propose a free energy density for intercalation materials undergoing a symmetry-lowering lattice transformation. This energy density is applicable to other chemo-mechanically coupled phase transformation materials undergoing a displace-type of transformation. Let us begin with the free energy density ψ(F, ∇F, c, ∇c) that depends on the lattice deformation gradient F, ∇F and the concentration of diffusing species c, ∇c. We assume that this free energy density is defined and continuous for all F ∈ M 3×3 and detF > 0 and for all values of the species concentration c during composition evolution. Here M 3×3 denotes a set of real m × n matrices. We assume that the free energy is Galilean invariant: for all F ∈ M 3×3 and detF > 0, for all values of c around the critical point, and each orthogonal rotations R with detR = 1, we have: Or equivalently, we describe the free energy in terms of the symmetric Green-Lagrange strain tensor from Eq. (3 Furthermore, we assume that the free energy density is an isotropic function of its arguments, and consequently depends only on the magnitude of the gradient terms ∇E and ∇c, We note that this free energy density satisfies frame-indifference and material symmetry, i,e., for all rotations R ∈ P(e • i ) and P(e • i ) is a finite point group of the undistorted crystalline lattice. The free energy density ψ therefore satisfies: The free energy density in Eq. ( Following We note that within the limits of a small deformation framework, e 1 represents a stretch-like deformation, and e 4 , e 5 and e 6 describe the shear-like deformation of lattices. The strain measures e 2 and e 3 in Eq. ( It follows from Eqs. ( and holds for all R ∈ P(e • i ). In this work, we assume a zero vector e = 0 minimizes the free energy density in the reference state and a non-zero tensor e ̸ = 0 minimizes the free energy in the intercalated state. The invariant condition in Eq. ( We next prescribe the specific form of the free energy function. We start by decomposing the free energy density into bulk and gradient energy terms. The bulk energy, in turn, includes contributions from the thermodynamic, elastic, and chemo-mechanically coupled terms: ψ(e, ∇e, c, ∇c) = ψ bulk (e, c) + ψ grad (e, ∇e, c, ∇c) = ψ ther (c) + ψ elas (e) + ψ coup (e, c) + ψ grad (e, ∇e, c, ∇c). (54) We construct the thermodynamic energy contribution ψ ther (c) as a sum of an ideal solution entropy and an excess free energy-representing a deviation from thermodynamic ideality-using a Redlich-Kirster polynomial series Eq. ( The elastic energy term penalizes the bulk and shear deformations: The coefficients K and G correspond to the bulk and shear modulus, respectively, and ∆V represents the volume change associated with the cubic to tetragonal structural transformation of the host lattices. Following The coefficient β 1 (c) represents the concentration-dependent deviatoric modulus governing the cubic to tetragonal transformations. The coefficients β 2 and β 3 are the nonlinear elastic constants. The third-order terms accompanying concentration-dependent β 2 coefficient are required to describe a first-order type of phase-transformation The energy well at (e 2 , e 3 , c) = (0, 0, 0.5) corresponds to the higher-symmetry cubic phase (denoted by Identity tensor I) and the energy wells at (e 2 , e 3 , c) ∈ {(0, -0.1, 1.0), (-0.1, 0.1, 1.0), (0.1, 0.1, 1.0)} corresponds to the tetragonal variants (denoted by stretch tensors U 1 , U 2 , U 3 ) at the lowersymmetry phase. Finally, the gradient energy term penalizes changes in concentration and/or strain and is given by: In Eq. ( We next derive the constitutive equations for the stresses, chemical potential, and microscopic forces for the form of the free energy function in Eq. ( We write the third-order stress tensor using Eqs. ( We derive the chemical potential expression using Eq. ( Finally, we construct the vector microscopic force using Eq. ( We discretize these constitutive equations and implement them in a finite element framework in section 4. During intercalation a guest-species, such as lithium, is inserted into the host-material lattices. This insertion is accompanied by an electrochemical reaction, at the electrode/electrolyte interface, which can be described for any guest species 'A' as follows: We incorporate this electrochemical reaction in our constitutive model by using a phenomenological Butler-Volmer equation In Eq. ( with k 0 denoting the reaction rate constant (units of mol/m 2 s) and μ + denoting the chemical potential in the electrolyte. We assume that the guest-species moves much faster in the electrolyte than in the active host material and therefore set μ + = 0 where ∆φ is the voltage drop across the interface between electrode and electrolyte. This voltage drop serves as a driving force for species insertion (or removal) into the electrode. By combining Eqs. ( Eq. ( For example, in this work we model the galvanostatic charge and discharge boundary conditions by employing the Butler-Volmer equation Eq. ( In Eq. ( Finally, we introduce Damköhler number Da to compare the reaction and diffusion time scales: where L is the characteristic length scale in the model, and D 0 is the diffusion coefficient. For a more detailed description of the galvanostatic (dis-)charging using the Butler-Volmer equation, we refer the reader to Appendix B. In this section we summarize the governing equations and boundary conditions for an intercalation material undergoing a first-order symmetry-lowering phase transformation: • Concentration Evolution: By substituting the constitutive form of flux of the diffusing species j in Eq. ( Please note that the chemical potential μ in Eq. ( • Macroscopic Force Balance: We use the local force balance law in Eq. ( In Eq. ( • Mechanical Boundary Conditions: To define the mechanical boundary conditions on the intercalation material, we consider ∂Ω = ∂Ω {χ} ∪ ∂Ω {t} are complementary subsurfaces of the boundary, in which the motion χ is specified on ∂Ω {χ} and the surface traction t on ∂Ω {t} . ζ L denotes a smooth boundary edge on which a jump in higher-order stress traction may occur The Dirichlet boundary condition in Eq. ( • Diffusion Boundary Conditions: Similar to the case of describing mechanical boundary conditions, we next consider ∂Ω = ∂Ω {c} ∪∂Ω {j} are complementary subsurfaces of the boundary, in which the species concentration is specified on ∂Ω {c} and the global flux on ∂Ω {j} : Next, we note that the microscopic stresses contribute to a power expenditure by the material that is in contact with the body. This requires that we consider suitable boundary conditions on ∂Ω that involve the microscopic tractions ξ • n and the rate of change of the species concentration ċ. In this work, we restrict to boundary conditions resulting in a null power expenditure: A simple boundary condition which satisfies this null expenditure of microscopic power is given by: • Initial Conditions: The initial conditions are χ(x, 0) = χ 0 (x) and c(x, 0) = c(x) on Ω. (76) The coupled set of Eqs. ( We next outline the finite element implementation of diffusion and finite deformation theory for intercalation materials. We note that this is a coupled, nonlinear, initial boundary value problem, in which, both the Cahn-Hilliard type of diffusion and nonlinear gradient elasticity formulation are solved. These formulations include fourth-order spatial derivatives and higher-order boundary conditions, which make the computation cumbersome. For example, the numerical solutions to the fourth-order partial differential equations (Eqs. ( Recall that the local force balance on Eq. ( We introduce the deformation gradient F as an additional degree of freedom and enforce kinematic constraints using a Lagrange multiplier ρ: The Galerkin weak form of the mixed formulation, with suitable test functions δu, δF, δρ, are given by: The corresponding forms using index notation are given by: Ω (-Y iJK,K + ρ iJ )δF iJ dV = 0, ( Note that these equations involve only the first-order gradients of kinematic quantities. We next introduce the boundary conditions in Eqs. ( The mass balance law in Eq. ( We next multiply Eq. ( Similarly, for Eq. ( (90) We implement the above weak forms in the open source finite-element, multiphysics framework MOOSE We next calibrate the material coefficients for Li 2x Mn 2 O 4 (0.5 < x < 1) that undergoes a cubic-totetragonal lattice deformation during intercalation. For simplicity, we assume a two-dimensional form of the model with E 13 = E 23 = E 33 = 0. This assumption in turn reduces the strain measures in Eq. ( with e 4 = e 5 = 0 and e 3 = e 1 / √ 2. We therefore construct the free energy in 2D as a function of the e 1 , e 2 , e 6 and, furthermore, in the absence of experimental measurements of gradient energies, we assume the most basic expression for the gradient energy contribution. Specifically, we assume an isotropic form for the gradient energy coefficients λ = λI and κ ij = κ ij I, respectively. In the latter term, we only assume gradient energy contributions involving ∇e 2 and set all other coefficients to zero. The coefficient accompanying the mixed composition-strain gradient term is also set to zero, γ i = 0. With these simplifications, the form of gradient energy density, with scalar constants λ and κ, for Li 2x Mn 2 O 4 reduces to Eq. ( We note that in 2D, the free energy density is a functional of c, ∇c, e 1 , e 2 , ∇e 2 and e 6 and Fig. Moving forward, we nondimensionalize the total of the system as ψ = ψ/(RT 0 c 0 ). We fit the coefficients of the thermodynamic energy term ψ ther in Eq. ( Eq. ( We next calibrate the coefficients in the elastic ψ elas (e) and the coupled ψ coup (e, c) energy terms for Li 2x Mn 2 O 4 : In Eq. ( Furthermore, based on experimental reports of isotropic Li-diffusion in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 We list all material constants calibrated to Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 in Table Table We next apply our modeling framework to investigate the interplay between Li-diffusion and lattice deformation in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 . Specifically, we analyze the microstructural evolution process on a 2Dplane of a Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 electrode (a primary particle) during a galvanostatic discharge process, how this evolution affects the macroscopic voltage response of the material, and investigate the stresses evolving during intercalation. For our computations, we model a 2D domain of size 500nm × 500nm of a single crystal Li 2x Mn 2 O 4 . We fix the displacements u = 0 of all the boundaries and apply galvanostatic discharge conditions Eq. ( During the galvanostatic discharge of Li 2x Mn 2 O 4 (i.e., Li-insertion) the SOC increases linearly with time, see Fig. The nucleation of the Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 phase manifests macroscopically on the voltage curve as a step-like feature 'A' in Fig. With continued lithiation, the Li-rich Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 phase, grows rapidly minimizing the surfacial area of the phase boundary and further reducing the elastic energy stored in the system. At SOC = 78.52% the Li-rich nucleus fills the left portion of the domain and the twinned microstructures adapt to varying volume fractions, see Fig. At SOC = 78.52%, the volume fraction of the twinned domains evolves to adapt and minimize the elastic misfit at the domain boundaries. Please recall that, in our computations, we fix the displacements of the boundaries. These fixed boundaries correspond to the cubic strain variant with e 2 = 0 of the LiMn 2 O 4 phase. On intercalation, the cubic-to-tetragonal lattice transformation generates lattice misfit at the domain boundary and the twinned microstructural pattern evolves (i.e., by changing its volume fraction) to minimize this elastic energy. This microstructural interaction is marked by the appearance of the second step-like feature 'B' on the voltage curve in Fig. In the final stage of the discharge process, the phase boundary reduces to a planar geometry and propagates through the computational domain. This change in the geometry of the phase boundary is accompanied by the formation of additional twins, see Fig. We next investigate the evolution of stresses in Li 2x Mn 2 O 4 electrodes during the galvanostatic discharge process. As highlighted in the previous section, Li-intercalation into LiMn 2 O 4 induces an abrupt cubic-to-tetragonal lattice transformation. This structural transformation of lattices at the atomic level generates continuum stresses, which on repeated cycling, lead to particle cracking and eventual failure. With our newly developed micromechanical model, we not only capture the interplay between Li-diffusion and finite deformation of lattices in 2D, but we also predict the evolution of stresses, in-situ, during the discharge process. Fig. Li-rich phase. The different orientations of the rectangular cells represent the two lattice variants of the Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 phase. Note that this structural transformation is accompanied by a 5.4% volume change and ∼ 13% lattice strains that contribute to elastic stresses in the domain. In addition to tensile stresses along the twin boundaries, we note stress concentrations at the LiMn 2 O 4 / Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 interface. These stresses correspond to the lattice mismatch between the cubic and tetragonal phases of the intercalation compound, and the tensile/compressive stresses depend on the lattice orientations at the phase boundary, see Fig. The LiMn 2 O 4 / Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 phase boundary is elastically stressed, see Fig. We derive a thermodynamically-consistent theory that predicts the symmetry-lowering lattice transformations in first-order phase change materials. In this theory, we use the Cauchy-Born rule and the principle of virtual power to develop a multiscale modeling framework that couples finite deformation of lattices at the atomic level with the diffusion of guest species (e.g., intercalating ions) at the continuum level. We applied this theoretical framework to intercalation materials, specifically to a spinel electrode Li 1-2 Mn 2 O 4 , and analyzed the interplay between Li-diffusion and lattice transformation during electrochemical half cycling. The theoretical predictions provide fundamental insights into microstructural evolution pathways in Li 1-2 Mn 2 O 4 and are consistent with the experimentally imaged HRTEM micrographs in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 Two features of our work limit the comparisons we can make with experimental observations of twinned microstructures in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 . First, we simplify the form of gradient energy contributions and evolution kinetics by assuming isotropic material constants. For example, we consider a scalar form of the gradient energy coefficients λ = λI and κ ij = κ 22 I = κI that penalizes a change in composition c or strain e 2 variable irrespective of the orientation of the interfaces. Furthermore, to prevent overfitting of the model parameters we do not penalize changes in strain components e 1 , e 6 or the mixed terms. These gradient energy contributions could be important to describe the geometric features of twinned microstructures (e.g., orientation of the phase boundary, volume fraction of the twinned domains) and we will account for these energy terms in our future work. Despite these simplifications, our modeling predictions on twin interface orientations and the nucleation and growth of the lamellar microstructural pattern exhibit a surprisingly favorable comparison with the experimental observations. Second, due to the nonlinearity and higher-order derivatives involved in the problem, we restrict ourselves to 2D finite element computations. This dimensional reduction simplifies the form of the free energy functional and we primarily describe the energy landscape using the strain variant e 2 as the order parameter. This 2D model phenomenologically describes the nucleation and growth of twinned domains in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 and predicts principal stresses in 2D at the phase boundary. Individual lattices in bulk Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 , however, rotate and shear in 3D space to minimize the misfit strains at the phase boundary. Computing these microstructural patterns in a 3D finite element framework is necessary to conclusively interpret microstructural evolution pathways and chemo-mechanically coupled stresses in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 . Extending our model to 3D not only presents a computational challenge, but it is also important to derive the coefficients of higher-order energy terms (e.g., nonlinear elastic energy and anisotropic gradient energy terms) using first-principle calculations The key feature of our model is that we derive a thermodynamically-consistent diffusion-deformation theory using the virtual-power approach and the second law of thermodynamics, without specifying, apriori, the form of the free energy function. Through this approach we derive the governing equations based on classical thermodynamic arguments, which differs from other models derived using variational approaches. We numerically solve this model using mixed-type finite element methods based on Lagrange multipliers and implement our framework in an open-source MOOSE platform. Using this model, we predict the interplay between higher-order diffusion terms and nonlinear strain gradient elasticity in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 with electrochemical boundary conditions. Unlike earlier phase field models that describe phase transformation in intercalation materials as a function of composition alone We derive a thermodynamically consistent theory that couples the diffusion of a guest species at the continuum scale with finite deformation of host lattices at the atomic scale. We adapt this diffusion-deformation theory for symmetry-lowering intercalation materials, such as Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 , and predict the delicate interplay between Li-diffusion and lattice deformation during a galvanostatic insertion half cycle. The present findings contribute to a multiscale understanding of how lattice deformations, in addition to composition phase separation, affect microstructural evolution pathways. Specifically, in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 , we find that the tetragonal lattice variants nucleate independently in the electrode particle and form compatible twins during phase transformation. These twinned microstructures evolve-by adapting domain thickness and orientation-to lower the misfit strains at the phase boundaries. Our findings quantitatively estimate stress field concentrations in a typical Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 electrode during a discharge half cycle and suggest a possible mechanism for structural degradation in Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 . More generally, our work establishes a theoretical framework that rigorously couples a Cahn-Hilliard type of diffusion with nonlinear gradient elasticity theory. This framework would be applicable to other symmetry-lowering first-order phase transformation materials beyond intercalation compounds. We rewrite Eq. ( The resulting mechanical boundary conditions are given by: T R iJ,J -Y iJK,JK + b i = 0. (A.12) Next, we write the tensor form of Eq. (A.10) in section 2.5.1 as: The mechanical boundary conditions are given by: P In our algorithm, we iteratively minimize the total energy of the system using the predconditioned Jacobian Free Newton Krylov method with an adaptive time step.