While fundamental scientific researchers are eagerly anticipating the breakthroughs of quantum computing both in theory and technology, the current quantum computer, i.e. noisy intermediatescale quantum (NISQ) computer encounters a bottleneck in how to deal with the noisy situation of the quantum machine. Since fully characterizing the quantum device has become technically impossible, and although an error mitigation technology has been adopted, it is still urgently required to construct more efficient and reliable benchmarking protocols through which one can assess the noise level of a quantum circuit that is designed for a quantum computing task. The existing methods that are mainly constructed based on a sequence of random circuits, such as randomized benchmarking (RB), have been commonly adopted as the conventional approach owning to its reasonable resource consumption and relatively acceptable reliability, compared with the average gate fidelity. To more deeply understand the performances of the above different randomized-framed benchmarking protocols, we design special random circuit sequences to test the performances of the three selected standard randomized-frame protocols under T1, T2, and coherent errors, which are regarded to be more practical for a superconductor quantum computer. The simulations indicate that MRB, DRB, and CRB sequentially overestimate the average error rate in the presence of T1 and T2 noise, compared with the conventional circuit's average error. Moreover, these methods exhibit almost the same level of sensitivity to the coherent error. Furthermore, the DRB loses its reliability when the strengths of T1 grow. More practically, the simulated conclusion is verified by running the designed tasks for three protocols on the Quafu quantum computation cloud platform. We find that MRB produces a more precise assessment of a quantum circuit conditioned on limited resources. However, the DRB provides a more stable estimation at a specific precision while a more resource-consuming. The emergence of increasingly powerful quantum technologies has brought millions of researchers in both experimental We know the researchers belonging to this attractive field are now challenged by the complex, even unknowable noise within a quantum computer Due to its intrinsic complex operation mechanism, we are only capable of abstracting very limited information to the quantum circuit designed for performing a quantum computing task. Even worse, it is nearly practically impossible to fully and succinctly characterize a general large-scale error-corrected quantum computer, i.e. called Noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) computer As far as we know, randomized benchmarking(RB) Although we have very limited information about the current superconductor quantum computer, we can still confirm that T1, T2, and coherent errors are the most significant noise resources that may unpredictably cause a catastrophic collapse Here, we select DRB, CRB, and MRB as three standard methods among the randomized-framed protocols Finally, in order to verify our simulated conclusion, we run the specifically designed task with these three methods on the Quafu quantum computation cloud platform Quantum computing has gained huge attention and even economic investments in the past decade years. There is a large growing number of experimental efforts and theoretic explorations that aim to demonstrate the reliability of scalable quantum computing. However, the current quantum computers suffer from unbearable errors, which are caused by complex situations, such as imprecise control, the natural decoherence of the qubits The threshold theorem The error rate of a quantum is a measure that indicts the closeness of an operation of a noisy quantum gate to the ideal quantum operation. Usually, the above demonstration is clear enough to be understood. Think much deeper, we might find some insights to unfold the vague points within this concept. There are many metrics to determine the difference between operations, unfortunately, some have no operation meaning, namely not intuitively understandable, and some even have the wrong operation meaning. Here we choose distinguishability to be a pretty good operational foundation in our context. An error at a low enough level is required in fault-tolerant quantum computing, therefore, we are specifically interested in very small errors. However, according to quantum mechanics, it is very hard or even impossible to detect a single mistake with confidence. If all gates are perfect, the circuit will output the correct result, however, if we get a wrong result, this real gate will be distinguished from the ideal one. According to this, we can define the error rate to be the distinguishability of gates from the ideal. After all, this is just one way to define the error rate of an operation. The statistics for an ideal process are governed by a probability distribution p id , however, an error-prone produces a different distribution p ac that governs the actual statistics. The total variation distance is a natural measure of the distance between two probability distributions over a set of outcomes X. Unfortunately, this measure is just theoretically meaningful while practically unmeasurable, especially for a largescale qubit system. We all know that process infidelity drastically underestimates the distinguishability between unitary operations and the diamond norm distance between G ac and G id just provides an upper bound on distinguishability. One may hope that an estimate of the infidelity of the logical noise under a probabilistic Pauli channel generalizes directly general logical noise. Unfortunately, even quantifying the error becomes more complicated for more general noise. The 'error rate' of a noisy process ε acting on a system is often experimentally quantified via the average gate infidelity to the identity, which can be efficiently estimated via randomized benchmarking The central task of quantum computation is to characterize the quality of quantum channels and quantum gates. The average gate fidelity of a quantum channel described by trace-preserving quantum operation ε is defined by where the integral is over the uniform (Haar measure where F (ε, U ) = 1 if and only if ε implements U U perfectly, however, a lower value indicate that ε is a noisy implementation of U . And F (ε, U ) = F (U † • ε),where U † (ρ) ≡ U † ρU , and • denotes composition of quantum gates. Naturally, average gate fidelity is related to the gate error gate that we have defined. However, these two quantities are not so directly connected physically, or operationally. It means that the average gate infidelity 1 -F (ε, U ) cannot be easily interpreted as an average error rate despite the common situation, i.e., because the measurement basis is not fixed in the integral so the infidelity is not an average error for a fixed measurement, yet neither is it averaged independently from the state. Instead, the lower and upper bounds to the error rate can be derived from fidelity, therefore, the mismatch of these two quantities or the substantial conditions with which they can directly connect with each other, are both in regimes of research interest. As authors in Entanglement fidelity In summary, either average gate fidelity or entanglement fidelity is useful for experimentally characterizing quantum gates and channels. There are two main effects that cause the noises within a quantum circuit, one is the qubit interacting with the environment, and the other is the interaction between qubits. An experimentalist of quantum computing always expects all the prepared qubits to be isolated, unfortunately, this expectation usually departs from the real case. The measurements or any non-unitary operations will affect the qubits to interact with the environment. The time of a qubit to keep isolated is coherent time, which yields two very important parameters in experiments. T 1 as one of the parameters characterizes the time that a qubit relaxes from an excited state to a ground state, which is mostly caused by the interaction between the qubit system and the environment. T 2 as another important parameter determines the time that a qubit decay from a superposition state to either the excited state or the ground state. Besides the above noises that result from the qubits interacting with the environment, quantum circuits always suffer from the disastrous crosstalk caused by the unwanted interaction with other qubits. A noise that is isolated is called a unitary error. Meanwhile, if not isolated, it might be the degradation of a quantum state, which is caused by imperfect operations or qubit leakage. The current superconductor quantum computers suffer from a noisy environment that is too complex to be precisely characterized. Technically, the noise within a quantum circuit can be converted into a specific quantum channel, i.e., twirling. Usually, we introduce a Pauli gate set to perform this particular twirling that is called Pauli twirling. If a kind of noise can be represented as a matrix, and the effect caused by off-diagonal elements is ignorable, we can use Pauli twirling to convert this kind of noise into a Pauli noise channel. Twirling Coherent errors severely affect the performance of quantum computers in an unpredictable way. Hence, achieving a reliable quantum computation necessarily requires mitigating their severe impact. Worse while, the average error rates measured by randomized benchmarking and even similar protocols, highly lack sensitivity to the whole impact of coherent errors. Therefore, this makes the prediction of the global performance of quantum computers unreliable and makes it difficult to validate the accuracy of future large-scale quantum computations. Fortunately, a protocol called randomized compiling has been proposed to overcome these limitations by converting the coherent noise into stochastic noise. This protocol dramatically reduces unpredictable errors and allows us to accurately predict the performance of a quantum computer by measuring the error rates via cycle benchmarking. Imagine a circuit that consists of single-qubit gate layers C k and two-qubit gate layers G k , where k is the index of the layers, we then insert and compile random single-qubit twirling gates , where T k is randomly sampled from a set of tensor products of single-qubit Paulis, and T c k-1 is chosen to undo the twirling gate, By this procedure There are following several major advantages of tailoring coherent errors into stochastic Pauli noise: (1) The off-diagonal terms in the error process caused by coherent errors can be completely suppressed(Pauli twirling assumed to be perfect); (2) Stochastic Pauli errors only grow linearly with circuit depth (in small error limit) because they occur with a finite probability in each gate cycle; (3) Stochastic Pauli errors have dramatically lower worst-case error rate than a coherent error at the same average rate. (4) The known fault-tolerant thresholds for stochastic noise are orders of magnitude higher than the threshold for generic local errors. As a practicably simple and efficient schema to estimate the noise level, conceptually, Randomized benchmarking (RB) proceeds as the following: The drawbacks in terms of operability and reliability of RB yield a method called direct RB (DRB). The authors of DRB claim that an RB-number-like r can be obtained by running many sequences of user-defined random circuits that consist of native gates directly instead of compiled ones. Moreover, the stabilizer state preparation that is used to encode the qubits brings another benefit, in which coherent errors can be converted into Pauli errors. Using this kind of technique, another method called cycle benchmarking (CRB) has been proposed and they claimed it to be reliable and efficient even for a non-Clifford gate set. Seems DRB and CRB have promoted efficiency and reliability obviously, unfortunately, the stabilizer preparation limits this method to apply to a larger scale qubit system. In order to solve the scalability of the previous protocols, the authors of MRB replace the 1-qubit Clifford state preparation rather than the multi-qubit stabilizer state. Besides this, they get the inversion of the user-defined random circuit by locally inverting each layer of the circuits, stead of the global inversion as the standard RB or DRM. As benchmark protocols, DRB, CRB, and MRB shown in Fig. B. An instance defined to compare the performances of Randomized-framed Protocols Since these protocols originally come from randomized benchmarking, the parameters exacted from the estimations would be operationally related to the average gate fidelity, however, these two parameters are not the same things essentially. Obviously, these protocols are operated very differently in terms of the structures of the circuits, and the formulas that are used to estimate the so-called error rates. Previous research has proved that these protocols are reliable for statistical noises and even coherent errors. However, it is not so clear for their performance under a more practical situation in superconductor qubit systems, for example, the T1 and T2 noise, and 1, 2-qubit gate coherent error. If we want to compare the performances of these three protocols, there will be several points that can not be ignored. Firstly, because there are a variety of parameters among these protocols, we have to control variables, such as (1) the structure that is defined by the density of two-qubit gates within the circuits; (2) the number of the repeated circuits that are required to guarantee the precision of estimations. Once the above two points have been satisfied, we can design an experiment to explore the performance of these protocols when the practical noises are considered. In order to figure out the above concerns, we mainly choose the density of the 2-qubit gate as a significant changeable quantity to build a sequence of random circuits. Meanwhile, in order to make the comparison more practical, we also consider the connectivity constraints in FIG. 1) Assuming circuit with ξ = 2α/wd = 0.75, the total number of the 2-qubit gates α equals w × d × ξ/2; 2) For the circuit of the depth of d, the number of the 2-qubit gate (here we choose CNOT gate) for each layer is determined randomly with the connectivity constraints and the calculated α satisfied simultaneously; 3) Once the 2-qubit gates are determined, the rest of the qubits that are idled will be filled with random 1-qubit Clifford gates from a set of {id, x, y, z, h, s, sdg, t, tdag}. So far we have clarified the procedure to generate a sequence of random circuits and defined the crucial concepts associated. Now let's explain the reasonability with which can compare the performances of these benchmarking protocols with the designed instance. According to the demonstrations in the second paragraph in the instance-design demonstration, it is clear that we have picked up the main factors of a quantum circuit at a gate level. Naturally, we choose the control variable method to those factors to make the results of comparison among those protocols more logically acceptable for the sake of rigor. Even though we have clarified the reasonability of comparing MRB, DRB, and CRB, it is still necessary to test it with a very trial situation, i.e. depolarization channel, with which it is much clearer for the numerical calculation and the physical interpretation and as well as the possible consistency between them and the operational meaning. It might be sufficient for an experimentalist to perform a quantum computer benchmarking with only clear and efficient instructions. However, it might lack much further to figure out the deep operating mechanism of the procedure. For example, why and how can this protocol convince us? Or is there any possibility of generalizing this protocol for a more practical or general situation etc..... Thanks to the elegant results in As shown in Fig. So far one may ask, since the displayed results are nearly the same except the extreme situations, can it more clear about the resource consumption of these protocols, as well as the possible precision of the estimations with given only a very limited resource, such as the total quantum gates consuming. With the above concerns, we test our instance on a real quantum computing platform, which is called the QuaFu quantum cloud platform. We choose the ScQ-P136 chip Ito run the instance that has been numerical simulated on in qiskit. Finally, we implement the experiment on the Quafu quantum cloud platform. As shown in In conclusion, the field of quantum computing holds tremendous potential, fueling the anticipation of groundbreaking advancements in both theory and technology. However, the current quantum computing landscape, characterized by noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) computers, confronts a formidable obstacle in managing quantum machine noise. The complete characterization of these quantum devices remains a technical impossibility, even with the adoption of error mitigation technologies. Addressing this challenge, there is a pressing necessity to develop more efficient and dependable benchmarking protocols capable of evaluating noise levels in quantum circuits designed for specific computational tasks. Established techniques, predominantly rooted in random circuit sequences such as randomized benchmarking (RB), have gained widespread acceptance due to their judicious resource utilization and satisfactory reliability compared to average gate fidelity. To attain deeper insights into the performance of these benchmarking protocols, specialized random circuit sequences were meticulously crafted to assess three standard randomized-frame protocols under the influence of T1, T2, and coherent errors-circumstances more pertinent to superconducting quantum computers. Simulations disclosed that MRB, DRB, and CRB consistently overestimated the average error rate in the presence of T1 and T2 noise when juxtaposed with conventional circuit average errors. Furthermore, these methods displayed akin sensitivities to coherent errors. Remarkably, the re-liability of DRB waned as T1 strengths increased. To substantiate the practicality of these findings, the simulated conclusions were authenticated by implementing designed tasks for the three protocols on the Quafu quantum computation cloud platform. The outcomes underscored that MRB furnished a more precise assessment of a quantum circuit within resource constraints, while DRB proffered a more steadfast estimation at specific precision levels, notwithstanding its greater resource utilization. These research findings elucidate the intricacies of noise mitigation in quantum computing and appraise the efficacy of benchmarking protocols under diverse error scenarios. They enrich our comprehension of the constraints and avenues for enhancement in NISQ quantum computers, thus paving the way for more dependable and efficient quantum computing technologies in the future.