Bilayer borophene, very recently synthesized on Ag and Cu, possesses extremely flat large surface and excellent conductivity. The van der Waals gap of bilayer borophene can be intercalated by metal atoms, tailoring the properties of bilayer borophene. Herein, we propose sandwiched B/TM/B (TM=Co, Ni, Cu, Pd) is a new 2D formation by transiton metal atoms intercalated into bilayer borophene, it is quite robust with both energetic, structural and thermal stability, and exhibits heat resistance of at least 1300 K. Besides, it is novel platform for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). The interecalation metal atom serves as single-atomic catalyst. Beyond, the transtion metal is protected by outside boron layers from being corroded by acidic/alkaline solution. B/Cux/B, B/Pdx/B and B/Alx/B with different metal coverage exhibit defect-independent extremely low HER free energy in the range of -0.162 ~ 0.179 eV, -0.134 ~ 0.183 eV and -0.082 ~ 0.086 eV which are comparable to noble metal Pt. Combining excellent conduction, high structural and thermal stability, low resistance to intercalated behaviour, effortless water splitting process, excellent defect-independent catalytic performance, cheapness and abundance of raw materials, free of corrodation, 2D sandwiched B/TM/B (TM=Co, Ni, Cu, Pd) is believed to promising for electrocatalytic HER applications. After the industrial revolution, the massive burning of fossil fuels has led to worrisome environmental and climatic concerns, calling in clean and renewable energy sources. Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), a branch of water splitting reaction, is believed to present a possible solution. Borophene is considered as the new wonder material after graphene, Except for charge transferring from metal substrate, regulation like metal doping and intercalation can be also pervaded ways to afford external charge required for the stability of borophene. Several freestanding metal-borophene networks including the second and third main group elements (Mg, Herein, highly stable transition metal intercalated bilayer borophene networks, B/TM/B (TM=Co, Ni, Cu, Pd), are proposed by high throughput calculations. We emphasize twenty transition metals in the third and fourth period elements due to their complex arrangement of d-orbital electrons and aplenty exotic properties. Our models comes from global structure search by CALYPSO code, The intrinsic electron deficiency of borophene leads to the formation of three-center twoelectron bonds (3c-2e, Figure B/Cu/B exhibits a trilayer structure composed of two δ4 borophene layers and one metal interlayer. The central hollow site of two boron hexagons belong to upper and lower sheets is the most stable intercalation site for metal atom. By scanning potential energy surface, binding energy of B/Cu/B on Cu(111) surface within -0.178 ~ -0.176 eV/Å 2 is independent of their relative position (More details in supporting information). This value of binding energy is extremely similar to -0.143 eV/Å 2 of Cu(111)/borophene BL. During the process of introducing foreign electrons using metal intercalation, borophene BL may take different numbers of intercalated atoms. As for B/TMx/B (x denotes metal coverage), the formation energy is defined as where E B/TM x /B represents the total energy of metal-intercalated δ4 borophene. EB denotes the energy of single B atom in δ4 borophene while EM denotes the energy of every metal atom in its most stable bulk phase (Table where N represents the number of intercalated metal atoms. Structures correspond to those positive peaks possess relatively higher stability according to our definition. Metal adsorption could enhance the catalytic activity of borophene. (3) The process of HER under the alkaline environment (usually KOH electrolyte) can be described by the following relations: H 2 O + H * + e -→ H 2 + OH -+ * According to above relations, there are readily available protons in acidic environment. Alkaline environment requires water as proton source and need additional water molecule dissociation process, which will significantly decrease the reaction rate of the HER. Even for excellent Pt catalyst, its reaction rate is usually 2~3 orders lower in an alkali than that in an acid. Consequently, B/TM/B is good platform for water dissociation and is expected to have similar or superior catalytic performance to noble Pt. Besides, * H may form hydrogen bonds with water molecules of aqueous solution, which results in deviation of theoretical prediction from experiments. Thus, the water solvation effect is considered for correction in our calculations. Except for electrolyte and water solvation effect, another major factor is also closely related to the catalytic performance: the most stable adsorption site for H atom. Seven probable sites including bridge, top and hollow sites are tested for H adsorption. Only three sites are found to be stable after optimization (Figure where EH*, E* and E H 2 are the energy of hydrogen adsorbed B/TMx/B, B/TMx/B and H2, respectively. As for B1 site, once a hydrogen atom is adsorbed there, two B-H bonds with the same length of 1.36 Å will form, and the plane where they are located is perpendicular to the borophene sheets. The free energy ΔG are employed to evaluate the catalytic performance of B/TMx/B, which is defined as where ΔEZPE represents the change of zero vibration energy, T and ΔS are the temperature and entropy change. Results are given in Figure Further investigation on the HER performance of B/TMx/B with different metal coverage x is conducted. As for B/Cux/B, B/Pdx/B and B/Alx/B, after eliminating deformed configurations, they exhibit excellent all-site defect-independent catalytic performance with extremely low ΔG ranging from -0.162 eV to 0.179 eV, -0.134 eV to 0.183 eV and -0.082 to 0.086 eV, respectively (Figure The readily available Cu, Al and B elements are abundant in the earth. Pd is half or two-thirds cheaper than Pt. Co and Ni are much more economical elements than noble metal as well. Consequently, B/TM/B are more economically viable and affordable than Pt. In addition, corrosion of catalysts by electrolytes is an intractable problem in practical applications. In sandwiched B/TM/B, non-metallic borophene plays an ideal coating role with both chemical reaction inertness and God-given high conductivity. Without affecting the penetration of metal electronic states through borophene for catalysis, the intercalated metal can be effectively protected from the corrosion of electrolyte. These metal-borophene networks are expected to be ideal reaction platforms for electrocatalysis. Charge distribution will change the electronic properties and chemical reactivity of B/TM/B, which crucially dictate its catalytic performance. Take charge density difference of B/Cu/B structure as en example (Figure Electrons are mostly distributed between B/TM/B layers while part of electrons are captured by B-B bonds between boron hexagons, which activates their chemical activity (Figure Charge density difference along Z axis is further obtained by projecting charge distribution after self-consistent calculation (Figure There is one crucial issue that whether sandwiched B/TM/B network could maintain considerable stability, so that it can be effectively applied. Therefore, ab initial molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations are performed to provide more evidence of thermal stability. Time step is set to 1 fs during the 10 ps simulation. Taking B/Cu/B as an example, it maintains thermally stable under 1500 K but starts to distort once the temperature rises up to 1550 K (Figure Our results demonstrate B/TM/B is highly thermal and kinetic stable. The structure, metal coverage, formation, water splitting process, hydrogen adsorption, The Authors declare patent of invention, its application number is 202211702777.3. Junfeng Gao*: gaojf@dlut.edu.cn approval to the final version of the manuscript. † Yuan Chang and † Hongsheng Liu contributed equally to the work. and regular (Figure