We propose a novel approach to enhance the performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) by incorporating grated Cadmium Sulfide (CdS) and plasmonic gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) into the absorber layer. The CdS grating acts as the electron transport layer and penetrates into the perovskite absorber layer, increasing the absorption of the active layer and reducing the electron-hole recombination rate. The plasmonic Au NPs enhance the absorption in the infrared region by scattering and trapping the incident light. We perform a coupled optical and electrical study that shows a significant improvement in the short circuit current density (J SC ) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the PSC after introducing the CdS grating and plasmonic Au NPs. Specifically, we observe a 48% increase in average optical absorption from 800 nm to 1400 nm and a 7.42 mA/cm 2 increase in J SC . We also find that the PCE of the PSC is increased by 7.91% when comparing the planar reference structure (without the CdS grating and the plasmonic Au NP). However, metal nanoparticles introduce ohmic losses and temperature rise in the solar cell. We analyze the non-radiative heat profile, electric field distribution, and temperature distribution across the PSC. We observe a temperature increase of approximately 14 K above the ambient temperature for the grated CdS layer with incorporated Au NPs, which is comparable to the temperature increase observed in the planar reference structure. Our results have the potential to pave the way for the development of highly efficient and stable PSCs in the future. In recent years, there has been an increased focus on the development of cheap, renewable, and carbon-free energy sources due to the growing energy demand and the worsening impact of global warming Efficient PSCs consist of a cathode/electron transport layer (ETL)/perovskite/hole transport layer (HTL)/anode. Perovskite optoelectronic devices contain several durable and stable metal oxide-based ETLs, including titanium dioxide (TiO 2 ), tungsten oxide (WO x ), and zinc oxide (ZnO), as well as cadmium sulfide (CdS) The use of metallic nanoparticles (NPs) in photovoltaic devices has been extensively researched as a means of enhancing PSC's efficiency. Researchers have investigated various optical manipulation techniques such as diffraction grating, aperiodic dielectric stacking, and plasmonic metal nanoparticle implementation In this work, we use a simulation study to improve the performance of perovskite solar cells by combining two realistic ways: we replace the planar electron transport layer with a CdS grating and add gold nanoparticles (NPs) in the spaces between the gratings. We numerically develop a planar PSC composed of ITO/CdS/MAPbI 3 /Spiro-OMeTAD/Au, where CdS, Spiro-OMeTAD, MAPbI 3 , and Au serve as the ETL, HTL, perovskite absorber layer, and back metal contact, respectively. In the second stage, we add a CdS grating to the absorber layer to improve the device's performance and lower the likelihood of electron-hole recombination. We insert plasmonic Au NPs between CdS gratings to enhance light absorption beyond the visible spectrum. We investigate the optical absorption of the PSCs and examine the electrical properties such as PCE, fill factor (FF), and J sc . After incorporating Au NPs into our PSC, we observe over 48% increased optical absorption in the infrared band of the sun's light. We achieve a significant improvement in photocurrent and PCE by 24.2% and 56.6%, respectively, where J sc increases from 30.67 mA/cm 2 to 38.09 mA/cm 2 and PCE increases from 13.96% to 21.87% when comparing the initial structure with the final structure in the electrical simulation. We perform a thorough investigation to learn the impact of CdS grating width, gold nanoparticle size, and location of nanoparticles. We use the coupled optical and thermal simulation to look at the spreading of heat and temperature. Our analysis shows that the temperature rise for all structures is approximately 14 K from the ambient temperature of 300 K, highlighting the applicability of our proposed PSC with grated CdS and embedded plasmonic nanoparticles. We also find that the grated CdS with Au NPs exhibits a notable improvement in quantum efficiency(QE) over a wide range of wavelengths, from 300 nm to 1200 nm, compared to the planar structure. We discuss a potential fabrication scheme in our manuscript. Our work paves the way for advancements in the field of optical and electrical performance enhancement for future solar cells due to its effective absorption of light outside the visible spectrum, increased photocurrent and PCE, and meticulous analysis of heat and temperature distribution across the PSC. The aim of this study is to investigate the impact of CdS grating and Au NPs on the performance of a perovskite solar cell (PSC) using optoelectronic simulation methods. Two simulation tools were employed, namely Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD)-based Ansys Lumerical software and SCAPS-1D. The FDTD method was used to solve Maxwell's equations at each mesh node, which helped to determine the optical absorption and photogeneration rate. Three fundamental semiconductor equations, including Poisson's equation, the drift-diffusion equation, and the carrier continuity equation, were solved to calculate important parameters such as the current density -voltage (I-V) characteristic and the spectral response of the solar cell. The interaction between plasmonic nanoparticles and the incident electromagnetic (EM) field was found to be critical to the device's performance. The electric field distribution was calculated using the FDTD method, and AM1.5G spectra were used as the input light power. The simulations were carried out in the wavelength range between 300 nm and 1400 nm, with a bandgap of around 1.5 eV for the absorber layer. This means that light with a wavelength longer than 800 nm cannot be absorbed by the absorber layer, and the plasmonic NPs were used to increase the amount of light absorbed outside of the visible spectrum. Refractive index (n) and extinction coefficient (k) values for materials such as CdS, Spiro-OMeTAD, and MAPbI 3 were obtained from previously published research where ε is the dielectric constant, ω is the angular frequency, and E is the electric field vector. The absorbance in MAPbI 3 , however, may be expressed as follows where ε 0 , λ, n, k, and V represent the vacuum permittivity, vacuum wavelength, real and imaginary components of the refractive index, and the integral volume computed inside it, respectively. Nevertheless, the absorption spectra of metal nanoparticles are examined independently by restricting the range of integrals within the NPs. Using the Poynting vector divergence, it is possible to calculate the value of absorption power per unit volume as follows where --→ E op denotes electric field orientation and I{(ì r, ω)} represents the imaginary part of the complex permittivity of each material. Next, using the acquired P abs and the following Equations where, h denotes the Planck's constant. After completing the optical simulation in Lumerical FDTD, we exported the resultant absorption data to SCAPS-1D for the electrical simulation. Using the fundamental photovoltaic equations for each layer, which are controlled by user-defined architectural and material factors, SCAPS is able to simulate solar responses. Three fundamental equations regulate the behavior of carriers in solar devices: the Poisson equation, the carrier continuity equation, and the drift-diffusion charge transport model equations. The Poisson equation describes the connection between the electric field produced at a P-N junction and the space charge density, and it may be represented as In this case, ψ(x) is the unidirectional electrostatic potential, q is the electrostatic charge, and r is the relative permittivity of the semiconductor material. Hole and electron densities are denoted by p(x) and n(x), whereas trapped densities are shown by p tr a p (x) and n tr a p (x), respectively. Also, the following are the electron and hole carrier continuity equations -1 1 Here, the current density of electrons and holes is denoted respectively by J n and J p . The rate of photogeneration of electron-hole pairs (EHPs) is denoted by the symbol G. The electron and hole recombination rates, respectively, are denoted by R n and R p . In the carrier transport model, which is used to determine the electron and hole densities, the total current density J is found to be equal to the combination of the drift and diffusion current densities The diffusion coefficients for electrons and holes are denoted by the symbols D n and D p , whereas the mobility of electrons and holes is expressed by the symbols μ n and μ p , respectively. The incident monochromatic photon's frequency is set at 10 18 s -1 . In SCAPS simulation, the shunt and series resistances of solar cells are fixed to 5000 Ohm.cm 2 and 1 Ohm.cm 2 accordingly. This study utilizes conventional AM 1.5G lighting at an ambient temperature (T) of 300 K. In addition to optical and electrical systems, photovoltaic devices are also thermodynamic systems; these three physical domains are strongly connected. This study also investigates the impact of optical absorption-induced heating on the electrical performance of the solar cell in the normal mode of operation. To get an understanding of the non-radiative heat and temperature distribution in the cell structure, we ran thermal simulations with Lumerical HEAT by linking the thermal module to the optical module and adding a heat source in Lumerical HEAT based on the optical absorption reported in Lumerical FDTD. The temperature distribution is determined by the solution to the differential equation of steady-state conduction with internal heat generation where k is a material's temperature-dependent thermal conductivity (W/(mK)), Cp is its specific heat (J/(kg-K)), and ρ d is its density. Q determines the amount of net energy absorbed at the sample surface exposed to concentrated solar radiation. It is also known as the source term. The amount of heat produced by the Joule effect is determined only by the product of the electric intensity and the current density. We provide a detailed description of the materials and geometries used in our study and present comprehensive 3D depictions of the device structures. Figure Table To ensure the practical implementation of the solar cell device, particularly incorporating gratings and nanoparticles, careful consideration must be given to a suitable and feasible fabrication process. Four design aspects must be taken into account while modeling the optimum design for dielectric grating and plasmonic nanoparticles. Firstly, the selected grating design should be simple and universally manufacturable on a large scale at an economical cost. Secondly, to prevent an increase in the width of the solar cells and the total cost, the height of the grating formation should be smaller than the breadth of the bottom active layer. Thirdly, to achieve Mie resonance with a high scattering cross-section, the size of the dielectric grating must be subwavelength. Finally, the grating and nanoparticle diameters must also be subwavelength to allow for the localization of surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) to guide and confine light. These considerations are crucial for ensuring the practicality and scalability of the solar cell device's fabrication process while maintaining its enhanced light absorption properties Various fabrication techniques are available today for the efficient implementation of devices incorporating gratings and nanoparticles. Nanotransfer lithography (NTL), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and chemical bath deposition (CBD) are some of the commonly used methods. NTL has been successful in constructing nanostructures for photon management in optoelectronic devices due to its low cost, quick turnaround time, flexibility, and reproducibility. However, the fragility of typical Si masters used in this process poses a significant limitation. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) masters, which are often used as Si alternatives, have a complicated fabrication process. The NTL fabrication process involves the replication of the Si master by applying a polymer resin coating, followed by the preparation of the polymer stamp, as illustrated in Fig. The desirable plasmonic metal (Au, Ag, Al) or dielectric (CdS, SiO 2 ) is deposited over the polymer stamp, which is then transferred onto the desired substrate or material layer. Our work solely focuses on a simulation-based approach to obtain results, but based on the current literature, it is feasible to effectively fabricate the proposed design using NTL due to its cost-effectiveness, flexibility, and controllability. For Au-NPs synthesis, a kinetically controlled seeded growth strategy can be implemented, which executes the chemical reduction of HAuCl 4 by sodium citrate. The incorporation of processed NPs into a perovskite layer can be achieved via methods such as spin coating, electrodeposition, etc. As light beams travel from the ITO to the back contact of Au, they undergo absorption in various parts of the structure. However, it is crucial to direct the generated electron-hole pair into the CdS and Spiro-OMeTAD regions, respectively, to produce a photocurrent. To enhance this optoelectronic effect, one approach is to utilize a CdS grating. Gratings provide multiple opportunities for the incoming light to bounce off between grating surfaces, which increases the optical path as well as the absorption probability. From Fig. Adding grated CdS does not improve the absorption of the PSC beyond 750 nm. However, the addition of gold nanoparticles between the grated CdS allows for further enhancement of absorption into the IR region. These nanoparticles scatter light with wavelengths close to their plasmon resonance, and plasmon stimulation can boost absorption and carrier generation. As shown in Fig. Figure To justify the absorption and generation spectra of these three structures, we simulate electric field intensity profiles at five different wavelengths: 357 nm, 556 nm, 859 nm, 945 nm, and 1350 nm, presented in Fig. For wavelengths of 357 nm and 556 nm, most of the light is absorbed in the upper part of PSC, as previously mentioned. Due to this and the short wavelength of the light, the top portion of the solar cell exhibits the highest electric field intensity, as seen in Fig. To maximize the generation rate, it is important to have a large interfacial area between the electron transport layer (ETL) and the absorber material, where most of the electron-hole pairs are created due to repeated reflection of light and charge separation. As shown in Fig. As the grating width decreases, the generation rate at the interface increases due to the larger interfacial area between the ETL and absorber, where most of the solar radiation is absorbed, leading to the creation of more electron-hole pairs. The generation rate is relatively uniform for all grating widths along the Y-axis of the solar cell except for the ETL/absorber interface, which is very sensitive to changes in the interfacial area. Near the ETL/absorber junction, the highest generation rate of 9.98 × 10 27 cm -3 s -1 is observed for a grating width of 20 nm, while the generation rate is 7.79 × 10 27 cm -3 s -1 for a grating width of 32 nm. The absorption and generation rates in the visible range remain unaffected by the presence of plasmonic nanoparticles (NPs) in the solar cell structure, as shown in Fig. In this section, we investigate the impact of the vertical location of gold nanoparticles on the optical and electrical performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). The depth at which nanoparticles are deposited inside the perovskite layer plays a crucial role in determining the absorption and generation rate of PSCs. To this end, we insert plasmonic nanoparticles at three distinct locations within the PSC: between grated CdS (530 nm in the Y axis), at the center of the absorber layer (320 nm in the Y axis), and at the bottom of the absorber layer (200 nm in the Y axis), and study their impact on the PSC's light absorption, generation rate, and I-V curves. Figure Figure We evaluated the optical and electrical performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) by implanting various metallic nanoparticles (NPs) with different shapes within the perovskite layer between CdS grating. The metallic NPs create near-and scattering effects with a plasmonic effect, enhancing PSC's absorption at longer wavelengths, and thus, its performance. To examine the augmentation of absorption in the infrared (IR) region, we simulate several nanostructures, including a cube, cone, inverted cone, and cylinder, in addition to the nanosphere. The interface area is kept nearly the same for each shape. Figure Since the generation rate and absorption are both at their highest for NPs with a cylindrical form, the current density and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the solar cell are also at their highest for this shape, with values of 39.48 mA/cm 2 and 21.96%, respectively. The second-highest current is observed at 38.09 mA/cm 2 for spherical shape NPs, with a nearly identical PCE of 21.87% to cylindrical shape NPs. Although it is easier to fabricate spherical-shaped Au NPs than cylindrical-shaped ones, the use of cylindrical-shaped NPs is recommended for PSCs. A detailed comparison of these NP shapes in terms of the highest generation rate, absorption enhancement, and electrical characteristics is provided in Fig. The grated CdS with Au NPs solar cell design shows a significant improvement in quantum efficiency (QE) compared to the planar structure. In Fig. The grated CdS with Au NPs exhibits a notable improvement in QE over a wide range of wavelengths, from 300 nm to 1200 nm, compared to the planar structure. This improvement is due to the large contact surfaces between the CdS gratings and the perovskite material, which enhances carrier transport and reduces carrier recombination. Thus, the grated CdS with Au NPs shows an enhanced QE between 300 nm and 825 nm, where the planar structure exhibits poor QE. The incorporation of Au NPs in the grated CdS structure facilitates photon absorption and results in a significant improvement in QE beyond 780 nm. The proposed structure shows an improved QE between the wavelength range of 825 nm and 1020 nm since the QE is correlated with the absorbance and internal QE, and the grated CdS with Au NPs provides enhanced absorption beyond 825 nm In Conclusion, the proposed design in this study shows significant potential in addressing the challenge of low optical absorption rates in perovskite solar cells (PSCs), particularly in the infrared (IR) region. The initial model was a planar PSC device with an ITO/CdS/MAPbI 3 /Spiro-OmeTAD/Au structure. The incorporation of a grated CdS nanostructure significantly enhanced the overall optical absorption of the planar structure by granting an extended optical path, reducing electron-hole recombination rates, and increasing light absorption in the active layer. Furthermore, plasmonic gold (Au) nanoparticles were added between every two consecutive CdS grating plates in the absorber layer to improve optical absorption in the IR region (beyond 750 nm). The combined implementation of grated CdS and Au NPs structures resulted in a mean light absorption increase of 48% in the 800-1400 nm range. The electrical characteristics, including power conversion efficiency (PCE), fill factor (FF), open-circuit voltage (V OC ), and short-circuit current (J SC ), were evaluated alongside the optical absorption of the PSC. Moreover, the heat and temperature distribution throughout the solar cell were analyzed, and the impacts of the width of the CdS grated structure on the generation rate and the radius, shape, and position variation of gold NPs on device performance were investigated. The results showed that the incorporation of the nanostructures led to significant improvements of 24.2% and 56.6% for J SC , which increased to 7.42 mA/cm 2 , and PCE, which increased to 7.91%, respectively. The V OC value of the device also increased from 0.81V to 0.87V, and the FF increased by 9.33%, from 56.25% to 65.58%, upon the implementation of the nanostructures. Therefore, our proposed device has the potential to pave the way for future research on incorporating nanostructures in PSCs to overcome the challenges associated with low optical absorption rates in the IR region, ultimately resulting in the development of more efficient solar cells. 3.7. Heat and thermal analysis