We study the effect of nanowire shape on mechanical properties and deformation behaviour of Cu nanowires using atomistic simulations. Simulations were carried out on [100] nanowires with different shapes such as triangular, square, pentagon, hexagon and circular. Based on size, two different scenarios were considered. In first, all shapes have different surface area to volume ratio, while in second, all have the same surface area to volume ratio. The results indicate that the Young's modulus is insensitive to shape in both cases. However, yield strength is different for different shapes. In both cases, triangular nanowire exhibit the lowest yield strength, while circular nanowire is the strongest. Deformation in all the nanowires is dominated by partials slip and twinning. Due to twinning, different shapes expose different surfaces at the twinned region. All nanowires show ductile failure and square nanowire exhibits the highest failure strain, while it is lowest for triangular nanowire. In recent years, nanowires have been a major focus of scientific research due to their remarkable electrical, magnetic, optical and mechanical properties strain rate With regard to nanowire shape, Leach et al. As the nanowire shape/geometry influences the surface area to volume ratio, which in turn affects the material properties, the mechanical behaviour of nanowires with different cross-sectional shapes such as triangular, pentagonal and hexagonal also should be known apart from the well studied square and circular shapes. In this context, it is surprising to find that there is no systematic study in the literature on how the nanowire shape influences the mechanical properties and associated deformation mechanisms of nanowires. Further, the details of twinning related effects such as the orientation of the twinned region and twin growth have not been investigated in nanowire shapes other than square and circular. In view of this backdrop, the present investigation is aimed at understanding the role of nanowire cross-sectional shape on mechanical properties, deformation and failure behaviour of nanowires using atomistic simulations. The tensile loading has been applied on nanowires with different shapes such as triangular, square, pentagonal, hexagonal and circular cross-sections. The tensile deformation of Cu nanowires with different cross-section shapes have been performed using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations through Large scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) package This potential has been chosen for being able to reproduce the generalized stacking fault and twinning fault energies for Cu The equilibrated side surfaces for all nanowires with different cross-sections has been shown in Figure Figure The size of nanowires of different shapes has been chosen in two different ways. In the first scenario, the size of the nanowires of different shapes is chosen in such a way that it can be inscribed in a nanowire with circular cross-section as shown in Figure Table to integrate the equations of motion with a time step of 2 fs. Following thermal equilibration, the tensile deformation was carried out by maintaining a constant strain rate of 1 × 10 8 s -1 along the axial direction. Strain (ε) has been calculated as (l -l 0 )/l 0 , where l is instantaneous length and l 0 is the initial length of the nanowire. The stress has been obtained using the Virial expression The effect of shape on the mechanical properties and deformation behaviour of nanowires has been studied for two different scenarios. In the first scenario, the nanowires having different shapes leading to different surface area to volume ratio have been chosen (Table In this scenario, the size of the nanowires of different shapes has been chosen in such a way that all the shapes can be inscribed in nanowire of circular cross-section shape having diameter of 10 nm (Figure Accordingly, all nanowires have different surface area to volume ratio (Table During this decrease, the flow stress exhibits a rapid fluctuations (Figure Figure The variations in yield strength for nanowires of different shapes has been presented in Figure In previous section, the effect of shape has been studied by considering different nanowire shapes having different surface area to volume ratio. In order to study the sole effect of shape, here the surface area to volume ratio has been kept same for all shapes. Accordingly, the size of the nanowires has been varied as shown in Table . 2. Figure Similar to previous scenario, the Young's modulus has been calculated as the slope of the linear elastic regime and found to be around 92 GPa for all nanowires. This indicate that the Young's modulus is insensitive to the nanowire shape, irrespective of whether the surface area to volume ratio is varied or kept constant. The variations in yield stress for different shaped nanowires with same surface area to volume ratio is shown in Figure In order to understand the effect of shape on the dislocation nucleation and deformation mechanisms, the atomic configurations have been analysed for two different scenarios using the CNA parameter and visualized using AtomEye. The results indicate that the defect nucleation and deformation mechanisms were same for both the scenarios. Following yielding, the sudden drop in flow stress corresponds to the defect nucleation in the nanowires and this can also be considered as the initiation of plastic deformation. The initial defect nucleation corresponding to the yielding in the nanowires of different shapes is shown in Figure Following the nucleation of Shockley partials from the corners, the deformation behaviour in nanowires of different shapes is dominated by the slip through partial dislocations along with deformation twinning (Figure known that the deformation twinning alters the surface orientation of the nanowires at the twinned region Figure As shown in Figure In single crystal nanowires, the deformation by partial or full dislocation slip can be understood based on the parameter α M , defined as the ratio of Schmid factors for leading and trailing partial dislocations Similarly, if α M =1, the deformation can proceed either through twinning or extended dislocations or by the combination of these two. It has been shown that for < 100 > orientation, the value of α M is 0.5 under tensile loading Molecular dynamics simulations have been performed to understand the influence of nanowire shape on the mechanical properties and the deformation mechanisms of Cu nanowires. Five different shapes (triangular, square, pentagon, hexagonal and circular) have been considered. Based on nanowires size, two different scenarios have been chosen. In the first scenario, the size of the nanowires has been chosen in such a way that all the shapes can be inscribed in nanowire of circular cross-section with a diameter 10 nm. In this case, all nanowires possess different surface area to volume ratios. In the second scenario, the size of the nanowires has been chosen in such a way that the surface area to volume ratio remains same for all shapes. The MD simulations results indicate that the Young's modulus in both scenarios is insensitive to the nanowire shape. This insensitivity of Young's modulus is interesting particularly in first scenario, where different shapes have different surface area to volume ratio. In both the scenarios, the yield strength increases with increasing number of side surfaces. The traingular nanowire shows the lowest strength and ductility (failure strain), while the circular nanowire display highest strength combined with good ductility. Here, it is interesting to observe that despite the same surface area to volume ratio in the second scenario, the yield strength still varies for different shapes. The variations in yield strength have been explained based on the variations in surface area to volume ratio (First scenario) and potential energy (Second scenario) of the nanowires. In all the nanowires, irrespective of their shape and surface area to volume ratio, the deformation is dominated by the slip through Shockley partial dislocations and deformation twinning. The deformation twinning changed the orientation of side surfaces at the twinned region, whose orientation is different for different shapes. Finally nanowires of all shapes fail in a ductile manner. 