The observation of zero-bias conductance peaks in vortex cores of certain Fe-based superconductors has sparked renewed interest in vortex-bound Majorana states. These materials are believed to be intrinsically topological in their bulk phase, thus avoiding potentially problematic interface physics encountered in superconductor-semiconductor heterostructures. However, progress toward a vortex-based topological qubit is hindered by our inability to measure the topological quantum state of a non-local vortex Majorana state, i.e., the charge of a vortex pair. In this paper, we theoretically propose a microwave-based charge parity readout of the Majorana vortex pair charge. A microwave resonator above the vortices can couple to the charge allowing for a dispersive readout of the Majorana parity. Our technique may also be used in vortices in conventional superconductors and allows one to probe the lifetime of vortex-bound quasiparticles, which is currently beyond existing scanning tunneling microscopy capabilities. Introduction. Majorana zero modes were originally proposed within the context of vortices in a topological superconductor (SC) However, the measurement of the topological quantum state of a non-local vortex MZM remains a challenge, hindering progress toward a vortex-based topological qubit. While it is in principle possible to move the vortices and associated MZMs In this paper, we propose a solution to the measurement problem using microwave (MW) techniques, which have been established and demonstrated as an extremely versatile tool to address electronic systems in various experiments Our approach focuses on studying the coupling between electrons in the Fe-based superconductor and the microwave photons from a resonator positioned above it. By analyzing the frequency-dependent transmission of the resonator, we can achieve a dispersive readout of the non-local vortex Majorana state. We provide the necessary requirements for the resonator quality factor Q to enable the parity readout. Importantly, our technique can also be applied to vortices in conventional superconductors, offering insights into the lifetime and coherent manipulation of vortex-bound quasiparticles, surpassing the capabilities of existing scanning tunneling microscopy. General theory of MW coupling to vortex state. The interaction between the external electromagnetic field with the charge density of the superconductor results in a MW coupling Hamiltonian where ρ e (r) is the charge density operator and V (r) cos ωt is the scalar potential of the external electromagnetic field. This electromagnetic field is created by a resonator, which is within a wavelength of the SC surface. Thus the field can be treated in the quasistatic approximation. The sketch of the measurement setup is shown in Fig. In the static field approximation, screening in the superconductor results in a decay of the field, characterized by a screening length λ TF . The scalar potential of the external electromagnetic field can be written as V (r) = V 0 e -z λ TF , where z is the distance from the top surface of the superconductor and V 0 is the amplitude of the external field. In Eq. ( T is the Nambu field operator and τ z = diag(1, 1, -1, -1). In order to expand the field operator in the exact eigenbasis of the unperturbed Hamiltonian H 0 , which is given by Eq. ( The eigenstates of the system exhibit a particle-hole symmetry (PHS) that is represented by an antiunitary operator P. For each eigenstate Φ n with energy E n , there exists another eigenstate Φ -n = PΦ n with energy -E n . The corresponding annihilation operator satisfies Γ -n = Γ † n . We consider energies below the SC gap and include the excited vortex-bound states (Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon states). The lowest energy state in the system is the Majorana state Φ M with energy E M , and its corresponding operator is given by Γ M = 1 2 (γ 1 -iγ 2 ), where γ 1 and γ 2 are two Majorana operators as shown in Fig. Expanding the Nambu spinor Ψ in terms of Γ n , the MW coupling (1) can be written as Here we introduced the matrix elements of the (surface) charge operator q = 2 ́d3 rρ e e -z/λTF , e.g., Because the charge operator preserves PHS, the matrix elements obey the same symmetry, encoded by the relations q n,-m = -q * -n,m and q n.-n = 0. Microwave readout of Majorana parity. In circuit quantum electrodynamics where κ = 2/(C tot R * ) is the escape rate of the cavity, and p = (-1) nM denotes the Majorana parity. We denote Π (p) (ω) the parity-dependent charge-charge correlation function. In the time domain, it is given by Π (p) (t) = -i ħ Θ(t)⟨[q(t), q(0)]⟩ p , where Θ(t) is the Heaviside step function. As shown in Fig. where C and C 1 are the capacitance of the resonator and the superconductor, respectively. The resonator is coupled with capacitance C κ to the input-output transmission line with resistance R 0 , and the effective resistance incorporates the coupling strength C κ The interaction between the resonator and the superconductor induces transitions between the Majorana state and the vortex-bound states localized near the top surface. The correlation function Π (p) contains information of these transitions and can be written as a sum (from hereon we set ħ = 1) (p) l = E l +pE M is the transition frequency and E M , E l , n M and n l are the energies and occupation numbers of the Majorana state and the bound state l. The infinitesimal level width δ > 0 accounts for causality and q l,±M are the charge matrix elements between bound state l and occupied/unoccupied (+/ -M) Majorana state. At low temperatures, in the absence of occupied bound states (n l = 0), we obtain that Π (+) (ω) ∝ |q l,-M | 2 for n M = 0 and Π (-) (ω) ∝ |q l,+M | 2 for n M = 1. The unequal charge matrix elements q l,M , q l,-M and transition frequencies ω (p) l result in different Π (±) (ω), which suggests that the MW coupling can be used to probe the Majorana occupation number n M . The critical cavity Q-factor. The paritydependent correlation function Π (p) allows for the microwave readout of MZM parity based on the transmission [Eq. ( where is the peak seperation of two parities in Fig. It is worth mentioning that Q c diverges at δζ = -E M /ω c since the peak position does not shift, and thus parity detection becomes difficult. In the detuning regime, where the resonator frequency is significantly detuned from the first bound state's energy (|E 1 -ω c | ≫ ω c ζ, E M ), the full expression for Q c is more complex compared to the resonant regime (for detailed derivation, see Ref. where The two different forms highlight the parity readout based on the parity-dependence of the charge matrix element (δζ) or the transition energy (E M ). The first form [Eq. ( We will analyze a two-band effective BdG model for an Fe-based superconductor The Hamiltonian in the Nambu basis T can be represented as H SC = 1 2 ́dkΨ † H SC Ψ, where the BdG Hamiltonian H SC is given by here μ = 5 meV represents the chemical potential, and ∆ 0 = 1.8 meV is the bulk pairing gap. In our lattice model, , where η i and σ i represent the Pauli matrices that account for the orbital and spin degrees of freedom, respectively In our numerical simulation, we set ν = 10 meV and a = 5 nm (the lattice constant), m 0 = -4ν, m 1 = -2ν, and m 2 = ν so that the system is in the topological phase In the context of our model, we consider the s-wave superconducting pairing potential in the presence of vortices that extend along the z-axis. For a single vortex centered at the origin, the pairing term can be expressed as where ξ = 5 nm represents the characteristic radius of the vortex and w = x + iy. In our specific model (shown in Fig. where w 1 and w 2 correspond to the respective locations of the two vortices. The two-vortex pairing term and the BdG Hamiltonian exhibit a Z 2 symmetry represented by R Z2 = R(z, π)τ z η z . This operator is characterized by a π rotation around the z-axis, with respect to the midpoint of the two vortices, taken here as the origin. Its action on a function f (x, y, z) is given by R(z, π)f (x, y, z) = f (-x, -y, z). The symmetry operator has eigenvalues ±1. The manifestation of this symmetry results in the observation of double degeneracy in the system's spectrum, as evident in the inset of Fig. However, the presence of random disorder in realistic conditions disrupts the symmetry, resulting in the elimination of the double degeneracy in the spectrum (Fig. Numerical studies of two-vortex systems. We employ a numerical approach to investigate a two-vortex system. To perform the numerical analysis, we discretize the Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( We utilize the results obtained in Ref. Discussion. We showed that a microwave coupling enables the parity readout of a non-local Majorana zero mode hosted in a vortex pair. We quantified the sensitivity of the readout by defining a critical cavity Q-factor Q c , Eqs. ( Our method offers a compelling approach to measuring the non-Abelian nature of Majorana zero modes. By employing two resonators to measure quantities s z = iγ 1 γ 2 and s x = iγ 2 γ 3 , we can effectively measure two non-commuting parities of MZMs. Through monitoring these observables 