Chiral metal halide perovskites have emerged as promising optoelectronic materials for emission and detection of circular polarized visible light. Despite chirality being realized by adding chiral organic cations or ligands, the chiroptical activity originates from the metal halide framework. The mechanism is not well understood, as an overarching modeling framework is lacking. Capturing chirality requires going beyond electric dipole transitions, the common approximation in condensed matter calculations. We present a density functional theory (DFT) parameterized tight-binding (TB) model, which allows us to calculate optical properties including circular dichroism (CD) at low computational cost. Comparing Pb-based chiral perovskites with different organic cations and halide anions, we find that the structural helicity within the metal halide 1 Circularly polarized light (CPL) is a vital ingredient in many emerging or existing technologies, for instance, in quantum computing, The mechanisms behind specifically the chiroptical activity in halide perovskites are un-clear. Whereas SOC plays a foundational role in explaining CISS, its role in CD is uncertain. Ultimately structure, lack of symmetry in particular, should govern these effects, but whether the electronic and optical properties are decided by the same structural parameters is open to question. Atomistic simulations are ideal for identifying the structural changes chiral molecules introduce in achiral perovskites. However, it is currently challenging to calculate optical activity in solid state materials due to the absence of an established computational framework, We start from DFT calculations on archetype chiral 2D perovskites, (R/S-MBA) 2 PbI 4 , with an orthorhombic unit cell consisting of four formula units. The structure is shown in Figure where Having constructed the TB model, we proceed with the calculation of the optical properties. In this paper, we focus on chiral dichroism (CD), which is basically the difference in the absorption between left-and right-handed CPL. The absorption coefficient is given by the expression where ε r and ε i are the real and imaginary parts of the relative electric permittivity; ω, q, and ± indicate the frequency, the wave vector and the polarization (right and left circular) of the electromagnetic radiation. We calculate the imaginary part ε i using the standard first-order perturbation theory independent particle expression, neglecting local field effects The real part ε r is then determined using a Kramers-Kroning transform. In 3 the indices c and v refer to wave functions of the conduction and valence band respectively, where k, k ′ refer to points in the Brillouin zone (BZ); v is the velocity operator of an electron (or hole), and ê± is the polarization vector of the electromagnetic radiation; the electron and hole energies, respectively. The matrix elements ⟨ck ′ |ê ± • v|vk⟩ are key quantities from a computational point of view. They are calculated in the approximation Restoring the spatial wave character of the electromagnetic field to first order allows one to make this distinction, and can be used to calculate CD. Figure The calculated dielectric function of R/S-MBA 2 PbI 4 is shown in Figure eV, and distinct peaks at ∼ 2.3 eV and 3.3 eV. The onset corresponds to the band gap as calculated with DFT. Van Hove singularities tend to be prominent in quasi-2D band structures, and markedly contribute to peaks in the JDOS. The absorption coefficient of R/S-MBA 2 PbI 4 , calculated from 2, is shown in Figure Qualitatively, the onset and peak structure of the absorption coefficient follow that of ε i (ω), with an enlarged high frequency part, and the peaks shifted to a slightly higher frequency, because of the influence of ε r (ω) in 2. The calculated CD spectrum, Figure As the calculations on the two enantiomers have been totally independent of one another, this serves as a consistency check on the results of the calculations. While the order of magnitude of the calculated CD is in good agreement with experimental data, a more direct comparison with experiments is unfortunately hard to make. Our model for calculating CD assumes a single crystal. Experimental CD spectra depend on the thickness of the studied films and are also sensitive to other parameters, such as in-plane homogeneity. Next, we look at whether there is a relation between the sizes of the CD and the SOCinduced spin splitting in the band structure. The latter determines the CISS effect, so it allows one to assess the correlation between CISS and CD. We calculate the CD of different perovskites with the same space group, but with spin splittings of different size. By doing so, differences in crystal symmetry are excluded as the cause of variations in the optical There is no obvious correlation between the size of the CD, and that of the spin-splitting discussed above, which is another indication that spin effects are not driving the chiroptical activity. Figure x and z. Interestingly, along the x-direction, the size of the CD is comparable to that in the y-direction, while it also follows the same trend n the order MBA < MHA < 4-Cl-MBA. In fact, the CD spectra of all compounds along the x and y directions are fairly similar. ]The main difference is that for all compounds the maximum CD is slightly lower along the x than along the y-direction, apart from the CD of MBA 2 PbI 4 , which is higher along x. Comparing different compounds, one observes that, apart from the amplitude, the CD spectra in x and y directions of the iodide-based ones are quite similar. In comparison, the spectrum of the bromide-based compound is shifted to a smaller wave length, as a result of the increased band gap of this compound. The CD spectra in the z direction (perpendicular to the Pb halide planes) are markedly different from those in the in-plane directions. For MHA 2 PbI 4 , 4-Cl-MBA 2 PbI 4 , and 4-Cl-MBA 2 PbBr 4 , the amplitude of the CD in the z direction tends to be at least an order of magnitude smaller. Only for MBA 2 PbI 4 the CD is comparable in size to that in the x and y directions, but for this compound the CD in all directions are small anyway, as compared to the other compounds. One would like to find a correlation between the structure of the compound and the amplitude of the CD. Inspired by Ref., According to the same table, smaller lattice parameters also tend to give rise to a larger divide the structural parameter ∆ z-X-ax by the lattice parameters a and b and plot it against the maximum CD along the x-and y-directions respectively, we get a trend that is very close to linear, see Figure The maximum CD along the z-direction also tends to increase with decreasing lattice parameter. Apart from this simple observation, we have not been able to identify a structural parameter that correlates exactly with this trend. However, the CD amplitude in the z direction is relatively small, compared to those in the x and y directions. Table To summarize, in this work we present a method for calculating the optical properties of chiral halide perovskites. To ensure computational efficiency, our method is based on a TB model, parametrized from DFT calculations, and includes on-site SOC Hamiltonians. While similar approaches are used for the calculation of optical properties of various materials, most studies use the electric dipole approximation, which is not suitable for calculating chiral properties, such as CD. For this reason, we determine higher order terms, namely the electric quadrupole and magnetic dipole terms, which allow us to calculate the CDs of the chiral perovskites. We perform calculations on a number of chiral perovskites, varying either chiral ligands or halide anions, and analyse and compare their structural, electronic and optical properties. In contrast to frequent assumptions, we find no correlation between CD and the chirality-induced spin splitting, suggesting the two being controlled by different structural parameters. While in-plane inorganic metal-halide octahedral tilting distortions generally determine the size of the spin splitting, out-of-plane ionic displacements of metal-halide layer are the decisive factor for the size of CD. Specifically, the latter correlates with the out-ofplane displacement amplitude of the axial halide atoms, divided by the lattice parameter in the direction of the incident light. The chemical composition of the inorganic layer is another important factor in determining the CD. Replacing I with Br within the same structure increases the size of the CD, besides shifting the peaks in the CD spectrum. Our method is computational efficient and flexible, making it a suitable starting point for refinements to include effects that have not yet been considered, such as excitonic effects obtained from solving the Bethe-Salpeter equation, or the coupling with lattice dynamics to take the impact of finite temperatures into account. The availability of such a tool therefore creates opportunities to understand more complex interactions of light, spin and charge in this fascinating class of materials and to design new compositions with new functionalities. Density functional theory calculations were performed using the Projector Augmented Wave (PAW) method, as implemented in the Vienna Ab-Initio Simulation Package (VASP). Initial structures were acquired from Ref. Spacer