Surface Dirac cones in three-dimensional topological insulators have generated tremendous and enduring interest for almost two decades owing to hosting a multitude of exotic properties. In this work, we unveil the existence of two types of anomalous surface Dirac cones in three-dimensional Dirac semimetals. These surface Dirac cones are located at the surfaces perpendicular to the rotation symmetry axis, and are found to display a number of features remarkably different from that in topological insulators. The most prominent one is the absence of singular Dirac node. In addition, the spin textures of these nodeless surface Dirac cones are found to exhibit a unique two-phase-angle dependence, leading to the presence of two different winding numbers in the orbital-resolved spin textures, which is rather different from the well-known spin-momentum locking in topological insulators. Despite the absence of Dirac node, we find that the two types of surface Dirac cones are also characterized by quantized π Berry phases, even though one of them takes a quadratic dispersion. In the presence of time-reversal-symmetry-breaking fields, we find that the responses of the surface and bulk Dirac cones display an interesting bulk-surface correspondence. The uncovering of these nodeless surface Dirac cones broadens our understanding of the topological surface states and bulk-boundary correspondence in Dirac semimetals, and also lays down the basis for studying unconventional Dirac physics. Since the rise of graphene and topological insulators (TIs), the exploration of Dirac-cone band structures has continued to be at the frontier of a number of disciplines TIs build a common picture through the bulk-boundary correspondence that the 2D gapless SDCs are decedent from the 3D gapped Dirac cones in the bulk Recently, a remarkable experiment reported the observation of 2D gapless SDCs in some iron-based superconducting compounds with 3D bulk Dirac nodes protected by C 4z rotation symmetry Linear nodeless SDCs in the opposite-parity DSM.-DSMs are materials whose conduction and valence bands cross at some isolated points (Dirac nodes) in the Brillouin zone Let us first consider the opposite-parity DSM. Focusing on a cubic-lattice realization, the minimal model is given by where k s = (k x , k y ) denotes the xy-plane momentum, η 1 (k s ) = η 1 (cos k x -cos k y ), η 2 (k s ) = η 2 sin k x sin k y , σ i and s i are Pauli matrices in orbital and spin space, and σ 0 and s 0 are the corresponding identity matrices. For notational simplicity, the lattice constants are set to unity throughout. Without loss of generality, below we consider all parameters in Eq.( It is noteworthy that the existence and the locations of the bulk Dirac nodes do not depend on the two η terms. However, as we shall show below, the η terms have rather remarkable effects on the topological surface states. When η 1 and η 2 vanish, the Hamiltonian (1) at a given k z is characterized by a Z 2 invariant To intuitively show that 2D gapless Dirac cones also exist on the top and bottom surfaces, we first introduce a set of momentum-dependent Pauli matrices, namely, sx = cos θ ks s x + sin θ ks s y , sy = -sin θ ks s x + cos θ ks s y , where In this work, two phase angles will be involved, one is θ ks , and the other is φ ks = arg(sin k x + i sin k y ). When considering the continuum counterpart of the lattice Hamiltonian, these two phase angles are implicitly assumed to take the corresponding continuum forms (e.g., φ ks = arg(k x + ik y )). It is easy to verify that this set of Pauli matrices also satisfies [s i , sj ] = 2iε ijk sk and {s i , sj } = 2δ ij s 0 for i, j ∈ {x, y, z}. Using them, the Hamiltonian can be rewritten as where η(k s ) = η 2 1 (k s ) + η 2 2 (k s ). The above form resembles the minimal model for 3D TIs where Considering a half-infinity system occupying z ≥ 0 (z ≤ 0), replacing k z → -i∂ z , and solving the eigenvalue equation H 0 (k s , -i∂ z )ψ α (x, y, z) = 0 under the boundary conditions ψ α (z = 0) = 0 and ψ α (z → ∞) = 0 (ψ α (z → -∞) = 0), one will obtain two solutions corresponding to the zero-energy boundary states at the bottom (top) surface. Their explicit forms read where the superscript a = {t, b} labels the top and bottom surfaces, The normalizability of the wave functions determines the region hosting boundary states, which turns out to be the region bound by the projection of the band-inversion surface, i.e., M (k s ) < 0. Noteworthily, the point k s = 0, however, needs to be excluded since γ(k s ) vanishes at this point. This result is consistent with the fact that the effective 1D Hamiltonian H(0, 0, k z ) is gapless, and the projections of the two bulk Dirac nodes are exactly located at this surface time-reversal invariant momentum The low-energy Hamiltonians for the top and bottom surfaces are obtained by projecting H 1 (k) onto the Hilbert space spanned by the corresponding two zero-energy eigenstates. Since [σ y sx , C] = 0, we can choose χ t/b α to be the eigenstates of the subchiral symmetry operator. Without loss of generality, we choose Here |σ y = ±1, sx = ±1⟩ stands for |σ y = ±1⟩ ⊗ |s x = ±1⟩, with σ y |σ y = ±1⟩ = ±|σ y = ±1⟩ and sx |s x = ±1⟩ = ±|s x = ±1⟩. Accordingly, in the basis of (ψ t -, ψ t + ) T or (ψ b + , ψ b -) T , the low-energy surface Hamiltonians are found to take the off-diagonal form where ρ i denote Pauli matrices acting on the two eigenstates of the subchiral symmetry operator. Apparently, the surface Hamiltonians take the exactly same form as in TIs Because the spin and orbital are entangled by spin-orbit coupling, we consider the orbital-resolved spin texture , where the two superscripts o + and o -label the two orbitals (here we ignore the constant factor h/2 connecting the Pauli matrices to the spin operators). A straightforward calculation obtains The spin polarizations are aligned in the surface plane. This is similar to the spin textures of the SDCs in TIs. However, here a striking difference is that the spin textures depend on two phase angles rather than one as in TIs where α = {x, y}. Since θ ks will wind 4π and φ ks will wind 2π when k s winds 2π, it indicates that one particle will accumulate a π (mod 2π) Berry phase when it goes around the surface Fermi loop once. This important result indicates that the quantized π Berry phase remains intact even though the singular Dirac node is absent in the SDCs. Quadratic nodeless SDCs in the same-parity DSM.-Let us move our attention to the same-parity DSM. Also focusing on a cubic-lattice realization, the minimal model is given by Without loss of generality, below we again consider all parameters to be positive, and |m -2t| < t z < m so that the two bulk Dirac nodes are also located at k D,± . Similar to the first model, this model also supports interesting gapless topological states on the side surfaces and hinges Also using the continuum-model approach, we find that the wave functions of surface states on the top and bottom surfaces are given by where The normalizability of the wave functions also suggests that the region hosting surface states corresponds to M (k s ) < 0 but with the point k s = 0 excluded. Without loss of generality, we choose χt ± = |σ ± = ±1, s z = ±1⟩, and χb ∓ = |σ ± = ∓1, s z = ±1⟩, where σ ± = sin φ ks σ x ± cos φ ks σ y . In the basis of ( ψt + , ψt -) T or ( ψb -, ψb + ) T , the low-energy surface Hamiltonians are found to take the off-diagonal form where + (-) refers to the top (bottom) surface, and It is easy to see that the energy dispersions of the surface Hamiltonian are given by E ± (k s ) = ± η + (k s )η -(k s ), which are quadratic rather than linear, as shown in Fig. Again let us focus on the upper band of the top-surface Dirac cone for a discussion of its spin texture and Berry phase. The corresponding spinor part of the wave function is found to take the form Based on |ũ(k s )⟩, one finds The two orbital-resolved spin textures also depend on two phase angles and display different windings, as shown in Figs. 2(e) and 2(f). The Berry connection is given by Similarly, this result indicates that the particle will accumulate a π (mod 2π) Berry phase when it goes around the surface Fermi loop once. This is a remarkable result since usually a quadratic cone is accompanied with a zero (mod 2π) Berry phase Response to TRS-breaking fields.-It is known that the SDCs in TIs are protected by TRS, and the lift of TRS can gap the SDCs Supplemental Material for "Anomalous Linear and Quadratic Nodeless Surface Dirac Cones in Three-Dimensional Dirac Semimetals" Dongling Liu The supplemental material contains two sections. In the first section, we provide the derivation details of the low-energy surface Hamiltonians, spin textures, and Berry phases for the opposite-parity Dirac semimetal. In the second section, we derive the orbital-resolved spin textures associated with the surface Dirac cone in a topological insulator to highlight the difference of the surface Dirac cones in Dirac semimetals and topological insulators. Because the derivation steps are rather similar for the two representative types of Dirac semimetals, here we restrict ourselves to the opposite-parity Dirac semimetal for a detailed discussion. We start from the tight-binding Hamiltonian describing the opposite-parity Dirac semimetal, where σ i and s i are Pauli matrices respectively acting on orbital and spin degrees of freedom, and σ 0 and s 0 are the corresponding 2 × 2 identity matrices. For notational simplicity, the lattice constants are set to unity. Without loss of generality, we consider that the band inversion occurs at the center of the bulk Brillouin zone, i.e., the timereversal invariant momentum Γ = (0, 0, 0), so that the bulk Dirac points are located on the k z axis going through Γ. Because the surface states originate from the band inversion, we expand the tight-binding Hamiltonian around the band inversion momentum and obtain the continuum Hamiltonian to derive the low-energy Hamiltonians describing the surface states. For each term in the Hamiltonian, we only keep the leading-order momentum terms to simplify the analytical derivation. Accordingly, the continuum Hamiltonian is given by where k s = (k x , k y ) denotes the momentum vector parallel to the z-normal surfaces, and where which is well defined except at k s = 0. It is easy to check that the new set of Pauli matrices si satisfies the algebraic properties associated with the conventional Pauli matrices, i.e., [s i , sj ] = 2iε ijk sk and {s i , sj } = 2δ ij s 0 for i, j ∈ {x, y, z}. Using this new set of Pauli matrices, the continuum Hamiltonian can be rewritten as where In this form, it is easy to find that the Hamiltonian anticommutes with the operator C = σ x sy . Conventionally, when there exists a momentum-independent unitary operator anticommuting with the Hamiltonian, it implies that the Hamiltonian has chiral symmetry. The momentum independence is because the chiral symmetry is a non-spatial symmetry. However, here the operator C depends on momentum, thereby the anticommutation relation between C and H(k) does not suggest the existence of the chiral symmetry. Nevertheless, here C only depends on k x and k y . For situations where k x and k y are good quantum numbers and can be viewed as a parameter, such as the surface states on the z-normal surfaces considered below, this anticommutation relation has the conventional meaning of chiral symmetry. In Ref. In the presence of a boundary in the z direction, the translation symmetry is broken in the z direction, and k z needs to be replaced by -i∂ z . Accordingly, and H 1 retains its form as the translation symmetry converses in the xy plane. The next step is to solve the eigenvalue equation under the boundary conditions ψ(x, y, z = 0) = ψ(x, y, z → +∞) = 0. We find that there are two zero-energy solutions satisfying the boundary conditions, and the solutions have the form where To be normalizable, the two parameters κ 1 and κ 2 in the wave functions need to satisfy the constraint that κ 2 1 + κ 2 2 > 0 and κ 2 ̸ = 0. Accordingly, one finds that the zero-energy surface states exist within the region M (k s ) < 0 but with the special point k s = 0 excluded. From the equation σ y sx χ b α = -χ b α , it is easy to see that the spinors χ b α can be chosen as |σ y = 1, sx = -1⟩ and |σ y = -1, sx = 1⟩. However, as σ y sx commutes with the subchiral symmetry operator C = σ x sy , we choose χ b α to be simultaneously the eigenstates of σ y sx and σ x sy . Without loss of generality, we choose One can check Cχ b ± = ±χ b ± . The low-energy Hamiltonian for the surface states is then obtained by projecting H 1 onto the two-dimensional Hilbert space spanned by ψ b + and ψ b -. To be specific, we choose the basis to be (ψ b + , ψ b -) T , then the matrix elements of the low-energy surface Hamiltonian are given by Now k s = (k x , k y ) has the meaning of the momentum vector in the surface Brillouin zone. In the matrix form, one has In terms of Pauli matrices, the low-energy surface Hamiltonian can be rewritten in the form where ρ i denote Pauli matrices. Because the underlying basis functions are the eigenstates of the subchiral symmetry operator, one can see that the surface Hamiltonian takes an off-diagonal form. From this surface Hamiltonian, one obtains the energy spectra of the surface states, which read The energy spectra form a linear Dirac cone. However, since the surface states do not exist at k s = 0, this linear surface Dirac cone does not host the Dirac node occurring at this surface time-reversal invariant momentum, which is fundamentally different from the linear surface Dirac cone in topological insulators. The latter is known to host a time-reversal-symmetry-enforced Dirac node in its structure. To obtain the low-energy Hamiltonian describing the surface states on the top surface, it is convenient to assume a half-infinity geometry with the region z ≤ 0 occupied. Then the surface at z = 0 corresponds to the top surface. Similarly, the next step is to solve the eigenvalue equation but with the boundary conditions modified as ψ(x, y, z = 0) = ψ(x, y, z → -∞) = 0. It is straightforward to find that there are also two zero-energy solutions satisfying the boundary conditions, and the solutions have a form similar to that in Eq.(S39). Namely, we have Here the parameters κ 1 , κ 2 and N are the same as before. The only difference is that now the spinors χ t α satisfy the eigenvalue equation, σ y sx χ t α = χ t α . Two natural solutions are |σ y = 1, sx = 1⟩ and |σ y = -1, sx = -1⟩. However, since the subchiral symmetry operator commutes with σ y sx , again we choose the eigenstates to be simultaneously the eigenstates of σ y sx and the subchiral symmetry operator. Concretely, we choose It is easy to check that Cχ t ± = ±χ t ± . Choose the basis to be (ψ t -, ψ t + ) T and project H 1 onto it, we obtain the low-energy surface Hamiltonian for the top surface, which takes the exactly same form as Eq.(S12), i.e., Despite the same form, one needs to note that here the basis is different. Eqs.(S12) and (S17) give the Eq.( In the following, let us derive the spin textures associated with the surface states. Without loss of generality, we focus on the upper-half cone. We first consider the bottom surface. According to the low-energy surface Hamiltonian in Eq.(S12), one knows that the eigenstate for the upper band is of the simple form (1, ie iφ ks ) T / √ 2, where φ ks = arg(k x + ik y ). However, here the basis is not the usual spin-up and spin-down basis, thereby one has to take into account the basis functions to determine the spin textures correctly. In addition, since both the spin texture and the Berry phase are determined by the spinor part of the wave function, we can ignore the space dependence and just focus on the spinor part describing the internal degrees of freedom. By taking into account the basis functions, the spinor for the upper band of the surface states on the bottom surface is given by Because the spin and orbital are strongly coupled by spin-orbit coupling, we should consider the orbital-resolved spin textures, which are given by sb,o± where the two superscripts o + and o -label the two orbitals (here we ignore the constant factor h/2 connecting the Pauli matrices to the spin operators). Before proceeding, it is worth noting that since sx = cos θ ks s x + sin θ ks s y , the explicit expressions of the two eigenstates of sx are (S20) It is easy to check that the above choice maintains the usual property of Pauli matrices, namely, and For the top surface, similar calculations show that the spin texture for the upper-half cone is just the opposite, i.e., st,0 x (k s ) = -sin φ ks cos θ ks , st,0 y (k s ) = -sin φ ks sin θ ks , st,0 Accordingly, we have For each orbital, the spin textures for the top and bottom surfaces are opposite, which can simply be inferred from the fact that the top and bottom surfaces are related by a mirror reflection (M z ) that reverses the in-plane spin polarizations. Now we proceed to determine the Berry connection and Berry phase associated with the surface states. The Berry connection for the surface states on the bottom surface is given by where α = {x, y}. By using the following results, The Berry phase along a closed loop encircling the center of the surface Brillouin zone (the surface time-reversal invariant momentum at k s = 0) is given by As φ ks and θ ks change 2π and 4π respectively when the polar angle of the momentum vector k s changes 2π, the above integral gives π (mod 2π). It is worth mentioning that the Berry phase is only gauge invariant in the sense of modulo 2π. This result suggests that the Berry phase on a surface Fermi loop takes a quantized value of π even though the Dirac node is absent in the surface Dirac cone. For the upper-half cone of the top surface, the corresponding spinor is of the form Similarly, the orbital-resolved spin textures for the bottom surface are just opposite. To highlight the difference between the two representative Dirac semimetals and the topological insulator, here we also provide a derivation of the orbital-resolved spin textures associated with the surface Dirac cones in the topological insulator. To start, we directly consider the minimal continuum Hamiltonian describing the topological insulator, which reads It is easy to see that the spin textures for the two orbitals are opposite, which is a natural result due to the spin-orbit coupling. From the above expressions, one can see that the orbital-resolved spin textures only depend one phase angle, i.e., φ ks . Accordingly, the two orbital-resolved spin textures carry the same winding number which is equal to one. s ) -st,z z (k s )) = 0,