Copper foil impurities are hampering scalable production of high-quality graphene by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Here, we conduct a thorough study on the origin of these unavoidable contaminations at the surface of copper after the CVD process. We identify two distinct origins for the impurities. The first type is intrinsic impurities, originating from the manufacturing process of the copper foils, already present at the surface before any high-temperature treatment, or buried into the bulk of copper foils. The buried impurities diffuse towards the copper surface during high-temperature treatment and precipitate. The second source is external: silica contamination arising from the quartz tube that also precipitate on copper. The problem of the extrinsic silica contamination is readily solved upon using an adequate confinement the copper foil samples. The intrinsic impurities are much more difficult to remove since they appear spread in the whole foil. Nevertheless, electropolishing proves particularly efficient in drastically reducing the issue. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on metallic catalysts is arguably the most promising method for graphene production at the industrial scale. The control of the crystallographic orientation of copper foils has received considerable attention over the last years. In contrast with the very little attention paid in general by research papers to elucidate the nature and the origin of the copper foil contaminations in the framework of graphene growth, we have made it the central focus of the present article. Based on the existing body of literature, we conduct a systematic and thorough investigation. Our work aims to contribute to bridging the reproducibility gap faced by large-scale graphene synthesis. Electropolishing. Copper foil pieces with a size of 2 × 2.5 cm 2 (cut from a 15 × 15 cm 2 foil, Advent Research Materials, 50 μm-thick, purity 99.9%) are used as starting substrates. The adopted EP procedure is inspired from Miseikis et al., Electron beam evaporation. The copper thin films were deposited on sapphire or copper foils at room temperature (at a pressure of ∼2 × 10 -7 mbar) by evaporation of 99.999% pure copper pellets from Kurt J. Lesker. The CVD reactor is a horizontal hot-wall split furnace (MTI corporation) fitted with a quartz tube (1.2 meter-long, 4-inch outer diameter). The copper sample is first put on the unpolished side of a sapphire wafer (C-plane (0001), 3-inch diameter, 600-μm-thick, and single-side polished) to avoid Cu to be stuck on it, itself deposited on a quartz boat and inserted into the horizontal hot-wall split furnace's quartz tube at room temperature. After sealing the tube, it is pumped down to a pressure below 2 × 10 -2 mbar. An argon flow is then fed into the tube until atmospheric pressure is restored. This preliminary purge ensures that the oxygen concentration in the tube is well controlled (equal to the residual oxygen in the argon canister, i.e. 1 ppm). Since the copper foils are very flexible, the copper foil piece is first sandwiched between two rigid 1-mm-thick copper plates glued with cold mounting epoxy (EpoFix from Struers). The copper foil piece was cut so as to comprise an electropolished zone and an unpolished zone (see Fig. The SEM images were recorded with a Zeiss Ultra 55 microscope in in-lens detector mode at an electron energy of 2 keV in most cases. Energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was performed in another Zeiss Ultra 55 fitted with a Quantax Bruker system (with a silicon drift detector detector) at 5 or 15 keV. The optical microscopy images were obtained with a Zeiss Axio Imager Vario. To facilitate the reading of the present paper, Fig. Previous literature has reported contaminations arising from the quartz tube. A striking difference showed up after observing the surface of the two samples by SEM after CVD growth: both samples were covered with lenticular nanoparticles, but these nanoparticles were surrounded by a dendritic halo only in the case of the unprotected sample (see Fig. Compared to a bare copper surface, we have also noticed that many lenticular nanoparticles are more difficult to remove when embedded in graphene (see Figs. 9(a) and (b)). As seen in Fig. Based on the latter observation and with the hope of blocking the segregation of contaminants to the surface of copper, we have deposited by electron beam a 1-μm-thick high-purity copper film on two types of samples: an as-received copper foil piece and a copper foil piece covered by a monolayer of graphene. In both cases, the situation is the same: the high-purity copper layer is not sufficient to prohibit the segregation of impurities during CVD growth (see Fig. Even though the results of the previous experiments advocate strongly for impurity segregation from the copper bulk, they are still only indirect evidence of the presence of impurities in the interior of copper foils. In the next experiment, in order to provide a more direct proof, we have fully etched a copper foil piece deposited on a clean Si sample (see Fig. As a complementary experiment, with the hope of directly observing impurity microparticles, we have also investigated their presence in the copper foil cross-section. We could indeed find a few potential candidates, one of them could be identified by EDX as composed of SiOx. However, considering the fact that the composition of that particle is not distinctive enough (AlOx would have been more irrefutable), that the polishing process itself could incur contamination (see the preparation protocol in the experimental section) and that large enough particles are rare (as inferred from our sedimentation experiment) and therefore difficult to find, it is preferable to remain inconclusive. It is worth noting that we have also observed nanoscale cavities in the copper foil cross-section (see Fig. In the final experiment, a graphene sheet grown on an electropolished copper foil piece (with the top edge, where the alligator clip is attached, left unpolished, see Fig. Even though the investigated copper foils are pure at 99.9%, the remaining 0.1% impurities constitute a real nuisance in the context of reproducible and defect-free graphene growth. EP has not only proved useful for smoothening out the copper surface but also to remove the first copper micrometers where most impurities appear to reside. The amount of contamination after CVD growth was in consequence strongly reduced after EP, but not completely suppressed. Achieving full impurity removal is not possible with pre-growth superficial chemical treatments. Albeit indirectly or semiindirectly, our bulk impurities segregation/precipitation scenario during HT treatment is supported by a large body of evidence. The present results could be further corroborated by dynamic, in situ studies 