We show that dynamics of the magnetization in ferromagnets can pump the orbital angular momentum, which we denote by orbital pumping. This is the reciprocal phenomenon to the orbital torque that induces magnetization dynamics by the orbital angular momentum in non-equilibrium. The orbital pumping is analogous to the spin pumping established in spintronics but requires the spin-orbit coupling for the orbital angular momentum to interact with the magnetization. We develop a formalism that describes the generation of the orbital angular momentum by magnetization dynamics within the adiabatic perturbation theory. Based on this, we perform first-principles calculation of the orbital pumping in prototypical 3d ferromagnets, Fe, Co, and Ni. The results show that the ratio between the orbital pumping and the spin pumping ranges from 5 to 15 percents, being smallest in Fe and largest in Ni. This implies that ferromagnetic Ni is a good candidate for measuring the orbital pumping. Implications of our results on experiments are also discussed. Injection of spin into a ferromagnet can induce magnetization dynamics, which is called the spin torque A natural question that arises is what are the properties of the reciprocal phenomenon to the orbital torque. We may denote this by orbital pumping, generation of non-equilibrium OAM from dynamics of the magnetization, whose concept is schematically illustrated in Fig. In this Letter, we develop a formalism describing the orbital pumping within the adiabatic perturbation theory and derive a Green's function expression for the generation of the OAM by magnetization dynamics. From first-principles, we compute the orbital pumping in ferromagnetic Fe, Co, and Ni. We show that the orbital pumping is a concomitant effect of the spin pumping due to the SOC and thus exhibits a Hund-rulelike behavior We define the orbital pumping as the response of ∂ t ⟨L⟩ to the magnetization dynamics, where L is the OAM operator. This can be formally written as a linear response expression, where m is the unit vector of the magnetization, and α, β are Cartesian indices. Note that m × ∂ t m acts as a generalized force, pointing in the direction of the Gilbert damping. As shown in Fig. To evaluate χ L αβ from the electronic structure, we apply the adiabatic perturbation theory is the retarded/advanced Green's function, H tot is the total Hamiltonian, E is the energy. The energy broadening Γ effectively describes relaxation of the electron quasiparticles by scatterings. The Fermi-Dirac distribution function f is defined at energy E. The operators are the total torque on the α component of the OAM and the exchange torque on the β component of the spin, respectively. Here, H XC = J(r) m • S is the exchange potential. In Eq. ( On the other hand, the linear response expression for the orbital torque is given by where B L β is an effective field that couples to the OAM by the Zeeman interaction H L = B L • L. It effectively describes a situation where non-equilibrium OAM is induced, for example, by orbital Hall effect The expression for χ L βα can also be derived similarly to Eq. ( can be explicitly shown We quantitatively evaluate the spin pumping and orbital pumping in prototypical 3d ferromagnets: bcc Fe, hcp Co, and fcc Ni. We set the magnetization m = -ẑ. Details of the computational method can be found in Ref. The results for the ratio χ L xx /χ S xx and χ L xy /χ S xy are summarized in Tab. I. The ratios are between 5 and 15 percents, and the magnitudes are in the order of Fe < Co < Ni. We find that the ratios are nearly the same for the two chosen values of the energy broadening Γ, 25 meV and 100 meV, implying that the relative magnitude between the orbital pumping and spin pumping is robust with respect to the degree of disorder. In order to understand what makes Fe, Co, and Ni different, we investigate Fermi energy dependence of both diagonal (χ S xx and χ L xx ) and off-diagonal (χ S xy and χ L xy ) components of the response, which are shown in Figs. For transition metals, Hund's third rule where ψ nk is the Bloch state with band index n and crystal momentum k, and is the spectral function at the Fermi energy, and E nk is the energy dispersion. On the other hand, the T -odd response [Eq. (2b)] has intrinsic limit even in the zeroth order of Γ, where f nk is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. Because of this, the diagonal and off-diagonal responses exhibit different behaviors as a function of the energy broadening Γ. Figures On the other hand, χ S xy and χ L xy shown in Figs. The experimental work by Hayashi et al. measured the DC component of the orbital pumping Recent terahertz spectroscopy experiments have revealed that ferromagnetic Ni can generate the OAM by laser extiation In conclusion, we have developed a theoretical formalism that describes the orbital pumping in ferromagnets. Unlike the spin pumping, the orbital pumping crucially depends on the SOC. We have performed first-principles calculations on ferromagnetic Fe, Co, and Ni for quantitative estimation of the orbital pumping. The results shows that the orbital pumping is strongest in Ni and weakest in Fe, whose magnitude ranges from 5 to 15 percents compared to the magnitude of the spin pumping. Our work opens the possibility of generating the OAM by magnetization dynamics and serves as a guideline for experiments. Note added -During the preparation of the submission of our manuscript, which was posted on arXiv in September 2023 we allow the possibility that the exchange coupling J(r) is position-dependent. This is the case for the spin-dependent density functional theory (DFT), which we use for the first-principles calculation. We emphasize that in principle, our formalism can be applied to real-space magnetic textures if the entire magnetic texture is included in the unit cell. With the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( which describes the transfer of angular momentum between the magnetization (order parameter) and the spin of electrons. This term keep appearing in describing the time-derivative of the Hamiltonian which is repeatedly used in the derivation below. Note the vector m × ∂ t m pointing in the direction of the Gilbert damping naturally appears. The occupation-change contribution to the orbital pumping, the first term on the right hand side of Eq. ( where is the energy derivative of the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. On the second line, we have made use of the force theorem, and on the third line, we have employed Eq. ( where α and β are Cartesian indices, and The state-change contribution, the second term on the right hand side of Eq. ( On the first line, n = m contribution vanishes because ⟨n|∂ t n⟩ = -⟨∂ t n|n⟩. On the second line, we have used ⟨m|∂ t n⟩ = -⟨∂ t m|n⟩ and exchanged the dummy variables n and m, where it can also be seen that n = m contribution vanishes due to the factor f (E n )f (E m ), thus consistent with the first line. We use the identity, which can be easily shown by taking the time-derivative of Eq. ( Finally, by using Eq. ( Note the similarity between Eqs. (S6) and (S12). Because the contribution by degenerate pairs (E n = E m ) is excluded by the factor f (E n )f (E m ), we can use the identity where is the total orbital torque. Thus, Eq. (S12) becomes Finally, we use a cute trick from the observation that the contribution n = m does not contribute anyway in Eq. (S15), which can be included in the sum. Therefore, we have where Here, we show that the state-change contribution [Eq. (S17)] can be represented in terms of Green's functions. We adopt several tricks for manipulating equations, as presented in Ref. In the Lehmann representation for the exact eigenstates, the retarded/advanced Green's function is given by where and Also, the Dirac delta function, which is proportional to the spectral function, can be written in terms of the exact Green's functions, By using these identities, Eq. (S18) can be written as Finally, this can be written in a gauge-independent manner without band indices, where the cyclic invariance of the trace has been used. Equation (S24) is in fact identical to Eq. ( can be re-written using integration-by-part, If we sum this with the time-reversal-odd contribution [Eq. (2b) in the main text] we recover Eq. (S24). That is, As an approximation, we assume the constant broadening Γ > 0 of the energy spectrum of single-electron Bloch states. Thus, the single-particle Green's function contains Γ in the imaginary part of the self-energy, where n is the band index and k is the crystal momentum of the Bloch state ψ nk . We also assume the zero temperature in the Fermi-Dirac distribution function f (E) = Θ(E F -E), where Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function and E F is the Fermi energy. Thus ∂ E f (E) = -δ(E -E F ). With these assumptions, the energy integral can be analytically performed, and the explicit expressions for Eqs. (S25) and (S27) [Eqs. (2a) and (2b) in the main text, respectively] become and where and We remark that Eqs. (S30) and (S31) are the formulae which we have numerically implemented for the first-principles calculation. Meanwhile, note that the occupation-change contribution [Eq. ( The orbital torque [Eq. (3) in the main text] is the response of the exchange torque T S XC by the orbital-dependent Zeeman interaction, where B L is an effective magnetic field having the dimension of [time] -1 . In the first-order perturbation, Eq. (S36) has two consequences. The first consequence is the change of the occupation function, and the second consequence is the change of the quantum states. Thus, the expectation value of the exchange torque changes by where δE n and |δn⟩ are the changes of the energy eigenvalue and the state ket. Note the similarity with Eq. (S2). By the first-order perturbation theory, we have and Thus, we may define occupation-change and state-change contributions analogous to Eq. (S2) on the orbital pumping, In Fig. Meanwhile, we find that χ S xy,occ is smaller than χ L xy,occ by an order of magnitude, while the state-change contribution exhibits the opposite behavior. This is because a transverse component of the OAM to the magnetization is generally more strongly polarized than that of the spin. In ferromagnets, the spin is substantially split due to the exchange interaction. On the other hand, although the OAM is generally quenched by the crystal field potential, there exist hotspots in which the orbital degeneracy remains protected by the crystal symmetries, in which a transverse component of the OAM may be large For convenience, let us define Cartesian coordinates such that x, y, and z are axes parallel to ∂ t m, m × ∂ t m, and m, respectively. From Eq. ( . The ratio between the orbital pumping and spin pumping in Fe, Co, and Ni for the diagonal and off-diagoanl responses, obtained for Γ = 25 meV and 100 meV of the energy broadening.