The persistent and switchable polarization of ferroelectric materials based on HfO2-based ferroelectric compounds, compatible with large-scale integration, are attractive synaptic elements for neuromorphic computing. To achieve a record current density of 0.01 A/cm 2 (at a read voltage of 80 mV) as well as ideal memristive behavior (linear current-voltage relation and analog resistive switching), devices based on an ultra-thin (2.7 nm thick), polycrystalline HfZrO4 ferroelectric layer are fabricated by Atomic Layer Deposition. The use of a semiconducting oxide interlayer (WOx<3) at one of the interfaces, induces an asymmetric energy profile upon ferroelectric polarization reversal and thus the long-term potentiation / depression (conductance increase / decrease) of interest. Moreover, it favors the stable retention of both the low and the high resistive states. Thanks to the low operating voltage (<3.5 V), programming requires less than 10 -12 J for 20 ns long pulses. Remarkably, the memristors show no wake-up or fatigue effect. The use of HfO2-based ferroelectric compounds The fabrication process uses techniques compatible with large-scale, back-end-of-line integration. A stack comprising of a 20 nm thick bottom electrode of TiN, a 2 nm thick interlayer of WOx, a 2.7 nm thick HZO and a 10 nm thick TiN top electrode is grown by Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) on a conducting Si substrate. The ALD process does not exceed 375 ̊C, and X-Ray characterization shows that the layers are amorphous after deposition. The native SiO2 oxide at the surface of the wafer was removed by a dip in buffered hydrofluoric acid prior to the ALD growth. The crystallization is performed using the ms-Flash Lamp Annealing technique The synaptic functionality of the devices is characterized using a B1530A Waveform Generator / Fast Measurement Unit (WGFMU) and a SMU (Source Measurement Unit). The shared bottom electrode (WOx/TiN/Si++) is grounded. In this section, we address both the programmability of the device for inference and its response under pulses of varying sign, amplitude and width, emulating the combination of pre-synaptic pulses (negative bias) and post-synaptic pulses (positive bias), described for example in First, the "weight" or conductance of the synapse is modulated by pulses of constant duration (20 ns) and increasing or decreasing amplitude. After each pulse of amplitude Vwrite (in abscise of Figure Long-term potentiation and depression are also obtained by schemes with a constant amplitude and an increasing duration. Figure The retention of the device under strong stress (DC bias) is measured for two weeks (see Figure The memristive properties of a ferroelectric twoterminals devices are studied in the context of in-memory computing for neuromorphic hardware. Programming, as well as long-term potentiation / depression is achieved by modulating the sign, the amplitude and the duration of the pulses, emulating pre-and post-synaptic activity. Compared to state-of-the-art junctions, the proposed devices show improved scalability and operate in the Ohmic-like regime, ideal for analog multiplication but suffer from a reduced On/Off ratio. The devices show good retention properties and stable behavior upon fatigue.