As a threat to mee ng the global demand for food created by the con nued growth of the popula on, different methods are being applied for enhancing seed germina on and plant growth. This study inves gates the effect of hydrogen-riched water (HRW), plasma-ac vated water (PAW) and their combina on on the seed germina on of len ls. For ac va ng water, arc discharge reactors are generated under atmospheric pressure in the air. Simula ons were also performed to simulate electric field and poten al, fluid flow, and arc plasma. Using op cal emission spectroscopy, species were evaluated in plasma columns. Raman spectra and physicochemical proper es of water were inves gated. On day 3 a er treatment, the frac on and length of germinated seeds were evaluated. During germina on, treated water significantly increased germina on parameters such as final germina on percentage, mean germina on me, germina on index, coefficient of germina on velocity and germina on rate index. It can, therefore, be concluded that seed germina on can be increased using PAW and hydrogenated PAW combined. A threat to mee ng global demand for food has been created by the con nued growth of the popula on all over the world. Various techniques, such as different fer lizers, pes cides, water treatment, heat disinfec on, etc., are being applied to increase crop yields PAW has been shown to affect seed germina on and plant growth with prior reports from various researchers Addi onally, a series of events in the growth and development of plants have been a ributed to H2 Furthermore, the cul va on of food legumes, which provides more than 1 billion people with a key source of diges ble carbohydrate polymers, could provide opportuni es for use in new plant protein-based foods and animal feeding stuff. Seeds of grain legumes are very popular as a source of diges ble carbohydrates, compared to animal-based protein, which is environmentally costly. The value of food, handling characteris cs and gustatory quali es can be provided by carbohydrate polymers Different methods of spectroscopy such as op cal emission and Raman spectroscopy can provide important informa on on chemical agents. Raman spectroscopy is an efficient way of obtaining chemical informa on by means of the distribu on of electromagne c radia on through molecular vibra ons in ma er In previous work, finite element simula on inves gated two-dimensional dielectric barrier discharge and arc discharge in a bubble inside water In order to gain a be er understanding of the electrical and fluidic parameters of plasma, simula on was performed to explore electric fields and poten als as well as fluid flow and plasma arcs. Species were evaluated in plasma columns by op cal emission spectroscopy and Raman spectra of water were inves gated. Mul farious produced waters were exposed to green Len ls (Lens culinaris Medik.) seeds to study the various phenotypic, growth parameters, etc. The schematic of the water activating setups illustrated in FIG. Green dried len l seeds (L. culinaris) were purchased from the local market. A total number of 750 seeds (6 groups'× 5 replicate× 25 seeds) were divided into 6 groups named control, PAW1, PAW2, HPAW1, HPAW2, and HRW. Each group was further subdivided into 5 sets of 25 seeds. Each set (25 seeds) of the group soaked in 7 ml of sample (Control, PAW1, PAW2, HPAW1, HPAW2, and HRW) for 72 h (24 °C, 26% Rela ve humidity). The Electrosta c Module within Comsol Mul physics which enables the simula on of electric fields and charged par cles and understanding the electrical parameters of plasma, such as electric poten al distribu on, electric field strength, and charge density as well as, the Laminar Flow Module which simulates the flow of fluid within the plasma reactor are used in this study. It considers the laminar flow regime, where fluid par cles move in smooth layers or streamlines without significant mixing. This module helps to inves gate plasma fluidic parameters, such as velocity profiles, pressure distribu on, and flow pa erns. Two different 2D geometries were designed for two plasma reactors, as illustrated in Figure More than a dozen studies focused on the discovery or suggested ac ve par cles and their mechanisms of ac on. A total of 79 gas phase species, 83 water phase species, 1680 gas phase reac ons and 448 plasma reac ons are included in the complete reac on mechanism 3NO2 -+3H + → 2 NO + NO3 -+ H3O + (14) Plasma reacts to water, triggering a range of kine c chemical reac ons and giving rise to the existence of an Aqueous reac ve species. Different processes, e.g. the transfer of gases to liquids and a chemical reac on between gas types and liquid molecules are performed when PAW is generated at an interface layer H2O+e → H + + OH• +2e - ( NO2 + OH → HNO3 (18) H2O2 + H + + NO2 -→ ONOOH + H2O (20) NO + OH • → HNO2 HNO2 + OH • → NO2 + H2O 2 NO2 + H2O → NO2 -+ NO3 -+ 2H + (25) OH + NO2 → [O=N-OOH] → O=N-OO -+ H + (26) With the presence of hydrogen in HRW, other reac ons can also occur. The formula of these reac ons is given below e -+H2→ e -+ H2 ; where N is the number of seeds germinated every day and T is the number of days from seeding corresponding to N. GRI = + + ⋯ + ; where G1 is the germina on percentage on day 1, G2 is the germina on parentage at day 2; and so on. A. Simula ons FIG. The intensity of the electric field must be at least 10 MV/m in order for to an electric discharge occurs at atmospheric pressure. A comparison is shown in FIG. Despite the fact that the direct discharge reactor does not have an inlet gas as can be seen in FIG. FIG. At wavelengths ranging from 200 nm to 270 nm, the low-intensity excited nitric oxide (NOγ-band) dominates the spectra The pH, electrical conduc vity and total dissolved solids of the ac vated water were measured to determine their physicochemical proper es. The concentra on of hydrogen ions in the solu on is measured by the pH. Table The reac on of water with the species produced in the plasma causes PAW to become acidic. The PAW shall become more acid as the quan ty of ROS and RNS delivered to the water increases. Changes in ionic species within PAWs were first iden fied by measuring their electrical conduc vity. The increases in conduc vity are due to the forma on of ROS and RNS, when ac ve water is prepared. Hydrogens are the lightest gases and they react with most elements under normal condi ons, whereas H2 is not very reac ve in its molecular state The Raman spectra of the water samples were collected using a Technooran (Microspectrophotometer, Ram-532-004) in the range of 134-4325 cm -1 with an exposure me of 500 ms and three accumula ons. Ac vated water's Raman spectrum is illustrated in FIG. Configura on of two hydrogen bonds and two covalent bonds between oxygen and hydrogens around oxygen atom is consistent with the tetrahedral-like structure of five water molecules In addi on to HRW, HPAW1 and HPAW2, hydrogen peak can also be observed in PAW1 and PAW2 due to reac between plasma ac ve species and liquids. Water peak intensity has decreased in PAW2 compared to PAW1 and HPAW2 compared to HPAW1 due to the increasing number of substances soluble in water. By forming a symmetrical configura on, hydrogen molecules in HPAW1/ HPAW2 have intensified the Raman Q-branch peak of water compared to PAW1/ PAW2. The measurement results of 125 len l bean sprouts in each group were taken for length and germina on parameters in five replicates on the third day (FIG. The acronym FGP represents the final percentage of germina on, which serves as an indicator of the seed popula on's viability. The seeds from HPAW1 and HPAW2 had the highest FGP, with a reported percentage of 93.95%. MGT, or Mean Germina on Time, refers to the average me required for seeds to germinate, taking into account the ming of the majority of germina on events. The lower the MGT, the faster a popula on of seeds has germinated In the Germina on Index (GI), seeds germinated on the first day are given more weight than those germinated later. The GI measures both the percentage and speed of germina on, with a higher value indica ng a higher percentage and rate There is a progressive differen a on of organs and ssue in developing legume seeds. The matura on is governed by a signaling network composed of sugars, amino acids, and SnRK1 kinases. Changing levels of oxygen energy and the nutrient state ac vates matura on processes. Embryo cells become green and photosynthe cally opera ve during the transi on. Sucrose func ons as a transport and nutrient sugar and as a signal molecule that ac vates storage-associated processes In this study, different PAW reactors and hydrogen injec on systems were used to produce ac ve species in water. HRW-irrigated seeds have be er parameters than control seeds, as evident from the results. The presence of RONS groups in PAW water s mulates seed metabolism and accelerates growth. The amount of compounds dissolved in water changes depending on the type of plasma system used. HPAW and PAW irriga on may result in a significantly higher yield in a shorter period of me, based on our findings. Future studies assessing the long-term effects of plasma and hydrogen treatment should examine the biological and chemical changes in the sprouts and their natural microbiota.