Partially disordered antiferro (PDA) magnetism' (in which one of the three magnetic ions in a triangular network remains magnetically disordered), has been known commonly among geometrically frustrated insulating materials. The 1/3-plateau in isothermal magnetization (M) of such materials has been of great theoretical interest. Here, we report these properties in a AlB2structure derived metallic material, Er2RhSi3, in which Er sublattice has triangular networks. The presence of a well-defined λ-anomaly in the temperature (T) dependence of heat capacity and its magnetic-field (H) dependence, and the loss of spin-disorder contribution in electrical resistivity (ρ) confirm antiferromagnetic order below (TN=) 5 K. On the other hand, the separation of zerofield-cooled and field-cooled dc magnetic susceptibility (χ) curves, decay of isothermal remnant magnetization and the frequency dependence of real and imaginary components of ac χ suggest the onset of spin-glass freezing concomitant with the antiferromagnetic order. In addition, interestingly, we observe 1/3-plateau in M(H) below 20 kOe for T <TN. The change in ρ as a function of H at a given temperature well below TN is also revealing, with this compound exhibiting a plateau below 20 kOe, with complexities at higher fields. Therefore, this compound serves as a prototype for theoretical understanding of transport behavior across 1/3 plateau due to PDA magnetism in a metal without any interference from the 4f delocalization phenomena. The phenomenon of highly frustrated magnetism due to the geometrical arrangement of the magnetic ions, labelled 'geometrically frustrated (GF) magnetism', is one of the modern topics of research in condensed matter physics, as such a frustration has been known to lead to a variety of interesting magnetic states. Clearly, the identification of materials exhibiting such quantized steps, in particular 1/3plateau, is an important direction of research in the field of GF magnetism. Needless to emphasize that any kind of PDA magnetic structure even in other GF families is of great interest in condensed matter physics, e.g., Gd2Ti2O7 A good number of ternary rare-earth compounds of the type R2(TM)X3 (where TM is a transition metal ion, X= Si, Ge) have been derived from AlB2 hexagonal crystal structure. The sites for TM and X are 4(f) and 12(i), respectively forming TM-X layers. The layers of TM-X form a honeycomb network and the layers of triangular network of R ions (Fig. Polycrystalline sample was prepared by melting together stoichiometric amounts of constituent elements in an arc furnace in an atmosphere of argon under partial pressure, followed by annealing at 1073 K for about a week in an evacuated sealed quartz tube. X-ray diffraction pattern (recorded with Cu Kα radiation) was analyzed by Rietveld refinement method, which confirmed single phase nature of molten ingot (see Supplementary Material In the inset of Fig. In order to explore further the origin of the above features, we have measured ac χ in the low temperature region with frequencies 1.3, 13, 133 and 1333 Hz and the results obtained as a function of T in the vicinity of the magnetic transition are shown in Fig. Having established the onset of spin-glass freezing at 5 K, a support for long-range magnetic order pointing to a well-defined magnetic structure comes from the C(T) data, apart from the appearance of magnetic Bragg peaks in the neutron diffraction data We have derived isothermal entropy change, defined as ΔS = S(H) -S(0), from the area under the curves of C/T versus T, measured at different fields, and the results obtained are shown in Fig. We present isothermal magnetization behavior for 1.8, 4 and 6 K in Fig. Previous neutron diffraction studies We now demonstrate the behavior of magnetoresistance (in the transverse geometry) across 1/3 plateau regime in this metallic system, serving as a food for thought for further theoretical work to understand transport anomalies in the 1/3 plateau regime, as such an opportunity is not provided by insulating PDA systems. The ρ(T) plot (see Fig. In conclusion, we report the results of our bulk measurements on Er2RhSi3 containing essentially localized 4f electrons in a triangular networkhitherto not paid much attention in the literature. A fascinating finding is that this compound exhibits characteristic features of PDA magnetism, also characterized by 1/3 magnetization plateau in this case, in a material with RKKY interaction, that too without any interference from other 4f-related phenomena (like the Kondo effect typical of Ce or U systems). It may be remarked that none of the isostructural ternary rareearth compounds has been known to show such PDA characteristics in the past, in particular, other rare-earth compounds of this Rh family (R= Gd, Dy and Ho) (Ref. 68) as well as the Er counterpart in the Pd-based family, Er2PdSi3 Authors acknowledge financial support from the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), Govt. of India (Project Identification no. RTI4003, DAE OM no. 1303/2/2019/R&D-II/DAE/2079 dated 11.02.2020). E.V.S. thanks Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India, for awarding Raja Ramanna Fellowship. K.M. thanks financial support from BRNS, DAE under the DAE-SRC-OI program. S.M. thanks support from Vision Group on Science and Technology-GRD No 852. Fig. 