Excitonic insulators (EIs), arising in semiconductors when the electron-hole binding energy exceeds the band gap 1-3 , are a solid-state prototype for bosonic phases of matter 4-12 . Unlike the charged excitations that are frozen and unable to transport current, the neutral electron-hole pairs (excitons) are free to move in EIs. However, it is intrinsically difficult to demonstrate exciton transport in bulk EI candidates The dipolar excitonic insulator (EI) of interest is realized in double layer structures made of two semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayers that support a type-II band alignment The Coulomb drag effect is a sensitive probe of the correlation effect between two spatially separated conductors Our sample consists of Coulomb-coupled MoSe2/WSe2 double layers with nearly symmetric top and bottom gates (Fig. We identify the EI phase of the double layer using the capacitance measurements as reported in an earlier study We study Coulomb drag in our device using the drag counterflow geometry illustrated in Fig. Below we focus on the case of equal electron and hole densities in the double layer (along the white dashed line in Fig. The lower panel of Fig. When exciton transport dominates over the free carrier transport in the double layer channel, perfect Coulomb drag is expected because a steady current of electrons driven through one layer has to be accompanied by an equal current of holes in the other layer We measure the drag resistance of our device to directly probe the transition from an EI to an electron-hole plasma using the open-circuit geometry shown in Fig. , via the contact resistance (R WC ) in the drag layer (see Extended Data Fig. Figure We make a further interesting observation that the coefficient A from our experiment scales with pair density as A ∝ (n P -n M ) -3 (solid line, Fig. We have demonstrated essentially perfect Coulomb drag up to about 20 K in a gate-tunable excitonic insulator realized in TMD atomic double layers separated by a thin hBN barrier. The drag resistance measurement has further revealed an excitonic insulator-to-metal transition at the Mott density. These studies are enabled by successfully establishing separate electrical contacts to the electron and hole components of the excitonic insulator. The perfect Coulomb drag here demonstrates pure exciton transport across the excitonic insulator. The relatively large contact resistance of the present device limits the ability to settle whether the exciton transport here is dissipationless, that is, whether there is exciton superfluity. Future multiple exciton terminal measurements that can drive an exciton current and simultaneously measure the exciton chemical potential drop along the channel should be able to set strict limits on any dissipation occurring in the exciton channel. In Extended Data Fig. Outside the channel region, the flow of exciton must be converted into flows of free electron and holes in the electrical wires. It is therefore crucial to have good electrical contacts to the monolayer TMDs for simultaneous electron and hole transport at low temperatures (down to 1.5 K). We chose platinum (Pt) that has a large work function to match the valence band edge of monolayer WSe2 (Ref. In addition, we designed a sample geometry such that the metal-TMD contact regions (region III in the schematic) are gated by only one gate (as seen in the optical image, the WSe2 contact pins W10 to W14 are covered only by the top gate, and the MoSe2 contact pins Mo6 to Mo9 are covered only by the bottom gate). With this specific design and the large perpendicular electric field from the antisymmetric gate voltage Δ = 5.5 V (large negative top gate and positive bottom gate voltages), we guarantee that the metal-TMD contact regions are heavily doped (more than the exciton contact regions) by holes for Pt-WSe2 and by electrons for Bi-MoSe2 for low contact resistances. Note that it remains challenging to obtain a device with multiple good contacts in each layer and a good geometry for exciton injection, mainly due to the variability of the mechanical stacking and microfabrication process detailed below. For our main device at T = 1.5 K, all five WSe2 contacts (W10 to W14) are around 5-7 kΩ in contact resistance; the two MoSe2 contacts (Mo8 and Mo9) are around 5 kΩ; the MoSe2 contact Mo7 is around 3 MΩ; and the MoSe2 contact Mo6 was mechanically broken during fabrication. We fabricated our device using the layer-by-layer dry transfer technique reported by Ref. We examine the exciton transport properties using two different configurations: the opencircuit and closed-circuit Coulomb drag measurements. Extended Data Fig. We applied a 10 mV (RMS) AC bias voltage at 7.33 Hz to drive the Mo layer through a 1:1 voltage transformer, which was connected to a 10 kΩ potentiometer to distribute the AC voltage on the two ends of the driving layer. This can reduce the AC coupling between the TMD layers by minimizing the AC interlayer potential difference in the channel. A DC voltage source was also connected to middle of the potentiometer to apply the interlayer bias voltage V b between the driving (Mo) and the drag (W) layers. We further connected a 150 kΩ resistor in series with the driving layer; we measured the voltage drop across this resistor to obtain the driving current. In the closed-circuit measurement, we shorted the drag layer so that a drag current can flow. We used a current preamplifier and a SR830 lock-in amplifier to measure the drag current. In the open-circuit measurement, we connected the two ends of the drag layer to a voltage amplifier with 100 MΩ input impedance and directly measured the voltage drop between the two ends using a SR830 lock-in amplifier in order to obtain the drag resistance. We carried all of the measurements in a closed-cycle He4 cryostat (Oxford TeslatronPT) down to 1.5 K temperature. The measurement results are largely independent of the excitation amplitude (3-20 mV) and frequency (7 Hz to 37 Hz). Details of the capacitance measurements have been reported by Ref. Extended Data Fig. The drag conductivity σ D describes the frictional drag from the free electrons and free holes. For the open-circuit measurement, we have J h = 0 and can obtain the drag resistance (for a channel length approximately equal to the channel width, see Extended Data Fig. For the closed-circuit measurement, the drag layer acts like a battery with an external load resistance equal to the total contact resistance in the W layer, R WC ; we have E h ≈ -J h R WC for a channel length approximately equal to the channel width. We can obtain an expression for the drag current ratio: Note that the final result on the right of Eqn. ( In the EI phase (n P < n M ), we can assume small frictional drag (σ X ≫ σ D ) and small contact resistance (R WC ≪ σ e -1 ) and obtain n X +n e (μ e /μ X ) . We can use the Saha equation to estimate the free carrier density due to thermal dissociations of excitons at finite temperatures where m * is the exciton effective mass. For a fixed pair density n P = n e + n X , the exciton binding energy Ɛ b can be obtained from penetration capacitance measurements (Extended Data Fig. 