In the first of two articles, we present here a novel mesoscopic micromagnetic approach for simulating materials composed of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic phases. Starting with the atomistic modeling of quasi one-dimensional systems, we explicitly show how the material parameters for the mesoscopic model of an antiferromagnet can be derived. The comparison between magnetization profiles obtained in atomistic and mesoscopic calculations (using a Heusler alloy as an example) proves the validity of our method. This approach opens up the possibility to recover the details of the magnetization distribution in ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic materials with the resolution of a few nanometers covering length scales up to several hundreds of nanometers. The discovery of strong ferromagnetism of Ni 2 MnIn precipitates embedded in an antiferromagnetic (AFM) NiMn matrix Detailed structural and magnetic characterization of the samples, including annealing-time and annealingtemperature studies of the segregation process The aim of this computational research is the development of a comprehensive mesoscopic micromagnetic model for materials consisting of FM and AFM phases, such as Heusler-type alloys. Mesoscopic calculations are needed due to two reasons: first, the sizes of the FM crystallites are relatively large (in these materials up to * s.erokhin@general-numerics-rl.de 50 nm), rendering simulations in frames of an atomistic model not feasible due to their enormous computational effort; second, investigations of collective phenomena in such systems are highly desirable. At the same time, initial simulations at the atomic level are nevertheless necessary, because experimentally measured mesoscopic material parameters for both AFM and FM phases are lacking. Our model, which integrates both atomistic and mesoscopic simulations, enables a micromagnetic analysis of the system and furnishes a detailed quantitative account of the corresponding remagnetization processes. The crucial aspect of our study is the comparison of results obtained using our model with the previously cited experimental data. This two-parts article is organized as follows: the present (first) part explains the atomistic and mesoscopic approaches to the micromagnetic model of Heusler alloys and provides all the necessary prerequisites for the three-dimensional (3D) mesoscopic calculations; the second part In the second part To find out which parameters are known reliably enough to be used in atomistic simulations, we have performed a thorough search in the literature devoted to experimental results and DFT calculations of FM and AFM phases. Experimental data obtained by x-ray diffraction demonstrate that Ni 2 MnIn has a crystal structure of L2 1 type (cubic austenitic state) with a lattice parameter a that is slightly above 6 Å First principles calculations First principles calculations were also used to study the exchange stiffness in monocrystalline NiMn Simulations of a real AFM/FM interface are not feasible, because there are too many unknown structural parameters related to the corresponding interfacial disorder. For this reason we have mapped the atomistic parameters described in the previous section onto a simple cubic lattice. Examples of generated structures are presented in Fig. Note that in our model we do not explicitly introduce a pinned intermediate layer between the FM precipitates and the AFM matrix as done in The following atomistic results are obtained using a system of atoms arranged on a cubic lattice with dimensions of N x ×N y ×N z = 333×8×8. Its length L = 100 nm is chosen in such a way that it can easily incorporate a domain wall (e.g., Bloch and Néel types) appearing in both AFM and FM phases. Periodic boundary conditions in all directions are applied. At the current stage, the magnetodipolar interaction is not included, because we expect that the major contribution to the system energy comes from the exchange interaction (both within the FM and AFM phases, and from the interphase exchange coupling) and the strong intrinsic anisotropy of the AFM matrix. If necessary, the magnetodipolar interaction can added and evaluated using the lattice-Ewald method. Atomistic magnetic parameters (magnetic moment μ s and anisotropy coefficient k) found in the literature for both phases (see Sec. II) were mapped to the corresponding mesoscopic values using the data presented in Sec. II and the standard relations Here, n at is the number of atoms per unit cell and V a denotes the unit cell volume. For our case of a simple cubic lattice, we have n at = 1 and V a = a 3 . An elementary cell size of a = 0.3 nm has been chosen, close to the corresponding parameter of materials under consideration. The anisotropy energy density of the tetragonal magnetocrystalline anisotropy of the AFM phase has the following form (see Fig. where θ and φ are the polar and azimuthal angles. For an easy-plane anisotropy type, K 1 < 0 and K 2 = 0. The constant K ′ 2 defines the basal-plane anisotropy of the fourth order. As it can be seen from comparison of the constants K 1 and K ′ 2 (see Table which establishes the connection between these constants and the Curie temperature T C of the ferromagnetic material; here, k B is the Boltzmann constant and z is the number of nearest neighbors in the atomic lattice (we omit the correction factor in this expression whose value is usually close to unity). For our choice of the elementary cell geometry (simple cubic lattice), z = 6 for both FM and AFM phases. The exchange constant for the AFM material obeys the same expression, but with the Néel temperature T N instead of T C in Eq. ( where J FM and J AFM are the exchange constants of the FM and AFM phases and the dimensionless coefficient 0 ≤ κ ≤ 1 accounts for the possible weakening of the interphase exchange due to interphase boundary imperfections. Note that for the quasi 1D atomistic simulations shown below we have used the geometry shown in Fig. In order to validate our method for FM materials, a standard calculation of the Bloch-wall profile was carried out using the well known material parameters of Co. First, following the scheme explained above, the saturation magnetization M s = 1440 G, the first-order anisotropy coefficient K 1 = 4.1 × 10 6 erg/cm 3 , and the exchange coefficient calculated using T C = 1360 K were mapped onto a simple cubic lattice. In the starting magnetization configuration, atomic magnetic moments were arranged according to the magnetization profile shown in Fig. where A is the mesoscopic exchange-stiffness constant. Plotting this expression with the standard exchange stiffness for Co, A = 3.1 × 10 -6 erg/cm, we obtain a remarkable agreement between the analytical result and the atomistic simulations, as shown in Fig. The same procedure as described above has been ap- plied to the AFM NiMn with a tetragonal magnetocrystalline anisotropy and the y-z-plane chosen as the easy anisotropy plane. Figure For a relatively small in-plane anisotropy constant, we obtain here a tanh-like Bloch-wall magnetization profile that is too close to the initial approximation (sin-like in this instance). For this reason, we had to perform additional calculations with an enlarged magnetic anisotropy constant with the result shown in Fig. At this point, all the necessary parameters for the atomistic micromagnetic simulations in frames of our model are defined. In the following, we present selected results obtained using the quasi 1D model described above and discuss hysteresis loops and magnetization distributions at particular external fields. In our study we have varied three parameters of the model, whose variations may lead to strong changes in the magnetization reversal process: the size d FM of FIG. the FM inclusion, the exchange weakening κ on the AFM/FM boundary, and the orientation of the AFM anisotropy axes with respect to the external field direction, along which the z-axis of our coordinate system was directed. Therefore, the parameter space of our simulations is as follows (with c FM the FM volume fraction): • size of the FM inclusion: d FM = 3 . . . 50 nm (c FM = 3 . . . 50 %) • exchange weakening: κ = 0.0 . . . 1.0 • anisotropy-planes orientation of the AFM phase: easy-plane anisotropies in the x-z, y-z, or x-y coordinate planes . Figures An inclusion with d FM = 36.6 nm, being almost three times larger than d FM = 12.6 nm, can easily incorporate a significantly inhomogeneous magnetization configuration in spite of the weak coupling (Fig. The typical sizes of simulated structures in atomistic simulations (especially in 3D) are limited to several hundreds of interatomic distances in each spatial direction. Therefore, for the modeling of the remagnetization process in 3D systems with sizes of hundreds of nanometers, the transition to the mesoscopic length scale is mandatory. In this section, we describe the steps necessary to introduce and validate the corresponding mesoscopic model. First, in order to implement a mesoscopic model for an AFM, it is necessary to introduce an effective vector that describes the direction of the magnetic moments in the AFM sublattices with a spatial resolution of a few nanometers (analogous to the standard procedure in micromagnetics). This vector coincides with the magnetization direction of one of the sublattices and is antiparallel to the moments of the second sublattice (under the above described limitation of the external field magnitude). In the following discussion, we will refer to this vector as a descriptor of the spatial distribution of magnetization in FIG. Second, in analogy to conventional micromagnetics, we have to define the size of finite elements having a constant "magnetization" (usually a few nanometers, 3.5 nm in our case) and all the interaction coefficients both within one phase and between the different phases. The mesoscopic saturation magnetization and anisotropy coefficient for a FM and for both sublattices of an AFM can be derived from their atomistic counterparts using Eqs. As a test calculation (see Fig. Special attention deserves the relation between the exchange-weakening coefficients κ present in both the atomistic and mesoscopic methods. This relation is highly nontrivial, because these coefficients lead in different approaches to the weakening of the exchange coupling between two very different "building blocks" of corresponding models. We have revealed this relation by comparing remagnetization curves obtained by both methods. The result is presented in Fig. In the first of two articles, we have presented a combined atomistic/mesoscopic approach for micromagnetic simulations of systems containing coupled ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) phases. The reliability of the atomistic simulations was tested using singlephase FM and AFM materials, where we have simulated Bloch-wall magnetization profiles and compared them with analytical results for the same system. Further, the developed methodology was validated by comparing the results of mesoscopic simulations with the corresponding ones of atomistic modeling for quasi one-dimensional systems, being either single-phase or consisting of a FM inclusion within an AFM phase. In the second part TABLE IV. Magnetic moment μ of Mn sublattices and Néel temperature TN of NiMn obtained by first principles calculations (LSDA: local spin-density approximation; GGCs: generalized gradient corrections).