To date, there are very few experimental techniques, if any, that are suitable for the purpose of acquiring, with nanoscale lateral resolution, quantitative maps of the thermal expansivity of 2D materials and thin films, despite huge demand for nanoscale thermal management, for example in designing integrated circuitry for power electronics. Besides, contactless analytical tools for determining the thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) are highly desirable, because probes in contact with the sample significantly perturb any thermal measurements. Here, we introduce ω-2ω near-field thermoreflectance imaging, as an all-optical and contactless approach to map the TEC at the nanoscale with precision. Testing of our technique is performed on nanogranular films of gold and multilayer graphene (ML-G) platelets. Our method demonstrates that the TEC of Au is higher at the metal-insulator interface, with an average of (17.12±2.30)x10 -6 K -1 in agreement with macroscopic techniques. For ML-G, the average TEC was (-5.77±3.79)x10 -6 K -1 and is assigned to in-plane vibrational bending modes. A vibrational-thermal transition from graphene to graphite is observed, where the TEC becomes positive as the ML thickness increases. Our nanoscale method demonstrates results in excellent agreement with its macroscopic counterparts, as well as superior capabilities to probe 2D materials and interfaces. With critical advances in integrated power electronics, Thermal expansion of inhomogeneous thin films is customarily investigated macroscopically with dilatometers, In principle, thermal expansivity information with higher resolution can be obtained by measuring the changes in the crystallographic lattice sites with x-ray spectroscopy where the measured spectra are accompanied with a thermodynamical interpretation involving anharmonic effects to determine the thermal expansion. To date, guesses on the local thermal properties of surfaces and near-surface features at the mesoscopic level chiefly rely on scanning thermal microscopy (SThM) Furthermore, the cantilever also expands due to heat, thus further complicating the genuine identification of thermal expansion from the sample. In this paper, we present and utilize for the first time contactless near-field thermoreflectance imaging, a novel tool for precisely mapping the thermal expansion coefficient at the nanoscale. Near-field thermoreflectance The use of scanning near-field thermoreflectance methods to map the thermal conductivity and heat capacity of specific samples, by locking the probe beam detection at the same frequency  as the pump beam in an - pump-probe technique, is well assessed. Panels a and b in Figure where h is a constant that only depends on , on the material, tip aperture radius and length, as well as the focal distance from the detector. ( Because the reflected evanescent field is not point-like, but can be approximated as a gaussian profile peaked at a constant distance z0 from the sample, and of full width at half maximum of about the tip aperture radius a, the near-field reflectivity from temperature-induced, timedependent fluctuations of the underlying surface is given by: where a Taylor expansion of the gaussian can be used to work out the right-hand term of eq 3 in conjunction with eq 2 and the half-angle formula 2cos 2 (t) = 1+cos(2t). Thus, the amplitude of the time-dependent SNOM signal at double-frequency (2) is given by: 2(x,y) = (x,y) (x,y) 2 / 2a 2 . ( (x,y) can be derived from 2 by means of eq 4, if (x,y) is known from an independent - experiment, and the lateral resolution of this method will be ~ a. The z-axis resolution will be more accurate, however, as the use of a lock-in method enables the detection of quantities (x,y) / a ~ 10 -2 and, therefore (x,y)  0.5 nm with a  50 nm aperture. As the two experiments (- and -2) can be carried out simultaneously from the same instrumentation, this finding opens a robust pathway towards contactless near-field based scanning optical nanodilatometry. An immediate way to picture the underlying principle of contactless SNOD through -2 experiments is depicted in figure After measuring (x0,y0) via eq 4, the next critical step is represented by properly taking into account the contributions from the substrate on the determination of the local TEC [f(x0,y0)] of the film, where the former can be substantial (up to 50%) even for thermally insulating substrates like glass. The two quantities are linked by the relationship: where Tf(x0,y0) can be obtained through - thermoreflectance measurements via eq (1), and d(x0,y0) is the local thin-film thickness. Being scanning-probe techniques, SNOM and SNOD are uniquely suited to determine d(x0,y0) through a simultaneous AFM scan of the sample. Also, in eq 5, s is the TEC of the substrate, which, for most of the cases of practical interest, is known and expected to be homogeneous. More complicate is the determination of Ts(x0,y0,z0), the change in temperature at a point of the substrate at a level z0 below the measured point of the surface. Multiple neighboring substrate points (x,y) may affect the thermal expansion around (x0,y0). In an ideal case where the substrate is perfectly insulating, and the film is enough conducting for heat to be overwhelmingly dissipated in-plane along the surface, the integral from the second addend of eq 5 yields a negligible value, but this is normally not the case. where Ts(x0,y0,z0) = Adx dy s(x-x0,y-y0,z0), and A is the considered cut-off area of the sample. Ts(x0,y0,z0) obtained from eq 6 can then be integrated over z0 in eq 5 to yield f(x0,y0). Specifically, component i) offers a substrate temperature uniformly decaying over z irrespective of (x,y) (figure In the following section, we explore the use of SNOD for investigating specific systems of practical interest, with both positive and negative TEC. The objective is to test our method with special attention to nanogranular and sparse films (where macroscopic dilatometry techniques may be inadequate) as well as highly thermally conducting systems such as gold and graphene, where the use of SThM is problematic due to strong heat transfer to the probe. Nanogranular but continuous thin films of gold on glass are ideal testing samples for SNOD as their data interpretation is simplified by the fact of heat being predominantly dissipated along the Au thin-film surface, which is very thermally conducting, while the relative uniformity of the thin film minimizes Tf(x0,y0) from figure 1c. For this system, the substrate's contribution to the sample's expansivity from eq 5 is overwhelmingly represented by Ts,av(z0) in eq 6, which is independent of (x,y) and, consequently (x0,y0). Figure To further substantiate the capabilities of SNOD, we have performed the same measurements on a system of complementary characteristics, which is formed by sparse multilayer graphene (ML-G) platelets deposited on optically transparent and thermally insulating glass, From the AFM micrograph in figure In this article, we have described the invention and construction of the first contactless nano-dilatometry apparatus capable of imaging the TEC at the nanoscale in nanostructured thinfilm materials, 2D materials and relating electronic nanodevices. Our apparatus, a scanning nearfield dilatometer, is all-optical and, therefore, does not require any external heater or electrical contact to vary the sample's temperature, nor it requires any physical thermometer or nanothermocouple to probe it. Our method is a -2 pump-probe method, where the probe is an aperture-type reflection-mode SNOM, which makes it uniquely suited for probing optically absorbing and thermally conducting layers on optically transparent and relatively thermally insulating substrates, albeit the role of the substrate in determining the measured thermal expansion is considered, through a rigorous model based on Fourier's heat equation. Using SNOD, we also have found that the TEC of nanogranular Au films is shown to be higher at the glass/Au interface. Such a finding would have been impossible with any other techniques. It would have been impossible with macroscopic contactless techniques because of poor resolution, which would be insufficient to resolve them by several orders of magnitude. To the best of our knowledge, the same effect has never been observed before using SThM, arguably because the strong interaction of supposed SThM "nano-thermocouples" (that are, in fact, rather voluminous) may produce a too large lateral heat spreads for thermal expansion gradients to be observed over few microns. As far as 2D materials are concerned, SNOD has led us to find for the first time to observe that, from a thermomechanical point, of view, the graphene-graphite transition occurs at ~175 layers. Such a finding has so far been elusive with other techniques because of the difficulty to reproducibly heat highly thermally conducting ML-G flakes on a thermally insulating samples without a contactless nanoscale dilatometer. The discovery that such a transition occurs over a hundred layers is particularly remarkable because, as far as its electronic structure is concerned, few-layer graphene is known to transition to graphite at about 10 layers or less, Reflection-mode SNOM images (panel c in figs. 2 and 3) were obtained within the same apparatus as the transmission-mode scans, but with scattered photons collected at a grazing angle in the nearfield by a subminiature accessory (SMA, WiTec) and, from there, fed into the photomultiplier tube. It was essential to be able to acquire both transmission-and reflection-mode SNOM images as they provide information on the local sample absorbance and, from there, determine the sample heat profile in conjunction with knowledge of the pump-beam illumination. Thermoreflectance (-) and Nano-dilatometry (-2, SNOD) scans. - and -2 thermoimages (corresponding, respectively, to panel d and panels e-h in figs. 2-3) are recorded using the above mentioned WiTec instrument in the configuration previously reported in Figure This 405 nm laser is modulated with a mechanical chopper (SciTec Instruments, 300 CD/HRG) and the chopper angular velocity, , is varied to record different scans (as in panels e-h of figs. the reference signal originating from the mechanical chopper, either at  Testing samples-Sparse ML-G platelets on glass. ML-G nanoplatelets on glass substrates (Corning 7101) were prepared accordingly to the method by Sharifi et al. Figure [s2] The discrepancy between the thermal expansion results for our Au thin film is due to the limitations of the optical dilatometer to accurately measure the dimensionality change in the film. The working principle of the optical dilatometer is based on the theory of multiple reflections which measures the consecutive interference patterns of the reflected light waves to determine the sample thickness. In the theory of multiple reflections, the sample thickness is assumed to be constant throughout the entire film, a condition that is rarely satisfied by mesoscopic structured thin films. Thus, in our macroscopic optical dilatometer the thermal expansion measurements only provides a reasonable value for a film of uniform thickness (e.g., Figure In this section, we present the model to consider the role of the substrate in determining the surface thermal expansivity in eq (5). Two component are considered and superimposed as described by eq (6): Ts(x0,y0,z0) = Ts,av(z0) + Ts(x0,y0,z0). The two parts to be linearly superimposed are as follows: Also, in eqs (s2) and (s4), Ds is the thermal diffusivity of the substrate, which is assumed, for the sake of simplicity, to be homogeneous (even though this assumption could be relaxed through a more sophisticated numerical model). Eq (s2) is readily solved as Ts,av(z0, t) = Tf,av exp[-(/Ds) 1/2 z0] cos(t), (s6) irrespectively of the scanned point (x0, y0). This happens because the uniform heat distribution assumed by eq (s2) indicates that each point receives, from points at the same level z0, as much heat as it dissipates, so the net heat flux is zero. We will now thus focus specifically on eq (s4). Hence, eq (s4) can be separated into three ordinary differential eigenvalue equations, respectively in r, , and t, which will take the forms: where r = [(x-x0) 2 + (y-y0) 2 + z0 2 ] 1/2 and  = atan{z0/[(x-x0) 2 +(y-y0) 2 ] 1/2 }. Although s(x0, y0, z0=0, t) appears to diverge at r = 0, this is just apparent, because also A tends to zero in a continuous approximation. By replacing eq (s18) into eq 7, the effect on the substrate of local temperature fluctuations at the film on the surface can be properly taken into account, and a suitable cut-off can be applied in eq 7 to determine the region of points (x,y) contributing to the integral in that equation.