High-temperature superconductivity is reported in a series of compositionally-complex cuprates with varying degrees of size and spin disorder. Three compositions of Y-site alloyed YBa2Cu3O7-x, i.e., (5Y)BCO, were prepared using solid-state methods with different sets of rare earth ions on the Ysite. Synchrotron X-ray diffraction and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy confirm these samples have high phase-purity and homogeneous mixing of the Y-site elements. The superconducting phase transition was probed using electrical resistivity and AC magnetometry measurements, which reveal the transition temperature, TC , is greater than 91 K for all series when near optimal oxygen doping. Importantly, these TC values are only ≈1% suppressed relative to pure YBCO (TC = 93 K). This result highlights the robustness of pairing in the YBCO structure to specific types of disorder. In addition, the chemical flexibility of compositionally-complex cuprates allows spin and lattice disorder to be decoupled to a degree not previously possible in high-temperature superconductors. This feature makes compositionally-complex cuprates a uniquely well-suited materials platform for studying proposed pairing interactions in cuprates. Disorder in superconductors has intrigued physicists and been the subject of numerous scientific studies over the last 60 years, starting with Anderson's theory and continuing to present day Recently, a new experimental approach to studying the the interplay of disorder and superconductivity has been enabled by the advent of high-entropy alloys (HEAs) More recently, this entropy-inspired materials engi-neering approach has been extended to cuprate d-wave systems Here, for the first time, we report the successful synthesis of compositionally-complex cuprates that exhibit high-T C superconductivity. Specifically, compositionallycomplex variants of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x were created by alloying three different sets of trivalent (isovalent) ions onto the Y-site to create three, unique (5Y)BCO compositions with varying degrees of size and spin disorder, parameterized by the ion radii variance and average spin, respectively. High phase-purity and elemental mixing for all three (5Y)BCO compositions was confirmed by synchrotron diffraction and electron microscopy. All compositions exhibited T C values between 91 K -92 K near op-TABLE I. Structural information for the different compositions of (5Y)BCO. Ionic radii (I.R.) and variance are calculated using eight-fold coordinate values from the Shannon-Prewitt tables Powder batches of each (5Y)BCO composition were prepared by weighing out stoichiometric amounts of metal oxide and metal carbonate precursors followed by manually grinding, room-temperature pellet pressing, and firing in a muffle furnace at dwell temperatures ranging from 900 • C -1000 • C. Each set of Y-site ions was selected to have an average ionic radius close that of yttrium to minimize lattice strain and long-range structural distortions. Only trivalent substitutional ions were used to prevent charge doping differences between series. Doping in these samples is instead due to oxygen vacancies, the concentration of which was controlled by the quench rate during synthesis with an optimal cooling rate of 1 • C/min for all series. Synthesis conditions were optimized using phase-purity and transition temperature as the primary metrics. These metrics were evaluated re-spectively using lab X-ray diffraction (XRD) collected on a Panalytic MPD (Cu Kα) and four-point probe measurements taken with a Quantum Design Versalab. Sample homogeneity and element clustering in sintered pellets was analyzed by collecting element-specific composition maps at different magnifications using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy in a FEI Nova 430 scanning electron microscope (SEM-EDS) The room-temperature crystal structure for each composition of (5Y)BCO was determined using highresolution synchrotron XRD measurements collected at Argonne National Lab's Advanced Photon Source 11-BM beamline and refined using the Rietveld method implemented in GSAS-II. Figure The refined structural parameters for each (5Y)BCO composition are reported in Table The sXRD refinement results also indicate that Y-site alloying changes the Cu-O-Cu bond angles in the CuO 2planes that carry supercurrent. On average, the Cu-O-Cu bond angles in the CuO 2 -plane are smaller in (5Y)BCO than pure YBCO. However, the (5Y)BCO samples appear to have greater variance of the Cu-O-Cu bond angles (i.e., greater difference between Cu-O2-Cu vs. Cu-O3-Cu angles) than pure YBCO. Interestingly, variance in the Cu-O-Cu bond angles correlates with decreasing average ionic radii on the Y-site, rather than with the variance of the ionic radii. Electrical resistivity measurements for each (5Y)BCO series, collected under 0 T and 3 T magnetic fields on pressed and sintered pellets, are shown in Figure In the near-optimally doped samples shown in Fig. The superconducting nature of the resistivity transition was verified using AC susceptibility measurements, collected in a Quantum Design MPMS3 Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) magnetometer. Figure Considering first the minimal T C suppression observed in (5Y)BCO, we leverage impurity potentials as a framework for comparing the degree to which different impurities are expected to disrupt pairing and suppress superconductivity. The strength of impurity potentials in cuprates depends both on the distance of the impurity from the superconducting plane and its charge difference with the parent ion on the impurity site Considering now the contrasting results reported for (5Y)BCO and (5R)CO, we first note that in both systems the disordered site is plaquette-centered above the CuO 2 square lattice and roughly the same distance from the CuO 2 plane. Specifically, in YBCO, the Y-site sits roughly 3.2 Å from Cu and 2.4 Å from O, while in the T'-(5R)CO structure, the RE-site sits slightly further away at 3.2-3.3 Å from Cu and 2.7 Å from O Alternatively, Mazza et al. proposed that the large cation-size disorder on the RE-site was the reason their (5R)CO samples did not superconduct Last but not least, we highlight the potential of compositionally-complex cuprates to disentangle spin and lattice contributions to pairing in high-T C superconductors, the precise origin of which remains a major open question in condensed matter physics. Broadly speaking there exist two leading explanations for pairing in cuprates. The first is that pairing is mediated by antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations, which is supported by inelastic scattering experiments In conclusion, this work reports high-temperature superconductivity in a family of compositionally-complex cuprate superconductors, and demonstrates the possibility of decoupling size and spin disorder for the purpose of interrogating pairing interactions in these materials. Three compositions of (5Y)BCO were made with high phase-purity and T C values greater than 91 K. The negligible T C reduction relative to undisordered YBCO is consistent with prior work on simpler YBCO alloys and a theoretical framework of weak impurity potentials in isovalently alloyed systems. The contrasting behavior of (5Y)BCO with recent reports of compositionally-complex (5R)CO highlights the sensitive nature of d-wave superconductivity to different types of disorder, and provides clear opportunities for future studies.