Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) exhibit an extensive variety of novel electronic properties, such as charge density wave quantum spin Hall phenomena, superconductivity, and Dirac and Weyl semi-metallic properties. The diverse properties of TMDs suggest that structural transformation can be employed to switch between different electronic properties. Intercalation and zero valence doping of molecules and atoms into the van der Waals gap of TMDs have emerged as effective approaches to modify the charge order states of the material. This eventually leads to phase transition or the formation of different phases, thus expanding the electronic, thermoelectric and optical applications of these materials. In this study, electronic and electrochemical energy storage properties of such an intercalated TMD, namely, 2H-TaSe 2 via intercalation of lithium (Li), sodium (Na) and potassium (K) have been investigated. The intercalation of these ions into the dichalcogenide resulted in a modified band structure and novel structural effects, leading to the emergence of a 1 eV band gap. Possibility of electrochemical energy storage application is also explored in this study. Furthermore, the importance of multi orbital electron-electron correlations in intercalated TaSe 2 is also investigated via dynamical-mean-field theory with local density approximation. Energy storage particularly in the form of rechargeable batteries, poses a critical limitation that impedes the progress of various technologies. From biomedical applications and portable electronic devices to emerging electric vehicles and renewable energy storage, the primary hindrance to advancing these fields is the lack of an efficient medium for energy storage. Batteries already play a significant role in modern life already. Despite substantial research in rechargeable battery technology, the problem of short battery life persists in many of our daily appliances. Over the past few decades two-dimensional materials with a diverse range of physical properties have gernered widespread attention from energy storage researchers Transition metal dichalcogenides have remarkable potential in the development of innovative electronic devices owing to their distinctive geometries and efficient charge transfer properties Additionally, charge density wave (CDW) and superconducting ground states are found frequently in their phase diagram. 2D materials are also one of the most fascinating topics of research due to the complex nature and significant quantum fluctuations of the collective electronic states. The common chemical formula of TMD is MX 2 , where M represents a transition metal and X denotes a chalcogen. The layered structure of TMDs leads to excellent host for intercalation due to the weak interlayer van der Waals force. Intercalation is a familiar occurance in layered chalcogenides and is essential for variety of applications, such as, supercapacitors, battery electrodes, and solid lubricants Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have garnered extensive attention for their potential applications in energy storage devices because of their favorable chemical and physical properties as well as their wide interlayer distance Consequently, to verify its theoretical storage capacity and conductivity it is imperative to determine the electronic properties and binding energy of the intercalated 2H-TaSe 2 . In this study, intercalation in 2H-TaSe 2 have been investigated and the unique properties of the resulting intercalated dichalcogenide as well as its potential applications in energy storage and optoelectronics have been analysed. 2H-TaSe 2 features a hexagonal structure with Se-Ta-Se tr-ilayer stack and is classified as a metallic TMD exhibiting CDW transition temperature at 122K and very low superconducting transition temperature of 0.15K. Also the interlayer distance of 0.4 nm of 2H-TaSe 2 renders it as a suitable host for intercalation. In this work, intercalation in 2H-TaSe 2 is investigated through the utilization of density functional theory (DFT) calculations based on the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) method. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) is employed for the exchange-correlation functional, while the full potential linearized augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) method, as implemented in WIEN2K package The integration in momentum space is conducted through a 12 × 12 × 1 Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh centered around Γ-point. Furthermore, all the lattice constants and atomic coordinates are fully relaxed until the forces were smaller than 0.001eV/ Å. Self consistent field (SCF) calculations are implemented to calculate the total energy of intercalated and pristine compounds. In addition, the optical conductivity, and imaginary and real parts of dielectric tensor were computed within the WIEN2K code. The interstitial wave function is expanded in terms of plane waves with a cut-off parameter of R M T × K max =8.5, where R M T and K max represent the smallest atomic sphere radius and the largest k vector in the planewave expansion. The optical terms are evaluated using a dense k-point mesh of 15 × 15 × 1 Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack with a fixed Lorentzian broadening of 0.05 eV. The electronic properties of the dichalcogenide will exhibit modifications due to the presence of intercalants. These modifications can be attributed to two mechanisms, (i) lattice modulation and (ii) transfer of charge from suitable intercalants to host atoms. The transfer of charge between the host atom and intercalant has the potential to alter both the Fermi surface and conductivity of the parent material. Consequently, intercalation induced changes in the Fermi surface can lead to transition between states such as metal-insulator, metalsemiconductor and even superconductivity. This study focuses on the changes observed in non-interacting structure of 2H-TaSe 2 resulting from intercalation of three different intercalants: lithium, sodium, and potassium. FIG. However, quantitative differences will produce different optoelectronic and electrochemical energy storage properties. Optical conductivity (σ(ω)) arises from the motion of carriers with oppositely charges induced by electromagnetic wave and, in turn, reflects the absorption coefficient and refractive index. In this study, the optical spectra are presented for a wide range of energy [0-10 eV] at room temperature. The optical conductivity plots [FIG. In two dimensional dichalcogenides composed of transition metals, a metallic layer is sandwiched between the chalcogen layers. Li, Na and K ions are intercalated in between two dichalcogenide layers. The structure of 2H-TaSe 2 belongs to space group of 194, leading to the selection of adsorption sites with fixed space group symmetry. As shown in FIG. After exploring other potential sites, this particular site is chosen following comprehensive structural relaxation as well as energy minimization as detailed in the methods section. The binding energy of intercalant atoms is defined as: E compound is the full energy of the intercalated TaSe 2 , in which n is no of intercalants added on pristine 2H-TaSe 2 . E intercalant is the energy of an isolated Li, Na and K ions in a vacuum. E T aSe 2 is the energy of an solitary 2H-TaSe 2 layer. The more negative the binding energy, the more favorable the structure. In the case of Li, Na and K with x=0.2, the calculated binding energies are -1.61 eV, -1.27 eV and -0.882 eV respectively. This points to strong attractive interactions between the intercalants and the parent structure. In order to assess the potential for electro-chemical energy-storage applications, the theoretical capacity is determined using the formula C = cnF/M T aSe 2 . In the above equation c is the number of adsorbed ions on a single unit 2H-TaSe 2 , n is the valence state of ions, F is the Faraday constant (26801 mA.h.mol -1), and M T aSe 2 is the molar weight of 2H-TaSe 2 . In this case, both c and n, are assumed to be 1 for the intercalations. As a result, the adsorption capacity for 2H-TaSe 2 is determined to be 79.1. The electrical conductivity of the intercalated 2H-TaSe 2 is obtained from Boltztrap code The electrical conductivity of intercalated 2H-TaSe 2 demonstrates a consistent upward trend with an increase in the atomic no of intercalants. Based on the considerations of binding energy and theoretical storage capacity, it can be concluded that Li intercalation is more favorable than Na and K intercalation. . The findings of the DFT and DFT plus DMFT calculation are summarized in conclusion. The intercalated 2H-TaSe 2 exhibit a significantly different state compared to its pristine form. The ground state of the intercalated dichalcogenide is characterized by strong correlations and 1 eV bandgap. This material holds promise as a new semiconductor material in optoelectronics, given its suitable bandgap for the visible part of the optical spectrum. Furthermore, a substantial static dielectric constant is observed. The study of Li, Na and K intercalation also aims to explore alternative energy sources. The energy storage calculations reveal an adsorption capacity of 79.1 for the intercalated dichalcogenide with ions of single valence state. This confirms the prospect of using these materials as alternate electrochemical energy storage material. Henceforth this theoretical research highlights the prospective application for fine tuning the properties of 2H-transition metal dichalcogenide. The data will be available on request.