Quantum oscillations in magnetic torque and electrical resistivity were measured to investigate the electronic structure of β-ReO2, a candidate hourglass nodal chain metal (Dirac loop chain metal). All the de Haas-van Alphen oscillation branches measured at 30 mK in magnetic fields of up to 17.5 T were consistent with first-principles calculations predicting four Fermi surfaces (FSs). The small-electron FS of the four FSs exhibited a very small cyclotron mass, 0.059 times that of the free electrons, which is likely to be related to the linear dispersion of the energy band. The consistency between the quantum oscillation results and band calculations indicates the presence of the hourglass nodal chain predicted for β-ReO2 in the vicinity of the Fermi energy. In recent years, considerable attention has been paid to topological semimetals that exhibit remarkable transport properties, responses to magnetic fields, and surface states 1) In nodal line semimetals, the band crossing is not a point in k-space but a one-dimensional loop-the so-called nodal line. In particular, nodal lines produce drumhead surface states Generally, spin-orbit interactions (SOIs) open an energy gap at the band crossings; however, in topological semimetals, band crossings are protected from the gap opening owing to the symmetry of the crystal structure Reportedly, materials have band crossings that are protected by non-symmorphic symmetries including partial translations such as glide planes and screw axes, rather than symmorphic symmetries like rotation and mirror symmetry. In materials with glide symmetry, bands may exchange pairs within the glide plane, thereby forming band dispersions with an hourglass shape; the Dirac point at the neck-crossing point of the hourglass is protected against SOIs through glide symmetry In materials with multiple orthogonal glide planes, multiple nodal lines (Dirac loops) appear that are protected by each glide plane, which may be connected by a single point, forming a chain-like structure in k-space. Materials with such electronic structures are called nodal-chain (NC) metals: these materials represent a new category of topological semimetals Particularly, only the metallic electrical conduction in β-ReO2 has been reported In this study, QOs in the magnetic torque and electrical resistivity were measured and compared with first-principles calculations to investigate the FSs of β-ReO2 in detail. The observed QO frequencies corresponded to the extremal crosssectional areas of all four FSs predicted by first-principles calculations, and the angular dependences of the QO branches between the calculations and experiments were consistent. The cyclotoron mass of the quasiparticles estimated from the temperature dependence of the oscillation amplitude was approximately identical to that of free electrons for the three large FSs, whereas for the small electron pocket, the cyclotoron mass was extremely light-0.059 times lighter than free electrons. The shape of the electron pocket surrounded by one of the two nodal lines forming the NC was determined with high accuracy, and first-principles calculations revealed that the NC was located extremely close to the EF in β-ReO2. Single crystals of β-ReO2 were grown by chemical vapor transport method using iodine as a transport agent as in previous reports Magnetic torque measurements were performed by a piezomicro-cantilever technique Electrical resistivity measurements were performed using a 17 T superconducting magnet and a For structural analysis, powder XRD experiments were conducted at 150 K and X-ray energy of 20 keV using a quadruple PILATUS 100K detecter at the BL5S2 of Aichi Synchrotron Radiation Center. The sample was prepared by crushing single crystals and sealing it in a Lindemann capillary of 0.1 mm diameter. RIETAN-FP was used for the Rietveld analysis First-principles electronic structure calculations were performed using the all-electron full-potential linearized augmented plane wave method 31)-33) implemented in the HiLAPW code Figure Based on the Onsager relation, the observed frequency F in the FFT spectrum yields the extremal cross-sectional area of the FS perpendicular to the magnetic field AF: F = (Φ0/2π 2 )AF, where Φ0 is the magnetic quantum flux. The highest fundamental frequency labbeled as ζ is 3020 T, corresponding to the cross-sectional area of the FS AF = 0.288 Å -2 . This area is considerbaly large; 49% of the cross-sectional area perpendicular to [110] in the first Brillouin zone, 0.586 Å -2 . However, the lowest frequency, α, is approximately 70 T, which originates from a cross-sectional area of less than 1/40th of ζ. The observed peaks are assigned as α, β, γ, δ, ε, ζ, and their higher order summations. The magnetic-field-angle dependence of dHvA oscillations in the magnetic-field orientations rotated around the c and b axes are displayed in Fig. First-principles calculations were performed to reveal the correspondence between the FSs and angular dependence of dHvA oscillations. The crystallographic parameters of β-ReO2 used in the first-principles calculations were precisely determined through synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction experiments (see appendix). Upon comparing the previously reported parameters The FSs obtained through first-principles calculations are consistent with previous reports Figure Based on the calculations, the dHvA oscillations originating from the smallest #103 electron are estimated to be less than 200 T. Previous magnetisation measurements have reported a QO with a frequency of 51 T at B || a, which is believed to originate from the #103 electrons The obtained cyclotron masses are 1.74m0, 1.35m0, and 0.67m0 for the #101 electron, #99 hole, and #97 hole, respectively, where m0 is the mass of free electron. The experimental values agree reasonably well with the values obtained from first-principles calculations: 2.20m0, 0.94m0, and 0.60m0. The calculated results reproduce the electronic structure of β-ReO2 not only in the shape of the FSs but also in the band dispersion. Under the same B || a conditions, the cyclotron mass of #103 electron was determined to be 0.23m0 According to the LK equation, the larger the cyclotron mass, the larger will be the temperature decay of the QO amplitude. Therefore, at high temperatures, QOs originating from FSs with large cyclotron masses disappear, and only QOs originating from quasiparticles with small cyclotron masses are observed. We noted the difference in cyclotron masses among the four FSs and observed only QOs originating from the #103 electrons by performing measurements above 1 K. Figure In the 1.5 K data, a distinct oscillation is superimposed on the magnetoresistance component above 10 T. This oscillation component, which increases in amplitude with an increasing magnetic field, is the SdH oscillation. The SdH oscillations exhibit a complex magnetic-field dependence at 1.5 K, which is a combination of oscillations with large periods and fine oscillation components. In contrast, at 4.2 K, the fine component disappears and only a large period remains. This indicates that the QOs originating from the FSs with large cyclotron masses disappear and only the components originating from the FS with small cyclotron masses are observed. After subtracting the monotonically increasing component of magnetoresistance using a polynomial function and performing an FFT, an oscillatory component at 100 T is observed up to temperatures above 4 K. The cyclotron mass obtained by fitting the temperature dependence of the amplitude from 1.5 to 4.2 K is 0.48m0 (Fig. The FFT of the oscillations yields a frequency of 8.5 T, and a cyclotron mass of 0.059m0 is obtained by fitting the amplitude to the temperature dependence. The FS corresponding to this frequency is considered to be the #103 electron, and the calculated frequency and cyclotron mass are 48 T and 0.087m0, respectively. The difference of approximately 5.6 times between the experimental and calculated frequencies may be attributed to the insufficient accuracy of the calculations for an extremely small FS. The dHvA and SdH oscillation results are in good agreement with the four calculated FSs: three large FSs #101 electron, #97 hole, and #99 hole with relatively heavy cyclotron masses, and a small electron pocket #103 electron with an extremely light cyclotron mass of at least 0.059m0. The #103 electron is an electron pocket around the U point in reciprocal space, which possesses a rugby-ball shape according to the calculations (Fig. As shown in Fig. The reason for the anisotropic shape of #103 electron is that bands with remarkably different slopes extend from the same U point in the kx, ky, and kz directions to form the FS. The slope of the band is reflected by the effective mass of the electrons. The cyclotron mass of electrons from the bands perpendicular to the ky direction, which have steep slope and small kF, is very small (0.059m0), whereas the cyclotron mass of electrons from the bands perpendicular to the kz direction, which have slow slope, is large (0.48m0). The experimental and theoretical values are in good agreement, and their consistency further validates that the observed QOs originate from #103 electron. The shape of the FSs near the U-R line is closely related to the NC. β-ReO2 has two types of nodal lines orthogonal in kspace (Fig. In the band dispersion near the EF, as shown in Fig. Linear bands extending from the Dirac points originating from nodal lines 1 and 2 on the U-Z and R-S lines form the #101 electron and #99 hole (Fig. If the NCs are present near the EF, the Dirac electrons originating from the NCs must contribute to the transport properties. β-ReO2 exhibits an extremely low electrical resistivity of 206 nΩcm at 2 K, which most likely results from the ultra-high mobility of Dirac electrons at low temperatures. In addition, β-ReO2 is a metal with a large electron carrier density of 1×10 22 cm -3 , and such metals usually do not exhibit a large transverse magnetoresistance In topological semimetals, quasiparticles originating from Dirac or Weyl points have extremely light cyclotron masses. Table Several candidate NC metals have been proposed; however, only a few candidates have been experimentally verified; TiB2 47),48) and Co2MnGa For both TiB2 and Co2MnGa, theoretically predicted drumhead surface states have been observed Recently, magnetic torque measurements revealed that the development of magnetic susceptibility at low temperatures is attributed to the quadrupolar fluctuations In this study, quantum oscillation measurements were performed to determine the Fermi surface of β-ReO2, an hourglass nodal-chain metal candidate. Clear quantum oscillations are observed in both the magnetic torque and resistivity measurements and show field-angle and temperature dependences that correspond well to the results of first-principles calculations using structural parameters determined through synchrotron XRD measurements. The temperature dependence reveals a significant difference in the cyclotron mass depending on the Fermi surface and orientation. The cyclotron mass of the large Fermi surface is approximately the same as that of the free electrons, whereas the small Fermi surface contained extremely light electrons with a minimum mass of 0.059 times that of the free electrons. According to the present calculation, the small electron pocket with light electrons is present near the nodal line, and thus the consistency between the calculation and experimental results suggests that the nodal chain exists at energies approximate to the Fermi energy. Table AI. Comparison of crystallographic parameters between this study, previous repot This study Previous study 