Broadband, energy-efficient signal transfer between cryogenic and room-temperature environment has been a major bottleneck for superconducting quantum and classical logic circuits. Photonic links promise to overcome this challenge by offering simultaneous high bandwidth and low thermal load. However, the development of cryogenic electro-optic modulators -a key component for photonic readout of electrical signals -has been stifled by the stringent requirements of superconducting circuits. Rapid single flux quantum circuits (RSFQ), for example, operate with a tiny signal amplitude of only a few millivolts (mV), far below the volt-level signal used in conventional circuits. Here, we demonstrate the first direct optical readout of an RSFQ circuit without additional electrical amplification enabled by a novel superconducting electro-optic modulator (SEOM) featuring a record-low half-wave voltage V π of 42 mV on a 1 m-long SEOM. Leveraging the low ohmic loss of superconductors, we break the fundamental V π -bandwidth trade-off and demonstrate electro-optic bandwidth up to 17 GHz on a 0.2 m-long SEOM at cryogenic temperatures. Our work presents a viable solution toward high-bandwidth signal transfer between future large-scale superconducting circuits and room-temperature electronics. Superconducting circuits are among the most promising technologies for quantum information processing Similar to the room-temperature fiber links, the implementation of cryogenic-to-room-temperature photonic links critically relies on electro-optic (EO) modulators to transduce microwave signals into the optical domain. Superconducting circuits, however, impose significantly more demanding requirements on the modulators than their room-temperature counterparts, not only in terms of stringent cryogenic compatibility but also in terms of infinitesimal signals to be uplifted. One important class of superconducting logic ICs is the single flux quantum (SFQ) logic family for digital signal processing, which has been utilized in radiofrequency (RF)-digital receivers, development of next-generation energy-efficient computers and proposed for large-scale control and readout of * hong.tang@yale.edu superconducting qubits Another important class of superconducting circuits is that for quantum information processing, where the uplift of quantum states to room temperature calls for efficient microwaveto-optics quantum transduction Cryogenic modulators have recently been demonstrated on different platforms with volt-scale modulation amplitudes of-principle cryogenic optical interconnect using a commercial LN EO modulator Recent advances in integrated modulators based on lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI) platform A straightforward approach to reduce the V π of travelingwave modulators and improve their transduction efficiency is to increase the modulation length from the current centimeter range to the decimeter or even meter range. On top of the technical challenges of fabricating extremely long modulators, there exists a fundamental limit between bandwidth and efficiency on traveling-wave modulator architecture, im-posed by the RF attenuation from ohmic losses In this Article, we demonstrate the concept of superconducting traveling-wave modulators based on thin-film LN for interfacing with superconducting logic circuits. This superconducting electro-optic modulator (SEOM) design combines the best of two worlds in terms of material performancethe low microwave loss of superconductors and the low optical loss / high EO coefficient of LN -thus drastically increasing the EO modulation efficiency. Through an electrode jump-over design, the modulation length can be extended to one meter long (0.5 m in each Mach-Zehnder arm) while still maintaining a compact footprint, thus reducing the V π to as low as 42 mV. We also show that at cryogenic temperatures, the superconducting modulator possesses a 3 dB bandwidth over 17 GHz (20 cm total modulation length) by matching the velocity of microwave and optical signals, in sharp contrast to the modulation bandwidth of a few megahertz when the electrodes are normal. Our results suggest that SEOM can break the fundamental trade-off between V π and modulation bandwidth in EO modulator designs. We further demonstrate cryogenic-to-room-temperature data link with low peak-topeak voltage (V pp ) and achieve direct data lifting from an RSFQ circuit (5 mV V pp ). We believe our superconducting modulator design provides a pathway toward future highbandwidth optical link for cryogenic integrated circuits. Ultra-low V π . For a specific EO material, the strategy to reduce V π is to fabricate modulators with extended modulation length. Here, we present our design to create the longest LN modulator to date, thereby achieving the lowest V π ever reported. The devices are fabricated on an x-cut LNOI wafer with a 600-nm-thick LN film. In the two arms of the Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) modulator (Fig. With the design presented above, we are able to fabricate modulators with up to 1 m-long modulation length. The V π of the fabricated MZI modulators with total modulation length of 0.2 m, 0.4 m and 1 m (0.1 m, 0.2 m and 0.5 m in each arm) are measured to be 230 mV, 110 mV and 42 mV respectively at room temperature, as shown in Fig. The ultra-low V π allows for mV-drive-voltage operation. At room temperature, we demonstrate eye diagrams with V pp as low as 3 mV and 1 mV using a 1 m-long modulator, as shown in Fig. Electro-optic bandwidth of SEOM. The modulation bandwidth of a traveling-wave EO modulator is determined by several factors: 1) the group velocity mismatch between the optical and microwave modes; 2) the propagation loss of each mode; 3) microwave dispersion control and impedance matching. A theoretical derivation of the bandwidth dependence on these factors is provided in the Supplementary Information Sec. VI. With negligible microwave loss and assuming low microwave dispersion (as suggested by simulation), the key to high EO bandwidth is the group velocity matching between the optics and microwave. A careful impedance engineering to match the on-chip transmission line impedance with the 50 Ω coaxial cable is also necessary for high-bandwidth operation. With these considerations in mind, we model the microwave transmission line electro-optically coupled with the optical waveguide (Fig. In Fig. To validate the SEOM's EO performance at low excitation signal levels, we first send signals from an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) at room temperature through different attenuations to drive the modulator. With 20 mV and 10 mV peak-to-peak pseudo-random bit sequences (PRBS7) in nonreturn-to-zero (NRZ) format at 1 Gbps, the packaged device generates clear eye diagrams as shown in Fig. Next, we switch to the RSFQ circuit as signal source. To electrically visualize the weak signal generated by RFSQ, we have to amplify the signal at cryogenic temperatures, which would otherwise be submerged by room-temperature noise. The electrical readout of the PRBS7 NRZ signal uses an amplifier with 35 dB gain at 4 K and the signal is shown in Fig. The corresponding bit error rates (BER) are calculated to be 1.4 × 10 -6 , 7.7 × 10 -4 and 2.2 × 10 -2 respectively We have established that the use of superconductors breaks the trade-off between V π and modulation bandwidth in EO modulator designs by suppressing the ohmic loss. Nevertheless, the optical loss comes into play as the limiting factor for meter-long modulators. As shown in Supplementary Information Sec. III, the transduction efficiency increases quadratically with the length of modulation, while the light intensity decays exponentially as it propagates. With a given optical input power, the transduction efficiency η (or equivalently the photon number per bit in eye diagram measurement) is given by: Projected SEOM transduction efficiency. The electro-optic transduction efficiency of SEOM is calculated as a function of modulation length under different optical propagation loss conditions. The calculation assumes a 10 dBm optical input power and uses a cryogenic V π L of 3.8 V • cm given by experimental results. The current SEOM device possesses a transduction efficiency of 1.4 × 10 -4 under 0.8 dB/cm propagation loss. With improved propagation loss to 0.2 dB/cm and 0.05 dB/cm, transduction efficiency can approach 1% and 10% with meter-long modulation length. where P opt is the optical input power, Ω and ω are the microwave and optical angular frequency, α o is the optical propagation loss, Z 0 is the microwave transmission line characteristic impedance, and L is the modulation length. As the voltage-length product V π L is a constant, Eq. ( Our current cryogenic power dissipation is also limited by the large optical losses. The power dissipation is composed of two parts: electrical and optical power dissipation. Electrically, power only dissipates at the end of the microwave transmission line when it is terminated by a 50 Ω load. Although a DC voltage bias is applied between the signal and ground elec-trodes, this pure voltage bias on the dielectric material does not consume energy. The dissipated microwave power can be calculated as V 2 /Z 0 , where V is the signal amplitude (one half of V pp ) and Z 0 is the microwave impedance. In our RSFQ optical readout demonstration, the 5 mV V pp signal at 1 Gbps corresponds to 125 aJ/bit. If operated at a higher rate of 10 Gbps, this will be further reduced to 12.5 aJ/bit. Optically, most of the 17 dBm optical power is dissipated at cryogenic due to large optical loss (50 mW, 50 pJ/bit), which is still comparable with cryogenic broadband electrical amplifiers (typical power consumption is 10-20 mW). If assuming a combined 2.5 dB/facet coupling loss and 0.05 dB/cm propagation loss, a 1 m-long SEOM is capable of optical readout of the RSFQ circuit at 10 Gbps with 0 dBm optical input (100 fJ/bit, see Supplementary Information Sec. X). For large-scale RSFQ readout, although each RSFQ high-frequency output requires one SEOM, it takes only one optical fiber to uplift the signal. For electrical readout, each output would require one coaxial cable, and each coaxial cable introduces tens of mW heat load from room temperate to 40 K and a few mW heat load from 40 K to 4 K Just as commercial EO modulators powering today's fiber networks, we believe SEOMs with significantly improved modulation efficiency and bandwidth can offer substantial advantages for future large-scale superconducting circuits. In this Article, we present the conceptual advances of SEOMs, including the development of meter-long modulators and a remarkable two orders of magnitude reduction in V π . Through careful device engineering, we achieve over 17 GHz bandwidth on SEOM. Using this device, we have successfully demonstrated the direct optical readout of an RSFQ circuit for the first time. By further enhancing our fabrication processes and refining material processing to fully unlock the potential of the thin-film LN-superconductor platform, we anticipate several orders of magnitude further improvement in the modulation efficiency of meter-long SEOMs. This will enable the realization of scalable, low-power-consumption, and high-speed fully photonic links for superconducting circuits. Device fabrication. The SEOM device is fabricated on xcut LNOI wafer (NanoLN) featuring 600 nm thin-film LN and 4.7 μm buried oxide on a 500 μm-thick high-resistivity silicon substrate. The optical waveguides are defined using electron beam lithography (EBL) with hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) as resist and etched by argon reactive ion etching. The optical waveguide is partially etched by 350 nm with remaining 250 nm slab. After stripping residual HSQ resist, 900 nm HSQ is spun on chip and then defined by EBL as cladding layer. The chip is thermally annealed at 400 • C for 1 hour after resist development to turn the HSQ resist into silicon dioxide. The niobium electrodes (200-300 nm) are defined using EBL with polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) resist through liftoff process. The niobium film is deposited through electron beam evaporation in a ultra-high vacuum chamber (2 × 10 -8 torr during the deposition) at 10 Å/s deposition rate. The fabrication process flow is included in the Supplementary Information Sec. I. Device characterization. Cryogenic characterization of the EO bandwidth of the SEOM devices is performed in a closedcycle low-vibration cryostat from Montana Instruments. The die-level chip is mounted on a 3-axis stack of micropositioners (Attocube). Through active alignment, photonic coupling to the SEOM device is through fiber array to on-chip optical grating couplers and electric connection is made using a multi-channel RF probe contacting on-chip superconductor electrode pads. Details regarding the calibration, data process and fitting of the EO response measurement is included in the Supplementary Information Sec. VI. Optical readout of the RSFQ circuit is performed using a packaged SEOM device in another closed-cycle custom-made cryostat. The packaged SEOM device and the RSFQ module are mounted on the front and back side of the 4 K sample plate respectively. Details of the device packaging are included in the Supplementary Information Sec. VIII. The fabrication process flow for SEOM is depicted in Fig. The RSFQ chip is designed by HYPRES, Inc., and fabricated at MIT Lincoln Laboratory using SFQ5EE process In SFQ logic, information is stored in magnetic flux quanta and transferred through voltage pulses. To interface with CMOS logic at room temperature, the output circuit employs SQUID-stack drivers The RSFQ chip is enclosed in a cryogenic stimulus module, which incorporates a magnetic shield and provides all necessary thermal connectivity and electrical connections to the chip through pressure contact With their remarkably low V π values, SEOMs can operate as broadband microwave-to-optics transducers and offer competitive transduction efficiency compared to cavity-based electro-optic quantum transducers. Here we present a theoretical description of the traveling-wave electro-optic modulation process within the quantum optics framework. Our approach follows the quantum Hamiltonian treatment outlined in Consider an optical waveguide coupled with a co-propagating microwave transmission line, the electrical and optic modal overlap leads to the electro-optic coupling. We assume both optical waveguide and microwave transmission line are invariant in the propagation direction (z axis) and have the same length L. With periodic boundary condition, the wave vector of the microwave and optical modes must be an integer times 2π/L. As L → ∞, the mode spectrum becomes continuous and mode branches begin to form. Here we consider the dispersion of optical and microwave branches of traveling-wave electro-optics, as depicted in Fig. where H p , H b , H r and H m are the Hamiltonian for the four modes of interests and H V is the electro-optic coupling term. In the following, we derive the expression for each component of the system Hamiltonian. The electric field of the four modes shown in Fig. where l(k) is the annihilation operators of the continuous optical or microwave electromagnetic modes of wavevector ke z , in which l = p, b, r or m; the electric field mode profile of each mode branch at wave vector k: u lk (x, y) = u lki (x, y)e i , where e i is the direction vector, i = x, y or z and Einstein summation convention is applied. The denominators in the equation are for normalization purpose and will disappear in the expression of Hamiltonian. The commutation relations of the continuous annihilation and creation operators indexed by l and l ′ reads below With Eq. S2 and neglecting vacuum fluctuations, the Hamiltonian of each mode branch is In Eq. S4, the 1 2 factor of the electric field energy density is multiplied by 2 to account for the magnetic field energy as the electric field and the magnetic field have the same amount of energy. With the continuous mode operators, a wave packet can be mathematically expressed by the envelop operator, which is defined as where L ω (z) is the envelop of the wave packet with central frequency ω, L = P, B, R or M in our model. Through inverse Fourier transformation, we have The commutation relation of the envelop operators can be derived from the commutation relation of the continuous creation and annihilation operators in Eq. S3, which gives Now we express the Hamiltonian using the envelop operators. Substituting Eq. S6 to Eq. S4 and using the expansion expression for ω l ) n , the Hamiltonian for mode l becomes To arrive at the expression above we used equation Note that in Eq. S5, the integration is over all the wavenumber and physically it means that the envelop operator represents the photons in all the frequency range. In real experiments, what we encounter is narrow-band signals like the laser. In this narrow bandwidth wavepacket assumption, we only consider the first two terms of the expansion and the Hamiltonian can be simplified to where v l = ∂ω l ∂k | ω is the group velocity at frequency ω for mode branch l. The first term assumes that the signal is monochromatic and L † ω (z) L ω (z) is the photon number density, while the second term is a correction to the monochromatic assumption, because it is a wavepacket instead. Next, we find the expression for H V in terms of the envelop operators. If we take p as the pump, there are two parts in H V : parametric down conversion between p, r and m and coherent electro-optic conversion (up conversion) between p, b and m. So we have where r ijk is the electro-optic component and (i, j, k) is the permutation of (x, y, z). In Eq. S2 the electric field mode profile u lk (x, y) is a function of the wavelength, but within a narrow frequency range, it is a good assumption that the mode profile does not change. Given this, substitute Eq. S2 into H V , we have where ∆k = k 1k 2 + k 3 and g 0 is the vacuum electro-optic coupling strength for the traveling-wave case. Suppose that the central frequency of the wavepackets of mode p, b , r and m are ω p , ω b , ω r and Ω respectively, then Eq. S12 can be written in terms of envelop operators as where ∆k = k p (ω p )k b (ω b ) + k c (Ω) and ∆k ′ = k r (ω r )k p (ω p ) + k c (Ω) are the phase mismatch terms. Here we have derived the system Hamiltonian in terms of the envelop operators, which can be applied to general electrooptic interaction process. It will be simplified by the dispersion and phase matching conditions when applied to traveling-wave electro-optic modulation process, as discussed in the next section. With the optical pump at frequency ω p and microwave signal at Ω, the blue and red sideband frequencies are ω b = ω p + Ω and ω r = ω p -Ω, as shown in Fig. where v o is the optical group velocity at ω p . With this dispersion relation, the ∆k and ∆k ′ in Eq. S14 become where v m,p is the microwave phase velocity. Eq. S17 shows how the wavenumber mismatch is related with the velocity mismatch. To realized a high-bandwidth electro-optic modulation, v m,p needs to be a constant over that frequency bandwidth and matches to v o . As n g = n p + f ∂np ∂f , where n g , n p and f are the group index, phase index and frequency, we have n g = n p when the microwave is dispersionless. So, the requirements for high bandwidth are that: the microwave is dispersionless and its phase velocity (or group velocity) matches to the group velocity of optics. Because the optical modes p, b and r are in the same optical mode branch and very close in frequency, the values g 0 and g ′ 0 in Eq. S13 are the same. We are now prepared to derive the system dynamic equations. Using the commutation relation Eq. S7, we obtain the Heisenberg equation in terms of the envelop operators where κ o , κ m and v o , v m are the intrinsic loss rates and group velocities of the optical modes in the optical waveguide and microwave mode in the transmission line respectively. We remove the fast oscillating component in P , B, R and M by introducing P = P e iωpt , B = Be iω b t , R = Re iωrt and M = M e iΩt . During the practical device operation, the pump is a constant laser input with high intensity to boost the electro-optic conversion efficiency. Because of its much stronger intensity than that of the signal light and microwave, the back-action of electro-optic interaction on the pump is negligible and the pump can be taken as a classical light source. Therefore in the steady-state, where P 0 is a constant and the exponential decay term indicates the dissipation in the optical waveguide of mode p. Suppose that at z = 0, the pump power is denoted as If the phase of the pump is set to be 0, Combining this equation and Eq. S18, we can derive the temporal-spatial dynamic equations of the system With these dynamic equations, we solve for the intensity of the converted optical sidebands and the microwave mode with microwave input M (z) = M 0 at z = 0. For the steady-state solution, where the time differential terms in Eq. S21 are zero, the solution to Eq. S21 is Here α o = κo vo and α m = κm vm are the optical and microwave power propagation loss. From this result we find that the microwave intensity is not affected by the electro-optic interaction. This is because: in the parametric down conversion process, one microwave photon is generated with one red sideband optical photon; in the coherent electro-optic up conversion process, one microwave is absorbed together with a pump photon to generate a blue sideband optical photon. While for the traveling-wave electro-optic modulation process, where the parametric down conversion and up conversion happen simultaneously, the net effect on the microwave signal is that its photon number remain the same if there is no propagation loss. Under the condition that the modulation length is short (in the conventional modulators' case), |(α m /2±i∆k)z| ≪ 1, the last terms in solutions S22a and S22b reduce to z. The out-of-chip microwave-to-optical transduction efficiency is then As V π is inversely proportional to modulation length, it implies that the efficiency is inversely proportional to the square of V π . In the next section we point out the connection between V π and the vacuum electro-optic coupling strength g 0 , and Eq. S23 will be the same as the result derived in In this section we show how the traveling-wave coupling strength g 0 used in the quantum optics language is related to V π L, the conventional figure of merit to characterize the efficiency of electro-optic modulators. Suppose that a voltage V is applied across the electrodes, and the induced optical mode index change is δn(V ), we have where u o (x, y) = u oi (x, y)e i , is the optical mode profile, i = x, y or z. u m (V )(x, y) = u mi (V )(x, y)e i is the microwave mode profile when voltage V is applied. Here we see a similarity between this equation and the definition of g 0 in Eq. S13. Upon inserting δn(V ) n into Eq. S13, we have where k is the optical wavenumber in vacuum and kδn(V )z is the optical phase change accumulated after an interaction length of z; P m (v) is the microwave input power with voltage amplitude V . For a given z, when ), Z 0 is the transmission line impedance. Therefore we have Substituting Eq. S26 into Eq. S23, we can express the conversion efficiency in terms of V π , The V π L value is primarily determined by the gap between the modulation electrodes, and the smallest possible gap distance is constrained by metal induced optical loss when the electrodes are in close proximity to the waveguide, as illustrated in the simulation shown in Fig. Vπ CHANGE FROM ROOM TEMPERATURE TO CRYOGENIC TEMPERATURE Cryogenic temperature dependence of the electro-optic coefficient of lithium niobate has been studied In the main text we present the measured electro-optic response along with fitting. Here we provide the detailed data analysis and fitting procedure. We use theoretical results Eq S22 obtained in section III C to model the electrooptic frequency responses, which is captured by the last term of Eq S22a and S22b. The parameters that depend on microwave frequency are α m , the microwave loss and ∆k, the wavenumber mismatch. We will discuss how we determine the microwave loss and dispersion first and then use these parameters to model the experimental data. We first investigate the microwave dispersion through simulation. As shown in Fig. The group index of the microwave transmission line is determined experimentally using a VNA equiped with a time-domain option. By measuring the time it takes a microwave pulse to travel through the transmission line, we can calculate the microwave group velocity. The measured data is shown in Fig S7b . Fig. The microwave propagation loss is quantified by directly measuring the S21 spectrum, as shown in Fig S7c . To extract the frequency dependent propagation loss, a simple linear fitting is employed to determine the slope of the envelope of the transmission line's S21 response. In the linear fitting, the frequency is in linear scale and the S21 response is in dB (logarithmic) scale. In summary, we approximate the microwave phase index using its group index, which has been validated through simulation. Both the microwave group index and propagation loss are determined experimentally. After extracting microwave group index and frequency-dependent microwave loss from S 21 response in Fig. For this purpose, we fabricate and measure another SEOM device with the same photonic waveguide structure as depicted Fig. In this section we study the fundamental limiting factors on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of eye diagrams in the low drive voltage region, where the peak-to-peak voltage (V pp ) is much smaller than the half-wave voltage (V π ). The shot-noise-limited photoreceiver sensitivity has been widely studied, and different receiver architectures and modulation formats are employed to approach this limit A. Theoretical model Fig. We define the SNR = (n 2n 1 )/(δn 1 + δn 2 ). The eye diagram SNR at 1Gbps, with V pp /V π = 0.01, is plotted versus different bias points with different optical output powers in Fig. The requirement for high SNR at a specific data rate speed aligns with the need for high out-of-chip transduction efficiency shown in Eq. S27, which is quadratic in V π and linear in optical power. With a fixed optical input power, the output I o is determined by the propagation loss and modulation length, while the V π is inversely proportional to the modulation length. This tradeoff is captured by Eq. S23. In the following section, we will discuss strategies to enhance the SNR (or equivalently electro-optic transduction efficiency). Here we present experimental SNR results with different drive voltage and optical power, and compare it with theoretical result Eq. S28. The results shown in Fig. The photonic packaging employs on-chip optical grating couplers glued with angled-facet bare fibers The fiber-connectorized SEOM is then placed in an aluminum housing to establish the interface with a PCB board. The PCB board features two 50 Ω microwave transmission lines. The SEOM chip is positioned alongside the PCB board, and short wires are utilized for wire bonding (Fig. It has been previously reported that PECVD silicon dioxide cladding on LNOI optical waveguide causes significant photorefractive effect We fabricate micro-ring resonators to quantitatively assess the photorefractive effect and process-induced optical loss. The waveguide etching and HSQ cladding follow the procedures outlined in section I, with selected devices omitting the HSQ cladding (thus air-cladded), serving as references. After the device fabrication, thermal annealing is required to mitigate the material absorption and restore device transmission In the process flow shown in section I, we have observed that the SEOM devices after metal deposition experience a decrease in transmission and an increase in propagation loss (from 0.2 dB/cm to 0.8 dB/cm). After ruling out the metal-induced absorption loss as the cause, we pin down the actual cause of loss is from the electron beam injected into TFLN during the electron beam lithography. We confirm this by controlled ebeam exposure test on micro-ring resonators. After the initial annealing, we use the electron beam writer to expose selected areas near the optical waveguide (only electron beam is injected, no resist spinning or any other following processes). The exposed area is 2 μm away from the optical waveguide edge and the electron beam dose is 600 μC/cm SEOM device fabrication process. Although the exposed area is not directly on the optical waveguide, the scattered electrons still manage to expose the waveguide regime through proximity effect. After the electron beam exposure, a noticeable decrease of the quality factor of the ring resonators is observed, as shown in Fig S12b . The air-cladded and HSQ-cladded ring resonators possess quality factor of 1.3 million and 2.0 million, respectively, prior to the electron beam exposure. However, after the exposure, the quality factor drops to around 600 thousand and 500 thousand, respectively. The resonance shift in resonance scanning remain relatively weak after the electron beam exposure. As a potential remedy, thermal annealing is performed again in attempt to recover the quality factor, and the result is shown in Fig. Given this incompatibility challenge between superconductor and thermal annealing, our current SEOM devices experience an elevated optical loss (0.8 dB/cm) induced by electron beam exposure. This damage is solely caused by the electron beam injection during the ebeam lithography process. Switching to photolithography using a high resolution stepper will eliminate this problem In the previous section, we have shown that the photorefractive effect in LNOI devices can vary significantly depending on the fabrication process. Here we present how the photorefractive effect specifically impacts our SEOM device at cryogenic temperatures. The SEOM device we use is based on a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI). In the presence of a strong photofrefractive effect, the light induced material index change can lead to phase drift in the two arms of the interferormeter, affecting the output power. To illustrate this, we compare two devices processed differently: One device (Device 2) undergoes waveguide etching, HSQ cladding and subsequent thermal annealing, and the other device (Device 1) follows through the same process first and then is deposited with metal through liftoff and further thermally annealed. As shown in Fig. The optical transmission drift of these two devices at 4 K are shown in Fig. In sections III, VI and VII, we present how the electro-optic transduction efficiency, electro-optic bandwidth and the eye diagram SNR are related to the SEOM device parameters. In this section we discuss the current limiting factors and provide projections for future SEOM devices. We focus on two essential figure of merits for electro-optic modulators: the transduction efficiency (or modulation efficiency) and the bandwidth. According to Eq. S22, the optical loss of the electro-optic materials sets the fundamental limit on the transduction efficiency by determining the maximum achievable modulator length. On the other hand, the microwave loss imposes the fundamental limit on the electro-optic bandwidth under the velocity-matched condition. For the completeness of the discussion, Fig. As shown in Eq. S23, there exists an optimal modulation length l = 2/α o , that maximizes the transduction efficiency. Substituting this value back into Eq. S23, we find that η ∝ (1/α o ) 2 . However, as discussed in section IX, our current fabrication process results in elevated optical loss, which is the primary limiting factor as shown in Fig. The electro-optic frequency response is captured by the last term in Eq. S22a and S22b. Assuming perfect velocity matching, the bandwidth limit arises from the microwave loss. Fig. 