Sn-Pb solders are superconducting materials whose Sn and Pb are perfectly phase-separated. Recently, anomalous magnetic-flux trapping in a Sn45-Pb55 solder has been revealed where the magnetic fluxes are selectively trapped in the Sn regions due to the supercurrents in the surrounding Pb regions. Here, we report on the observation of the anomalous critical field (Hc)-temperature (T) phase diagram of superconductivity in the Sn45-Pb55 solder. Although the Hc(T) for the Pb regions decreases with increasing field as in normal type-I superconductors and is consistent with the conventional trend with Hc(0) ~ 800 Oe, the Hc(T) for the Sn regions exhibits anomalous behaviors. The most noticeable trend was observed in the field-cooled (under 1500 Oe) solder. The Hc-T phase diagram for the Sn regions largely varies when the applied external field is reversed, and Tc increases with increasing field amplitude when H < 0 Oe is applied. On the basis of the flux trapping and the observed anomalous Hc-T phase diagrams, we propose that the field-robust superconductivity in the Sn regions is related to the ferromagnetically-aligned magnetic fluxes (or formation of vortices) in the Sn regions of the Sn45-Pb55 solder. Superconductivity is a quantum phenomenon where electrical resistivity becomes zero at temperatures (T) lower than the transition temperature (Tc) of the material. When superconductivity emerges, electrons form Cooper pairs Due to their exotic superconducting properties, superconductors with unconventional pairing have been extensively studied. Among them, Uranium-based (U-based) superconductors have been drawing much attention because of the observation of spin-triplet superconductivity and extremely high (robust) upper critical fields (Hc2) [10˗17]. In the U-based superconductors, ferromagnetism and superconductivity can coexist, and inhomogeneous superconducting states are observed, for example, in UCoGe Therefore, researchers have explored different types of superconductors, in which ferromagnetism and bulk superconductivity may coexist In this letter, we report on the observation of anomalous critical field (Hc)-temperature (T) phase diagrams of the superconducting states of a commercial Sn45-Pb55 solder (mass fraction: Sn:Pb = 45:55, atomic ratio: Sn0.58Pb0.42) without a flux core. Recently, superconducting and thermal transport properties of the Sn-Pb solders were carefully investigated because of the observation of nonvolatile magneto-thermal switching with a large switching ratio The weight of the measured sample is 14.5 mg, which was placed on the sample puck with N grease. We measured the temperature dependences of specific heat after ZFC and FC under H = 1500 Oe. For the FC case, data under positive (same direction as the applied field in the FC process; H > 0 Oe) and negative (opposite direction as the applied field in the FC process; H < 0 Oe) magnetic fields were taken in different sequences after the same FC process. We measured specific heat of the Sn45-Pb55 solder with a H interval of 100 Oe after flux trapping by FC under 1500 Oe. According to previous works, the maximum quantity of trapped fluxes in Sn-Pb solders is around 500 Oe [26˗28]. Therefore, FC under 1500 Oe can produce enough magnetic fluxes in the Sn regions. Figure In addition, with applying negative fields, Tc increases with increasing field amplitude at H < 0 Oe. The causes of the phenomena would be related to the ferromagnetically-aligned fluxes (when Sn is normal conducting) and formation of vortices (when Sn is superconducting). 