Like single perovskites, halide double perovskites (HDP) have truly emerged as efficient optoelectronic materials since they display superior stability and are free of toxicity. However, challenges still exist due to either wide and indirect bandgaps or parity-forbidden transitions in many of them. The lack of understanding in chemical bonding and the formation of parity-driven valence and conduction band edge states have hindered the design of optoelectronically efficient HDPs. In this study, we have developed a theoretical workflow using a multi-integrated approach involving ab-initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations, model Hamiltonian studies, and molecular orbital picture leading to momentum matrix element (MME) estimation. This workflow gives us detailed insight into chemical bonding and parity-driven optical transition between edge states. In the process, we have developed a band-projected molecular orbital picture (B-MOP) connecting free atomic orbital states obtained at the Hartree-Fock level and orbital-resolved DFT bands. From the B-MOP, we show that the nearest neighbor cation-anion interaction determines the position of atom-resolved band states, while the second neighbor cation-cation interactions determine the shape and width of band dispersion and, thereby, MME. The latter is critical to quantify the optical absorption coefficient. Considering both B-MOP and MME, we demonstrate a mechanism of tailoring bandgap and optical absorptions through chemical doping at the cation sites. Furthermore, the cause of bandgap bowing, a common occurrence in doped HDPs, is explained by ascribing it to chemical effect and structural distortion. In the last couple of decades, organic and inorganic halide single perovskites (HSPs) of the formula ABX 3 (e.g. CsPbI 3 ) have gained enormous research attention as they demonstrate promising optoelectronic properties Compared to the HSPs, HDPs are in general more stable Despite a few disadvantages, HDPs have attracted considerable attention due to their simple, robust, and easy synthesis process. Since the valence band and conduction band edges are formed out of the covalent hybridization among the orbitals of metal cations (B, B ′ ) and halide anions (X), cationic and anionic mixing naturally becomes an effective strategy to manipulate the electronic properties and optical behavior. Taking into account these advantages, many design principles have been proposed experimentally Recent studies In this study, by considering a set of prototype compounds Cs 2 BB ′ Cl 6 (B = Ag, Na, In, Tl and B ′ = In, Tl, Bi, Sb), we develop a theoretical workflow to establish the relationship between cationic and anionic intermixing and the electronic structure, as well as, the optical absorption in the HDPs. The theoretical workflow, schematically illustrated in Fig. FIG. We will first briefly discuss the crystal structure of HDPs. As shown in Fig. The approach to design the theoretical workflow is summarized in the flowchart shown in Fig. The DFT electronic structure calculations are performed on a set of HDPs (see Table The GGA-PBE functional underestimates the bandgap as compared to the experimental bandgap, and hence the GGA-PBE along with the modified Becke-Johnson (mBJ) As the next step, we perform first-principles calcu-lations to estimate the electronic properties of a set of HDPs. For all HDPs discussed here, we have used A = Cs and X = Cl as an example, and we believe that results and description will not change by replacing A and X site atoms with their equivalent unless the crystal symmetry is destroyed. Since not all HDPs are experimentally synthesized in their pristine phase, we have conceived the hypothetical cubic Fm 3m structure and performed the full relaxation (both atomic positions and crystal lattice parameters) for all of them. The relaxed lattice constant in comparison to the available experimental lattice constant and bandgap calculated with GGA+mBJ+SOC functional is listed in Table A MOP examines the possible chemical bondings and provides us with a broader picture of the electronic structure of a material and its universality in a given family. Therefore, without carrying out comprehensive electronic structure calculations, it is possible through MOP to develop an insight into how the modulations in the electronic structure across a family due to chemical substitution and doping. Here, we construct the MOP in three steps: First, the free atomic energy levels of the valence orbitals are estimated using the Hartree-Fock theory, and their relative positions in the energy scale are obtained. In the second step, orbital projected band structures are carried out using DFT. In the third step, the band centers of the projected bands are linked to the free atomic orbital energy levels so as to obtain probable chemical bonding and their strengths and finally draw the MOP. Such an attempt of linking the schematical MOP with eigenstates and eigenvalues in the momentum space has never been done before. Therefore, to distinguish it from the conventional not-to-scale MOPs, we name it as band projected MOP (B-MOP). Figure Similarly, the salient features that we obtain from B-MOP for the HDPs (Cs 2 InBiCl 6 , Cs 2 InSbCl 6 , Cs 2 TiBiBr 6 , Cs 2 TlSbBr 6 without Ag) are as follows (Fig. When the group-1A atoms (Na, K, etc.) occupy the B-site of HDPs, the B-MOP for such compounds is illustrated in Fig. The replacement of Cl by Br nearly replicates the B-MOP DFT is considered as a reliable tool for calculating the fundamental properties of materials in their ground states. However, the common exchange-correlation approximations tend to underestimate quasiparticle (QP) bandgaps. To obtain accurate QP energies, Green's function-based ab-initio many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) can be employed. In the framework of MBPT, the QP eigensystem is determined through the solution of one-particle equations, incorporating a non-local, energydependent self-energy operator referred to as Σ. In practice, Σ is frequently approximated as iGW, where W denotes the screened Coulomb interaction and G represents the one-particle Green's function. Instead of iterative evaluations of Σ at each step, G 0 W 0 , a computationally more efficient one-shot approach, is frequently employed. In the context of modeling halide perovskites, it has become evident that achieving an accurate representation of the electronic structure hinges on the calculation of many-body QP energies. This approach effectively corrects localized electronic states, reducing the mixing of orbitals between B-e g or B ′ -s and X-p near the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM). Consequently, the method enhances accuracy by precisely pinpointing the positions of the VBM and CBM, ultimately leading to more reliable bandgap values. Methodology: In the case of HDPs, G 0 W 0 calculations have been performed on top of the orbitals obtained from hybrid exchange functional (HSE06@G 0 W 0 ) with 0.25 mixing in Hartree-Fock exchange which is included in the VASP QP band gap correction: While it is computationally expensive to carry out HSE06@G 0 W 0 calculations for all the compounds, for demonstration, we have chosen four compounds, namely Cs 2 AgBiCl 6 , Cs 2 AgInCl 6 , Cs 2 InBiCl 6 , and Cs 2 NaInCl 6 , one each from the categories listed in Table In Figs. While the B/B ′ -X interactions primarily build the MOP and hence provide a broad overview of electronic structure, the next-neighbor B ′ -B interactions influence the band dispersion considerably. As we will see later, the optical properties are driven by these second-neighbor interactions. To provide a deeper insight to the band dispersion, in the following section, we develop a tightbinding (TB) model Hamiltonian involving B-B ′ , B ′ -B ′ , and B-B interactions. The model is constructed based on linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) and within the framework of Slater-Koster (SK) formalism. In the second quantization notation, the spin-orbit coupled SK-TB Hamiltonian is given as: where i, j and α, β are indices for the sites and orbitals, respectively. The first term represents the onsite energy (ε), while the second term is for the hopping integrals, with t being the hopping strength. The effective tight-binding Hamiltonian matrix includes second nearest-neighbor metal-metal (B-B ′ ) interactions, as well as fourth-neighbor B-B and B ′ -B ′ interactions. The third term in the Hamiltonian represents the atomic spin-orbit coupling (SOC) effect, with the strength of the SOC λ. A full Hamiltonian involves the interactions among both B and B ′ valence orbitals as well as X-p orbitals. The present model Hamiltonian with minimal basis is constructed by excluding the X-X interactions while the B-X and B ′ -X interactions are mapped into effective B-B ′ interactions Here, H BB and H B ′ B ′ are the interaction submatrices between the same cations i.e., B-B and B ′ -B ′ which correspond to the 4 th neighbor interactions and H BB ′ /H B ′ B are interaction matrices between two different cations B-B ′ and B ′ -B which correspond to the 2 nd neighbor interactions (among d and p orbitals for Ag-based HDPs and p -p orbitals interactions for Cs 2 (In/Tl)(Bi/Sb)Cl 6 ) as shown in Fig. The f αβ (t; l, m, n) depend on the tight-binding hopping parameters t and direction cosines (l, m, n) connecting the site j to i. The h SOC αβσσ ′ is driven by the atomistic SOC λL • S. The required h αβσσ ′ as well as h SOC αβσσ ′ depend on the basis chosen, which varies from compound to compound, see Section XIII of SI for details. As shown in Fig. The optical absorption coefficient α(ω) of a material is determined by its frequency (ω) dependent dielectric constant (ε(ω) = ε 1 (ω) + iε 2 (ω)): Here, C is the Cauchy principal value of the integral; e and m e , respectively, are charge and mass of an electron. P v,c in the expression of ε 2 (ω) are the MME corresponding to a transition from valence band at energy E v to conduction band at energy E c . The Dirac-delta function switches on the MME contribution when a transition occurs from one state to another. The MME for periodic Block functions u ⃗ kβ e i ⃗ k• ⃗ R are obtained as follows In the case of optical transition, the transitions from the top valence to the bottom conduction band are generally considered. Therefore, the component of relevant MME can be expressed as follows, Here, u ⃗ kβ,c and u ⃗ kβ ′ ,v respectively represent the eigenvectors associated with the energy eigenvalues E v and E c . We have calculated the squared MME along the same high symmetric k-path as that of the band structure. A detailed derivation to calculate the optical properties of materials using the SK-TB model is given in Section XVI of the SI. In Fig. For example, in the case of Cs 2 AgBiCl 6 and Cs 2 AgSbCl 6 , the transition between VBE and CBE at the high symmetry points W, Γ, and X is allowed due to opposite parities while it is forbidden at L due to same parity (odd-odd). Agreeing with it, the P 2 value vanishes at L and is finite elsewhere. In the case of Cs 2 AgInCl 6 and Cs 2 AgTlCl 6 , the P 2 is zero along the path Γ-X as both the CBE and VBE have even parity along this path. Therefore, even though these two systems have a direct bandgap, the lowest energy transitions are not allowed, and hence the optical bandgap (defined through transition at L) differs from the electronic bandgap. The compounds Cs 2 (In/Tl)(Bi/Sb)Cl 6 are direct bandgap systems with VBM and CBM lying at Γ. The finite value of P 2 implies the lowest energy allowed transition, which is further verified by the parity analysis. Hence, these compounds are much more promising for optoelectronic applications. In the case of Cs 2 (Na/K)BiCl 6 , where the VBE and CBE are formed by Bi-s and Bi-p respectively (see Fig. The optical transition analysis through Fig. (10) The JDOS, obtained for the lowest electronic transition, is plotted in the upper panel of Fig. As discussed in the above paragraph, the optical transition in Na/K based compound is negligible (see Fig. Similarly, in the second case, we are doping Ag at the Na site of Cs 2 NaInCl 6 . As already been discussed, the Cs 2 NaInCl 6 does not exhibit any optical transition as the P 2 vanishes, thanks to the identical parity of CBE and VBE (see Fig. The band positioning due to cation doping, as discussed in the previous section, can be schematically summarized through Figs. To understand the role of the lattice on the bandgap bowing, we have carried out three hypothetical experi- ments on Cs 2 AgIn x Bi 1-x Cl 6 . (I) Across the concentration range, the lattice parameter of the doped system is taken as that of Cs 2 AgInCl 6 (10.560 Å), and band structure is calculated without relaxing the system. The resulting bandgap as a function of concentration x is shown in Fig. For further analyzing the role of octahedral distortion on the bandgap, we have calculated the orbital resolved DFT band structures of Cs 2 AgIn 0.5 Bi 0.5 Cl 6 with and without octahedra distortion. The distortion of the octahedra includes the compression of InCl 6 and expansion of AgCl 6 , as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we carried out a comprehensive electronic structure study by employing density functional calculations, model Hamiltonian formulation, and optoelectronic study by estimating the momentum matrix elements (MME). From our results and analysis, we developed a theoretical workflow to study the electronic and optoelectronic properties of halide double perovskites (pristine and doped) for photovoltaic applications. In this work, we devise band projected molecular orbital picture (B-MOP) as an efficient tool to analyze the electronic structure of covalent hybridized systems in general and halide double perovskites (HDPs) in particular. Based on our understanding of the electronic structure, we could successfully categorize the HDPs into five categories which are based on the valence electron configuration of B and B ′ , characters of the valence and conduction band edge states, and bandgap as well as optical transition behavior. The list is summarized in Table Through our design principle, we show the possibilities of tuning the bandgap and optical absorption by doping. To demonstrate, we took two prototype examples of doping at the cationic site: Cs 2 AgIn x Bi 1-x Cl 6 and Cs 2 Na 1-x Ag x InCl 6 for x = 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75. We obtain the maximum transition dipole moment at x = 0.75 for Cs 2 AgIn x Bi 1-x Cl 6 and at x = 0.5 for Cs 2 Na 1-x Ag x InCl 6 which are found to be in good agreement with the previous experimental finding. Our analysis also provides an interesting insight into the bandgap gap bowing, which seems to be a common occurrence in HDPs. We show that the chemical effect plays an enhancement factor in bandgap bowing, while the octahedra distortion tends to minimize it. The findings of the present study provide guiding principles to design efficient optoelectronic materials out of HDPs. We hope that these findings will stimulate theoretical and experimental research on alloying of HDPs to realize their applications in the area of photovoltaic and optoelectronics. The tight-binding model developed in this work (for pristine and cation intermixed) is generic and can be employed to study the electronic structure and optical behavior of 3D HDPs and their 2D and 1D counterparts As mentioned in the manuscript, all of the halide double perovskites (HDPs) adopt a cubic crystal structure featuring double space group symmetry of Fm 3m (no. 225). Within this symmetry group, optical transitions occur along the high-symmetry points of the Brillouin zone (BZ), namely Γ, X, L, and W (see Fig. Character table for the double point group D 3d at symmetry point L ((0.0, 0.0, 0.0): w.r.t primitive vector; (0.5, 0.5, 0.5): w.r.t. conventional vectors.) The irreducible representations (IR) at the band edges can be explained via group theoretical analysis. As an example, for Cs 2 AgBiCl 6 the conduction band and the valence band primarily arise from the contributions from Ag-e g , Bi-p, s and Cl-p states. Consequently, these bands can be expressed as a linear combination of |j, m⟩ states like - By closely analyzing the band structure, for the symmetry point W and the corresponding D 2d point group, we can deduce that only W 6 and W 7 represent these kind of orbital combinations such as - ⟩) and many more. Likewise, the IRs at Character Table for the double point group D 4h at point X ((0.0, 0.5, 5.0): w.r.t primitive vector; (0.0, 0.0, 1.0): w.r.t. conventional vectors.) ) also represent similar orbital combinations which are expected from our calculations. Therefore, the IRs of the band diagrams obtained from DFT agree well with our group theoretical analysis. Here, we are going to discuss the optical transitions primarily driven by the direct products of IRs as well as the parity of these representations. For a comprehensive discussion of these transitions, we have written the direct product tables (Table The details of the Hamiltonian are provided in Section V of the main text. Here, we have explained the components of the Hamiltonian matrix. The complete Hamiltonian matrix containing interactions between B and B ′ is expressed as Where H BB/B ′ B ′ are the Hamiltonian sub-matrices containing interactions among the same cations (i.e., the onsite energy and fourth-neighbor BB and B ′ B ′ interactions) and the Hamiltonian sub-matrices H BB ′ and H † BB ′ contain the second neighbor BB ′ interactions between two different cations (see Fig. The This is also the Hamiltonian matrix for 2 nd neighbor B-B ′ interactions when s and p orbitals of B and B ′ are contributing, however, in that case, hopping parameters will be different. Furthermore, the Hamiltonian matrix for 4 th neighbor B-B interactions, when an Ag atom is sitting at B-site, in basis set order |s B,↑/↓ ⟩, |d and the Hamiltonian sub-matrix H BB ′ /B ′ B , containing interactions between d and p orbitals from two different NN cations can be expressed as Each of the above elements of the Hamiltonian matrix h ij are expressed in terms of Slater-Koster xz ⟩, |d B,↓ yz ⟩ and p-orbital basis set in the basis order |s B/B ′ ,↑ ⟩, |p 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -iλ 0 0 0 0 λ 0 iλ 0 0 0 0 0 -iλ 0 0 0 0 0 -λ iλ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -λ 0 0 iλ 0 0 0 0 -iλ 0 -iλ 0 0 0 λ iλ 0 0 0 0 0 XIV. ESTIMATION OF TB HOPPING PARAMETERS TB hoppings for various HDPs obtained from fitting with DFT band structures are provided in Tables S10, S11, and S12. deduce a consistent pattern wherein electronic characteristics remain largely unaltered, apart from the bandgap, when newly substituted cations belong to the same group within the periodic table. This phenomenon is exemplified by Cs 2 AgB ′ Cl 6 , where B ′ corresponds to group 15 elements (As, Sb, Bi) within the periodic table. In each of these three compounds, the band structure consistently exhibits the qualities of an indirect bandgap, with the VBM situated at point X, and the CBM located at the high-symmetry L. Notably, as we turn B ′ from As to Bi within this framework, a remarkable trend unfolds. The mBJ bandgap experiences a progressive increase, escalating from 2.26 to 2.98 eV, while concurrently, the dispersion of the edge bands diminishes. Similar observations have been made for Cs 2 AgB ′ Cl 6 , where B ′ corresponds to group 13 elements (Ga, In, Tl). The nature of bandgap remains direct with both VBM and CBM situated at Γ. The calculated MME also shows the same behavior with the parity-forbidden transition from Γ to X for all three cases (see Fig. In another case, we altered B from Ag to Cu and conducted electronic structure calculations using various B ′ elements. The calculated band structures, B-MOP results, tight-binding models, MME, and parity values from symmetry analysis are illustrated in Fig. We will start from the Fermi Golden rule and then derive the expressions for the momentum matrix element (MME). Fermi Golden rule: The Fermi Golden rule states that transition probability per unit time from initial state |i⟩ to a set of final states |f ⟩ is given to first-order approximation: where ⟨k, β| ⃗ P |k, β ′ ⟩ is matrix element of perturbation H ′ between final and initial states, and ρ(E f ) is density of states at energy E F . The density of states for transition between states E v and E c with incident photon energy ħω, can be approximated to δ(E c -E vħω). As a starting point to derive the momentum matrix element (MME), let us consider n th tight-binding eigenstate formed with a linear combination of atomic orbitals, where |α, k⟩ is an atomic orbital eigenstate in k space, α is the atomic orbital, and k is momentum. In periodic systems, the state |α, k⟩ can be defined as the Bloch sum of localized orbitals Where R is lattice vector and N is number of lattice sites. The system Hamiltonian H is then diagonalized within eigenstate to obtain the energy eigenvalue E nk of the system. The connection between position and momentum operator is derived through commutator relation: Here, u kβ,c and u kβ ′ ,v respectively represent the eigenvectors associated with the energy eigenvalues E v and E c . The real and imaginary parts of the dielectric constant can be calculated as: From the hopping interaction strength, we observed that electron's hoppings are confined to 2 nd neighbor B-B ′ interactions. Therefore TB fitting parameters obtained for the pristine unit cell can be further used to calculate the electronic properties of cation-doped double perovskites. Here, we have designed the model for Cs 2 AgIn 1-x Bi x Cl 6 and Cs 2 Na 1-x Ag x InCl 6 at x = 0.25, 0.50, and 0.75. To obtain TB band structure, we have designed four formula supercell, from rhombohedral unit cell to cubic supercell as shown in Fig. The TB hopping parameters, while cation doping, are fixed (do not vary with x) and taken from previously fitted pristine compounds. However, the onsite energies vary as a function of x and are plotted in Fig. In Fig. As stated in our B-MOP, the positions of the bands in the energy spectrum are obtained from the molecular hybridization of (B, B ′ )-{s,p/s,d} -X-p atomic orbitals. For example, in the case of Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 and Cs 2 AgBiCl 6 , the prominent interactions that define the valence band spectrum and conduction band spectrum are Ag-d -Br/Cl-p and Bi-p -Br/Cl-p, respectively. We find that the Br-p energy levels are comparable to that of Ag-d energy levels while the Cl-p energy levels lie ∼ 0.5 eV below (9.96 eV for Cl-p and 9.46 eV for Br-p orbitals). Therefore, the Ag-d -