Freestanding tubular crystals offer a general description of crystalline order on deformable surfaces with cylindrical topology, such as single-walled carbon nanotubes, microtubules, and recently reported colloidal assemblies. These systems exhibit a rich interplay between the crystal's helicity on its periodic surface, the deformable geometry of that surface, and the motions of topological defects within the crystal. Previously, in simulations of tubular crystals as elastic networks, we found that dislocations in nontrivial patterns can co-stabilize with kinks in the tube shape, producing mechanical multistability. Here, we extend that work with detailed Langevin dynamics simulations, in order to explore defect dynamics efficiently and without the constraints imposed by elastic network models. Along with the predicted multistability of dislocation glide, we find a variety of irreversible defect transformations, including vacancy formation, particle extrusions, and "reactions" that reorient dislocation pairs. Moreover, we report spontaneous sequences of several such defect transformations, which are unique to tubular crystals. We demonstrate a simple method for controlling these sequences through a time-varying external force. Freestanding tubular crystals represent a distinctive form of crystal structure found in both natural and technological settings. Characterized by their hollow, tube-like morphology, tubular crystals consist of atoms or molecules arranged in a two-dimensional (2D) lattice structure closed along one direction into the topology of a cylinder. Unlike a 2D crystal attached to a cylindrical substrate Similarly to other crystals, tubular crystals can contain lattice defects, such as grain boundaries and dislocations. These imperfections naturally arise due to various factors including crystal growth kinetics, lattice mismatch with supporting substrates, or external influences, and they play a significant role in determining a crystal's mechanical, optical, electrical and other properties In prior work However, the assumptions of the elastic network model exclude some phenomena likely to be of interest in colloidal tubular crystals. Because the model probes dislocation motions by imposed bond flips, one defect at a time, it is challenging to investigate other types of possible particle rearrangements such as vacancy formation, extrusion of particles from the crystal surface, and the interaction of existing dislocations with spontaneously nucleated defect pairs in dislocation "reactions". Here, we use Langevin dynamics simulations to investigate the spontaneous evolution of tubular crystals with thermal fluctuations and without constraints on the particles' contact network. Our simulated spherical particles interact through a model anisotropic interaction potential that stabilizes sheet-like assemblies. Such particles with designed surface pattern can be precisely engineered, for example by colloidal fusion Although the elastic network model's predictions are often corroborated here, we additionally observe a wealth of more complex behaviors when dislocations pass near each other, including vacancy formation and particle ex- trusion. Most interestingly, we report novel dislocation reaction sequences that are unique to the tubular crystal setting, arising from the fact that distances between gliding dislocations change non-monotonically due to the surface's periodicity. We show that the interplay between dislocations, the helical symmetry of tubular crystals, and out-of-tangent-plane deformations leads to a rich variety of transformations in crystal structure, including metastable dislocation patterns, dislocation reactions, and helicity transformations. We construct tubular crystals from identical particles of spherical shape but with anisotropic interactions favorable for crystalline membrane assemblies. Neighboring particles interact as hard spheres except along a narrow equatorial band, where a mutual short-range attraction causes particles to stick together. To implement this patchy particle interaction, we model each particle as a rigid body composed of one purely repulsive spherical "atom" of effective radius a, together with a collection of attractive point-masses arranged along a circle at slightly smaller radius a -δ, just under the larger sphere's sur-face (Fig. where ε r is the interaction strength, and σ = 2a/2 1/6 sets the cutoff distance to r = 2a, equal to the minimum of the LJ potential, so that E r (r) is purely repulsive. The pair interactions between attractive atoms on different particles are defined by the soft potential with strength ε a and range r a . For simplicity, we assume the attractive atoms are located along the equator of the repulsive atom, but in general they can have a more sophisticated arrangement There is no interaction between repulsive and attractive atoms. We explore Langevin dynamics with these pair interactions by performing molecular dynamics (MD) simulations in LAMMPS The anisotropy of patchy particles allows for their assembly into sheets The tubular arrangement of particles can be conveniently described using the parastichy numbers, a pair of integers (m, n) defining the number of distinct helices of particles in the steepest right-handed and steepest lefthanded directions. In the family of helices there are three principal directions along unit vectors ±a i , i = 1, 2, 3. To determine helicity of a tubular assembly, we use the helicity angle φ, which is the angle between the steepest left-handed helix along the a 2 direction and the tube axis (Fig. We focus on tubes with an armchair and near-armchair crystal tessellation (one lattice direction approximately parallel to the tube axis) that are most common in the chirality family of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) Chiral tubes of different helicity with 0 < φ < 30 • represent intermediate states between the two achiral cases, with a discrete transition step ∆φ = 30 • /m. While an exhaustive exploration of possible φ-values is beyond the scope of this work, we focus here on certain small-φ tubular crystals to demonstrate the principle of controlled tubular crystal helicity transitions through dislocation interactions and reactions. The constructed tubular assemblies are free-standing, and thus the tube local radius can change to reduce the energy associated with interparticle attraction and repulsion. For our patchy particles with equatorial attractive bands, the minimum energy configuration is a flat monolayer of particles with regular hexagonal closed packing. In tubular assemblies, every configuration has non-vanishing potential energy due to the curvature of the monolayer. The preference for a flat sheet morphology, encoded in the arrangement of attractive spheres on each particle's equator, introduces a bending energy, which was imposed as a separate term in our previous elastic network model First, we explore stability of a free-standing tubular crystal with armchair (m, n) = (7, 14) arrangement of particles and containing two oppositely oriented,v isolated dislocations with Burgers vectors ±b (Fig. In Fig. For larger azimuthal separations the dislocations glide to decrease their axial separation to zero. Even though the middle region of the tube has a larger radius with lower bending energy, the dislocations are attracted to a state with minimum axial separation at most possible azimuthal separations, which produces a kink in the tube axis as observed in the elastic network model The outcome changes significantly if the azimuthal (climb) separation is small, |c| ≤ 3. We can divide this regime into two parts, one with c > 0 where the 5-coordinated particles are closer to the other dislocation ("fives inside"), and one with c < 0 where the 7coordinated particles are closer ("sevens inside"). For the fives inside case, the two dislocations attract to zero axial separation and then disappear through an extrusion event, in which one or more particles are expelled from the surface of the tubular crystal and forced to sit on top of it, at larger radius. For c = 1, a single particle is extruded, becoming a 3-coordinated particle (colored in blue in the "extrusion" panel of Fig. An opposite azimuthal separation, with c = -1 and "sevens inside", leads instead to the formation of a vacancy. The total number of bonds decreases, leaving six five-coordinated particles that become a nucleation site for plastic deformations when the tube is under applied force. For example, applied torsion can destabilize this metastable vacancy, replacing it with two dislocations oriented along a lattice direction that depends on the sign of the torsion: Simulations show that unlike a pristine tube under torsion, in which unbinding dislocations have Burgers vectors ±a 2 , the preferable path for nucleation in a tube with a vacancy is along ±a 1 when the torsion is applied in the counter-clockwise direction, and along ±a 3 when torsion is in the clockwise direction [Supplemental Material Video 1-2]. While the vacancy formation at c = -1 is intuitively opposite to the extrusion at c = +1, we find an altogether new behavior for c = -2 or -3: When the gliding dislocations reach points that sit on the same ±a 3 parastichy, their Burgers vectors appear to suddenly change from ±a 2 to ±a 1 . This is a dislocation reaction event In this tube with (m, n) = (7, 14), there is only a single azimuthal separation, at c = 4 climb steps, at which the dislocations are always repulsive and do not react. At zero azimuthal separation and axial separation less than πR, dislocations are attractive and annihilate, forming a pristine tube. More generally, the glide paths of dislocations in tubular crystals are helices rather than straight lines, a distinction that we find has important consequences for defect interactions. In Fig. However, once dislocations reach smaller axial separation, they usually interact in a more complex way that stabilizes their relative positions. We find two groups of these metastable states at small ∆x. In the first group, dislocation pairs come to rest at maximum azimuthal separation ∆y (i.e. opposite sides of the tube), giving the tube a kinked conformation. The other group, at small azimuthal separation, results in more dramatic changes to the defects, strongly depending on the climb sepa- ration c between the two glide paths. For c = 0, the dislocations annihilate, just as in the previously examined case of b parallel to the tube axis. For |c| = 1, the final state has no dislocations but contains either a vacancy (c = -1, sevens inside) or a single extruded particle (c = +1, fives inside). Examining the |c| = 2 paths, we find that dislocation reactions may occur for both sevens-inside and fivesinside configurations, in contrast to the previous example with Burgers vectors parallel to the tube axis. The reactions in this case replace the ±a 1 Burgers vectors with new ones along ±a 3 . For c = +2, there are two different metastable states along the same glide path: the "reacted" state with two nearby 3 dislocations in an approximately straight tube, and a "kinked" state with diametrically opposed ±a 1 dislocations. For this particular choice of initial parastichy numbers (m, n) = (7, 13), there is only one climb separation c = -3 (highlighted with a dashed red line along the helical path in the stability map in Fig. To better understand how helicity transitions in tubular crystals may be controlled, we next examine the effects of externally imposed torsion applied at the ends of the tube. Just as an applied shear stress provides control over an isolated dislocation's motion in a planar crystal To quantitatively analyze this mechanical reconfigurability, we plot in Fig. At first, applied torsion leads to an increasing potential energy and destroys the metastable state, inducing glide (at t = 15), which reduces the slope in the energy increase. As the dislocations glide apart along helical trajectories, they increase their axial separation but eventually bring their azimuthal separation to near zero (state 1 at t = 50, Supplemental Material Video 3). At that time, with the dislocations located on the same ±a 2 parastichy, a dislocation reaction event occurs rapidly. The reaction changes the two Burgers vectors from ±a 1 to ±a 3 and thus changes the parastichy numbers describing the middle region of the tube from This example demonstrates that dislocation reactions decrease the elastic energy in a tubular crystal through reorientation of existing dislocations when torsion is applied. Although the hexagonal crystal structure imposes limitations on the available glide motion and reaction directions, specifically along the three lattice directions ±a 1,2,3 , the tube's periodicity enables a sequence of reactions. In planar crystals, the spatial separation between a pair of dislocations varies monotonically with their glide motion. In contrast, the tube's periodicity facilitates multiple reaction events: After the initial reaction, dislocations glide apart along helical paths but eventually become closer again on the opposite side of the tube, leading to further reactions. To better understand why we observe some possible reactions and not others in MD simulations, we examine the interaction energy between two dislocations using an analytical approximation for dislocation pair energy on a cylinder calculated in In Fig. Applied shear stress changes the energy landscape, destabilizing the states at small axial separation, and predicting glide motion that increases the axial separation (cyan arrows in Fig. is more favorable for unbinding than the ±a 3 direction (cyan dashed line). As a result, the original dislocations glide along ±a 1 until reaching a common ±a 2 parastichy with minimal azimuthal separation, and then react along the a 2 direction. This reaction leads to reorientation of the Burger vectors by π/3 to a new pair of directions ±a 3 . The calculation of Ref. The energetic reasons for the observed dislocation glide and reaction behaviors become more apparent when we take one-dimensional cuts of the energy along the relevant parastichy paths. In Fig. To examine dislocation reactions in tubular crystals in greater detail, we increase the climb separation between the initial dislocations of Fig. We never observe dislocations with |b| > a in our sim-ulations; all of the dislocations are elementary. A consequence of excluding larger Burgers vectors is that reactions by the mechanism we describe can never occur along the b direction, even if the dislocations sit on the same glide parastichy (c = 0), because a nucleated dislocation pair could only glide along such a path if its Burgers vectors were parallel to those of the original dislocation pair; the reaction would then produce non-elementary dislocations. (Geometrically, a reaction could occur that annihilates all dislocations, but this seems energetically implausible compared to the original dislocations simply gliding to zero separation and annihilating there.) The final Burgers vectors are explicitly defined by the initial defects' orientations and the reaction-nucleated dislocations. For two oppositely oriented dislocations along ±a 1 , a dislocation pair unbinding is possible along the other two primitive lattice directions ±a 2,3 . The favorable direction for unbinding dislocations under torsional stress depends on the helicity angle φ Having demonstrated that externally imposed torsion can move dislocations into configurations where they react, we further demonstrate here that time-dependent torsion of alternating sign can be used to change the helicity of the tubular crystal. Such helicity changes hold significant practical implications, particularly in the field of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) to control their electric conductivity. Here we start with an achiral configuration of crystal with an armchair 6, Supplemental Material Video 4). In order to elucidate the complex interplay between topological defects, lattice chirality, and surface geometry in freestanding tubular crystals, we have employed MD simulations to investigate the behavior of spherical patchy particles, organized into tubular structures with pre-existing defects. In agreement with predictions made using elastic network simulations Our investigation establishes externally applied torsion as a promising means to effectively regulate the dislocation motion. We show that time-varying manipulation of the direction and magnitude of these forces can be used to initiate a sequence of elementary reactions that result in a desired dislocation reorientation, defect pattern, and change in crystal helicity. This controllable design of dislocation dynamics holds the potential to engineer colloidal crystal assemblies with in situ tunable mechanical and electro-optic properties. Despite the strong assumptions underlying the analytical theory of Ref. Our results suggest that it would be fruitful in future work to examine dislocation reaction sequences on 2D crystals of other periodic topologies, such as spherical and toroidal, and on tubular crystals with helicites other than the (near-)armchair configurations that we have studied here. How these dislocation reaction sequences may influence the kinetics of tubular crystal self-assembly remains an open question. Slight variations to our patchy particle construction could offer future simulations a minimal model of tubular crystals with spontaneous curvature, preferred helicity, and/or crystal symmetries other than hexagonal, modeling the rhombic lattices of tubulin that make up microtubules Altogether, our findings not only offer insights into the rich interplay between topological defects, lattice helicity, and surface geometry at play in freestanding tubular crystals, but also advance our understanding of dislocation behavior in flexible 2D crystals and the variety of ways in which they can interact. Video 1. Applied torsion in the counter-clockwise direction to a tubular crystal with a preexisting vacancy defect leads to unbinding dislocations that travel along helical paths opposite to the direction of torsion. Video 2. Applied torsion in the clockwise direction to a tubular crystal with a preexisting vacancy defect leads to unbinding dislocations that travel along helical paths in the counter-clockwise direction. Video 3. A tubular crystal, with two initial dislocations gliding on helical parastichies, under applied torsion in the counter-clockwise direction. The intial dislocations glide toward each other due to torsion; then there occurs a sequence of two dislocation reactions, an extrusion, and a dislocation pair-unbinding as illustrated in Figure Video 4. A sequence of reactions in a tubular crystal under alternating sign of torsion that causes reorientation of dislocations.