Remarkable recent experiments have observed fractional quantum anomalous Hall (FQAH) effects at zero field and unusually high temperatures in twisted semiconductor bilayer tMoTe2, hence realizing the first genuine fractional Chern insulators. Intriguing observations in these experiments such as the absence of integer Hall effects at twist angles where a fractional Hall effect is observed, do however remain unexplained. The experimental phase diagram as a function of twist angle remains to be established. By comprehensive numerical study, including entanglement spectroscopy, we show that band mixing has large qualitative and quantitative effects on the energetics of competing states and their energy gaps throughout the twist angle range θ ≤ 4 • . This lays the foundation for a detailed realistic study of a rich variety of strongly correlated moiré superlattices and an understanding of the phase diagram of these fascinating systems. Introduction. Recent years have witnessed the advent of moiré superlattices, made of atomically-thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), as highly tunable platforms where experiments have established the existence of a plethora of strongly correlated phases phenomena such as correlated insulators, ferromagnetism and quantum criticality Due to the emergence of narrow flat topological bands, moiré superlattices have become an arena for an intricate interplay between topology and correlations. The hallmark example of topological phases is the quantum Hall effect The integer quantum anomalous Hall effect (QAH) has been already experimentally observed in different moiré systems In a very recent exciting development, the first evidence of FQAH states has been observed in twisted MoTe 2 based on both thermodynamic and transport measurements Motivated by the current state of art, we provide a detailed study of the many-body interacting problem of AA stacked twisted TMD homobilayers at both integer (n = 1) and fractional (n = 1/3 and n = 2/3) hole doping of the underlying moiré valence bands. Using unbiased exact diagonalization techniques (ED) that includes multiple bands, we uncover novel significant effects of band mixing on various topological and correlated phases, which also enables a new electronic phase. For integer filling n = 1, we demonstrate robust QAH states over a wide range of twist angles. However, for realistic interaction strength at dielectric constant ε = 5, we find the interacting QAH energy gap as a function of twist angle to be strongly renormalized compared to the non-interacting case, highlighting ubiquitous correlation effects due to band mixing. Remarkably, we also find that strong interactions could drive spontaneous layer polarization (i.e. ferroelectricity) that is only enabled by multiband effects. Moving to fractional fillings n = 1/3 and n = 2/3 where previous single-band projected ED studies Model. To model the K valence bands of twisted bilayer TMDs, we use a continuum description arXiv:2309.16548v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 1 Apr 2024 Where V ± (r) captures the intralayer moiré potential and T (r) represents the interlayer tunneling. Fourier expanding both functions to the lowest harmonics and taking into account symmetry constraints restrict their form to take In the Hamiltonian H ↑ , the corners of the moiré Brillouin zone are chosen to be κ ± = 4π 3a M (-√ 3/2, ∓1/2) and the moiré recirpocal lattice vectors are given by where a M = a 0 /(2 sin(θ/2)) is the moiré lattice constant for twist angle θ and a 0 is the lattice constant of the monolayer. The Hamiltonian around the opposite valley H ↓ is related to H ↑ by a time-reversal transformation. Focusing on twisted MoTe 2 (tMoTe 2 ), we take a 0 = 3.52 Å and use the following parameters obtained from fitting the continuum model to DFT calculations (3) We are concerned with the problem of interacting holes in the moiré valence bands of H ↑(↓) . The full momentum space many-body Hamiltonian reads where c † kασ (c kασ ) are creation (annihilation) operators of holes in a Bloch state |kασ⟩ where α and σ =↑, ↓ are band and spin indices respectively. ε ασ (k) is the single-particle energies and are the two-body interaction matrix elements between the different Bloch states. Our two-body interaction is the dual-gated screened Coulomb interaction V (q) = 2πe 2 tanh d g |q|/(ε|q|) for dielectric constant ε which controls the interaction strength. Unless stated otherwise, we choose the distance d g from the sample to the gates to be d g = 5 nm. We diagonalize the Hamiltonian (4) on different equalaspect-ratio clusters Results. We begin our analysis by investigating integer hole filling n = 1 where previous studies have mainly used self-consistent Hartree-Fock methods As the interaction strength is increased to the realistic value ε -1 = 0.2, we observe the appearance of a ferroelectric phase which exhibits strong layer polarization. The signs of ferroelectricity stem from the existence of twodegenerate many-body ground states (Fig. The ferroelectric phase dominates over the QAH for smaller twist angles. In Fig. Similar to The emergence of ferroelectric phase strongly affects the phase space of QAH state. For realistic interaction strength ε -1 = 0.2, the QAH state now appears at θ > 2.8 • . Interestingly, its topological gap (within the fully polarized sector) increases monotonously (see Fig. Next, we consider fractional hole fillings n = 1/3 and n = 2/3. For n = 1/3, single-band exact diagonalization studies To contrast the two fillings, we focus first on twist angle θ = 2.5 • and ε -1 = 0.2. As shown in Fig. In order to pin-point the underlying phase, we calculate the particle entanglement spectrum (PES) denotes the three quasi-degenerate ground states. We perform a cut in the particle-space corresponding to minority particles in a single band, holes for n = 1/3 and electrons for n = 2/3. By tracing out N B particles and keeping N A ones, the entanglement spectrum consists of the eigenvalues {ξ i } of exp(-ρ A ) where ρ A = Tr N B ρ is the reduced density matrix. In order to trace out electrons from the first valence band and avoid additional entanglement structure from the filled higher bands, we calculate the entanglement spectrum { ξ i } obtained from projecting the density matrix ρ onto the first valence band. As evident from Fig. Moreover, we find the CDW state at n = 1/3 and the FQAH state at n = 2/3 to exist for a wide range of twist angles. In Fig. We also study the stability of the discussed phases for various twisted boundary conditions. While, we find the phases at n = 1 and n = 1/3 to be insensitive to the choice of boundary conditions, we observe significant effects of twisting the boundary conditions at n = 2/3, see Fig. Our results have several important implications. First, it follows that the optimum twist angle for QAH states is filling dependent, i.e. there is no unique magic angle for all fillings. For instance, at twist angles θ ≲ 2.8 • , an integer QAH states is missing at n = 1 (Fig. Note added. During the preparation of this work, a related study of twisted bilayer MoTe 2 reported two-band ED results at n = 2/3 In this paper, we employ exact diagonalization techniques on finite clusters. Let a 1 and a 2 be two basis vectors for the moiré superlattice. The finite cluster is spanned by two vectors T 1 and T 2 given by where m 1 , n 1 , m 2 and n 2 are integers. Generic twisted boundary conditions are imposed by requiring T T1 ψ kασ (r) = e iθ1 ψ kασ (r) and T T2 ψ kασ (r) = e iθ2 ψ kασ (r) where T is the translation operator and ψ kασ (r) is a Bloch state of momentum k, band α and spin σ. In momentum space, this amounts to a discrete set of momentum points given by k = (α+θ 1 /2π)g 1 +(β +θ 2 /2π)g 2 for integer α and β where g 1 and g 2 are the discretization vectors of the momentum grid, given by g In this sections, we study the continuum model of tMoTe 2 using the parameters introduced in Ref 