First principles computations reliably predict the energetics of point defects in semiconductors, but are constrained by the expense of using large supercells and advanced levels of theory. Machine learning models trained on computational data, especially ones that sufficiently encode defect coordination environments, can be used to accelerate defect predictions. Here, we develop a framework for the prediction and screening of native defects and functional impurities in a chemical space of Group IV, III-V, and II-VI zinc blende (ZB) semiconductors, powered by crystal Graph-based Neural Networks (GNNs) trained on high-throughput density functional theory (DFT) data. Using an innovative approach of sampling partially optimized defect configurations from DFT calculations, we generate one of the largest computational defect datasets to date, containing many types of vacancies, self-interstitials, anti-site substitutions, impurity interstitials and substitutions, as well as some defect complexes. We applied three types of established GNN techniques, namely Crystal Graph Convolutional Neural Network (CGCNN), Materials Graph Network (MEGNET), and Atomistic Line Graph Neural Network (ALIGNN), to rigorously train models for predicting defect formation energy (DFE) in multiple charge states and chemical potential conditions. We find that ALIGNN yields the best DFE predictions with root mean square errors around 0.3 eV, which represents a prediction accuracy of 98 % given the range of values within the dataset, improving significantly on the state-of-the-art. Models are tested for different defect types as well as for defect charge transition levels. We further show that GNN-based defective structure optimization can take us close to DFT-optimized geometries at a fraction of the cost of full DFT. DFT-GNN models enable prediction and screening across thousands of hypothetical defects based on both unoptimized and partially-optimized defective structures, helping identify electronically active defects in technologically-important semiconductors. Semiconductors are critical for a variety of technologies such as consumer electronics, healthcare and biotechnology, information technology, communication and connectivity, automotive manufacturing, renewable energy, and industrial automation Experimentally, defect levels are measured using techniques such as cathodoluminescence and deep-level transient spectroscopy Predicting defect properties can be significantly accelerated by combining DFT data with state-of-the-art machine learning (ML) models Graph-based Neural Networks (GNNs) have been rising in popularity over the last few years, and are widely applied today for adequately representing and predicting properties of molecules, polymers, and inorganic crystals In this article, we present one of the most comprehensive efforts undertaken to date for predicting defect properties in semiconductors, by combining a massive high-throughput (HT) DFT dataset of defect formation energies (DFEs) with state-of-the-art GNNs. We utilize our previously published dataset The semiconductor+defect chemical space considered in this work is pictured in Fig. The DFT details, including specific VASP input parameters, level of theory information, reciprocal space sampling, references for chemical potentials, and equations used for DFE calculation, are present in our past publication Thus, PBE-level DFEs and transition levels may be sufficient for a first-level screening of low-energy defects. Inaccuracies will still persist from incorrectly locating VBM and CBM, but appropriate corrections can be applied afterwards using different higher-accuracy bulk calculations once PBE-level DFEs are predicted for multiple q and μ conditions. Two such possible correction methods include using the modified band alignment approach based on PBE and HSE06 band gap values Dataset 1 contains DFEs for all possible native defects in each AB compound, namely V A (vacancy at A-site), V B , A i,A (A self-interstitial at A-coordinated tetrahedral site), A i,B , A i,oct (A self-interstitial at octahedral site), B i,A , B i,B , B i,oct , A B (A on B anti-site substitution), and B A . All AB compounds, simulated in the cubic ZB structure with A atoms occupying an FCC lattice and B atoms occupying tetrahedral sites, are listed as follows: 8 II-VI compounds (ZnO, ZnS, ZnSe, ZnTe, CdO, CdS, CdSe, and CdTe), 16 III-V compounds (AlN, AlP, AlAs, AlSb, BN, BP, BAs, BSb, GaN, GaP, GaAs, GaSb, InN, InP, InAs, and InSb), and 10 group IV compounds (SiC, GeC, SnC, SiGe, SiSn, GeSn, C, Si, Ge, and Sn). There are a total of 312 possible native defects across the 34 compounds, and DFEs were computed for all under both A-rich and B-rich conditions. From each of the 312 (× 5 q states) PBE geometry optimization calculations, we collected all possible "intermediate structures", that is, geometries generated during Native defects in 34 compounds (Dataset 1) 2053 (q=+2), 1840 (q=+1), 3071 (q=0), 1966 (q=-1), 1498 (q=-2) Impurities in 34 compounds (Dataset 2) 5326 (q=+2), 3990 (q=+1), 13966 (q=0), 3568 (q=-1), 4628 (q=-2) Native defects in CdSe x Te 1-x (Dataset 3) 291 (q=+2), 322 (q=+1), 734 (q=0), 305 (q=-1), 329 (q=-2) Defect complexes in CdTe (Dataset 4) 47 (q=0) the course of the optimization, all the way from pristine structure (which is simply the ground state semiconductor bulk supercell structure with a defect introduced) to the fully optimized structure; also collected were the total DFT energies corresponding to each structure. The shell script used to collect intermediate structures (IS) for every defect from XDATCAR and corresponding energies from OUTCAR (typical output files in VASP This approach helps swell the DFT native defect dataset to 3071 data points for q = 0, and between ∼ 1500 and ∼ 2000 points for the other q values, as reported in Table Dataset 2 contains hundreds of impurities or extrinsic defects (M) at various sites, namely M A , M B , M i,A , M i,B , and M i,oct , across each of the 34 unique AB compounds. The five distinct defect sites are considered in 30 binary compounds and three defect sites (A-site, one tetrahedral interstitial site, and one octahedral interstitial site) are considered in the elemental systems (C, Si, Ge, and Sn). This dataset encompasses a wide range of singular impurity atoms, including groups I to VII, all transition metals, and all lanthanides, leading to a total of 77 species, as shown in Fig. This dataset includes several possible native defects in a series of CdSe x Te 1-x alloys (x = 0.125, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5, 0.625, 0.75, and 0.875), namely V Cd , V Te , V Se , Cd i , Te i , Se i , Cd Te , Cd Se , Te Cd , and Se Cd . This results in a total of 82 unique defects across the 7 mixed compositions, which are of interest in CdTe solar cells where Se is often mixed at the anion site Finally, we posit that crystal graphs should be capable of representing any type of defect complexes as well in addition to the single-point defects described above. For exhaustively investigating defect tolerance and dopability of a semiconductor, it is vital to consider likely defect com- plexes, which are typically multiple point defects or impurities that form simultaneously in the lattice and interact with each other. Examples include Schhotky and Frenkel defects, and compensating vacancies or interstitials that form along with dopants. The V Ga -O N -2H triple complex was found to have a very low energy in GaN Before training GNN models, we analyzed the DFT datasets to determine the scale of the differences between DFEs from full DFT-optimization and from pristine, unoptimized defect structures. For any hypothetical defect, an unoptimized pristine structure could be trivially generated simply by inserting the defect of interest in an optimized bulk supercell, but obtaining the ground state DFE is a matter of optimizing this structure, which would involve a PBE calculation that runs for minutes, hours, or days, depending on the nature of the defect. The purpose of GNN-based on-demand predictions is to reduce this time drastically. Since any new GNN predictions would likely be made using pristine defect structures, it is informative to examine, for a given type of defect, how low the energy could go starting from the unoptimized DFE if full optimization were to be performed. Fig. In this section, we briefly describe the technical details behind the three GNN schemes chosen in this study, namely CGCNN, MEGNET, and ALIGNN. (CGCNN) CGCNN, developed by Xie et al. 1. Structure representation: The crystal structure is represented as a graph where the atoms are nodes and the bonds are edges. The nodes and edges are labeled with features such as atomic coordinates, and bond length. 2. Graph convolutional layers: CGCNN applies multiple graph convolutional layers to the input graph wherein each layer aggregates information from neighboring nodes and edges and learns features that capture the local environment. Generally, the convolution operation includes computing a weighted sum of the features of neighboring nodes and edges, followed by a non-linear activation function Here, H (l+1) is the output feature matrix of the (l + 1)th layer, W (l) is the weight matrix of the l-th layer, σ is a non-linear activation function, h i is the feature vector of node i in layer l, and N (i) is the set of neighboring nodes of node i in the graph. The output of the last convolutional layer is passed through a global pooling layer (e.g., min, max pooling), which aggregates the features of all nodes in the graph into a single vector Here, h pool is the output feature vector of the pooling layer, N is the total number of nodes in the graph, and h (L) i is the feature vector of node i in the last layer L. 4. Fully connected neural network (FCNN): Finally, the output of the pooling layer is fed into an FCNN, which is trained like a regular NN-regression model to make predictions. Here, y is the predicted property, W f c is the weight matrix of the FCNN, b f c is the bias vector, h pool is the output feature vector of the pooling layer, and f is a nonlinear activation function such as ReLU or sigmoid. The MEGNET framework was developed and released by Chen et al. in 2019 1. Graph representation of materials: MEGNET represents the crystal as a graph where the atoms are the nodes, and the edges represent the connections between the atoms. Each atom is associated with a set of features such as its atomic number, coordinates, and chemical environment. 2. Message passing algorithm: MEGNET uses a messagepassing algorithm to capture the interactions between atoms in the crystal. Each atom sends a message to its neighboring atoms, which is a function of the node and edge features. The messages are then aggregated at each node and the resulting feature vector is used as input to a neural network. The output of the message-passing algorithm is passed through a readout layer which maps the learned node and edge features to target properties, and a loss function is calculated to capture the difference between the predicted and actual values. ALIGNN is a novel approach developed by Choudhary et al. 1. Atomic feature extraction: ALIGNN takes as input a graph representing the atomic structure of the crystal. Each node (atom) in the graph is associated with a set of atomic features, which includes properties such as electronegativity, group number, covalent radius, valence electrons, ionization energy, electron affinity, atomic block, and atomic volume. Each edge (bond) in the graph is associated with both the bond angle and bond distance. 2. Graph convolutional layers: ALIGNN uses graph convolutional layers to update the feature vectors of each node based on the features of its neighboring nodes. In each layer, the feature vectors are updated using a weighted sum of the features of neighboring nodes, similar to other models. This step captures short-range interactions in the structure. To capture long-range correlations, ALIGNN constructs a line graph on top of the original crystal graph. The line graph has nodes that represent unique bonds between atoms, corresponding to edges in the crystal graph. The line graph edges connect pairs of bonds that share a central atom in the crystal graph, effectively capturing bond angle information. ALIGNN then applies another set of graph convolutional layers to the line graph, which updates the feature vectors of each bond based on the features of neighboring bonds. The information from the line graph is then propagated back to the original crystal graph to update the bond features in combination with the node features. 4. Feature refinement: After the line graph convolution, ALIGNN refines the feature vectors for each edge using a set of learnable transformations that help capture more complex interactions between atoms and bonds. 5. Graph pooling: ALIGNN aggregates the refined bondlevel feature vectors into a single graph-level feature vector using a graph pooling operation that summarizes the relevant information from the entire crystal graph. 6. Output prediction: Finally, the graph-level feature vector is fed to an FCNN for making predictions. As a first step, we tested the performance of CGCNN, MEGNET, and ALIGNN for predicting the q=0 E f for Dataset 1 only. For each model, the data is split 60:20:20 into training, validation, and test sets. The CGCNN training protocol has several important hyperparameters that must either be kept fixed at recommended values or rigorously tuned over a set of possible values, such as the number of properties used in the atom feature vector, the number of convolutional layers, the length of the learned atom feature vector, the number of hidden layers, the regularization term, the scaling factor of the Gaussian initialization of weights, step size of the Adam optimizer Next, we trained a MEGNET model as shown in Fig. To determine whether the GNN models optimized so far could directly be applied to impurities, complexes, and alloys, we first tested the ALIGNN model trained on dataset 1 for their predictive power on datasets 2, 3, and 4, before suitably re-optimizing the models by adding more training data points. Fig. Upon combining 50 % of each dataset (chosen randomly) with dataset 1 and re-optimizing the model using the same approach as before, and performing necessary hyperparameter optimization anew, RMSE values improve drastically to 0.36 eV for dataset 2, 0.70 eV for dataset 3, and 0.18 eV for dataset 4. These errors will go further down as more data is added to the training set, showing that each type of defect data needs to be adequately represented during the training process for generalizing the ALIGNN predictive power. This exercise provides insights into the challenges associated with representing and predicting the energetics of defects in different defect categories with a limited training dataset and demonstrates the importance of training ML models on comprehensive datasets to improve their performance across various defect types. Next, we trained predictive models by combining all four datasets, for all charge states and chemical potential conditions. For charged defects, the DFE value is taken to be E f (E F =0), because by predicting this value for each charge state, the E f vs E F plot can be extended across the band gap region by using straight lines with slope = q. Thus, a total of 10 different ALIGNN models are trained for the combined dataset, for E , and E f (q=-2, E F =0), at A-rich and B-rich chemical potential conditions. As seen in Fig. The next objective is to utilize the best ALIGNN models to make predictions for new defects and perform screening of potentially low-energy defects based on predicted DFEs. The caveat here is that for any new defect, one could only really generate an "unoptimized" defect structure, and thus the only ALIGNN prediction that can be made is the unoptimized DFE. As described earlier, a full DFT optimization of any defect structure is obviously a time-consuming step, involving structural relaxation until atomic forces become close to zero and the energy of the crystal reaches a minimum. In contrast, ALIGNN prediction of unoptimized DFE can be performed in seconds and thus used to estimate the unoptimized energies of hundreds of thousands of defect structures, which could then be used Charge Train RMSE (eV) Validation RMSE (eV) Test RMSE (eV) q = +2 0.10 0.25 0.30 q = +1 0.07 0.27 0.23 q = 0 0.20 0.30 0.32 q = -1 0.11 0.26 0.25 q = -2 0.06 0.26 0.26 as a surrogate for screening based on some upper bound values To test the correspondence between ALIGNNunoptimized energies and DFT-optimized energies, we plotted the ALIGNN-predicted E f (q=0) (ALIGNN-unopt) on pristine structures of all defects across datasets 1, 2, 3, and 4, against the DFT-optimized E f (q=0) (DFT-opt), in Fig. Looking at only the DFT-opt values, we find that 170 defects have DFE < 0 eV, with some examples including N S in ZnS (-3.76 eV), N As in GaAs (-3.2 eV), and N Te in CdTe (-2.64 eV). Whereas a look at the ALIGNN-unopt values yields 351 defects with DFE < 1 eV which includes all 170 low energy defects from DFT, meaning that the suggested upper-bound energy screening procedure should help account for all potentially low energy defects in addition to a few unstable defects which may be eliminated subsequently. On average, the computational cost for optimizing a single-point defect in a 64-atom supercell amounts to approximately 2500 core hours for the neutral state and 1000 core hours each for charged calculations. Running only static, single-shot calculations on pristine structures requires around 400 core hours in total. On the other hand, ALIGNN-unopt predictions are made in seconds with minimal computing expense, and it is imperative to use these predictions as descriptors for low energy defects. Visualizing the ALIGNN-unopt vs DFT-opt values for q = +2, +1, -1, and -2, in Fig. Finally, we examine the accuracy of predicting charge transition levels (CTLs) from ALIGNN compared to optimized DFT predictions. For any possible defect, a pristine unoptimized structure is created as described earlier and their DFE values are predicted at E F = 0 eV for q = 0, +2, +1, -1, and -2. Using these values, E f vs E F plots are produced based on the lowest energies and locations where the defect transitions from one stable charge state to another, referred to as ε(q1/q2), are identified. This would effectively yield ALIGNN-unopt values for ε(+2/+1), ε(+1/0), ε(0/-1), and ε(-1/-2), which may then be compared with corresponding DFT-opt values available for datasets 1, 2, and 3. Fig. We employed our trained ALIGNN model to optimize a crystal containing point defects using an iterative distortion approach. This gradient-free optimization method entailed subjecting the initial defective crystal structure to a series of systematic atomic displacements. Each atom in the crystal was displaced based on a normal distribution, and the displacements were carefully adjusted to ensure no overall translation of the system. The magnitude of these displacements ranged from zero (representing no displacement) to a maximum value specified as a user input. The best ALIGNN models are applied to predict the E f of all generated crystals in all 5 q states. This procedure is iteratively repeated and the applied distortions are adjusted until the predicted DFE becomes as low as possible. This approach allows the efficient exploration of the energy landscape of the defective crystal, seeking configurations that approach the optimal structure. Another advantage of this gradient-free approach is that it does not rely on explicit training for atomic forces, which significantly increases the memory cost of GNNs at both training and prediction time. For a demonstration of this procedure, we pick two defects in the neutral state, namely Re Zn and La Zn , both in ZnO. The ALIGNN-based defective structure optimization scheme is pictured in Fig. Next, we applied the same optimization scheme to 6 selected defects across 3 compounds, for different charge states, and plotted their ALIGNN-optimized E f vs E F in Fig. Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of GNNs in guiding crystal structure optimization and highlight their potential for accelerating materials discovery and design. It should be noted that the geometry optimization process is not very clean, and there is no clear answer on how many distortions or atomic displacements must be applied for a given defect, although the unoptimized vs optimized energy visualization provides some insight into different types of defects. It is not easy to determine when to stop the optimization process, other than when the GNN-predicted energy does not reduce anymore, which does not negate the risk of local minima trapping. This process can also get expensive when applying for hundreds of thousands of defects, especially depending on the values of hyperparameters such as r c ; nevertheless, they are still meaningfully faster than complete DFT optimization. The best ALIGNN models were finally applied to predict the E f (E F = 0 eV) of all 12,474 possible single defects and impurities across the entire chemical space, in all 5 q states, at A-rich chemical potential conditions. These predictions were then used to generate E f vs E F plots for all defects spanning the experimental band gap of the semiconductor. To screen for potentially low energy defects, we look for E f becoming negative for any portion of the band gap, using a stringent threshold of 1 eV for neutral defects and 0 eV for charged defects. This yields a total of 1,281 defects that are very likely to be stable based on the ALIGNN-unopt predictions, though many more such low-energy defects may exist once ALIGNN-optimization is performed. In this work, we used state-of-the-art crystal graph-based neural networks to develop predictive models for defect formation energies in a chemical space of zincblende semiconductors, by learning from a substantial computational dataset containing optimized and partially optimized geometries. Three established GNN techniques, namely CGCNN, MEGNET, and ALIGNN, are tested in this work. The ALIGNN scheme shows the best prediction performance and is capable of high-accuracy prediction for native defects, impurities, complexes, and defects in alloys. While ALIGNN predictions made on hypothetical pristine defect structures deviate significantly from DFT-optimized defect formation energies, we demonstrate an ALIGNNbased defective geometry optimization approach which helps bridge the gap and bring down errors in predicting charge transition levels. The ALIGNN-unoptimized predictions made for the entire chemical space of > 12,000 possible defects are released with this manuscript, along with necessary code and training data. We believe the DFT-GNN approach presented in this work will be highly consequential for screening across optoelectronically active point defects and functional dopants in technologically important semiconductors, even being applicable to all kinds of defect complexes. The next steps would involve developing a package to perform ALIGNN-based defect optimization, expanding the models to other semiconductor classes and higher levels of theories, and testing alternative ML and GNN approaches for further improvement. | 1-