Understanding the fundamental link between structure and functionalization is crucial for the design and optimization of functional materials, since different structural configurations could trigger materials to demonstrate diverse physical, chemical, and electronic properties. However, the correlation between crystal structure and thermal conductivity (κ) remains enigmatic. In this study, taking two-dimensional (2D) carbon allotropes as study cases, we utilize phonon Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) along with machine learning force constant potential to thoroughly explore the complex folding structure of pure sp 2 hybridized carbon materials from the perspective of crystal structure, mode-level phonon resolved thermal transport, and atomic interactions, with the goal of identifying the underlying relationship between 2D geometry and κ. We propose two potential structure evolution mechanisms for targeted thermal transport properties: in-plane and out-ofplane folding evolutions, which are generally applicable to 2D carbon allotropes. It is revealed that the folded structure produces strong symmetry breaking, and simultaneously produces exceptionally strongly suppressed phonon group velocities, strong phonon-phonon scattering, and weak phonon hydrodynamics, which ultimately lead to low κ. The insight into the folded effect of atomic structures on thermal transport deepens our understanding of the relationship between structure and functionalization, which offers straightforward guidance for designing novel nanomaterials with targeted κ, as well as propel developments in materials science and engineering. Two-dimensional (2D) carbon crystal structures have recently received an abundance of theoretical and experimental interest as an emerging material system The phonon behavior in 2D materials is controlled by structural confinement and dimensionality effects, which differs from those observed in conventional three-dimensional (3D) materials. In 2D materials, layered structure restricts atomic coupling to the in-plane direction, resulting in heat conduction primarily through inplane phonon transport The diversity and complexity of atomic bonding types and dimensional effects make accurate estimations and general interpretations for the κ of the numerous carbon allotropes more challenging, but they also inspire strong research interest. For instance, Choudhry et al. Purely sp 2 -hybridized carbon atoms are arranged into planar structures in 2D carbon materials, where folding effects triggered by the superstructure limit the amount of heat that can be transported. The different folding shapes and configurations of carbon atoms may lead to different phonon propagation characteristics and κ. Note that the remarkable features of 2D carbon structures include not only in-plane structural folding but also out-of-plane morphological expansion, leaving a major gap in our understanding of the link between the shape of these structures and κ. A variety of out-of-plane structures, including carbon nanotubes These complex and rich out-of-plane designs generate various phonon propagation modes and scattering processes that have a significant impact on κ. However, precise κ is elusive despite the rich and complex carbon configurations that enable diverse phonon transport behaviors. Complex and asymmetric configurations require computational resources to perform high-order partial derivatives of potential energy, especially the fourth-order and above interatomic force constants, leading to expensive costs for obtaining thermal transport properties, while solving the phonon Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) with firstprinciples calculations. As for the molecular dynamics method, it can consider higher-order phonon effects and may exhibit higher efficiencies, such as the four-phonons in c-BAs In this study, we exploit the phonon BTE combined with machine learning potential to investigate pure sp 2 hybrid carbon materials with complex folded structures. Compared with traditional first-principles and molecular dynamics methods, machine learning force constant potential methods can efficiently evaluate higher-order phonon effects, and can quickly obtain potential energy surfaces and their partial derivatives without consuming more computing resources for asymmetric complex lattices. In this way, we focus on the crystal structure, phonon properties, phonon-phonon scattering and atomic interaction levels of 2D carbon materials, with the goal to establish a link between different geometries and heat transfer properties (geometry-phonon-κ) in the 2D structure. Most importantly, we propose two evolution mechanisms of thermal transport properties with structure: in-plane and out-of-plane folding evolution. Note that Janus-graphene produces out-of-plane Janus-type buckling superfolding in addition to the in-plane 4-6-8 ring folding structure. The in-plane and out-of-plane double superfolding can suppress the contribution of flexible acoustic (FA) phonons, resulting in low group velocity, weak phonon-phonon scattering, weak phonon hydrodynamic effect, and strong asymmetry, which finally contributes to low κ. The findings of this investigation have significant ramifications for our comprehension of folded atomic structures' effects on thermal transport, as well as the connection between structure and κ. The aforementioned findings are anticipated to be crucial in creating and improving the heat transfer capabilities of novel nanomaterials. To demonstrate the correlation between the folding behavior of crystal structures of different twodimensional carbon allotropes, Fig. Intriguingly, the κ of folded carbon allotropes is generally lower than that of unfolded carbon allotropes, even one to two orders of magnitude lower than that of pure hexacyclic graphene, as shown in Fig. Graphene, a perfect 2D carbon allotrope, exhibits an ultrahigh κ of 2970 W/mK via machine learning force constant potential (MLFCP) method, serving as an initial research standard due to its perfect planarity and pure six-membered ring framework. The results of MLFCP are similar to our calculated results using DFT (3150 W/mK in Fig. These results demonstrate that the reduced κ of the same sp 2 -hybridized 2D carbon material can be attributed to the folding of the in-plane folding of planar crystals, which forms phononic crystal-like carbon allotropes with different atomic chain configurations, thereby reducing κ. The evolution of in-plane folding is similar to that of phononic crystals, where the folding structure leads to the switching of related bandgaps, thereby altering the transport characteristics of phonons. Different ring types lead to different arrangement periodicity and symmetry of phononic crystals, leading to different phonon transport properties and diversifying κ. Note that for Janus graphene, the lower thermal conductivity compared to biphenylene and Ybiphenylene excludes the influence of in-plane structural folding. Because Janus-graphene, biphenylene, and Y-biphenylene share identical 4-6-8 carbon ring, the difference between the κ of biphenylene and Ybiphenylene is negligible. As a consequence, this dramatic difference in Janus-graphene may be traced to its out-of-plane superfolding to generate the Janus-configuration, which goes beyond in-plane folding to produce stronger phonon-phonon scattering. allotropes come from density functional theory calculations. The red line highlights the ratio (R) of the thermal conductivity calculated by the iterative method (κ ITE ) to that calculated by the relaxation time approximation method (κ RTA ). To explore and understand the underlying fundamental link between the unique configuration of Janus- In machine learning networks, it is required to concentrate on an atom and encode its domain information, or the descriptor of the local environment. All of these descriptors must satisfy numerous types of symmetry criteria, including translational and rotational invariance, as well as permutation (with regard to the exchange of two atoms of the same sort). Descriptions are usually limited to the local environment of atoms within a specific cut-off radius, typically 5 or 6 Å for covalent bonds, in order to be valid in practice. We reveal the extent of interatomic interactions in the local environment by normalized force constants traces trace (NFCT) in individual neighborhoods. The interatomic force constant can be obtained as the second derivative of the energy E by: [19] where means atomic interaction forces along the x-direction between the i th and j th atoms and labeled "0" means the specified initial atom. As shown in Fig. To validate the accuracy of the machine learning potential function model, we firstly construct the phonon dispersion curve of Janus-graphene and compare to density functional theory (DFT) results. The influence of different supercells on phonon dispersion was tested in Janus-graphene, and the 4×4×1 supercell was finally selected as shown in supplementary Fig. To further reveal the origin of κ with structural evolution, we will comprehensively compare the evolution of κ and phonon transport behavior, using Janus-graphene and graphene as typical cases. Modelevel κ and relaxation time as functions of Brillouin zone position and frequency are depicted in Figs. Building on the study of Mortazavi The contribution of different phonon branches for Janus-graphene to the κ is shown in Fig. Furthermore, the coupling between the mode-level phonon properties in the frequency domain interval is plotted in Figs. Further, representative phonon properties and scattering channels of FA, and TA branches for graphene and Janus-graphene are visualized in the Brillouin zone as shown in Fig. In addition, the TA branch of Janus-graphene has higher phonon group velocities than the FA branch due to the linear dispersion relation, indicating that the TA branch contributes relatively more to the κ. Meanwhile, Figs. The weakening of the FA branch is structurally due to the reorganization of the phonon dispersion caused by the folding of the in-plane structure, which was observed in previous studies where E is lattice potential energy, and u ⃗ ij represents the perturbation displacement of the jth atoms in the ith unit. The third-order force constant can be mapped to itself in the in-plane when n=3 for 2D materials: [19] where m comes from the symmetry operation and depends on the scattering phase space. It satisfies: E α 1 ,...,α n (i 1 j 1 ; ... ; i n j n ) ≠ 0, m even (6) The phonon-phonon scattering of the FA branch in graphene [Fig. Differently, although the in-plane symmetry of biphenylene and Y-biphenylene is not protected, the out-ofplane symmetry is preserved, leading to lower κ than graphene but higher than Janus-graphene [Fig. The out-of-plane folding effect in Janus-graphene leads to a significant breaking of the central and mirror symmetries, inducing a stronger anharmonicity. As we know, phonon behavior is largely constrained by the crystal structure of the material itself. As a result of their softness and bending stiffness, 2D materials are easily deformed in the plane, giving rise to flexural acoustic modes with quadratic power, i.e., FA branch. The generation of the FA branch mainly involves the bending vibration of atoms inside 2D materials, similar to the bending modes of thin films. Due to the perfectly planar structure of graphene, these phonons have very little scattering in the direction perpendicular to its plane, i.e., they can propagate freely within the plane. This leads to a high density of states for long-wavelength FA phonons, i.e., a kinetically abundant presence of this type of phonons. In graphene, the collective motion of these long-wavelength FA phonons can exhibit a dynamic flow similar to fluid drift, which is known as the phonon hydrodynamic effect The contribution of the relaxation times of graphene and Janus-graphene under the ITE and RTA methods can further reveal a significant difference in κ, as shown in Fig. The significant phonon softening of the FA branch in Janus-graphene compared to graphene can also be trapped as shown in Figs. The suppression of phonon hydrodynamics in the Janus-graphene can be further attributed to the momentum redistribution during phonon-phonon scattering. Based on the conservation of momentum, the phonon scattering process can be divided into two categories: normal (N) scattering and umklapp (U) scattering: where K ⃗ ⃗ = 0 and K ⃗ ⃗ ≠ 0 correspond to N and U processes, respectively. In N-scattering, a collision occurs between two phonons, but the sum of their wave vectors remains within the unit vector of the reciprocal lattice. This scattering event does not change the wave vector magnitude and direction of the phonons, only their phase, leading to the fact that N scattering events preserve momentum. However, in U-scattering, the scattering between two phonons produces a wavevector that exceeds the unit vector of the reciprocal lattice. This means that the sum of the wave vectors has crossed the boundary of the first Brillouin zone and cannot be represented by the primitive cell vectors of the lattice. In this case, the excess momentum cannot be retained between the phonons, but is transferred to other parts in the lattice. Thus, the U-scattering event results in a loss of momentum. In phonon hydrodynamics, the relative contributions between N and U processes determine the propagation and depletion behavior of phonons, whose relative strength can be measured by their ratio (N/U). As shown in Fig. The superfolded buckled structure significantly suppresses the contribution of FA branch to thermal conductivity, and this structure-function evolution enables us to gain deep insights from atomic interactions and anharmonicity. In graphene, two carbon atoms form a strong and stable covalent bond in pure sp 2 hybridization by sharing electron pairs. In sp 2 hybridization, one 2s orbital and two 2p (p x and p y ) orbitals of carbon atoms are linearly combined to form three equivalent sp 2 hybridization orbitals. These sp 2 hybrid orbitals form three σ bonds in graphene, which lie in a plane and are separated by an angle of 120° from each other. The remaining one p z orbital is perpendicular to the plane and forms a π bond, responsible for the π electron conjugated system in graphene. This ideal electronic configuration exhibits strong symmetry, which limits the anharmonicity in the atomic vibration process due to the perfectly planar structure. Differently, the out-of-plane buckling significantly destroys the planar features, especially the p z orbitals of Dirac cones (for graphene), making the p z electrons localized in the out-of-plane direction to form a quasi-sp 3 hybridization as shown in Fig. The diverse electron localization behavior can be further revealed by the electron localization function (ELF): [51] where where K h [ρ(r)] is also the normalization coefficient of K(r) and is the curvature in a homogeneous (h) electron gas of density ρ in position r. The size of the ELF represents the distribution of electrons from fully delocalized (ELF=0) to fully localized (ELF=1). When the ELF value is greater than 0.5, it means that the electrons are more localized in a certain position. As shown in Fig. where RMS can be obtained by traversing each atom with the initial central atom, representing the interatomic interactions. As shown in Fig. Ultimately, it could potentially be feasible to arrive at broad conclusions about the causes of the uneven distribution of force constants from the folding evolution of atomic geometries. As shown in Figs. In summary, we take advantage of the powerful fitting ability of machine learning methods to solve the phonon BTE by establishing a regression potential energy surface from DFT to MLP, thereby obtaining the thermal transport properties of Janus-graphene and graphene. We provide an interface module between MLIP and ShengBTE with respect to the fourth-order force constant, which further isolates and accounts for fourphonon scattering effects compared to previous molecular dynamics potentials More importantly, we propose two evolution paths of folded structure and thermal transport properties for pure sp 2 hybridized 2D carbon structures, namely in-plane and out-of-plane folds. The κ of T-graphene and Janus-graphene, which consist of superfolded evolved structures, are significantly lower than those of other 2D carbon allotropes with pure sp 2 hybridization. Among them, T-graphene undergoes superfolding of structural evolution in the plane, thereby forming a natural phonon crystal-like carbon configuration with 3-12 carbon rings. Differently, Janus-graphene produces out-of-plane Janus-type buckling superfolding in addition to the in-plane 4-6-8 ring folding structure, leading to a κ value one order of magnitude lower than that of biphenylene (and Y-biphenylene) and two orders of magnitude lower than that of planar graphene. A detailed physical picture can be obtained through Janus-graphene's structural evolution, mode-level phonon properties, momentum-conserving phonon-phonon scattering, electronic structure, and atomic interactions with graphene as a benchmark. The superfolding of the Janus structure suppresses the contribution of the FA phonon branch, leading to low group velocity, strong anharmonicity, weak phonon hydrodynamic effect, and strong asymmetry, which ultimately contributes to low κ. This study sheds new light on understanding the relationship between the structure and function of 2D materials, especially heat transport, and for designing materials with specific thermal transport properties. The initial data set was constructed using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) Based on the isothermal and isobaric (NPT) ensemble, 1000 frames of data are extracted in 50K, 150K, 300K, 500K, and 700K, respectively, when the time step is 0.1 fs. To fit the force constants, we used a linear programming-based Machine-Learning Interatomic Potential (MLIP) developed by Shapeev et al. V (n i ) = ∑ ξ α B α (n i ) α , In machine learning networks, the Taylor expansion of the potential energy E MLP of the configuration at small displacements can be obtained: and fourth-order force constants, respectively. Further, the force constants can be obtained by the finite displacement difference method through our recompiled thirdorder_MTP.py and Fourthorder_MTP.py code, which provide an interface between MLIP and shengBTE. In fact, the same holds true for other potential functions where τ λα , C λ , and ν λα , and V are relaxation time, specific heat capacity, group velocity for λ mode phonon along α direction, and crystal volume, respectively. More information about the phonon BTE can be found in Supplementary Note S2.