In this study, we investigate a novel design of an on-chip nested coupled ring resonator to enhance the quality factor and the effective length of the resonator. The configuration consists of an open ring and racetrack resonator, with lengths of 340 μm and 184.4 μm, respectively, with a coupling ratio of 97/3. In this regard, the proposed nested cavity has been experimentally characterized and compared with a single cavity ring resonator. Our results show a significant improvement in the quality factor by a factor of four. This improvement in performance opens up exciting new possibilities for state-of-the-art applications, such as compact optical sensors and delay lines. Our proposed design represents a significant advancement in the field of integrated optics, and we believe that it has the potential to enable a broad range of applications in the future. Recently, silicon photonics technology has incited a flurry of interest in both scientific and industrial communities. What has motivated the efforts in this field is the promise of high-speed optical communication capabilities enabled by wavelength division multiplexing Quite recently, the generation of orbital angular momentum modes from micro rings has been explored Along these lines, silicon photonics ring cavities have been widely used in sensing and spectroscopy. In most of these applications, a high-quality factor is required. Yet, to enhance the quality factor of a resonator, both the losses and the coupling coefficients must be reduced. Practically speaking, the losses in such resonators are usually limited by the surface roughness and the intrinsic loss which is prespecified by fabrication technology capabilities. Another figure of merit for the ring resonators is the free spectral range (FSR) -the spacing between cavity resonanceswhich depends on the cavity's length. For many applications, a large FSR is preferred. This will translate to a very small cavity length which leads to high radiation loss and low-quality factor To this end, several configurations have been proposed to improve the quality factor or finesse, the ratio between the spectral range and the full width at half maximum (FWHM), and the quality factor We begin our analysis by considering a nested ring cavity configuration. Note that the schematic of the single ring cavity and the nested ring cavity is shown in figure where κ n and t n are the cross and forward coupling coefficients of the coupler n, respectively. While L 3 is the length between the input and output coupler. In addition, H c is the transfer function of the nested cavity. Note that in the case of the single-ring cavity, H c = 1. From here, the power transmission coefficient can be written as here, 2C = 1 + A c 2 + A o 2 with A c = exp(αL c ) t 1 t 2 and A o = exp(αL) t 3 t 4 κ 1 κ 2 . Moreover, θ c = βL c and θ = βL with L and L c are the lengths of the main and coupled cavities, and β stands for the propagation constant in the cavity. In equation ( (3) Moreover, using cos(x) ≈ 1 -x 2 , the full width at half maximum can be derived as where λ o is the free space wavelength and n g is the group refractive index. It is worth emphasizing that the full width at half maximum for single ring resonator is FWHM s = (1-A)λ o 2 /(n g L) and can be obtained from the previous formula by setting t 1 = t 2 = 0 and κ 1 = κ 2 = 1. In a straightforward manner, the quality factor can be derived as: Meanwhile, the finesse of the cavity is usually defined as F = FSR/FWHM. Yet, in the case of the nested cavity, it is difficult to define a fixed FSR as there are many sub-resonance lines with different suppression ratios. To solve this issue, the free spectral range for the nested cavity is calculated for two full resonance modes From here, by comparing the latter formula with Beer-Lambert law for absorption (T = c o (1 -2αl)) , where c o is a constant that accounts for intrinsic loss, we can acquire the effective interaction length for the nested cavity as As expected, the effective length increases as the forward coupling coefficients increase. Interestingly, the total effective length of the nested cavity can be approximately obtained by multiplying the effective length of both cavities. To illustrate these results, numerical simulations have been carried out to compare the nested and single cavities. In general, the regimes of operations for nested cavities could be divided into three regimes. First is when we have L ≫ L c , while the second is L~L c and the last regime is L ≪ L c . Figure The described design was sent for fabrication at the Washington Nanofabrication Facility, University of Washington. This fabrication facility performs prototypes of passive silicon photonics by Electron Beam Lithography (EBL) In conclusion, a comprehensive study of the nested cavity resonator has been presented. The proposed silicon photonics filter allows for the precise engineering of key cavity parameters. Our innovative design has demonstrated a remarkable four-fold increase in quality factor compared to the conventional ring cavities, making it a highly promising solution for on-chip spectral filters with high finesse ratios. Furthermore, this novel filter has the potential to enable a range of advanced applications, including slow light and variable delay lines. The exceptional performance and versatility of our silicon photonics filter make it a valuable addition to the toolkit of researchers and engineers working in the field of photonics. With further development, this technology could pave the way for new advances in a variety of fields, including telecommunications, sensing, and quantum computing.