The locally noncentrosymmetric heavy fermion superconductor CeRh2As2 has attracted considerable interests due to its rich superconducting phases, accompanied by a quadrupole density wave and pronounced antiferromagnetic excitations. To understand the underlying physics, we here report measurements from high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission. Our results reveal fine splittings of the conduction bands related to the locally noncentrosymmetric structure, as well as a quasitwo-dimensional Fermi surface (FS) with strong 4f contributions. The FS exhibits nesting with an in-plane vector (π/a, π/a), which is facilitated by the van Hove singularity near X that arises from the characteristic conduction-f hybridization. The FS nesting provides a natural explanation for the observed antiferromagnetic excitations at (π/a, π/a), which could be intimately connected to its unconventional superconductivity. Our experimental results are well supported by density functional theory plus dynamical mean field theory calculations, which can capture the strong correlation effects. Our study not only provides spectroscopic proof of the key factors underlying the field-induced superconducting transition, but also uncovers the critical role of FS nesting and lattice Kondo effect in the intertwined spin and charge fluctuations. The recent discovery of heavy fermion (HF) superconductivity (T c ∼ 0.26 K) in CeRh 2 As 2 has attracted broad interest Another key question in CeRh 2 As 2 is the origin of the observed antiferromagnetic (AFM) fluctuations Here we report measurements of the quasiparticle dispersion and FS in CeRh 2 As 2 , from angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). Although there have been a few theoretical studies on the electronic structure CeRh 2 As 2 crystallizes in a CaBe 2 Ge 2 -type tetragonal structure (see Fig. Figure From the DFT calculations, both α and β bands actually consist of two closely spaced (or split) bands, which can be clearly identified in the ARPES data (red arrows in Fig. The in-plane FS maps at k z = 0 and π/c are shown in Fig. The unusual QDW at T 0 in CeRh 2 As 2 was attributed to mixing of the ground-state and first excited 4f doublets due to strong Kondo effect Figure Both the experimental and theoretical FS maps exhibit signatures of nesting. A nesting vector q 1 ≈ (π/a, π/a) marked in Fig. , where the summation is over the first BZ. The 2D results for the k z = 0 and k z = π/c FS maps are shown in Fig. In HF systems, the nesting of FS with heavy quasiparticles is often necessary for the strong magnetic excitations and spin fluctuations In principle, the proposed QDW at T 0 also requires nesting of the FS According to theory, a large Rashba-type SOC due to local noncentrosymmmetricity and a small interlayer hopping are both crucial for realizing the field-induced parity transition in CeRh 2 As 2 In summary, our high-resolution ARPES measurements on CeRh 2 As 2 , in combination with DFT+DMFT calculations, demonstrate that the Ce 4f electrons play a significant role in the FS due to band-dependent c-f hybridization. We find that the FS exhibits clear nesting at (π/a, π/a) and the nesting is facilitated by a VHS near X at k z = π/c, originating from c-f hybridization. The FS nesting can well explain the observed AFM excitations at (π/a, π/a) from INS measurements 