Two-dimensional (2D) materials are popular candidates for emerging nanoscale devices, including memristors. Resistive switching (RS) in such 2D material memristors has been attributed to the formation and dissolution of conductive filaments created by the diffusion of metal ions between the electrodes. However, the area-scalable fabrication of patterned devices involves polymers that are difficult to remove from the 2D material interfaces without damage. Remaining polymer residues are often overlooked when interpreting the RS characteristics of 2D material memristors. Here, we demonstrate that the parasitic residues themselves can be the origin of RS. We emphasize the necessity to fabricate appropriate reference structures and employ atomic-scale material characterization techniques to properly evaluate the potential of 2D materials as the switching layer in vertical memristors. Our polymer-residue-based memristors exhibit RS typical for a filamentary mechanism with metal ion migration, and their performance parameters are strikingly similar to commonly reported 2D material memristors. This reveals that the exclusive consideration of electrical data without a thorough verification of material interfaces can easily lead to misinterpretations about the potential of 2D materials for memristor applications. Resistive switching (RS) is observed in many materials like metal-oxides 1 , polymers 2 , phasechange materials 2D layered materials have recently received attention as resistive switching materials because they potentially enable fast and low-power switching, large switching windows, forming-free characteristics, utilization on arbitrary substrates, and ultimate thinness. Two-terminal, vertical devices have been demonstrated from 2D hexagonal boron nitride Several of these pioneering studies Consequently, understanding the role of polymer residues inside 2D memristors is crucial for understanding 2D material switching characteristics. Several studies have shown cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analyses of their vertical memristors to assess the cleanliness of the interfaces and exclude parasitic layers inside the active structures In this study, we demonstrate reproducible RS in vertical memristors with metal electrodes using thin polymer residues as the active material, which were created during the patterning of the 2D material platinum diselenide (PtSe2). We find that devices containing only polymer, but excluding the 2D material in the fabrication process, switch similarly to PtSe2 devices that include polymer residues from the fabrication. Such polymer-residue memristors operate with comparable voltages and display similar resistance ranges to 2D material memristors in the literature. Area-dependent measurements and modeling of our experimental data indicate a filamentary switching mechanism, analogous to conductive bridge random access memories (CBRAM), a mechanism also proposed for many 2D material memristors We fabricated vertical crosspoint and crossbar array memristors based on ~3.7 nm and ~12 nm thick PtSe2 with palladium (Pd) back-electrodes (BE) and nickel (Ni) top-electrodes (TE). The samples are named PtSe2-A and PtSe2-B, respectively, and Fig. All samples described in Fig. The presence of parasitic metal oxides was excluded with reference I-V measurements on devices with a direct contact between the BE and the TE (SI, Fig. The similarities in samples PtSe2-A and -B are consistent over all devices and cycles for both switching voltages and LRS and HRS resistances. Moreover, the LRS resistances and both SET and RESET voltages are very similar for all three samples, indicating a common switching mechanism, which confirms the polymer as the switching medium. We attribute the higher HRS resistances in the polymer sample to the thicker polymer layer in the device stack. The higher HRS variability can be explained by the larger number of wrinkles on the surface of the active material in the polymer sample compared to both PtSe2 samples (see AFM scans before the TE deposition in Fig. The filaments in the polymer sample without PtSe2 are thicker and more stable and hence harder to dissolve fully, which leads to the HRS spreading over up to four orders of magnitude. We have summarized our device statistics in Fig. We analyzed the electrical characteristics of our polymer sample in more detail. Electrode-areadependent measurements show an area-dependent HRS and an area-independent LRS (Fig. Here, I is the current, kBT is the thermal energy, q is the elementary charge, μ is the charge carrier mobility, ε is the permittivity of the conductive medium, and A is the cross-sectional area. Equation ( (1) is, therefore, equivalent to the average gap size from multiple filaments. During the SET transition, while SCLC still governs the current, the gap size reduces due to filament growth. Consequently, L in eq. ( We demonstrated reproducible RS in vertical memristors based on parasitic polymer residues introduced during the processing of 2D materials. We show that these polymer residues dominate the switching behavior over the 2D material. The voltage and resistance ranges of the RS in our polymer devices are similar to those in state-of-the-art 2D material memristors. Our analysis and modeling indicate a filamentary RS mechanism, which has also been associated with 2D material memristors in the literature. We conclude that thorough electrical and material analyses, including appropriate reference structures, are necessary when investigating RS in 2D material memristors to distinguish it from RS in parasitic residual polymer layers. This is particularly important because the fabrication of 2D material-based devices with conventional CMOS fabrication techniques often leads to polymer residues, especially in vertical device configurations. 2x2 cm 2 highly p-doped silicon (Si) chips with 300 nm silicon dioxide (SiO2) grown by thermal oxidation on top as insulation were used as substrates. The back-electrode (BE) was patterned via a negative optical lithography process using a double layer of lift-off resist (LOR 3A, micro resist technology) and AZ5214E photoresist (MicroChemicals). Then, 10 nm of titanium and 40 nm of palladium were deposited by electron-beam evaporation, followed by lift-off in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). All samples presented in this work were fabricated with the same BE process. Platinum diselenide (PtSe2) was grown by thermally assisted conversion of thin, sputtered Pt films on Si/SiO2 chips at 450°C in a furnace using Se vapor The top-electrode (TE) was patterned by a negative lithography process using AZ5214E with subsequent dc sputtering of 55 nm of nickel and 15 nm of aluminum and lift-off in acetone. All samples presented in this study were fabricated using this process. Cross-sectional transmission electron microscope (TEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) investigations were conducted with a JEOL-JEM200 TEM at 200 kV operation voltage. Thin lamellas for TEM and EDX analysis were cut from the respective crosspoint or crossbar devices with a Strata400 focused ion beam system using a gallium ion beam. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were performed using a Dimension Icon AFM by Bruker in tapping mode. Raman spectroscopy was done with a WiTec alpha300R Raman imaging microscope using an excitation laser wavelength of 532 nm with 1 mW laser power. Electrical measurements were conducted in a cryogenic probe station (LakeShore) connected to a semiconductor parameter analyzer (SPA) 4200A-SCS by Tektronix at room temperature in ambient conditions. Two source measure unit (SMU) cards (Keithley 4200-SMU), each connected to a pre-amplifier (Keithley 4200-PA), were used. Repeated voltage cycles were applied to the TE, while the BE was grounded, according to the sequence indicated by the arrows and numbers in the graphs in Figs. following equation (1). The LRS is fitted using the Ohmic law I = V/R, where R is extracted to be 290 Ω.