Two dimensional materials are attracting new research for optoelectronics and spintronics due to their unique physical properties. A wide range of emerging spintronic devices are achieved from parent and doped two dimensional materials. First-principles electronic structure calculations of a two-dimensional monolayer of borophene in its P6/mmm form is explored in this study. The electronic, magnetic, and optical properties of doped borophene are analyzed for doping with lithium, sodium, and magnesium. Density functional theory calculations advocate their good dynamical and thermal stability. Spin-polarized electronic properties of these materials are observed to be useful for predicting new spintronic materials. Additionally optical analysis exhibits the absorption peaks in monolayers along the in-plane direction. These properties of doped magnetic borophene suggest the material to be a suitable candidate for designing optoelectronic devices. The most competent spintronic material among three different doped borophenes is lithium doping that can imply a promising avenue for the fast-growing electronics industry. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been celebrated since the first synthesis of graphene as it displays exceptional conductivity properties which are lacking in its bulk crystal form is close to the 2s orbit radius. Hence, the rich electronic structure and bonding between the boron atoms make its 2D structure different from other 2D materials. However the magnetic phase diagram and doping dependence on borophene remains largely unexplored. Amidst different structures of borophene only the P6/mmm structure shows suitable spin polarization. With the goal of uncovering 2D magnetic materials for superior spintronic and optical applications, the investigated structure is doped with both electron and hole. Present study quantifies the optical and spintronic properties of borophene for different doping. Spintronic application of doped borophene then can be used as new zero gap spintronic materials. Electronic structure of borophene was estimated using density functional theory calculations based on the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) generalized gradient approximation (GGA) for exchange-correlation functional, along with full potential linearized augmented plane wave(FP-LAPW) method as executed in WIEN2K In accordance with structural symmetry of P6/mmm borophene the unit cell consists of three types of inequivalent boron atoms. Three inequivalent atomic positions of boron are B1(0.0,0.0,0.5), B2(0.362,0.181,0. The hexagonal unit cell is doped with other atoms for hole and electron doping. Doping site is chosen to be (0.0,0.0,0.5) point with 6/mmm symmetry for an energetically favourable scenario (in all the position stability of the atom is checked through scf calculated total energy, finally minimum energy structure is chosen for further calculation.) A phonon spectra that shows real frequency dispersion was achieved using the force-constant method and the PHONOPY package The inequivalence of the boron atoms changes the contribution of each atom to the electronic properties of the material. netic borophene Spin-polarized band structure and density of states of three doped systems (i.e. Li, Na, and Mg ) is plotted in Figure .3(a-f) and Figure An ideal spintronic material is selected by the number of spin-polarized carriers of a system. These properties were quantified by the number of spin-up and spindown charge carriers in the doped borophenes. In this case, spintronic order parameter (λ) is defined as follows to measure the degree of spin polarization and compare them for finding most competent dopant, where n ↑ and n ↓ are the numbers of carriers respectively for up and down spins. Large spin polarization demands λ to be higher and thus make a suitable candidate for a spintronic system. The main panel of figure.5 portrays λ for three doped systems which decreases with an increase in atomic number of dopants (Figure .5 main panel). This property of dopant implies elements having lower atomic number than boron can be employed to improve spintronic properties. The calculated λ shows a smaller value that can be increased with external parameters such as pressure and biasing. In this work, the energetically favorable struc-ture is selected for these doped structures, however further research is required to understand whether other elements can yield similar energetically favorable scenario. Albeit the parent borophene in its crystal structure shows magnetism and is a satisfactory element for spintronic applications, the present study suggests doping will enhance the applicability. Doped borophene does not have any gap in its electronic band structure. Similar results were obtained in earlier work on the intercalated phosphorene Motivated by semiconducting behavior of parent material, the optical properties of doped borophene are studied to predict optoelectronic application of these materials. The imaginary part of dielectric function was estimated by applying a density functional theory method constructed through WIEN2K software. The assessed electronic structures of doped borophenes discussed ear- lier in the results are the basis to interpret the imaginary part of the dielectric functions for three different systems. The optical terms for polarization of light parallel to the plane are dominant because of the strong depolarization effect in 2D planar geometry. The structures of three doped borophenes have geometrical symmetry along the x-and y-axis. The imaginary part of the dielectric function can also be defined as optical absorption spectra of these doped borophenes for the in-plane and out-of-plane polarized directions which is illustrated in Figures This study demonstrates density functional theory study of the magnetic and optical properties of Li, Na, and Mg-doped borophene in spin-polarized system. Borophene is a member of newly found 2D Dirac systems in its different structures and has potential application because of its high capacity, outstanding electronic and ionic conductivity in metal ion batteries as an anode material in its different structures; however the research interest on its application as the spintronic materials is recent. Parent borophene in this p6/mmm structure shows half-metallic nature with up-spin showing semiconducting nature and down spin showing metallic behavior. Doping induces vanishing of gap but doped borophene remains spin-polarized. While the main characteristics are common in all doped crystals but the nature of spin polarization varies with different dopant. The detailed assessment into spin-dependent properties shows magnetization, and reveals that spintronic order parameter(λ) decreases with increasing atomic number. In addition the imaginary part of the dielectric functions of all three doped materials are characterized by in-plane maxima around 0.5 eV (corresponding to near-infrared region) and out-of-plane maxima around 3.0 eV (corresponding to visible region). The lowest energy excitations demonstrate almost similar characteristics in all the doped materials. In conclusion, Li, Na and Mg doping of borophene shows similar electronic and optical properties. The optical absorption threshold of all the materials shows promising applications because of photoemission in visible and near-infrared region. Spintronic properties reveal better performance for doping with lighter atoms which labels Li as the best among three. Thus this study suggests the potential for fine tuning the properties of borophene using doping.