Here we report the first time-and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (TR-ARPES) with the new Fermiologics "FeSuMa" analyzer. The new experimental setup has been commissioned at the Artemis laboratory of the UK Central Laser Facility. We explain here some of the advantages of the FeSuMa for TR-ARPES and discuss how its capabilities relate to those of hemispherical analyzers and momentum microscopes. We have integrated the FeSuMa into an optimized pump-probe beamline that permits photon-energy-(i.e., k z -) dependent scanning, using probe energies generated from high harmonics in a gas jet. The advantages of using the FeSuMa in this situation include the possibility of taking advantage of its "fisheye" mode of operation. Pump-probe time-and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (TR-ARPES) presents challenges, both with respect to light sources and to detection, that do not arise in "static" ARPES measurements of systems at equilibrium. In this paper, we describe the commissioning of the newly-developed "FeSuMa" analyser on a beamline for high-harmonic generation (HHG) at the UK Central Laser Facility's Artemis Laboratory. We demonstrate efficient acquisition of high-quality ARPES spectra of optically pumped excitations close to the Fermi level, and we use the FeSuMa's "fisheye" measurement mode in combination with the beamline's capability to switch rapidly between ultraviolet photon energies that are generated as high harmonics in an Ar gas jet. We suggest that this measurement configuration offers major benefits as a cost-efficient laboratory-scale approach to time-resolved TR-ARPES. Compared to its static equivalent, an ultrafast TR-ARPES measurement adds a "pump" laser pulse, which-arriving at a well-defined delay time ∆ before the system is probedpromotes the system into an optically excited state. The transient, out-of-equilibrium state and its evolution in time are the subject of study. Both the probe and the pump pulses must be short (i.e., must have narrow width in the time domain) relative to the time scales of the physical phenomena to be measured, and the pulse train of the pump must be well synchronized to that of the probe. The pulse widths and the pulse synchronization determine the limits of time resolution in the experiment. Pump-probe methods require the simultaneous generation of synchronized pulse trains of very different energies. In TR-ARPES, an infrared (IR) or visible pulsed beam is needed for excitation, while an ultraviolet (UV) or extreme ultraviolet (XUV) beam probes the system via photoexcitation. The Fourier limit places a strict boundary on the energy resolution achievable in an experiment, depending on what time resolution is needed (or, vice versa, if energy resolution is critical, then the Fourier limit determines the maximum achievable time resolution). The demands on the resolution are set by the time and energy scales of the physical phenomena of interest: for example, studies of electron-electron interactions typically demand time resolution of no worse than tens of fs Light sources commonly used to supply the pulsed ultraviolet probe beam include tabletop laser setups Wavelengths down to approximately 115 nm (i.e., energies up to approximately 11 eV) are achievable with commercial off-the-shelf laser systems It is possible to use a single powerful laser to generate both the IR pump and the HHG XUV beam. An advantage of this approach is that the pulse trains of the two beams are automatically synchronized. The method works by taking the IR beam from a commercial laser system and splitting it into two parts, one of which is used to generate HHG, and the other of which is sent along a separate beam path for use as a pump. A movable delay stage in one of the beamlines (typically the pump beamline) controls the pulse separation ∆, and then the two beams are recombined. In a 3D-dispersing system, the probe photon energy determines which part of the 3D Brillouin zone is measured. Control of the probe energy also allows for optimization of photoemission intensity in electronic states of interest, via control of final state and matrix element effects The best-established technology for photoelectron spectroscopy is the hemispherical analyser (HA). This tool measures photoemission intensity as a function of momentum and energy across a wide range of binding energies and with energy resolution that is better than 1 meV When important physics arise simultaneously in multiple parts of the Brillouin zone, or when photon-energy-dependent measurements will cause the 3D Brillouin zone to shrink and expand on the detector, an alternative approach to detection is desirable. Moreover, in the case of short-pulse pump-probe applications, the high energy resolution of the analyser greatly exceeds the Fourier limit of the short light pulses. Recent years have seen rapid advancements in new types of analyser technologies Very recently, a new type of simple, economical, and yet highly effective photoelec-tron analyser has been developed. The working principle-similar to that of velocity map imaging In Fig. The pump and probe pulses are generated from the output of a 1-kHz Ti:Sapphire laser (upgraded from the RedDragon, KMLabs) with a pulse energy of about 3 mJ at 790 nm. The bandwidth is approximately 50 nm, as shown in Fig. The remaining 20 percent of the output beam is used for pumping, either at its fundamen- The FeSuMa is a new type of ARPES analyser that combines Fourier electron optics with retarding field techniques By setting V r such that only Fermi-level electrons can reach the detector from an unpumped sample, one can observe the Fermi surface map directly on the screen. In order to obtain information about electrons with higher binding energies, V r is reduced step-bystep while the detector collects the integrated signal. Subsequent differentiation results in a conventional photoemission spectrum. An example of such a measurement is in Fig. In the Direct Mode, the lens projects an image of the electron source in real coordinates; thus, it can be used to characterize and track the beam spot in two dimensions (see Fig. This is a significant advantage in comparison with conventional HAs, where only one spatial coordinate, corresponding to the direction along the entrance slit, is accessible. Since the MCP is sensitive to UV photons, Direct Mode can also be used to detect reflected or scattered light from surface features and sample edges, and thus either to track the position of the photon beam or to find flat portions of the surface (since no photons should enter the analyser from a flat sample region if the electron signal is optimised). We finally mention here an advantage of the FeSuMa for pump-probe experiments: unlike in HAs and MMs, electron trajectories in the FeSuMa (being an order of magnitude shorter) do not pass through auxiliary focal planes or crossing points. In HAs, there are two imaging planes and one crossing point where electron trajectories are brought together (e.g., Ref. and Coulombic electron-electron interactions are presumably enhanced at such points. It is generally desirable to avoid such space charge effects, as they degrade angular and energy resolution. In the case of MMs, electron-electron interactions both inside the focusing column and in front of the objective lens are complex and problematic In the following, we summarise the versatile applications of the FeSuMa analyser when coupled with a pump-probe setup. To facilitate comparison with similar approacheas involving HAs and MMs We start by demonstrating a simple approach to a common (but historically challenging) application of TR-ARPES: namely, characterization of excited carrier relaxation between local conduction band minima in different parts of the BZ. In Fig. BZ simultaneously, allowing for identification of scattering pathways in the material. The time traces in Fig. An advantage that the FeSuMa shares with PEEM and momentum microscopy is the capability for maintaining a fixed sample geometry while mapping the momentum space. Incident light polarisation can remain fixed and photoemission matrix elements unchanged throughout an experiment, and one can straightforwardly extract information such as dichroism from excited-state populations. In Fig. A full movie of dynamics in a different material system-Bi(111)-is available in the Supplementary Materials 26 . A powerful aspect of the Artemis setup is its ability to switch efficiently between different HHG probe energies. (See also Ref. In this connection, we note both that the out-of-plane dispersion along the Σ-X path is more pronounced than that along K-H path Applying a bias voltage to the sample holder is a very convenient approach to increase the momentum field of view The drawback of this approach is that it can lead to distortions resulting from the presence of the electrical field, especially when cylindrical symmetry around the lens axis is broken by the sample's immediate environment (i.e., non-cylindrical sample holder, manipulator shape, cables, etc.). Because we can easily see the momentum distribution "live" before acquiring a spectrum, we can take some steps to minimize distortions by adjusting of the geometry of the experiment. Further processing after the measurement, based on purely symmetry-driven considerations, allows us to eliminate all visible distortions of the angular distribution. This will now be explained. We introduce two types of corrections to deal with angular and radial distortions, taking as our starting point the known symmetries of our material systems. In the angular case, we are concerned with a segment of the dataset where there are distortions like those illustrated schematically by black dashed lines in the left panel of Fig. For the radial correction, we show an illustrative example in Fig. As sketched schematically in Fig. In addition to the fact that a dense cloud of Coulombically interacting photoelectrons can be generated by the probe pulse, the pump beam can produce an unwanted cloud of "slow" secondary electrons via multiphoton photoemission and emission from surface defects In our setup, photoemitted electrons are tightly confined in space and time only once, at the sample surface, before they interact with the MCP Of course, the severity of distortions always depends also on XUV beam diameter and on pulse energy In Fig. The FeSuMa offers a simple, affordable approach to high-quality pump-probe photoemission measurements, particularly for time-resolved ARPES of valence and conduction states near the Fermi level. Like certain PEEM-based approaches, it permits measurement of dynamics spanning the entire Brillouin zone. In the context of an HHG beamline that permits scanning of the probe energy, the fisheye mode of operation offers particular benefit for studies of 3D-dispersing states. The FeSuMa is highly to hemispherical analyzers, and constitutes an attractive option for laboratory-scale measurements of electron dynamics. Measurements of conduction-band dynamics in layered 2H-WSe 2 yield excellent agreement with previously published results based on momentum microscopy. In Fig. P. Grychtol, N. Kohlstrunk, J. Buck, S. Thiess, V. Vardanyan, D. Doblas-Jimenez, J. Ohnesorge, S. Babenkov, M. Dommach, D. La Civita, M. Vannoni, K. Rossnagel, G. Schönhense,