Bi2O2Se has attracted intensive attention due to its potential in electronics, optoelectronics, as well as ferroelectric applications. Despite that, there have only been a handful of experimental studies based on ultrafast spectroscopy to elucidate the carrier dynamics in Bi2O2Se thin films, Different groups have reported various ultrafast timescales and associated mechanisms across films of different thicknesses. A comprehensive understanding in relation to thickness and fluence is still lacking. In this work, we have systematically explored the thickness-dependent Raman spectroscopy and ultrafast carrier dynamics in chemical vapor deposition (CVD)-grown Bi2O2Se thin films on mica substrate with thicknesses varying from 22.44 nm down to 4.62 nm at both low and high pump fluence regions. Combining the thickness dependence and fluence dependence of the slow decay time, we demonstrate a ferroelectric transition in the thinner (< 8 nm) Bi2O2Se films, influenced by substrate-induced compressive strain and non-equilibrium states. Moreover, this transition can be manifested under highly non-equilibrium states. Our results deepen the understanding of the interplay between the ferroelectric phase and semiconducting characteristics of Bi2O2Se thin films, providing a new route to manipulate the ferroelectric transition. In contrast to van der Waals (vdW) forces, Bi2O2Se exhibits relatively strong electrostatic forces between layers due to its alternately stacked positively charged [Bi2O2] 2+ and negatively charged Se 2-layers along the c direction. Despite the limited number of experimental studies utilizing ultrafast spectroscopy to investigate the carrier dynamics in Bi2O2Se thin films, various groups have reported a diversity of ultrafast timescales and their associated mechanisms. Tian et al. associated the rapid recovery time (several picoseconds) with electron-electron coupling in solution-processed Bi2O2Se with a thickness of 155.5 nm. It is, therefore, imperative to systematically investigate thickness-dependent ultrafast carrier dynamics. Additionally, comprehending high-density carrier behaviors remains crucial for applications in high-power electronics. In this work, we systematically investigated the thickness-dependent and pump fluencedependent ultrafast dynamics of thin Bi2O2Se flakes on mica substrate prepared by the CVD method. In a Bi2O2Se crystal, the atoms are arranged in an orthogonal lattice (a=b=3.88 Å, c=6.08 Å), as illustrated in Figure Figure To shed light on the diminished e-ph coupling strength in the thinner films, we then conducted degenerate pump-probe measurements at low pump fluence levels (0.61 μJ/ cm 2 ~ 12.13 μJ/cm 2 ) using an Oscillator (Maitai SP) with 84 MHz repetition rate and 800 nm central wavelength. Both pump and probe beams were focused onto the same spot of the sample by an objective lens. The pulse width of both pump and probe pulses was around 150 fs at the sample surface. These pump fluences correspond to photoexcited carrier densities of 0.65 × 10 18 cm -3 to 12.86 × 10 18 cm -3 (More details can be found in Supporting Information.), which were calculated using the transfer matrix method. where ΔR represents the transient reflectivity change at time t, R0 is reflectivity without pump, An is the amplitude of the corresponding process, τn is the decay time of different decay channels, and y0 is an offset term. In the pump fluence range of 0.61 μJ/cm 2 to 12.13 μJ/cm 2 , only a single exponential decay function (Equation 1, n=1) is required for successful fitting. This suggests that only one electron decay channel is active under the measurement conditions employed. To unravel the abnormal mechanism in the thinner films, we conducted high-fluence degenerate pump-probe experiments with an Amplifier (Ascend, 800 nm, 35 fs, 5 kHz). The pump fluence varies from 0.96 mJ/cm 2 to 4.08 mJ/cm 2 , corresponding to photoexcited carrier density of 0.25 The fast decay process (τ1) can be attributed to several possible mechanisms: i) Carrier-carrier scattering, ii) Carrier-phonon scattering, and iii) Auger recombination at high pump intensities. However, it is important to note that carrier-carrier scattering typically happens on the timescale of hundreds of femtoseconds. To further understand the decaying mechanisms for τ1 and τ2, we analyzed the rate equation (Equation where Nt is the photogenerated carrier density, and the coefficients C1, C2, and C3 depict the weight or rate constants for each process. This equation describes the time evolution of the photogenerated carrier density (Nt) following photoexcitation of the thin film. The first term represents first-order Shockley-Reed recombination, which is mediated by trap states. The second term corresponds to second-order non-geminate/free carrier recombination, while the third term represents three-body Auger recombination. We observe that τ1 is relatively independent of film thickness, consistent with the argument that the Auger recombination process only depends on carrier density. On the other hand, τ2 exhibits a similar trend to Figure Therefore, we can eliminate the influence of thickness-dependent exciton binding energy on the observed phenomenon. The distinct behavior observed for τ2 in these thinner films indicates the presence of specific processes or interactions that are either absent or less prominent in thicker films. To further understand this phenomenon, we have plotted τ2 against pump fluence for three different film thicknesses of 4.62 nm, 7.96 nm, and 22.44 nm, which is shown in Figure Three possible mechanisms leading to prolonged decay time in the thinner films are i) dielectric screening, ii) Mott-like phase transition, and iii) a ferroelectric phase transition of Bi2O2Se induced by symmetry breaking. As illustrated in Figure Additionally, under high pump fluences, with more photoexcited carriers reaching a non-linear excitation level, as depicted in Figure Light-driven temporal phase transitions have been reported in bismuth by modifying the potential energy surface Overall, we have investigated the thickness-dependent Raman spectroscopy and ultrafast carrier dynamics in the CVD-grown Bi2O2Se thin films on mica substrate with thicknesses ranging under the compressive strain from the substrate, while this transition can be manifested under highly non-equilibrium states. These findings deepen our understanding of the interplay between the ferroelectric phase and semiconducting properties of Bi2O2Se thin films, providing a new route to manipulate the ferroelectric transition. The controllable synthesis of ultra-thin to a few nanometers thick Bi2O2Se flakes was effectuated following our previously reported vapor-solid growth technique. Optical Characterizations: The thickness of Bi2O2Se nanosheets was measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM Bruker Dimension Icon, Germany). Raman results were collected on a Renishaw InVia Raman Microscope system with a 532 nm excitation laser in backscattering geometry. Degenerate pump-probe system: In this work, we utilized two home-built degenerate femtosecond laser pump-probe systems for transient measurements of carrier dynamics under ambient conditions. The time delay was controlled using a mechanical delay stage. At the low pump fluences, 800 nm laser pulses with a pulse width of 35 fs and a repetition rate of 84 MHz from the oscillator (Maitai SP, Spectra Physics) were split into pump pulses and probe pulses using a beam splitter. The spot diameter of the pump beam is approximately 50 μm, while the spot diameter of the probe beam is approximately 18 μm (1/e 2 ). The pump pulses were modulated at a frequency of 2 kHz using a mechanical chopper, and the signal from the probe pulses was recorded using a detector (Thorlabs, PDA100) linking to a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems, SR860). The absorption depth of 800 nm in Bi2O2Se is much larger than the sample thicknesses we studied. At the high pump fluence, the light source was switched to an Amplifier (Ascend, 800 nm, 35 fs, 5 kHz). The spot diameter of the pump beam is approximately 13 μm, while the spot diameter of the probe beam is approximately 10 μm (1/e 2 ). The pump pulses were modulated at a frequency of 585 Hz using a mechanical chopper, and the probe signal was recorded using a balanced photodiode (Thorlabs, PDB210A/M) linking to a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems, SR860). Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or the author. Foundation" (Grant No. 11110032542301) and Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (RCBS20210609103822042). where n is the complex refractive index of Bi2O2Se, d is the thickness, and λ is the wavelength. So, the total transfer matrix can be written as: The reflectance can be written as: Next, the initial carrier density N0 is given by N0 = (1-R-T)×F / (deff×Eph), where F represents the pump fluence, Eph represents the photon energy. deff stands for the effective absorption depth, which is equal to the sample thickness since the laser penetration depth is much greater than the thickness of the sample. Table 