We construct correlation-consistent effective core potentials (ccECPs) for a selected set of heavy atoms and f -elements that are of significant current interest in materials and chemical applications, including Y, Zr, Nb, Rh, Ta, Re, Pt, Gd, and Tb. As customary, ccECPs consist of spin-orbit averaged relativistic effective potential (AREP) and effective spin-orbit (SO) terms. For the AREP part, our constructions are carried out within a relativistic coupled-cluster framework while also taking into objective function one-particle characteristics for improved convergence in optimizations. The transferability is adjusted using binding curves of hydride and oxide molecules. We address the difficulties encountered with f -elements, such as the presence of large cores and multiple near-degeneracies of excited levels. For these elements, we construct ccECPs with core-valence partitioning that includes 4f -subshell in the valence space. The developed ccECPs achieve an excellent balance between accuracy, size of the valence space, and transferability and are also suitable to be used in plane wave codes with reasonable energy cutoffs. Several years ago, we introduced correlation-consistent effective core potentials (ccECPs) that are constructed in an explicit many-body framework in contrast to more traditional one-particle approaches We have also established sets of reference data for constructed ccECPs, such as exact/nearly-exact total and kinetic energies and corresponding values typically obtained in single-reference real-space QMC calculations within the fixed-node approximation Here we present ccECPs for another selected set of elements, including transition metals, heavy elements, and, most importantly, a few lanthanides. It is well-known that the construction of ECPs for these elements is challenging due to several reasons, such as large relativistic effects including spin-orbit, many valence electrons, and also very large cores that can affect the transferability due to core polarizations and/or relaxations in varying chemical environments; difficult to resolve neardegeneracies showing up for states with occupations by 4f , 5d, 6s and 6p orbitals. Another issue is that there are much fewer calculations for heavy elements that probe the fidelity of ECPs in general, especially when compared with calculations involving elements from the first three rows In what follows, we briefly summarize the methods used. These are primarily based on our previous work Obvious complexities for heavier atoms arise from the increasing number of electrons in the core resulting from filling the shells with higher principal numbers. This leads to the associated core and semi-core polarizability and relaxation effects, especially in the lanthanide row where f -electrons are involved. Although most of the f -electron charges are in the core region, the tails extend far beyond the nominal core radii and typically reach bonding regions On the other hand, many constructions opt to use large cores, which also include f -electrons In our constructions, we attempt to balance accuracy and core size. Therefore, we have chosen to probe for a compromise solution that has been tested on the Tb element The construction of our ECPs aims to reproduce valence properties of the all-electron Hamiltonian for given elements in a many-body, correlated framework. The form of the pseudopotentials follows the same parameterization as used in our previous works This can be further explicitly written as: (2) Here the term V loc represents the local potential, while V l -V loc stands for the non-local s, p, d and f potentials with m |lm⟩ ⟨lm| as the angular-momentum projector. l max ranges from 3 to 4 depending on the element in question. V loc is chosen to remove the Coulomb singularity from the potential. The local contribution is given as follows: γ i e -δir 2 (3) where Z eff is the number of electrons in the valence space. α, β, δ i , and γ i are all parameters optimized during the optimization. This form ensures the perfect cancellation of the Coulomb singularity and smoothes out the curvature of the potential at small r The non-local channels follow a similar form and are parameterized as given by where n lj are fixed integers determined prior to optimization, and α lj , β lj are parameters optimized for each non-local channel individually. Most functions in each channel have n lj equal to 2. The spin-orbit terms are derived from Lee's definition of the general SOREP where l ′ max is a chosen integer that indicates the number of channels of spin-orbit terms. P l is the same angularmomentum projector described above. The radial potential in the spin-orbit terms can be further parameterized as: Note that in both AREP and SO term constructions, the parameters n lj and n lk are usually chosen as integers and fixed during the process. The set of parameter α lj , α lk , β lj and β lk forms our parameter space. DONLP2 For Y, Zr, Nb, Rh, Ta, Re, and Pt, since the choice of their core is the same as the elements in the same row in our previous works, the objective functions and optimization process are similar. However, for Tb and Gd, the novel core choice also has led to extra complexities. To have a better starting point, two different initialization strategies have been experimented with before the legacy optimization workflow. The construction of objective functions in the legacy optimization routine will be introduced in the next section; Tb and Gd will be discussed shortly after. The objective functions are crucial in constructing ECPs, as they directly reflect the desired properties to be reproduced. For the AREP ECP optimizations, the objective functions consist of several items. One of the important components is the minimization of atomic spectra discrepancies with respect to the ground state calculated at the CCSD(T) level. This includes the electron affinity (EA), several excited states, and ionization potentials (IPs) that aim to capture frequently observed effective charge states of the given atom in molecules and solids. Another useful criterium is reproducing the single-particle eigenvalues since they determine the tails of one-particle states and indirectly also the charge norm conservation. The objective function can be expressed as: Here ∆E s • represents the atomic gap of a state s with respect to the ground state in ECP and AE cases. Hence the first term indicates the sum of squared biases of the chosen states from the AE atomic spectrum. The corresponding weight ω s can be tuned to adjust the influence of each particular state, and having this flexibility improves the convergence of optimizations. ε i • represents the single-particle eigenvalue in ECP and AE cases. Usually, they correspond to the ground state, while {ω i } are the corresponding weights. In our optimizations, {ω i } are typically larger than {ω s }, with the difference reaching up to an order of magnitude to balance the impact of the terms that leads to faster optimization. Here all the energies are obtained from CCSD(T) level calculations with large uncontracted basis sets, typically aug-cc-pwCVTZ with extra diffusive terms. For Gd and Tb, due to the sensitivity of the basis set choice, we have expanded the basis set to aug-cc-pwCVQZ with diffusive terms. All of our CCSD(T) calculations are carried out by Molpro v.2015.1 with 10 th DKH Hamiltonian accounting for scalar-relativistic effects. Very often, our ECP parameters are initialized from Stuttgart ECPs and further trained with the target objective functions. In some of the cases, we also tried to start with parameters from previous ccECPs of other elements, for example, in the same group or close in atomic number. Using this approach, Zr, Nb, Rh, Ta, and Re ECPs have been successfully constructed. The spin-orbit terms are subsequently optimized after the AREP ccECPs are optimized and verified with transferability tests. Similar to the above, the objective function for the spin-orbit terms can be written as: The main difference here is that instead of singleparticle eigenvalues, we focus on the multiplet splitting energies referenced from the lowest energy of the same electronic state in ECP and AE cases, represented by ∆E m • . All the calculations for spin-orbit optimizations are carried out using the DIRAC code at the complete open-shell configuration interaction (COSCI) level of accuracy with the exact two-component Hamiltonian (X2C). After the AREP and SOREP constructions are finalized, well-tempered (aug)-cc-p(C)VnZ basis sets (n = D, T, Q, 5 for non-f elements and D, T, Q for f -elements) are generated. The basis sets are optimized using the CISD method. We optimize the lowest exponent and the ratio between two subsequent exponents for each basis channel. After this procedure, the augmentation terms were added. More detailed explanations of basis set generations are given in the Supplementary Material. For the non-f elements, the initial parameters are often obtained from Stuttgart ECPs or previous ccECPs for other elements. However, due to the special choice of core for f -elements, namely [Kr]4d 10 (46 electrons), the initialization of ECP parameters becomes a non-trivial challenge. In the first place, we generate all the initial parameters from scratch. Additionally, in the complicated space formed by ECP parameters, numerous local minima can easily trap the optimization process if the initial guesses are not close enough to a desired or, at least, an acceptable local minimum. For the Tb element, the initial guess generation can be summarized as follows: The primary gain here is reducing the number of parameters and the fact that the objective function O i AREP contains only one single-particle eigenvalue. This makes the optimization process finish much faster than if there more parameters and a more complicated objective function. The results for the Tb element will be shown in later sections. However, it is not guaranteed that this will work for all cases of interest. This happens when the above procedure is applied to initialize the Gd element. After many restarts, we tried a slightly modified approach, which eventually worked as follows: 1. Partition the chosen set of states S into S sp , S d and S f . 2. We optimize the S sp objective function with extra single-particle eigenvalues from different states included, beyond just the ground state. 3. Add the d channel with initial guesses and update the modified reduced objective function with drelated atomic spectrum gaps so that spd channels are optimized. 4. Update the f channel and repeat step 3. These additional optimization steps for the f -elements lead to a unique set of difficulties during ECP constructions. Currently, due to the complicated parameter space, we found that it is difficult to come up with a universal solution to the initialization problem of the felements. At the same time, since Tb and Gd have been generated successfully, as will be shown later, these can be used as possible starting points for other f -elements. For each element we demonstrate the accuracy of the spectrum in a table with three versions of absolute deviations related to the ECP gaps compared to the corresponding AE values. The first one is the mean absolute deviation (MAD). For the considered N atomic states, the MAD is defined as follows: The next metric is the MAD of selected low-lying gaps for a smaller subset of n atomic states that includes only the states of the first excitation state (EX, mostly s ↔ d transitions), electron affinity (EA), first ionization potential (IP), and second ionization potential (IP2): Additionally, a weighted MAD (WMAD) is defined as well for all considered N gaps as follows: Besides our ccECPs, we calculate the same metrics for various other legacy ECPs for comparison. These ECPs include MWBSTU where the D(r) is the binding energy of dimer molecules at the atomic separation length r, which ranges from compressed bond length to stretched bond length. For each core approximation, the calculated binding energies are fitted to the Morse potential: where D e denotes the dissociation energy, r e labels the equilibrium bond length, and a is a fitting parameter depends on the vibration frequency: where μ is the reduced mass of the molecule. Table In this section, we discuss the results for Y, Zr, Nb, and Rh. The elements in this section use the same 28 electron core [Ar]3d 10 as in our previous ccECP work The binding energy discrepancy is plotted in a wide range of bond lengths, from near the dissociation limit at short distances to stretched bond lengths. We observe modest improvement in the binding curves of monohydrides and monoxides for these selected 4d elements. The results are shown in the following Figures We can observe that for Yttrium, given its simple structure, all the ECPs are presenting binding curves that are almost completely within the chemical accuracy bounds. We note that our ccECPs for Y,Zr, Nb, and Rh, show systematic improvements when compared to other ECPs. We see consistently small discrepancies at equilibrium bond lengths as well as throughout the entire bond lengths. Improvements are more noticeable in the oxide binding scenario, especially in ZrO and NbO, where ccECP outperforms other ECPs significantly to maintain accuracy in all geometries. Our AREP ccECPs show systematic improvement when compared to legacy ECPs, both in atomic spectra and molecular tests. In Table This section includes elements Ta, Re, and Pt. The 60-electron core employed (configuration [Kr]4d 10 4f 14 ) is identical to the core used for 5d elements from in our previous work The atomic spectra accuracy are presented with MAD, LMAD, and WMAD plots in Figures For the molecular calculation, similar to the 4d series, we also observed overall consistency and quality improvements shown in Figures It is important to note that throughout the optimization of the 5d elements, we imposed additional restrictions on the range of all exponents (α lk ) to prevent high plane wave cutoffs in codes with periodic boundary conditions. Consequently, some compromises observed in the results stem from these additional restrictions made in favor of wider applicability in plane wave applications. In conclusion, our ccECPs for the selected 5d elements, Ta, Re, and Pt, exhibit systematic improvements in both atomic spectra accuracy and molecular binding curves. The elements in this section are characterized by a unique core configuration, which represents one of the novel aspects of this work. The core comprises 46 electrons, separating thus the n = 4 shell into subshells. Specifically, the core is given as [[Kr]4d 10 ], with the 4f subshell included in the valence space. This unorthodox core choice has been less explored in previous ECP constructions since the core is often defined by a closed shell of principal quantum number n. For instance, the core for 3d transition metals includes electrons up to n = 2 ([Ne]-core), while for the 4d transition metals it is n = 3 ([Ar]3d 10 ). Generating ECPs for these elements required a modified approach due to the chosen core structure. We first fitted eigenvalues for each one-particle channel to establish reliable initial guess parameters. A similar procedure of developing initial guess parameters has been applied in our previous work when constructing soft ccECPs for the late 3d transition metals Despite the additional constraints applied to exponents (α lk ) for a desirably small cutoff in plane wave applications, our ccECP atomic results for Tb display com-parable accuracy with the uncorrelated core results and show a significant improvement over SBKJC and also DFT-PBE (which was generated using Troullier-Martins scheme For transferability tests of rare-earth elements (R), we focused on RH 3 and RO molecules, instead of regular monohydride and monoxide molecules since the R 2+ and R 3+ are more relevant for wider applications, such as in bulk materials. The results are summarized in Figures We note that further studies are still needed to better understand Gd, Tb, and rare-earth elements in general. For example, just identifying the ground state of an isolated Tb atom proved to be non-trivial. Spectroscopy experiments indicate that the correct ground state is [Xe]4f 9 6s 2 (J = 15 2 ) and the lowest excited state is [Xe]4f 8 5d6s 2 (J = 13 2 ) with a ≈ 0.035 eV gap We present a new set of correlation-consistent ECPs for selected elements Y, Zr, Nb, Rh, Ta, Re, Pt, and lanthanides, Tb, Gd. This choice has been motivated by needs from areas such as catalysis and materials research, where these elements play a prominent role. We encountered several complications that made construction much more complex than in our previous works on 5d transition metals One of the key difficulties observed for f -elements is the near-degeneracy of 4f levels with s, p, and d channel states. In CCSD(T) calculations, this often results in severe convergence problems in both ECP and all electron calculations. Additionally, different choices of basis sets can also contribute to the ill-convergence behavior, with the f -elements displaying particular sensitivity to the choice of basis sets We also observe that the usefulness of atomic spectra as the guiding principle of ECP constructions becomes less impactful on final quality than in previous works Clearly, recreating the effect of all-electron atoms with a full account of relativity, possibly QED effects, and a full account of correlation poses a significant challenge that is further complicated by effects such as core polarization and relaxation. One possible remedy would be to include core polarization and relaxation terms that have been occasionally used before. Unfortunately, this goes against the simplicity of use since almost all of the existing mainstream condensed matter codes (Quantum Espresso, VASP) and many quantum chemistry basis set packages (PySCF Overall, our work provides a new generation of ECPs for selected set of heavy elements, pioneers new corevalence partitioning for 4f open-shell atoms, and opens possibilities for valence-only calculations with signifi- cantly better account of accuracy and transparency of systematic errors involved. Additional information about ccECPs can be found in the Supplementary Material. Therein, AREP results for calculated atomic spectra for each element and molecular binding curve fit parameters are provided. The atomic spectra results include AE spectra for each element and the corresponding discrepancies of various core approxi-mations. The molecular fit parameters for hydrides, trihyrides, and oxides are provided. The ccECPs in semilocal form, Kleinman-Bylander projected forms, as well as optimized Gaussian valence basis sets in various input formats (Molpro, GAMESS, NWChem) can be found on the website Concerning the SO results, the detailed atomic gaps at the COSCI (complete open-shell configuration interaction) level used for optimizing spin-orbit terms are provided. Input and output data generated and related to this work will be published in Material Data Facility FIG.