We investigate the ultrafast optical response of PbTe to an intense single-cycle terahertz pulse, resonant with the soft transverse optical (TO) phonon mode of the crystal. We detect multifrequency oscillations of the reflectance anisotropy, which we associate with nonlinear motion of the TO phonon oscillator excited directly by the terahertz pulse. Our observation of monotonically decaying optical anisotropy together with second harmonic oscillations of the TO mode is an evidence of a transient non-centrosymmetric state of the crystal lattice that can be accompanied by the ferroelectric order. We suppose that this state is induced in the PbTe crystal by the intense terahertz pulse via alignment of the local polar nanodomains. This hypothesis is partially supported by the observation of coherent phonons near the satellite phonon mode frequency that are impulsively generated by a femtosecond laser pulse and are considerably enhanced by a synchronous terahertz pulse. Lead telluride crystals have the NaCl structure and possess a strongly anharmonic transverse optical phonon mode with a rather low frequency near 1 THz Bringing a PbTe crystal closer to this transition is of interest from the point of view of fundamental physics, as well as practical applications, such as control of ferroelectric polarization and increasing the thermoelectric figure of merit. The energetic proximity to a noncentrosymmetric structure and the softness of the TO phonon mode make lead telluride crystals particularly susceptible to various external stimuli including strain Since the TO mode is infrared active, it is possible also to explore a direct approach -excitation of atomic vibrations by terahertz radiation In addition, we use near infrared femtosecond laser pulses to generate in the PbTe crystal coherent phonons at a frequency of ∼ 1.4 THz (∼ 6 meV), which behave differently with respect to the observed harmonics. This phonon mode can be related to the satellite peak of the main TO phonon of PbTe that has been detected or theoretically predicted is several previous studies The crystal of lead telluride that was studied in the present work was grown by the Czochralski method and cleaved along the (100) plane. The room-temperature concentration of charge carriers was 3•10 18 cm -3 (p-type). Measurements of the ultrafast dynamics were performed using the standard pump-probe layout. Pump terahertz pulses were generated via optical rectification of femtosecond laser pulses with tilted front in a crystal of lithium niobate In order to characterize the excited state created by the pump pulse in the PbTe crystal we detected anisotropy of reflectance using weak probe femtosecond pulses at 800 nm. To do that we measured rotation of polarization of a probe pulse reflected from the sample using a Wollaston prism and a pair of amplified photodiodes. The initial polarization of the probe beam was set to 45 • relative to the vertical polarization of the terahertz pulses. The measurement was repeated multiple times for open and closed pump beam (modulated by an optical chopper) and the normalized difference value was calculated and then averaged. The resulting quantity will be denoted as φ throughout the text. Due to this normalization procedure, it is close to zero in equilibrium. Pump and probe beams were incident onto the sample at an angle of ∼ 15 • . Low temperature measurements were performed with the PbTe crystal placed inside a liquid nitrogen cryostat with optical windows made from TPX polymer. Figure The frequencies of the TO and LO phonon modes of PbTe at room temperature that can be found in the literature usually lie near 1 THz and 3.3 THz, respectively (see e. g. Moreover, symmetry considerations impose restrictions on the types of coherent phonons that can be detected using our experimental layout. Rotation of polarization of the probe pulse upon reflection from the excited sample implies a certain anisotropy of reflectance induced by coherent motion of atoms. Therefore, in order to be detected, coherent phonons should modulate polarizability of the crystal and be Raman active. However, it was shown theoretically that for crystals with rock-salt structure there is no first-order Raman scattering In order to clarify the origin of the observed oscillations, we have repeated measurements at lower temperatures. The results obtained at 85 K for two values of the peak electric field of the pump terahertz pulse are shown in Fig. Normalized spectra of the oscillations obtained at temperatures of 85, 120, 140, 170, and 200 K are presented in Fig. The experimental results described above can be tentatively interpreted as follows. First, we identify the observed spectral peaks at frequencies ω 1 , ω 2 , and ω 3 with the fundamental frequency of the TO phonon mode of the PbTe crystal, and with its second and third harmonics, respectively. The intense terahertz pulse is resonant with the infrared active TO mode and drives the atomic motion directly, creating a coherent wave packet with a rather large amplitude. This process can in principle be illustrated as motion of a classical oscillator in a potential that is strongly anharmonic due to anharmonicity of the crystal lattice of PbTe and the "softness" of this TO mode. The oscillator is nonlinear and the spectrum of its vibration contains harmonics of the fundamental frequency This simplified model can account for the basic features of the detected reflectance anisotropy signal. However, it contains several inconsistencies. First, the model implies that the damping rate γ of the second harmonic oscillations is twice larger than the damping rate γ T O of the vibrations at the fundamental frequency ω T O . Using this relation, we can obtain from our data values of γ T O from ∼ 0.2 THz to ∼ 0.6 THz in the temperature range 100-300 K, which are considerably larger than the typical values available in the literature (see e. g. Here we note that in several recent studies on x-ray and neutron scattering of PbTe it was argued that though the "average" structure of the crystal is cubic, on the scale of several unit cells there occurs dynamic off-centering of Pb atoms, which leads to a local symmetry lowering and formation of non-centrosymmetric polar nanoregions A notable feature that was associated with the polar nanodomains in the above-mentioned studies was a satellite peak that appeared for temperatures above ∼ 100 K at slightly higher frequencies relative to the TO phonon. This additional phonon mode at frequencies ∼ 1.4-1.6 THz was also observed experimentally and modeled numerically in several previous works We have performed additional measurements of the photoinduced reflectance anisotropy of PbTe with femtosecond pump pulses at 1.3 μm and detected very weak oscillations at Ω ∼ 1.4 THz, the behavior of which differs considerably from the behavior of the coherent TO phonons and their harmonics generated by the intense terahertz pulse. The results are shown in Fig. The observed oscillations at Ω ∼ 1.4 THz are likely caused by coherent phonons impulsively excited in the PbTe crystal by the 1.3 μm femtosecond laser pulse. We suppose that these phonons can be associated with the fluctuating polar nanodomains of PbTe by analogy with the previous studies, in which the satellite peak of the TO phonon mode was detected. First, such interpretation could account for the small amplitude of the oscillations. Indeed, as we have already noted above, since the static (or dynamic "averaged") crystal structure of PbTe is of the cubic rock-salt type, generation and anisotropic detection of coherent phonons are forbidden to the first order in phonon coordinates. Local symmetry lowering can lift this selection rule and allow generation of weak coherent phonons. Second, as we assumed above, an intense terahertz pulse could align the local polar nanoregions and create a transient state with a lower symmetry and enhance the oscillations at Ω ∼ 1.4 THz. Such effect is indeed observed in our experiments (see Fig. The effect of cooling on these features is, however, somewhat controversial, if we refer to the studies, in which the satellite peak was reported, staying at the same time in the framework of our hypothesis. In our case both the amplitude of coherent phonons at Ω ∼ 1.4 THz and the effect of the terahertz pulse on this ampli- tude increase upon cooling, while the frequency shift is relatively small. However, in most of the neutron and x-ray scattering experiments the amplitude and the frequency of the satellite peak increased considerably upon heating starting from ∼ 100 K In summary, we have studied the optical response of PbTe to an intense nearly single-cycle terahertz pulse. Relaxation of the induced anisotropy of reflectance of the crystal was accompanied by oscillations at three distinct frequencies, which we associated with the fundamental frequency of the TO phonon mode and with its second and third harmonics. All three spectral peaks shifted to lower frequencies upon cooling in accordance with the well-established temperature dependence of the soft TO mode of PbTe. Measured decay traces contained a monotonic exponential transient, the characteristic time of which was close to the lifetime of the second harmonic oscillations in the whole temperature range covered. Ex-citation of the PbTe crystal by a femtosecond pulse at 1.3 μm generated coherent phonons at the frequency of ∼ 1.4 THz, close to the well-known but controversial satellite of the TO phonon mode. The damping of these oscillations, as well as the low-frequency shift and line narrowing upon cooling were considerably smaller than those of the second harmonic of the TO phonon mode, while at low temperature they could be enhanced by a synchronous terahertz pulse. In order to interpret the obtained results, we supposed that the terahertz pulse aligns fluctuating local polar nanoregions of PbTe creating a macroscopic non-centrosymmetric state of the crystal lattice. In this transient state the nonlinear motion of the TO phonon oscillator, resonantly excited by the same pulse, becomes detectable due to lifting of the selection rules. The alignment of local dipoles also enhances impulsive coherent excitation of the associated satellite phonon mode by a femtosecond laser pulse.