CoFe 2 O 4 /Co-Fe magnetic composites are usually prepared through partial reduction of CoFe 2 O 4 , which often yields monoxides (i.e., FeO, CoO) as secondary phases. Since these compounds are paramagnetic at ambient conditions, the presence of a small amount of monoxide is generally downplayed in the literature, and the possible effects on the magnetic properties are simply ignored. However, the present study shows that even a low concentration of monoxide results in decoupling of the soft and hard magnetic phases, which inevitably leads to a deterioration of the magnetic properties. Additionally, it is confirmed that a partial reduction of CoFe 2 O 4 is a suitable method to produce CoFe 2 O 4 /Co-Fe nanocomposites, provided that the treatment is well controlled with respect to duration, temperature and flow of reductant. A monoxide-free nanocomposite was produced and its magnetic properties evaluated both at room and low temperature. Our model system exemplifies the potential of exchange-coupling (and decoupling) as a tool to tune the magnetic properties of a material within a relatively wide range of values, thus widening its spectrum of potential applications. Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) have undoubtedly been one of the hot research topics of the 21st century. The actual application determines the required magnetic properties. Very often, the stability and longevity of the devices rely on a strong resistance to demagnetization (i.e. hard magnetic material, with large coercivity, H c ). Other times, the crucial parameter that ensures compliance with the specific task is the ability of the material to become magnetized up to a high value (i.e. high saturation magnetization, M s ). Most of the available materials show either a large H c and a moderate M s or vice versa. SFs have the general formula M 2+ (Fe 3+ ) 2 O 4 , with M = Mg, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn. For the above reasons, numerous studies on the CoFe 2 O 4 (hard)/Co-Fe (soft) composite are found in the literature, including composites prepared as powders, Magnetic CoFe 2 O 4 /Co-Fe nanocomposites were prepared by means of a controlled reduction of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles. The starting CoFe 2 O 4 material was hydrothermally synthesized following the procedure described in a previous work, Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD). PXRD data were collected on all the samples in a Bragg-Brentano y/y configuration using Cu Ka 1,2 radiation (l 1 = 1.540593 Å, l 2 = 1.544427 Å) at a laboratory Rigaku SmartLab s diffractometer operated at 40 kV and 180 mA. The incident slit (IS) choice was different depending on the amount of sample available for the measurement. Further details on IS and 2y range may be found in the ESI. † A diffracted beam monochromator (DBM) was installed on the receiving optics to suppress the fluorescence contribution to the background and the data were collected with a D/teX Ultra detector. Rietveld analysis of the PXRD data was performed using the FullProf Suite. Prior to the measurements described above, the room temperature magnetization of the samples was measured in a smaller field range AE4 kOe (318 kA m À1 ) using a home-built VSM setup. Reduction treatments of variable duration and temperature yielded five different samples. Henceforth, tags in the form {time@temperature} are used to refer to the samples. Sample composition and sizes obtained from Rietveld analysis of the PXRD data collected on those samples are displayed in Fig. At 300 1C, the growth of the soft phase crystallites remains relatively controlled (r30.4(2) nm) regardless of the dwell time. Increasing the treatment temperature accelerates the reduction process, Fig. The unit cell dimensions of Co-Fe alloys increase with an increasing Fe content. To evaluate whether the crystallite size of the starting material plays a role, an additional time series of experiments were carried out at 300 1C using CoFe 2 O 4 powders with an average size of 8.2(1) nm (see Fig. Magnetization at room temperature (RT). Magnetic hysteresis loops measured at 300 K are displayed in Fig. M s follows the expected linear increase with the amount of alloy present in the sample. The trends exhibited by M r and H c are slightly more complex. A mild reduction, such as {2h@3001C} (in red color) yields a significant enhancement of both parameters; the composite with a 20.5(1) wt% alloy has a 50% higher M r and a 39% larger H c than the starting material. This is understood as a consequence of the temperature which causes a moderate growth of the CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles, from 14.4(1) to 21.5(1) nm, and has very likely induced a betterment of the crystallinity as well. As the alloy wt% increases, both M r and H c decrease, but the decrease is much more pronounced for the temperature series (circles) than for the time series (squares). For instance, the {4h@3001C} nanocomposite has a M r = 30.4(2) A m 2 kg À1 and a H c = 90(1) kA m À1 , and these parameters are reduced by more than half for the sample with approximately the same composition fabricated at 400 1C for 2 h (M r = 13.8(2) A m 2 kg À1 , H c = 44.3(6) kA m À1 ). Despite the similarity in composition between these two samples, the crystallite sizes of both hard and soft phases are much larger for the composite prepared at the higher temperature, which can explain the deterioration of the magnetic properties: (i) the 52.9(4) nm refined for the hard phase in {2h@4001C} is above the critical stable single-domain size (SSD) for CoFe 2 O 4 (E40 nm), The number of reversal or switching events is readily revealed by the maxima in the first derivative curve of the magnetization data. First derivatives of the M-H data from all a H c is given both in SI an CGS units to ease comparison with other works. samples are displayed in Fig. To summarize, the only composite showing LT exchangecoupling behavior is the monoxide-free sample {8h@3001C} (blue color). We believe this observation is far from coincidental, considering the correlation between the monoxide concentration and the degree of decoupling shown by our data (see plots on the right from Fig. Based on a joint interpretation of the RT and LT magnetization data, we understand that our monoxide-free, exchangecoupled sample {8h@3001C} is far from reaching the best magnetic properties the CoFe 2 O 4 /Co-Fe system allows. Samples with a lower alloy content, such as {2h@3001C} and {4h@3001C}, appear significantly more promising, owing to their higher M r and H c values at RT (see Fig. CoFe 2 O 4 (hard)/Co-Fe (soft) magnetic nanocomposites have been prepared through controlled partial reduction of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles, obtaining samples with several compositions and crystallite sizes. An additional monoxide phase was found in some of the samples, although this phase disappeared for long reaction times. Magnetization curves at room and low temperature reveal that an increasing monoxide concentration deteriorates inter-phase magnetic exchange-coupling. In fact, the only composite showing an effective exchange-coupling was monoxide-free. Thus, minimizing/avoiding the formation of the monoxide is crucial for producing effectively exchangecoupled CoFe 2 O 4 /Co-Fe nanocomposites. Once the chemistry behind the process is understood, partial reduction of CoFe 2 O 4 is a very strong method for synthesizing CoFe 2 O 4 /Co-Fe nanocomposites with controlled magnetic properties. Adjusting each of the reduction parameters (temperature, time, partial H 2 pressure, crystallite size of the starting CoFe 2 O 4 powders) has a very specific impact on the composition and crystallite sizes of the obtained nanocomposite, which, in turn, directly determines its magnetic behavior. The present work reveals exchange-coupling to be an excellent tool to further expand the range within which the magnetic properties of spinel ferrites can be tuned, extending the scope of this family of compounds. The method described here using CoFe 2 O 4 /Co-Fe as an example may in principle be applicable to other ferrite systems, including hard hexaferrites or other spinel ferrites (soft), and allows multiple combinations of magnetic compounds. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2020