The dimensionality of quantum materials strongly affects their physical properties. , such as charge-density wave and Luttinger liquid behavior, are well understood in one-dimensional (1D) systems, the generalization to explore them in higher dimensional systems is still a challenging task. In this study, we aim to bridge this gap by systematically investigating the crystal and electronic structures of molybdenum-oxide family compounds, where the contexture of 1D chains facilitates rich emergent properties. While the quasi-1D chains in these materials share general similarities, such as the motifs made up of MoO6 octahedrons, they exhibit vast complexity and remarkable tunability. We disassemble the 1D chains in molybdenum oxides with different dimensions and construct effective models to excellently fit their low-energy electronic structures obtained by ab initio calculations. Furthermore, we discuss the implications of such chains on other physical properties of the materials and the practical significance of the effective models. Our work establishes the molybdenum oxides as simple and tunable model systems for studying and manipulating the dimensionality in quantum systems. One-dimensional (1D) systems not only exhibit abundant quantum phenomena, such as chargedensity wave (CDW) Molybdenum oxide (MO), with a typical chemical formula AxMoOy, is a huge materials family In the current work, we focus on several low-dimensional MOs with layered structures to study their low-energy electronic structures. We disassemble the crystal structures of MOs into 1D chains, which arrange into either parallel quasi-1D arrays or intercrossed quasi-2D networks. On this basis, we construct low-energy effective models to excellently simulate the electronic structure of these MOs near EF. We propose that, notwithstanding the different dimensionality of MO crystals, their electronic structures can be understood by regarding the materials as assemblies of homologous 1D chains. In particular, we reveal radically different, i.e., quasi-1D and quasi-2D electronic structures of LixMo6O17 (x~0.9) and Mo4O11, despite their similar quasi-2D crystal structure, in which the electron filling plays a critical role. Our study provides a unified understanding of the crystal and electronic structures of MO compounds, which sheds light on the understanding and manipulating of the dimensionality in real materials. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe the methodology. Then we construct the effective model for four different materials in Sec. III. Sec. IV presents further discussions on the scientific implications of our results. Finally, the paper concludes in Sec. V. Electronic structure calculations were performed using density functional theory (DFT) with projected augmented wave method as implemented in the QUANTUM ESPRESSO package The calculated electronic structures of the studied materials well reproduce experimental results obtained by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy The effective models are of tight-binding type based on the crystal structure analysis and DFT calculation. The hopping integrals and overall energy shifts were determined by fitting the effective Hamiltonian to the DFT-calculated band energies. We evaluated the effective Hamiltonian numerically for each k-point in the uniform k-point mesh used in the non-selfconsistent calculation described previously. Then we performed least-squares fitting to minimize the difference between the effective-model and the DFT calculated band energies on the k-point mesh. The MOs considered here are built with 1D chains of corner-sharing MoO6 octahedrons [Figs. In general, the corner-sharing octahedrons can form chains via different connection patterns [Figs. We first consider KxMo6O17 (x~0.9) in the trigonal space group P3 ̅ (# 147), with lattice parameters a = 13.656 Å, b = c = 5.538 Å, α = 120°, and β = γ = 90° A 3×3 Hamiltonian can therefore be formulated with the same energy shift e s for the 3 equivalent chains: with k denoting the 2D wave vector in the b-c plane and r 1 = b, r 2 = c, r 3 = b + c. As shown in Fig. Mo4O11 crystallizes in either monoclinic (η-type) or orthorhombic (γ-type) structure, with two nearly-identical or quasi-mirrored Mo8O22 slabs in a unit cell respectively where r 1 = b, r 2 = b -c, r 3 = b + c. Here we assume equal distances between nearby lattice sites along C2/C3. The effective model also agrees nicely with the DFT calculated (surface-projected) bands in Fig. LixMo6O17 (x~0.9) crystallizes into the monoclinic space group Material where r 1 = b, r 2 = b -c, and r 3 = b + c. Fig. Considering that the lattice sites in C1 and C1′ within the same step [Fig. Table thereby emulating the situation depicted in Fig. In addition to the materials introduced above, the vast MO family contains many other congeners and isomers with similar chain-like structures and can therefore be analyzed likewise. Supplemental Note 7 In MPTBs and DPTBs, the structure of coupled-1D chains is highly similar to that of MOs, with MoO6 octahedrons (MoO4 tetrahedrons) replaced by WO6 octahedrons (PO4 tetrahedrons or P2O7 double-tetrahedrons). Such a replacement lowers the filling of the low-energy quasi-1D bands, due to the shortage of valence electrons of P compared with Mo. A notable characteristic of the tungsten bronzes is the larger spin-orbit coupling (SOC) strength of W atoms, which may be attractive for the establishment of SOC-induced spin transport effects Many MOs are derived from MoO3 by replacing some MoO6 octahedrons with MoO4 tetrahedrons during the reduction process On the other hand, the 6-coordinated Mo-O octahedron (with an effective coordination number of 3 due to the corner-sharing connection) and the 6 valence electrons of Mo atoms result in a closed shell with EF lying between the O p band continuum and the Mo d band continuum. Therefore, the lowest quasi-1D bands by Mo t2g orbitals are occupied by electrons donated by MoO4 tetrahedrons and intercalated metal atoms. For valence electron number different from 6, the quasi-1D orbitals, if exist, are either empty or fully occupied, making the electronic structure practically 2D / 3D. Therefore, with more delocalized 4d or 5d orbitals, Mo and W atoms are ideal for the formation of quasi-1D electronic structures in the quasi-2D crystals. Although the detailed structures and chemical environments of the quasi-1D chains are diverse, they manifest their structural rigidity with similar bond length and corner-sharing manner along the chain direction in different MOs, as summarized in Fig. On the other hand, the electronic structure of MOs can be strongly modulated by the fine structure of the chains. The "dimerization" of the staggered chains (C2/C3 in Mo4O11 and Li0.9Mo6O17) induces band gaps in Mo4O11, which are further enhanced in Li0.9Mo6O17 (Supplemental Material Thus far, we concentrated primarily on the crystal and band structures of the materials. However, many other physical phenomena have been experimentally explored, which warrant a detailed examination since they are rooted in intrinsic quasi-1D physics. A significant hallmark to consider in the quasi-1D realm is LL physics. The LL theory is initially designed for 1D systems, the reduced phase space relative to higher dimensional systems invalidates the Fermi liquid theory Another noteworthy phenomenon of quasi-1D materials is the transition between LL and CDW. Among the 4 materials that have been detailed, 3 of them, including KxMo6O17, Mo4O11, and K0.3MoO3, display CDW transitions at low temperatures. All of them feature periodic lattice distortion and gap opening in the electronic structure, with corresponding CDW wave vectors agreeing perfectly with the predictions by extracting the filling factors from the effective models, as detailed in Supplemental Material Considering the absence of well-defined quasiparticles in the LL normal phase in the 4 materials, their phase transitions require special treatment. Thus, the MO family provides a rare platform to explore the LL-originated phase transitions in real materials. As elucidated above, the LL physics in MOs can be qualitatively depicted by the 1D electronic structures. For the extraction of interacting parameters of the materials, quantitative models are essential. In fact, there have been extensive theoretical investigations starting from the doublechain structure (C1/1′) of LixMo6O17 to study the LL physics The CDW transitions in KxMo6O17, Mo4O11, and K0.3MoO3 can, to some extent, be explained with the quasi-1D chain structures under the Peierls scenario The current effective Hamiltonians are well-suited for analytical or calculation-demanding theories, but may not be accurate enough for certain numerical calculations due to the trade-off between model size and precision. As a solution, higher-order hopping terms can be added to the Hamiltonian, such as next-nearest neighbor hopping, hopping between chains along the same directions, and hopping beyond the same unit cell. In Supplemental Material Alternatively, one can build tight-binding models based on Wannier functions The current work examines the crystal and electronic structures of several low-dimensional MOs in detail. Disassembling their crystal structures yields 1D chains of Mo-O octahedrons, based on which effective Hamiltonians of the weakly-interacting-chain models are constructed, which fit well to the real band structures. Our work not only presents a rare materials platform with rich tunability of the structural and electronic dimensionality but also provides a simple model for the theoretical exploration of emergent properties of complex oxides, such as the LL behavior and its competition/interaction with electronic orders. in total (doubled with KxMo6O17). Consequently, the six low-energy bands are nearly half-filled.