Standard microscopic approach to magnetic orders is based on assuming a Heisenberg form for inter-atomic exchange interactions. These interactions are considered as a driving force for the ordering transition with magnetic moments serving as the primary order parameter. Any higher-rank multipoles appearing simultaneously with such magnetic order are typically treated as auxiliary order parameters rather than a principal cause of the transition. In this study, we show that these traditional assumptions are violated in the case of PrO2. Evaluating the full set of Pr-Pr superexchange interactions from a first-principles many-body technique we find that its unusual non-collinear 2k magnetic structure stems from high-rank multipolar interactions, and that the corresponding contribution of the Heisenberg interactions is negligible. The observed magnetic order in PrO2 is thus auxiliary to high-rank "hidden" multipoles. Within this picture we consistently account for previously unexplained experimental observations like the magnitude of exchange splitting and the evolution of magnetic structure in external field. Our findings challenge the standard paradigm of observable magnetic moments being the driving force for magnetic transitions. In systems with localized f-electrons, such as compounds with rare-earths or actinides elements, magnetic interactions can induce a rich variety of magnetic orders, often quite complex and non-collinear The multipolar moment operators, O " ! " (L = 1, . .2J, M = -L, . . L) are normalized Stevens operators; the latter have been used in the theory of rare-earth magnetism for over 50 years O " ! (%) O " where the summations run over the i, j lattice sites. The parameters V !",! ! " ! %' are two-site superexchange interaction (SEI) parameters and is the standard single-site CF Hamiltonian 1 expressed through unnormalized Stevens operators O " ! " . The number of higher rank multipoles (L > 1) and their associated interaction parameters increase rapidly with the multiplicity of the ground state of the f-ion. Unless there is experimental evidence of "hidden" multipolar order in the system or if large lattice distortions are associated with the magnetic ordering, only first-order (dipole) intersite interaction terms with L=1 are typically considered in theoretical analysis. They are of the handbook 1 Heisenberg-like form ∑ J , where the dipole magnetic moment at the site i is given by gμ + J " % , I ̅ %' is 3x3 interaction matrix, g , is the Lande factor and μ + is the Bohr magneton. The usual theoretical approach is then to look for the interaction matrices I ̅ %' that stabilize of the observed magnetically ordered structure In this study, we identify a system -the PrO2 dioxide -in which high-rank multipolar interactions are responsible for occurrence of the magnetic transition and stabilization of the observed magnetic order. We use first-principle based many-body techniques to calculate the full set of multipolar SEI and then solve the ab initio effective many-body Hamiltonian (1). At high temperatures, the PrO2 compound has a fluorite crystal structure similar to the dioxides of actinides Jensen To calculate the full set of parameters required for the effective many-body Hamiltonian (1) for PrO2, we first obtained the paramagnetic CF splitting and composition of the corresponding wave functions for both the cubic fluorite and experimental JT distorted structures using a charge self-consistent DFT + Dynamical Mean-Field Theory (DMFT) technique The interaction term in equation ( , we used the force theorem in the Hubbard-I Approximation (FT-HI) Using ab-initio-derived parameters of the full interacting Hamiltonian (eq. 1), we apply a generalized mean-field approximation (MFA) to study magnetic and multipolar phase transitions in PrO2. To cover all possible orderings within the crystal cell of the distorted structure (Fig. In the basal planes of the crystal structure there are two components of the magnetic moment: m -= 〈O " . . 〉, m / = 〈O " . 0. 〉 (Fig. PrO2 also exhibits a complex evolution of the magnetic structure and structural domain distribution under applied magnetic field. An initial application of 5 Tesla field H along the [110] cubic direction was found As shown above, the full calculated SEI Hamiltonian (1) provides a faithful description for the properties of magnetically ordered PrO2. Since a very large number terms are included into this Hamiltonian, it is important to understand the impact of different interactions on the complex magnetic and multipolar order in PrO2. To that end, we solved MFA equations only with standard Heisenberg magnetic interactions (dipolar interactions) included. Thus, we used only the dipole-dipole block (L=1) of calculated SEI, ∑ ∑ V .",." ! %' O " . (%) " O " .(') , disregarding all higher order multipolar interactions. This can be recast in the standard form ∑ J 1 % I ̅ %' J " ' %,' of a Heisenberg-like interaction between dipole magnetic moments. As expected from earlier analyses provided by Thus, the dominant contribution to the ordering in PrO2 must be due to high-order multipolar SEIs. We verified this explicitly, by setting in eq. 1 all SEIs involving dipole operators to zero. By solving eq. 1 with the dipole-moment contribution completely suppressed, we find essentially the same magnetic structure with the magnitude of magnetic moment reduced by about 6% and TN=18 K. Hence, the actual contribution of dipole moments into the formation of ordered structure is insignificant. This can be further confirmed by evaluating the contributions of various SEI, V !",!3" ! %' 〈O " ! " 〉 % 〈O " !3 "3 〉 ' , into the magnetic ordering energy; this analysis shows that the leading contributions are due to octupolar and trikontadipolar SEI (see SI Table To understand the mechanism through which the auxiliary dipole order is induced we determined among the J=5/2 moments those that are active within the lowest CF doublet. Since the JT splitting of 30 meV between this doublet and the first excited one (Fig. where for brevity we introduce a shorthand notation S 1 5 (S 2 5 ) for normalized superpositions of octupole (trikontadipole) Stevens operators contributing to a given τ 5 . Analogous expression is found for τ 4 , which includes only z-projections of the magnetic operators and thus, due to a strong planar anisotropy, plays no role in the magnetic order. The identity τ 6 is formed by timeeven J=5/2 operators corresponding to the CF; thus, it also plays no role. One sees that any doublet-space density matrix for an arbitrary planar order, ρ = τ -〈τ -〉 + τ / 〈τ / 〉, will include about the same total contributions due to dipoles, octupoles and trikontadipoles, since their respective contributions to both τ -and τ / are very similar. The strong JT splitting thus entangles magnetic operators of different ranks together; this is how dominating multipolar SEIs induce the auxiliary dipole order in PrO2. Due to this entanglement, separating the order parameters presented in Fig. In general, there is no physical reason why dipolar inter-site exchange interactions should dominate higher-order multipolar ones in heavy ions with unquenched orbital moments. This work demonstrates that the prevailing paradigm, which suggests that observed magnetic order arises solely from interactions between the observed order parameters, can be violated in real systems. A possible prominent role of the higher order multipolar interactions in PrO2 has been suggested previously Ab initio calculations. We calculated the electronic structure of PrO2 within the DFT+DMFT framework using the experimental lattice structures of both the high-temperature cubic structure and the "chiral" JT-distorted body-centered tetragonal one The CF splitting and states for the Pr 4f shell were obtained from converged DFT+HI calculations. The SEIs for all Pr-Pr bonds within several first correlation shells were obtained using the FT-HI method for the full J=5/2 multiplet and explicitly kept the CF term in the Hamiltonian (1). Mean-field calculations. We solved the many-body effective Hamiltonian (1) in the MFA considering all possible orders realizable within the distorted unit cell of PrO2 (Fig. !" %,'(@@) we obtained a set of coupled mean-field equations for each of the 35 multipolar moments 〈O " ! (%) " 〉 on each i AB sub-lattice, resulting in a system of 280 equations: ,...=) (!G.,...,8,,"G0!,..,!) (3) which we solve iteratively. Calculations of neutron-scattering intensities. We calculated the intensities of neutron Bragg peaks using the beyond-dipole-approximation approach of ref. 11. Namely, the intensity of elastic scattering I(q) at the scattering vector q reads , where 〈O K (q)〉 = ∑ 〈O K 〉 % e %qR i % is the Fourier transform of the order parameter 〈O K 〉 % for the magnetic multipole μ ≝ [LM] at site i, R i is the coordinate of this site within the magnetic unit cell, F K5 (q) is the form-factor for the multipole μ and α = x, y, or z, q h=q/|q|. The form-factors F K5 (q) were calculated by evaluating matrix elements of the neutron scattering operator 32 in the Pr J=5/2 basis and expanding the resulting matrix in the basis of J=5/2 magnetic multipole operators Below we list the full SEI matrix V !",! + " + '( for the nearest-neighbor lattice vector R=[0,1/2,-1/2], which is schematically shown in Fig. 