E LECTRONIC properties of materials are crucial to their ability to function in a wide range of applications, from electronics and energy production to structural materials and biomedicine The band structure of a material describes the allowed energy levels that electrons can occupy within the material. These energy levels are formed by the interaction of the electrons with the crystal lattice and other electrons in the material. They are typically organized into bands separated by energy gaps. The band structure can be calculated using various theoretical methods, such as density functional theory (DFT) and the tight-binding model, and it can also be measured experimentally using techniques such as angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) The density of states (DOS) is a measure of the number of electronic states available at a given energy level. It is typically calculated by considering the electronic states within a particular energy range, such as a band or an energy gap. The DOS can be used to calculate a range of electronic properties, such as the electrical conductivity and thermoelectric power, as well as to understand the electronic and optical responses of the material Both the band structure and DOS are important for understanding the electronic properties of materials and predicting their behavior in various applications. For example, the band structure can be used to predict the electrical conductivity of a material, as well as its suitability for use in electronics and optoelectronics. The DOS can be used to understand the optical properties of a material, such as its absorption coefficient and refractive index, as well as to predict its thermoelectric properties. In addition to their theoretical and predictive capabilities, the study of the band structure and DOS also has important practical applications. For example, the band structure can design new materials with specific electronic properties, such as high electrical conductivity or optoelectronic performance. The DOS can be used to optimize materials for energy conversion and storage applications, such as thermoelectrics and batteries Overall, the study of the band structure and DOS is an essential part of materials science and engineering, with wide-ranging implications for various fields and applications. In this article, we will compute the three-dimensional electronic band structure and density of states (DOS) of 14 face-centred cubic (FCC) crystals using pseudopotentials. We adopt Bloch Model for the calculations of the band structures. The Bloch Model describes the spectrum of the electron energy states in the framework of the one-electron approximation using a periodic potential that is independent of time. Bloch's theorem applies to wave functions of electrons inside a crystal and rests in the fact that the Coulomb potential in a crystalline solid is periodic. As a consequence, the potential energy function, V (r), in Schrödinger's equation should be of the form: Here, n points to a triplet of integer numbers (n 1 , n 2 , n 3 ) identifying a vector of the direct lattice R n , which is itself expanded on the direct lattice basis vectors a 1 , a 2 , a 3 according to: The periodic V (r) given in equation 1 may be expanded by a FOURIER series using the reciprocal lattice vector G: with the form factor of FCC lattice defined by Where, with lattice spacing a, τ = a 8 (1, 1, 1) and -τ are the positions of the two atoms relative to the centre of the primitive cell that is chosen as the origin. The values of V S |G| 2 and V A |G| 2 are deduced from fit to experimental data. They feature V G = 0 if |G| 2 > 11(4π 2 /a 2 units).For a selection of 14 semiconductor, Table We find the expression of Schrödinger equation in reciprocal space: The system of equations given in equation 6 couples the values q differing from each other by a reciprocal lattice vector. Which, for q = k -G ′ and G ′ + G = G ′′ can be written as with C(k) = 0, and H(k) is the Hamiltonian matrix in reciprocal space given by: with Since V ((r) are real, it allows us to deduce V -G = V * -G , which implies that the hamiltonian matrix is Hermitian. This coupled Hamiltonian matrix can be decoupled by setting V G=0 = V0 = 0, which corresponds to the constant adjusting the zero of the potential Complete program for the calculation of the band structures can be divided into the following steps. Step 1:Define the number of bands to be plotted, cutoff and maximum value of G described in II-A, lattice spacing and Pseudopotential Form Factors provided in Step 8:Calculate the difference |k -G| 2 along the BZ exploration path and kinetic energy part of the hamiltonian matrix, then diagonalize to find the eigenenergies. Step 9:Plot the eigenenergies against the BZ exploration path to obtain band structure. Density of states refers to the number of states available per unit of energy, thus having units [eV -1 ]. Unlike band structure calculations, DOS calculation is not restricted to exploring just the high symmetry path in BZ. We define a sequence of numbers ur = (2r -q -1)/2q (r = 1, 2, 3, Where q is an integer that determines the number of special points in the set. With the above ur's we define That gives q 3 distinct points in reciprocal space uniformly distributed in BZ where Band structure and density of states (DOS) plots for energy range -14 eV to 6 eV for 14 face centered cubic (FCC) crystals produced with the developed program are shown in Figures Filled Bands Empty Bands Figure - 