Periodically driven systems provide a novel route to control the topology of quantum materials. In particular, Floquet theory allows an effective band description of periodically-driven systems through the Floquet Hamiltonian. Here, we study the time evolution of d-wave superconductors irradiated with intense circularly-polarized laser light. We consider the Floquet t-J model with time-periodic interactions, and investigate its mean-field dynamics by formulating the time-dependent Gutzwiller approximation. We observe the development of the id xy -wave pairing amplitude along with the original d x 2 -y 2 -wave order upon gradual increasing of the field amplitude. We further numerically construct the Floquet Hamiltonian for the steady state, with which we identify the system as the fully-gapped d + id superconducting phase with a nonzero Chern number. We explore the low-frequency regime where the perturbative approaches in the previous studies break down, and find that the topological gap of an experimentally-accessible size can be achieved at much lower laser intensities. Topological superconductors host robust gapless excitations at the boundary or vortex cores due to the topological structure of the superconducting gap function Periodically driven systems provide a novel route to control the topology of quantum materials. In particular, Floquet theory allows an effective band description of periodicallydriven systems through the Floquet Hamiltonian. Thus the dynamical control of quantum phases has recently been studied actively, called "Floquet engineering" Applying the concept of Floquet engineering to topological superconductors, Floquet topological superconductivity has been explored Recently, it was revealed that d-wave superconductors exhibit Floquet topological superconductivity purely from the many-body effect without invoking the internal degrees of freedom However, experimental implementation of the above theoretical proposals is still challenging because of the required field intensity of ∼ 100 MV/cm In this paper, we study Floquet topological superconductivity at low frequencies by performing a time-dependent Gutzwiller simulation. We formulate the time-dependent Gutzwiller approximation based on the action principle combined with the mean-field approximation. Specifically, to simulate the time evolution of the many-body state in a tractable way, we apply the Gutzwiller approximation to the Lagrangian formalism to deduce a time-dependent Schrödinger equation with a mean field approximation for pairing amplitudes and bond orders. The time-dependent simulation shows that the d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductor evolves into the topological d x 2 -y 2 + id xy -wave superconductor under the CPL driving, both in the high and low frequency regimes. We further analyze the obtained time-periodic superconducting state in terms of the Floquet Hamiltonian, revealing the full-gap nature and the nontrivial winding of the gap function. We find that the topological gap of the order of 3 K emerges for an electric field of ∼ 10 MV/cm, which will be feasible for experimental measurements. In this section, we derive an effective low-energy Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian in the presence of the CPL, employing time-periodic Schrieffer-Wolff transformation (a canonical transformation) with Gutzwiller ansatz We consider a periodically-driven Hubbard model defined on a square lattice, having in mind a cuprate superconductor. The time-dependent Hamiltonian is given by where ĉiσ is an electron annihilation operator at site i with spin σ =↑, ↓, and niσ = ĉ † iσ ĉiσ is the spin-density operator. Here we set ħ = e = 1 for simplicity. The latter term is the on-site Coulomb repulsion terms with the Hubbard interaction U, while the former term is the hopping terms with modulated hopping amplitude t i j e -iA(t)•R i j , where t i j is the hopping amplitude between site i and site j. We introduce R i j = R i -R j , where R i is the location of the i-th site. Here we consider CPL, for which the vector potential A(t) is given by To deduce low-energy dynamics of the driven Hubbard model, we consider the Lagrangian of this system, where |Ψ(t)⟩ is a state vector of the many-body system. First, we perform the time-periodic Schrieffer-Wolff transformation , here we approximate the original Lagrangian L by L G , as We conduct the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation up to the second-order of the hopping and obtain where Ŝ j is a spin operator. The coupling constants are given by Ji Γi Here, t (m) i j is the m-th Fourier component of the modulated hopping amplitude t i j e -iA(t)•R i j , whose explicit form is ob-FIG. tained by the Jacobi-Anger expansion as with the m-th Bessel function J m (x) and Θ i j defined as the polar angle of R i j , i.e., R i j = |R i j |(cos Θ i j , sin Θ i j ). In the absence of the external field, Eq. ( is the so-called three-site term. This Hamiltonian is known to yield singlet (d-wave) Cooper pairing in equilibrium, so that here we assume the singlet pairing as well. A remarkable point here is that the three-site terms in the present case break time-reversal symmetry, due to the circular polarization of the light field. When we consider the spin part of the three-site terms σσ ′ ĉ † iσ σ σσ ′ ĉkσ ′ • Ŝ j where ij is a next-nearest neighbor bond and j-k is a nearest neighbor bond, the three-site terms generate pairing amplitude on each bond as j↑ and ĉ j↑ ĉk↓ correspond to d xy -wave components and d x 2 -y 2 -wave components of pairing amplitudes respectively. When the coefficients of the three-site terms Γ(t) in Eq. ( Second, we perform the Gutzwiller approximation We perform the Gutzwiller approximation to the second term of Eq. ( Hereafter, ⟨• • •⟩ represents the expectation value in terms of BCS wavefunction |Ψ BCS (t)⟩. As described in Gutzwiller approximation subsection in the Methods, we obtain the effective Hamiltonian ĤG (t), where , and f = 1f . Similarly, we perform Gutzwiller approximation to the first term of Eq. ( For details of derivation, see Gutzwiller approximation subsection in Methods. Third, we derive the BdG Hamiltonian from the timedependent Gutzwiller Hamiltonian in Eq. where τ = mx + ny represents a bond connecting two sites that are distant by ma in the x direction and na in the y direction, with a being the lattice constant. By applying the meanfield approximation to each term in Eq. ( with Here, matrix elements are given by Finally, we obtain the effective Lagrangian as L G ≃ ⟨Ψ BCS (t)| (i∂ t -ĤBdG (t)) |Ψ BCS (t)⟩. By using the action principle with δu * k (t), δv * k (t) as variants, we end up with the timedependent Schrödinger equation, where ⃗ ψ k (t) = (v k (t), u k (t)) T . We solve this Schrödinger equation In this section, we show the results of the time evolution generated by Eq. Throughout this paper, we set the next-nearest-neighbor hopping t ′ 0 = -0.2t 0 , the onsite interaction U = 12t 0 , and the hole doping level δ = 0.2, with t 0 being the nearest-neighbor hopping amplitude. As for the other doping levels and onsite interaction, see Figs. S1-S3 in Supplementary Note 1. We show the time evolution of superconducting pairing amplitudes ∆ τ for ω = 5.8t 0 in Figs. and ∆ [-1,1] in Fig. Once we turn on the electric field, the phases of the superconducting pairing amplitudes start to rotate, as shown in Figs. ). In Figs. ])/2 and remains finite in the presence of the driving field. Now let us look at the id xy -wave component of the pairing amplitude. We define the id xy -wave component of superconducting pairing amplitudes as ])/2, which indeed belongs to the same irreducible reprenentation of C 4v as the d xy pairing. Figure Next, to study the magnitude of the id xy -wave pairing amplitude in the steady state, we compute the time average of ∆ id xy over ωt/2π ∈ [240, 400], denoted as ∆ id xy . We show a color plot of ∆ id xy as a function of the driving amplitude E and the frequency ω in Fig. The Floquet theory is a useful tool to describe periodically driven systems via an effective static Hamiltonian (Floquet Hamiltonian). The topological properties of the steady state in the CPL driven system are characterized by the Chern number of the Floquet Hamiltonian. In this section, we show the Floquet bands and Chern numbers obtained in the present method. The Floquet Hamiltonian is defined as H(k, t)dt for a time-periodic Hamiltonian H(k, t) of a period T . As can be seen from Figs. In the present system, once the system arrives at the steady state, the superconducting pairing amplitudes satisfy as can be seen from Figs. where U(T, 0) is the original time evolution operator. For detailed derivation, see Time-periodic Hamiltonian and Floquet Hamiltonian subsection in Methods. We compute the Floquet Hamiltonian for H(k, t) in Eq. ( Figure Next, let us look at the results for the systems with the CPL drivings. We study two cases of CPL driving. One is in the high-frequency regime with the driving frequency ω = 5.8t 0 and the field amplitude E = 5.4t 0 /a, shown in Figs. In these cases, the black curves correspond to the k points where the diagonal (normal) component of the Floquet Hamiltonian is zero (Fermi energy in the equilibrium cases) or ω/2 (Floquet Brillouin zone boundary). In the high-frequency case (ω = 5.8t 0 , E = 5.4t 0 /a), the black curve in Fig. Furthermore, the sign of the Berry curvature coincides with the sign of the id xy -wave component of the pairing amplitude ∆ id xy in Fig. We show the phase diagram of Floquet topological superconductivity by computing Chern numbers of the Floquet bands in Fig. We have demonstrated the emergence of topological superconductivity even at low frequencies. To discuss the experimental feasibility, let us turn our attention to evaluating the size of topological gaps and the required magnitude of electric fields and frequencies. The low-frequency region shown in Fig. Several experimental methods are considered for probing the Floquet topological superconductivity demonstrated in this paper. The first is the measurement of the optical conductivity which directly observes the topological gap. Several studies have already investigated the optical conductivity of cuprate superconductors In this section, we derive Eq. ( where Td (t) is the kinetic energy operator that changes the double occupancy by d: [ D, Td (t)] = d Td (t) with D being the double occupancy operator. The explicit form of Td (t) is given by T- where ↑ ≡↓, ↓ ≡↑. In order to obtain the transformed Hamiltonian ĤSW (t) = e i Ŝ (t) ĤHub (t)e -i Ŝ (t)e i Ŝ (t) (i∂ t e -i Ŝ (t) ) with no charge excitations (i.e. [ D, ĤSW (t)] = 0), let us determine Ŝ (t) order by order in terms of the hopping amplitude. We can write down the first-order term of the transformed Hamiltonian as where the superscript (n) for Ŝ (t) and ĤSW (t) denotes the order of the hopping amplitude, and we have chosen Ŝ (0) (t) = 0. In order to satisfy [ D, Ĥ(1) SW (t)] = 0, S (1) (t) = S (1) +1 (t) + S (1) -1 (t) have to be chosen such that with which the transformed Hamiltonian is given as Ĥ(1) SW (t) = -T0 (t). The solution of the above operator equation for Ŝ for the time-periodic hopping amplitude. In a similar manner, the second-order term can be obtained as We obtain Eq. ( By expanding t (m) i j in the Taylor series around t ′ = t, we obtain The correction term is smaller by a (dimensionless) factor of ∼ | Ȧ0 |a/U, and is indeed negligible for the present calculation. In this section, we describe the detailed derivation of Eqs. ( where δ = 1 -1 N i ni↑ + ni↓ is the hole doping rate, f = (1 -δ)/2 is the probability to have a singly-occupied site in the Gutzwiller wave function PG |Ψ BCS ⟩, and f = 1f . Here we have used n! ∼ (n/e) n on the second line. We evaluate the expected value of each term in Eq. ( while for the Heisenberg interaction we have The spin part of the three-site term, PG (ĉ As for the density operator, there is arbitrariness in whether to renormalize this as an operator or to replace it as the density at each site. In the present case, in which δ has a finite value, the variational Monte Carlo calculation shows that the densitydensity term has a few effects in contrast to the half-filling case, which allows us to replace PG ni PG with 1 -δ with i k. In this way, we obtain the effective Hamiltonian Eq we can rewrite the time derivative in an operator form as with which the first term of Eq. ( The expectation value PG ĉ † i↑ ĉ j↑ / PG can be evaluated within the Gutzwiller approximation as Note that both doubly-occupied and singly-occupied configurations at site j are allowed as the initial configuration due to the absence of the projection operator. The other expectation value can also be evaluated in the same way as PG ni↑ / PG ≃ ni↑ , with which Eq. ( In this section, we describe how to obtain the time-periodic BdG Hamiltonian and the associated Floquet Hamiltonian This implies that the pairing amplitude is transformed as ∆ τ (t) → ∆ ′ τ (t) = ∆ τ (t)e 2iεt under the unitary transformation ⃗ ψ k → ⃗ ψ ′ k ≡ e iεtτ z ⃗ ψ k , which keeps the relative phase of the pairing amplitudes intact. When the pairing amplitudes satisfy ∆ τ (t + T ) = ∆ τ (t)e iα , the transformed amplitude becomes time-periodic when -εT = α/2. Namely, under this condition the transformed BdG Hamiltonian H ′ (k, t) ≡ e iεtτ z H(k, t)e -iεtτ z -ετ z becomes time-periodic, and we can define the corresponding Floquet Hamiltonian, where the time evolution of its eigenstates are expressed as the time-periodic wave function multiplied by a plane wave factor. Using the relation for the transformed time evolution operator, U ′ (t, t ′ ) = e iεtσ z U(t, t ′ )e -iεt ′ σ z , we can compute the Floquet Hamiltonian as U ′ (t 0 + T, t 0 ) : = e iε(t 0 +T )σ z U(t 0 + T, t 0 )e -iεt 0 σ z . (47) By setting t 0 = 0, we arrive at Eq. ( 