Spectral data is routinely broadened in order to improve appearance, approximate a higher sampling level or model experimental measurement effects. While there has been extensive work in the signal processing field to develop efficient methods for the application of fixed-width broadening functions, these are not suitable for all scientific applications -for example, the instrumental resolution of inelastic neutron scattering measurements varies along the energy-transfer axis. Naïve application of a kernel to every point has O(N × M ) complexity and scales poorly for a high-resolution spectrum over many data points. Here we present an approximate method with complexity O(N + W × M log M ), where W scales with the range of required broadening widths; in practice the number and cost of mathematical operations is drastically reduced to N polynomial evaluations and a modest number of discrete Fourier transforms. Applications are demonstrated for Gaussian interpolation of density-of-states data and to instrumental resolution functions. We anticipate that these performance improvements will assist application of resolution functions inside fitting procedures and interactive tools. Many scientific properties are spectra, i.e. continuous functions. Experimental measurements tend to involve a degree of sampling (e.g. of photons in an optical measurement) and discretisation (e.g. finite detector sizes, measurement timesteps), from which the "true" underlying spectrum is approximated. Computational simulations may have access to high precision floating-point operations but still involve sampling in the form of numerical integration and finite-different approximations. Such data is then routinely broadened in order to improve appearance, approximate a higher sampling level or model experimental measurement effects. where σ is the standard deviation of the Gaussian function. This normal distribution may appropriately represent the resolution limits of a scientific instrument; incorporating such quirks into simulated spectra allows for more direct comparison with real data. This approach is generally simpler and more reliable than trying to correct the real data for the resolution of the instrument (deconvolution). A number of existing software packages implement variable-width broadening, for example OptaDOS, Here we build on the approximate method for variable-width Gaussian broadening implemented in AbINS and present an improved, generalised method, limiting the number of expensive kernel evaluations with minimal loss in accuracy. The method is outlined formally and scientific applications are demonstrated. For simplicity, the method is formally outlined in this section for Gaussian broadening; however it is easily adapted to other smooth broadening functions such as the Lorentzian and we include some data for Lorentzian functions. Rather than explicitly evaluate a Gaussian function for each data point, a small set of spectra are convolved with fixed-width Gaussian kernels using Fast Fourier Transforms (FFTs). These spectra consist of weighted points that, when summed together, form suitable approximations to the desired Gaussian widths and intensities. A small number of Gaussian kernels are explicitly calculated, covering the required range of σ values for the variable-width broadening operation. Broadening at intermediate σ values can be approximated by a linear combination of the closest two exact Gaussians, one of which is narrower (G 1 ) and one wider (G 2 ), where w is the linear combination weight. The simplest way to choose w is by linear interpolation: w = (σσ 1 )/(σ 2σ 1 ), but a better choice can be found by least-squares optimisation, as illustrated in Fig. A mixture of two Gaussian functions with the same mean but different σ produces a leptokurtic distribution, which compared to a Gaussian distribution has a more prominent peak and longer tails. A distribution is leptokurtic if its excess kurtosis κ . Exact function is compared with naïve linear interpolation and least-squares optimised fits. is positive: where μ i denotes the ith central moment of the distribution. Kurtosis can be used as a measure of the quality of a Gaussian approximation. When 0 < w < 1 and α > 1, the kurtosis value decreases as α approaches 1, and therefore the linear combination becomes closer to a Gaussian distribution. Therefore, as illustrated in Fig. The choice of α also determines the number of Gaussians which will need to be explicitly calculated. The values of σ for the exact Gaussians are chosen to be logarithmically spaced across the range of σ values for the spectrum being broadened. By using a common ratio between successive σ samples, we ensure that the relationship between σ and the linear combination weights will be the same for each neighboring pair of Gaussians. This relationship is determined by finding optimal linear combination weights for a small number of σ values in the range σ = 1 to σ = α. A polynomial is then be fitted to the computed weights to obtain the function w(σ/σ 1 ), allowing weights to be determined for any σ value in that range. The logarithmic spacing means that the required number of broadening kernels Gaussians are explicitly calculated on the output data bins for widths in the set As n increases, the computation time required to calculate the exact kernels increases: the choice of width factor is a trade-off between accuracy and efficiency, which should consider the application and the importance placed on highly accurate results. This is illustrated in Fig. for Lorentzian broadening, where ε is the desired maximum error in the Gaussian approximations. These polynomials were obtained by Chebyshev regression, which tends to minimise the maximum error along the curve. The convolution of two discrete data sets, f and g, both of length N Using the linear properties of convolution, we can avoid a sum over individual peaks. Suppose fixedwidth convolution is carried out with the approximated Gaussian of Eq. ( by distributivity by associativity with scalar multiplication. Now rather than convolving once with an approximated Gaussian, two convolutions are performed with exact Gaussians, while the spectrum f is multiplied by the linear combination weights w. If the points of the unbroadened spectrum are scaled by corresponding arrays of weights (1w) and w, we obtain two spectra of contributions from G 1 and G 2 respectively. These can be broadened with their corresponding (fixed-width) kernels by convolution and summed to give the overall broadened spectrum. The approach is illustrated in Fig. In practice, the method is applied to much denser data than in Fig. where F and F -1 are the Fourier transform and its inverse. For data on a regular grid, FFT algorithms with computational complexity of O(N log N ) are used and so FFT convolution has overall complexity O(N log N ). Using the concepts described in Section 3.1 and Section 3.2, the approximate variable-width broadening method comprises the following steps: 1. Compute the required width factor α with Eq. ( 2. Determine the number of Gaussians to be exactly computed, and the values of σ for these Gaussians using Eq. ( 3. On a grid with evenly spaced bins, evaluate the Gaussians for the selected σ values. 4. Obtain a model function w(σ) that provides optimal mixing weights for a given target function width 5. Use this model to distribute the input data to a set of spectra (one per exact Gaussian) 6. Convolve each spectrum with its respective kernel 7. Sum together all convolved spectra Conventional variable-width broadening which involves the summation of N individual peaks on a grid of length M has a complexity of O(N × M ). The fast, approximate method significantly reduces the number of Gaussians that have to be computed exactly, as shown in Eq. ( The reduced computation time associated with the approximate method has the consequence of reduced accuracy in the broadening process. As shown in Fig. Depending on the application of the method, it may be preferable for this error to be distributed differently. For example, if correct peak intensity is important then the error could be minimised at this point. The right-hand side of Fig. Another source of error comes from the requirement that data is binned onto a regular grid: if the choice of bin width is too coarse then fine detail in the data will be lost. This also applies to the Gaussian function evaluations which are evaluated on the same grid: if σ is too small in relation to bin width, then the Gaussian will only be represented by a single point. Techniques such as linear binning could be used to maintain accuracy with a slightly larger bin size, but this is not implemented here; they are particularly powerful when working with higher-dimensional data. Adaptive broadening allows density-of-states (DOS) plots to be computed with both fine detail and smooth tails from a limited number of q-point samples. This has been implemented in the OptaDOS code and is routinely used for electronic structure DOS plots. The fast, approximate method reported here has been implemented in Euphonic. When calling broadening functions, users are able to define the desired maximum error level in the Gaussian approximations, which determines the width factor to be used in the algorithm, calculated using Eq. ( For this particular dataset, the Gaussian σ values ranged from the bin width 0.032 meV to 0.759 meV -smaller σ values obtained from the data gradients were rounded up to the bin width. The exact sum over peaks required 23 958 Gaussian kernels, whereas with a width factor 1.22 (nominal error 0.01) a total of 17 Gaussian functions are evaluated -a reduction of 3 orders of magnitude. The resolution of time-of-flight INS instruments is limited by the size of detectors and width of neutron pulses. This can lead to energy and q-dependent broadening of the underlying scattering function, which may be applied to simulated spectra to facilitate analysis of experimental results. The effect of this is demonstrated in Fig. A fast, approximate method is reported that alleviates the computational cost of variable-width broadening. This new approach significantly reduces the number of expensive Gaussian function evaluations, with an exact kernel calculated at logarithmically spaced intervals over the range of broadening widths. The input data is carefully distributed to small set of fixed-width broadening operations, such that a sum over the resulting spectra forms a good approximation to the broadening of each peak with its designated width. Due to interpolation errors and the pre-binning of data onto a regular grid, there is loss of accuracy compared to exact broadening and summation over individual 93 meV to 6.39 meV, computed with PyChop2. In upper row these limits are illustrated by fixed-width broadening (6a, 6b), while the bottom row compares the exact summation of a Gaussian kernel at each energy bin (6c) with the approximate interpolated method (6d), using a relatively large nominal error of 10 %. peaks. However, with appropriate sampling density the error introduced is minimal, and even a large nominal error of 20 % is shown to give visually acceptable results in some scientific applications. The method is equally applicable to Lorentzian broadening and the method has been implemented for both Gaussian and Lorentzian broadening in the Euphonic Python package, for accelerated q-point sampling (by adaptive broadening) and simulation of instrumental resolution functions. Further potential applications include interactive visualisation of resolution effects and the fitting of models to experimental data. In its current form the method is only suitable for broadening along one axis at a time, but there is potential for the approach to be extended to higher dimensions. Whereas in this 1-D scheme two basis functions are used at each point (i.e. a narrower and wider kernel of the same shape as the desired function), a higher-dimensional scheme would likely benefit from the use of more general basis functions such as plane waves. This would also support the implementation of more complex (e.g. bimodal) broadening functions. Plots in this paper are generated with a set of Python scripts from simple synthetic data or with publicly-available force constant data from the Kyoto Phonon database. 