In this paper, we have analyzed the spectral and transport properties of a weakly correlated single-level quantum dot hybridized with one normal conducting and another Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconducting lead (N-QD-S system) in the presence of an external magnetic field. We have employed Green's function equation of motion (EOM) approach within a self-consistent Hartree-Fock (HF) mean-field approximation to analyze the Hamiltonian. We studied the effect of on-dot Coulomb correlation and an external magnetic field on the sub-gap Andreev levels of a quantum dot, strongly coupled to a conventional s-wave superconductor as a function of impurity parameters. We have shown that for a finite magnetic field, the Andreev bound states (ABSs) split into a spin-up and spin-down contribution (i.e. Zeeman splitting) and cross the Fermi energy level, resulting in a quantum phase transition, which is an indication of a change in the fermion parity of the ground state. Further, within the non-linear regime, we discuss the total electrical conductance for various values of Zeeman energy and on-dot Coulomb interactions. We have compared our results with the existing experimental and theoretical results. Quantum dot (QD) When a normal-type (N) conductor is connected to a superconductor (S), a superconducting order parameter can leak into it, giving rise to pairing correlations and an induced superconducting gap. This phenomenon, known as the superconducting proximity effect, forms new sub-gap states known as Andreev bound states (ABSs). In this case, the superconducting proximity effect competes with the Coulomb blockade effect, which comes from the electrostatic repulsion among the electrons of the quantum dot (QD). At low temperatures, additionally, one crucial effect comes into play known as the Kondo physics. Both these phenomena, i.e., Coulomb blockade and the appearance of a Kondo singlet state, compete with the induced on-dot pairing. In this present study, we exclude the Kondo effect, and only the competition between the Coulomb blockade effect and induced on-dot pairing is analyzed. Besides, when such hybrid structures are exposed to the magnetic field, the proximity effect allows for interplay between superconductivity and magnetism, which gives rise to a variety of interesting effects. In nanoscopic tunneling junctions, a wide range of important physical phenomena can be explored by varying the QD hybridization with the superconducting lead, applying a magnetic field, and controlling the temperature (lowering the temperature can activate the Kondo effect). Here, we have addressed the subgap ABS transport properties of a single-level quantum dot coupled to normal and BCS superconductor reservoirs (N-QD-S) in the Coulomb blockade regime in the absence and presence of an external magnetic (Zeeman) field. Also, we have analyzed the formation of Andreev-bound states in this particular N-QD-S system [see Figure We would like to investigate the case of a Zeeman-split dot energy level. As for the case of non-interacting dot electrons, the energy levels are spin-independent. But, even if we apply a small enough magnetic field B, the dot level splits into two levels, where the higher level is occupied by the spin-up electron and the lower level by the spin-down electron. We show the singlet to doublet transition of ABSs for different U (Coulomb interaction), ∆ sc (superconducting gap), Γ s (coupling to the superconducting lead) values irrespective of B-field (external magnetic field). Most importantly, the B-field dependence of Andreev levels is depicted depending on whether the system is in a singlet or doublet ground state (GS). Moreover, we demonstrate the variation of electrical conductance as a function of bias voltage eV dc = μ Nμ S for various values of on-dot Coulomb interaction U and Zeeman energy E z in the non-linear regime. The Hamiltonian for the N-QD-S system where QD has a single level is modeled by a single impurity Anderson model (SIAM) and BCS Hamiltonian. The assumption of QD with a single level is reasonable if QD level spacing δ ε is larger than all other relevant energy scales. The Hamiltonian for the given system in second quantized notation is written as: where ĤS-QD = ∑ kS,σ ĤN-QD = ∑ kN,σ In equation ( In equation ( 2 with E z = gμ B B being the Zeeman splitting energy. The second term in Eq.( In equation ( To diagonalize the BCS Superconducting part of the Hamiltonian in equation ( Now, we can solve the above effective Hamiltonian by using Green's function equation of motion technique. As we are mainly interested in spectral and transport properties of the quantum impurity, it can be extracted from the single-particle retarded Green's function in Zubarev notation defined as, Where θ (t) is the unit step or Heaviside step function. Now, the Fourier transform of the above retarded Green's function should satisfy the following equation of motion (EOM) In the presence of finite on-dot Coulomb interaction U, it hinders an exact solution to the problem which means the Hamiltonian is not exactly solvable due to the quartic term in the Coulomb interaction. This leads to a hierarchy of Green's function equation of motion that one needs to truncate by invoking some physical arguments i.e. Hartree-Fock (HF) mean-field approximation or some other higher-order decoupling schemes to obtain a closed set of coupled Green's function equations. Within the simple mean-field HF approximation, higher-order correlation functions are expressed as, In Nambu representation, the retarded Green's function of the quantum dot (QD) can be represented by 2 × 2 matrices: By using Green's function EOM technique (Eq. 9), we obtain the close set of coupled equations, and after solving those set of coupled equations, the expression for the single electron retarded Green's function (⟨⟨d σ ; d † σ ⟩⟩) of the QD can be written as, where I 1 , I 2 are diagonal, and I 3 is the off-diagonal part of self-energy, which corresponds to the induced pairing due to the coupling between the quantum dot and superconducting lead. The expressions for I 1 , I 2 and I 3 are where the coupling to the superconducting and the normal lead in wide-flat band limit is given by kN | respectively and ρ 0α is the density of states at the Fermi energy of contact α (= S, N) in the normal phase. The explicit form of G r,HF d We are interested in solving Ĥ to obtain the energy spectrum. For that purpose, we obtain the poles of the Green's function (i.e. equating denominator equal to zero) as, D(ω) ≡ Det[G r,HF d (ω) -1 ] = 0 gives the Andreev-level spectrum of the system. The average occupation number σ ⟩⟩dω at the QD level of a given spin and the pairing parameter ↑ ⟩⟩dω have to be calculated self-consistently. The spectral function gives the energy resolution for a given quantum state. It indicates the distribution of excitations when a particle with certain quantum numbers is added to a given system. Thus, the QD spectral function is defined as, ]. Such subgap spectrum can be obtained experimentally by measuring the differential conductance G = dI dV dc where I is the electrical current when a DC bias voltage (V dc ), eV dc = μ Nμ S is applied between the contacts. Here, we set μ S = 0, only changing the chemical potential of the normal metal; thus, the applied bias voltage is V dc = μ N . In this non-linear regime, the total current can be decomposed into Andreev (A) and quasi-particle current (QP) currents, I = I A + I QP . For voltages eV dc ≤ ∆ sc , the quasi-particle current is zero, I QP = 0, and the only contribution comes from Andreev processes. For the opposite voltage limit, the quasi-particle current contribution is also finite and they can be expressed in the Landauer-type form with the Fermi-Dirac distribution Here, e and h denote the magnitude of the electronic charge and Planck's constant, respectively and the prefactor 2 is due to the spin degeneracy. The Andreev and quasiparticle transmission are defined as, In the next section, we will discuss the results obtained by the numerical computations for various parameter regimes. In this section, we present the numerical results obtained using MATLAB coding language. Our primary aim is to study the effect of U and the external magnetic field on the Andreev Bound states (ABSs) energy and non-linear electrical Conductance. Let us start by considering an uncorrelated QD, which is equivalent to a spinless impurity. In Figure We also consider the case when the system is under the influence of voltage biasing. Figure In summary, the Bogoliubov transformation, followed by the Hartree-Fock (HF) mean-field approach, is employed to understand the nature of sub-gap ABSs in the presence of the external Zeeman field at the N-QD-S system in the Coulomb blockade regime. At first, we start with an uncorrelated quantum dot and analyze the nature of ABSs at two different quantum dot energy levels. After that, when it is exposed to the external magnetic field, it is observed that the finite Zeeman field can split the subgap levels into two due to different spin level contributions. Next, we move to the case of correlated (interacting) quantum dot, where we analyze the QD's spectral density to study the ABSs as a function of dot parameters and we show singlet to doublet transition in the absence of a magnetic field and splitting of ABSs in the singlet GS due to finite Zeeman field. A similar observation can be found in the case of electrical conductance as a function of bias voltage for various values of on-site Coulomb interaction and Zeeman energy. In this study, we have analyzed the spectral and transport properties of the weakly correlated N-QD-S system in the presence of an external magnetic field, and this work can be extended to the strongly correlated region and to address more properties like electrical, thermoelectric, etc.