Two-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) magne?c materials hold promise for the development of high-density, energy-efficient spintronic devices for memory and computa?on. Recent breakthroughs in material discoveries and spin-orbit torque (SOT) control of vdW ferromagnets have opened a path for integra?on of vdW magnets in commercial spintronic devices. However, a solu?on for field-free electric control of perpendicular magne?c anisotropy (PMA) vdW magnets at room temperatures, essen?al for building compact and thermally stable spintronic devices, is s?ll missing. Here, we report the first demonstra?on of field-free determinis?c and non-vola?le switching of a PMA vdW ferromagnet, Fe3GaTe2 above room temperature (up to 320 K). We use the unconven?onal out-of-plane an?-damping torque from an adjacent WTe2 layer to enable such switching with a low current density of 2.23 × 10 6 A/cm 2 . This study exemplifies the efficacy of low-symmetry vdW materials for spin-orbit torque control of vdW ferromagnets and provides an all-vdW solu?on for the next genera?on of scalable and energy-efficient spintronic devices. The discovery of emergent magne?sm in two-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) materials Here, we report the first demonstra?on of determinis?c and non-vola?le switching of a PMA vdW ferromagnet above room temperature without any external magne?c fields. We achieved this by building a bilayer SOT system of room-temperature PMA vdW ferromagnet, Fe3GaTe2 (FGaT) with the low symmetry vdW material WTe2 to harness the unconven?onal out-of-plane an?-damping torque for SOT switching (Fig. Our heterostructure devices use exfoliated sheets of FGaT and WTe2, with pa>erned electrical contacts, and hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) encapsula?on for air-stability, as illustrated schema?cally through Fig. Magneto-transport characteriza?on of the FGaT/WTe2 devices using anomalous Hall effect helps to establish that the inherent ferromagne?c characteris?cs of FGaT are well preserved in the heterostructure device and can be effec?vely probed through transverse voltage monitoring for current-induced magne?za?on switching experiments. Fig. Fig. In contrast to the above discussed case, when current is applied along the low-symmetry a-axis of WTe2, the applied current breaks the bc-mirror plane symmetry (σ %& ). Thus, the causali?es break both the mirror plane symmetries (σ '& broken by crystal structure, σ %& broken by applied current), and a ver?cal spin-polariza?on component in the ver?cal spin-current is now permissible. This scenario is depicted schema?cally in Fig. We u?lize the unconven?onal, out-of-plane an?-damping spin orbit torque, τ !" ##$ , generated from WTe2 upon charge current injec?on along its low-symmetry a-axis to switch the magne?za?on of underlying FGaT, in the FGaT/WTe2 heterostructure devices. We clearly show that the τ !" ##$ induced field-free switching occurs exclusively for charge current injec?on along WTe2 a-axis, while charge injec?on along the b-axis results in demagne?za?on of underlying FGaT. Thus, we have reported the first demonstra?on of field-free magne?za?on switching of a perpendicular magne?c anisotropy vdW ferromagnet above room temperature (up to 320 K) using a low current density of 2.23 × 10 6 A/cm 2 . The proposed all-vdW architecture can also provide unique advantages like improved interface quality needed for efficient spin-orbit torques, possibili?es for gate-voltage tuning to assist SOT switching, and prospects for flexible and transparent spintronic technologies. This work asserts the role of crystal symmetry in spin-orbit coupling layers of an SOT switching device using a low-symmetry vdW material, and provides a new, scalable all-vdW approach to developing energy-efficient spintronic devices. The Fe3GaTe2/WTe2 devices reported here were fabricated using heterostructure assembly of exfoliated vdW flakes. Bulk FGaT was grown using a previously reported process All transport measurements were performed in a 9 T PPMS DynaCool system. Measurements were performed by sourcing current using a Keithley 6221 current source and measuring the transverse voltage across the devices, using a Keithley 2182A nanovoltmeter. Anomalous Hall effect measurements with field sweeps were performed using a drive current of 50 -200 μA. For the current-induced switching measurements, a 1 ms pulse of write-current was followed by 999 ms of read pulses (±200 μA). Field could be applied in and out of the sample plane using the PPMS' horizontal rotator module. Fig. Determinis?c switching up to 320 K. Field free determinis?c, non-vola?le switching of the OOP magne?za?on of FGaT in device D2, using the train of current pulses, 1 ms long and ±8 mA in magnitude (top panel), with I ∥ a, at 310 K (middle panel) and 320 K (lower panel). The data is acquired in two sets of 50 s long pulsing sequences, with periodic and randomized current pulses, respec?vely. MIT Media Lab, Massachuse>s Ins?tute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA Department of Nuclear Science and Engineering, Massachuse>s Ins?tute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA * deblina@mit.edu