The phenomenon of self-assembly of constituent elements to form molecules at low temperatures appears ubiquitously in transition metal compounds with orbital degrees of freedom. Recent progress in local structure studies using synchrotron radiation x-rays is shifting the interest in structural studies in such molecule-forming systems from the low-temperature ordered phase to the shortrange order that appears like a precursor at high temperatures. In this study, we discuss both experimentally and theoretically the relationship between the trimer structure that appears in the layered LiVX2 (X = O, S, Se) system with a two-dimensional triangular lattice of vanadium and the zigzag chain-like local structure that appears near the phase transition boundary where molecular formation occurs. The vanadium trimerization that persistently appears in both low-temperature phases of LiVO2 and LiVS2 disappears in LiVSe2, and a regular triangular lattice is thought to be realized in LiVSe2, but this study reveals that the zigzag chain local distortion appears with a finite correlation length. This zigzag chain state local distortions are similar to the motif of local distortions in the high-temperature phase of LiVS2, indicating that the local distortions are persistent away from the trimer phase transition boundary. On the other hand, it is concluded that the zigzag chain order appearing in LiVSe2 is more stable than that in LiVS2 in terms of the temperature variation of atomic displacement and correlation length. The zigzag chain order is considered to be competitive with the trimer order appearing in the LiVX2 system. In this paper, we discuss the similarities and differences between the parameters that stabilize these electronic phases and the local distortions that appear in other molecular formation systems. Since the discovery of the Verwey transition of magnetite in the 1930s Layered LiVX 2 (X = O, S, Se) with a two-dimensional triangular lattice provides a unique playground for studying the relationship between the molecular formations that appear in the low-temperature phase and the local distortions that appear in the high-temperature phase. The electronic phase diagram characterizing the LiVX 2 system is shown in Fig. Similar to AlV 2 O 4 It has been argued that this anomalous local distortion is related to the appearance of pseudogaps, a phenomenon of anomalous reduction in magnetic susceptibility that appears in the metallic phase near the trimer phase transition boundary in terms of physical properties In this paper, we discuss the relationship between the zigzag chain ordering and the trimer phase in the LiVX 2 (X = O, S, Se) system, focusing on the results of structural studies obtained utilizing synchrotron radiation x-rays and theoretical calculations of LiVSe 2 . Synchrotron x-ray diffraction experiments have revealed that the zigzag chain order appears in LiVSe 2 with a finite correlation length, as in the high-temperature phase of LiVS 2 . Strangely, even though LiVSe 2 is farther from the trimer transition boundary in phase space, the zigzag chain order has a larger vanadium displacement than that of LiVS 2 and persists at higher temperatures with longer correlation lengths. This indicates that the zigzag chain local distortion that appears in the LiVX 2 system is not merely a precursor to the trimerization that appears at low temperatures. Based on theoretical calculations and pressure effects, we discuss the factors that stabilize the trimer and zigzag chains, and argue that the LiVX 2 system is the stage for studying a unique local distortion phenomenon that is clearly different from conventional molecular formation systems. LiVSe 2 was synthesized by a three-step synthesis method. First, the raw materials, V (99.5%) and Se (99.999%), were mixed so that V:Se = 1:1.01 to avoid V self-intercalation, sealed in a vacuum quartz tube, and calcined at 700 °C for 3 days to obtain 1T -VSe 2 . The resulting powder sample was then immersed in a large excess of 0.2 M n-BuLi/hexane solution for 2 days in a glove box under an Ar atmosphere. This yields Li 2 VSe 2 . To remove excess Li, the sample was immersed in I 2acetonitrile; by adjusting the weight of I 2 , the deintercalation of Li can be quantitatively controlled. The resulting samples were annealed at 150 °C for 10 hours to restore crystallinity and obtain powder samples of LiVSe 2 . For LiVO 2 and LiVS 2 , we used the same batch of samples as presented in the previous paper Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) measurements were performed to calculate the Li content of the synthesized samples. Considering the presence of impurity Li 2 Se (3.4%) revealed by Rietveld analysis, ICP measurement estimated the LiVSe 2 used in this study to be Li/V = 1.01. The occupancy of the Se site was 0.983(3) as a result of our Rietveld analysis. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was conducted using a DSC 204 F1 Phoenix (Netzsch). The ambient pressure x-ray diffraction data were measured at BL44B2 and BL02B2 at SPring-8. 30 keV x-rays and the detectors commonly used at each beamline were used. The data obtained at BL44B2 were corrected, combined, and converted to one-dimensional data X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) measurements were performed on the vanadium K-edge (∼ 5.47 keV) at BL5S2 and BL11S2 at Aichi Synchrotron Radiation Center. XAFS spectra were collected by the Quick-XAFS method using a vanadium foil as a reference. The samples were mixed with BN and pelletized. Temperatures below 300 K were controlled by a cryostat, while temperatures above 300 K were controlled by a heater. The obtained data were transformed using Athena included in Demeter The partial densities of states (PDOS) and the Fermi surfaces in LiVSe 2 and LiVS 2 were calculated by employing the WIEN2k code A. X-ray diffraction experiments at ambient pressure Figure As shown in Fig. The structural features of the zigzag chain state of LiVSe 2 shown above are similar to those of the hightemperature metallic phase of LiVS 2 The reason for these strange structural features appearing in LiVS 2 is related to the fact that the zigzag chain order is not long-range enough, and the correlation length remains finite. This is evident from the experimental results in Fig. It is interesting that structural features similar to LiVS 2 were observed in LiVSe 2 . This seems to suggest that the same features are realized in LiVSe 2 as in LiVS 2 , where the correlation length of the zigzag chain remains finite and shortens with increasing temperature. To confirm this, we performed the vanadium K-edge XAFS measurements of three LiVX 2 compounds (X = O, S, and Se) at various temperatures. Fig. The absence of a peak corresponding to the V-V distance is consistent with the previous paper Similarly, in the spectrum of LiVSe 2 , a peak corresponding to the V-Se distance is observed near ∼2.2 Å, but no peak corresponding to the V-V distance is observed at all. If the zigzag chain structure in LiVSe 2 forms a long-range order without fluctuating, three types of split V-V distances should be observed in RDF. Therefore, the present result indicates that the zigzag chain interactions are not sufficiently long-range ordered and disordered as in LiVS 2 . In addition, interestingly, no clear change in the RDF appears well beyond around 500 K, where the superlattice peaks disappear in x-ray diffraction data. This clearly suggests that the zigzag chain order persists to high temperatures while becoming short-range ordered in LiVSe 2 as well. It should be noted that the correlation length of the zigzag chain changes continuously with temperature, and therefore no clear signature is observed in the physical property measurements. As shown in Fig. The above experimental results might seem to indicate that the zigzag chains that appear as precursors to trimerization in LiVS 2 also persist in LiVSe 2 , but this is not such a simple case. If the zigzag chain order is best developed near the trimer phase transition boundary, then the zigzag chain order of LiVS 2 , which shows trimerization at low temperatures, should be more stable than that of LiVSe 2 . However, as shown in Figs. The above structural studies show that zigzag chain ordering is realized in both metallic phases of LiVS 2 and LiVSe 2 , persistently surviving with the correlation length becoming shorter when the temperature increases. A unique feature of this system is that the zigzag chains are more stabilized at LiVSe 2 , which is farther from the metal-insulator transition boundary than LiVS 2 in the phase space shown in Fig. On the other hand, Fig. The reason why the zigzag chain appears more stable in LiVSe 2 , even though the partial DOS of LiVS 2 and LiVS 2 are very similar, may be due to the difference in the energy width of the d orbital. In the trigonal structure, the d xy , d yz , and d zx orbitals that consist of t 2g orbitals are triply degenerate, and the electron filling of these three orbitals are equal to 1/3, as shown in Fig. Since the zigzag chain formation is associated with the instability of the Fermi surface, it is expected that applying pressure causes poor nesting of the Fermi surface. Instead, trimerization is stabilized by the effect of closer V-V distance and stronger d-d hybridization. Based on these expectations, we performed diffraction experiments under pressure. Fig. There are two possible reasons for the unexpected stabilization of the zigzag chains. First, the Li ions between the VSe 2 layers prevented the dimensionality from decreasing under pressure. This is evident from the pressure dependence of c/a, a measure of dimensionality, shown in the lower part of Fig. From the above experiments, it seems likely that the zigzag chain states appearing in the LiVX 2 system are not simply trimer precursors, but are characterized as competing electronic phases governed by various parameters such as Fermi surface nesting, band width, d-p and d-d hybridization. On the other hand, however, the feature that the correlation length of the zigzag chain state remains finite up to high temperatures indicates that the zigzag chain state is very different from the usual electronic phase, rather similar to the local distortion features that appear in the high-temperature phase of many systems where molecular formation occurs at low temperatures In summary, we have performed structural studies and theoretical calculations of layered LiVX 2 and found that the zigzag chain state that appears in the hightemperature phase of LiVS 2 is more stabilized in LiVSe 2 . This indicates that the zigzag chain phase appears more stable in the phase space of LiVX 2 (X = O, S, Se) in regions away from the trimer phase boundary. The zigzag chain phases found in this system are significantly different from the local distortion features that appear in conventional molecular formation systems, clearly indicating that molecular formation systems with a long history, as typified by the Verwey transition of magnetite, are still unique playgrounds with a rich variety of fascinating physics.