Using the Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations, we determined the electronic and magnetic properties of a T-phase VS2 bilayer as a function of tensile and compressive strain. First, we determine the ground state structural parameters and then the band structure, magnetic anisotropy, exchange parameters, and Curie temperature. Variation of these parameters with the strain is carefully analyzed and described. The easy-plane anisotropy, which is rather small in the absence of strain, becomes remarkably enhanced by tensile strain and reduced almost to zero by compressive strain. We also show that the exchange parameters and the Curie temperature are remarkably reduced for the compressive strains below roughly -4%. Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) represent a wide class of materials, that have been extensively investigated recently as they are of highly promising potential for applications in nanoelectronic and optoelectronic devices Typically, layers of vanadium (V) based TMDs exist in two structural phases, namely the 2H phase characterized by trigonal prismatic coordination, and the 1T phase with octahedral coordination On the other hand, computational studies can be used to elucidate the physical properties of TMDs, down to single monolayers. Indeed, such calculations show that monolayers of VX 2 (where X = S and Se) exhibit intriguing ferromagnetic behavior, providing thus evidence of magnetic properties of pristine 2D monolayers The first-principles calculations were performed using the Density Functional Theory (DFT) and the Quantum ATK code package (version 2021.06-SP2) The T-phase vanadium disulfide (VS 2 ) is a van der Waals layered material, in which an individual monolayer consists of a single layer of vanadium atoms sandwiched As illustrated in Fig. The bond length between Vanadium and Sulfur atoms (d V -S ) is found to be sensitive to the direction and magnitude of the applied strain. The d V -S exhibits a smooth decrease with increasing compressive strain from 0% to -10%. Under compressive strain, the compression of the lattice constants enhances the covalent interactions between Vanadium (V) and Sulfur (S) atoms, resulting in a decrease in the bond length between them. Conversely, under tensile strain, the elongation of the lattice constants weakens the covalent interactions between the V and S atoms, resulting in an increase in the bond length between them. However, under tensile strain, d V -S exhibits a non-monotonic variation; it increases for the tensile strain up to 6%, and then smoothly decreases at the higher values of the tensile strains. This anomalous behavior can be explained by the evolution of the electronic structure of the V S 2 bilayer under strain, which alters the hybridization of the orbitals involved in the V-S bond. Specifically, the tensile strain can induce a weakening of the V-S bond due to the destabilization of the 3d orbital of the Vanadium atom, leading to an initial elongation of d V -S . However, at higher tensile strains, the hybridization of the V-S orbitals changes, leading to a stabilization of the 3d orbital of the Vanadium atom and a subsequent contraction of d V -S . The distance between Sulfur atoms, d S-S , is also observed to vary monotonically with increasing compressive and tensile strain, increasing with increasing compressive strain, and decreasing with increasing tensile strain. This trend is due to the changes in the electrostatic interaction between the Sulfur atoms and the Vanadium atoms in the V S 2 bilayer, which are influenced by the changes in the inter-layer distance and the electronic structure of the bilayer. To obtain the spin-resolved electronic band structure, we need to determine first the ground state. In the case of the T-phase of VS 2 , finding the ground state is challenging due to the Coulomb interaction. It has been shown that the ground state of this material can alternate between antiferromagnetic (AFM) and ferromagnetic (FM), when the Coulomb interaction is taken into consideration. This variation in the ground state makes it important to determine where the magnetic moment is predominantly localized. This is especially important when calculating exchange integrals. In this work, we have found that the magnetic moment becomes localized mainly on the vanadium (V) atoms. To determine the most stable geometry of the T-VS 2 bilayer, we calculated the total energy of FM and AFM configurations for different values of U eff (ranging from 0 to 3). We fully optimized the structure without the Coulomb interaction (U = 0), and found that it had an AFM ground state. Structures with U eff greater than or equal to 1 were found to be FM. We then optimized the structure for U eff ranging from 1 to 3, and selected the optimized structure with U eff =2 eV, based on its stability which was determined by changes in the lattice parameters and bond lengths. Using this value of U eff , we calculated all other relevant properties. We employed the DFT calculations to investigate the spin- Magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) plays a crucial role in determining the ground state magnetization orientation and can be calculated using the force theorem by evaluating the energy difference between relevant spin orientations. In this paper, we focus on the perpendicular anisotropy, which is defined as the energy difference between magnetizations along two specific crystallographic orientations. More precisely, the perpendicular anisotropy is defined as MAE , when the system is magnetically isotropic or near isotropic in the plane), where the positive value of MAE corresponds to the perpendicular easy axis, while the negative value to the perpendicular hard axis, i.e. to the easy-plane anisotropy. Our results, as illustrated in Figure C. Exchange parameters, Curie temperature When investigating magnetic properties of materials, the density functional theory (DFT) technique is commonly used as it gives reliable results. This technique allows to determine material parameters, like zerotemperature magnetization and magnetic ordering. Additionally, DFT enables calculation of the exchange parameters which enter Heisenberg spin Hamiltoniancommonly used to determine the Curie temperature, spin wave dispersions, and others. The Heisenberg exchange Hamiltonian can be written as: Here, êi represents the normalized local spin vector on atom i, and J ij stands for the Heisenberg exchange coupling constant. We utilized the energy mapping technique developed by Liechtenstein-Katsnelson-Antropov-Gubanov (LKAG) formula (1987) Our results for the clean and unstrained structure show that both J 1 and J 2 are positive, indicating that the magnetic interactions between the nearest and next nearest neighbors are ferromagnetic. The parameter J int is also positive, indicating that the magnetic interaction between spins in different layers is ferromagnetic, too. Furthermore, we found that J 1 is the largest coupling parameter, J 2 is smaller than J 1 , and J int is the smallest from the set of the three determined coupling constants. Our calculations of the Heisenberg exchange coupling constants for the bilayer of T-phase VS 2 reveal several interesting behaviors. First, we find that both GGA+U and GGA+SOC methods yield similar behavior for J 1 , but with small differences in magnitude. Specifically, the J 1 values obtained from both methods are almost the same at zero strain, with the GGA+U values being slightly larger than the GGA+SOC values. This can be attributed to the fact that the GGA+U method tends to overestimate the strength of the Coulomb in- FIG. Having found the exchange parameters, one can determine the Curie temperature. To do this we use the Mean Field Approximation (MFA) and the Random Phase Approximation (RPA). In the Mean Field Approximation, spins are treated based on an average interaction field, and any correlations beyond the nearest neighbors are disregarded. The MFA allows for a straightforward cal- culation of the Curie temperature (T c ) using the following expression: where k B is the Boltzmann constant, while Z 1 = 6, Z 2 = 6, and Z int = 1 denote the respective numbers of the nearest neighbors, next-nearest neighbors, and interlayer nearest neighbors atoms. In turn, the Random Phase Approximation (RPA) takes into account fluctuations in the spin orientations and incorporates correlations beyond the mean field. This approximation offers a more precise estimation of the Curie temperature. However, the RPA involves solving a system of coupled equations that take into account the spin correlation functions, resulting in a more intricate expression for T c . The pure structure of the bilayer of T-VS 2 has T c close to or beyond the room temperature for GGA+U in the MFA and RPA methods, respectively. However, this value is lower for the GGA+SOC calculations. Furthermore, we have calculated the Curie temperature for the different strains and the results are listed in Table In this paper, we have analyzed the influence of biaxial compressive and tensile strains on the electronic and magnetic properties of a bilayer of T-VS 2 . The bilayer structure seems to be interesting for applications, as it reveals the properties of a natural spin valve An interesting effect is that easy-plane magnetic anisotropy is enhanced for tensile strains and reduced almost to zero for compressive strains. This anisotropy in unstrained structures is rather small, so the tensile strain can be used to enhance the corresponding anisotropy parameter. Similarly, the compressive strain also reduces other magnetic properties, like magnetic moments of Vanadium, exchange parameters, and Curie temperature, which are strongly suppressed at higher compressive strains. FIG. 7: Spin-resolved band structures for the Bilayer T-phase of VS2 in the GGA+U and GGA +SOC approximations.