We develop a theory of the nonlinear optical responses in superconducting systems in the presence of a dc supercurrent. The optical transitions between particle-hole pair bands across the superconducting gap are allowed in clean superconductors as the inversion symmetry breaking by supercurrent. Vertex correction is included in optical conductivity to maintain the U (1) gauge symmetry in the mean-field formalism, which contains the contributions from collective modes. We show two pronounced current-dependent peaks in the second-harmonic generalization σ (2) (2ω, ω, ω) at the gap edge 2ħω = 2∆ and ħω = 2∆ and one in the photocurrent effect σ (2) (0, ω, -ω) at ħω = 2∆, all of which diverge in the clean limit. We demonstrate this in the models of a single-band superconductor with s-wave and d-wave pairings, and Dirac fermion systems with s-wave pairing. Our theory predicts that the current-induced peak in Im[σ (2) (ω)] is proportional to the square of the supercurrent density in the s-wave single-band model, with the same order of magnitude as the recent experimental observation of second-harmonic generation in NbN by Nakamura et al. [Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 097004 (2020)]. Supercurrent induced nonlinear optical spectroscopy provides a valuable toolbox to explore novel superconductors. The linear and nonlinear optical spectroscopy methods are well established as a powerful experimental technique to explore quantum materials, in particular superconductors Meanwhile, the nonlinear response of superconductors has attracted considerable interest. The second-order optical effects exist in superconductors with intrinsic broken I symmetry of the band structure or superconducting pairing order parameter Recently, there is growing interest in the effect of a supercurrent on the optical response of superconductors. With the help of a dc supercurrent, the Higgs mode can be linearly excited by an electromagnetic field It has been a longstanding proposal that gauge invariance should be maintained when calculating optical responses The paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews the diagrammatic method applied to the superconductor in mean-field formalism. Section III presents the formalism of the gauge-invariant second-order nonlinear optical response in superconductors by including vertex correction, which can be readily applied to higherorder responses. In Section IV, we calculate second-order nonlinear optical conductivity in several different superconductor models, namely, the lattice model of a singleband superconductor with s-wave and d-wave pairings, and Dirac fermion systems with proximity effect from an s-wave superconductor. Finally, we conclude our work with some further discussions in Section V. Some auxiliary materials are relegated to the Appendices. We start by briefly reviewing the mean-field theory of a superconductor, specifically the diagrammatic method of the mean-field gap equation. The BCS meanfield theory can be understood as the self-consistent Hartree-Fock (SCHF) approximation In the Nambu basis, the interaction term can be written as ) T is the Nambu spinor operator and τ 3 is the Pauli matrix. We approximate the four-fermion interaction by a quadratic term. Then, up to first order of the interaction, the self-energy of the electron can be written as, where At zero temperature, the corresponding self-consistent gap equation is obtained by integrating out k ′ 0 , If V k,k ′ can be approximate to be constant near the Fermi surface, Σ(k) will become a constant matrix, which is the case for the s-wave BCS superconductor. If V k,k ′ can be factorized as V φ k φ k ′ , and φ k takes the form (cos k xcos k y ), Σ(k) turns out to be a constant matrix multiplied by the factor φ k , which is the d-wave case When the superconductor carries a dc supercurrent, which may be from an external source or induced by a magnetic field, a Cooper pair will get a nonzero total momentum 2q. Then we change the Nambu spinor to be Ψ k = (c k+q,↑ , c † -k+q,↓ ) T , and the BCS mean-field Hamiltonian will become The eigenvalues of the BdG Hamiltonian are (5) The gap equation is almost the same as Eq. ( Now we are ready to study the nonlinear optical response of superconductors. In the velocity gauge, an electromagnetic field couples to a superconductor through minimal coupling: k → k -q ′ A/ħ in the diagonal sector of BdG Hamiltonian, where q ′ = -e (e) is the electron (hole) charge. We focus on the limit of a weak, monochromatic and uniform external electromagnetic field. The generalized velocity operators are defined by These operators are represented by bare electron-photon vertex functions in the diagrammatic method, some examples of which are shown in Fig. As mentioned previously, the gauge invariance should be maintained when calculating the linear optical response in BCS mean-field theory where γ(p + q, p) and Γ(p + q, p) are the bare and corrected vertex. For an s-wave superconductor, V k,p is a constant, the integrand, and thus Γ(p + q, p) in the above equation is independent of p, while Γ(p + q, p) is generically determined both by p and q (e.g., d-wave case; see Appendix B). In general, the corrected vertex function will contain all τ 1 , τ 2 and τ 3 components, which characterize the fluctuations of the pairing order parameter and charge density. Thus, after considering the vertex correction, the final electromagnetic response already contains the contributions from the collective modes, which is the necessary requirement for a gauge-invariant theory. The nonlinear optical responses of the superconductors can be calculated via the diagrammatic approach Here we mainly consider the clean limit l ≫ ξ 0 , which means the momentum of the electron remains unchanged during optical transition under uniform and monophonic light illumination. Moreover, we calculate the optical response up to second order; this method also works for a higher-order response. The first-and second-order opti-cal conductivity are defined as The subscripts a, b, c are x or y in the two-dimensional system. After vertex correction, the gauge-invariant formulas for σ abc (ω 1 + ω 2 , ω 1 , ω 2 ) are given through Feynman diagrams shown in Fig. Note that only the temporal component of photon momentum q is considered since spatial components q are negligibly small in the terahertz region, whose corresponding energy is comparable to the superconducting gap. The analytic continuation should be done in the Green's function as ω → ω + iη, where η is a infinitesimal positive parameter. In addition, we consider the low-temperature limit, i.e., the summation of the Matsubara frequency can be replaced by an integral. We study two processes in the second-order response: SHG and the photocurrent effect (PC) Now we calculate second-order nonlinear optical conductivity σ (2) (ω) in several different models of superconductors, which could exemplify the different aspects of supercurrent-enabled optical conductivity. We first consider a single-band spin-degenerate s-wave superconductor. A generic tight-binding model is on a square lattice with unit lattice constant, the nearest neighbor hopping t, the chemical potential μ, and a superconducting gap ∆, where The model has C 2x symmetry when the supercurrent flows along the x direction. The symmetry allows two nonzero independent components of σ (1) : σ xx , σ yy , and four possible nonzero independent components of σ (2) : σ xyy , σ yyx . All of the remaining components are zero. The intrinsic permutation symmetry leads to σ (2) acb (ω 1 + ω 2 , ω 2 , ω 1 ), and the reality condition requires σ (2) Thus we obtain the following relations of nonlinear optical responses in the low-frequency regime Finally, only σ yyx are independent. In addition, σ xxx (0, ω, -ω) and σ xyy (0, ω, -ω) are real. The numerical results of the linear, SHG and PC optical conductivity for the s-wave tight-binding model are shown in Figs. For the linear optical conductivity σ (1) (ω) shown in Fig. Meanwhile, q has a negligible effect on Im[σ (1) (ω)]. Since the dominant contribution comes from the tadpole diagram, the vertex correction makes almost no difference and Im[σ For the second order in Figs. xyy and σ (2) yyx even reverse sign, while the shape of the frequencydependence curve is unchanged. Interestingly, we find that in this model, the contribution from the triangular diagram of Fig. Then we proceed to study the Dirac fermion with an s-wave superconducting pairing, which describes the surface state of a 3D topological insulator with the proximity effect from a conventional s-wave superconductor Here, v is the Fermi velocity, and we set μ staying high above the Dirac point. Thus we can focus on the upper Dirac bands around the proximity gap when the photon is in the terahertz frequency. The projected model for the Dirac fermion is where kx ≡ k x /k and k = k 2 x + k 2 y . The model has C 2x symmetry, similar to the above s-wave singleband model, and the symmetry-allowed nonzero independent components are σ yy for linear order, and σ yyx for second order. The numerical results of linear, SHG, and PC optical conductivity for the Dirac fermion model are shown in Figs. yy , which is consistent with previous research Finally, we study a different type of superconducting pairing, namely, a single-band spin-degenerate d-wave superconductor. The tight-binding model on a square lattice is where The independent nonzero components of σ (1) and σ (2) are the same as in the s-wave model since the d-wave model here has C 2x symmetry with the supercurrent flows along the x axis. In the numerical calculations for σ (1) and σ (2) , we set q x = 0.07/a, μ = 0.9 × 10 2 meV, V = 1.8 × 10 2 meV, η = 3×10 -2 meV, and ∆ ≈ 23 meV determined by Eq. ( Figs. We compare the magnitude of the predicted effect to the present experiments on second-order optical conductivity of superconductors. A current-enabled SHG was recently reported in the experimental of Ref. th ≈ 3.9 × 10 8 pm/V, which matches well with the experimental result. Meanwhile, the current- induced peak in Im[σ (2) (ω)] is predicted to be proportional to the square of the supercurrent density, which is also consistent with the experimental observations So far, we only consider a clean system, and the effect of impurity scattering can be considered as a positive imaginary parameter into the Green's function. Thus the resulting response from both linear and second order is reduced, especially near the resonance frequency region, and the divergent behavior in the low-frequency limit is replaced by approaching to a large value. In the dirty limit, the linear response will return to Mattis-Bardeen theory In summary, we have studied a supercurrent-enabled second-order optical response in BCS superconductors of the clean limit. Such a supercurrent flow can be induced and controlled by an external magnetic field through the Meissner effect. Similar to the linear order case, we find a large second-order response near the gap edge in the presence of dc supercurrent. After vertex correction, the entire magnitude of the linear-and second-order responses is reduced, only some second-order components even reverse sign, while the shape of the frequency-dependence curve is unchanged. Here we point out that the contribution from collective modes has already been included in vertex correction reflecting the BCS electronelectron interactions. For the above several examples with typical superconducting order parameters, we show that the current-enabled second-order optical conductivity strongly depends on the type of superconducting pairing as well as the nature of the normal state. As such, the supercurrent-induced nonlinear optical spectroscopy provides a valuable toolbox to explore novel superconductors. Moreover, although we only present the nonlinear response up to second order in this manuscript, the diagrammatic method with vertex correction can be readily extended to a higher-order optical response. Note added: During the finalization of our manuscript, we learned of an independent work on the second-order optical Hall response of superconductors In the s-wave case, Γ(p+q, p) is independent of p, and the photon momentum q is negligible, thus all expansion coefficients of the Γ matrix can be solved by self-consistent Eq. ( To find out the resonance frequency clearly, we sum over the imaginary temporal component and reexpress the formulas of σ (1) and σ (2) . The diagram in Fig. where we denote εk = (ε +ε -k+q )/2, E ′ k = ε2 k + ∆ 2 and abbreviate the integral over k to where ω = ω + i0 + . The denominator indicates that the resonance frequency is ħω ≈ 2∆. Eq. ( The second part is a bubble diagram, [dk] -2∆ ab +2∆(γ The denominator indicates that the resonance frequency is ħω ≈ 2∆. The third part is another bubble diagram, [dk] -2∆ bc ) where ω 12 = ω 1 + ω 2 and ω12 = ω1 + ω2 . The denominator indicates that in the case of SHG, the resonance frequency is ħω ≈ ∆, and in the case of photocurrent effect, no resonance frequency appears. The triangular diagram is far more complicated; we only show the result without vertex correction, (2) c (B7) Likewise, the denominator indicates that for SHG, the resonance frequencies are ħω ≈ ∆ and ħω ≈ 2∆; for the photocurrent effect, the resonance frequency is ħω ≈ 2∆. Vertex correction will modify this term significantly, while leaving the resonance frequencies unchanged, which can be seen in the Dirac fermion case in the main text. As a side note, if there is no supercurrent, q = 0, γ Only the imaginary part of σ (1) survives and there is no optical transition at any finite frequency, verifying the effect of the supercurrent. Besides, the zero response of the second order reflects inversion symmetry of the system when q = 0. In the d-wave case, V k,k ′ can factorized as: V φ k φ k ′ , where V is a constant and φ k = (cos k x -cos k y ), and the self-consistent equation for the corrected vertex function becomes Γ(p + q, p) φ p = γ(p + q, p) [φ k τ 3 G(k 0 + q 0 , k + q)Γ(k + q, k)G(k 0 , k)τ 3 ] (B8) After being divided by φ p , the integrand above is independent of p, and thus we can expand the Γ matrix as: Γ(p + q, p) = γ(p + q, p) + φ p In this manner, all the expansion coefficients of the Γ matrix can be solved through Eq. (B8) for every frequency (again, we consider q = 0); then the optical responses of the d-wave superconductor can be obtained by Eqs. ( where η is a small positive parameter, which is set to be 5 × 10 -2 meV in the calculation of the main text. Similarly, the different factor of angular integral for γ x and γ y results in σ 