Combining non-hermiticity and interactions yields novel effects in open quantum many-body systems. Here, we develop the generalized Schrieffer-Wolff transformation and derive the effective Hamiltonian suitable for various quasi-degenerate non-Hermitian systems. We apply our results to an exemplary PT -symmetric circuit QED composed of two non-Hermitian qubits embedded in a lossless resonator. We consider a resonant quantum circuit as |ωr -Ω| ≪ ωr, where Ω and ωr are qubits and resonator frequencies, respectively, providing well-defined groups of quasi-degenerate resonant states. For such a system, using direct numerical diagonalization we obtain the dependence of the low-lying eigenspectrum on the interaction strength between a single qubit and the resonator, g, and the gain (loss) parameter γ, and compare that with the eigenvalues obtained analytically using the effective Hamiltonian of resonant states. We identify PT -symmetry broken and unbroken phases, trace the formation of Exceptional Points of the second and the third order, and provide a complete phase diagram g -γ of low-lying resonant states. We relate the formation of Exceptional Points to the additional P-pseudo-Hermitian symmetry of the system and show that non-hermiticity mixes the "dark" and the "bright" states, which has a direct experimental consequence. Seminal Schrieffer-Wolff transformation A particular example of the qubits-type systems coined as circuit QED, i.e., various arrays of superconducting qubits coupled to a low dissipative resonator, presents a special interest for quantum computing, quantum simulations, and precise quantum measurements Recently, this field of study has got a new twist as so-called PT -symmetric non-Hermitian qubits systems have been experimentally realized in various solid state systems such as trapped ions, ultracold and Rydberg atoms A general theoretical study of PT -symmetric non-Hermitian Hamiltonians has been started by the works of Bender and coworkers Systems of PT -symmetric interacting qubits (twolevels or spin 1/2) have been theoretically studied for two PT -non-Hermitian qubits with an exchange interaction In this Article, we develop the generalized Schrieffer-Wolff transformation for arbitrary non-Hermitian inter-acting systems and derive the effective Hamiltonian in which the interaction is treated as the perturbation up to the second order. Since the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation is especially suited for quantum systems with well-defined groups of quasi-degenerate states The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section II we formulate the general Schrieffer-Wolff transformation suitable for quasi-degenerate non-Hermitian Hamiltonian systems. Using such transformation, we derive the effective Hamiltonian. In Section III we introduce a basic model of PT -symmetric circuit QED, i.e., two non-Hermitian qubits embedded in a lossless resonator, discuss important symmetries of a system, and, using the direct numerical diagonalization, obtain the dependence of the eigenspectrum on the coupling strength, g, and the gain (loss) parameter, γ. In Section IV, we use the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation to derive the effective Hamiltonian matrix of the resonant states and discuss its symmetry properties. After that, in Section V, using the effective Hamiltonian we study the formation of Exceptional Points in detail, and produce a complete phase diagram of the low-lying resonant states. In Section VI the conclusions will be provided. There are also Appendix A, where we compute the matrix elements of the effective Hamiltonian, and Appendices B, C and D, where the derivation details regarding the phase diagram and EP s are presented. Let us consider a quantum system described by an arbitrary non-Hermitian Hamiltonian of the form where both Ĥ0 and V can be non-Hermitian. We assume that the main part of the Hamiltonian, Ĥ0 , has a well-defined group of quasi-degenerate eigenstates which is clearly separated from other levels in energy. The pa-rameter g is considered to be small, and we will treat the second term g V as a perturbation. We further assume, that Ĥ0 is not close to the EP s and it has a complete biorthonormal basis of right |R i ⟩ and left ⟨L i | eigenvectors These eigenvectors satisfy the condition [42] Let P be the set of quasi-degenerate eigenstates of the Hamiltonian Ĥ0 that we want to project onto, and let Q = P be the set of all other states. In the non-Hermitian case, the projector operator P on the set of states P is defined as We also introduce the orthogonal projector: written explicitly as Using the biorthogonality of the left and right eigenvectors, one can check that the projector operators P and Q satisfy the following properties: P 2 = P , Q2 = Q and P Q = Q P = 0. The use of the projector operators, P and Q, allows one to split the Hamiltonian as Note, the projector operators P and Q commute with Ĥ0 . As a consequence, P Ĥ0 Q = Q Ĥ0 P = 0, and The operator Ĥ0 + g VD yields the "diagonal" part of the Hamiltonian that does not mix the states from subspaces P and Q. On the contrary, the operator g VX gives rise to the "off-diagonal" part of the Hamiltonian connecting the states from different subspaces. Next, we search for the transformation allowing to get rid of the off-diagonal part g VX of the Hamiltonian where Ĥ′ satisfies The procedure described by Eqs. ( As usual, Eq. ( Expanding the operator Ŝ in a series of powers of g as and substituting it in Eq. ( To eliminate VX in the first order, we require and Ŝ0 is obtained explicitly as where Choosing the operator Ŝ1 to satisfy the condition [ Ŝ1 , Ĥ0 ] + [ Ŝ0 , VD ] = 0 we obtain the effective Hamiltonian as Substituting Eq. ( Since the effective Hamiltonian does not mix the two subspaces P and Q, one concludes that the second term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( Note, the outlined procedure is quite general and can be extended to obtain the higher-order corrections in g. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the non-hermitian version of the Schrieffer-Wolf transformation we consider a basic PT -symmetric circuit QED composed of two non-Hermitian qubits coupled to a lossless resonator. The Hamiltonian of such a system reads as where the Hamiltonian of two non-interacting biased qubits is Here, σ(x,z) are the corresponding Pauli matrices, and ∆, ε (a qubit's bias) are real off-diagonal and diagonal matrix elements, accordingly. The non-hermiticity is introduced as a staggered imaginary longitudinal magnetic field or a gain/loss parameter of individual qubits, γ. All parameters of individual qubits are assumed to be identical. The Hamiltonian Ĥres describes a single bosonic mode of the resonator with the frequency ω r where ω r is the characteristic frequency of the resonator. The interaction between the qubits and the resonator is determined by the Hamiltonian Ĥint as Identical coupling strengths, g = g 1 = g 2 , are assumed for simplicity. The parity P and the time-reversal T operators are defined for the system as the exchange of qubits and the complex conjugation operators, respectively Notice here that in the presence of the opposite signs of the gain/loss parameter for different qubits, i.e., a staggered gain/loss, the PT symmetry of the Hamiltonian ( which will prove to be crucial for the qualitative understanding of the results. Next, by making use of the direct numerical diagonalization we compute the low-lying eigenspectrum of the Hamiltonian Since the formation of EP s in the model is based on the parity-indices of the states due to its P-pseudo-Hermitian symmetry A. Hermitian circuit QED, γ = 0: longitudinal and transverse couplings First, we recall the quantum-mechanical behavior of a basic circuit QED system in the absence of non-Hermitian terms, i.e., as γ = 0 Transforming the single-qubit Hamiltonian Ĥ1qb = (∆/2)σ x + (ε/2)σ z to the diagonal form we obtain two eigenvectors |±⟩ with corresponding eigenvalues ±Ω/2. In a new representation the interaction Hamiltonian takes the form: We choose the parameters to be close to the resonance condition, |ω r -Ω| ≪ Ω, precisely ω r /Ω = 1.07. The numerically obtained nine low-lying normalized energy levels, E/Ω, of Eq. ( the middle group of three states corresponds to and the upper group of four states is Here, the notation implies where n is the number of bosons in the resonator. The parities of all these states are positive (+1) except of the states which have negative (-1) parity. According to the Wigner-von Neumann selection rule To study the eigenspectrum of PT -symmetric circuit QED with an almost longitudinal coupling (θ = π/40 ≪ 1) between qubits and the resonator it is convenient to focus separately on the two groups of quasi-degenerate states that we identified in Fig. The panels (b, c) of Fig. The three upper levels of Fig. In Fig. Qualitative picture roughly does not change: the nonhermiticity leads to the formation of the second-order EP s between the levels with opposite parity indices. We also observe pairs of second-order EP s with shared level of opposite parity index that approach each other as γ increases. These pairs eventually coalesce into third-order EP s. Nevertheless, there is also a significant difference with the case of almost longitudinal coupling: as the qubitresonator interaction g increases, the level repulsion between the states of the same parity index inside a resonant group is so strong, that it pushes the states from different groups towards each other and they go through avoided crossings. Therefore, the applicability of the Schrieffer-Wolf transformation for the PT -symmetric circuit QED with a transverse coupling is limited to the regime g/Ω ≪ 1. Here, we obtain analytically the eigenspectrum of PTsymmetric circuit QED by making use of the generic Schrieffer-Wolf transformation elaborated in Sec. II. We identify the main part Ĥ0 of the Hamiltonian (1) as Ĥ0 = Ĥqb + Ĥres , and the perturbation g V = Ĥint . We focus on a PT -symmetric circuit QED with a longitudinal coupling and on the quasi-degenerate group of states presented in Fig. A. Biorthonormal basis of the right and the left eigenvectors at g = 0. Let us first discuss the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of unperturbed PT -symmetric circuit QED, i.e., as g = 0. The eigenvalues of the single-qubit Hamiltonian Ĥ1qb = (∆/2) σx 1 + (ε/2 + iγ) σz 1 are readily obtained as The corresponding right eigenvectors are chosen as As Ĥ1qb is described by a symmetric matrix, the corresponding left eigenvectors are obtained by the transposition: The chosen right and left eigenvectors produce the biorthonormal basis states of a single qubit. Indeed, one can check that ⟨+ l |+ r ⟩ = ⟨l |r ⟩ = 1, and The Hamiltonian of the second qubit Ĥ2qb is obtained from Ĥ1qb by complex conjugation. As the consequence, the eigenvalues and both right and left eigenvectors can be obtained by the complex conjugation of the expressions (34)- constitute the basis of the right eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian Ĥ0 with eigenenergies Here, ∼ in | ±r ⟩ serves as a reminder that the eigenenergies and the eigenvectors of the second qubit are obtained by complex conjugation of ( Notice that the normalized boson states |n⟩ are simultaneously the right and the left eigenvectors, so they do not have any r/l subscripts. Thus defined eigenvectors For γ ≪ Ω one finds λ ≈ Ω. For resonant PTsymmetric circuit QED, i.e., as ω r ≈ Ω, the following states form the group of quasi-degenerate levels (the last state is absent for n = 0): For γ = 0 these states transform in Eqs. Here, using the main result and the left eigenvectors are The corresponding energies at g = 0 are (45) The evaluation of the direct matrix elements of the pertubration ⟨L p | V |R p ′ ⟩ and of the second-order contribution due to indirect transitions in Eq. ( Ĥeff is given by Here, the parameters s and t are the single qubit matrix elements defined in Appendix A 1 a: The coefficient s is the probability amplitude for the qubit to stay in the same state, while t is the probability amplitude to flip the qubit. Since γ/Ω ≪ 1, the expressions for s and t are simplified as and λ ≈ Ω/2 + iγ cos θ. To assess the quality of the generic Schrieffer-Wolf transformation and the effective Hamiltonian approximation, we compare in Fig. The reasons of such a slight disagreement can be understood in the following way. The denominators in Eq. ( q , we can neglect the renormalization of the energies in Eq. In order to provide the parity analysis of PTsymmetric QED, we notice that an exchanging of two qubits corresponds to the parity operator P in the subspace P written as Using ( Using these properties of Ĥeff we apply the parity analysis of Ref. To facilitate such parity analysis, it is natural to switch to a new basis of right and left eigenvectors, in which the parity operator ( The transformation from the basis ( where Using (57) we obtain the effective Hamiltonian in the new basis: 2(ω0+2λ) Taking into account the approximate expressions for s, t and λ, i.e., where the detuning frequency ∆ω = ω r -Ω is introduced. At γ = 0 and g = 0, the three states ( As γ and g are turned on, the middle state (the dark state at γ = 0) with negative parity can go through a second-order EP with either of the other two states, but the first and the third states having the same (positive) parity, never form a second-order EP. This property is reflected in the structure of the matrix (59): the diagonal matrix elements are purely real, and the non-Hermitian off-diagonal matrix elements 2iγ cos θ only couple the middle state with the other two. The interplay of the avoided crossing between the "bright" states and of the mixing between the "dark" state and one of the "bright" states due to nonhermiticity leads to the precursor behaviour that we observed in Fig. The eigenvalues spectrum of an arbitrary PTsymmetric quantum system can be of two types, i.e., real or complex conjugate values defining PT -symmetry unbroken (preserved) and broken quantum phases, accordingly. The EP s of different orders separate these phases. By making use of the effective Hamiltonian (59) in the following we identify these phases and the lines of EP s in the group of resonant levels of PT -symmetric circuit QED. The eigenvalues of the effective Hamiltonian (59) are obtained as the roots of its characteristic polynomial, P (E) = det(E -Ĥ) = 0 Because of the PT -symmetry of H p,p ′ , the coefficients of the characteristic polynomial are all purely real Transforming the characteristic polynomial, P (E), to the dimensionless depressed cubic form, we obtain where the dimensionless energy Ẽ is and the coefficients p and q are Using the standard analysis of a depressed cubic equation (63) (see Appendix B for more details), we find that the equality, p 3 + q 2 = 0, determines the line of secondorder EP s, and a third-order EP is determined by the condition p = q = 0. The PT -symmetry preserved and broken phases can be quantitatively characterized by the maximal imaginary part of the eigenvalues of Ĥeff and the minimal absolute value of the difference between two eigenvalues as the functions of parameters g/Ω and γ/Ω. It is presented in Fig. The Fig. The intersection of lines p = 0 and q = 0 (red point) corresponds to the triple-degenerate root of Eq. ( In principle, triple-degeneracy of the characteristic polynomial root is not the sufficient condition to have a third-order EP. However, we show explicitly in Appendix B, that the triple-degeneracy point is indeed the third-order EP in this case. B. The eigenvalues under perturbation of parameters γ and g near the third-order EP. To study the asymptotic behaviour of eigenvalues E 1-3 as the parameters γ and g slightly deviate from the values γ cr and g cr corresponding to the third-order EP (EP 3 ), it is convenient to work directly with the depressed cubic parameters p and q as a curvilinear system of coordinates in the vicinity of the third-order EP. To corroborate this view, we display the lines of constant p and q in Fig. Considering different directions of perturbation, we classify the behaviour of eigenvalues as follows (the details of the derivation can be found in Appendix D). Along the line of second-order EP s (case 1), where the condition p 3 + q 2 = 0 is valid, we obtain a single wellseparated eigenvalue, Ẽ1 = -2 3 √ q and doubly-degenerate eigenvalues, Ẽ2,3 = -2 cos 2π 3 × 3 √ q (see Figs. The variation of parameters γ and g along the line q = 0, p < 0 (case 2) results in the real spectrum with three distinct eigenvalues, Ẽk = 2 cos π 6 + 2π 3 (k -1) × |p|, where k = 1, 2, 3. Such spectrum is also present in Figs. Depending on the direction of the perturbation in the parameter space, we observe very different behaviour of the eigenvalues that an EP 3 splits into, i.e. anisotropic scaling of eigenvalues that was already reported for second-order EP s To conclude, we extend the formalism of the generalized Schrieffer-Wolff transformation to arbitrary non-Hermitian interacting quantum systems, and derive the effective Hamiltonian taking into account the interaction terms as the perturbation up to the second order. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the method we apply this generic procedure to a basic PT -symmetric circuit QED composed of two non-Hermitian non-interacting superconducting qubits weakly coupled to a lossless resonator of the frequency ω r . In this model the non-Hermiticity is introduced as a staggered imaginary longitudinal magnetic field or gain/loss γ of corresponding qubits states. We consider PT -symmetric circuit QED biased in the resonant regime as the frequency of a single qubit Ω is close to the frequency of the resonator, i.e., Ω ≃ ω r . The resonant regime of a circuit QED is a simplest one providing well-defined groups of quasi-degenerate eigenstates even for moderate values of the coupling strength, g/Ω. Using the explicit expression for the effective Hamiltonian, we calculate analytically the eigenspectrum of a PT -symmetric circuit QED for different parameters γ and g and identify the PT -symmetry preserved and broken quantum phases, obtain the EP s of different orders. In particular, we obtain the values of parameters γ cr and g cr for the third-order EP s. The values of γ cr and g cr decrease with the detuning ω r -Ω and the mixing angle θ ≪ 1. We compare our analytical results with the direct numerical diagonalization of the Hamiltonian The most important physical signature of the nonhermiticity is the mixture of "bright" and "dark" states. In particular, in the absence of non-Hermitian terms the energy spectrum of a circuit QED system splits into the subgroups of "bright" and "dark" states having different parity indices, and therefore, these subgroups do not mix with each other The lines of constant p and q in the vicinity of the third-order EP. Horizontally aligned green dashed lines: level curves p = 8 × 10 -6 • m for integer m; solid line corresponds to the level p = 0. Vertically aligned purple dash-dot lines: level curves q = 2 × 10 -7 • n for integer n; solid line corresponds to the level q = 0. Orange solid line: level curve p 3 + q 2 = 0. one of "bright" states) due to P-pseudo-Hermitian symmetry of the Hamiltonian Going beyond the analytical considerations of the present paper, it is important to emphasize that in the vicinity of an n-th order EP, the states involved form an isolated quasi-degenerate group of states. As such, the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation outlined here can be used to numerically derive the local n×n effective Hamil-tonian describing the vicinity of the n th -order EP. Our formalism can also be readily applied to the thermodynamic models in condensed matter where Schrieffer-Wolf transformation is used to obtain the effective low-energy models by integrating out high-energy degrees of freedom. 1. Spin part of the matrix elements Derivation of the spin part of the matrix elements proceeds in two steps. In subsection A 1 a, we compute the single-spin matrix elements ⟨± l |σ z |± r ⟩. In subsection A 1 b, we use this single-spin matrix elements to compute the two-spin matrix elements ⟨± l ±l |(σ z 1 + σz 2 )| ± r ±r ⟩. Let us start with Here, we used the following two identities to factorize first the denominator and then the nominator: After that, we proceed with the other matrix elements in a straightforward manner. b. Action of σz 1 + σz 2 on two-spin states and the two-spin matrix elements. Here, we use the single-spin matrix elements obtained in the previous section. Instead of directly computing the two-spin matrix elements, it is more convenient to compute the action of (σ z 1 + σz 2 ) on the two-spin states. The coefficients of the expansion then give the desired matrix elements. Notice that the matrix elements are symmetric with respect to the exchange of the initial and the final states. We first start we the second term in Eq. ( To compute the matrix elements of ∆ Ĥ(2) , we need to find the possible intermediate q-states for the given p, p ′ matrix element. Below we list the intermediate states in a table. Substituting the results of this section and the expressions for the energies at g = 0 (45) into Eq. ( * ω 0 -2 Re λ -4g 2 (Re s) 2 ω0 + Re