Undoped and Si-doped GaN films were grown epitaxially on sapphire by reactive rf sputtering of GaAs (and Si) in Ar-N2 mixture. The resistivity of undoped GaN film grown at 100% N2 was ~2 × 10 5 Ω cm, which reduced to ~1 Ω cm in Si-doped film, revealing the effect of Si doping. With decrease of N2 from 100% to 75%, the carrier concentration of Si-doped films increased from ~7 × 10 18 cm -3 to ~2 × 10 19 cm -3 , but remained practically unchanged as N2 was decreased to 20%, which is explained by effects due to saturation of Si doping and increase of Ga interstitials as well as compensation by N interstitials and Ga vacancies. Undoped and Si-doped films grown below 20% N2 displayed similar carrier concentrations (~10 20 cm -3 ), due to dominance of Ga interstitials. Both undoped and Si-doped films were degenerate and displayed increase of mobility with carrier concentration and temperature, which was analyzed by the combined effect of ionized impurity and dislocation scattering, using compensation ratio as fitting parameter. At carrier concentrations ≲10 19 cm -3 , the mobility was governed by both ionized impurity and dislocation scattering, while at higher carrier concentrations, ionized impurity scattering was found to dominate, limited by compensation due to acceptors. In spite of the degenerate character, the films displayed a small decrease of carrier concentration with temperature, along with a nearly linear decrease of mobility, which are explained by a marginal increase of compensation ratio with decrease of temperature, taking into account the band edge fluctuation effects. Following the rapid advancement of GaN based devices, ranging from short wavelength optoelectronics and white light sources to high power and high frequency transistors The mobility of MOCVD and MBE grown non-degenerate GaN films possessing threading edge dislocations ≲10 8 cm -2 is usually reported to be in the range of 10 2 -10 3 cm 2 V - 1 s -1 , and is predominantly controlled by the lattice and ionized impurity scattering mechanisms According to their results, the mobility of Si-doped GaN films having different edge dislocation densities in the range of 10 9 -10 11 cm -2 followed a family of bell-shaped curves, wherein it increased with increasing carrier concentration up to values as high as ~10 20 cm -3 (depending on the dislocation density), beyond which it decreased due to the effect of ionized impurities. Subsequently, Look and Sizelove We have recently demonstrated the epitaxial growth of highly conducting, unintentionally doped GaN Undoped and Si-doped epitaxial GaN films were grown by reactive rf magnetron sputtering of a GaAs target, as described earlier ESCApe software was used for the analysis of core level spectra, which were fitted with Shirley-type background and a combination of Gaussian and Lorentzian line shape components for the peak envelope. High resolution x-ray diffraction (HRXRD) measurements were carried out with a Cu rotating anode (9 kW), RIGAKU-Smart Lab-X-Ray diffractometer, equipped with a 2-bounce Ge (220) monochromator, to calculate the density of edge dislocations from mosaic twist, obtained by in-plane measurements of (112 ̅ 0) reflection, as described elsewhere The structural data of undoped Hall measurements were carried out to obtain the resistivity, mobility and carrier concentration of undoped and Si-doped GaN films grown at different N2 percentages in sputtering atmosphere, and the results are shown in figures 1-3. Figure Undoped GaN film grown at 100% N2 displays a large resistivity of ~2 × 10 5 Ω cm, which decreases monotonously and drastically with decrease of N2 percentage to attain a low value of ~2 × 10 -3 Ω cm for the films grown in the range of 8% -10% N2, as reported earlier Interestingly, the resistivities of Si-doped GaN films grown at 20% or lower N2 are close to those of the undoped GaN films and attain nearly equal values (~2 × 10 -3 Ω cm) in the films grown at ~10% N2. It is also noticed that the resistivities of both undoped and Si-doped GaN films grown at lower N2 percentages tend to increase and become substantially larger (~2 × 10 - The carrier concentration of undoped and Si-doped GaN films grown at different N2 percentages are shown in figure The above results show that firstly, the Si-doped GaN films grown with 20% -100% N2 possess substantially higher carrier concentrations compared to the corresponding undoped GaN films. This is particularly evident for the films grown in the range of 20% -40% N2 (figure As mentioned above, the Si content of all the doped films grown at different N2 percentages is nearly the same Figure The results presented in figures 1-3 thus reveal a strong dependence of the electrical parameters of both undoped and Si-doped GaN films on the N2 percentage in sputtering atmosphere and more importantly, display an increase of mobility with carrier concentration over a large range of 10 18 -10 20 cm -3 . As discussed in the Introduction, such an increase of mobility with carrier concentration has been attributed mainly to the scattering of electrons due to charged edge dislocations in epitaxial GaN films. However, the concurrent increase of carrier concentration and mobility, seen in both undoped and Si-doped GaN films grown by sputtering in the present study is particularly interesting for two reasons. Firstly, the critical carrier concentration at which semiconductor-metal transition (based on Mott's criterion In semiconductor films with such high carrier concentrations, the scattering due to ionized impurities is likely to be governed by the degenerate form of Brooks-Herring relation where, Z is the ionization charge (taken as 1 for donors and acceptors The increase of mobility with carrier concentration has generally been attributed to scattering of electrons by charged edge dislocations where, N dis is the density of edge dislocations, c is the lattice constant (here, c is taken to be equal to the lattice parameter along c-axis of GaN), m * is the electron effective mass and ε is the static dielectric constant. Thus, in order to analyze the dependence of the mobility of undoped and Si-doped GaN films on carrier concentration, considering the combined effect of ionized impurity and dislocation scattering mechanisms, the density of edge dislocations (dominant in hexagonal systems Following the above, the dependence of the mobility of undoped and Si-doped GaN films on carrier concentration has been analyzed by considering the combined effect of ionized impurity and dislocation scattering mechanisms in degenerate semiconductors and the results are presented in figure and (b), respectively. It may be noted that several films were grown at each N2 percentage to verify the reproducibility of data, the variation of which, is indicated by appropriate error bars. The dependence of mobility on carrier concentration is found to be nearly similar for undoped and Si-doped GaN films, changing from ~2 cm 2 V -1 s -1 to ~25 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , as the carrier concentration changes over two orders of magnitude from ~10 18 cm -3 to ~10 20 cm -3 . In the following analysis, the values of μ ii for undoped and Si-doped GaN films, were calculated from cm -3 ), the values of μ dis and μ ii are nearly comparable, for both undoped and Si-doped GaN films. Hence, it is inferred that the low values of measured mobility in this range are determined by the combined effect of ionized impurity scattering and dislocation scattering. However, in the higher carrier concentration range (10 19 -10 20 cm -3 ), μ dis increases substantially, which may be partly due to the decrease of N dis , with decrease of N2 percentage, as shown in figure In order to further ascertain the transport mechanism in undoped and Si-doped GaN films, the temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity, mobility and carrier concentration was studied in the temperature range of 10 K to 300 K. Figure In order to understand the temperature dependence of mobility of undoped and Sidoped GaN films, the mobility data has been analyzed by taking into account the scattering due to charged dislocations and ionized impurities, as was done to analyze the room temperature mobility data. It may be mentioned that the small increase of mobility with temperature could not be fitted using the grain boundary scattering model In the present case, both undoped and Si-doped GaN films are degenerate and as discussed above, are substantially compensated due to the presence of acceptor centers. As the temperature dependence of resistivity, shown in figure The electrical properties of undoped and Si-doped GaN films (with nearly constant Si content of ~2 at. %) grown on sapphire by reactive sputtering are found to be strongly dependent on the N2 percentage in sputtering atmosphere. The resistivity of the Si-doped GaN film grown at 100% N2 is five orders of magnitude smaller than that of the undoped film grown under the same condition, confirming the effect of Si doping. With decrease of N2 from 100% to 75%, the carrier concentration of Si-doped GaN films increases from ~7 × 10 18 cm -3 to ~2 × 10 19 cm -3 , due to the decrease of N interstitials, resulting in reduced compensation. As the N2 percentage is decreased to ~20%, the carrier concentration displays a plateau-like behaviour, which is explained by the combined effects due to the saturation of Si doping and increase of Ga interstitial donors, as well as the compensation by acceptors due to interstitials and Ga vacancies. Interestingly, undoped and Si-doped GaN films grown below 20% N2 display nearly the same values of electrical parameters and similar dependences on N2 percentage, indicating the prevalence of the same source of n-type conductivity in both cases, which is attributed primarily to Ga interstitial donors. Both undoped and Si-doped GaN films are degenerate and display a concurrent increase of mobility with carrier concentration. Analysis of the room temperature mobility data shows that the low mobility of undoped and Si-doped GaN films having carrier concentrations ≲10 19 cm -3 is controlled by the contributions from scattering due to ionized impurities and charged edge dislocations, the former being determined by a high compensation ratio (~0.9). With increase of carrier concentration above 10 19 cm -3 , the effect of dislocation-controlled scattering becomes insignificant due to stronger screening as well as the decrease in the density of edge dislocations. Accordingly, in the case of highly degenerate films with carrier concentrations of ~10 20 cm -3 , the mobility is determined primarily by ionized impurity scattering. The concurrent increase of mobility with carrier concentration in both undoped and Si-doped GaN films is attributed to the large reduction in compensation ratio (to ~0.5) due to the substantial decrease of N interstitials in the films grown at low N2 percentages. The temperature dependent transport measurements reveal that in spite of their degenerate character, both undoped and Si-doped films display a small decrease of carrier concentration along with a nearly linear decrease of mobility, with decrease of temperature. The temperature dependent mobility data has also been analyzed by considering the combined effect of scattering due to ionized impurities and charged dislocations, where the former is influenced by a marginal increase of compensation ratio with decrease of temperature. The increase of compensation ratio is explained by the reduction of ionized donors, in consonance with the observed decrease of carrier concentration with temperature, and is attributed to band edge fluctuation effects in highly doped semiconductors with substantial compensation. Ω cm) in the case of the films grown at 7% N2.