Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) and neutron powder diffraction (NPD) have been used to investigate the crystal structure of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles prepared via different hydrothermal synthesis routes, with particular attention given to accurately determining the spinel inversion degrees. The study is divided into four parts. In the first part, the investigations focus on the influence of using different diffraction pattern combinations (NPD, Cu-source PXRD and Cosource PXRD) for the structural modelling. It is found that combining PXRD data from a Co source with NPD data offers a robust structural model. The second part of the study evaluates the reproducibility of the employed multipattern Rietveld refinement procedure using different data sets collected on the same sample, as well as on equivalently prepared samples. The refinement procedure gives reproducible results and reveals that the synthesis method is likewise reproducible since only minor differences are noted between the samples. The third part focuses on the structural consequences of (i) the employed heating rate (achieved using three different hydrothermal reactor types) and (ii) changing the cobalt salt in the precursors [aqueous salt solutions of Co(CH 3 COOH) 2 , Co(NO 3 ) 2 and CoCl 2 ] in the synthesis. It is found that increasing the heating rate causes a change in the crystal structure (unit cell and crystallite sizes) while the Co/Fe occupancy and magnetic parameters remain similar in all cases. Also, changing the type of cobalt salt does not alter the final crystal/magnetic structure of the CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles. The last part of this study is a consideration of the chemicals and parameters used in the synthesis of established and potential biomedical applications The spinel ferrites, including CoFe 2 O 4 , crystallize in the spinel structure (space group Fd3m, No. 227), which consists of a cubic close-packed (c.c.p.) structure of O 2À anions where 1/8 of the tetrahedral (Td) and 1/2 of the octahedral (Oh) sites are occupied by the cations x ) Td -[A 2+ x B 3+ 2Àx ] Oh O 4 , with a fraction (x) of the A 2+ ions occupying the octahedral site. The fraction x is often called the inversion degree Bulk CoFe 2 O 4 has an inverse spinel ferrite structure In the literature, the structural characterization of CoFe 2 O 4 is predominantly carried out by conventional Cu-source laboratory powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) as this technique is readily available, plus it has higher intensity compared with other anode materials and, for most materials, provides reliable structural information. However, in the case of CoFe 2 O 4 it is challenging to reliably determine the site occupancies of Co 2+ and Fe 3+ due to their almost identical scattering power. Another point to consider is that Cu K 1,2 radiation ( CuK = 1.54 A ̊, E CuK = 8.05 keV) The cation distribution within spinel ferrite structures can be investigated by a multitude of local spectroscopy techniques, such as Mo ̈ssbauer spectroscopy The present study is based on a compilation of data from three of our earlier studies on CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles Part 1, reliable extraction of Fe/Co occupancies in CoFe 2 O 4 . This work is based on a study by Part 2, reproducibility of synthesis and refinements. This part investigates the reproducibility of the synthesis using data from samples prepared under identical conditions from a study by The Fe/Co contrast at Q = 0 was calculated for resonant scattering terms and for the neutron scattering length, ignoring the imaginary term. The atomic form factor is given by f(Q = 0, ), f 0 corresponds to the Thomson scattering, while f 0 and f 00 are the real and imaginary resonant scattering terms, respectively. The resonant scattering values are extracted from the DMC instrument. This allows us to investigate the reproducibility of both the synthesis method and the data acquisition and refinement procedure. Part 3, effect of different synthesis approaches. Here, the effect of different hydrothermal synthesis approaches on the structural and magnetic properties of CoFe 2 O 4 is investigated. This part is divided into two subsections. (a) Different hydrothermal reactors: an extensive study prepared CoFe 2 O 4 using different hydrothermal reactors (autoclave, spiral reactor and continuous flow reactor) conducted by The CoFe 2 O 4 samples used for these investigations were all prepared using variations of the same hydrothermal method. An overview of all samples is given in Table For part 1, the CoFe 2 O 4 powder was prepared following the method described by For part 2, the CoFe 2 O 4 powders were prepared using the method described by For part 3, three different hydrothermal reactors (autoclave, spiral reactor and flow reactor) with different heating rates were used. In addition, three different Co salts were used to prepare the precursors for the autoclave synthesis. The details are as follows: (a) Different hydrothermal reactors. In this part, the precursor consisted of 2.0 M Co(NO 3 ) 2 Á6H 2 O, 2.0 M Fe(NO 3 ) 3 Á9H 2 O and 16.0 M NaOH with the molar ratios of Co:Fe and OH À :NO 3 À being 1:2 and 2:1, respectively. The synthesis was carried out using the following reactors and specific conditions: Autoclave (AC): the synthesis was carried out in a conventional Teflon-lined steel AC (170 ml filled with 80 ml precursor) over a period of 1 h at 240 C. The corresponding sample name is AC240. Spiral reactor (SR): the synthesis was carried out in a custom-built Swagelok steel tube spiral reactor (b) Different cobalt salts. The syntheses using different cobalt sources required slight modifications compared with the previous synthesis, due to the reduced aqueous solubilities of the used cobalt salts. The salts used were cobalt(II) chloride (CoCl 2 ), cobalt(II) nitrate [Co(NO 3 ) 2 ] and cobalt(II) acetate [Co(CH 3 COOH) 2 ]. Here, 20 ml of Fe(NO 3 ) 3 Á9H 2 O (2.0 M) were mixed with 20 ml of either CoCl 2 , Co(NO 3 ) 2 or Co(CH 3 COOH) 2 (1.0 M) to obtain a Co:Fe molar ratio of 1:2. After thorough mixing, 30 ml of NaOH (12 M) was added, giving an OH À :Cl À /NO 3 À /CH 3 COOH À ratio of 2.25:1. The precursor was sealed in a 170 ml Teflon-lined steel autoclave and placed in a convection oven at 200 C for 1 h. In the following, cobalt(II) acetate will be abbreviated as Co(Ac) 2 . Several different X-ray and neutron powder diffraction instruments were used for the structural characterization. An overview of the employed instruments is given in Table Room-temperature PXRD patterns were collected on two in-house Rigaku SmartLab powder X-ray diffractometers (Rigaku, Japan), one equipped with a Cu source (Cu K 1,2 ; 1 = 1.54059 A ̊; 2 = 1.54441 A ̊) and the other equipped with a Co source (Co K 1,2 ; 1 = 1.78892 A ̊; 2 = 1.79278 A ̊), both in Bragg-Brentano geometry. The powder diffraction patterns were collected using a Dtex/Ultra detector in fluorescence suppression mode and a diffracted beam monochromator was placed in front of the detector on the Cu-source instrument. The data collection is summarized in Table The NPD patterns were measured at room temperature at two different neutron sources: at the Swiss spallation neutron source (SINQ) The instrumental contributions to the peak broadening of the collected patterns were determined from data collected on standard reference materials at equivalent instrumental configurations. An LaB 6 NIST 660B standard was used for the in-house PXRD experiments The magnetic properties of the samples were characterized using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS), from Quantum Design, equipped with a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). The measurements were performed on coldpressed cylindrical pellets with a diameter of 3 mm, gently compacted using a hand-held press. The field-dependent magnetization curves (expressed in A m 2 kg À1 ) of the pellets were measured by scanning the externally applied field, H app , between AE3 T at 27 C. The saturation magnetization M VSM sat was obtained by applying the law of approach to saturation to the data The structural analyses were carried out using the FullProf Suite software The number in parentheses refers to the relevant part of the study. Both DMC and HRPT used a radial collimator to reduce the background signal from the surroundings. additional magnetic phase with the lowest-symmetry space group of the corresponding centring, i.e. F1. The special positions of Fe 3+ and Co 2+ cations were specified, and the first 24 symmetry operations of the Fd3m space group were provided to generate all atomic magnetic moments. Additional scattering factors (resonant terms) were added for each of the X-ray sources (see Table The peak profile parameters were described using the Thompson-Cox-Hastings (TCH) pseudo-Voigt function The scale factors for X-ray data sets were refined individually, in contrast to the scale factors for nuclear and magnetic phase for the neutron data, which were kept identical as they belong to the same data set. The backgrounds were described by Chebyshev polynomials, with a maximum of six refinable coefficients (Bck_0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5). The wavelength for the neutron data was refined, allowing a single common unit-cell parameter to be refined for all the diffraction patterns, along with the zero point. The fractional coordinates of oxygen (x, x, x) were also refined. The site occupation fraction (Occ) was refined with a constraint, as were the atomic displacement parameters (ADPs) and the atomic magnetic dipolar moment (R x ). The refinement of these three parameters is described below. For low-Q-coverage neutron data (Q max < 4 A ̊, i.e. DMC), the ADPs were refined as one common isotropic displacement parameter (B ov ) for all atoms. We set the Td and Oh sites to be fully occupied while refining the relative Co and Fe occupancies with the total Co and Fe content constrained to the nominal Co:Fe ratio of 1:2. This means that CoFe 2 O 4 was refined as (Co 2+ 1Àx Fe 3+ x ) Td [Co 2+ x Fe 3+ 2Àx ] Oh O 4 , with x being the inversion degree, where x = 0 is normal spinel and x = 1 is fully inverse. The magnetic structure was constrained on the basis of the number of unpaired electrons in Fe 3+ (3d 5 ) and Co 2+ (3d 7 ). Thus, the magnetic moments of Co 2+ and Fe 3+ were refined in a 3:5 ratio, without taking the Co orbital contribution into account, i.e. assuming the orbit moment is quenched. The moment was refined along the (100) direction using the R x parameter, where R x (Oh) was chosen to be positive and R x (Td) negative. The effect of including the Co orbital contribution to the magnetic moment was investigated and is reported in the supporting information. It is not straightforward to determine which model is better suited to describe the magnetic structure of CoFe 2 O 4 . According to the VSM measurement, a better match between the experimental data and the refined NPD values was found when the orbit moment for Co was quenched. For the uncertainties, the standard deviation provided by the FullProf Suite software was used except for the crystallite size. Here, the uncertainty was chosen to be equal to the unitcell length, i.e. 0.8 nm, instead of the very low (0.001-0.01 nm) mathematical uncertainties provided by FullProf. Given that the unit cell constitutes the smallest crystal unit, we consider using the cell parameter as the uncertainty for the average crystallite size to be more appropriate from a physical perspective. The uncertainty of the calculated net intrinsic magnetization (M neutron ) is based on the standard deviation of each element constituting the calculation. (a) Pattern weighting influence. When jointly refining multiple diffraction patterns, the weighting between data sets must be carefully considered as this may significantly influence the outcome of the refinement. As noted by both Here, we have considered three weighting schemes and made a simple comparative study of the influence of the pattern weighting on the refinement of atomic and microstructural parameters of cobalt ferrite. In conclusion, we found that the three tested weighting models gave very similar results and/or are within the uncertainty of each other, indicating that the weighting scheme does not hugely affect the refinements of the present data. Therefore, in the following, we have used the standard FullProf weighting model using equivalent weight of all patterns. The study of the three weighting schemes can be found in the supporting information. (b) Combining different patterns. Joint refinements of different combinations of the PXRD (Co and/or Cu) and NPD data are evaluated, with special emphasis on investigating the reliability/consistency of the Co/Fe occupation fractions obtained from the refinements. Refinements of seven different combinations of the three patterns were tested using equal weighting: (i) DMC/Co/Cu, (ii) DMC/Co, (iii) DMC/Cu, (iv) Co/Cu, (v) DMC, (vi) Co and (vii) Cu. Table The in-depth investigation of the different combinations reveals the models that best describe the crystal and magnetic structure, as well as the Co/Fe occupation fraction. The different models are discussed in the following. Using only the data set (vii) (Cu) is not a good choice for refining the Co/Fe site occupation fractions as unphysical values are obtained. This is not surprising because the Cu data have almost no scattering contrast between Co and Fe. The neutron data with limited Q range alone Also the joint refinement of Cu and DMC [data set (iii)] provides a good structural description, making this a feasible data set combination for future diffraction experiments. List of refined parameters for the seven different combinations of data sets. In all combinations the wavelength of the neutron data was refined, except in (v) (DMC) where it was fixed to 2.45948 A ̊, based on the refined value of (i) (DMC/ Co/Cu). The saturation magnetization extracted from a VSM measurement (M VSM sat ) is tabulated along with the formula unit magnetic moment (m f.u. ), as well as the net intrinsic crystallographic magnetization (M neutron ) of CoFe 2 O 4 , calculated from the refined magnetic structure. The numbers in parentheses represent the uncertainties of the FullProf Suite software, except for x and M neutron where the uncertainties were calculated by the propagation of errors. The number of reflections is written as #reflections in the table. '-' means there is no value attributed to the refined parameter. The diffraction data were previously published by In conclusion, four of the examined data combinations can be used to obtain a reliable refinement of Fe/Co occupancies in CoFe 2 O 4 : (i) (DMC/Co/Cu), (ii) (DMC/Co), (iii) (DMC/ Cu) and (vi) (Co). A neutron diffraction pattern with a larger Q range would also be able to produce reliable refinements of Fe/Co occupancies and the magnetic moment. Despite the limited Q range of the DMC instrument, it was shown that only six peaks in NPD data are sufficient to extract reliable magnetic moments. Combining NPD with PXRD data gives a more robust refinement of the occupation factors as it removes correlations between ADPs and magnetic moments inherent to a single data set. Moreover, the refined formula unit magnetic moment m f.u. value is close to that of the bulk CoFe 2 O 4 , and good agreement was seen between the calculated net intrinsic magnetization and the saturation magnetization obtained by VSM measurement. Even if combinations (ii) (DMC/Co) and (iii) (DMC/Cu) are comparable, we recommend using the model involving the Co source (ii) as it also carries information about the Fe/Co occupancies. Combination (i) (DMC/Co/Cu) constituted our benchmark as it has the largest quantity of data; however, the joint refinement of combination (ii) (DMC/Co) gives close to identical values to combination (i) (DMC/Co/Cu), and therefore combination (ii) is favoured as it involves collecting and treating fewer data to obtain the same result. The PXRD data in this case provide better peak resolution and Q coverage, which is essential for describing the microstructure (lattice parameter, crystallite size and thermal vibrations). While it is preferable to have multiple patterns, the study reveals that it is possible to achieve a reasonable refinement of the Fe/Co occupancies using data from a Co X-ray source alone [model (vi)]. This second part of the study investigates the reproducibility of the autoclave synthesis method on the basis of data from three CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticle samples (A, B and C), reported by The unit cell, apparent crystallite size (ACS) and oxygen position are all identical within the uncertainties of each repetition and between all samples. Only minute variations were noticed in the unit cell and thermal vibration parameters between the different samples; this can be attributed to a reduced probed sample volume for the Q range exceeding 5 A ̊À1 due to penetration of the sample as revealed by an Al(222) reflection originating from the sample holder (see the supporting information). This could also explain the larger B ov found here compared with values reported in the literature ($0.65 to $1.05 A ̊2) The effect of different thermal vibration values was tested on sample C, by fixing B ov to 1.57 A ̊2 (the value from sample A). The refinements are shown in the supporting information (Table The magnetic moment dipole was refined anti-parallel on the Td and Oh sites. Net intrinsic magnetization (M neutron ) was calculated on the basis of the R x values obtained from the refinement. The multiple measurements are referred as A1, A2, A3, B1, B2, and C1, C2, C3. The 'Average' column is based on the multiple refined parameters obtained for samples A, B and C. The uncertainties of the average column are based on the standard deviation. The neutron diffraction data are part of an in situ study published by 70 ( Site occupancy. The obtained inversion degree, x, is comparable for all data sets and the values range between 0.79 (3) and 0.82 (3). In other words, x is identical between the multiple measurements, but is higher than other reported inversion degrees for CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles (x = 0.69-0.79) The cation distribution within a spinel ferrite compound is reported to be synthesis dependent Atomic (R x ) and formula unit magnetic moment (m f.u. ). The extracted atomic magnetic dipole moments (R x ) reveal small differences between the different multiple measurements of the same sample, and across the batches. Sample A has identical R x within uncertainties while the variations of the atomic magnetic moment are larger in the case of samples B and C. For sample C3 an additional Bragg peak in the NPD pattern is observed at $3.1 A ̊À1 -this peak is attributed to Ni(111) from a thermocouple used for monitoring the sample temperature. The Ni peak affects the residual between the experimental and calculated patterns (see Fig. Considering the magnetic moment per formula unit (m f.u. ), it is found that all samples have similar values [2.9 (2)-3.4 (2) B ] within 2 uncertainties, and that the multiple measurements yield the same refined value. Net intrinsic magnetization (M neutron ) and saturation magnetization (M VSM sat ). For sample A, the calculated M neutron values are close to identical between the three measurements, and all values are within the same uncertainty range. Comparison with macroscopic experimental values (M VSM sat ) reveals good agreement between macroscopic and microscopic magnetization. Sample C exhibits the highest net magnetization [77 (5)-81 (5) A m 2 kg À1 ] as extracted from the occupancies and magnetic moment. The obtained values are higher than the saturation magnetization [73.9 (1) A m 2 kg À1 ] measured by VSM. Nonetheless, the relatively large uncertainties on the extracted magnetization show that the obtained M neutron is within 2 of M VSM . Comparing M VSM sat for the three samples shows that they have close to identical saturation magnetization [72.9 (1)-73.9 (1) A m 2 kg À1 ], meaning that the AC synthesis yields reproducible results. Sample C exhibits an M neutron higher than the saturation magnetization from M VSM . This deviation cannot arise from impurities in the sample, because an impurity would result in a reduced M VSM saturation magnetization. There is no apparent reason for the higher M neutron value in sample C. The other samples have M neutron and M VSM corresponding very well. Average. To determine the reproducibility of the autoclave synthesis, an 'Average' column was added in Table In summary, the comparison of the refinements of multiple data sets from the same sample shows hardly any variations, which clearly indicates that both the data collection of the DMC instrument and the Rietveld refinements yield strongly reproducible results. Additionally, by comparing the refined parameters between samples A, B and C we can conclude that the synthesis method is likewise reproducible, since the refined crystal/magnetic structures are almost identical with only minor deviations. The PXRD and NPD patterns do not show traces of impurities or eventual amorphous phase, and by comparing the theoretical magnetization (M neutron ) and the measured saturation magnetization (M VSM sat ), we can argue that all samples are highly crystalline. For high-Q-coverage neutron data (Q max > 4 A ̊), some additional degrees of freedom may be included in the refinement since more data are available. In order to investigate this statement, a study was performed to compare the effect of the ADP being described by one parameter (B ov ) or by two distinct isotropic displacement parameters (B iso ) for the metal ions and oxygen. This study is detailed in the supporting information (Tables x ) Td [Co 2+ y Fe 3+ 2Ày ] Oh O 4 , with x and y representing the inversion degrees for the Td and Oh sites, respectively. The formula unit charge balance was ignored for the obtained overall structure, when refining x and y freely. (a) Effect of different hydrothermal reactors. This study is based on the work of The Cu source was used because the Co source had not yet been installed in the laboratory. The sloping background can be explained by the fluorescence signal decaying at a high angle (Q > 5 A ̊À1 ) and is clearly visible in all of the PXRD patterns in Fig. Unit-cell parameter. The largest unit cell is obtained for samples AC240 (slowest heating rate), followed by SR240 (medium heating rate), while the two FR samples (fastest heating rate) exhibit smaller unit cells. In the literature (Ceden ̃o-Mattei & Perales-Pe ́rez, 2009; On the basis of the in situ studies by Apparent crystallite size. Overall isotropic displacement parameter (B ov ). All samples have a different B ov value, with FR220 having the highest, FR320 and SR240 being similar, and AC240 having the lowest. Whether the observed decrease throughout the four samples is an effect of the crystallite size is difficult to conclude from the available data. In fact, this effect could be explained by the fact that the ADPs are strongly correlated to background refinement. Nevertheless, the obtained values are within the range expected for inorganic compounds ($0.5 to $3 A ̊2) Site occupancy. All samples have similar site occupancy, with Fe 3+ occupying almost 2/3 of Td sites, which is close to a random occupancy for a stoichiometry of Fe:Co = 2:1 Magnetic properties. Even though the four samples have similar atomic magnetic moments, a trend emerges where FR320 and SR240 have equal R x , while AC240 has the highest value and FR220 the lowest. This trend could be due to the increasing ACS. Indeed, it is found in the literature that increasing the particle diameter enhances the saturation magnetization (3.0 m B f.u. À1 ), while for FR220 it is lower (2.7 m B f.u. À1 ), but within the standard deviation. The differences are explained by variations in the occupancy of the different sites and the Co/ Fe ratio. Comparing FR220 and FR320, it is revealed that increasing the temperature enhances the magnetic properties. Regarding the saturation magnetization obtained from VSM measurements, a large discrepancy is seen in the FR220 and FR320 samples: M VSM sat (FR320) is almost twice as large as M VSM sat (FR220). Concerning the FR220 sample, the reason why M VSM sat is significantly smaller than the others (38.68 A m 2 kg À1 ) is probably the small ACS, which increases the surface area to volume ratio, thus increasing the relative amount of surface structural reordering. It could also be due to cation vacancies and defects in the octahedral sites, reducing the magnetic moment In parts 1(b) and 2 it was found that the AC synthesis produced highly crystalline materials, as corroborated by the values of M neutron and M VSM sat . The most likely explanations for the discrepancies for the other samples are the presence of non-crystalline impurities adding to the mass of the sample. Additionally, for FR220 the model may not correctly describe the system, because the interstitial sites are forced to be fully occupied and vacancies could occur on the octahedral site. The temperature used during the synthesis is included in the name of the sample. The refinement model employed a combination of PXRD data (Cu K) and NPD data from PUS. Due to the high Q range of the NPD data, the Td and Oh site occupancies could be refined independently. The distribution of both Fe 3+ and Co 2+ within Td and Oh sites is detailed as x and y, respectively. m f.u. and M neutron were calculated on the basis of the refined site occupancy and R x . The X-ray and magnetic data were previously published by (b) Different cobalt salts. In addition to investigating the influence of the different hydrothermal reactors, the effect of using different cobalt salt precursors has also been studied as a potential way of influencing the Co/Fe site occupancy. Three different precursors were prepared for an AC reactor from three different cobalt salts (see Section 2), cobalt(II) acetate [Co(Ac) 2 ], cobalt(II) nitrate [Co(NO 3 ) 2 ] and cobalt(II) chloride (CoCl 2 ). The samples were characterized by PXRD using Cu K 1,2 radiation and NPD at HRPT at SINQ. The diffraction patterns can be found in the supporting information (Fig. Following the results shown in This part of the paper features the four CoFe 2 O 4 samples synthesized by the autoclave reactor, which were prepared from Co(NO 3 ) 2 Á6H 2 O and Fe(NO 3 ) 3 Á9H 2 O in a ratio of 1:2. The four samples were characterized using three different NPD instruments and two different in-house X-ray diffractometers. Table Regarding the atomic magnetic dipole moment, the average of samples A, B and C from part 2 is the sample that exhibits the highest R x values compared with the three other samples, which have similar values. For the calculated net intrinsic magnetization, which is a parameter depending on the refinement method used, we clearly see that the samples have close to identical values [73 (3)-77 (2) A m 2 kg À1 ]. Concerning the saturation magnetization, two sets of values are observed: AC240 and Co(NO 3 ) 2 exhibit close to identical values, and the samples from parts 1(b) and 2 are identical. The AC240 and Co(NO 3 ) 2 samples were held for only 1 h, while all other samples were reacted for 2 h. The reduced reaction time is likely to cause these samples to have lower crystallinity due to the introduction of disorder, vacancies or amorphous impurity phases. It has been reported that performing the autoclave reaction for 19 h increases the saturation magnetization while reducing the reaction temperature to 100 C reduced the saturation magnetization The present study consists of four distinct parts, each dedicated to examining the robustness, reproducibility and reliability of structural parameters obtained from Rietveld analysis of powder diffraction data (X-ray and neutron). Nanocrys-talline cobalt ferrite, CoFe 2 O 4 , was used as a sample prepared using different synthesis conditions and collected using different instrumentation and radiation sources. The study devotes special attention to the reliability of the site occupancies of Co 2+ and Fe 3+ in CoFe 2 O 4 , as the atomic structure is the key parameter for examining the structure-property relationship in spinel ferrites. In part 1(b) it was demonstrated that combining X-ray powder diffraction from Cu and Co sources with low-Q-range neutron powder diffraction data gives reliable Fe/Co occupancies and magnetic structure for CoFe 2 O 4 . Reliable Fe/Co occupancies were obtained from refining Co-source data solely. In other words, the in-house powder pattern has sufficient contrast to distinguish the neighbouring elements of Fe and Co, when taking into consideration the resonant scattering contributions f 0 and f 00 . This may be expanded to other elements, e.g. Fe/Mn and Fe/ Ni, allowing in-house determination of site occupancies in spinel structures and other transition metal oxides with mixed occupancies, e.g. battery materials. Here neutron diffraction data improved the robustness of the model, even if only six Bragg peaks were included. Part 2 was focused on the reproducibility of the synthesis, data collection and refinements of the low-Q-range neutron data. Comparing multiple measurements on the same sample clearly showed that the low-Q-range neutron data collection and Rietveld refinements are highly reproducible. The comparison of three samples with identical synthesis procedure showed that the synthesis method was reproducible, with only minute deviations. Part 3(a) compared three samples prepared using different hydrothermal reactors, with different heating rates, namely, a continuous flow reactor (FR), spiral reactor (SR) and autoclave (AC). The size is the parameter most affected, while the distribution of Co/Fe between the octahedral and tetrahedral sites in the structure is less influenced by the heating rate and holding time. Part 3(b) was dedicated to the investigation of the influence of using different cobalt salts in the precursors: CoCl 2 , Co(NO 3 ) 2 and Co(CH 3 COOH). The three CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticle samples prepared from the different precursors have practically identical crystal and magnetic structures, demonstrating that the cobalt salt anions used have no influence on the final product. Finally, part 4 described considerations regarding differently prepared samples of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles using an autoclave. Despite differences in the macroscopic magnetic properties, all samples exhibited similar crystal and magnetic structure. The presented study revealed that the hydrothermal synthesis of CoFe 2 O 4 is highly reproducible. The net crystallographic magnetizations calculated from refined occupancies and the atomic dipolar magnetic moment are generally in good agreement with macroscopic magnetic measurements, except for the smaller crystallite where superparamagnetic behaviour or disorder and amorphous phases may play a role. Reliably establishing this link between crystal/magnetic structure and observed magnetic properties is key to investigating the structure-property relationship in spinel ferrites as well as other magnetic compounds. The following references are cited in the supporting literature: * J. Appl. Cryst. (2022). 55, 1336-1350 Killian Henry et al. In-depth investigations of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles Killian Henry et al. In-depth investigations of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles J. Appl. Cryst. (2022). 55, 1336-1350 Killian Henry et al. In-depth investigations of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles J. Appl. Cryst. (2022). 55, 1336-1350 Killian Henry et al. In-depth investigations of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles J. Appl. Cryst. (2022). 55, 1336-1350 J. Appl. Cryst. (2022). 55, 1336-1350 Killian Henry et al. In-depth investigations of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles J. Appl. Cryst. (2022). 55, 1336-1350 Killian Henry et al. In-depth investigations of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles J. Appl. Cryst. (2022). 55, 1336-1350