Currently, self-induced InAlN core-shell nanorods enjoy an advanced stage of accumulation of experimental data from their growth and characterization as well as a comprehensive understanding of their formation mechanism by the ab initio modeling based on Synthetic Growth Concept. However, their electronic and optical properties, on which most of their foreseen applications are expected to depend, have not been investigated comprehensively. G 0 W 0 is currently regarded as a gold-standard methodology with quasi-particle corrections to calculate electronic properties of materials in general. It is also the starting point for higher-order methods that study excitonic effects, such as those based on the Bethe-Salpeter equation. One major drawback of G 0 W 0 , however, is its computational cost, much higher than densityfunctional theory (DFT). Therefore, in many applications, it is highly desirable to answer the question of how well approaches based on DFT, such as e. g. LDA, LDA-1/2, and mBJ, can approximately reproduce G 0 W 0 results with respect to the electronic and optical properties. Thus, the purpose of the present paper is to investigate how the DFTbased methodologies LDA, LDA-1/2, and mBJ can be used as tools to approximate G 0 W 0 in studies of the electronic and optical properties of scaled down models of core-shell InAlN nanorods. For these systems, we observed that band gaps, density of states, dielectric functions, refractive indexes, absorption and reflectance coefficients are reasonably well described by LDA-1/2 and mBJ when compared to G 0 W 0 , however, at a much more favorable computational cost. Wurtzite InAlN semiconductor alloys have a direct band gap that span a wide spectrum range from 0.65 eV (InN) to 6.25 eV (AlN). In the context of the InAlN low-dimensional nanostructures, self-induced core-shell InAlN nanorods (NRs) have been successfully synthesized by reactive magnetron sputter epitaxy (MSE) while their formation mechanism was elucidated by modeling the relevant precursor prevalence and their corresponding energetics using the DFT-based synthetic growth concept (SGC). The LDA-1/2 approach has proven to be an efficient alternative for obtaining approximate quasi-particle corrections at low computational cost. Another promising choice is the mBJ potential, In this work, for the case of core-shell InAlN NRs, we conduct ab initio calculations to analyze how LDA-1/2 and mBJ improve over LDA and how they can approximate G 0 W 0 for the following electronic and optical properties: density of states (DOS), band gaps, dielectric function, refraction index, extinction and absorption coefficients, and the reflectivity. Nanostructures of similar structural and chemical complexity and their electronic and optical properties including in relation to electronic applications have been successfully studied previously by using both different flavors of GGA to DFT levels of theory The paper is divided as follows: in section II, we introduce the theoretical aspects of this work; section III describes the computational methods employed; in section IV, we present and discuss our results; and lastly, in section V, we summarize the paper. A. The LDA-1/2 method LDA-1/2 where f i is the occupation of the KS state i. In LDA-1/2, instead of dealing with half-occupations, KS equations are modified as: Here, we consider electrons in a solid with wavevector given by k. φ ik is the corresponding KS wavefunction. The KS potential, V KS (r) = V H (r) + V XC (r), written as the sum of the Hartree, V H (r), and the exchange-correlation (XC), V XC (r), potentials has been adjusted to include V S (r), the so-called self-energy potential. in which, we add an extra label f i to V KS to denote the occupation. Θ(r) is a trimming function to avoid the divergence due to the tail 1/(2r) coming from the difference of the two KS potentials in (3). Historically, Θ(r) has been chosen as where R CUT is the cutoff radius, which is determined variationally The mBJ potential keeps the correlation potential the same as in LDA and replaces the exchange potential with: 47,48 where ρ σ (r) is the density of electrons with spin σ , t σ (r) is the corresponding kinetic-energy density, and v BR x,σ (r) is the Becke-Roussel potential where α = -0.012 and β = 1.023 bohr 1/2 , and Ω is the volume of a unit cell. Taking KS eigenvalues and wavefunctions as reference, quasiparticle-corrected eigenvalues E QP ik can be calculated in the G 0 W 0 approximation as: where Z ik is the quasiparticle renormalization factor, and Σ ik (ω) and V XC,ik are matrix elements of the self-energy (Σ(r, r ′ , ω)) and the exchange-correlation potential: Within the G 0 W 0 approximation, the self-energy Σ(r, r ′ , ω) is given, in the time domain, as a product of the imaginary number, the single particle Green's function, G 0 (r, r ′ ,t), and the screened Coulomb interaction, W 0 (r, r ′ ,t), evaluated in the random-phase approximation. Neglecting excitonic effects and considering an electric field applied along the êα direction, the tensorial component αα of the dielectric function ε, at a given frequency ω, has an imaginary part given by ) where N k is the number of k-points, c and v are labels for the conduction and valence states, respectively, and φ ck and φ vk are the corresponding KS wavefunctions. The transition energies, ω cvk , are expressed in terms of the KS eigenvalues as: If the imaginary part is known, the real part can be obtained using the Kramers-Kronig relations With ε αα (ω), it is possible to obtain other optical properties, such as the refraction index ñ, the extinction coefficient κ, the optical absorption A and the reflectivity R 74 : where v light is the light speed in vacuum. For simplicity, we dropped down the double indexes αα in Eqs. ( In all DFT calculations, we employ the Quantum Espresso code Then, we proceed to the core-shell InAlN NRs. We take as diameter d = 14 Å, as illustrated in Fig. To avoid dangling bonds which lead to spurious states at the Fermi energy, we use H passivation, and, so, the chemical formula of the NR becomes In n Al 38-n N 38 H 40 . We study three different In concentrations: n = 0, 2, and 4. In all cases, we consider an unrelaxed geometry with bond lengths determined from the AlN experimental lattice parameters. The purely binary compositions, AlN and InN, can be seen as benchmarks in relation to the ternary InAlN compounds and their properties are of relevance to the present first-principles comparative study of the InAlN core-shell NRs study. In Table We present the xx component of dielectric function in Fig. 1. projecting the DOS onto core atoms; 2. identifying the valence state with the highest energy E v ; 3. taking E v as reference and referring all other energies with respect to it. The identification of E v is illustrated for G 0 W 0 DOS in the top panel of Fig. The definition of E v and E c allows us to compute ∆E as ∆E can be identified as a kind of band gap for the core region of the NR, since it is obtained from band edges of states that belong to core atoms. 0.45, 1.05 and 0.96 and eV, when calculated with G 0 W 0 , LDA, LDA-1/2 and mBJ respectively. As estimated in Appendix B, an enlargement of 1.9-2.5 eV is expected due to quantum confinement effects. G 0 W 0 best matches this expectation, followed by LDA-1/2, mBJ and LDA. red-shifted by 1.8 and 2.0 eV, respectively, in comparison with G 0 W 0 . For LDA, this amounts to 3.5 eV. By blue-shifting all Im[ε xx ], a good agreement with G 0 W 0 can be observed, as shown in Appendix C. Although these shifts do not reproduce exactly the differences in ∆E, they are comparable. Next, we consider the contribution of In atoms present in the core region to the dielectric function of the NRs. In Fig. In Fig. Table Figure We have studied electronic and optical properties of coreshell InAlN NRs with LDA, LDA-1/2, mBJ and G 0 W 0 . For the properties, DOS, dielectric function, refractive index, extinction coefficient, absorption coefficient, and reflectance: results with LDA-1/2 and mBJ are similar and agree better with G 0 W 0 than those obtained with LDA. For band gaps and peaks in Im[ε] coming from In contributions, LDA-1/2 agrees better with G 0 W 0 than mBJ. Overall, LDA-1/2 and mBJ can be used as tools to replace G 0 W 0 with reasonable accuracy at much less computational cost. The authors have no conflicts to disclose. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. vergence of G 0 W 0 band gap is slower than that of DFT. Having a fully converged band gap is challenging, as employing a set of fully converged parameters comes with a very high computational cost. Therefore, we follow here an extrapolation procedure to evaluate the G 0 W 0 band gap, adopting the expression where E g (∞), A and B are fit coefficients, and x is the convergence parameter being tested, which can be N bands or E cut . Assuming that the extrapolation with respect to E cut , N bands and the k-grid can be carried out separately, the extrapolated band gap E extr g can be evaluated as where Then δ cut and δ bands are obtained as and the contribution of the k-grid to the extrapolation is approximated as where 8 × 8 × 6 is employed as k large grid . Table V collects the relevant data regarding the extrapolation of the G 0 W 0 band gap. In Eq. (10), Ω stands for the volume of the sample. However, in most of ab initio codes, including Quantum Espresso, Ω is treated as the unit cell volume. For systems with vacuum in the unit cell, such as the NRs studied here, the dielectric function must be corrected by a factor h equal to the ratio between the volumes of the cell and the sample. In terms of the geometry shown in Fig. where A cell and A nanorod are the cross-sections of the unit cell and the NR, respectively. Denoting ε ′ xx as the dielectric function without the correction and ε xx , the corrected one, then according to Eqs. (10) and (12), it follows that: refer to the AlN NR and have been carried out with LDA, and a similar trend has been observed for the other cases. Fig. Here, we discuss the precision level expected for our G 0 W 0 calculations concerning the NRs. As for bulk AlN and InN, we check convergence with respect to N bands , E cut and the kgrid 1 × 1 × N kpt . For the sake of computational cost, we restrict the analysis to the ΓΓ band gap and the dielectric function of AlN. Figure On the right side of Fig. Figure 