Silicon photonics is a rapidly developing technology that promises to revolutionize the way we communicate, compute, and sense the world [1,2,3,4,5,6]. However, the lack of highly scalable, native CMOS-integrated light sources is one of the main factors hampering its widespread adoption. Despite significant progress in hybrid and heterogeneous integration of III-V light sources on silicon [7,8,9,10,11,12], monolithic integration by direct epitaxial growth of III-V materials remains the pinnacle in realizing cost-effective on-chip light sources. Here, we report the first electrically driven GaAs-based multi-quantum-well laser diodes fully fabricated on 300 mm Si wafers in a CMOS pilot manufacturing line. GaAs nano-ridge waveguides with embedded p-i-n diodes, InGaAs quantum wells and InGaP passivation layers are grown with high quality at wafer scale, leveraging selective-area epitaxy with aspect-ratio trapping. After III-V facet patterning and standard CMOS contact metallization, room-temperature continuous-wave lasing is demonstrated at wavelengths around 1020 nm in more than three hundred devices across a wafer, with threshold currents as low as 5 mA, output powers beyond 1 mW, laser linewidths down to 46 MHz, and laser operation up to 55 °C. These results illustrate the potential of the III-V/Si nano-ridge engineering concept for the monolithic integration of laser diodes in a Si photonics platform, enabling future cost-sensitive high-volume applications in optical sensing, interconnects and beyond. Silicon photonics enables the miniaturization and mass manufacturing of optical systems for a growing set of applications For these reasons, the direct epitaxial growth of high-quality III-V optical gain materials selectively on the desired device locations on large-size silicon photonics wafers remains a highly sought-after objective. Unfortunately, the large mismatch in crystal lattice parameters and thermal expansion coefficients between III-V and Si materials inevitably initiates the formation of crystal misfit defects, which are known to deteriorate laser performance and reliability. To reduce the defectivity in the III-V layers, multiple research groups have developed thick buffer layers and strained superlattice layers with great success Selective-area growth (SAG) of III-V materials on patterned Si wafers by metalorganic vapor-phase epitaxy (MOVPE) represents a compelling integration approach, arguably with better scalability potential than MBE. Selectivity can be easily achieved in vapor-phase epitaxy, and as such, the III-V material can be deposited only where it is needed. The confinement of misfit defects is achieved by starting the growth of the III-V layers in deep and narrow trenches, etched in a dielectric masking layer on the Si wafer, a technique referred to as "aspect-ratio trapping" (ART) Over the past several years, we have developed the concept of nano-ridge (NR) engineering, a SAG-based integration approach applying ART for defect reduction, followed by the growth of lowdefectivity III-V nano-ridges outside of the trenches. By careful tuning of the MOVPE process parameters, the nano-ridge dimensions, shapes and composition can be accurately engineered, independent from the starting trench dimensions. Optimized nano-ridge structures typically feature threading dislocation densities well below 10 5 cm -2 , up to 100x lower than for optimized blanket buffer layers (see Methods and Supplementary Information Epitaxy and crystal defects). Previously, we successfully applied the nano-ridge engineering concept to realize a variety of heterostructures, in-situ doping profiles and surface passivation layers in various III-V material systems such as GaAs, InAs, GaSb and InGaAs In this paper, we exploit the III-V nano-ridge engineering concept to demonstrate, to the best of our knowledge, the first full wafer-scale growth and fabrication of electrically pumped GaAsbased lasers on standard 300 mm (001) Si wafers, entirely in a CMOS pilot manufacturing line. Leveraging the low defectivity in GaAs nano-ridge structures, the lasers employ an optical gain region based on InGaAs multiple quantum wells (MQW), embedded in an in-situ doped p-i-n diode and effectively passivated with an InGaP capping layer, all monolithically grown on 300 mm Si wafers. Using on-wafer GaAs nano-ridge p-i-n monitor photodetectors for wafer-scale measurements, more than 300 nano-ridge devices were found to lase around 1020 nm wavelength in continuous-wave operation at room temperature, with threshold currents as low as 5 mA, slope efficiencies as high as 0.5 W/A, and up to 1.75 mW total emitted optical power. Furthermore, an early reliability test revealed continuous lasing during at least 500 h of room-temperature operation, with only a mild increase in threshold current and constant slope efficiency. We believe that these results represent a significant milestone towards the manufacturing of scalable and energy efficient light sources for low-cost optical interconnects, optical sensors and beyond. Leveraging wafer-scale processes, several thousands of GaAs nano-ridge devices including lasers, photodetectors and test structures are fabricated on a standard 300 mm silicon wafer, as shown in Fig. A cross-sectional high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF-) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) of a fabricated device is shown in fig As part of the wafer-scale fabrication process, laser cavities are formed in the GaAs nanoridges by dry etching two facets with an angle of 12°, yielding approximately 5 % facet reflectivity (fig. A key aspect to achieve lasing in the GaAs nano-ridges resides in optimizing the pitch of the W plugs contacting the p-GaAs layer. For dense contact pitch designs, the strong spatial overlap between the optical mode propagating in the GaAs nano-ridge waveguide and the W plugs induces very large optical losses that prohibit lasing. Yet, efficient lasing operation is obtained for laser designs with a relatively large W plug pitch (pCON35=4.8 μm). In these designs, mode beating of the fundamental TE00 and the higher-order TE02 mode results in a periodic interference pattern that minimizes the optical intensity locally underneath the W plugs, as illustrated by the simulated mode profiles shown in fig. where gth is threshold gain, i is the laser internal and m is the total mirror loss. The test configuration used for the wafer-scale characterization of the devices is shown in fig. First, we discuss die-level laser measurements to unambiguously demonstrate laser operation in the cleaved-facet GaAs nano-ridge devices. In a first measurement, we drive the nano-ridge laser with a continuous-wave current at room temperature and collect the laser output from the cleaved facet by a large-area photodetector. Fig. To gain additional insights into the nano-ridge laser properties, we measured a similar, 1.4mm long laser in a different test configuration (fig The optical spectra recorded as a function of laser current are displayed in fig. Next, we discuss the fully wafer-scale fabricated lasers with two etched facets. As a first example, a nano-ridge laser with a 2 mm long cavity was probed on the wafer and the optical emission was measured using the on-chip photodetector (PD) on one side and a MMF on the other side. The I-I plot depicted in fig. The relatively large spread in measured threshold current, slope efficiency and output power across the wafer originates from variability of the wafer-scale processes, which have not yet been optimized for uniformity: first, variations in GaAs NR width and height across the 300 mm wafer originating from the MOVPE process variability induce changes in the confinement factor  within the InGaAs quantum wells, as well as in the mode-beating periodicity, which in turn increases the absorption loss from the metal contact. Second, wafer-scale variation of the InGaP/GaAs etch process needed to land the W vias on the p-GaAs layer and residual topography after the planarization steps required for the back-end-of-line (BEOL) processing may lead to shorted or open-circuit electrodes. The wafer-scale variability is further illustrated in fig. The temperature dependence of the nano-ridge lasers was investigated by mounting the tested wafer on a stage with a temperature controller and recording the L-I curves (fig. As an early investigation into the reliability of the nano-ridge lasers, we carried out an onwafer stress test on one of the best performing, 2-mm long nano-ridge lasers. We biased the laser at 1.5 Ith at room temperature and monitored the output power, slope efficiency and threshold current (fig. To the best of our knowledge, the presented work marks the first monolithic III-V laser diode integration on 300 mm Si wafers entirely carried out in a CMOS manufacturing pilot line, without the need for any III-V substrates or bonding steps. High-quality active GaAs waveguides are grown by MOVPE applying nano-ridge engineering, mitigating any major issues related to wafer bow or crack formation as typically encountered in blanket III-V layers epitaxially grown on silicon. Despite their sub-micrometre-scale cross-sectional dimensions, the GaAs/Si nano-ridge structures feature efficient carrier injection and generate strong optical gain at 1-micrometre wavelengths, enabled by the record-low crystal defectivity in epitaxially grown GaAs on Si and effective passivation by the InGaP capping layer. These attributes are instrumental for robust steady-state laser operation at room temperature and above, as demonstrated in this paper with threshold current densities comparable with conventional laser designs and below 1 kA/cm 2 . In the demonstrated nano-ridge lasers, an optical multi-mode beating effect mitigates part of the optical losses induced by the top metal contacts, which is equally essential to achieving the low threshold currents and slope efficiencies as high as 0.5 A/W. Furthermore, the grating structure formed by the periodic metal plugs enables single-mode laser operation, with linewidths comparable or smaller than those realized in typical vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs). A key remaining challenge is to demonstrate the long-term reliability of the monolithic GaAs-on-silicon nano-ridge lasers. It is well known that quantum-well based lasers on silicon are particularly sensitive to the presence of threading dislocations, and a reliable quantum-well laser essentially needs to have a dislocation-free active region We see multiple opportunities to go beyond the current demonstration. First, the nanoridge cross section can be improved to decouple the optical modes from the metal contacts, enabling a much higher density of p-type contact plugs while retaining low internal optical loss. This will lower the operating voltage and improve wall-plug efficiencies, while also reducing current density and electrical resistance in the top metal contacts, leading to improved reliability. Next, the laser operating wavelength can be extended towards the O-band by growing nano-ridges with higher In-content The mode profile, field overlap with the quantum wells and total internal loss were simulated considering the dimensions of fabricated nano-ridge devices, using the 2D finite-difference (FD) method with Ansys Lumerical software. Optimization of the W plug pitch to minimize propagation loss, and estimation of etched mirror reflectivity and fibre collection efficiency was carried out using 3D finite-difference time-domain simulations in Ansys Lumerical software. The electrical injection efficiency and carrier loss rates were simulated using the technology computer-assisted design (TCAD) Poisson solver in Synopsis Sentaurus software. Finally, the laser threshold current and slope efficiency were computed using Python-based codes solving the standard laser rate equations, enabling us to correlate the simulated parameters with the measured data. We express the general form of these equations as where N and N p are the carrier and photon densities, η i is the carrier injection efficiency extracted from the TCAD simulation, I is the injected current, q is the electron charge and V a is the active volume. A, B and C are the Schockley-Read-Hall recombination, the bimolecular recombination and the Auger coefficients, respectively. v g is the group velocity, g 0 the gain coefficient and N tr the transparency carrier density. Γ is the confinement factor, i.e., the fraction of the optical mode confined in the quantum wells, γ p is the cavity photon loss rate and β is the spontaneous emission factor. The different parameters and their respective values are detailed in Supplementary Information. The devices are processed on 300 mm silicon wafers with {001} orientation, starting with the formation of 300 nm tall Si ridges and subsequent oxide deposition and planarization following a standard shallow trench isolation (STI) process typical in CMOS foundries, and n-type ion implantation of Si. The Si ridges are subsequently wet etched using tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) to form V-shaped trenches in the STI oxide, with two {111} facets used as the starting surface for subsequent III-V epitaxy. GaAs p-i-n nano-ridges containing three In0.2Ga0.8As quantum wells and capped by an In0.5Ga0.5P passivation layer are grown in one process step using metalorganic vapor-phase epitaxy (MOVPE). The Si wafers are then coated with oxide and planarized. Laser mirrors and photodiode facets are subsequently patterned using DUV lithography and III-V dry etch. Next, the wafers are again coated with oxide and planarized. Subsequently, the fabrication steps move to Back-End of Line (BEOL) processing to form W contact plugs to the p-GaAs and n-Si contact layers. Final metallization is done using a standard CMOS Cu Damascene process. Details of the fabrication process and GaAs epitaxy are reported in the Supplementary Information and a high-level process flow is depicted in Extended Data Fig. The characterized devices were taken from a fully processed 300 mm wafer cleaved into smaller dies. A high-precision cleaving tool was used to form a mirror in the middle of the NR structure. The lasers were then characterized on a die-level probing setup using a large-area PD to extract the single-facet output power, while the light emitted from the other etched facet is collected by the in-line PD. Spectral analysis of the laser emission was carried out by collecting the emitted light using a butt-coupled lensed fibre connected to an optical spectrum analyser. The laser linewidth was measured on a cleaved sample using a self-homodyne interferometric setup (see Supplementary Information for additional details of the setup), containing a 1-km long fibre delay line in one arm of the fiber-based Mach-Zehnder Interferometer. The resulting signal is recorded by a balanced photodiode and sent to an electrical spectrum analyser (ESA). The power spectral density (PSD) of the laser emission was measured under DC bias current, and the laser linewidth was extracted from a Voigt fit of the measured PSD. Wafer-scale laser characterisation was carried out using a 300-mm semi-automated wafer probe station outfitted with a temperature controller and a MMF to collect the laser emission, enabling the measurement of thousands of devices on a single wafer at high throughput. Early reliability measurements were carried out using the same setup, tracking the performance of one of the best performing GaAs NR laser diodes during a 500-h long stress test. In this test, the laser bias current was kept at 9.17 mA (=1.5 Ith) and the wafer stage was kept at 25 °C. Bias current sweeps were carried out every 20 h, and L-I plots were recorded to extract threshold current, output power and slope efficiency. The die-level measurement configuration allows an estimation of the total optical power radiated by both facets. Let us note the output powers at the cleaved facet and the etched facet to be P 1 and P 2 , and their respective transmission coefficients T 1 and T 2 . T 1 and T 2 are calculated through 3D FDTD simulations (see Supplementary Information) and are evaluated to be T 1 =0.45 and T 2 =0.30, respectively. 3D FDTD simulation is also uses to estimate the coupling efficiency of the laser diode into the monitor photodetector (PD), yielding T laser→PD =12.5 %. This value accounts for the reflection at the PD facet, the beam diffraction at the laser facet and the beam divergence in the etched gap between the two devices. Knowing the photodiode responsivity We can extend this relationship to the wafer-level measurement case, where both facets have equal transmission and reflection (i.e., T 1 = T 2 = T and P 1 = P 2 = P ), which reduces the relationship to: Finally, we can express the total output power of the NR laser from the photocurrent readout, as depicted in fig. The standard laser rate equations describe the intracavity dynamics of carrier and photon densities N and N p Recalling that the laser is at threshold when the modal gain exactly compensates the total loss of the laser, we set the threshold modal gain as: This allows us to readily express the threshold carrier density: Since we are operating our lasers in continuous wave, we can reduce the rate equations to the steady-state case. As no stimulated emission occurs at threshold, we get: We finally obtain the threshold current value: As the gain is clamped at threshold, we can express above threshold the steady-state carrier density rate equation: With appropriate substitutions, we have: We get the linear relationship between intracavity photon density and the injected current: To obtain the total output power, we can readily express the energy stored in the cavity: The total output power corresponds to the energy loss rate through the mirrors, that is: By applying the appropriate substitutions, we get: Where η d = α m /(α m + α i ) is the slope efficiency. The output power per facet can be expressed by adding a coefficient F 1(2) derived from the facet reflectivity r 1(2) and transmittivity t 1(2) : 2 ) The expression of F 1(2) also accounts for lossy mirrors when r 1(2) + t 1(2) 2 < 1. We can therefore relate the measured output power at each facet P 1(2) : To model our NR devices using the laser rate equation model, we summarize the different parameter definitions and their respective values in Table The intracavity photon loss rate γ p is a key attribute driving laser performance. A high mirror loss rate v g α m is desired to maximize the output power and wall-plug efficiency through a large slope efficiency η d , but competes with the need to have a small intracavity photon loss rate γ p to minimize the threshold current, as the total intracavity loss can in some cases exceeds the maximum achievable modal gain, preventing lasing operation. In the demonstrated nano-ridge lasers, the presence of W vias in the vicinity of the active region induces optical scattering and absorption. These vias pierce through the InGaP passivation layer and land on the p-doped GaAs layer to form the anode. The arrangement of these W plugs with respect to the NR waveguide requires a careful optimization. Fig. The absorption loss can be reduced by reducing the plug density. By increasing the pitch from 0.3 μm to 4.8 μm while keeping the plug diameter fixed at 150 nm, the plug density is reduced by a factor of 16 which should result in a similar decrease in optical loss. Figure To understand the nature of these low loss dips, we have investigated light propagation through the nano-ridge waveguide structure. First, let us consider the nano-ridge waveguide without the tungsten contact plugs. This waveguide supports multiple eigenmodes. The 5 modes with the lowest orders are shown in Table When we inspect the field profile from the 3D FDTD simulation with 4.8 μm plug pitch at the dip wavelength (see fig. The self-homodyne interferometric setup used to measure the laser linewidth of various devices is depicted in fig. Nonetheless, the measured linewidths place our nano-ridge lasers between commercial distributed feedback (DFB) lasers (≤ 1MHz) and vertical cavity surface emission lasers (VCSELs) (> 1 GHz) Where n sp is the population inversion factor, typically around 1.25-1.75, and α is the well-known linewidth enhancement factor, typically around 4-6 for quantum well lasers. By assuming n sp = 1.5 and α = 4.5, and by setting the total output power of one of our NR lasers to 2.3 mW (for a cleaved facet output power of 0.5 mW), we get Δν ST =30 MHz, which is in line with the best measured linewidth (Δν =46 MHz) among the devices that were tested. We expect to strongly reduce the laser linewidth in future designs by suppressing the beating modes, by improving the pcontact scheme allowing to operate at much large currents and by introducing DFB grating in the nano-ridge devices to reduce α m . Future experiments will also expand the laser characterization to include relative intensity noise (RIN) measurements and extend the bias current range to larger values to observe reduction of the Schawlow-Townes linewidth. Nano-ridge engineering of the III-V nano-ridges (NRs) on trench-patterned Si was carried out by metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) in a 300 mm deposition chamber applying tertiarybutyl arsine (TBAs), tertiarybutyl phosphine (TBP), trimethyl arsine (TMAs), triethylgallium (TEGa), trimethylgallium (TMGa) and trimethylindium (TMIn) as group-V and -III precursors, respectively. Silane (SiH4) and carbon tetrabromide (CBr4) were used to achieve n-and p-doped layers. Before the III-V deposition, the patterned Si wafers were loaded into an Siconi chamber from Applied Materials for the native oxide removal from the {111} Si surfaces at the trench bottom at temperatures below 200 °C. The GaAs nucleation was done at 360 °C applying TEGa before the growth temperature was raised to 590 °C for the n-doped GaAs (~5× 10 18 cm -3 ) trench filling and first n-doped box formation using TMGa. The undoped InGaAs/GaAs multi-quantum well (MQW) stack was deposited at 570 °C and the TMIn/TMGa+TMIn ratio was adjusted to achieve an In-concentration of about 21% inside the QWs. The p-and p+-doped GaAs layers (~1× 10 19 and 5× 10 19 cm -3 ) were grown at 580 and 550 °C, respectively, and the InGaP layer added at high growth temperature again. The TBAs/III, TMAs/III and TBP/III ratio were varied between 4 and 60 as a function of the material, doping and growth temperature. The threading dislocation and planar defect densities of the GaAs NR were investigated before by electron channelling contrast imaging (ECCI) and the results are reported in Planar defects such as micro twins and stacking faults lie in a crystallographic plane perpendicular to the trench line. They penetrate the complete NR volume and always reach the NR surface. However, they do not cause any dark spot in CL of NRs. This is caused by the fact that no partial dislocation, always present at the end of a planar defect, remains inside the NR volume as it would be the case for a planar defect in a blanket two-dimensional layer. This conclusion is also supported by the observation that the planar defect density of the GaAs NRs, which is in the range of 0.1-0.5 μm -1 (defect per micrometre NR length) We extract the spontaneous emission factor β from the I-I curve of one of our lasers and we fit it with the laser rate equation model. From the fig. We note in the main text that the laser diodes have a relatively large operating voltage of 3-4 V (see fig. 