Using a recent continuum model of a single-crystal nanowire morphological evolution in the applied axial electric field, an axisymmetric evolution of a microscopically rough nanowire surface is computed. Morphological evolution results in a wire breakup into a cylindrical segments (particles). Breakup time and the number of particles are characterized for various levels of the radial and axial surface roughness. It is shown that electromigration and larger surface roughness lead to a shorter breakup time and the increased number of particles. It is well-known that solid cylindrical nanowires are vulnerable to a Rayleigh-Plateau-type morphological instability, that typically results in a local wire thinning and the ultimate breakup (with a subsequent formation of a chain array of nanoparticles) Effects of surface electromigration 1 on morphological and compositional instabilities and evolutions of crystal surfaces were considered experimentally and theoretically since 1960s (see Ref. Historically, the models of a breakup (rupture) of thin solid (liquid) films were focused on exploration of a surface evolution self-similarity and a singularity formation at a breakup In this section, the model is briefly presented; full details and extensive discussions are in Ref. Dropping the tildas, the dimensionless equation describing the evolution of the wire surface reads: where and is the anisotropic diffusional mobility of the adatoms When surface diffusion is isotropic (M (φ) = 1) and the electric field is off (E = 0), Eq. ( which is the mathematical expression of the adatom surface diffusion via a surface Laplacian of mean curvature in cylindrical coordinates Initial wire shape is given by equation F (t, y) = 1. A quasi-random perturbation of this shape is introduced to serve as the initial condition for Eq. (1): where a is the "amplitude", l = 20λ max = 40π/k max is the size of the computational domain (with k max , λ max the most dangerous wavenumber and the most dangerous wavelength from linear stability analysis and RI(u, v) is a random integer in [u, v] (u and v are integers). Notice that for each k = 1, ..., 10 the random number generator is called four times; also, at (n 1 , n 2 ) = Computations were done using the Method of Lines framework in Mathematica ® . Periodic boundary conditions for Eq. ( The model in Ref. 