Nontrivial band topology along with magnetism leads to different novel quantum phases. When time-reversal-symmetry is broken in three-dimensional topological insulators (TIs) by applying high enough magnetic field or proximity effect, different phases such as quantum Hall or quantum anomalous Hall(QAH) emerge and display interesting transport properties for spintronic applications. The QAH phase displays sidewall chiral edge states which leads to the QAH effect. In a finite slab, contribution of the surface states depends on both the cross-section and thickness of the system. Having a small cross-section and a thin thickness leads to direct coupling of the surfaces, on the other hand, a thicker slab results in a higher contribution of the non-trivial sidewall states which connect top and bottom surfaces. In this regard, we have considered a heterostructure consisting of a TI, namely Bi2Se3 , which is sandwiched between two-dimensional magnetic monolayers of CrI3 to study its topological and transport properties. Combining DFT and tight-binding calculations along with non-equilibrium Green's function formalism, we show that a well-defined exchange gap appears in the band structure in which spin polarised edge states flow. We also study the width and finite-size effect on the transmission and topological properties of this magnetised TI nanoribbon. Three dimensional topological insulators (3D TIs) are characterized by an insulating gap in the bulk and gapless 2D surface states at the termination surfaces inside this gap, which are topologically protected by time-reversal symmetry (TRS) When TRS is broken at the surface of a TI, a halfinteger quantum anomalous Hall conductivity ±e 2 /2h (h is the Planck constant and e is the electron charge) arises at that surface One approach to generate magnetism at the surfaces of a TI thin film is to exploit the interfacial proxim-ity with an adjacent film of a magnetic insulator or semiconductor In this paper, we employ density functional theory (DFT) along with tight-binding model to study the electronic and topological properties of an FM/TI/FM trilayer heterostructure, where the 2D ferromagnetic CrI 3 is used to magnetize the Dirac surface states of Bi 2 Se 3 To study the electronic and topological properties of the CrI 3 -Bi 2 Se 3 -CrI 3 heterostructure, we have constructed a periodic slab consisting of six quintuple layers (QLs) of Bi 2 Se 3 slab which is sandwiched between inversion-symmetric CrI 3 monolayers. To match the lattice constants one needs to consider a √ 3 × √ 3 supercell of Bi 2 Se 3 in the lateral plane to match the CrI 3 monolayer 28 . We have included a 15 Å vacuum between adjacent slabs to avoid any couplings between them. Placing CrI 3 on top of the TI can be done in several way, but the configuration in which the Cr ions are placed on top of the Se atoms is energetically favorable For the topological studies of this system, we have to construct a real-space Hamiltonian in the basis of the Wannier states for the low-energy bands. Constructing Wannier states of this complex system from DFT calculations is computationally very challenging, particularly with SOC. Therefore we used two model Hamiltonians to describe the topological properties and transport for the CrI 3 -Bi 2 Se 3 -CrI 3 heterostructure. We used a four-band effective Hamiltonian in momentum space to analysis the topological properties and a tight-binding model to describe accurate transport properties. It is possible to characterize the low-energy longwavelength properties of the system using a simple effective Hamiltonian, since the topological nature is determined by the physics near the Γ point. Therefore, we employ here a low energy effective k.p model to describe the topological properties for the CrI 3 /Bi 2 Se 3 /CrI 3 slab heterostructure. The effective k.p Hamiltonian is given by where the basis are |t ↑⟩, |t ↓⟩, |b ↑⟩ and |b ↓⟩, and t, b denote the top and bottom surface states and ↑, ↓ represent the spin up and down states, respectively. Here ), v F is the Fermi velocity and k ± = k x ±ik y are the wave vectors respectively. ∆ is the exchange field along the z axis introduced by the FM ordering from CrI 3 monolayer at the interface. Here, ∆ ∝ ⟨S⟩ with ⟨S⟩ the mean field expectation value of the local spin. m(k) describes the tunneling effect between the top and bottom surface states of the Bi 2 Se 3 slab and is given by k, m(k) = M -B(k 2 x +k 2 y ). When the slab thickness is very high, the top and bottom surface states are well separated spatially i.e m(k) ≈ 0. However, with the reduction of the film thickness, m(k) becomes finite and |M | < |∆| guarantees that the system is in the topological state. H Interface (k x , k y ) describes the inversion asymmetry between the top and bottom surfaces due to the existence of a substrate (i.e., the CrI 3 monolayer) where V p represents the magnitude of the asymmetric interfacial potential that can occur in experiments by the mis-alignment of layers and we keep it as a parameter that can affect topological properties. The parameters of the effective model are obtained from fitting the energy spectrum of the effective Hamiltonian with DFT-calculated bands of CrI 3 /Bi 2 Se 3 /CrI 3 slab near the Γ point. our fitting leads to v f = 2.395403 eV. Å; M = 0.001086 eV; B = 2.996947 eV. Å2 ; δ = 0.007838 eV; A = 19.000841 eV. Å2 . Our study further elaborated a real space tight binding model Hamiltonian mimicking ribbon geometry of CrI 3 -Bi 2 Se 3 -CrI 3 heterostructure to describe the topological properties for spin transport. In order to have the possibility to study the width dependency of emerging of the edge states we have built an effective TB Hamiltonian containing the effect of the exchange field obtained from DFT calculation, which is then used to consider a quasi 1D nanoribbon geometry with different widths. The acceptable accuracy of the TB Hamiltonian is determined by the criterion that the bands obtained from this Hamiltonian should be a good match with the corresponding bands obtained from the full DFT calculations. The goal is to see the emergence of chiral edge states on the sidewalls of the nanoribbon when the system is in the CI phase. This method is more feasible and efficient than doing several first-principle calculations for different nanoribbons which qualitatively gives the same results. Using an atomistic tight-binding (TB) model, we have first constructed a pristine Bi 2 Se 3 slab of 6 QLs fig. (1(a) and zoom-in structure in fig. In the first term, t αα ′ ii ′ are the Slater-Koster parameters for the hopping energies. c σ † iα (c σ iα ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for an electron with spin σ and the atomic orbital α ∈ (s, p x , p y p z ) at site i. k is the reciprocal-lattice vector that spans the BZ. i ′ ̸ = i runs over all the neighbors of atom i in the same atomic layer as well as the first and second nearest-neighbor layers in the adjacent cells (r ii′ represents the vector connecting two neighbor atoms). In the second term, the on-site SOC is implemented in the intra-atomic matrix elements In the presence of an exchange field in the vicinity of a topological insulator, an exchange gap appear at the TI surface states. The size of the gap depends on the magnitude of the magnetization which is induced as well as the coupling between the adjacent layers in the heterostructure. Fig. As it is shown in fig. If we consider a nanoribbon by limiting the structure also in the x direction, there should be chiral edge states inside the exchange gap. In this configuration, k y is still a good number and we can plot the band structure along this direction. As it is shown in fig. ] † is the self-energy due to the connection of the left (right) semi-infinite electrode to the central channel. g L(R) is the surface Green's function of the left(right) lead; g R is calculated iteratively by adding one unit cell from the central region at a time using the method of Ref. is the broadening due to the electrode contacts and the trace is taken over the sites in the σσ ′ sub-matrix. FIG. In fig. In summary, our investigation into the interplay of nontrivial band topology and magnetism in threedimensional topological insulators has led to intriguing findings with significant implications for spintronic applications. By breaking time-reversal symmetry through the proximity effect, we have unveiled novel quantum phases, particularly the quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) phase, which showcases remarkable transport properties attributed to sidewall chiral edge states. Our study of finite slabs within this context has revealed that the contribution of surface states depends critically on the system's cross-section and thickness. The choice of these parameters governs the extent to which the nontrivial sidewall states, connecting the top and bottom surfaces, influence the material's behavior. Specifically, we have examined a heterostructure comprising the topological insulator Bi 2 Se 3 , sandwiched between two-dimensional magnetic monolayers of CrI 3 . Employing a combination of density functional theory (DFT), tight-binding calculations, and the non-equilibrium Green's function formalism, we have observed the emergence of a well-defined exchange gap in the band structure, accommodating spinpolarized edge states with distinctive transport characteristics. Furthermore, our investigation extends to the study of width and finite-size effects on the transmission and topological properties of this magnetized topological insulator nanoribbon. These findings contribute valuable insights into the design and understanding of materials with tailored topological and transport properties, holding great promise for future advancements in the field of spintronics and quantum information technologies.