The present paper introduces a quantum weak measurement (WM) scheme for the measurement of the complex magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE). We achieve the simultaneous measurement of the Kerr rotation angle and the ellipticity in a single WM process by utilizing two auxiliary pointers derived from the same meter state. The experimental measurement precision for both the Kerr rotation angle and the ellipticity is capable of reaching 10 -4 deg. This technique is also employed for the determination of the complex magneto-optical constant Q. The proposed method overcomes the limitation of acquiring the complex magneto-optical Kerr parameters through a multi-step measurement process, which was previously encountered. This breakthrough holds immense significance for efficiently measuring and applying the complex MOKE with high precision and cost-effectiveness. The magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE), which originates from the anisotropy of the dielectric tensor 1 , refers to the phenomenon that when a linear polarized beam incident on the interface of a magnetic medium, the polarization state or the intensity of the reflected light is changed. The corresponding magneto-optical Jones matrix used to characterize this effect can be represent as where r pp , r ps , r sp and r ss are the Fresnel coefficients of the magnetic medium 2 . There are three cases of MOKE depending on the orientation of the magnetization relative to the interface, the polar magneto-optical Kerr effect (PMOKE), the longitudinal magneto-optical Kerr effect (LMOKE), and the transverse magneto-optical Kerr effect (TMOKE) 2,3 . Among them, both LMOKE and PMOKE cause changes in the polarization state of the reflected light. This process can be expressed by the complex magneto-optical Kerr angle where the real and the imaginary part of it represent the Kerr optical rotation angle and the Kerr ellipticity of the reflected polarization, respectively. Without loss of generality, for horizontal polarization |H⟩, it gives Θ H K = r sp /r pp , while for vertical polarization |V ⟩, it becomes Θ V K = r ps /r ss 2 . With the development of spintronics, MOKE especially the longitudinal and the polar configuration has shown the superiority for the in-situ investigation of the magnetic properties of magneto-optical devices and thin films, and has been a) These authors contributed equally to this work. widely applied in magnetism measurement In recent years, some studies used weak measurement (WM) to measure the tiny MOKE signals of separate θ K and ε K To study the complex MOKE and apply it to the investigations of materials' properties, e.g., the measurement of the complex optical parameters, both θ K and ε K are required to be measured quantitatively. However, θ K and ε K always coexist and simultaneously contribute to the detected MOKE signals. In the previous work, these two parameters have to be measured separately by using and adjusting the angle of a quarterwave-plate both in the traditional MOKE setup Considering an initialized horizontal polarization |ψ i ⟩ = |H⟩ reaching a magnetic interface from a nonmagnetic medium, as shown in Fig. where are the left-and the right-circular polarization states, respectively. In the second line of Eq. ( where n 0 , n 1 are the refractive indices of the nonmagnetic medium, and that of the magnetic medium, respectively. m z is a direction cosine of the magnetization M. Q = Q 0 exp(-iq) is the complex magneto-optical constant, whose amplitude Q 0 is proportional to the magnetization intensity 3 and q is its phase factor. In addition, it should be emphasized that r pp is a constant in this configuration. Previous weak measurement scheme for measuring MOKE usually employ the SHEL induced by the magnetic sample as the weak coupling 1,13,14 . However, SHEL only exists with oblique incidence where σ3 = |+⟩ ⟨+| -|-⟩ ⟨-|, the spin operator of a photon, is the observable of the quantum system being measured, k y is the transverse component of the wave vector describing the momentum wave function, and δ = (1 + r s /r p ) cot θ i /k represents the photon spin splitting occurring on the air-glass interface where |φ ⟩ = dk y (w/ √ 2π) 1/2 exp (-w 2 k 2 y /4) k y is the momentum wave function with Gaussian distribution (w denotes the beam waist), which serves as the meter in the WM scheme. Unlike Eq. (1) which has non-diagonal elements, is the Jones matrix describing the reflection upon an isotropic non-magnetic dielectric medium (glass), and |ψ pre ⟩ = R 2 |ψ 1 r ⟩ is regarded as the pre-selected state in the WM system. Next, the state of the whole systerm undergoes a free evolution Ûfree = exp(-ik 2 y z/2k) (z is the free propagation distance) Therefore, the final wave function of the light in the momentum space gives where is the complex weak value corresponding to the complex MOKE. What noteworthy is that when only Kerr optical rotation angle θ K (Kerr ellipticity ε K ) appears, the complex A w degenerates into a pure imaginary (real) one. And the amplified shift of the beam, which is the most currently used pointer in WM, can be calculated as where R 0 = kw 2 /2 is the Rayleigh distance. The theoretical relationship between ∆ and the complex MOKE is shown in Fig. To obtain more information of the complex MOKE, we introduce the post-selected intensity as an extra pointer: It contains the information of both θ K and ε K but dependent non-linearly with neither of them. By combining Eq. ( where I| θ k =0,ε k =0 is the post-selected intensity corresponding to no polarization change. The approximations in Eq. ( A Ni-Fe film with the thickness of 30 nm that depositing on the silicon substrate using the vacuum thermal evaporation technique is prepared for the experiment. During the measurement, the applied magnetic field B is changed from 0 to 0.45 T with steps of 0.05 T. At each value of B, the amplified shift ∆ and the post-selected intensity I are recorded 30 times with intervals of 1 second by the CCD. The measurement results of ∆ and I are shown in Fig. Furthermore, we can characterize the complex MOKE using the two auxiliary pointers. According to Eq. ( In this experiment, θ K0 = α = 0.035 deg. Thus, we can calculate the dependence of the complex MOKE on B, which are shown in Fig. where S ∆ S I , S I 0 are the standard deviations of ∆, I, and I 0 , respectively. In this experiment, S ∆ ≈ 2.5 μm and S I 0 ≈ S I ≈ 0.013 × 10 -6 mW are calculated by the 30 times measurement. Thus, the corresponding standard derivations of θ K and ε K , S θ K ≈ S ε K ≈ 2.5 × 10 -4 deg, are obtained (see the supplementary material for details). Furthermore, we calculate the complex magneto-optical constant Q using this method. From Eq. ( Since the plane of the Ni-Fe film is isotropic, and the applied magnetic field is normal to the film surface, we assume m z = 1 during the whole measurement process. The refractive indices of n 0 and n 1 are 1 and 1.26 -0.44i, respectively, where n 1 is measured by the ellipsometer. We depict the dependence of Q and B, as shown in Fig. In summary, we propose a method to measure the complex MOKE using WM. By introducing two auxiliary pointers, ∆ ′ and η, we realize the simultaneous measurement of θ K and ε K with the precision of 2.5 × 10 -4 deg, which addressed the problem that these two MOKE parameters have to be measured separately using previous methods. Since the information of the two pointers are given by the same meter state, this scheme greatly improve the efficiency and precision for the measurement of the complex optical parameters. It is worthy noting that a higher measurement precision could be further achieved by combing with the quantum light source or the noise reduction techniques such as the lock-in amplifier. What's more, since the complex MOKE cause a rotation angle and an ellipticity of the polarization light before it reached to the surface where SHEL occurs, it can be used as a flexible approach to manipulate the spin splitting of SHEL with quantitative analysis. See the supplementary material for (S1) feasibility of introducing the compensation angle α, (S2) calculation of the measurement precision of θ K and ε K , (S3) the linear response region of the amplified shift ∆ with θ K , and (S4) a comparative experimental case to measure the complex MOKE using the standard polarimetry scheme. FIG. X. Qiu, X. Zhou, D. Hu, J. Du, F. Gao, Z. Zhang, and H. Luo, "Determination of magneto-optical constant of Fe films with weak measurements," Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 131111 (2014). 2 C. You and S. Shin, "Generalized analytic formulae for magneto-optical Kerr effects," Journal of Applied Physics 84 (1998), 10.1063/1.368058.