Since the discovery of superconductivity in cuprate materials, the minimal ingredients for high-Tc superconductivity have been an outstanding puzzle. Motivated by the recently discovered nickelate bilayer superconductor La3Ni2O7 under pressure, we study a minimal bilayer model, in which, as in La3Ni2O7, inter-and intralayer magnetic interactions but no interlayer hopping are present: a mixeddimensional (mixD) t-J model. In the setting of a mixD ladder, we show that the system exhibits a crossover associated with a Feshbach resonance: from a closed-channel dominated regime of tightly bound bosonic pairs of holes to an open-channel dominated regime of spatially more extended Cooper pairs. The crossover can be tuned by varying doping, or by a nearest-neighbor Coulomb repulsion V that we include in our model. Using density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) simulations and analytical descriptions of both regimes, we find that the ground state is a Luther-Emery liquid, competing with a density wave of tetraparton plaquettes at commensurate filling δ = 0.5 at large repulsion, and exhibits a pairing dome where binding is facilitated by doping. Our observations can be understood in terms of pairs of correlated spinon-chargon excitations constituting the open channel, which are subject to attractive interactions mediated by the closed channel of tightly bound chargon-chargon pairs. When the closed channel is lowered in energy by doping or tuning V , a Feshbach resonance is realized, associated with a dome in the binding energy. Our predictions can be directly tested in state-of-the art quantum simulators, and we argue that the pairing mechanism we describe may be realized in the nickelate bilayer superconductor La3Ni2O7. Since the discovery of high-T c superconductors Motivated by this minimal working example of unconventional superconductivity, understanding the pairing mechanism of mixed-dimensional (mixD) Fermi-Hubbard or t -J bilayers, or ladders, is an important step towards a microscopic theory of pairing In this article we show that the mixD setting allows to tune through a crossover associated with a Feshbach resonance, which enables strong pairing despite the presence of dominant Coulomb repulsion In atomic systems, where the BEC to BCS crossover has initially been explored using ultracold atom experiments inated Luther-Emery liquid of paired fermions to the closed-channel dominated regime of bosonic molecules Starting from the closed-channel dominated side with cc constituents and at low doping, we increase the Coulomb repulsion V to tune through the crossover and into the open-channel dominated regime of spatially more extended sc pairs. The latter remain bound into (sc) 2 Cooper-like pairs through the pairing mechanism realized in Feshbach resonances Alternatively, we can tune across the Feshbach resonance at large V by varying doping δ. Beyond δ > 50% closed-channel cc states proliferate, which boosts the induced attraction among sc constituents and leads to the formation of tightly bound (sc) 2 -type Cooper pairs, with tetraparton character and residing on plaquettes of the ladder, as illustrated in Fig. The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows: In the first section, we introduce the mixD t -J ladder model supplemented by repulsive interactions V (mixD+V, see Fig. The mixD+V model that we investigate is shown schematically in Fig. where P is the Gutzwiller projector that projects onto the subspace with maximum single occupancy per site. Spin and (hole) density operators at site i in layer μ = 0, 1 are denoted by Ŝiμ and niμ = niμ↑ + niμ↓ (n h iμ = 1niμ ). The ground state of the model without hole doping, δ = 0, consists of one singlet on each rung of the ladder, with energy E δ=0 0 = -L x J ⊥ . Upon doping, the physics of this model is determined by a competition between kinetic, magnetic and Coulomb contributions. The emergent constituents can be most easily understood in the tight-binding regime 0 ≈ t ∥ ≪ J ⊥ without Coulomb repulsion, V = 0: In this limit, it is favorable for two holes in opposite legs to sit on neighboring sites to reduce the number of rungs with distorted rung-singlet spin configuration. For t ∥ ≳ J ⊥ , the chargon-chargon pairs develop a spatial structure. However, it is still advantageous for holes to move through the system coherently, since the second hole can retrace the distorted spin background of the first hole, see Appendix 1, yielding tightly bound pairs of holes that are close to each other in real space When the repulsive interaction V reaches a critical value V c > 0, it is energetically favorable to place at maximum one spin and one hole per rung, i.e. to form spinon-chargon pairs. The respective regimes are dominated by (i) bosonic chargon-chargon (cc) pairs and (ii) fermionic spinon-chargon (sc) pairs, which themselves pair up to form (sc) 2 -type Cooper pairs, see Fig. The mixD+V model is closely related to the recently discovered, pressure-induced nickelate superconductor La 3 Ni 2 O 7 In contrast to AFM interactions that originate only from superexchange, the interaction mediated via Hund's coupling corresponds to a vanishingly small interlayer hopping t ⊥ . We further argue that at low doping, when Coulomb interactions are not yet fully screened, the nearest-neighbor repulsion V between the layers can potentially play an important role. The mixD+V model in Eq. ( term in The mixD+V model ( This interaction is positive, i.e. repulsive, for doublon doping in the lower leg and hole doping in the upper leg; vice versa, for doublon doping in the upper leg and hole doping in the lower leg, the resulting interaction obtained by replacing ∆ with -∆ in Eq. ( In order to gain a qualitative understanding of the physics in the mixD+V model in both weak and strong repulsion limits, we derive effective low-energy Hamiltonians in terms of cc's b † i in the low V regime and sc's f ( †) i in the large V limit. This is done by performing Schrieffer-Wolff transformations of Eq. ( In the chargon-chargon (weak V ) regime, the lowenergy subspace is given by holes on the same rung, whereas the high-energy subspace contains spinonchargon configurations. The effective Hamiltonian we obtain in this regime, describes hard-core, bosonic cc's with a chemical poten- z denotes the coordination number of the lattice, i.e. z = 2 for the ladder and z = 4 in the two-dimensional bilayer geometry. The second term corresponds to a nearest-neighbor repulsion along the legs / in plane. A detailed derivation can be found in Appendix 4. In the spinon-chargon regime (strong V and doping δ ≤ 50%) all configurations involving two holes on the same rung can be integrated out. The effective Hamiltonian becomes with 2 as well as the singlet and triplet pro- , where we have defined the spinon-chargon density oper- and rung isospin operators Eq. ( V , for singlettriplet recombination processes to the chargon-chargon channel and back, respectively. We would like to emphasize that the attractive terms arise from second-order recombination processes of sc's to a spin singlet and a cc and back to the sc channel, i.e. the attraction is mediated by virtual coupling processes to the tightly bound, high energy chargon-chargon channel Moreover, we point out that Eq. ( Figure ). For V = 0, the number of cc's grows linearly with the hole density δ, and n sc is suppressed to very small values. In contrast, for larger repulsion strengths the formation of cc's is suppressed in the intermediate doping regime, with n cc ≈ 0 below δ ≤ 0.5 for V ≥ 2J ⊥ . In this strongly repulsive regime, we find that the number of sc's increases linearly to a value of n sc = 1 at δ = 0.5, i.e. holes will avoid to sit on the same rung if they can. Above δ = 0.5, there are more holes than particles in the system and hence n cc increases to unity (n sc decreases to zero). Note that we calculate the density of point-like sc (cc) pairs here, as assumed in the derivations. In principle, in particular for larger t ∥ , the distance between spinons and chargons (chargons and chargons) can be larger and spatially overlapping mesons are possible as well (see Fig. The bond-ordered density wave (BODW) at δ = 0.5 For doping δ = 0.5, Eq. ( which we derive in Appendix 6. Individually, the two factors under the sum would favor a Heisenberg AFM order of isospins Ĵ and spins Ŝ, respectively. However, as we have shown in In the remaining part of the paper we will present our numerical analysis of the Feshbach resonance and the associated crossover between the open-and closed channel dominated regimes. Thereby we reveal the underlying pairing mechanism between doped holes, and how it changes with increasing Coulomb repulsion V and doping. All our numerical results have been obtained using the DMRG package SyTen The key finding is that the binding energy is positive in the entire doping regime even if strong repulsive interactions dominate. Moreover, the value c = 1 of the central charge and the Fermi momentum k F = πδ/2 we find in the gapless regimes, i.e. away from the commensurate filling δ = 50%, indicates that the system realizes a Luther Emery liquid constituted by the emergent (sc) 2 or cc's. Therefore, we argue that by tuning the repulsion V and doping, the character of the ground state changes from open channel dominated (BCS side of the Feshbach resonance) to closed channel dominated (BEC side of the Feshbach resonance), see Figure In order to further investigate the emergent excitations in the low and high Coulomb repulsion regime, we calculate the hole density correlation function ⟨n h i nh j ⟩ with i = L x /2, as exemplary shown for a hole doping δ = 0.9 in Fig. For low repulsion strengths V ≤ 2J ⊥ , one can observe a density wave pattern of chargon-chargon pairs with a wavelength λ ≈ 10, with alternating enhanced (red) and suppressed (blue) hole density simultaneously on both chains of the ladder, in agreement with the high density of cc's found in Fig. In contrast, the upper panel of Fig. In Fig. with N h the number of holes doped into the system. We assume that holes are added to the two chains in an alternating fashion, i.e. the state at N h + 2 is obtained by adding one hole in each chain. Per definition, positive binding energies indicate that the system tends to form pairs, with stronger binding for larger values of E B . In agreement with the chargon-chargon picture of tightly bound hole pairs A comparison with the density correlations and sc densities from the previous sections shows that the resulting dome of E B arises in the regime of V where the system forms sc-like pairs rather than cc's. Furthermore, the effective attraction in the finite doping regime and at large V is in agreement with the phenomenology of the Feshbach-mediated pairing mechanism that is expected from the effective sc model Eq. ( For larger hopping strengths t ∥ /J ⊥ , binding is stabilized and the resonance shifts to larger V c > J ⊥ , yielding effective attraction in the finite doping regime even at V > J ⊥ , see Fig. We would like to point out that strong binding in the limit of large doping is consistent with experiments on bilayer nickelates, where superconductivity has been observed at quarter filling, δ = 0.5 In the large V limit, two holes on the same rung are strongly penalized and hence no more than one sc can occupy each rung. At commensurate filling δ = 50%, this leads to a charge gap, corresponding to the energy required to create a cc, which is visible by a jump in for the respective repulsion strengths at δ = 0.5 and V ≥ 5J ⊥ , see Fig. (E: ground state energy) that remains from the singlet occupation of rungs at V = 0 In order to determine the central charge c, we fit the bipartite entanglement entropy to the CFT prediction where c and g are determined by fitting S to the numerical results. As can be seen in the inset figures of Fig. Around δ = 0.5, the extracted central charge increases. This is a finite size effect, as can be seen from the drastic change when comparing the results for 200 and 400 sites. The strong impact of the size on c can be understood by the fact that the BODW emerges at δ = 0.5 and, as shown in Sec. II E, doping away from δ = 0.5 yields domain wall excitations from the bond order. However, the number of excitations N dw is very small compared to the system size, e.g. for a system with 200 sites and δ = 0.45 the number of domain walls is only N dw = 20. Consequently, extremely large system sizes are needed to decrease this finite size effect. Our observations on the central charge as well as the charge and spin gaps show that the system forms a Luther-Emery liquid for δ ̸ = 0.5. As discussed in previous works on atomic BEC to BCS crossovers (e.g. The special singlet-no singlet order of the BODW is reflected in oscillations of ⟨ Ĵi • Ĵi+1 ⟩ as well as ⟨ Ŝi • Ŝi+1 ⟩ Furthermore, we consider the difference between the x, y and z components of the isospin Ĵi • Ĵi+1 , as a measure for the SU (2) symmetry of the Ĵ isospin sector. The results are presented in Fig. The BODW of correlated sc's allows to understand further observations in the finite doping regime. Here, we focus on the wave vectors k Friedel x of Friedel oscillations, extracted from the Fourier transformed density for L x = 200 and t ∥ /J ⊥ = 1. Fig. x = 2πδ = 2k F , where k F is the Fermi momentum. In view of the finite binding energies, the k1 x -peak can be understood as arising from a liquid composed of either individual cc's or pairs of sc's ((sc) 2 ), both corresponding to a density The doping dependence of k1 x is shown in Fig. x , possibly arising due to residual short-range repulsion. In addition, a second, smaller peak arises only for large V with k x = 0.44πδ for the considered system with hole doping δ = 0.45. As shown in Fig. x , with decreasing k2 x up to δ = 0.5 and increasing k2 x for δ > 0.5. We argue that this peak is associated with excitations of the BODW found at δ = 0.5. The latter correspond to domain walls of the plaquette order, with rung-singlet (δ < 0.5) or cc (δ > 0.5) character, whose density is Respective peaks arise at kx = 2πn dw (black line), which is in excellent agreement with the location of the peak in the whole density regime that was calculated numerically for L x = 100 and L x = 200, see 8b. This supports our observations from before that in the intermediate doping regime, the system can be understood in terms of correlated spinon-chargon pairs, forming a BODW state of Cooper pairs with (sc) 2 character and domain walls between them. To conclude, we have presented the mixD+V model with repulsive Coulomb interactions V -closely connected to the newly discovered bilayer nickelate superconductor La 3 Ni 2 O 7 The mixD setup allows a controlled crossover from a clearly BEC-like pairing mechanism with tightly bound holes for V = 0 to a state of correlated spinon-chargon pairs at strong repulsion V resembling closer a BCS state of fermions. We see very clear signals for a drastic change of the nature of the charge carriers in the numerical results of the low and high repulsion limits, e.g. in correlation functions and binding energies. In contrast, the central charge and Friedel oscillations remain unchanged, as expected from a Luther-Emery liquid. Moreover, our comparison to effective descriptions in terms of tightly bound chargon-chargon pairs for low repulsion and spatially extended bound states of spinon-chargon pairs for high V indicate that the system can indeed be described by very different types of charge carriers in the respective regimes. In order to investigate this change further, spectroscopic probes could be used to distinguish the excitations in both regimes by their dispersion. Lastly, the mixD+V ladder can also be investigated using ultracold atom experiments, where the nearest-neighbor repulsion can be realized by doping the setup of Ref. Note added.-While finishing the manuscript, we became aware of a closely related work by H. Yang, H. Oh and Y. H. Zhang As shown in Refs. 1. The ladder: Compared to a single hole that distorts the background singlet order when moving through the ladder (see Fig. 2. The mixed dimension: Suppressing the hopping term between the chains enhances the probability for two holes sit on the same rung since the effect of Pauli blocking is suppressed. This is further discussed in Ref. The mixD Hamiltonian (1) without repulsive interactions V has already been realized by Hirthe et al. If the chains are occupied only by single spins and holes (no doublons), the virtual tunneling between site i in the upper layer and j in the lower layer is given by -t2 ⊥ ∆ (1ni )n j (for a hole at site i in the upper layer and spin at site j in the lower layer) or + t2 ⊥ ∆ ni (1nj ) (for a hole at site i and spin at site j) respectively. In total, this leads to Similarly, if we have doublons in both layers one gets contributions by virtual tunnelings between two doublons or a doublon and a single spin at sites i and j in opposite layers (no holes in the system). In this case, we find + t2 ⊥ ∆ (1-ni ) nj (for a doublon at site i in the upper layer and spin at site j in the lower layer) or -t2 ⊥ ∆ ni (1 -nj ) (for a spin at site i in the upper layer and doublon at site j in the lower layer) and hence if we introduce the number operator n with ñi = 0 if n i = 2 (doublons) or n i = 0 (holes) 1 if n i = 1 (single particle) . Both cases correspond to a constant shift and does not change the physics of the mixD ladder. In contrast, if we add doublons in only one of the chains, i.e. the lower chain, we get ∆ (1 -ni )n j (for a doublon at site i in the lower leg and spin at site j in the upper leg) • a contribution -t2 ⊥ ∆ ni (1nj ) (for a single spin at site i in the lower leg and a hole at site j in the upper leg) for a doublon at site i in the lower leg and a hole at site j in the upper leg). In total, we have a contribution and hence where we can define and V is repulsive for doublon dopants in the lower chain and hole dopants in the upper chain (∆ ≥ 0 and V ≥ 0) and attractive for doublons in the upper chain and holes in the lower chain (∆ ≤ 0 and V ≤ 0). Note that we have the restrictions 1 denoted by the black lines in Fig. We use the single-site density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) algorithm implemented in the package SyTen Convergence is ensured by comparing energies, their variance and other expectation values like the density for different bond dimensions χ up to χ max = 1100. Typical bond dimensions we use for the results presented in the main text are χ ≈ 1000. Examples for a system of length L x = 200 with t ∥ /J ⊥ = 1 and different repulsion strengths V are shown in Fig. d. Hole distance in the limit of low doping Furthermore, we mention the average distance of holes in the main text. The average hole distance is calculated using DMRG by evaluating the probability to find the holes / particles at a certain distance d, given by An example is shown in Fig. where singlets are denoted by and chargon-chargon pairs by . First of all, we notice that we can rewrite ĤJ in terms of the chargon-chargon operators b( †) i , i.e. The hopping term can be considered by performing a Schrieffer-Wolff transformation and restricting to the energy subspace related to energy scales V -J ⊥ of chargon-chargon excitations. We assume that V ≪ J ⊥ , i.e. the chargonchargon states are the low energy states of the system and their energy subspace is well separated from the energy subspace of spinon-chargon pairs. The transformed Hamiltonian consists includes the correction ∆ Ĥt given by second order processes via the higher energy spinon-chargon channel, i.e. Here, Pb is the Gutzwiller projector on states with maximally one boson per site. Note that the second term results from the fact that the energy reduction by the kinetic contribution is smaller (i.e. the energy is higher) if there are two chargon-chargon pairs next to each other. If we neglect the last term which gives a constant contribution when assuming a fixed chargon-chargon number we can rewrite Ĥcc ef f in terms of spin operators by mapping Z i = b † i bi -1 2 and b( †) i to the respective spin raising and lowering operators and obtain This is an XXZ model with J cc,xy ef f = -J cc,z ef f < 0 (for V < J ⊥ ). In order to derive the effective spinon-chargon Hamiltonian (4) from the mixD Hamiltonian (1) for strong repulsive interactions V, V -J ⊥ ≫ t ∥ we perform a Schrieffer-Wolff transformation Here, we adapt the notation introduced in Fig. Furthermore, second order processes without recombination to the chargon-chargon channel for isolated spinonchargons without nearest neighbors have amplitude -2 , where the factor 2 arises from the two directions in which the holes / particles can hop and the factor 3 4 comes from the matrix element of this process. In addition, H J gives a contribution +J ⊥ for every rung with a broken singlet w.r.t. the spinon-chargon vacuum (the ground state at half filling). Putting it all together, we arrive at the free spinon-chargon Hamiltonian As soon as two sc's occupy neighboring rungs, there is no contribution by second order processes without recombination to the chargon-chargon channel in the direction of the neighboring sc; since those terms are already included in the free Hamiltonian term (32) a term has to be added. Lastly, there are second order hopping terms via the high energy subspace V (for recombination to the the triplet channel) and V -J ⊥ (singlet channel), schematically depicted in Fig. For the singlet channel we need to consider second order hopping processes from the sc to the cc channel and back, where the former is given by and the latter analogously. The factor (-1) σ takes the sign structure of the singlets into account. The perturbative correction due to these processes is given by which includes μ = μ ′ and μ = μ′ processes. Here μ = μ densotes the opposite leg of μ, i.e. 0 = 1 and 1 = 0. The amplitude of the interaction, -t 2 ∥ V -J ⊥ , is attractive in the regime under consideration and diverges for V → J ⊥ . Ĥff can be represented using the operators Ĵ defined in Eq. ( For the triplet channel we get The resulting effective Hamiltonian Eq. ( since in the case of half-filling (i.e. maximal sc filling) the first term of Eq. ( 