The Point Defect Model (PDM) is known for over 40 years and has brought deeper insight to the understanding of passivity. During the last decades it has seen several changes and refinements, and it has been widely used to analyze growth kinetics of different alloys. Nevertheless, the model has been based on still unconfirmed assumptions, as constant and potential independent electric field strength. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a Refined PDM (R-PDM) in which we replace those assumptions by using additional equations for charge distribution including new physically valid boundary conditions based on considering finite dimensions for the defects by introduction of two defect layer at the film boundaries and by calculating the potential drop at the surface of the film towards the solution over the compact double layer. The calculations by the R-PDM show that the original PDM assumptions are only valid for very specific parameter combinations of oxide film growth and vacancies transport and cannot generally be taken for granted. We believe our findings of electric field and potential drop dependency on the external potential to pave the way for a more realistic description of passive layer formation. We are surrounded by metal oxides in our daily live in form of semiconductors The PDM describes film growth of oxides as a result of interfacial reactions and defect transport (which gives the name of the model) within the oxide film based on the Nernst-Planck equation. Even though the PDM is widely used it is based on a few assumptions, which have not been fully proved. Among them, two fundamental ones are: 1.) The field strength (FF E ) inside the oxide film was assumed to be constant and independent of the external potential φφ ext . This was justified as follows: "The electric field strength (ε) (sic) is independent of voltage and distance through the film. The former is due to band-to-band (Esaki) tunneling, such that as the field strength tends toward a higher value the bands become steeper and the tunneling distance for electrons from the valence band to the conduction band (or to inter band gap states) decreases, thereby resulting in a higher tunneling current. This produces a separation of charge that opposes the field and essentially buffers the field at an upper, voltage-independent value of 2-5 MV/cm" The potential drop at the oxide/solution interface was assumed to be a linear function of the external potential and pH: φφ fs = ααφφ ext + ββpH + φφ fs 0 , where αα, ββ and φφ fs 0 depend on the type of metal and the environment. There has been an ongoing debate to which extent these assumptions can be justified and limit the applicability of the PDM. Different approaches have been suggested to overcome such a limitation. In 1995 Battaglia and Newman published a comprehensive model to describe the growth of iron oxide on an iron electrode A generalized growth model was presented by Seyeux et al. in 2013 In 2019 Engelhardt et al. calculated the electric field strength inside the oxide films based on the transport equations and the Poisson equation and found it to be constant over a broad range of the film for sufficient thin films without the incorporation of electrons and holes In this work we demonstrate that, by extending the number of equations of the PDM without increasing the number of parameters, we can eliminate the two discussed assumptions. These extensions allow for calculating the potential distribution over the oxide film and the potential drop at the film solution interface by using the Poisson equation as well as the transport of defects by the Nernst-Planck equation. In contrast to previous work, the boundary conditions introduced in our model take into account the physically dimensions of ions and defects and present an explanation for the potential drop at the film interfaces. By means of the presented comprehensive Refined PDM (R-PDM) we calculate the film thickness and properties of an oxide film growing on a metal. The model is based on the interfacial reactions given by the PDM (whereas only 5 of the 7 given reactions are used for simplification. The additional reactions can be easily added). The influence of the polarization potential on the average defects and electric field, as well as the defect and electric field distribution will be analyzed and discussed in details. Furthermore, a comparison to calculations of film thickness and defect concentrations based on the classic PDM is given. The PDM introduces 7 interfacial reactions which lead to film growth, film dissolution and the production and consumption of oxygen vacancies, metal vacancies and metal interstitials. For the purpose of simplification, we reduce the model by two interfacial reactions (namely the production and consumption of metal interstitials, see Figure Two reactions occur at the metal/film (mf) interface: Reaction 1, the consumption of metal vacancies V M χ′ (CMV), and Reaction 2, the production of oxygen vacancies V O .. (POV). Reaction 2 is a so-called non-lattice conservative reaction, because the production of oxygen vacancies and metal ions in the oxide leads to the growth of the oxide film into the metal. At the film/solution (fs) interface occur three different reactions. Reaction 3, the production of metal vacancies (PMV), Reaction 4 the consumption of oxygen vacancies (COV) and the film dissolution reaction (FDR), Reaction 5. The FDR is also a non-lattice conservative reaction, because due to the film dissolution the fs boundary moves and the oxide film shrinks. If both non-lattice conservative reactions are in equilibrium -moving the interfaces equally -the system reaches steady state. The metal is still dissolving at the mf interface and the film is still dissolving at the fs interface in steady state but the growth of the oxide film (by metal dissolution and oxygen vacancies production) equals the dissolution of the film at the fs interface. The kinetics of the different reactions can be described by the rate constants: For the two reactions at the mf interface. kk ii 0 is the standard reaction rate constant of the Reaction ii depending on the activation energy of Reaction ii , αα ii is the charge transfer coefficient of Reaction ii, nn is the number of electrons involved in the reaction, FF the Faraday constant (96485 As/mol), RR the gas constant (8.314 J/mol/K) and T the temperature (293 K). The potential drop at the mf interface φφ mf drives the reaction and depends on the film thickness, the defect distribution over the film and the external potential inside the metal. Because it has been pointed out as a critic on this kinetic assumption, that it would not depend on potentials such as the equilibrium potential φφ eq or the corrosion potential A detailed description of the potential distribution in the system is given below. Furthermore, as in the original PDM we assume the interfacial reactions to be irreversible. This simplification can be justified in this simulated case by the assumption of the reaction being far from equilibrium. Nevertheless, treating the reactions as reversible is also a possible case, as shown by Bataillon The rate constants of Reaction 3 and Reaction 4 is described by: φφ fs describes the potential drop at the film/solution interface. The dissolution of the oxide film (Reaction 5) is assumed to be a chemical -potential independent -reaction which depends on the concentration of protons cc H + at the fs interface and the kinetic order of film dissolution nn. According to the described kinetic constants the steady state condition for oxide film growth can be described by: This steady state condition with the molar volume of the oxide Ω can be used to determine the steady state film thickness as described in Section 3.1.1. The transport of the defects can be described by the Nernst-Planck equation for the onedimensional case: With the flux of moles JJ ii of species ii, namely the oxygen vacancies and metal vacancies, the concentration cc ii , the diffusion coefficient DD ii of species ii, the charge zz ii of species ii and the potential φφ. The transport of metal vacancies and oxygen vacancies and the boundary conditions at the interfaces is schematically represented in Figure JJ OV (xx = 0) = kk 2 JJ OV (xx = LL) = kk 4 cc OV The distribution of the potential φφ over the oxide and the solution can be described by the Poisson equation for the one-dimensional case: The permittivity of the vacuum εε 0 is 8.85×10 -12 As/V/m, the relative permittivity εε r is material depending, zz ii is the charge of the charged species, metal and oxygen vacancies (and electrons and holes in the extended model), and cc ii is the concentration of the charged species at the position x. The potential distribution across the metal, the oxide and the solution is schematically shown in Figure Where εε is the permittivity, εε = εε 0 εε r and the indices 1 and 2 represent the left-hand side and right-hand side of the interface, respectively. The potential drop at the metal/film interface is consequently the difference of the external potential and the potential at this interface φφ mf = φφ ext -φφ(xx = 0) (note that xx = 0 is the defect layer/film interface). The mathematical formulation of the boundary condition used in the model is in case of the metal/film side: whereas εε F and εε dl represent the permittivity of the oxide film and the defect layer, respectively. φφ F mf is the potential inside the film at the metal/film interface and its (negative) partial derivation describes the electric field strength. At the film/solution interface also a defect layer is formed on the side of the oxide film. Subsequently to the defect layer follows the compact double layer at the solution side. The compact double layer is followed by the diffuse double layer in solution. At these interfaces (film/defect layer, defect layer/compact layer, compact layer/solution) again the continuity of the electric flux boundary condition Equation 10 applies. Inside the defect layer and the compact double layer there is no charge, thus the electric field is constant. Since the electric field inside the defect layer and the compact double layer is constant, the formulation of the boundary condition at the film solution interface can be written as: With the permittivity of the compact double layer εε cdl and of the solution εε sol . The potential of the solution at the film/solution interface φφ sol can be calculated by: whereas dd cdl represents the thickness of the compact double layer. For further simplification -assuming a very high ions concentration in the electrolyte -φφ sol fs can be assumed to be zero meaning that the entire potential drops across the compact double layer (this has not been done in the case of this publication). One should further note that the reactions at the metal/film interface indeed occur at the defect layer/film interface. For the purpose of this paper the term metal/film interface is interchangeable with defect layer/film interface. Inside the solution the Poisson equation applies to describe the potential distribution. The potential at xx = LL cell , i.e. at the end of the cell, is set to 0 to represent the usage of a counter electrode. In our model the transport of cations and anions inside the solution is described by the Nernst-Planck equation. At the compact layer/solution interface a no-flux boundary condition is chosen (the ejection of metal ions to the solution is neglected). This represents the fact that there is no reaction of the ions in solution (the applied potentials are far from the equilibrium potentials of both species). The ejection and transport of the metal ions in the solution caused by the dissolution of the oxide films has been calculated for comparison and did not show any significant effect under the investigated parameters. For simplification the transport and ejection of this species has been neglected. At xx = LL cell the ion concentration is fixed to cc c 0 for the cations and cc a 0 in case of the anions, representing the bulk solution. The case study chosen is a pure metal subjected to an acidic liquid environment. We are interested here in predicting the properties of the oxide film being formed on the surface of the metal as well as both potential distribution over the oxide film and transport of vacancies under steady state conditions. For that purpose, we started with educated guesses for the parameters of the R-PDM, which are later varied in case of expected high sensitivity on the outcome or kept constant for all calculations as given in Table As first variable input parameter the external potential φφ ext is varied and the resulting film properties are presented. For this purpose, at first the film thickness for every chosen external potential needs to be determined. The thickness of the passive film is not a priori known but can be determined by the steady state condition kk 5 = kk 2 ss The steady state film thickness shows a linear dependency on the external potential (Fig- or the ion concentration in solution, affects the film thickness. The values in this manuscript are chosen to achieve typical values of film thickness, electric field and vacancies concentration observed experimentally in oxides formed on stainless steel. The potential distribution and the electric field inside the oxide film result from the charged defect densities and their distribution, whereas both can be calculated by the Poisson equation. The electric field in oxide films is known to be in the order of magnitude of 10 8 V/m Furthermore, it can be seen that the maximum electric field strength is depending on the external potential (Figure shown in Figure With increasing external potential, the course of potential shows a much steeper decrease over the passive film (Figure The vacancies concentration is dictated by the rate of production and consumption at the boundaries and the electric field. Due to the higher production rate of anion (oxygen) vacancies (which is a function of both the standard rate constant and the potential drop φφ mf ) compared to the production rate of cation (metal) vacancies, the concentration of anion oxygen vacancies is higher over a broad range of the oxide (Figure The total number of oxygen and metal vacancies lies around 10 20 /cm 3 (Figure The base rate constant of the oxygen vacancies production kk 2 0 does not only affect the concentration of oxygen vacancies but the film growth as well because it dictates the rate of one of the two non-lattice conservative reactions. With increasing base rate of oxygen production, and thus film growth, the steady state film thickness increases (Figure The potential drop at the film solution interface drives the electrochemical reaction occurring at both sides of the interface between oxide film and solution (in the studied case there are only electrochemical reactions on the oxide film side of the interface). The potential drop is compounded of the potential drop over the defect layer and over the compact double layer (Figure With increasing ion concentration in the solution, the film thickness of the oxide film increases as well (Figure If the potential drop at the film/solution interface would be known a priori, it might not be necessary to include the solution to the calculation. But since the potential drop at this interface is also a function of the other model parameters, involving the solution to the calculation is recommended. As can be seen, the influence of ion concentration in the solution on the film thickness as well as on φφ fs shrinks with higher ion concentration, which is due to a higher potential drop in the compact double layer and less potential drop inside the diffuse layer. With very high ion concentration the assumption of a complete potential drop to the counter electrode potential (in this case 0 V over the defect layer and the compact double layer can be justified. Nevertheless, it is important to implement the electric flux condition to this potential drop. The potential inside the solution and the concentration distribution of the ions in the solution show the expected behavior due to the Gouy-Chapman-Stern theory (see Appendix). The inclusion of the Poisson equation to calculate the electric field strength for the modeling of passive films leads to significant differences compared to the classic PDM. The steady state film thickness LL ss based on the classic PDM can be calculated by assuming a constant pH (the pH dependent term can be included to kk 2 0 ), γγ = FF/RR/RR and αα is the polarizability of the film/solution interface. By αα the potential drop at the film/solution interface becomes potential dependent (by the R-PDM calculation this potential drop is calculated from the model and no parameter needs to be assumed). It should be noted that LL ss calculated by the original PDM is independent of the reaction constants of the oxygen vacancies consumption rate and the metal vacancies production and consumption. In case of the R-PDM the concentration of the metal and oxygen vacancies affects the electric field and thus LL ss . The steady state film thickness calculated by the original PDM and the R-PDM is shown in Fig. A calculation of the defect concentrations can also be done by the classic PDM. According to the Nernst-Planck equation the flux of defects can be described by: Assuming a nearly constant defect concentration which leads to The concentration on the film solution interface cc OV fs is given by the steady state condition: The solution of the differential equation leads to the concentration profiles of the oxygen vacancies across the passive film (Fig. • The assumption of a potential independent electric field strength is not generally valid. • The Refined-PDM, which is not limited by such an assumption, is more broadly applicable and free of physically unsound boundary conditions. • The assumption of a constant field strength is only valid in very specific cases. • The potential drop at the film/solution interface φφ fs shows a dependency on the external potential. • It is necessary to include the environment (namely the potential drop across the compact double layer) to the model for the correct calculation. • The choice of model parameters strongly affects the outcome of the calculation and several different oxide films can be shown by the model. As already discussed in the text, the PDM hypothesis of potential independent electric field strength is based on the assumption of tunneling current and there can be rare cases at which this affects the electric field strength. A detailed description of this cases will be explored in the future.