Quantum oscillation phenomenon is an essential tool to understand the electronic structure of quantum matter. Here we report a systematic study of quantum oscillations in the electronic specific heat C el in natural graphite. We show that the crossing of a single spin Landau level and the Fermi energy give rise to a double-peak structure, in striking contrast to the single peak expected from Lifshitz-Kosevich theory. Intriguingly, the double-peak structure is predicted by the kernel term for C el /T in the free electron theory. The C el /T represents a spectroscopic tuning fork of width 4.8k B T which can be tuned at will to resonance. Using a coincidence method, the doublepeak structure can be used to accurately determine the Landé g-factors of quantum materials. More generally, the tuning fork can be used to reveal any peak in fermionic density of states tuned by magnetic field, such as Lifshitz transition in heavy-fermion compounds. Oscillations of physical properties of materials with magnetic field are powerful tools to reveal the electronic properties of quantum matter. They range from Aharonov-Bohm oscillations In the latter case, with increasing the magnetic field, the Landau quantisation of the carrier motion gives rise to a series of quantized singularities in the density of states (DOS) that cross the Fermi level, resulting in the oscillatory behaviour of various of physical quantities, such as resistivity (Shubnikov-de Haas effect), magnetic susceptibility (de Haas-van Alphen effect), thermopower and specific heat. Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) theory has been widely used to describe these oscillatory phenomena Although the theory is remarkably successful in describing quantum oscillations in metals over a wide range of magnetic fields and temperatures, there is growing evidence to suggest that experiment often deviates from the predicted LK behaviour It is natural to expect that a similar departure is also observed in specific heat. However, the oscillatory behaviour of the specific heat in the quantum limit has yet to be fully explored. In this respect, graphite, in which the quantum limit is reached already at fields as low as 7 T In this study, we report the quantum oscillations of specific heat in natural graphite with temperatures down to 90 mK. Intriguingly, as the field increases and the system approaches the quantum limit, a characteristic double-peak structure appears in the specific heat for magnetic fields corresponding to the expected crossing of an individual spin Landau level and the Fermi energy. This result is in striking contract to the single peak feature predicted in LK theory for the quantum oscillations of specific heat, which is widely used in the literature When a Landau level crosses the Fermi energy, the occupation of the Landau level changes rapidly, inducing large changes in the entropy of the system, which can be probed using thermodynamic measurements. The magnetocaloric effect (MCE) measures the sample temperature as a function of applied magnetic field under quasi-adiabatic conditions. In this case, the absolute value of entropy is roughly proportional to the reciprocal sample temperature. To follow the evolution of the entropy in our graphite sample, we show in Fig. These results are in stark contrast to the electronic specific heat divided by temperature C el /T which is proportional to the temperature derivative of entropy. The C el /T of the graphite sample taken at a similar temperature (T = 0.5 K) is shown as a function of magnetic field in Fig. Strikingly, the magnetic field splitting ∆B = B 2 -B 1 of the double-peak structure in C el /T is strongly temperature dependent and vanishes as T → 0. Fig. The SWM Hamiltonian For the SWM parameters, we used the values which were fine-tuned to correctly reproduce de Haas-van Alphen measurements in natural graphite , actually suppresses the double-peak structure in C el /T To obtain a quantitative comparison, we use a model DOS, calculating the specific heat C el /T as the Landau level crosses the Fermi energy using Eq. ( The one in the denominator prevents the unphysical (in a real system) divergence of the DOS which has a maximum amplitude of A at E = E 0 . The parameter Γ is the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the Landau level. For simplicity all energies are calculated relative to the Fermi energy E F = 0. The position of the Landau level at a given magnetic field is dB, B 0 is the magnetic field at which the Landau level crosses the Fermi energy at T = 0. In this model, the magnetic field dependence of the Landau level energy dE/dB measured relative to the Fermi energy is a fitting parameter, and thus includes the cyclotron energy and Zeeman energy, together with any movement of the Fermi energy in magnetic field. We stress that the double-peak structure, is the result of a single spin Landau level crossing the Fermi energy. However, since the spin splitting is small, the spin up/down Landau levels cross E F in quick succession, generally producing quadruple peaks. In order In this approximation the spin split Landau level rigidly shifts through the Fermi energy i.e. the spin gap remains constant over the limited magnetic field range involved. This approximation is justified by the fact that the extracted dE/dB values for a given spin up/down Landau level are quasi-identical, and for simplicity we force them to be identical in the final fit. Fig. The peaks in C el /T appear at certain magnetic field when the DOS peak is tuned to the In Table A crucial test of our model for the origin of the double-peak structure is shown in Fig. For each Landau level and each temperature we can compare the energy through which the Landau level moves (from field B 1 to B 2 ) with the energy separation of the maxima in -x 2 dF (x)/dx which depends only on the temperature. The energy shift, as the magnetic field changes by ∆B = B 2 -B 1 , can be calculated provided we know the slope of the Landau levels (movement relative to Fermi energy). In Fig. Estimate of the dE/dB from the double-peak structure The comparison between the DOS model and SWM-model allows us to derive the following relation for a quantitive charaterization of the double-peak structure, Intriguingly, Eq. ( As T → 0, we expect the double-peak structure to merge into a single peak (as seen in 90 mK data in Fig. Estimate of the g-factor from the double-peak structure In general, to extract the g-factor using techniques such as SdHs, dHvA, MCE etc, one has to know the Landau index (orbital quantum number) for each peak, and the system dependent Fermi energy shift . Using the values in Table It is clear that our simple DOS model provides a reasonable estimate of the g-factor. However, in most cases of quantum oscillations, the exact shape of the DOS is unknown, making it difficult to fit the data in order to extract the g-factor. Alternatively, this limitation can be overcome by using a coincidence method based on the magnetic field positions of the double peaks. The specific heat which depends on an integral involving the kernel term -x 2 dF (x)/dx represents a spectroscopic tuning fork of width 4.8k B T which can be tuned at will to resonance. For example, the observed coincidence of the B 1 and B 2 features of the 1 ± h spin Landau levels at T = 1.09 K and B = 3.75 T (marked as orange arrow in Fig. In graphite, dE/dB of Landau levels extracted from the double-peak structure originates from the cyclotron/Zeeman energies corrected for the Fermi energy shift in magnetic field. To understand what drives the double-peak structure near the Lifshitz transition, we compare the measured dE/dB with the field dependence of the cyclotron/Zeeman energies in Table It is interesting to consider in what other thermodynamic and transport properties a double-peak structure is to be expected within the free electron theory. The exact form is an experimentally verified integral involving a convolution of the density of states D(E) and a kernel term -x n dF (x)/dx with n = 0, 1, 2 depending upon the probe considered (see Supplementary Note 6) Fig. We have shown that, as the quantum limit is approached in high quality graphite, the electronic specific heat divided by temperature C el /T exhibits a double-peak structure when a single spin Landau level crosses the Fermi energy that vanishes as T → 0. A simple DOS model, combined with the predictions of the SWM Hamiltonian, successfully reproduces the double-peak structure, which can be understood with the exact form of the free electron expression for C el /T . The specific heat, which depends on an integral involving the kernel term (-x 2 dF (x)/dx), represents a spectroscopic tuning fork of width 4.8k B T that can be tuned at will to resonance. Using a coincidence method, the double-peak structure provides a reliable estimate of the exchange enhanced g-factor. Crucially, the double-peak structure is also observed in the specific heat of heavy-fermion compounds in the vicinity of the Lifshitz transition, potentially providing direct access to the Fermi energy shift at the Lifshiz transition. The measurements were performed on high quality natural graphite samples. The graphite flakes have a typical length of ≃ 1 mm and thickness of ≃ 0.1 mm. The weight of Sample#1 -Sample#3 are 0.96 mg, 0.18 mg, 0.23 mg respectively. Experimental setup AC specific heat measurements were performed in a static magnetic field on natural graphite samples. During the experiment, the specimen was attached to the backside of a bare CERNOX resistive chip by a minute amount of Apiezon grease. The resistive chip was split into heater and thermometer part by artificially making a notch along the middle line of the chip. The heater part was used to generate a periodically modulated heating power P ac with a frequency of 2ω, which can be described as the following relation, where R H is the resistance of heater part, i ac is a modulating current with a frequency of ω. The induced oscillating temperature T ac of the sample was monitored by the thermometer part of the resistive chip. To do so, we applied a DC reading current i DC and monitored the induced AC voltage V ac . Based on a precise calibration of the thermometer(R-T relation), T ac can be calculated from, Knowing P ac and T ac , specific heat can be calculated by Here, φ stands for the phase shift between P ac and T ac . By properly choosing the measurement frequency (ω), φ is close to -90 o (|sin(φ)| ≃ 1). To measure the angle-dependence of the specific heat in magnetic field, a CERNOX resistive chip is mounted on a copper ring attached to an attocube rotator. On the back of the copper ring, a Hall probe allows to measure the angle with the magnetic field. The misalignment between the sample and the Hall probe is estimated to be within ±2 degrees. MCE measurement was carried out in long pulsed fields with duration of 1.2 s. The temperature of the natural graphite sample was read by the home-made RuO 2 thermometer, which was calibrated in temperature and magnetic field Graphite is a semi-metal with the carriers occupying a small region along the H -K -H edge of the hexagonal Brillouin zone. The SWM Hamiltonian and the Hamiltonian has infinite order. Nevertheless, the infinite matrix can be truncated and numerically diagonalized, as the eigen-values converge rapidly The values of SWM parameters that are used in this study are shown in Supplementary Table where n e and n h are the electron and hole concentration, n 0 is a constant value representing the difference. Considering the degeneracy of the Landau bands, the electron and hole concentrations are given by here, k e,i and k h,j are the k z distance for the occupied i-th electron and j-th hole Landau The maximum and minimum in z correspond to the roots of the function Using Newton's method the roots occur at x = ±1.543404638418208, so that the expected splitting of the maximum and minimum in thermopower, when a DOS singularity crosses the Fermi energy is ≃ 3.09k B T . features occur at magnetic fields slight below the B = 5 T crossing of the Fermi energy. passes through the Fermi energy at the Lifshitz transition of CeRu 2 Si 2 . Moreover, the MCE curve of CeRu 2 Si 2 only exhibit a single-peak feature In heavy fermion system, it is known that a 'logarithmic divergence' feature in temperature sweep of specific heat (C/T ∝ log (T 0 /T )) is a signature of non-Fermi Liquid behaviour to locally fit the C el /T data we use D ↑↓