Applying the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations with density-functional theory, it is possible to formulate first-principles description of current-phase relationships in superconducting/normal (magnetic)/superconducting trilayers. Such structures are the basis for the superconducting analog of Magnetoresistive random access memory devices (JMRAM). In a recent paper [1] we presented results from the first attempt to formulate such a theory, applied to the Nb/Ni/Nb trilayers. In the present work we provide computational details, explaining how to construct key ingredient (scattering matrices SN ) in a framework of linear muffin-tin orbitals (LMTO). In a recent paper [1], we have combined density functional theory and the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations to form a first-principles approach to the study of transport in magnetic Josephson junctions (MJJ). This method allowed us to predict and explain the properties of realistic MJJs such as the period of oscillation and decay of the critical current oscillations with the ferromagnet thickness. We applied our methodology to study realistic material stacks of the Nb/Ni/Nb trilayer and established that suppression of supercurrent is an intrinsic property of the junctions, even in absence of disorder. To determine the supercurrent in a superconductor-normal metal-superconductor (S/N/S) junction from a density-functional approach (which is inherently single-particle), one needs to "decompose" the entire scattering process into different steps. First we use the Andreev approximation to account for electron-hole scattering processes In the present paper, we show in detail how to obtain such scattering matrices from the Questaal suite, which is an open access electronic structure code based on the LMTO technique 6,7 . The Questaal package 6,7 calculates the single-particle electronic structure and includes some many-body effect corrections as well. It is based on the LMTO technique. One of Questaal's packages provides the ability to calculates the full non-equilibrium (NE) transport properties of an infinite L-C-R system representing a central region C cladded by two semi-infinite L and R leads The key quantity is the total transmission probability T (E, V ) from which the non-linear current can be obtained with the conventional Landauer-like elastic scattering framework. The linear conductance regime is simply described by T (E F , V = 0) taken at the Fermi energy E F of the L-C-R system at equilibrium. The total trans- mission probability T (E, V ) is given by where w k ∥ is the weight associated with the transverse momentum k ∥ , and σ is the spin of the electron. The partial transmission probability T (E, V ; k ∥ , σ) are obtained from NEGF where (for simplifying the notation, explicit dependence of spin σ and bias V has been dropped) the trace is taken over the basis set of the central C region. The GF G r/a are the retarded/advanced NEGF of the C region connected to the leads, i.e. G r/a = [g r/a -Σ In order to calculate the supercurrent in the junctions, we actually need the full scattering matrix S N of the central region. The S N matrix is built from the transmission (reflection) coefficients between the L and R and not from the transmission (reflection) probability Eq. ( Hence, we need to apply a transformation to Eq.( Therefore we first need to determine the eigenmodes of propagation in the L and R leads, and then transform the lead self-energies into the eigenmode basis of these propagating states. Deep inside the leads, one can calculate the eigenmodes of propagation by solving a nearest-neighbor (in terms of PLs) tight-binding-like equation for the bulk GF g p,p ′ -S 0,-1 g -1,0 + (P -S) 0,0 g 0,0 -S 0,1 g 1,0 = 1 . (3) In the LMTO language by expanding the wavefunction coefficients as a solution α of a quadratic equation -S 1,0 (P -S) 0,0 0 S 0,1 and can be solved from a set of two independent equations: -S 1,0 P r -1 P -1 + (P -S) 0,0 -S 0,1 P rP -1 = 0 (6) and Note that all matrices M ≡ S, g, Q, P are dependent on variables M ≡ M (E; k ∥ , σ). The above equations need to be solved for each energy E, each k ∥ and each spin σ. The eigenvalue vectors r and x characterize the propagating (or decaying) modes in the bulk. Their meaning becomes clear when written as Bloch-like factors e ±ikza , where a is the characteristic width of the PL and k z is the (energy dependent) wave number normal to the interface. The columns of the matrices P and Q are the corresponding eigenvectors. For the propagating modes, the wave numbers k z (E; k ∥ , σ) are real numbers; k z (E) contains a non-zero imaginary part for the decaying modes. We choose the following convention: |r i | ≤ 1 (propagating and decaying modes towards the right) and |x i | ≥ 1 (propagating and decaying modes towards the left). One can rewrite the central equations of the previous section in term of the wavefunctions φ p of the PL p deep inside the leads: as the system is translation-invariant in the bulk of the leads. For notation convenience, we use g -1 b = (P -S) 0,0 . By introducing the ratio matrix R ← p = φ p-1 φ -1 p and by manipulation of the recursion relation one ends up with the following expression As the bulk of the lead is translation-invariant, we can use the generalized Bloch condition φ p+1 = λφ p between adjacent PLs (note that this is reminiscent of the relation β = λα used in the previous section). The ratio matrix becomes R ← p = φ p-1 φ -1 p = λ -1 , and Eq. ( However, we have found this expression can be used as an iterative scheme, i.e. to improve (at will) the accuracy (precision) of the eigenvalues λ ≡ (r, x). This is particularly crucial in the cases of degenerate modes that might occur at particular E and k ∥ . We have also implemented the possibilities of dealing with singular matrices that may occur in the generalized eigenvalue problem Ax = λBx which is not easily solvable when one, or both, A, B are singular. An eigenvalue shift procedure can be used to solve the linear generalized eigenvalue problem when both matrices are singular and when the full eigensystem is required For that one adds the term -αBx on both sides of Ax = λBx. If Ā = A -αB is not singular, one can calculate M = Ā-1 B and solve the conventional eigenvalue problem: A typical eigenvalue γ of M must be related to one of the λ values according to γ = 1/μ where μ = λ -α, with the corresponding eigenvector unchanged. We can now build the surface GF of the leads which enters into the definition of the lead self-energies Σ r/a RR . The L and R surface GFs are obtained from only one part of the eigenmodes, i.e. from the propagating modes and the modes that decay inside the bulk of the corresponding lead The surface GF of the R lead is obtained from and the L lead surface GF from We have used an explicit notation for the leads' structure constant, S 0R and S 0L , as the two L and R leads need not be identical. In comparison to the bulk case in Sec. II A 1, we have S 0R = S 0,1 and S R0 = S 1,0 for the R region, and S 0L = S 1,0 and S L0 = S 0,1 for the L region. Note the different ordering of the subscript of the bulk structure constant for the L and R regions: the R (L) surface GF is built from "propagating" towards two different R (L) directions. By introducing Eq. ( or equivalently and The matrices P, P -1 (Q, Q -1 ) perform the change of basis set, from the original basis to the basis of the propagation eigenmodes. We now proceed with the transformation of the quantities Γ αα into the basis of the propagation eigenmodes. The quantity Γ αα is related to the imaginary part of the lead self-energy Σ αα (α=L, R) Using Eq. ( Introducing the identity 1 = QQ -1 (1 = (Q -1 ) † Q † ) to the right (left) side of the second (first) term in Eq. ( where Proceeding similarly for Γ RR , we get where It is crucial to note that the matrices v L and v R correspond to the expectation values of the current operator calculated in the basis set of the eigenmodes For non-degenerate modes, the diagonal elements v L,n (v R,m ) correspond to the group velocity ∂E/∂k of the propagating mode n (m) in the L (R) region , and transform Eq. ( The transmission probability is now expressed in terms of transmission coefficients t n,m linking the propagating modes n of the L lead to the propagating modes m of the R lead. The transmission coefficients are given by a generalized Fisher-Lee expression 11 : It is important to note that the original Meir and Wingreen expression 9 involves a trace over the degrees of freedom in the C region (first line in Eq. ( In analogy to the transmission probability, we can also define reflection probabilities in the same lead: Following the derivations given in the previous section we find (for the L region): The reflection coefficients r LL = r n,n ′ are now expressed in the basis of the propagating modes n and n ′ of the L lead. Similarly, one can find the reflection probability R R (E) = Tr R r RR (r RR ) † from the reflection coefficients r RR = r m,m ′ expressed in the basis of the propagating modes m and m ′ of the R lead. One should note that the reflection probability, defined in Eq. ( Hence the expressions of the reflection coefficients are as follows: and The full scattering matrix S N is built from the reflection coefficients r LL and r LL , and from the transmission coefficients t LR and t RL (t RL is the transpose of t LR ). All quantities are explicitly dependent of (E; k ∥ , σ). For the calculations of the supercurrent, we construct the normal state scattering matrix S N as follows: The normal state scattering matrix S N (E F + ε; k ∥ ) characterizes electron (particle) transport for a positive energy ε above the Fermi level E F . The transport of hole (antiparticle) is given by the time-reserved symmetric S * N (E F -ε; k ∥ ) scattering matrix for (negative) energy -ε below E F . As mentioned above, the dc Josephson current in the junction is obtained from the Andreev bound states formed in the junction. The spectrum of the Andreev bound states can be calculated from a scattering matrix formalism We have successfully applied such an approach in a recent paper 1 to the study of the supercurrent decay and oscillation in magnetic Josephson junctions made of Ni layers connected to two Nb leads. We now provide an illustrative example of our eigenmode approach applied to a simple case. We consider that all PLs in the L-C-R junction are identical, i.e. we study the bulk (equilibrium) transport properties of a "perfect" crystal. In this case, the transmission probability (at a given energy E and for a given k ∥ point) is simply given by the number of "real" bands crossing that energy E at that k ∥ point, each "real" band corresponding to a propagating mode. We compare the results obtained from the two Meir and Wingreen 9 and Fisher and Lee 11 expressions. Figure We conclude the present paper by the following note: the size (N × N ) of the velocity matrices v α is given by the size of the matrices for the structure constant S 0α and for g -1 b in the identical PLs of the α = L, R leads (this is for each spin and for each value of k ∥ ). We have found that the number of propagating modes (with non zero value of the velocity) is much smaller than N . This reduces considerably the size of the transmission (reflection) coefficient matrices and hence improve the computational performances. For bulk Co, we have seen that N = 18 and only 5 propagating modes are present. For other examples shown in 1 , we get similar trends. In the case of Nb(110)/Ni(111)/Nb(110) junctions, each PL of the α = 