The cubic polytype of silicon (Si) is the most commercialized semiconductor material and finds applications in numerous electronic and optoelectronic devices such as solar cells. However, recent reports on the synthesis of the hexagonal 4H Si polytype have attracted the attention of the scientific community to understand its functional properties. Here we report the electronic, vibrational, and optical properties of the 4H Si polytype obtained with predictive first-principles calculations. We find that, compared to the cubic polytype, 4H Si shows a slightly narrower indirect gap by ∼ 0.05 eV. By calculating its direct and phonon-assisted optical spectra, we show that 4H Si exhibits a stronger absorption coefficient than cubic Si across the visible and IR spectral regions. We further evaluate the short-circuit current density of textured thin-films, and we demonstrate that 4H Si can achieve the same short-circuit current density for a five times thinner film compared to the cubic polytype. Our work demonstrates the advantages of 4H Si for thin-film silicon-based solar-cell applications. Silicon (Si) is a semiconducting material widely used in optoelectronic devices and is by far the most widely deployed solar-cell technology. The properties of the conventional cubic Si have been thoroughly studied both from an experimental and from a theoretical point of view. While there are many aspects that drove Si to be the dominant semiconductor for solar cells, the indirect nature of its band gap (with a magnitude of 1.1 eV at room-temperature) limits the capability of Si for thin-film solar applications. Simulations have shown that the optimum thickness of Si solar cell is on the order of 100 μm 1 , in contrast to many thin-film solar cells whose thickness can be on the order of a few microns or even in the nano-region Recently, the hexagonal structure of Si (4H) has been successfully synthesized In this work, we present a first-principles evaluation of the structural, electronic, and optical properties of 4H Si, including its indirect optical properties assisted by electron-phonon interactions. We show that our theoretically calculated structural and electronic properties agree well with previous studies. Using the GW approximation, we calculate the quasiparticle band structure of both hexagonal and cubic polytypes, and find that the 4H polytype exhibits both a narrower indirect band gap by 0.05 eV as well as a much narrower direct band gap by 1.46 eV. The direct absorption spectra of 4H Si show that it exhibits a much lower absorption onset compared to the cubic polytype. We then calculate the absorption coefficient of 4H Si and demonstrate that the 4H Si is a better absorber compared to cubic Si in the entire spectral range of IR and visible. Further analysis on solarcell performance shows that the 4H polytype achieves the same short-circuit current density as the cubic polytype for a five times lower thickness. Our computational study demonstrates that 4H Si is a promising candidate for increasing the efficiency of silicon-based solar cells. Our first-principles methods for calculating the structural, electronic, and optical properties of 4H Si are based on density function theory We next calculate the band structures for both 4H and cubic Si (Fig. Since 4H Si is an indirect-gap material, like cubic Si, it is necessary to consider electron-phonon interactions in order to determine its indirect optical absorption spectrum. We plot the calculated phonon dispersion relations of both the cubic and the 4H polytype in Fig. We next calculate the direct optical absorption spectra for both 4H and cubic Si, both at the independent quasiparticle level and by considering electron-hole in- teractions with the Bethe-Salpeter equation. We find that excitonic effects are comparable for the two different light polarizations: for the ordinary polarization, a redshift of ∼0.12 eV is observed while a similar redshift of ∼0.10 eV is observed for the extraordinary polarization due to excitonic effects from both exciton binding and change in oscillation strength. Figure While the direct absorption spectra already show the potential of 4H Si in thin-film solar cells, it is also important to accurately examine indirect (phonon-assisted) optical absorption in order to fully quantify the absorp- eV is applied to both polytypes to match the band gap of the cubic polytype to experimental measurement of 1.12 eV at room temperature tion spectrum of solar radiation. This is because the difference of the fundamental indirect gap between the two polytypes is much smaller compared to the difference in direct gaps, while the indirect region is much more important for the application of these materials under the solar spectrum. Figure A rigid shift of -0.17 eV is applied to the onset of both polytypes so that the band gap of the cubic polytype matches the experimental value of 1.12 eV 37 . In the near IR region, 4H Si is a stronger absorber for both light polarizations, especially in the 1∼1.5 eV spectral region. This is due to two main reasons. First, 4H Si exhibits a narrower indirect gap compared to cubic Si. Although the difference is only 0.05 eV between the two polytypes, this causes a difference of almost one order of magnitude for the absorption coefficient in the indirect region of the spectrum. Moreover, it can be seen from the Fig. To quantify the advantages of the 4H polytype compared to cubic Si in photovoltaic applications, we calculate the photo-induced current density of textured films of various thickness for the two polytypes. We follow the model of Tiedje et. al 1 to calculate the current density from photogenerated electron-hole pairs using the AM1.5 solar spectrum and the absorption coefficient of the bulk material. The absorption coefficient of the 4H polytype is averaged over the in-plane and out-of-plane light polarizations to model the absorption for a textured surface. Under ideal conditions, i.e., without considering loss induced by free-carrier absorption, the absorbance (A) of a textured film of thickness (L) as a function of photon energy (ω) in the weak absorption limit (αL ≪ 1) is given by: where α(ω) is the absorption coefficient and n r (ω) is the photon-energy-dependent refractive index of the material. The term of (4n 2 r (ω)L) -1 results from the increased mean path length for light rays through internal scattering due to the assumption of nonspecular textured surface 1 . We evaluate n r (ω) only from the calculated real part of the dielectric function Re ε(ω) via the relationship: [n 2 r (ω) = Re ε(ω)] because the imaginary part of the dielectric function is small compared to the real part in the range of photon energies where A(ω, L) ≪ 1. Following the absorbance, the short-circuit current density per photon energy dJ sc /dω is calculated via: where n ph (ω) is the photon flux obtained from the AM1.5 spectrum S(ω) via the relationship: [n ph (ω) = S(ω)/ħω]. The integral of dJ sc /dω over energy gives the shortcircuit current J sc (L) as a function of film thickness. Fig- Comparing the two curves horizontally, our calculation indicates that a 20 μm film of 4H Si achieves a similar short-circuit current density as a five times thicker (100 μm) film of cubic Si. As a result, the 4H polytype of Si can be a potential excellent candidate for manufacturing thinner silicon-based solar cells. While our study shows promising potential for 4H Si in thin-film solar-cell applications, the large-scale growth of high-quality 4H Si films has not yet been achieved experimentally. The authors of Ref. 7 utilized metastable allotropic transition to synthesize bulk 4H Si by annealing Si 24 crystals. The authors proposed that the metastable allotropic transition can serve as a way of growing seed 4H Si crystals, which can result in the synthesis of nanostructures and for device-level applications but it remains a challenge to grow high-quality 4H Si using deposition and epitaxial techniques. Therefore, the advantages of 4H Si for optoelectronic applications predicted by our theoretical work aim to stimulate and guide experimental synthesis and characterization of this material for nextgeneration Si optoelectronic devices. In summary, we studied the structural, electronic and optical properties of the 4H Si polytype, and we show that it is a promising solar-cell material. We find that the 4H polytype of Si exhibit a slightly narrower band gap compared to its cubic variation. Due to this difference in the band gap, as well as the stacking along the out-of-plane direction, the optical properties are also affected. We show that the absorption coefficient of 4H Si is much higher than cubic Si across the IR and visible light range. Subsequent calculations on textured thin films demonstrate that application of 4H Si in solar cells can allow up to five times thinner cells compared to the cubic polytype with similar performance, demonstrating its potential in optoelectronic applications. See supplemental information section I for detailed computational parameters, section II for the comparison of the excitonic effects for 4H silicon for different light polarizations, and section III for the analysis of the contributions of electron-phonon coupling and band gap on the change in the absorption coefficient. In this section, we show the direct spectra calculated within independent particle approximation and that of including electron-hole interactions via solving the Bethe-Salpeter equation. Including electron-hole interactions results in a redshift of the absorption onset of around 0.1 eV for both the ordinary polarization and extraordinary polarization of light. 