Vanadium dioxide (VO 2 ) is a strongly-correlated material that exhibits insulator-to-metal transition (IMT) near room temperature, which makes it a promising candidate for applications in nanophotonics or optoelectronics. However, creating VO 2 nanostructures with the desired functionality can be challenging due to microscopic inhomogeneities that can significantly impact the local optical and electronic properties. Thin lamellas, produced by focused ion beam milling from a homogeneous layer, provide a useful prototype for studying VO 2 at the truly microscopic level using a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM). High-resolution imaging is used to identify structural inhomogeneities while electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) supported by statistical analysis helps to detect V x O y stoichiometries with a reduced oxidation number of vanadium at the areas of thickness below 70 nm. On the other hand, the thicker areas are dominated by vanadium dioxide, where the signatures of IMT are detected in both core-loss and low-loss EELS experiments with in-situ heating. The experimental results are interpreted with ab-initio and semi-classical calculations. This work shows that structural inhomogeneities such as pores and cracks present no harm to the desired optical properties of VO 2 samples. Vanadium dioxide is a strongly-correlated material that can undergo a volatile phase transition between the low-temperature monoclinic insulating phase and the high-temperature rutile metallic phase The properties of IMT in VO 2 can be strongly influenced by crystallographic defects resulting from a substrate lattice mismatch and specific fabrication conditions † Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI) available: details on the experimental procedures, fitting of core-loss EELS, raw low-loss EEL data, and computational details of ELNES calculations. See DOI: 00.0000/00000000. sample or functional structure The IMT is tightly connected with an abrupt change in electronic structure, which determines electric and optical properties. Conventional ways to characterize the IMT thus involve measurements of the electric conductivity EEL spectra in the core-loss region are dominated by excitations of electrons from core shells to unoccupied valence states. The spectral signatures are thus not only element-specific, but they also provide insights into local bonding, oxidation states of atoms To gain insights into temperature-dependent properties of VO 2 at the microscopic level, we study a lamella with gradually decreasing thickness fabricated from a thick evaporated layer of presumably VO 2 by focused ion beam (FIB) lithography. The lamella is attached to a commercial heating chip, which allows for external control of the lamella temperature. The lamella is then thoroughly studied by analytical methods available in TEM. We use high-resolution imaging and STEM with energy-dispersive Xray spectroscopy (EDX) to analyze the lamella structure and elemental composition. The optical and electronic properties of the lamella are characterized by temperature-dependent STEM-EELS. We complement our experimental observations with ab-initio calculations of the core-loss probability. Low-loss probability is retrieved from the experimental dielectric function using a semiclassical formalism A 550-nm-thick VO 2 layer was fabricated on a silicon substrate by evaporating VO 2 powder (Mateck) in an electron beam evaporator (Bestec, 8 kV, 32 mA, 1 Å/s) at room temperature and subsequent ex-situ annealing for 20 min at 550 • C in a vacuum furnace under 10 sccm of O 2 flow. Lamellas for TEM were fabricated using a gallium FIB Tescan LYRA3. The final polishing and thinning of the V-shaped lamella denoted in the following as "IS" was performed with a low voltage (5 kV) and low current (40 pA) FIB for approximately 25 seconds at a low glancing angle (the ion beam is nearly parallel with the surface of the lamella) to reduce the beam-damaged surface area TEM analysis was performed on TEM FEI Titan equipped with a Super-X spectrometer for EDX, a monochromator, and a GIF-Quantum spectrometer for EELS. The heating experiment was performed using in-situ holder Fusion Select and the corresponding thermal chip by Protochips 51 . To avoid excessive electronbeam-induced damage to the sample, we have utilized as low electron currents as possible while keeping a good signal-to-noise ratio. Further, we performed each step of the analysis in a new spot on the sample, so far unexposed. On the other hand, the distance between the spots was minimized to reduce the impact of the sample's inhomogeneity. EDX measurement was performed in the scanning regime with the energy of primary electrons set to 300 keV. The probe current was set to approximately 600 pA. We acquired and integrated 100 spectrum images with a pixel size of 0.34 nm and a dwell time of 2 μs. The spectrometer dispersion range was set to 20 keV. Chemical composition was evaluated in Velox software using the parabolic background model, absorption correction, and Schreiber-Wims ionization cross-section model (a semi-empirical model recommended for metal oxides). For the quantification of the vanadium dioxide layer stoichiometry, we used V K, O K, and Ga K edges. Core-loss EELS was performed in the monochromated scanning regime with the energy of primary electrons set to 300 keV. We used the following parameter settings: The probe current of around 200 pA, the convergence semi-angle of 10 mrad, the collection semi-angle of 18.4 mrad, and the spectrometer dispersion of 0.25 eV/px. The full-width at half-maximum of the zero-loss peak (determining the energy resolution) read 0.2 eV. We used the dualEELS option, which allows us to record both the low-loss and core-loss EELS spectra simultaneously, resulting in the correct calibration of the energy loss axis to absolute values Low-loss EELS was performed in the monochromated scanning regime with the primary electron energy of 120 kV. The reduced value of the primary electron energy was used to achieve a better signal-to-background ratio A layer of presumably vanadium dioxide (VO 2 ) with a thickness of 550 nm was prepared by electron beam evaporation and subsequent ex-situ annealing (see Experimental Section). We first performed macroscopic characterization of the sample by spectroscopic ellipsometry to verify that it indeed corresponds to VO 2 and that it exhibits the desired optical properties and their switching across the IMT temperature as reported in literature We further characterized the homogeneity of the layer surface by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and an atomic force microscope (AFM) as shown in Figure We prepared a standard TEM lamella (further labelled as "S" which stands for standard) by FIB. A high-angle annular darkfield (HAADF) image of the ∼ 120 nm thick lamella (representing a cross-section of the original VO 2 layer) is shown in Figure To perform in-situ analysis of IMT in the TEM, another lamella (further labeled as lamella "IS" standing for in-situ) was prepared and attached to a TEM heating chip (Protochips 51 ; see Figure Our VO 2 layer exhibits structural inhomogeneities, which might be associated with chemical inhomogeneities and irregularities in the switching from the insulating to the metallic phase. To explore this possible correlation, we analyze EELS of the lamella "IS" in the core-loss region. In Figure To facilitate visualization of the spectra and preliminary analysis, we binned the spectra into twenty groups by ten, and represented each bin by the average spectrum, which was further normalized by its maximum. The spectra shown in the waterfall plot in Figure We utilize cluster analysis for a refined sorting of the acquired spectrum line scans. We sort each dataset (spectra acquired at room and elevated temperature, respectively) into clusters using the "k-means" clustering approach as implemented in Mathematica 12 The cluster representants exhibit multiple peaks, which can be assigned to transitions from core to unoccupied valence states of vanadium We further fit the cluster representants by a sum of seven Gaussian peaks (for details on fitting, see Figure It is interesting to correlate the cluster index of each spectrum (i.e., to what cluster an individual spectrum belongs) with the parameters at which the spectrum was taken: the position at the sample, the local thickness of the sample, and the temperature. We visualize this in Figure The cluster analysis yields a following conclusion: With decreasing lamella thickness, we observe a gradual reduction of vanadium from VO 2 to V 2 O 3 , and VO/VO+O. The part of the lamella with the reduced oxides is rather large, with a thickness up to 0.6 -0.7 IMFP or 80 -90 nm and a width (measured from the lamella edge) up to 60 nm [cmp. Figure For the crack at both temperatures and for the pore at the room temperature we observe no modification of the core-loss EEL spectrum in comparison to the areas of the lamella adjacent to the inhomogeneity, neither by visual inspection [Figure We note that the area of the lamella identified as the crack is present in the region of V 2 O 3 at the interface with VO 2 . Further investigation is required to determine whether this correlation is causal or coincidental, and possibly determine its mechanism. To verify that the temperature-dependent changes in our core-loss EELS measurements of VO 2 are due to the IMT, we perform abinitio calculations. We use the TELNES3 package, the extension of the Wien2k all-electron DFT code Modifications in the band structure across the IMT are also tightly connected with changes in valence-electron excitations, which can be probed by EELS in the low-loss region. In the case of VO 2 , the IMT could be clearly identified based on the emergence of plasmons in the rutile (metallic) phase. Plasmons in VO 2 nanostructures were previously detected only with highresolution EELS Unfortunately, the long time necessary to acquire the core-loss EELS prevented us from performing the low-loss EELS experiment in the previously analysed area due to accumulated contamination and beam-induced damage. We therefore collected the low-loss EEL spectra in the region close by, denoted by the green square in Figure The experimental low-loss EEL spectra in Figure We have studied the insulating and metallic phases of nanostructured vanadium dioxide (VO 2 ) using analytical electron microscopy. We have focused on ultrathin lamellas fabricated from a 550 nm thick VO 2 film. With the help of STEM-EELS, we have revealed that the lamellas show both structural and stoichiometric inhomogeneities at the microscopic level. Results from the core-loss EELS enhanced by statistical analysis helped to correlate the stoichiometry with the thickness of the lamella, finding vanadium oxides with a reduced oxidation number (V 2 O 3 and VO) at thinner parts of the lamella (with the thickness of 60 nm or less). This represents a challenge for preparing ultrathin VO 2 nanostructures. The principal contribution of our study is the observation of temperature-induced changes in both core-loss and low-loss EELS in thicker regions of the lamella, which were identified to contain dominantly VO 2 . Changes in the core-loss spectra were analyzed with the help of ab-initio calculations that were used to relate the fine structure of the oxygen K peaks with the modifications in the band structure during the IMT. In the low-loss spectra, the most significant evidence of IMT is the emergence of a strong plasmonic peak in the metallic phase. This work establishes the STEM-EELS with in-situ heating as a suitable technique to probe the IMT in VO 2 , and potentially in other materials. We foresee that STEM-EELS could also be combined with in-situ diffraction studies to correlate the spectroscopic results with crystal structure and orientation to further enhance the analysis of the IMT. | 1-9 | 1-9