Recent discovery of giant electrostriction in rare earth (RE (III)) substituted ceria (CeO2) thin films driven by electroactive defect complexes and their coordinated elastic response, expands the material spectrum for electrostrain applications beyond the conventional piezoelectric materials. Especially Gd substituted CeO2, with Gd concentration >10% seems to be an ideal material to obtain such large electrostrain response. However, there are not many experimental studies that systematically investigate the effect of RE (III) ion-defect interaction and RE concentration on electrostriction. Here we perform structure-property correlation studies in bulk ceramics of RE 3+ substituted ceria doped with RE=Y, La and Gd at various concentrations upto a maximum of 20%, to understand the features responsible for giant electrostriction. Our results show that Y substituted ceria, with atleast 20% Y substitution, is clearly both a giant M and a Q electrostrictor at low frequencies (<20 Hz), and this correlates with the unique attractive defect-dopant interaction of Y with V O •• . La has a repulsive interaction with V O •• , and La doped ceria at all the studied compositions (upto 20%) does not show giant electrostiction. Gd has a neutral interaction, and only 20% Gd doped ceria at best falls at the border of classification between giant and non-giant electrostrictors at frequencies <0.05 Hz. Our work takes a step back from thin-films and assesses the fundamental defect features required in the design of giant electrostrictors. Materials with large electromechanical response are crucial for applications in nano/micro electromechanical systems (N/MEMS) such as sensors, actuators, transducers, nanopositioners and so on 2 nd order electrostrain can be expressed by x = QP 2 or x = ME 2 , where x, Q, P, M, and E are electrostrain, polarization electrostriction coefficient, polarization, field electrostriction coefficient, and electric field respectively. In classical electrostrictors Q (hydrostatic) and M can be empirically expressed in terms of s (elastic compliance) and  (dielectric permittivity) as follows: |M| ≈ 10 4 (s 0  r ) 1.14 (Yu and Janolin's relation) (eq. 2) In this work, we utilize the above definitions of giant electrostrictors to classify various RE 3+ substituted CeO2 as a function of RE 3+ concentration (5 to 20%). La, Gd and Y were chosen as the RE 3+ ions, all of them larger than Ce 4+ ions. The criterion for selecting these dopants arises from a DFT based study by Nakayama et al., who showed that the defect association energy of RE 3+ ion with V O •• is repulsive with La, neutral with Gd and attractive with Y RE substituted CeO2 bulk ceramic samples were synthesized by solid state reaction method. CeO2 and RE2O3 (RE = Gd, La, Y) powders were mixed in stoichiometric ratio and ball milled in acetone medium using zirconia vials and balls at 200 rpm for 12 hours. Ball milled powders were dried, ground and calcined at 1450C for 10 hours in alumina crucibles. X-ray powder diffraction was performed using Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer with monochromatic CuK  radiation. 5% PVA binder is mixed with calcined powders and pressed into pellets using 10 mm diameter die with uniaxial pressure and followed by cold isostatic pressure. Pellets were sintered in alumina crucibles at 1500C for 10 to 50 hours, until a density >95% (estimated through Archimedes principle) was achieved. Pellets were thinned down to 0.8 mm and annealed at 1480°C to remove residual stresses (see Figure Silver paste was applied to make electrical contacts. Electrostrain was measured using Precision Premier II Ferroelectric Tester with Trek amplifier and MTI-2100 Fotonic TM Sensor. From here on we will also refer to these compositions as y RE SC, indicating y% RE substituted Ceria (y=100 x). Note that for all the selected RE ions, Y, La and Gd, the ionic size of RE ion is larger than that of Ce 4+ , that they substitute x than Gd substituted ceria (GSC), where Gd has a neutral interaction with V O •• . In case of Y 3+ substituted ceria, however, the attractive defect-dopant interaction contracts the lattice, dominating over the expansion effects resulting from the larger ionic size of Y 3+ . To understand the structure-defect-electrostriction correlation, we performed electrostrain measurements at various frequencies (0.03 Hz to 10 Hz) on all the samples discussed above. In Figure In comparison to20YSC, when 20GSC and 20LSC, show smaller electrostrain values (~0.009% for Gd and 0.004% for La at 100 kV/cm and 0.1 Hz, Figure From these results, we note that the following factors are crucial to design giant M electrostrictors in acceptor substituted ceria, which are solely driven by electroactive defects (such as in bulk systems): a) An attractive vacancy-acceptor ion interaction as present in yttria substituted ceria b) concentration of the acceptor atom of at least 20%, which creates enough electroactive defects that give a coherent strain response. Next, we evaluated the Q33 coefficients of our samples to acquire necessary guidelines to design giant Q electrostrictors. To this end, we measured the induced polarization of all the samples synchronously with the electrostrain (see displacement (D) -electric field (E) loops in supplementary information, Figure The corresponding strain-displacement curves comparing between various acceptor ions (Figure Most of the works in literature the authors have reported larger M and Q coefficients 10GSC thin films than in 20GSC or 33GSC thin films. We propose that these enhanced effects can a result of not just electroactive defects, but also the other possible extrinsic effects that thin films possess such as residual stresses, microstructure, electrode clamping effects and so on, which need to be investigated. Here, we also mention another comparative study performed on bulk ceramics of acceptor doped ceria, which also reports larger M values for 10% or less Gd, La substituted ceria, than what we observe. We note that this report studies these materials only in the low field regime (E<10 kV/cm), which renders larger apparent slopes in x-E 2 plots as a consequence of hysteresis (as we also observe) We report a systematic study on giant electrostriction in Re (III) substituted ceria, by comparing the effect of different acceptors which are larger than Ce (Y, Gd, La) and by varying their concentrations (5 to 20%). We show that in bulk, only 20YSC is both a giant M and Q electrostrictor as per the strict definitions given by Yu and Janolin. Different from reports on thin films, 20GSC is a giant M electrostrictor, only below 0.05 Hz, highlighting a case for studying the effect of other extrinsic factors that appear in thin film systems. We learn that an attractive interaction between acceptor ion and oxygen vacancy, in addition to a minimum concentration of the acceptor ions creates the maximum defect induced electrostrictive effects. The vacancy-acceptor interactions for acceptors larger in ionic size than ceria proposed in DFT study by 