The ν = 1 2 + 1 2 quantum Hall bilayer has been previsously modeled using Chern-Simons-RPA-Eliashberg (CSRPAE) theory to describe pairing between the two layers. However, these approaches are troubled by a number of divergences and ambiguities. By using a "modified" RPA approximation to account for mass renormalization, we can work in a limit where the cyclotron frequency is taken to infinity, effectively projecting to a single Landau level. This, surprisingly, controls the important divergences and removes ambiguities found in prior attempts at CSRPAE. Examining BCS pairing of composite fermions we find that the angular momentum channel l = +1 dominates for all distances d between layers and at all frequency scales. Examining BCS pairing of composite fermion electrons in one layer with composite fermion holes in the opposite layer, we find the l = 0 pairing channel dominates for all d and all frequencies. The strength of the pairing in these two different descriptions of the same phase of matter is found to be almost identical. This agrees well with our understanding that these are two different but dual descriptions of the same phase of matter. Quantum Hall bilayers have been a subject of intense investigation since the first experiments on these systems almost thirty years ago (see Refs. The composite Fermi liquid may be described either with a Jain wavefunction approach The CE and CH approaches to the half-filled Landau level are supplemented by the Dirac composite fermion approach Returning now to the ν = 1 2 + 1 2 bilayer, although the two limits of large and small distance d between the layers have been quite well understood for some time, the question that has occupied the community for years Inspired by new experiments in bilayers built from graphene To test these two pictures of interlayer pairing, Wagner et al. To try to access the thermodynamic limit, and in order to gain more physical intuition, one can attempt to address the pairing between the two layers analytically. Very early in the history of the field, Bonesteel, Macdonald and Nayak A more detailed version of this CSRPAE calculation was attempted much later by Isobe and Fu Recently the Isobe-Fu calculation (ω m ), depending on the cutoff and ω m this inequality may either be greatly unequal or may be very close to an equality. The above mentioned Chern-Simons Eliashberg calculations The purpose of this paper is to repair the many problems of these previous works and for the first time obtain unambiguous results. This letter will report our main findings with the calculational details relegated to the Supplement We now briefly describe the calculation. More details are given in the Supplement We now consider CSMRPAE in the limit of m b going to zero. This limit is meant to represent projection to a single Landau level, although as mentioned in Supplementary material section VI, once one makes any sort of mean field approximation, some of the detailed structure of the lowest Landau level is lost, such as its particle-hole symmetry. Remarkably, in this limit we find that the divergences in coupling constants λ Z (ω m ) and λ (l) φ (ω m ) vanish proportional to m n b with n ≥ 1 for any value of ω m such that 0 < ω m < O(ω c ) (see Supplementary material FIG. pairing. By taking the m b → 0 limit, we push ω c to infinity, removing all divergences at any finite frequency, and thus remove the need for an ad-hoc q c cutoff. In this limit, we find that for CE-CE pairing l = +1 is now unambiguously the strongest pairing channel for all values of d and ω m (see Fig. We note in passing that, as pointed out in Ref. To further demonstrate the usefulness of our approach, we now examine a number of extensions. First, we can consider other filling fractions, see Supplementary material We can further examine whether changing the interelectron interaction might change our results, see Supplementary material Finally we turn to examine the robustness of our results to deformations of the spatial metric. Such deformations are of particular interest To conclude, we believe our approach of looking at the m b → 0 limit of CSMRPAE has satisfactorily tamed the divergences and ambiguities of CSRPAE theory which have been problematic for several decades. Our main results for ν = 1/2 + 1/2 are: for CE-CE pairing the l = +1 pairing channel is unambiguously the strongest, and for CE-CH pairing the l = 0 pairing channel is unambiguously the strongest. To very high precision we also find that these two cases pair with the same strength in agreement with the results of prior trial wavefunction calculations Chern-Simons Modified-RPA Eliashberg Theory of the ν = 1 2 + 1 2 Quantum Hall Bilayer Tevž Lotrič and Steven H. Simon In this section we reproduce results of the Isobe-Fu calculation Fig. the definition of this coupling is given in Ref. While it seems plausible that l = +1 is the dominant pairing channel since it is the most attractive at low frequency, without further calculation, strictly speaking, it is ambiguous since higher |l|'s can be more attractive at finite frequency. φ (ωm) from the Isobe-Fu While the introduction of an arbitrary cutoff does not change the ordering of the different CE-CE pairing channels in strength when comparing them to each other, that is no longer the case when comparing CE-CE channels to CE-CH channels. In this section, we present numerical results showing that the comparison between CE-CE and CE-CH channels (as done by We note that within the m b = 0 MRPA, the low-q divergence is removed, so the results in Fig. The different dependence of CE-CE pairing channels on the cutoff relative to the CE-CH channels: at certain frequencies, changing the cutoff can change the ordering of the different channels in pairing strength. The insets show the difference between the two most promising candidates: CE-CE l = 1 and CE-CH l = 0. At any fixed ωm, the difference between the two varies significantly as the cutoff is changed. Our calculation closely follows that of Isobe and Fu's paper We start with the standard HLR Lagrangian Here, is the Coulomb interaction between the composite fermions (CFs), and δρ s (x, τ ) = ψ † s (x, τ )ψ s (x, τ )n e is the CF density fluctuation. We start with the mean-field solution and account for fluctuations within the RPA. First notice that a (s) 0 only appears linearly in S, so it acts as a Lagrange multiplier, enforcing The system is at half-filling, so ∇ × A = B = 2π ν n e = 4πn e . The mean field may thus be identified as δρ s = 0 and a (s) = c s A. To expand around the mean field, we let a (s) = c s A + ã(s) and use Eq. 2 on the interaction term in Eq. 1. This gives us We move to Fourier space, choosing to continue in the Coulomb gauge for ã(s) , ∇ • ã(s) = 0 and dropping the tilde from now on. In the Couloumb gauge, we may write a (s) (q, τ ) = a (s) 1 (q, τ )(ẑ × q). The action in Fourier space is where ω m is a bosonic Matsurbara frequency and ε n is a fermionic Matsurbara frequency. V ss ′ (q) = 2πe 2 εq e -qd(1-δ ss ′ ) is the Fourier transformed Coulomb interaction. The RPA is performed by integrating out the fermionic degrees of freedom, and proceeding to expand the result to second order in the gauge fields a (s) μ (q, iω m ). Since the action is quadratic in the fermionic fields, the first step is simple, yielding Here, Ĝ0 is an operator diagonal in momentum and frequency, whose diagonal elements are the fermionic propagators, G(q, iε n ) = 1 iεn-ξq , with ξ q = q 2 2m *μ. We assumed equal chemical potential in both layers, μ 1 = μ 2 = μ. The operator φ is not diagonal in the momenta: the amplitude for a momentum transfer q and energy transfer iω m from an initial state with momentum k is described by Eq. 8. Continuing the RPA scheme by expanding to second order in the gauge fields and summing over momenta, which accounts for the polarization bubble, yields the correction Π 01 (q, iω m ) = Π 10 (q, iω m ) = 0, ( with f (ξ) = 1 exp(ξ/T )+1 the Fermi distribution function. Note that in principle, if a superconducting gap opens in the spectrum, the polarization bubble needs to be re-computed accounting for this gap. If we work close to the superconducting transition, this can be ignored. The integrals in Eqs. 12-14 are analytically evaluated in the zerotemperature case by Isobe and Fu To implement the MRPA correction on top of this, we first need to find the RPA fermion polarization function The MRPA prescription is to replace K RPA by K MRPA , which is defined in imaginary time as where K RPA is calculated with the effective mass m * . Here, we make a distinction between the interactionrenormalized effective mass m * and the bare band mass m b . The effective mass is set by the interaction scale so that ħ 2 /m * = Ce 2 l B /ε with ε the dielectric constant and C a constant estimated To get the MRPA gauge propagator, D MRPA , we simply replace K RPA in Eq. 20 with K MRPA . Since μ, ν ∈ {0, 1} and s, s ′ ∈ {1, 2}, the propagators are 4x4 matrices. From here on, we assume that at least one layer is taken to be CE's, so we may set c 2 = 1 in Eq. 1. We define the in-phase and out-of-phase components of the gauge field as With these components, both the gauge propagators and fermion polarization matrices are block diagonal. In this form, the bare gauge propagator is At RPA and MRPA level we then have RPA: ±,ρν (q, iω m ), In order to convert back to the original a (s) basis, we may use the identities along with the transformation Eq. 21. We note that in block-diagonal form, the propagators are identical between the CE-CE (c 1 = 1) and CE-CH (c 1 = -1) systems. The physics remains different however due to the different transformations Eq. 21 from the block-diagonal form into the physical layer basis. The gauge field mediates interaction between the fermions. Looking at the form of interactions between a and ψ in Eq. 7 and Eq. 8, we can see that the action includes an effective interaction term The form of these terms may be derived by computing the expectation value of e -S for the action Eq. 1, using the MRPA value of the gauge field propagator, Eqs. 25-27. This step follows Isobe-Fu Following where D μs,νs (q, iω), and the denominator becomes a delta function δ(ξ q+k ) restricting the q integral to the Fermi surface. This assumption is also made by At this stage we will still follow where the coupling constants λ Z (ω m ) and λ The angular parts of these integrals may be performed analytically, to yield In our calculations, we use the MRPA result for the propagator. In the CE-CH case, c 1 = -1, the second term in Eq. 40 is zero, so as mentioned in Isobe and Fu From Eq. 17-19, we get where V ± (q) = V 11 (q) ± V 12 (q). Using that k F = 1, we have n e = 1/4π and ε F = 1/2m * . This implies where mb = m b + O(m * q 2 ) is defined to absorb the inaccuracy in our approximation of Π. Using Eq. 20, we get (45) When computing λ Z from Eq. 39 we are concerned with terms of the type D MRPA +,μν +D MRPA -,μν , which can be approximated to lowest two orders in q as Since mb = m b + O(m * q 2 ), the most divergent term is mb /q 2 = m b /q 2 + O(1), and we may simply replace all the mb by m b . The leading order divergence in D 00 is discussed in Section VI-C of with A, B being O(1) constants. Note that in these units, ω c = 1/m b . At a given frequency, when m b → 0, there is no divergence in λ Z . At finite m b , the leading divergence is ∼ 1/q c , with the strength proportional to m b when φ via Eq. 40, we need to evaluate terms of the type D MRPA +,μν -D MRPA -,μν . Again approximating up to zeroth order in q, we find (since V 12 ∼ 1/q at small q) The most divergent term is ∼ 1/q, so replacing mb with m b only introduces an error O(q). With a momentum cutoff q c , we get from Eq. 40 φ ≈ c 1 C log q c + O(1). The important part of the result Eq. 49 is that the divergent term is independent of l, but is dependent on c 1 , i.e., on the type of coupling: it is positive for CE-CE, but negative for CE-CH. This confirms, as suggested by Isobe-Fu We have successfully eliminated divergences that stem from the cyclotron mode, by pushing the cyclotron mode off to infinity in the m b → 0 limit. One might worry whether, no matter how large the cyclotron scale is, divergences at (or above) that scale may be problematic. This potential concern encouraged us to look more closely at these divergences. First, we find that the divergences obtained by the approaches of Refs. Roughly, the error by prior works Let us now take a more detailed look at some of these divergences for nonzero m b . Before so doing, we should recall the derivation of the coupling constants Eqs. 37-38. Note in particular that we have used inequality Eq. 34 to restrict the integration to the Fermi surface. However, the left hand side of this inequality is never arbitrarily small, so the resulting delta-function obtained in Eqs. 37-38 is never infinitely sharp. In fact, we should think of the delta function δ(ξ q+k ) as having a thickness of or equivalently the distance perpendicular from the Fermi surface is smeared by with v F the Fermi velocity. For q greater than this scale, we should think of the q integral in Eqs. 37-38 as being one-dimensional as we have done in Eqs. 39-40. However, for q smaller than this scale the q integral should be thought of as being two-dimensional. For each value of n and m in Eqs. 30-31 this cutoff scale is different, however, it is always nonzero for any finite T or ω m . This analysis suggests it should be possible to pursue Eliashberg Chern-Simons theory without serious divergences even for nonzero values of m b , although this would require a more careful analysis of the relevant two-dimensional integrals, which is beyond the scope of this work. Instead we focus in this work on the m b → 0 limit such that all problematic divergences are pushed away to infinite frequencies and we can safely work with the one-dimensional Fermi surface integrals. The Chern-Simons fermion (CE) approach to fractional quantum Hall effects The idea of attaching Chern-Simons flux to holes within the lowest Landau level (CH) was suggested, and derived, by Ref. The CH model is strictly equivalent to a physical system of charge +e fermions (compared to charge -e electrons) in a magnetic field. When projected to a single Landau level, the CH model is equivalent to a theory of holes in the single Landau level of electrons (which is why we use this model). However, when Landau level mixing is included, the system of charge +e fermions and the system of charge -e electrons are inequivalent. As mentioned above, in the limit that m b is taken to zero, and one can think of the system of being projected to a single Landau level and the concept of particle-hole conjugation is well defined within the Hilbert space of the single Landau level. In this case, the CH MRPA theory also becomes an equally good description of the system as the CE MRPA. We evaluate the pairing Eliashberg constants λ φ (ω m ) by numerically integrating Eq. 40 within the MRPA with m b = 0, using Eq. 25 for the gauge propagator D μν . Note that as there is no divergence now, there is no need to introduce a cutoff. The results in Fig. By far the most precise degeneracy is seen between l = 0 CE-CH and l = 1 CE-CE, as shown in Fig. We also investigate what happens if an external potential different to the Coulomb V (q) ∼ q -1 is used. With a Gaussian potential, V (q) = Ae -1 2 (qw) 2 , with w controlling the width and A the strength (both V 11 and V 12 are taken to have this form, but possibly different strength and width), we see qualitatively the same results as for the Coulomb potential, that is l = 1 favoured for CE-CE and l = 0 for CE-CH, with the two being very close to degenerate. We have tried w/l B ∈ (0.5, 5) for both V 11 and V 12 , and A/ε F ∈ (1, 10) for V 11 and A/ε F ∈ (e -5 , 10e -1 ) for V 12 . For completeness, the coupling constants for φ (ωm) for a Gaussian interaction of width w = lB with A11 = εF and A12 ∈ {0.2εF , 0.7εF }. The insets show the difference between the two favoured channels, magnified. Further, for a screened potential V (q) ∼ (q + q 0 ) -1 (with q 0 ≤ 0.5k F ), longer range potentials V (q) ∼ q -2+η (so V (r) ∼ r -η ) for η ∈ (0, 1), potentials projected into any of the first three Landau Levels (by replacing ), or cases where finite sample width is accounted for by multiplying potentials by a Gaussian factor e -1 2 q 2 w 2 (for w ≤ 4l B ), we similarly see good qualitative agreement with the above results in the Coulomb case. In short: numerical integration of Eq. 40 shows that l = 1 is unambiguously favoured for CE-CE coupling, and confirms that l = 0 is favoured for CE-CH coupling. It also shows that the two are extremely similar, but not precisely equal in strength. This holds for a variety of rotationally symmetric potentials. Our method allows for an easy generalisation to compressible QHE states away from ν = 1 2 + 1 2 . Re-write the pre-factor of the Chern-Simons term in Eq. 1 as 1 2π φ , where φ is to be understood as the number of flux quanta attached to each electron In this section, we take Eq. 40 with the MRPA propagator, and compare CE-CH l = 0 and CE-CE l = 1. Working through the algebra, we find that with . We choose units with k F = 1 and e = 1, which implies n e = 1 4π . We note that if the denominator of the integrand Eq. 50 is positive, the integrand is strictly non-negative, implying ∆λ φ (ω m ) ≥ 0, or that CE-CH l = 0 is always at least as strong as CE-CE l = 1. While we do not generally prove the denominator to be positive, this can be clearly seen in the limit of large d: there, the second term rapidly decreases at q ≳ 1/d due to the factor of V 12 (q). At small q, the first term scales as q -4 , while the second term scales only as q -2 , meaning the first term is always larger at small q: so for large enough d, we can confidently claim the denominator to be always positive and that ∆λ φ (ω m ) ≥ 0. In practice, numerically, we have not been able to find any set of values of the parameters where the denominator of Eq. 50 is not positive. In Eliashberg theory, q ≤ 2k F always, so for ω m ≫ ε F , we have q/k F ≪ ω m /ε F , and some of the results of section IV may be used, namely the forms of Eqs. 41, 42 giving While m b does not appear explicitly here, we note that this result applies only for finite m b as it requires ω m ≫ 1/m b . This is divergent, with ∆λ φ (ω m ) ∝ log q c at small q c . So there exists an ω m -independent, log q c divergent difference between CE-CE l = 1 and CE-CH l = 0 when ω m ≫ ω c = 1/m b . This result is very similar to what we found in section IV, and using Eq. 49 we can see that the most divergent term in the coupling is opposite between the two layers, meaning that for small q c large ω m , λ (ω m ) > 0 and λ (ω m ) < 0. This is seen for high ω m in Fig. Perhaps the more interesting case is MRPA when m b = 0, where all the divergences go away. In order to get a nonzero result, we expand the polarization functions to second lowest order in . Inserting this into Eq. 50 and keeping terms down to ε F ωm 4 , we get This is no longer divergent, and scales as ω -4 m , as opposed to the RPA and finite m b cases being divergent and scaling as ω 0 m . This shows that in the high-frequency limit, the MRPA ∆λ φ (ω m ) is much smaller than the RPA counterpart -the MRPA result is much closer to being symmetric between CE-CE and CE-CH pairing than the RPA result is. To find why MRPA would have a lower ∆λ φ (ω m ) at low frequencies, we look at the structure of Eq. 50: the integrand may be written as (prefactor) × [g(q, iω m )] 2 . As mentioned above, we observe that the prefactor is strictly positive for a large range of q, d and ω m . We thus integrate a positive function, multiplied by [g(q, iω m )] 2 , which is itself positive. Thus reducing [g(q, iω m )] 2 reduces the difference between CE-CE and CE-CH pairing strengths. Since V 12 becomes very small for q ≳ 1/d, in the large-d case at least, most of what contributes to ∆λ φ is [g(q, iω m )] 2 at small q. We now show that at small q and low frequency, the MRPA has a lower [g(q, iω m )] 2 . Expanding g(q, iω m ) in powers of ω m at small q, we get Importantly, in RPA (m b = m * ) or in finite m b MRPA, the leading term is O(ω 2 m ), while for the m b = 0 MRPA the leading term is O(ω 4 m ). The MRPA cancels the lowest-order term in the Taylor expansion of g, reducing value at small ω m and q, which we expect, as discussed, to reduce ∆λ φ (ω m ) at least for low ω m and large d. In the last two sections we saw that the MRPA is a step closer to achieving particle-hole symmetry in both low and high frequency limits. As shown in section VII, numeric integration shows it is closer at all ω m . But there remains a finite difference between l = 0 CE-CH and l = 1 CE-CE. In the following, we discuss how the MRPA can be adjusted to achieve perfect degeneracy between the two pairing channels. A hint on how to achieve full symmetry between CE-CE and CE-CH pairing can be seen in Eq. 50: if we can force g(q, iω m ) = 0 for all q, ω m , the pairing would be exactly symmetric. This would amount to replacing the F 1 of Eq. 19 with an Adjusted MRPA (AMRPA) version which is then to be used in Eq. 18. If m b = 0, this enforces g(q, iω m ) = 0. Here the function b(q, iω m ) is an arbitrary function, subject to the constraints of causality (no poles in the upper half plane of b(q, ω))), as well as b(q, ω) ∼ q n for small q with n ≥ 2 and b(q, ω) should not grow as fast as ω for large ω. Note that for b = 0 the lower right element of the F 1 matrix matches that of the MRPA. The MRPA F 1 can be thought of as the AMRPA F 1 , expanded to the lowest order in q. As such, the two share the same long-wavelength physics, and the AMRPA will satisfy Kohn's theorem. It is also easy to show that the AMRPA satisfies the f-sum rule. While the AMRPA is designed to give an exact agreement between the coupling strengths of l = 0 CE-CH and l = 1 CE-CE, it generalises nicely to a general l: within the AMRPA with m b = 0, numeric integration shows that in general l-wave CE-CH is exactly of the same strength as (l + 1)-wave CE-CE, at all frequencies. Since CE-CH is symmetric between l and -l, this implies that couplings come in degenerate quadruples: l and (-l)-wave CE-CH, and (l + 1) and (-l + 1)-wave CE-CE. We note that the AMRPA is a correction within one layer which brings the different bilayer pairing channels to degeneracy. Rüegg, Chaudhary, and Slager We keep the total filling ν T = 1 fixed, but move some density from one layer to the other so that we have ν = ν 1 +ν 2 with ν 1 ̸ = ν 2 . For simplicity, let us consider the case where ν 1 = p/(2p + 1), potentially with p large. This single layer can be described as p filled CE Landau levels. The opposite layer has filling ν 2 = (p + 1)/(2p + 1) but this can also be viewed as a filling of 1ν 2 = p/(2p + 1) of holes, and can be described as p filled CH Landau levels. To build a CE-CH pairing we simply pair the states of the n th CE Landau level of the first layer with those of the n th CH Landau level of the second layer We note that this argument does not rely on an integer number of CF LL's being filled: for a general filling fraction of CE's ν ↑ > 1 2 in the upper layer, p ↑ = ν ↑ 2ν ↑ -1 CF LL's are filled. If p ↑ is non-integer, this indicates partial filling of the top LL. The CE filling fraction in the lower layer is ν ↓ = 1ν ↑ < 1 2 , and So in the general case, there is an extra Landau level in the upper layer: if the filling fraction is non-integer, both the top LL's have the same fractional filling, meaning they may still be BCS-coupled to form an l = 1 state. In this section, we prove generally that when Landau levels n and n + l are BCS-paired in the imbalanced ν T = 1 case, the resulting pair wave function always has l-wave symmetry, both for CE-CE and CE-CH pairing. We take ν ↑ = p+1 2p+1 , ν ↓ = p 2p+1 . If the physical magnetic field is B 0 , the effective fields seen are then exactly opposite between the two layers, defining From now on we work in units where the effective CF magnetic length is l B = ħ eB = 1. Then, in a planar geometry, the single-particle wavefunctions are in the Landau gauge, with H n (x) the n-th order physicist's Hermite polynomial. Case 1: CE-CE pairing BCS pairing occurs between an electron of momentum k in LL n + l of one layer and an electron of momentum -k in LL n in the other, for all n. So the BCS pair function may be constructed as Here, g n are constants to be determined from energetic considerations. The function f n l is the main object of interest and using Eqs. 56, 57 we may write it as Case 2: CE-CH pairing Here, both layers are less than half-full of the carriers, so the wavefunction Eq 57 is to be used for both. Now we pair a hole of momentum k in one layer to an electron of momentum k in the other. Taking the hole to be in the up layer, making the replacement k → -k in Eq. 57 and remembering that the hole wavefunction must be complex conjugated we get, since φ n is real, This exactly matches the expression Eqs. 59, 61, for CE-CE, so both may be treated simultaneously from now on. To evaluate f n l explicitly, we define R = 1 2 r ↑ + r ↓ and r = r ↑r ↓ . Using these in Eq. 61, and putting q = k -X + x/2, we get Using Eq. 58, we can get Here, is a constant. Going between Eq. 65 and Eq. 66, we re-wrote the exponential as iqy - with L n associated Laguerre polynomials and a ≥ b. Using this on Eq 66 yields The prefactor e -iXy in Eq. 68 is a center of mass momentum in the X direction depending on the separation in the y direction. This stems from the non-commutativity of x and y coordinates in a magnetic field, and is reminiscent of the physics of excitons in a magnetic field (see for example Ref. clearly showing an l-wave pair wavefunction for l ≥ 0. We note that G l (|r| 2 ) is just a polynomial of order p -1 in |r| 2 , multiplied by the Gaussian factor e -1 4 |r| . Trivially, for l < 0, we get g l (R, r) = e -iXy (xiy) |l| G |l| (|r| 2 ), which gives a -|l| = l-wave state, as expected. To re-iterate our argument, in the case of CE-CH pairing, there are p filled Landau levels in each layer: we may pair levels n and n for 0 ≤ n ≤ p -1, giving us an l = 0 BCS state. In the case of CE-CE pairing, there are p + 1 LLs in the upper layer and p in the lower. We pair level n + 1 in the upper layer to level n in the lower layer for 0 ≤ n ≤ p -1. This results in an l = 1 BCS state, and only the LLL of the upper layer remains unpaired. This level is far below the Fermi surface, and as such the fact that it remains unpaired should not significantly impact the pairing strength. Consider the limit of our wavefunction as ν → 1 2 . Re-introduce factors of l B into Eq. 68, and take l B → ∞ (this is the CF l B ). Measuring distance in units of the original magnetic length, l B0 , we get, with s = sign l where η replaces n, being defined as η = n ωc,CF ε F , in other words η = ε ε F is the ratio of the energy of the electron under consideration to the Fermi energy of the ν = 1 2 system. As usual, J |l| is the Bessel function of the first kind and is of order |l|. Importantly, as discussed above, if ν tot = 1, we will always have l = 1 for CE-CE and l = 0 for CE-CH, if we want to pair the states closest to the Fermi surface, at least at finite imbalance. We expect this to continue to hold into the limit of infinitesimal imbalance. The full BCS pair wavefunction is then of the Hankel form: where again g(ω) is to be determined by energetic considerations, which can then generate any function g whose Taylor expansion has the leading power |r| |l| . If we started by considering plane waves and insisted the pairing to be l-wave, the resulting pair wavefunction in two dimensions is exactly Eq. 71. This is another way to understand why l = 0 CE-CH and l = 1 CE-CE would be preferred: they are the natural continuation of the finite magnetic field pair function into the zero-field limit. One might ask about the stability of the above wavefunction approach against slight anisotropic deformations. Consider an anisotropic effective band Hamiltonian, where Π = p -A. We work in the Landau gauge, A = (0, Bx). Define x = x/ √ a and ỹ = √ ay, along with p = (-i∂ x, -i∂ ỹ ). In these transformed coordinates, the Hamiltonian reads of course Π = p -Ã and Ã = (0, B x). This is just the isotropic Hamiltonian we have already analysed in Sect.IX A. Note that since the product of x and y is preserved, so are areas and thus filling fractions do not change (crucially, the magnetic field B is the same in both equations). We thus expect all our analysis to carry over to this case. There is a difference however, namely that if the potential V (r) was isotropic in the original (x, y) coordinates, it will no longer be isotropic in our rescaled (x, ỹ) coordinates. But note that we never appealed to the pairing interaction being isotropic -we merely relied on the assumption that the most strongly coupled states are the ones where particles closest to the Fermi surface are all paired up. If this was true in the isotropic case, there is no obvious reason for why it would no longer hold in the anisotropic case (as all that really matters is that the effective interaction is strongest at low frequency, which must be true at least close to the critical temperature), and we conclude that our analysis of the isotropic imbalanced state carries over completely to the anisotropic case, still favouring s-wave pairing for CE-CH and p-wave (l = 1) for CE-CE in the imbalanced case and as discussed, also in the limit ν → 1 2 . Note that the angle-dependent part of the wavefunction is now ∼ (x + iỹ) l . In the original coordinates the angle dependent part of the pairing translates to ∼ (x/ √ a + i √ ay) l , so it is l wave pairing only in the rescaled coordinates (and similarly we should use |r| = x 2 /a + ay 2 in the wavefunction formulae). Indeed, once we have broken rotational symmetry the pairing symmetry need not be an eigenstate of rotation (i.e., have a fixed l) in the unrescaled coordinate system. If we instead made the potential anisotropic and kept the band structure isotropic (or if we made both anisotropic), we would expect a similar result to continue to hold -again the symmetry of the paired wavefunction does not primarily come from properties of the interaction between particles, but rather from the Landau Level structure of the problem at finite imbalance. It can be shown that the composite fermion Landau level structure of incompressible FQHE states is stable against slight anisotropy in the form of a tilted magnetic field In addition, as mentioned in the main text, the arguments of Ref. While strong anisotropy, especially in higher Landau levels might lead to stripe ordering It is natural to ask about the relation of particle-hole symmetry of the LLL and the (near) degeneracy of p-wave CE-CE pairing and the s-wave CE-CH pairing. In the Dirac composite-fermion language, Sodemann et al It is also worth asking whether the near degeneracy that we have found between CE-CE p-wave and CE-CH s-wave pairing really relies on particle-hole symmetry. The underlying system is only particle-hole symmetric in the limit of m b → 0. Further, even in this limit, the HLR approach We turn to the effect of three-body interactions on our results. While such interactions break the particle-hole symmetry of the problem, we surprisingly find that for certain types of three-body terms, the resulting degeneracy between the CE-CE l = 1 and CE-CH l = 0 channels is preserved. We assume that the three-body terms of interest may be written as an interaction between three density fluctuations. Starting out in the CE-CE picture, we may write the additional term as L 3-body = s,t,u∈{1,2} dxdydzW stu (x, y, z)δρ s (x)δρ t (y)δρ u (z), with s, t, u layer indices. We assume translational invariance, so that W stu depends only on the differences of the three coordinates. The main idea is to use the flux attachment condition, Eq. 2 in the form δρ s (q) = 1 4π |q|ã (s) 1 (q), with ã(s) 1 (q) the fluctuation of the transverse gauge field about its mean-field value. Then, the three-body term turns into a 3-point vertex for the transverse component of the gauge field. This affects our results by modifying the gauge propagator via the loop diagram shown in Eq. 74. will see only a small breaking of the degeneracy. While we do not compute the loop integrals F ± , approximating them as polynomials in q and scanning through a wide range of the coefficients, we find no cases where ∆λ φ (ω m ) is appreciably larger than what is seen in Sect. VII without a three-body term. We thus conclude that layer-exchange (anti-)symmetric terms cubic in the gauge fields do not break the degeneracy between the CE-CE l = 1 and CE-CH l = 0 channels. While they cannot break this degeneracy, three-body terms can significantly impact the pairing strength of any channel. It remains to be seen whether a strong enough three-body term might lead to a different pairing channel being favoured, or if it can entirely prevent pairing. We thus find that three-body terms which (1) may be written as a product of three density fluctuations and (2) are either fully symmetric or fully antisymmetric under layer exchange in the CE-CE picture maintain the near (full) degeneracy of the CE-CE l = 1 and CE-CH l = 0 channels within the MRPA (AMRPA), despite breaking particle-hole symmetry. While we suspect that terms not obeying these two conditions could lift the degeneracy, a more detailed calculation would be required in that case. ative