Magnon frequency comb (MFC), the spin-wave spectra composing of equidistant coherent peaks, is attracting much attention in magnonics. A terahertz (THz) MFC, combining the advantages of the THz and MFC technologies, is highly desired because it would significantly advance the MFC applications in ultrafast magnonic metrology, sensing, and communications. Here, we show that the THz MFC can be generated by nonlinear interactions between spin waves and skyrmions in antiferromagnets [Z. Jin et al., arXiv:2301.03211]. It is found that the strength of the three-wave mixing between propagating magnons and breathing skyrmions follows a linear dependence on the driving frequency and the MFC signal can be observed over a broad driving frequency range. Our results extend the working frequency of MFC to the THz regime, which would have potential applications in ultrafast spintronic devices and promote the development of nonlinear magnonics in antiferromagnets. The far-infrared electromagnetic spectrum in the frequency region of 0.1 -30 terahertz (THz), known as the THz band, has long been considered the last remaining scientific gap in the electromagnetic spectrum Merging THz technology with other powerful techniques can yield unique multidimensional insight into fundamental processes at ultrafast time scales. An optical frequency comb is a spectrum consisting of a sequence of discrete and equally-spaced spectral lines that represent precise marks in frequency, like an optical ruler Antiferromagnets with two opposite magnetic sublattices have unique advantages, such as the full freedom in magnon polarization, vanishingly small stray field, and ultrafast magnetization dynamics typically in the THz region The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present the analytical model describing the nonlinear interaction between magnons and breathing skyrmions. The linear dispersion relation of magnons propagating in antiferromagnets is given. The dynamical equations of magnon modes involved in threemagnon processes are derived and numerically solved. Section III gives the full micromagnetic simulations to verify our theoretical analysis. Conclusions are drawn in Sec. IV. We consiser an antiferromagnetic film hosting a Néel-type skyrmion stabilized by the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), as shown in Fig. where λ = 8J, A = 2Jd 2 , L = 2 √ 2Jd, K c = 2K, and D c = 2Dd are the homogeneous exchange, inhomogeneous exchange, parity-breaking, magnetic anisotropy, and DMI constants, respectively, and d is the lattice constant. It has been demonstrated that the MFC can be generated by nonlinear coupling between magnons and breathing skyrmion in ferromagnets with the gyromagnetic ratio γ = 1.76 × 10 11 rad s -1 T -1 , and k = (k x , k y ) being the wave vector of spin waves, in the lattice model. In the continue limit, the dispersion relation reads where are the damping rate of the magnon modes with the effective Gilbert damping constants α v and mode frequencies ω v . g p and g q are the coupling strength of the three-magnon confluence and splitting, respectively. The incident spin wave is excited by the microwave field h 1 e -iω 1 t . Since the skyrmion breathing mode in antiferromagnets is difficult to be excited merely by the incident spin waves in a non-resonant manner, as shall be discussed later, we apply another microwave field h 2 e -iω 2 t to resonantly excite the skyrmion breathing mode. Here, h i and ω i (i = 1, 2) are the microwave field amplitude and frequency, respectively. Then, the incident spin-wave mode (ω k ) and breathing mode (ω r ) of the skyrmion would mix with each other and generate the sum-frequency (ω p = ω k + ω r ) and difference-frequency (ω q = ω k -ω r ) modes. These two secondary signals further hybridize with the skyrmion breathing mode to generate higher-order frequency modes, eventually leading to the MFC. To verify the above picture, we perform full micromagnetic simulations using MUMAX3 In ferromagnets, when the amplitude of the local exciting field increases above a threshold, the skyrmion breathing would be excited via a three-wave splitting process. Subsequent wave-mixing would result in the MFC To overcome this obstacle, we apply another microwave field h 2 = h 2 sin(ω 2 t)ẑ with ω 2 /2π = 0.095 THz (ω 2 = ω r ) in a square region [blue box in Fig. The coupling strength (g p,q ) between spin waves and skyrmion is crucial for the formation of MFC, which depends on the mode overlap and is difficult to calculate in our case due to the lacking of the analytical skyrmion profile. Hence, we treat them as fitting parameters. For simplicity, we assume g p,q = g and that all modes have the same damping rates α k,r,p,q = α. By numerically solving Eq. ( Next, we investigate the dependence of the MFC on the driving frequency, as shown Fig. In summary, we theoretically demonstrated that the THz MFC can be generated in antiferromagnetic film by nonlinear interactions between magnons and skyrmions. Although the mechanism of the MFC generation in both ferromagnets and antiferromagnets comes from the three-wave mixing, there exist significant differences between them. First, the skyrmion breathing in antiferromagnets can hardly be excited merely by propagating magnons because of an unexpectedly large threshold field amplitude of microwaves. An additional lowfrequency driving source is therefore needed to assist the MFC generation. Second, the dependence of the coupling strength on the driving frequency in two magnetic systems is different. The frequency dependence follows a Gaussian profile in ferromagnets We thank H. Yang, L. Song, and X. Liu for helpful discussions. This work was funded by the National Key R&D In general, the dynamical equations of magnon modes Eq. ( 