Advancements in quantum system lifetimes and control have enabled the creation of increasingly complex quantum states, such as those on multiple bosonic cavity modes. When characterizing these states, traditional tomography scales exponentially in both computational and experimental measurement requirement, which becomes prohibitive as the state size increases. Here, we implement a state reconstruction method whose sampling requirement instead scales polynomially with subspace size, and thus mode number, for states that can be expressed within such a subspace. We demonstrate this improved scaling with Wigner tomography of multimode entangled W states of up to 4 modes on a 3D circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) system. This approach performs similarly in efficiency to existing matrix inversion methods for 2 modes, and demonstrates a noticeable improvement for 3 and 4 modes, with even greater theoretical gains at higher mode numbers. Quantum state tomography (QST) is the process of determining the quantum state of a system, and is a fundamental part of quantum information processing. The exponentially greater complexity of quantum systems compared to classical ones makes efficient QST a challenging task. In its conventional formulation, obtaining full state information has a processing and measurement requirement that scales exponentially with the size of the Hilbert space Efficient QST is especially relevant in continuous variable systems with bosonic cavity modes, whose Hilbert spaces are arbitrarily large. These systems have applications in error correction codes In this work, we use the Direct Extraction of (Density) Matrix Elements from Subspace Sampling Tomography (DEMESST) method to demystify and reconstruct quantum state density matrices. DEMESST applies when an unknown state lies in a polynomial dimensional subspace. It only requires local operations if the subspace is spanned by a set of finite local operations acting on a DFE-efficient state The structure of this paper is as follows: we first describe the details of DEMESST and elaborate on how it operates. We then discuss existing QST methods for continuous variable systems and how they have been optimized DEMESST scales polynomially with mode number for states that have support in a polynomial subspace of DFE-efficient basis operators With this approach, we avoid extracting irrelevant information about states outside the subspace of interest, thereby lowering the number of measurements required for an accurate result (see supplementary information). For example, if we know a 3-mode state has a maximum of 2 photons (M = 3, N = 3 for 0, 1, or 2 photon population), we reconstruct it with DEMESST by measuring the matrix elements associated with that subspace, namely the one formed by |000⟩ , |001⟩ , |011⟩ , |002⟩, and permutations. We eliminate unnecessary sampling of unnecessarily high photon number states like |111⟩ or |012⟩ and beyond. Additionally, we build upon existing work Wigner tomography uses measurements of the Wigner operator W(⃗ α) = D(⃗ α)ΠD(-⃗ α) acting on a bosonic state ρ to reconstruct it. Here, D(⃗ α) = i D(α i ) is the displacement operator and Π is a parity measurement. Existing inversion-based Wigner tomography methods operate by taking the Wigner functions of a set of displacements {⃗ α} to construct a measurement matrix M that maps to states as ⃗ x = M|ρ⟩⟩, where |ρ⟩⟩ is the vectorized form of ρ. This improves the overall efficiency of the sampling, especially for states with support across large numbers of modes. In practice, we use Hermitian {O} that are accessible through experiment. (b) Number of measurements required for the DEMESST (purple, circles) and OLI (orange, squares) methods to reach a 90% state reconstruction fidelity on W states of up to 7 modes, assuming perfect state preparation. OLI scales exponentially with the size of the Hilbert space (and therefore the number of modes M ), while DEMESST scales only polynomially. allows us to determine the physical (unit trace and positive semidefinite) ρ that was most likely to have produced ⃗ x. The set {⃗ α} is optimized by minimizing the condition number (the ratio of largest to smallest eigenvalue) of M and thus the error magnification, using the techniques presented in W states are excellent candidates for testing our Wigner tomography sampling methods. Here, the φ j 's are a priori unknown phases on each of the state components, and are determined through measurement. Additionally, due to imperfect state preparation, we make no assumptions about the component populations and precisely measure each one separately, making our measurement task more difficult. We further generalize this: rather than restricting ourselves to the pure states W j = |W j ⟩ ⟨W j |, we measure the full, possibly mixed density matrices. W states are great representative states because they are irreducible multimode states that generalize straightforwardly to arbitrary numbers of modes, and have a well-defined photon number. We prepare them easily using photon blockade We first investigate the simulated theoretical performance of DEMESST and OLI on M -mode W states. Assuming perfect state preparation, we compare the number of observations required to accurately reconstruct the W state with 90% fidelity. This is shown in Fig. We generate W states and implement DEMESST and OLI on a superconducting 3D cQED platform. The system consists of a transmon qubit coupled to a 3D readout cavity and a 3D multimode storage cavity. A schematic of this hardware setup is shown in Fig. The tomography sampling methods use the same generalized Wigner tomography sequence, where each cavity mode is displaced before performing a generalized parity measurement on the transmon We first compare the state reconstructed from the OLI method with simulation, which we use as a baseline for later comparison to DEMESST. With OLI, we find prepared W state fidelities that are in good agreement with the simulated fidelities, as shown in Table For the DEMESST approach, we reconstruct the 2-4 mode density matrices by measuring Wigner operators corresponding to multimode Fock basis states with up to 2 photons. Even though W states have at most one photon, we measure two-photon operators to capture imperfect state preparation errors. These observations directly provide the values of each density matrix element. From the density matrix, we obtain the component populations and phase angles φ j of our prepared approximate W states by calculating the phase angle value that best matches the resulting data. These angles are then verified to match with the ones obtained from the OLI approach. We quantify the performance of the DEMESST and OLI sampling methods versus total measurement number with two metrics: reconstructed state fidelity and Frobenius norm matrix distance. The fidelities are computed with respect to an ideal W state, while the matrix distances are calculated with respect to the experimentally prepared state reconstructed at the maximum measurement number. These results are shown in Fig. This improvement is most evident in the matrix distance comparisons. The distances are computed using the Frobenius norm, with error bars again computed from 10 independent sets of 10 repetitions for each displacement. The final state density matrix against which the distances are computed is obtained by considering all 100 repetitions, rather than sets of 10, which is why the final distances do not completely vanish. The behavior of both sampling methods is nearly identical for the 2-mode W state. However, for the 3-mode case, the DEMESST has noticeably faster convergence versus total measurement number x, as the matrix distance d to the final state is smaller, as seen by the fit coefficient to d = ax b (a = 1.1 ± 0.1 for DEMESST versus 1.71 ± 0.02 for OLI). This effect is further enhanced in the 4-mode case. The ratio of these fit values scales roughly geometrically, as shown in Table An advantage of the DEMESST sampling method compared to OLI is its self-consistency. Individual density matrix elements for any multimode state are mea- show Frobenius norm matrix distances between the state at a given measurement number versus the final measured state. The rates of convergence are close to 1/ √ x or a power of -0.5, as expected. As the mode number increases, the DEMESST method performs increasingly more efficiently by requiring fewer measurements to reach a given level of convergence or error threshold. sured independently, without needing to choose a cutoff maximum photon number or Hilbert space size that could subject the reconstructed state to inversion errors. This eliminates the risk of obtaining an inaccurate tomography result if, for example, the prepared state contains population beyond the space spanned by our chosen basis during OLI sampling. We verify that the DEMESST tomography sampling method leads to self-consistent measurement results. We check the traces of our prepared W states and compare them with unity, the expected value for physical states. This allows us to confirm that our prepared state indeed lives in our chosen, measured Hilbert space. The results are shown in Fig. In summary, we have applied the DEMESST sampling method to characterize multimode cavity states with Wigner tomography. DEMESST is most appropriate for multimode states that have population contained in a small subspace of DFE-efficient elements of an overall Hilbert space, and outperforms traditional optimized inversion-based methods by scaling polynomially rather than exponentially with mode number. We observe this improvement for W states on 3 and 4 modes. Here, we have presented comparisons using the multimode Fock basis on multimode W states, but DEMESST also applies to different bases that more readily support other states; this tomography method can even be used for DFE by choosing as a basis the intended target state. While Wigner tomography was presented in this work, the method also operates beyond the bosonic Wigner function, and works for both continuous and discrete systems. This approach operates without coupling gates between modes, and would be useful for calibrating entangled states over distributed quantum networks. Ultimately, the DEMESST sampling method enables efficient measurement of large states, which will be crucial as the size of quantum hardware systems increases and more complicated states are generated and applied for quantum simulation, bosonic logical state encoding, and error correction. Supplementary Information: Efficient multimode Wigner tomography The multimode cavity device is heat sunk to an OFHC copper plate connected to the base stage of a Bluefors LD-400 dilution refrigerator (10-12 mK). The sample is surrounded by a can containing two layers of μ-metal shielding, with the inside of the inner layer connected to a can made out of copper shim that is painted on the inside with Berkeley black and attached to the copper can lid. A schematic of the cryogenic setup, control instrumentation, and device wiring is shown in SFig. S1. The device is machined from a single piece of 5N5 aluminium and consists of a readout cavity and a multimode storage cavity fabricated using the flute method described in [S 1] and also used in [S 2]. The cavities are bridged by a 3D transmon circuit. Controls are performed through the readout cavity or the direct cavity drive line, by driving at the qubit and storage mode frequencies. The pulses are directly digitally synthesized using a four-channel, 64 GSa/s arbitrary waveform generator (Keysight M8195A). The combined signals are sent to the device after being attenuated at each of the thermal stages, as shown in SFig. S1. Outside the fridge, the signal is filtered (tunable narrow band YIG filter with a bandwidth of 80 MHz) and further amplified. The amplitude and phase of the resonator transmission signal are obtained through a homodyne measurement, with the transmitted signal demodulated using an IQ mixer and a local oscillator at the readout resonator frequency. The homodyne signal is amplified (SRS preamplifier) and recorded using a fast ADC card (Keysight M3102A PXIe 500 MSa/s digitizer). The Hamiltonian of the multimode cQED system realized by the transmon and the storage modes is: where ω q /(2π) = 4.96 GHz is the frequency of the transmon |g⟩ -|e⟩ transition, ω m /(2π) ranging from 5.72-6.47 GHz are the cavity mode frequencies, χ m /(2π) ranging from -1.64 to -0.91 MHz are the dispersive shifts, k m the self-Kerr shift of each mode, and k mn the cross-Kerr interactions between the modes. The Kerr nonlinearities range from -6-7 kHz. Parameter values are determined with the processes described in the supplement of [S 2]. A summary of the system parameters used in the experiment, as well as Liouvillian terms corresponding to transmon and cavity decoherence and decay, is provided in STable 2. The 2-mode experiments used the last two modes in the table, the 3-mode experiments used the last three modes, and the 4-mode experiments used all four of the modes. The Wigner function is the quasiprobability distribution of a state in phase space, and is one of the most important functions in the field of quantum optics. For a single-mode state ρ, the Wigner function is defined as [S 3] Transmon thermal population where θ m can be different and need not equal π for the M modes. We also denote where Wρ (⃗ α, ⃗ θ) can in general be a complex number, since e In this section, we discuss the sampling method for estimating the expectation value of the Wigner function with an operator with finite F-norm O. We then analyze the overhead required to reach a certain accuracy threshold. We start with the identity that reflects the relationship between expectation values and the Wigner function: For the generalized Wigner function, we have a similar expression: where The equations above have been applied for direct fidelity estimation between an experimentally prepared state ρ and a target pure state σ [S 5]. For example, we can rewrite Eqn. where , such that we can treat p W 2 (⃗ α) as a probability distribution function that we can then use to sample a set of displacement vectors {⃗ α (k) }. Given a set {⃗ α (k) }, we can measure Re[e iφ(⃗ α (k) ) Wρ (⃗ α (k) , -⃗ θ)] and calculate the average to obtain an estimate of F (ρ, σ). In Sec. VI, we show explicitly that by repeatedly measuring whether the qubit is in the |g⟩ level, we can obtain a series of binomial outcomes A Wρ (⃗ α (k) , -⃗ θ)]. We call the above sampling method the W 2 tomography sampling method. In general, we have the freedom to choose other probability distribution functions p(⃗ α) to generate sampling points {⃗ α (k) }, since We can calculate the average of to obtain an estimate for Tr A (k) will be limited by Here, we have used the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and the fact that d 2M ⃗ α p(⃗ α) = 1. The minimum is achieved when p(⃗ α) ∝ | WO (⃗ α, ⃗ θ)|, which we call the DEMESST sampling method. It is also worth noting that, for the W 2 method where p , the integral shown in the first line of Eqn. (10) will be divergent. To avoid this, Ref. This cutoff procedure can lead to bias when estimating Tr[ρO] and makes the error analysis more complicated. A detailed analysis of the effect of this cutoff in a multimode setting is beyond the scope of this work. Instead, we focus on the DEMESST method. The probability distribution function is given by where In the DEMESST method, we must average over all sampling vectors ⃗ α (k) and all possible binomial outcomes from the qubit measurement per sampling vector. In the limit where we do one qubit measurement per ⃗ α (k) , we can use Hoeffding's inequality to estimate the number of samples N spl required to reach an accuracy ε 1 with probability 1 -δ 1 to be when We can see that, in general, In the next section, we analyze the properties of Z O for our operators of interest. In this section, we discuss our scheme for reconstructing an unknown state using the DEMESST sampling method to estimate each element of its density operator in the Fock basis. We consider a system with M modes and maximum total photon number N between those modes. This restricts the dimension of the Hilbert space to M +N N . We focus on the scaling of the sampling overhead (number of samples required) vs. mode number M , in the limit where M is much larger than 2N , and show that this overhead scales polynomially vs. M with bounded photon number N , demonstrating the efficiency of the DEMESST approach as M increases. We assume that the operator O (in Tr Here One essential observation is that, when M > 2N , for any (⃗ n, ⃗ n ′ ) pair there are at least (M -2N ) elements in the set S ≡ S (⃗ n,⃗ n ′ ) = {m|n m = n ′ m = 0}. We also denote S = {1, 2, . . . , M }\S. Because of this, the corresponding operators shown in Eqn. where O S has support on the modes with index m ∈ S. We can see that the number of elements in S is no greater than 2N , and independent of M . Similarly, the generalized Wigner function of such an operator O satisfies where ⃗ α S , ⃗ θ S contain those elements in ⃗ α, ⃗ θ whose mode index m ∈ S. Again, WO S (⃗ α S , ⃗ θ S ) is independent of M . Now, we consider the sampling overhead to obtain a precise estimate of Tr Here, Since O S is supported on at most 2N modes, which is independent of M when M > 2N , the only M -dependence in C M Z O comes from the 2 M factor. Unfortunately, this is still unfavorable, as it grows exponentially with mode number M . To resolve this issue, consider O S , which is nontrivially supported on the modes contained in S, rather than the full operator O itself. We introduce the projection operator P S = m∈S |0⟩⟨0| m and denote ρ S = Tr S [ρP S ]. Here Tr S [•] means the partial trace over all modes with m ∈ S. We can see that where ρ S and O S are wholly supported on modes in S, which contains at most 2N elements. We can perform DEMESST sampling according to O S as follows: In the experiment, we utilize the |f ⟩ level of the transmon to effectively restrict the cavity state to ρ S . From the measurement, we obtain binomial outcomes . More details about this experimental protocol is presented in Sec. VI. Like before, we can use Hoeffding's inequality to estimate the sampling overhead. If we only measure once per sampling vector ⃗ α S , we will have when When N is bounded, C S Z O S is independent of mode number M when M > 2N . Therefore, N spl in Eqn. ( where O M indicates that we focus only on the scaling over M in the large M limit, and O S is a function that depend solely on N and the specific form of O from Eqn. We can now consider our reconstructed density matrix ρ. By performing expectation value estimation on the unknown state ρ with all M +N N 2 operators with form in Eqn. with total sample number where B requires all the conditions below: If B is satisfied, we will have the Frobenius norm distance between our reconstructed state and the true state satisfy Also, if ρ is a pure state, we will have In summary, by choosing , our sampling method will require the total sample number to achieve even if we only perform a single measurement for each sampling instance. With the same amount of sampling, we can also achieve when ρ is a pure state. The procedure for DEMESST is as follows: first, the Wigner function corresponding to a chosen basis operator is normalized to a probability distribution based on its absolute value. Then, displacement vectors are sampled from the resulting inverse cumulative distribution function (CDF) by randomly selecting a value between 0 and 1 to find the corresponding angular and radial values of the displacements (see supplementary information). This calculation is performed efficiently by utilizing Laguerre functions and their inverses. During measurement, each displacement vector will have the original sign of its Wigner function value preserved, so that if the Wigner function was negative at that point, the final measured value will be multiplied by -1. Observing a set of these will provide an estimate of the chosen density matrix element. Repeating this for multiple elements will thus produce the density matrix of the prepared state. For simplicity, in this section we assume that the cavity is initialized as a pure state |ψ⟩. However, the same arguments will apply for a generic density operator ρ, which can always be decomposed as ρ = i c i |ψ i ⟩⟨ψ i | and understood as an ensemble average of a set of pure states {|ψ i ⟩⟨ψ i |} with probability c i . First, we consider the generalized Wigner function of an M -mode state. We assume that the cavity-qubit state is initialized as |ψ⟩ |g⟩. To perform the Wigner tomography measurement, we apply a short (large-bandwidth) drive to each cavity mode, then apply a large-bandwidth π/2 pulse on the qubit to begin the parity measurement. After these operations, the qubit part becomes exp(-i π 4 σ y ) |g⟩ = |g⟩+|e⟩ √ 2 , and the cavity part becomes |ψ D ⟩ = D(-⃗ α) |ψ⟩. Then, as part of the parity measurement, we wait for a time t. Due to the dispersive interaction Hamiltonian H int = m χ m a † m a m |e⟩⟨e|, the cavity modes will be entangled with the qubit as where θ m = χ m t. In principle, we could choose any time t, as long as none of the θ m are integer multiples of 2π. However, in practice, we select t to make each of the θ m as close to π modulo 2π as possible. This choice provides the maximum contrast and is closest to the ideal multimode parity operator. To complete our generalized parity measurement, we apply another π/2 pulse on the qubit, but with different phase from the initial one. Specifically, we consider the qubit rotation along ⃗ r = -sin φ ⃗ e x -cos φ ⃗ e y . By applying this exp(-i π 4 ⃗ r •⃗ σ) operation, the final cavity-qubit entangled state |Ψ⟩ will be Thus, when performing readout on the qubit, the final probability of achieving |g⟩ will be Therefore, if we record A = 1 upon measuring |g⟩ and A = -1 otherwise, the expectation value of A will be exactly Re[e iφ Wρ (⃗ α, -⃗ θ)]. This derivation applies for any φ, but as mentioned before, the choice of φ depends on the operator O and the sampling vector ⃗ α. We must modify the experimental protocol above to measure the generalized Wigner function for the projected state ρ S , which is defined in Sec. V. In particular, we utilize the second excited state |f ⟩ of the transmon to implement subsystem tomography and measure the Wigner values for only the projected states ρ S , which is similar to the idea used in [S 7]. Our W states are generated using multimode photon blockade as described in [S 8] to ensure that our maximum total photon number is N = 1. Consequently, for the density matrix reconstruction, the Hilbert space will be spanned by {|⃗ n⟩ | M m=1 n m ≤ 1}. In this case, the projected operator O S introduced in Eqn. ( Finally, we can use the procedure that we described before when focusing on the Wigner value measurement of a generic M -mode state ρ. We only need to drive those modes with index m ∈ S such that those modes are displaced by D(-⃗ α S ). The probability to measure |g⟩ from the final qubit readout is where ρ S = Tr S [P S |ψ⟩⟨ψ|]. In practice, the result above is unaffected by the order in which we perform the qubit π pulses and cavity displacements, assuming that we add additional π pulses to target the displaced state. We found this order to work better in the experiment, despite the need for a larger comb of π pulse frequencies. Now, if we proceed similarly to before and assign A = 1 for |g⟩ and A = -1 otherwise, the expectation value of A will not give us our desired result. To solve this issue, we utilize the freedom we have in choosing the phase of the second qubit π/2 pulse in the parity measurement. If we choose the second qubit π/2 rotation to be along -⃗ r instead of ⃗ r (or equivalently choose (φ + π) instead of φ, then the probability of measuring |g⟩ will be Therefore, comparing with Eqn. (35), one solution to recovering our desired quantity is to first generate a random binomial number s. There is a 50% probability that s = 1 and 50% probability that s = -1. If we get s = 1, we choose the second qubit π/2 rotation to be along ⃗ r, and otherwise choose -⃗ r instead. In both cases, we assign A = 1 if the qubit measurement outcome is |g⟩, and assign A = -1 if it is not |g⟩. The expectation value of sA will be exactly Re[e iφ Wρ S (⃗ α S , -⃗ θ S )]. An advantage of this procedure is that it will work even when it is difficult to distinguish |e⟩ and |f ⟩ levels in qubit readout, as long as we can distinguish |g⟩ outcomes from others. The same applies for other permutations of these three states, as long as the experimental protocol is adjusted accordingly. In the actual experiment, we did not use this trick of random number s generation, since we can perform more than a single measurement per sampling vector ⃗ α S . Instead, we repeated the experiment 10 times for rotation of the second π/2 along ⃗ r and 10 times along -⃗ r. Finally, we subtracted the averaged probability of measuring |g⟩ between the two cases to obtain an estimate for Re[e iφ Wρ S (⃗ α S , -⃗ θ S )]. Using the DEMESST and OLI tomography methods, we can reconstruct the final density matrices of our prepared W states. These matrices are final in the sense that they are the results obtained from the entire set of measurements performed in the experiment, i.e. 100 averages for each distinct displacement, so that the total measurement number is 10 times the maximum measurement number shown in Fig. The final reconstructed density matrices for 2, 3, and 4 modes are shown in SFig. S3. We plot the absolute values of the density matrix elements so that we have a single matrix grid for each combination of tomography method and mode number. We can see that the two methods are in good agreement, with the largest visible deviation being in the 3-mode case for Fock basis elements with nonzero population in the second (middle) cavity mode. Nevertheless, the distances between the two final matrices as determined by the two methods is still low, and is 0.05 for the 2-mode case, 0.22 for the 3-mode case, and 0.30 for the 4-mode case. These distances are all below the corresponding minimum distances at the maximum total measurement number presented in the main text, and so this difference should not have significantly affected those results. Besides some slight deviations in the measured populations of individual density matrix elements, the remaining distance between the final reconstructed matrices can be explained by small differences in the fit phase angles of the W states. For the 2-mode W state with form |W 2 ⟩ = (|10⟩ + e iφ |01⟩)/ √ 2, using the DEMESST method we obtain a fit φ D = 0.04, and using the OLI method we measure φ O = 0.03. In the 3-mode case, for W state with phase angles defined as |W 3 ⟩ = (|100⟩ + e iφ1 |010⟩ + e iφ2 |001⟩)/ √ 3, we measure φ 1D = -0.19 and φ 2D = 1.57, while φ 1O = -0.12 and φ 2O = 1.57. Similarly to what we see in the populations, the deviation is primarily in the middle mode. Finally, for 4 modes and W state |W 4 ⟩ = (|1000⟩ + e iφ1 |0100⟩ + e iφ2 |0010⟩ + e iφ3 |0001⟩)/ √ 4, we find φ 1D = -1.36, φ 2D = -2.90, and φ 3D = 0.60, and φ 1O = -1.38, φ 2O = -3.02, and φ 3O = 0.63. These angles are obtained by discretely sweeping the φ j values over the full 2π range for each of the modes and determining which set of φ j gives the largest fidelity when compared to an ideal W state with those phases. In this section, we present simulations of the infidelity and Frobenius norm matrix distance vs. point number for our two tomography methods, DEMESST and OLI, following the same procedure described in the main text. Wigner tomography measurements are sampled assuming perfect state preparation, and the infidelities are computed with respect to an ideal M -mode W state, and the results are shown in SFig. S4. Error bars are obtained by repeating the simulations while modeling bit flip readout errors. The resulting infidelity vs. total measurement number for each M is fit to a power law, and the intersection with 0.1 (90% fidelity) is used to generate the values plotted in Fig. To compute the Frobenius norm matrix distances, we obtain the density matrix of an imperfect W state prepared by photon blockade, with errors from transmon and cavity decoherence and leakage through the blockade. We then simulate Wigner tomography measurements on that state for the total measurement numbers and using the same cavity displacement sampling points as used in our experiment, then reconstruct the density matrix while including readout and bit flip error. These simulated results are shown in SFig. S5, with error bars obtained from repeating the simulations with the readout errors. As expected, the DEMESST method performs increasingly more efficiently as the mode number increases. Comparing to the experimental data presented in the main text, the matrix distance results are similar, albeit with some differences. For example, we can see that the measurement number at which the simulated distance reaches roughly 0.1 for 2 modes is slightly less than 10 5 , while we observe a distance slightly above 0.1 at that point number in our data. For the 3-mode case, in the experiment we observe a distance of roughly 0.3 at 10 5 measurements for DEMESST and 0.4 for OLI, which is close to the simulated distances of roughly 0.25 and 0.3, respectively. For the 4-mode case, we measure a distance of 0.4 at roughly 2 × 10 5 measurements for DEMESST, compared to a simulated distance of roughly 0.2, and a distance of roughly 1.0 vs 0.8 for OLI at that measurement number. We attribute the discrepancies to fluctuations over time in the readout error that may affect the accuracy of the simulation. This effect is particularly pronounced for the 4-mode case, where more measurements are required. Another Wigner tomography sampling method that we implement is the W 2 method, which was first introduced in [S 5] and that we briefly discussed in Sec. IV. In this approach, sets of coherent cavity displacements α i are chosen using rejection sampling. This approach computes the overlap between a prepared state and a desired target state. For M modes, a cutoff c and a displacement vector (β 1 , ..., β M ) is randomly sampled from a uniform distribution between 0 and a maximum value of |W(α 1 , ..., α M )| 2 M i=1 |α i |, where W corresponds to the target state. If |W(β 1 , ..., β M )| 2 M i=1 |β i | > c, the vector is kept. This ensures that we measure cavity displacements that provide the most information about the state, while also avoiding displacements with large magnitude or Wigner values near zero, which are more susceptible to experimental errors. After measuring a set of n of these vectors, the final overlap fidelity is computed as 1 n n i=1 W exp ( -→ α i )/W ideal ( -→ α i ). This approach allows for direct fidelity estimation of a prepared state with an ideal state. In particular, the W 2 method can be used in a similar manner to the DEMESST, where the fidelity estimation is performed with respect to multimode Fock state basis elements. Repeating for multiple elements can thus provide a reconstructed density matrix. Experimentally, we use the W 2 method as an additional check on our prepared W states. We set the target state to be the multimode W state with φ's determined from the DEMESST and OLI methods. The W 2 measurements then provide a direct fidelity estimation of the prepared state with the expected target. Since the sampling uses these angles, we present the W 2 results independently from the DEMESST and OLI, which do not utilize that information. The results are shown in SFig. S6. The fidelities for the maximum provided observation number are 0.972 ± 0.013, 0.95 ± 0.35, and 0.90 ± 0.08 for the 2-, 3-, and 4-mode W states respectively. These averages are consistent with the results of the previous DEMESST and OLI methods, with the OLI fidelities indicated by the horizontal lines in SFig. S6(a), and the data converges quickly to the expected fidelity obtained from those two approaches, although with large uncertainties, as shown in SFig. S6(b). One reason for these errors is the relatively low total measurement number compared with the other methods. However, an odd behavior is that the 3-mode data has much greater uncertainties than even the 4-mode case, when we would expect the uncertainties to increase monotonically with mode number. Some possible explanations for this behavior could be a particularly low readout fidelity during data collection or fluctuations in drive strength during the measurement sequence that modify the effective Wigner operator differently for distinct sets of cavity mode displacements. This could also be caused by the choice in cutoff, as derived in Sec. IV. All the uncertainties have the expected 1/ √ x with total observation number. where D(α) = e αa † -α * a is the displacement operator. We can see that W ρ (α) is proportional to the expectation value of the parity operator with the state ρ displaced by complex amplitude -α. Similarly, we can introduce the Wigner function for an operator O with finite Frobenius norm (F-norm) (||O|| F = Tr[O † O] < +∞) by substituting the state ρ with the operator O in Eqn. |⃗ n⟩ = M m=1 |n m ⟩ and |⃗ n ′ ⟩ =