The surface chemistry and inter-connectivity within perovskite nanocrystals play a critical role in determining the electronic interactions. They manifest in the Coulomb screening of electronhole correlations and the carrier relaxation dynamics, among other many-body processes. Here, we characterize the coupling between the exciton and free carrier states close to the band-edge in a ligand-free formamidinium lead bromide nanocrystal assembly via two-dimensional coherent spectroscopy. The optical signatures observed in this work show: (i) a nonlinear spectral lineshape reminiscent of Fano-like interference that evidences the coupling between discrete electronic states and a continuum, (ii) symmetric excited state absorption cross-peaks that suggest the existence of a coupled exciton-carrier excited state, and (iii) ultrafast carrier thermalization and exciton formation. Our results highlight the presence of coherent coupling between exciton and free carriers, particularly in the sub-100 femtosecond timescales. Lead halide perovskite nanocrystals (PNCs) are promising candidates for quantum dot optoelectronic applications It is now well known that the photoluminescence in the PNCs originates from radiative recombination of bound electron-hole pairs (excitons). The correlation between excitons and free charge carriers has been a topic of research for over two decades, with early works on semiconducting systems such as GaAs Here, we investigate the exciton-carrier coupling and inter-particle interactions through 2D coherent spectroscopy The FAPbBr 3 NCs solid-state assembly is prepared by infiltrating a precursor solution to the void space of the nanoporous silica scaffold via spin-coating followed by an annealing step. More details on the sample preparation can be found in the Supporting Information and in Ref. The temperature-dependent absorption spectrum of the sample is shown in Fig. The experiment consists of a train of three ultrashort pulses incident on the sample in a BoxCAR geometry. Such a coherent excitation sequence generates a thirdorder nonlinear polarization in the material, which emits coherent radiation in the phase-matching direction. A fourth pulse that serves as a local oscillator enables measurement of the amplitude and phase of the emitted field. The first pulse generates a coherence that evolves for a time (t 1 ), the second pulse further drives the system to a population state which relaxes within a population time (t 2 ), and finally, the third pulse establishes another coherence which emits the electric field. We measure the emitted electric field from the ensemble of photo-excited species through spectral interferometry whose energy corresponds with the emission axis of the two-dimensional spectrum, labeled ħω 3 here. By scanning t 1 and performing a discrete Fourier transform we recover the excitation axis which we label as ħω 1 . We specifically focus on the nonlinear response with a phase-matching condition, referred to as the rephasing pathway. The experimental details are described in the supplementary information and further details can be found elsewhere The spectrum of the ultrashort pulses used in the current experiment covers the exciton and free carrier energies close to the optical edge of the sample, as shown in Fig. More details on the excited-state couplings can be deduced by analyzing the real component of the rephasing spectrum along with the absolute spectrum at different temperatures as shown in Fig. Firstly, the ESA feature in a 2D spectrum is associated with an excitation pathway that results in the emitted field oscillating at the energy of the coherence between the photo-generated species and a higher-lying state. The latter is typically a two-quantum transition where the energy of the final state depends on the correlations between the excited species As the temperature increases the absorption edge shifts towards higher energy, as evident in the spectra shown in body interactions which result in an excitation-induced shift and excitation-induced dephasing process Having described the signatures of ESA, A and B, we now turn our attention to the extended cross-peak observed in all of the real spectra of Fig. Firslty, we consider two main transitions associated with the exciton and free carrier band edge to be at energies k 1 = 2.27 eV and k 2 = 2.31 eV respectively (energy separation of 40 meV). The strength of the coupling of these states with the continuum is determined by the parameter q, q = μe μcπV where V is the coupling constant between the continuum of states and the discrete transition. For the simulations showed here, we kept the value of q to be 1. We also considered contributions from two excited state absorption transitions from k 1 or k 2 to a coupled state k 1 k 2 . More details on the analytical expressions used for the simulations are given the Supporting Information (Sec. 2.2). For this set of simulation parameters, we show the absolute and real values of the rephasing spectrum in Figs We now reduce the energy difference between the discrete exciton and free-carrier band edge state to 20 meV and obtain rephasing response shown in Fig. It can be seen in Fig. We now discuss the evolution of the rephasing spectra, measured at 10 K with population time (waiting time between pulse 2 and 3), shown in Fig 4 . From the absolute maps, Figs In summary, we have presented a study of the excitoncarrier coupling dynamics in a assembly of FAPbBr 3 nanocrystals in a silica scaffold through 2D coherent spectroscopy. The experimentally determined optical signatures indicate coherent coupling of the excitonic and free carrier states in these material systems. This is particularly evidenced by the characteristic Fano-like lineshape in the two-dimensional rephasing spectra. In addition, we find evidence for the excited state features associated with a coupled exciton-carrier state, similar to what was suggested in bulk metal halide perovskites Supplementary Information: Exciton-carrier coupling in a metal halide perovskite nanocrystal assembly probed by two-dimensional coherent spectroscopy A. Sample preparation a. Materials For precursor sample preparation formamidinium bromide (FABr, GreatCell Solar Materials, 99.9%), Lead (II) bromide (PbBr 2 , TCI, 99.99%), dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO, Merck, anhydrous 99.8%), methanol (MeOH, VWR, 98%) and chlorobenzene (CB, Merck, 99.9%) were employed without additional purification steps. b. Preparation of SiO 2 nanoparticles porous scaffold A colloidal suspension of 30 nm SiO 2 nanoparticles (34% w/v in H2O, LUDOX-TMA, Sigma-Aldrich) was obtained by diluting with methanol to 3% w/v. Low-fluorescence glass substrates were dip coated with the diluted suspension with a withdrawal speed of 120 mm/min. The deposition was repeated 15 times to achieve a thickness of roughly 1 μm. The porous matrix was consequently annealed at 450oC for 30 min to remove any residual organic component and improve its mechanical stability. c. Synthesis of FAPbBr 3 nanocrystals within nanoporous silica scaffold FABr and PbBr 2 powders were dissolved in DMSO in a 1:1 molar ratio with 30% concentration to obtain a perovskite solution precursor. The solution was infiltrated into the voids of the porous matrix by spin-coating with 5000 rpm for 60 s. The sample was anneahled at 100oC for 1 hour to crystalize FAPbBr 3 nanocrystals within the pores of the matrix. All preparation steps of the synthesis of FAPbBr 3 nanocrystals were performed in a protected N 2 environment of a glovebox. The absolute PL quantum yield (PLQY) was measured using a commercial flourometer (Edinburgh FLS1000) and an integrating sphere accessory employing a continuous light excitation source with λ exc = 450 nm. The cw-PLQY was determined to be 1.3 %. Perovskite pore filling fraction was determined to be 14.5 % of the pore volume by Atomic Emission Spectroscopy by Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES), using 10 mL water solutions of soaked FAPbBr3 QD-SiO2 films for 1 hour (complete extraction of perovskite in the film) in an iCAP 7200 ICP-AES Duo (Ther-moFisher Scientific) equipment. We used the same system as previously implemented A. Data Analysis The contents of this section have already been discussed in previous literature ( The global phase ∆Φ is defined as: The detected heterodyne signal is: (3) I XT (ω) = 2A(ω)A LO (ω) e -i[φsig(ω)+∆Φ-φ LO (ω)] + e +i[φsig(ω)+∆Φ-φ LO (ω)] . I XT (ω) = 4A(ω)A LO (ω) cos(φ sig (ω) + ∆Φ -φ LO (ω)). ( After the acquisition of the data, we take the inverse Fourier transform (define as dωf (ω)e iωt ), remove the negative times numerically, and do a Fourier transform back ( dtf (t)e -iωt ): F T -1 (I XT (ω)) = B + (t) + B -(t). F T (B + (t)) = A(ω)A LO (ω)e -i[φsig(ω)+∆Φ-φ LO (ω)] . To isolate the emitted electric field we need to know φ LO (ω) such that it can be removed, we assume the φ LO (ω) = (ω -ω LO )τ LO : E sig (ω) = A(ω)A LO (ω)e -i[φsig(ω)+∆Φ-φ LO (ω)] A LO (ω)e -φ LO (ω) = E sig (ω) = A(ω)e -iφsig(ω) e -i∆Φ (9) To correct the phase of the measured four-wave-mixing signal through heterodyne detection. We scan the phase of one of the pulses (Beam 4 in this case) using the spatial light modulator, then: E sig (ω) = A(ω)e -iφsig(ω) e -i∆Φ+iφ scanned (10) R(E sig (ω)) = A(ω) cos(∆Φ -φ scanned ) The obtained map after scanning is shown in Fig. 