We show that electron interaction with the crystal lattice imposes stringent symmetry constrains on the atomic orbital moment propagation. We present examples that elucidate the underlying mechanisms and reveal an additional effect of ultrafast orbital moment oscillations not captured by the semiclassical models. The constraints revealed by our analysis warrant re-interpretation of prior observations, and suggest routes for efficient orbitronic device implementation. Spin-electronic phenomena such as spin transfer torque (STT) Spin carried by the Bloch waves is only weakly perturbed by the lattice via SOC. In contrast, we show below that atomic orbital moment dynamics can be dominated by interaction with the lattice potential even in the absence of SOC. The resulting effects are dependent on the orientation of the orbital moments and the propagation direction, imposing hitherto largely unrecognized symmetry constraints on orbitronic device geometries and structure qualitatively distinct from spintronics. The concept of transport of physical quantities emerges from the relations connecting their local variations to flux. For the density operator lα (r, t) of α th component of orbital angular momentum L = r × p of an electron j q Lz j j Sz moving in the potential U (r), this relation is Here, qLα is the density of the orbital angular momentum current where v is the electron velocity operator, and Tα is the density of the α th component of orbital torque exerted by U (r), where F = -∇U is the force. According to Eq. ( which signifies the conservation of orbital angular momentum, enabling control of the local orbital moment in a certain volume by its injection into this volume, for example via OHE. However, if the torque dominates the dynamics described by Eq. ( To elucidate the effects of orbital torque, consider the z-component of orbital angular momentum Lz = x pyy px = -ih∂/∂φ, where φ is the polar angle in cylindrical coordinates. The corresponding component of torque is As expected from the Noether's theorem, the continuity relation Eq. ( In crystals, continuous rotational symmetry is broken by the lattice. Nevertheless, if the Fermi surface is welldescribed by the free electron approximation, the effects of lattice potential are small so the continuity equation Eq. ( In orbitronic devices based on transition metals First, we consider the conduction band of complex transition metal oxides exemplified by SrTiO 3 , which is dominated by the t 2g orbitals of the transition metal atoms on a cubic lattice where d m = (d yz , d xz , d xy ), the operator ĉ+ n,m,s creates an electron on site n with spin s in the orbital state m, l is a unit vector in one of the six principal directions, and V is the hopping matrix element describing orbital-selective hybridization. In the reciprocal space, where ĉ+ k,m,s = 1 This spectrum is orbitally degenerate along the planes k i = k j , which allows Bloch states to carry angular momentum where σ = ±1. They are stationary states (Bloch waves) in the two planes k x = ±k y at the intersection between the d yz and d xz sub-bands. The contribution to orbital moment from the crystalline momentum identically vanishes for the plane wave by symmetry. On the other hand, the z-component of the atomic orbital momentum carried by this wave is where lz (n) is the z-component of atomic angular momentum on site n, and we used lz Because of the anisotropy of the subbands ε xz (k), ε yz (k), the component d xz of the wave cannot propagate in the y-direction, while the component d yz -in the x-direction. Thus, the dispersion of the wavepackets formed by the states Eq. ( For k x ̸ = ±k y , ψ σ,k,s is not a stationary state, resulting in the evolution of the relative phase between its d xz and d yz components according to This state is characterized by the oscillating angular momentum The flux divergence vanishes, so this oscillation cannot be described by the continuity relation Eq. ( Since orbital dynamics depends on the wavevector, oscillation of the orbital moment carried by a wavepacket decays due to dephasing between different momentum components, similar to spin dephasing in STT where v g is the group velocity. Since the wavepacket width is ∆x = ∆k -1 = v g ∆t, the components of orbital moment orthogonal to the direction of propagation decay over the packet width. To elucidate the underlying microscopic mechanism, we consider an electron with orbital moment L z = h initially localized on site 1, Fig. We now demonstrate similar symmetry constraints on orbital moment dynamics for a system with a completely different symmetry, a triangular 2d lattice which approximates a single {111} fcc plane or (0001) hcp plane in transition metals studied in the context of OHE To the best of our knowledge, the d-orbital composition of the Bloch states on the triangular lattice does not have a simple form amenable to the analysis of orbital dynamics, due to the mismatch between d-orbital symmetries and the lattice geometry The probability that orbital moment is conserved on hopping is about 30 times smaller than the probability that it is lost (L ′ z = 0), and about 150 times smaller than the probability that it is reversed. This somewhat counter-intuitive orbital selectivity favoring orbital moment reversal results from the constructive interference between opposite-moment orbitals which remain in phase over the region of their overlap illustrated by curved arrows in Fig. To put this dynamics in the framework of the continuity relation Eq. ( We conclude that hopping in the direction normal to the orbital moment results in its relaxation over a single lattice constant. On the other hand, similar analysis for the orbital moment initially aligned with the x-axis shows that orbital moment along the hopping direction is conserved, as in the previous example. Thus, despite substantial differences between the two considered systems, both exhibit the same symmetry constraints on the atomic orbital moment dynamics in relation to hopping direction. In contrast to cubic complex oxides, for the hexagonal 2d lattice crystal torque-mediated orbital relaxation occurs for any in-plane moment direction, because hopping to at least some of the six nearest neighbors is always non-collinear with the orbital moment. By the same argument, relaxation within distances comparable to the lattice constant is expected for any orbital moment direction on the 3d fcc or hcp lattice. This conclusion is consistent with numeric calculations, which show that orbital moment accumulation due to OHE in transition metals is limited to a few atomic constants from their surfaces or interfaces In summary, we analyzed two systems whose highly symmetric crystal fields allow unquenched atomic orbital moments. Our analysis reveals a dramatic anisotropy of atomic angular momentum dynamics dependent on its direction relative to electron transport and crystal axes, placing stringent symmetry constraints on the possible structure and geometry of orbitronic devices. Orbitallyselective electron hopping along principal axes in cubic transition metal oxides such as SrTiO 3 preserves the component of atomic orbital moment in the hopping direction, making such materials particularly attractive for orbitronic applications. On the hand, the normal component of atomic orbital moment is suppressed over essentially a single lattice spacing, making it impossible for this moment to propagate transverse to its direction or to locally accumulate in a small volume away from interfaces. We also demonstrate the possibility of orbital moment oscillations induced by lattice potential analogous to spin precession induced by the exchange field of ferromagnets. Thus, in contrast to spin, orbital moments can be controlled by the electron wavevector, without the need for magnetic fields, orbital moment injection or SOC. One can expect rapid relaxation of orbital moment injected into fcc or hcp transition metals, since at least some of the electron hopping is always non-collinear with the orbital moment. This does not contradict the existence of OHE or its importance for orbital moment generation and SHE. Nevertheless, it places stringent constraints on the geometry and crystal structure of devices where atomic orbital moment is generated by OHE in one material, and is injected into another. On the other hand, the interatomic contribution to orbital moment is not constrained by the identified relaxation mechanism, warranting more detailed analyses of different contribu-tions to orbital moment transport. Recent observations of anomalous current-induced torques in transition metal-based magnetic heterostructures were attributed to orbital moment generation via OHE and its long-range propagation through transition metals such as Pt and Ni One of the central experimental observations attributed to the orbital moment injection is the variation of STT effects at large ferromagnet thicknesses 