We use molecular dynamics to study mechanism of deformation twinning of β -1,3,5,7-tetranitro-1,3,5,7tetrazocane (β -HMX) in the P2 1 /n space group setting for the twin system specified by K 1 = (101), η 1 = [101], K 2 = (101), and η 2 = [101] at T = 1 K and 300 K. Twinning of a single perfect crystal was induced by imposing increasing stress. The following three forms of stress were considered: uniaxial compression along [001], shear stress in K 1 plane along η 1 direction, and shear stress in K 2 plane along η 2 direction. In all cases the crystal transforms to its twin by the same mechanism: as the stress increases, the a and c lattice parameters become, respectively, longer and shorter; soon after the magnitude of a exceeds that of c the system undergoes a quick phase-transition-like transformation. This transformation can be approximately separated into two stages: glide of the essentially intact {101} crystal planes along 101 crystal directions followed by rotations of all HMX molecules accompanied by N-NO 2 and CH 2 group rearrangements. The overall process corresponds to a military transformation. If uniaxial compression along [001] is applied to a β -HMX crystal which is already subject to a hydrostatic pressure 10 GPa, the transformation described above proceeds through the crystalplane gliding stage but only minor molecular rearrangements occurs. This results in a high-pressure phase of HMX which belongs to the P2 1 /n space group. The coexistence curve for this high-pressure phase and β -HMX is constructed using the harmonic approximation for the crystal Hamiltonians. The high explosive 1,3,5,7-tetranitro-1,3,5,7-tetrazocane, also known as octahydro-1,3,5,7-tetranitro-1,3,5,7-tetrazocine (HMX), is an important energetic material which is used in a number of high performance military explosive and propellant formulations. In addition to exhibiting polymorphic transformations, HMX is known to undergo twinning. In particular, β -HMX can form both growth and deformation twins. Growth twins of β -HMX with the (101) twinning plane were reported. The detailed mechanism of the deformation twin formation in β -HMX is not well understood. Armstrong et al. All molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the LAMMPS package. To study the mechanism of deformation twining associated with the twin system specified by K 1 = (101), η 1 = [101], K 2 = (101), η 2 = [101] we initially performed molecular dy- namics simulation of uniaxial compression of β -HMX at 1 K and zero initial pressure. At this temperature the thermal noise is eliminated and the twinning mechanism can be seen clearly. The unit cell of β -HMX in the P2 1 /n space group setting is shown in Fig. We compressed β -HMX uniaxially along several directions lying in the (010) plane in the vicinity of the [001] direction; this direction was chosen because uniaxial compression along [001] induces shear along both [101] (η 1 ) and [101] (η 2 ). The pressure along a given direction was increased from 0 to 2 GPa over the time interval of 1 ns using NPT simulations. The pressure values for which twinning occurs, P 001,α , are shown in Fig. Note that pressure tensor parameters for NPT simulations in LAMMPS are specified with respect to the Cartesian frame and not the crystal frame. As a result, if the direction of uniaxial compression and a chosen crystal direction are exactly aligned at the start of the simulation they will not, in general, be exactly aligned at a higher pressure because the simulation box deforms under stress. To circumvent this problem we note that LAMMPS always aligns one of the three edges of the simulation box with the x Cartesian axis. To ensure that the compression was directed exactly along [001] for any pressure, we aligned [001] direction of the 4 × 4 × 4 supercell with the x axis and applied compression along x. The crystal transforms to its twin as the pressure tensor component along [001], P 001 , reaches a critical value. The transformation is military and follows the mechanism whose main features are shown in Figs. 1.14 1.15 1.16 1.17 . The separation into the glide and rotation-rearrangement stages is approximate in that the molecular rotation begins before the glide stage is fully complete. For a given HMX molecule, the molecular rotation axis is formed by intersection of the plane passing through the four carbon atoms and the plane passing through the four nitrogen atoms of the axial N-NO 2 groups. The rotation angle when transforming from the structure in Fig. Applying uniaxial compression along [001] to the same 4 × 4 × 4 supercell of β -HMX at T = 300 K and zero initial pressure induces deformation twinning that follows the same basic steps as at T =1 K. Apart from the presence of thermal noise, the main difference from the 1 K case is that the value of P 001 at which the twinning occurs is lower and given by 0.792 ± 0.004 GPa. The twin system studied here is specified by the conjugate twinning planes K 1 = (101), K 2 = (101) and conjugate twinning directions η 1 = [101] and η 2 = [101]. This implies that the deformation twinning can also be induced by applying shear stress either in K 1 plane along η 1 direction or in K 2 plane along η 2 directions. We studied both cases at T =1 K and 300 K. Evaluation of the (101) twin boundary energy is given in the Appendix. As in the case of the uniaxial compression discussed in the previous subsection, we needed to choose the proper orientation of the simulation box to ensure that the shear stress is always aligned with the corresponding twinning plane and twinning direction as the box deforms under stress. This could not be done exactly with the supercell that we used for the uniaxial compression. To overcome this, we used a nonconventional 4-molecule unit cell of β -HMX whose lattice The supercell comprising 3 × 4 × 3 of these unit cells (4032 atoms), which was used to study twinning under shear, is shown in Fig. The twinning mechanism discussed in the previous section involves a glide of crystal planes followed by rotation and rearrangement of HMX molecules. This two stage process hints at the possibility of a transformation in which, under proper conditions, the molecular rotation does not occur. Indeed, if the uniaxial compression along [001] is applied to a β -HMX crystal which is already subject to a hydrostatic pressure 10 GPa, the transformation described above proceeds through the crystal-plane gliding stage (Fig. The phase diagram for β -and ε-HMX in P-T space was obtained using the condition ∆G = 0, where ∆G is the difference of the Gibbs free energies for β and ε phases. ∆G was calculated from where ∆U, ∆V , and ∆S are, respectively, the differences of internal energies, volumes, and entropies for the two phases. The first two terms of the right-hand side of Eq. ( T ∆S term in Eq. ( where ω ε i and ω β i are the normal mode frequencies for εand β -HMX, respectively, and N is the number of atoms in the system. The frequencies ω ε i and ω β i as functions of temperature and pressure were calculated using the normal mode analysis. For given pressure and temperature the crystal potential energy was minimized keeping simulation box parameters fixed, second derivatives of potential energy with respect to atomic displacements were calculated and the corresponding dynamical matrix was diagonalized to obtain normal mode frequencies; the detailed description of this procedure can be found in Ref. As an example, Fig. Armstrong et al. Our observation of a high-pressure phase of HMX belonging to P2 1 /n space group (ε-HMX) finds some support in the experimental results of Sui et al. We used molecular dynamics simulations to clarify the mechanism of twinning in β -HMX for the twin system specified by K 1 = (101), η 1 = [101], K 2 = (101), and η 2 = [101]. Our results apply to a single perfect crystal in which twinning proceeds militarily. Twinning in crystals with defects is likely to follow more complicated paths Supplementary material includes video files of β -HMX twinning, β -ε transformation, and ε-β transformation. LAMMPS data files for ε-and β -HMX unit cells are also provided. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. It is of interest to estimate the value of the (101) twin boundary energy and compare it to the DFT-calculated results obtained by Cawkwell et al. The supercell with the twin boundary was equilibrated at T = 1 K and zero pressure using NPT simulations. The average potential energy E of the supercell was calculated from the 500 ps production NPT trajectory. An identical calculation was performed for a perfect crystal of β -HMX constructed from 3 × 4 × 6 non-conventional 4-molecule unit cells discussed in subsecton II C to obtain the average potential energy E 0 for a crystal without the twin boundary. Following Ref. where A is the area of the twin boundary and the factor of two accounts for the presence of two twin boundaries in a periodic cell. The resulting energy of the (101) twin boundary is 28.2 mJ/m 2 . Note that our results apply to a system at T = 1 K and zero pressure. However, at this temperature, we can expect them to be close to the values obtained by energy minimization, the approach used by Cawkwell et al. 