Photocurrent matching in conventional monolithic tandem solar cells is achieved by choosing semiconductors with complementary absorption spectra and by carefully adjusting the optical properties of the complete top and bottom stacks. However, for thin film photovoltaic technologies at the module level, another design variable significantly alleviates the task of photocurrent matching, namely the cell width, whose modification can be readily realized by the adjustment of the module layout. Herein we demonstrate this concept at the experimental level for the first time for a 2T-mechanically stacked perovskite (FAPbBr3)/organic (PM6:Y6:PCBM) tandem mini-module, an unprecedented approach for these emergent photovoltaic technologies fabricated in an independent manner. An excellent Isc matching is achieved by tuning the cell widths of the perovskite and organic modules to 7.22 mm (PCEPVKT-mod= 6.69%) and 3.19 mm (PCEOPV-mod= 12.46%), respectively, leading to a champion efficiency of 14.94% for the tandem module interconnected in series with an aperture area of 20.25 cm 2 . Rather than demonstrating high efficiencies at the level of small lab cells, our successful experimental proof-of-concept at the module level proves to be particularly useful to couple devices with non-complementary semiconductors, either in series or in parallel electrical connection, hence overcoming the limitations imposed by the monolithic structure. More than 13 years after the first report of the application of perovskites in mesoscopic solar cells, Although perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells are the frontrunners for commercialization in the short-to mid-terms, it is also possible to combine perovskites with other semiconductors like copper-indium-gallium selenide (CIGS) In the conventional, series-connected 2T monolithic architecture the top and bottom sub-cells are fabricated using the same lateral layout, being joined by an interconnecting layer where the carriers of opposite charge recombine to maintain the electrical neutrality within the device In this case, at least two independent problems arise: 1) depositing the top module may damage one or several layers of the bottom module unless an impermeable indium-tin oxide (ITO) layer and/or a buffer film is employed, such as SnO2 deposited by atomic layer deposition (ALD), due to the polar solvents used to process the perovskite film of the upper module We demonstrate herein how both problems can be eliminated by fabricating perovskite and organic sub-modules individually and stacking them subsequently. Based on earlier reports theorizing the possibility to adjust the cell size or number of cells to match the currents of perovskite and silicon or CIGS modules The concept demonstrated herein can be extended to match the Isc or the Voc of bigger modules with already optimized deposition conditions, thus circumventing the need to carefully optimize each of the layers comprising a monolithic tandem. Moreover, the replacement of interconnecting layers with simple wire-based connections offers the possibility to simplify the manufacturing process, reduce the fabrication costs, and decrease the optical and electric losses associated with interconnecting layers. Hence, this strategy opens new horizons to simplify the fabrication of tandem modules, and at the same time enables a wider selection of light absorbing materials. The concept of individual cell widths in bottom and top modules is explained as follows. The general structure of our 2T-interconnected perovskite/organic tandem solar modules is depicted in Figure Here, the filtering effect imparted to the bottom organic module refers to two aspects: 1) the absorption of the short-wavelength range of the electromagnetic spectrum by the top perovskite module, and 2) the decrease in the light intensity resulting from the absorption and reflection occurring in the top perovskite module. According to Kirchhoff's laws, the electrical current flowing through each of the elements connected in series is the same. In the case of an ideal solar module, i.e. with infinitely high shunt resistance and low series resistance, the total current is the same as the current photogenerated in each of its constituting cells. A linear relationship exists between the photocurrent generated in a solar cell and its active area, which in turn varies linearly with the cell width for a constant cell length (A= width x length). From this it follows that the total current delivered by a module can be adjusted by varying the width of its constituting cells, hence making it possible to simplify the process of current matching of two modules to fabricate a 2T mechanically stacked tandem module. This additional degree of freedom is unique to the mechanically stacked tandem architecture, an advantage that can be conveniently applied at the industrial level. The electric current Isc,PVK of the perovskite sub-module is obtained as the product of the short circuit current density (Jsc,PVK), which increases with the thickness of the FAPbBr3 film, and the active area (Aac,PVK) of its individual cells. Since all the cells have the same length, the active area is directly proportional to the cell width (wac,PVK). Likewise, the electric current delivered by the bottom organic module depends on the light transmitted by the perovskite module, the thickness of the PM6:Y6:PCBM film (dOPV) and the cell width (wac,f-OPV). The intensity of light transmitted to the bottom organic module is also reduced by the parasitic absorption and reflection across the layers comprising the top perovskite module, especially by the FTO and ITO films employed as the top and bottom electrodes, respectively, as observed in Figure For a given semiconductor employed in the bottom cell of a monolithic tandem, the condition necessary to attain the highest possible efficiency is to choose a wide bandgap cell that absorbs high-energy photons more efficiently than the bottom semiconductor, hence reducing the excess energy lost as heat (e.g. thermalization losses) in the latter for E > Eg. In a working device, this is reflected by a maximization of both the tandem Jsc and Voc, which is only achieved by a specific combination of wide and narrow bandgaps. The tandem is thus designed to have semiconductors with complementary bandgaps. For example, the specific wide bandgap that complements the bandgap of silicon (1.12 eV) is within the range 1.68-1.70 eV, as demonstrated by the highly efficient tandems fabricated by Mariotti et al. As shown in Figure In order to assess the design flexibility enabled by the adjustment of the cell width to match the module photocurrents, we perform optical simulations based on the transfer matrix method. The optical constants of the films comprising the individual modules are given in Figure Two cases are considered to attain the current matching, 1) monolithic tandem cell, where only the variation of the film thickness or optical density (OD) is possible (same active area for both cells, as seen in Figure At OD620 nm lower than 0.27 (tOPV < 53 nm), the cells of the organic module would deliver a current lower than that of the perovskite module, that is, Jsc,f-OPV/Jsc,PVK < 1 (see Figure hence deviating from the ideal condition necessary for a series interconnection. However, if the OD620 nm of the organic film is significantly larger, the photocurrent delivered by the organic module will be larger than that of the top module regardless of the perovskite film thickness (Jsc,f-OPV/Jsc,PVK > 1). In this case, the performance of the tandem module is always limited by the perovskite module regardless of the thickness of the PM6:Y6:PCBM active layer and, therefore, the highest attainable efficiency remains at the 11% threshold. These findings highlight one of the major shortcomings of monolithic tandems, which are built on the same substrate and therefore confine the top and bottom cells to the same active area. The maximum performance that can be attained with this specific perovskite/organic pair is considerably limited by the restrictive set of processing variables, i.e. only the film thicknesses of the layers within the stack can be adjusted. In stark contrast, if the cell width of the organic sub-module is adjusted alongside the OD of both active layers, as shown in Figures Our optical simulations in Figure The additional degree of freedom demonstrated herein at the module level, i.e. photocurrent matching via the cell adjustment, will alleviate the design of mechanically stacked tandems that do not impose the necessity to deposit an energy-and time-consuming recombination layer. Furthermore, this strategy enables the matching of modules with non-complementary semiconductors, being solely based on a geometrical optimization related to module patterning without varying the delicate equilibrium of the cell stack composition, sequence and thickness as performed in a conventional 2T tandem design. Based on our optical simulations, in the following we provide experimental evidence that validates the strategy proposed in this work. In order to prove the concept described above, different tandem modules were fabricated, consisting of a 6-cell semitransparent wide-bandgap FAPbBr3 perovskite module and PM6:Y6:PCBM organic solar modules with different cell widths corresponding to 12 and 13 cells connected in series. The FAPbBr3 modules have high average visible transmittance (AVT ~60%) and high geometric fill factor (>97%). Likewise, the PM6:Y6:PCBM modules show outstanding FF values above 73% and GFF above 96% Table Additionally, in our perovskite/organic tandem configuration we noticed a negligible contribution in the Isc of the perovskite module from the light reflected at the surface of the substrate of the organic module and its silver electrodes. As observed in Table These results support the known fact that the photocurrent from devices forming a tandem in series connection must have a mismatch as small as possible, which then as a consequence maximizes the tandem Voc and the FF, as seen in the Table The efficiency of the tandems employing 12 cell-and 13 cell-organic solar modules are equal to 12.75% and 14.34%, respectively, which is a noticeable improvement with respect to the standalone perovskite and organic modules that is in line with our optical simulations. The device performance of a tandem fabricated with the 13-cell module was further raised to 14.82% when a FAPbBr3 module with slightly higher Voc and FF was employed, as seen in Figure In an attempt to increase the FF of the perovskite/organic tandems, we connected the 13-cell organic module to a perovskite module deposited on an FTO substrate with lower sheet resistance (Tec 7), which effectively led to a tandem FF of 71.16% as shown in Figure Regarding the connection in parallel, we observed that it is also possible to match the Voc of the individual modules by adjusting their cell width. The Voc of the tandem (9.01 V) with a 12cell organic module was almost exactly the average of the perovskite and filtered organic modules, while its Isc and FF were equal to 43.02 mA (0.96% higher than the sum of the individual perovskite and filtered organic Isc) and 65.96%, respectively, leading to an efficiency of 12.63%. Although the tandem with the 13-cell module has a larger Voc mismatch, its higher efficiency of 13.96% is largely the result of an additional cell that overcompensates the slightly lower Isc and FF compared to those of the tandem with the 12-cell organic module. In the case of the 13-cell module, the tandem Voc of 10.10 V is closer to the highest Voc, which is delivered by the filtered organic module. This is due to the series resistance of the individual modules and can be rationalized by analyzing their I-V curves in the vicinity of their respective Voc, as shown in Figure Based on simulations and experiments, we have proven that it is possible to fabricate perovskite/organic tandem modules with matched photocurrents and voltages via the adjustment of their cell width. This concept allows the independent fabrication of each submodule, which avoids the risk of damaging the bottom module during the deposition of the top module, eliminates the requirement to deposit a recombination layer and adds a degree of freedom to the adjustment of the film thickness or optical density. To experimentally demonstrate this strategy, we combined a semitransparent, wide-bandgap FAPbBr3 module with a narrow-bandgap PM6:Y6:PCBM module having efficiencies of 6.69% and 12.46%, respectively, to obtain a tandem module with efficiency of 14.94% on an aperture area of 20.25 cm 2 . The focus of this contribution has been placed on the successful proof-of-concept of matching the Isc and Voc of thin film photovoltaic modules rather than the attainment of high efficiencies, which is commonplace for tandem solar cells with small active areas (≤ 1.0 cm 2 ) and complementary bandgaps. In contrast to the geometrically fixed monolithic structure, our findings show that adjusting the cell width for the development of mechanically-stacked tandem modules lead to higher efficiencies if non-complementary semiconductors are at hand. The enhanced design flexibility and independent fabrication enabled by this concept opens new opportunities in the design of semitransparent tandem modules for application in windows or greenhouses, whose visual transmittance can be conveniently adjusted by using a wider range of semiconductors. Semitransparent wide-bandgap perovskite modules Anhydrous dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (99.9%), Ethyl acetate (99%, anhydrous), Titanium diisopropoxide (bis-acetylacetonate), Lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide salt (Li-TFSI) (99.95%), 4-tert-butyl pyridine (tBP, 96%), Niobium ethoxide was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. PbBr2 (99.99%) was purchased by TCI Chemical. Formamidinium bromide (FABr, 99.98%), neo-Pentylammonium chloride, iso-Pentylammonium chloride were purchased from Great Cell Materials. PTAA (10kDa) was purchased from Solaris Chem. Tin(IV) oxide, 15% in H2O colloidal dispersion was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Transparent perovskite solar modules have been fabricated using patterned FTO substrates (2. Al2O3 nanoparticles in 2-propanol at 3000 rpm for 30s. After spin coating, the film was dried at 80°C for 2 minutes. The porosity of the film reduces the refractive index compared to bulk Al2O3 and provide a facile method to reduce the reflections at the ITO/air interface. The inverted structure was chosen for the OPV modules in this work. The layer stack was glass/ITO/ZnO/PM6:Y6:PC61BM/MoOx/Ag. 6 cm x 6 cm glass substrates coated with indium tin oxide (ITO) with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω/□ were purchased form VisionTek. Zinc Oxide (ZnO) nanoparticle dispersion (N-10;2.5 wt.-% in isopropanol) was purchased from Avantama. Poly[( The laser patterning of the solar modules, "P1", "P2" and "P3", was conducted by means of a Spirit 1040-8 SHG laser from Spectra Physics (Pmax= 6 W, λ =520 nm) with a femtosecond pulse width in combination with a galvanometer scanner with f-theta lens and a focal length of 506 mm. The module fabrication process was carried out as follows: The glass/ITO substrates were "P1" laser patterned with the fs-laser, followed by a cleaning step with a microfiber tissue and toluene. N-10 was coated with a doctor blade and annealed for 30 minutes at 200 °C in ambient atmosphere. PM6:Y6:PC61BM (1:1,1:0.1, 20 mg/ml in chloroform) was stirred at room temperature for 2 hours in a nitrogen-filled glovebox before being coated in air with a doctor blade using the following processing parameters: 120 μl of solution are injected into a 400 μm gap between substrate and blade (both heated to 30 °C). Coating with 5-10 mm/s formed a fast-drying wet film, that covered the substrate completely. The resulting dry films had a maximum optical density between 0.50 and 0.60. The devices were subsequently annealed at 110 °C for 10 minutes under inert atmosphere. Subsequently, 10-nm MoOx were thermally evaporated, followed by the "P2" laser patterning step. Finally, 50-nm Ag were thermally evaporated, followed by the "P3" laser patterning step. The current-voltage characteristics of all the modules were recorded with a precision source measurement unit (B2901A by Keysight) under illumination by a class AAA solar simulator (LOT) providing an AM1.5G spectrum with an intensity of 100 mW/cm 2 , which was calibrated by employing a silicon reference cell. The tandem configuration of the perovskite and organic modules was realized by placing the organic solar module underneath the perovskite module, which was mounted on a glass cover by using stripes of sticky tape on the edges of the substrate far from the active area. The constituting cells of the semitransparent, top mini-module based on the wide band gap perovskite FAPbBr3 were oriented perpendicularly with respect to those of the bottom organic module, as observed in the Figure During the I-V measurements, the performance of the individual as well as the tandem solar modules was recorded while keeping both devices inside a closed metallic box, in which a constant N2 flow was maintained throughout the complete procedure. Sticky bus bars were attached to the module terminals to extract the photocurrent via wiring with electric clips, as seen in the Figure The average and standard deviation of the photovoltaic parameters of the tandems were calculated over three consecutive I-V scans in reverse bias, whereas the measurements for the individual organic modules were performed in forward bias. The latter were exposed to light soaking for about 30 s before the beginning of the measurements. To decrease the hysteresis and enhance the performance of the semitransparent wide bandgap perovskite modules, I-V scans in forward and reverse bias were recorded, followed by maximum power point tracking for 2 min and finally another round of I-V measurements in the same sequence were performed. When analyzed individually, a piece of black cardboard was placed at the bottom of the perovskite module (on the sputtered ITO electrode) to isolate its Isc from any light reflection coming from the metallic box. We observed a negligible impact on its Isc when the black cardboard was replaced by an organic module, as shown below. Specifically, the values for ITO and ZnO were determined by reflectance / transmittance measurements according to Čampa, Also, the reflectance of the OPV module is incident on the perovskite module for a second time from the back (silver electrodes). Voc and FF values were taken from the measurements of single cells as FFOPV = 0.63, FFPVKT = 0.7, Voc,OPV = 0.8 V and Voc,PVKT = 1.5 V. A thickness dependence of these quantities was not considered in this approximation. The IQE values of OPV and perovskite were set as 80% and 100%, respectively, based on the comparison of the calculated with the measured Jsc values of the single cells. For the simulation of the tandem module with equal cell widths, we assumed the sum of the voltages and the smaller value of the current, the fill factor was taken as the average value of the single values. For the module with adjusted cell widths, the width of one cell of the OPV module was chosen so that the currents of both modules are equal, as illustrated in Figure Figure The higher Jsc that is produced by an OPV cell compared to a perovskite cell thus leads to a larger number of cells and, therefore, to a higher Voc compared to the case of equal cell width. For the architecture with equal cell width, we assumed the minimum loss of 5% (assuming that the modules are fabricated with optimum cell width). For a parallel interconnection, the total current delivered by the tandem (Itandem) equals the sum of the individual currents delivered by the perovskite (IPVKT) and shaded organic modules (If-OPV) at a given voltage. However, when the applied voltage equals the tandem Voc, no net current can be extracted from the device, which means that Itandem = IPVKT + If-OPV = 0. From this, it follows that IPVKT = -If-OPV. In the region between the perovskite and shaded organic Voc, there will be a point on the V axis (I= 0) that lies on the straight line uniting the same I value on the individual curves but of opposite sign; this value represents the expected tandem Voc, which is equal to 9.01 V and 9.91 V for the tandems built with the organic modules having 12 and 13 cells, respectively. A similar procedure can be used to estimate the tandem Isc, the difference is to make the geometric construction in the vicinity of the individual Isc. In this case, Vtandem = VPVKT + Vf-OPV = 0 on the I axis and, therefore, VPVKT = -Vf-OPV. The tandem Isc will lie on the line passing through the same voltage values but of opposite sign. tandem module connected in series in LTspice, whose equivalent electric circuit is displayed in Figure