The approximate power-law dependence of the apparent viscosity of liquids on shear rate is often argued to arise from a distribution of energy barriers. However, recent work on the Prandtl model, which consists of a point mass being dragged by a damped, harmonic spring past a sinusoidal potential, revealed a similar dependence of the friction on velocity as that of many liquids. Here, we demonstrate that this correlation is not only qualitative but can also be made quantitative over a broad temperature range using merely three dimensionless parameters, at least for alkanes, in particular hexadecane, at elevated pressure p. These and other observations made on our all-atom alkane simulations at elevated pressure point to the existence of an elementary instability causing shear thinning. In addition, the equilibrium viscosity shows power law dependence on p near the cavitation pressure but an exponential dependence at large p, while the additional parameter(s) in the Carreau-Yasuda equation compared to other rheological models turn out justifiable. Research on how liquids oppose shear as a function of shear stress or shear rate, temperature, and also pressure supposedly started almost exactly a century ago [6], when Schalek and Szegvari sion, defined as the ratio of shear stress τ and shear rate γ, became continuously smaller with increasing shear rate. Ostwald The equilibrium viscosity η 0 (T , p) generally increases with pressure p and decreases with temperature T It remains actively debated what shear-thinning model describe real-laboratory or in-silico experimental data the best Another debate evolves around the question what time-temperature, or even time-temperature-pressure superposition principle is best suited for lubricants. For example, Bair In this work, we revisit the dependence of the viscosity of simple liquids depends on shear-rate, temperature, pressure and molecular weight. While numerous simulation studies For our investigation, in which we mean to understand trends rather than to produce accurate numbers for specific molecules, we see computer simulation as the ideal tool, despite essentially unavoidable flaws in interaction potentials and the difficulty to predict reliable viscosity data for shear rates below 10 7 Hz. However, the advantage of simulations is that high shear rates can be reached while conditions such as shear rate, pressure, and temperature can be set to a target precision. Moreover, undesired effects like frictional heating can be suppressed or at least be quantified. Last but not least, the pressure dependence of the viscosity can be investigated even under a well-defined isotropic, tensile stress. We continue this paper with a background section on rheological models in Sect. 2. Theory and numerical methods are introduced in Sect. 3. Results are presented in Sect. 4, while conclusions are drawn in Sect. 5. The rheology of a broad class of different liquids including standard base oils, water, or blood is captured quite well by the Carreau-Yasuda (CY) equation, where η 0 is the equilibrium viscosity, γ0 is a reference shear rate, near which shear thinning starts or has started to set in, while η ∞ is a parameter discussed in detail in the next paragraph. Two other popular models arise as limiting cases of Carreau-Yasuda, namely the Carreau model An arguably tricky term in Eq. ( Coming back to the discussion of rheological models: Carreau A beneficial aspect of the Carreau model is that the leading-order corrections to the linear-response viscosity are, as they should be, of order γ2 Another shear-rate dependence of the viscosity, which can be motivated from Eyring theory, is where the ideal value for γ0 may differ from that of another rheological model. This relation makes the shear stress increase logarithmically with γ at large γ while converging to the equilibrium viscosity η 0 at γ → 0, as is typical for boundary lubrication. This is arguably the main reason for the use of this and related relations in state-rate models of frictional contacts where N enumerates the data points. This way, errors do not depend on whether stress or viscosity are targeted. To not bias the fits to large or low shear rates, we furthermore used γn+1 / γn constant. 3 Theory and methods In the Prandtl model, a mass point is pulled with a spring over a corrugated substrate. In addition to the conservative forces, Stokes' friction terms arise, which are argued to reflect lattice vibrations in the substrate. However, this explicit damping can also be assumed to occur in the pulling spring, in which case the mass point's equation of motion in the presence of thermal noise Γ th (t) reads Here x is the position of the "Prandtl atom", ẋ its velocity, v 0 the velocity of the pulling spring, γ 0 is a damping term of unit kg/s, V the amplitude of the sinusoidal potential through which the atom is dragged, 2π/q is the period of the potential, k the stiffness of the pulling spring, and Γ G is thermal noise with the expectation values where k B T the thermal energy and δ(...) is the Dirac delta function. We have the liberty to use a unit system of our choice, i.e., one in which q, V 0 , and γ define the units used for inverse length, energy, and weight per time. When doing so, it becomes clear that this form of the Prandtl model has two parameters defining the shape of a F (v) relation, since only the reduced stiffness k ≡ k/(q 2 V ) and the reduced temperature T ≡ k B T /V remain, in which case the dynamical equation to be solved, introducing Γth (t) Γth (t In this model, only two dimensionless numbers, k and T , determine the shape of a η( γ) relation, e.g., the exponents n and a that would be obtained when fitting simulation data to a Carreau-Yasuda relation. Absolute values, such as the equilibrium viscosity η 0 or the crossover shear rate γ0 are then determined by the model parameters defining the units in the Prandtl model. For example, given a value of k and assuming k and V 0 to be temperature-independent, the small-temperature dependency of the equilibrium-damping constant of the Prandtl model, which is proportional to the viscosity, reveals Arrhenius type dependence Substrate and total potential energy for k = 0.7, which is used at the reference state (300 MPa, 500 K, which corresponds to t = 0.076). The energy barrier ∆E = 0.14 is defined at the moment of time when the position of the driving spring coincides with the maximum of the substrate potential. When varying temperature of a large range, it seems clear that both V 0 and k depend on temperature. Specifically, at large T , the all-atom liquid expands, which will reduce V 0 supposedly more than k. To reflect such effects of thermal dilation in the model, we allowed k where T k is an empirical parameter, which would need to get readjusted as a function of pressure and the degree of polymerization. The exponential dependence is motivated by the Boltzmann distribution without any further justification. However, we note that the value used for T k was only T = 90.5 K, is clearly less than the smallest investigated temperature of 300 K. Before discussing some important asymptotic limits of the Prandtl model, we wish to justify why we damp the spring motion rather than the velocity of an atom or rather a material point relative to the substrate. First, the kinetic energy of monolayers sliding across a substrate was shown to be related to the (anharmonic) coupling of vibrations in the monolayer A few properties of the Prandtl model are worth reciting, most of which can be found in The fourth asymptotic limit to be discussed is the high-velocity limit. In this case, the atom moves at constant velocity of v 0 plus small fluctuations, which can be described using perturbation theory, The firstorder perturbation is a time-dependent force qV sin(ωt) with ω = qv 0 . For ω → ∞, the response function x1 (ω) ∝ 1/ω so that the dissipated power P ∝ |ω x1 | 2 is independent of ω, which in turn means that the friction force is proportional to 1/ω or 1/v, which, when applied to laminar flow would translate to n = -1. Couette flow would no longer be possible, as discussed in the introduction. Adding inertia to the model would further impede Couette flow at large γ as x1 would then be proportional to 1/ω 2 at large ω, which decreases n to n = -3. Irrespective of the choice of the mass, extreme shear thinning at very high shear rate occurs in the Prandtl model, when the spring head moves so fast that the energy released during an instability can no longer be transferred into heat before the atom undergoes the next instability. We would argue that similar statements can be made for any other systems and degrees of freedom showing decreasing friction with increasing velocity. Non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD) simulations are carried out on a bulk liquid consisting of approximately 5,000 atoms using the open-source code-LAMMPS Results are reported for a fixed normal pressure, which was achieved as follows: In a first set of short simulations at fixed volumes and shear rates, an equation of state for the give shear rate was ascertained and the volume determined by interpolation (never extrapolation!) at which the target pressure was expected to occur. This volume was then used in a longer run during which the effective viscosity was calculated. The average normal stress in those long runs always turned out within 1% at finite stress and ±1 MPa at zero stress, where small relative errors are somewhat difficult to achieve. In the case of moderate, mean tensile stresses, the same average value σ 33 value can be reached with two different densities. We first investigate the dependence of the viscosity of hexadecane as a function of temperature at a pressure of p 33 = 300 MPa, where p 33 ≡ -σ 33 . The latter value was chosen such that it is high enough to almost represent boundary-lubrication conditions but small enough so that the equilibrium viscosity could be calculated down to a temperature of T = 320 K, which would be at the cold end of engine oil after warming up. Fig. Although it has been a matter of ongoing debates what functional form describes data as that presented in Fig. Relative standard-deviations converted in percentages, χ % ≡ 100•χ, are listed in Table Since Carreau (Ca) and Cross (Cr) are exact limits of Carreau-Yasuda (CY), they cannot outperform CY. It is similarly clear that Eyring (E) should be the least accurate of the four models, because it arises as an approximate asymptotic limit from the other models. However, the interesting question is to what degree increasing the number of fit parameters from 2 (E) to 3 (Ca, Cr) to 4 (CY) improves the goodness of the fits. Our personal view is that the dividing line between justified and unjustified additional parameter is a reduction of χ by a factor that should be clearly smaller than k/(k + 1) when k is the number of originally adjustable coefficients. Table all investigated model functions, even that based on Eyring, matches the MD data in the representation of Fig. The just-mentioned feature of the Prandtl model motivated us to explore to what extent the two dimensionless parameters of the Prandtl model can be tuned to match experimental or realistic, in-silico data. The interesting aspect of such an analysis is that the model parameters can be fixed at one temperature and changes in η( γ) be estimated without requiring adjustment of the parameters beyond including a smooth temperature dependence of k. Fig. The final analysis in this section is concerned with the temperature dependence of hexadecane's viscosity at the relatively large, constant compressive stress of p 33 = 300 MPa. Fig. temperature remains, as we have not yet managed to compute an equilibrium viscosity below 320 K within our statistical error margin of about 1% from the full MD simulations. However, the Prandtl model, which accounts for the cross-over reasonably well, while clearly having a constant energy barrier supports an extension of an Arrhenius dependence to smaller temperature. The model thereby also reveals that the deviation from Arrhenius at large T might not be caused by temperature-dependent energy barriers but could be owing to the ratio ∆E/k B T not being a large number, at which point the exponential factor exp(∆E/k B T ) no longer dominates other temperature dependencies. To further illuminate the reason for the FST, we computed the diffusion coefficient D of carbon atoms from their time-dependent root-mean-square displacement (see also Sect. 4.4) to explore if the temperature dependence of the diffusion coefficient starts to decouple from that of the viscosity, as it happens at the FST of glass-forming melts. Fig. Besides the temperature dependence of the viscosity η at fixed pressure p 33 , we also analyzed η(p) at fixed temperature. This time, however, we present the results in the form of shear stress τ as a function of shear rate γ, see the main panel in Fig. Analysis of the equilibrium viscosity, see Fig. where the parameters η 1 , η 2 , μ, and V * are phenomenological adjustable parameter and β = 1/k B T V * can be interpreted as V * ≈ ∂∆E/∂p at intermediate pressures and be called "free volume" or Peter, both names probably being similarly meaningful, also because V * can take a different value in non-equilibrium situations when replacing the hydrostatic pressure p in Eq. ( A few more words on the decrease of viscosity at p p * may be in place. The line represented in Fig. We do not intend to claim that the functional form of η(p) proposed in Eq. ( In fact, we find the McEwen η(p) dependence, which can be cast as the η 2 = 0 limiting case of Eq. ( In addition to changing pressure and temperature, we also altered the degree of polymerization, P , however, only in a relatively narrow range in which molecules are much too short to entangle. From the results reported in Table Since the early days of shear-thinning studies, attempts were made to rationalize phenomenological relations in terms of microscopic models and to relate shear thinning to structural changes It might have came as a surprise to many when Jadhao and Robbins For reason of completeness, we also present data that we produced to determine the diffusion coefficient from equilibrium simulations in Fig. This work demonstrates that the shear-thinning of alkanes at high pressure can be mapped quite well onto the Prandtl model. Fixing its two dimensional parameters at a given temperature and pressure even allows changes in the equilibrium viscosity and the functional form of η( γ) to be reproduced over a reasonably broad temperature range without readjusting parameters. To a large degree, the parametrization is even transferable between different alkanes. Moreover, the obtained activation barrier of ∆E ≈ 0.08 eV that we obtain at a pressure of p = 300 MPa is greater but of similar order of magnitude as experimental result for the relaxational dynamics in polyethylen melts at zero pressure, which are close to 0.05 eV at ambient pressure Our simulation data on all-atom alkanes, in particular n-hexadecane also indicates that the additional parameter(s) used in a Carreau-Yasuda fit are justified, at least at elevated pressure. We find a fit to have a median error of roughly 12%, which reduces to about 6% when using an additional parameter in the Cross model. This error is cut once more into one half when using Carreau instaed of Cross, and by almost another factor of two with Carreau-Yasuda, at which point the systematic error is on par with our stochastic error. 