A novel spin texture formed by Cooper pair spins is found theoretically with a phase string attached by half-quantized vortices at both ends in a unit cell and characterized by its topologically rich vortex structure in a spin-triplet pairing. It is stable at an intermediate field region sandwiched by two conventional singular vortex phases below and above it. The d-vector direction of this spin texture is tilted from the principal crystal axes, whose spin susceptibility is neither the normal Pauli one χN nor zero, describing microscopically the process of the d-vector rotation phenomena observed recently in UTe2. We compare the spin texture and singular vortex state in relation to the quasi-particle structure with Majorana zero modes for STM, the nuclear spin resonance spectral line width for NMR and μSR, and the vortex form factors for SANS to facilitate the identification of the pairing symmetry in UTe2. A spin-triplet pairing is extremely rare in nature. However, its utility is highly envisioned in fundamental physics to applications such as quantum computation, except for superfluid 3 He Only a few phases have been identified among the rich 3×3×2=18 dimensional order parameter space spanned by SO(3) spin ×SO(3) orbital ×U The concept of the d-vector rotation is well established in neutral 3 He superfluids UTe 2 is a newly found heavy fermion superconductor (3) There exists a variety of non-trivial superconducting properties. The polar Kerr experiment shows that SC breaks time-reversal symmetry These experimental findings provide strong evidence for a spin-triplet pairing in UTe 2 . The order parameter must be properly configured to describe the d-vector rotation phenomenon microscopically. Since χ s (T ) decreases below T c for three principal directions at lower fields, the d-vector must have three components with complex numbers whose transition temperatures associated with each component are nearly degenerate; otherwise, continuous d-vector rotation is impossible. Upon increasing the H b(c)-axis, χ s (H)(< χ N ) starts to gradually increase toward χ N at approximately 5T (1T), and finally reaches χ N at approximately H b rot =15T (H c rot =5T). Since H i rot (i = b, c) depends on the field orientations, those are slightly different, reflecting that the original spin space symmetry SO(3) spin is weakly broken The purpose of this study is to find a stable spin texture in a spin-triplet pairing under SO(3) spin symmetry, by solving the microscopic quasi-classical Eilenberger equation for a spin-triplet pairing We can obtain physical quantities from the quasiclassical Green's function defined in the 4 × 4 matrix in particle-hole and spin spaces, depending on the direction of the relative momentum of a Cooper pair k, the center-of-mass coordinate of the Cooper pair r, and the Matsubara frequency ω n = (2n + 1)πk B T . It satisfies the normalization condition g 2 = -π 2 1. g(k, r, ω n ) is calculated using the Eilenberger equation where It includes the paramagnetic effects due to the Zeeman term μ B B(r) • σ, where μ B is a renormalized Bohr magneton, B(r) is the flux density of the internal field, and σ is the Pauli matrix. In this study, we consider the two-dimensional cylindrical Fermi surface, k = k F (cos θ, sin θ), with the Fermi velocity v(k) = v F (cos θ, sin θ), where 0 ≤ θ < 2π. We assume the chiral p-wave pairing symmetry with the pairing function φ(k) = e iθ independent of the spin state. In the assumption, the spin-triplet order parameter is given by ∆(k, r) = iφ(k)d(r) • σ σy , with the local d-vector d(r). The selfconsistent condition for ∆(k, r) is given as where N 0 is the DOS in the normal state, ω c is the cutoff energy setting ω c = 20πk B T c with the transition temperature T c , and , where g is a coupling constant. In our calculation, we use the relation 1/gN 0 = ln(T /T c ) + πk B T |ωn|≤ωc 1/|ω n |. The vector potential for the internal magnetic field A(r) is also self-consistently determined by where g 0 is a component of the quasi-classical Green's function ĝ in spin space, namely, The paramagnetic moment is given by where the normal state paramagnetic moment M 0 (r) = 2μ 2 B N 0 B(r). We solve eq. ( where η is a positive infinitesimal constant. Here, σ indicates the spin state and g R σ is defined as To obtain g R σ (k, r, E), we solve eq. ( Local spin polarization of the Cooper pair is given by the local d-vector as S(r We obtain a stable spin texture by the self-consistent calculation. The spin texture under the magnetic field B = 0.01B 0 with μ = 1 at T = 0.2T c is shown in Fig. The phase singularities at (0, ±y c ) can be viewed as a half-quantized vortex (HQV) because locally d -e iφ-+ d + = e iφ-/2 {d x cos(φ -/2) + d y sin(φ -/2)}. Therefore, the spin texture obtained is described as the two HQVs (red and blue dots in Fig. The local spin of the Cooper pair is polarized in the +y-direction perpendicular to the field direction z on the boundary edge of the hexagonal unit cell shown in Fig. Internal field B(r) and paramagnetic moment M para (r) for the spin texture are shown in Fig. These remarkable three peak structures in P (B) can be observable by the muon spin rotation (μSR) experiment The paramagnetic moment M para (r) shown in Fig. P (M ) is directly measured by NMR on 125 Te as KS The zero energy LDOS for the spin texture with B = 0.01B 0 , μ = 1, and T = 0.2T c is shown in Fig. A singular vortex with S z in HSC has a spinpolarized Majorana zero energy mode regardless of the Pauli paramagnetic effect. The Pauli paramagnetic effect hybridizes a spin-polarized zero energy mode in the vortex core with quasiparticles in the normal spin state for a singular vortex with S y in LSC. Despite the hybridization of the spin states, their energy levels do not shift from zero energy. The zero energy modes in a singular vortex with S y are protected by the symmetry of the magnetic π-rotation around the x-axis. The magnetic π-rotation symmetry gives a topological winding number that guarantees the existence of two zero energy modes in a singular vortex with S y (see the detail in Supplements). In summary, we microscopically described the d-vector rotation phenomena by solving the Eilenberger equation for a spin-triplet pairing to understand this concept. The obtained spin texture S(r) for MSC stabilized in between the two singular vortex states with uniform S for LSC (HSC) with S ⊥ B ( S B) was fully characterized, providing several important indications to understand experimental data on UTe 2 . Table One (KM) of the authors thanks K. Ishida, S. Kitagawa, H. Sakai, D. Aoki, Y. Shimizu, S. Kittaka, T. Sakakibara, Y. Tokunaga, Y. Haga, and A. Miyake for helpful discussions. In particular, K. Ishida allowed us to share their unpublished data which motivated the present project. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI, No.17K05553 and No. 21K03455, and performed in part at Aspen Center for Physics, which is supported by National Science Foundation grant PHY-2210452. The unit cell is divided into 41 × 41 mesh points, where we obtain the quasi-classical Green's functions, d(r), A(r), and M para (r). When we solve eq. ( with where μ = μ B B 0 /E 0 and κ = B 0 /(E 0 √ 2N 0 ) = 7ζ(3)/8κ GL . We use a large GL parameter κ GL = 60. Since magnetic fields are applied to the z-direction, in the symmetric gauge, the vector potential A(r) = ( B × r)/2+a(r), where B = (0, 0, B) is a uniform flux density and a(r) is related to the internal field B(r) = B + ∇ × a(r). We consider the hexagonal vortex lattice whose coordinate in the unit cell is given by with -0.5 ≤ s i ≤ 0.5 (i = 1, 2), u 1 = l(1, 0, 0), and /2, 0). The spin texture is obtained by the self-consistent calculation from the following initial spatial structure of the d-vector. The initial d-vector has the singularities of φ z , φ + , and φ -at (0, 0), (0, -3R 0 ), and (0, +3R 0 ), respectively, with 2π-phase winding. We constrain the d-vector to remain in the stable spin-polarized state except within a radius of 3R 0 around (0, 0). The free region is introduced to converge in a smooth structure. The singularities of φ ± allow to move to the favorable position, and the singularity of φ z splits into two singularities with π-phase winding in the converged process. Note that a singular vortex structure with a uniformly polarized spin state is a possible self-consistent solution in this calculation. The singular vortex structure is stabilized under high magnetic field or at high temperature. As a result of the large length scale of the spin-polarized rotation region, the spin texture is unfavorable for a small unit cell of the vortex lattice. As shown in Fig. where ĥ(k) = ( 2 /2m)(k 2 -k 2 F ) 1-μ B B σz is the Hamiltonian in the normal state, and ∆ is OP which approaches • σy e iφ , (S.5) far away from the vortex core. The BdG Hamiltonian has particle-hole symmetry defined by C H BdG (k, φ) C -1 = -H * BdG (-k, φ). The singular vortex has the magnetic π-rotation symmetry around the x-axis, which implies R H BdG (k, φ) R -1 = H * BdG (-k x , k y , -φ). From the combination of the magnetic π-rotation symmetry and the particle-hole symmetry, the BdG Hamiltonian obeys ( C R) H BdG (k, φ)( C R) -1 = -H BdG (k x , -k y , -φ). The combined symmetry defined the chiral symmetry Γ H BdG (k x , k y = 0), φ = 0, π) Γ -1 = -H BdG (k x , k y = 0), φ = 0, π) with Γ = C R in the symmetric space k y = 0 and φ = 0 or π. The chiral symmetry enables us to introduce the one-dimensional winding number as follows: w φ=0,π = -1 4πi dk x tr Γ H -1 BdG (k x , k y = 0), φ = 0, π) ×∂ kx H BdG (k x , k y = 0), φ = 0, π) . (S.6) For the singular vortex with S y, the one-dimensional winding number is evaluated as w 0 = 2 and w π = -2 under the Pauli paramagnetic effect, μ B B = 0. The difference of the winding (w 0 -w π )/2 = 2 provides the number of zero energy modes in the singular vortex core. For the singular vortex without Pauli paramagnetic effect, μ B B = 0, the difference of the winding (w 0 -w π )/2 = 1 implies that a spin-polarized Majorana zero energy mode is localized in the vortex core. Note that we can evaluate the one-dimensional winding number for a singular vortex with S z, in which the difference of the winding (w 0 -w π )/2 = 1, regardless of the Pauli paramagnetic effect.