Non-volatile memory (NVM) devices that reliably operate at temperatures above 300 o C are currently non-existent and remains a critically unmet challenge in the development of hightemperature (T) resilient electronics, necessary for many emerging, complex computing and sensing in harsh environments. Ferroelectric AlxSc1-xN exhibits strong potential for utilization in NVM devices operating at very high temperatures (> 500 °C) given its stable and high remnant polarization (PR) above 100 μC/cm 2 with demonstrated ferroelectric transition temperature (TC) > 1000 °C. Here, we demonstrate an Al0.68Sc0.32N ferroelectric diode based NVM device that can reliably operate with clear ferroelectric switching up to 600 °C with distinguishable On and Off states. The coercive field (EC) from the Pulsed I-V measurements is found to be -5.84 (EC-) and +5.98 (EC+) (+/-0.1) MV/cm at room temperature (RT) and found to decrease with increasing temperature up to 600 °C. The devices exhibit high remnant polarizations (> 100 μC/cm 2 ) which are stable at high temperatures. At 500 °C, our devices show 1 million read cycles and stable On-Off ratio above 1 for > 6 hours. Finally, the operating voltages of our AlScN ferrodiodes are < 15 V at 600 °C which is well matched and compatible with Silicon Carbide (SiC) based high temperature logic technology, thereby making our demonstration a major step towards commercialization of NVM integrated high-T computers. Non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies that reliably operate at temperatures above 300 o C are not available commercially and remain a critical gap in the design of extreme environment electronics. Incumbent nonvolatile random-access memory (NVRAM) technologies relying on magnetic, FLASH, phase-change, and resistive switching mechanisms rapidly degrade at < 300 °C. Among the NVM technologies explored at temperatures exceeding 300 °C, three have received significant attention: flash memory, resistive memory based on oxides, and ferroelectric memory. 17-20 Among these, only flash memory, which operates at approximately 200 °C, is a commercially available product. Ferroelectric materials exhibit remanent polarization, field-driven switching, and the ability to retain the switched state for an extended time. This makes them well-suited for low-power nonvolatile memory applications as they also exhibit fast switching speed, low switching energy, and have potential for multibit operation. In contrast wurtzite structured III-Nitride based ferroelectric AlxSc1-xN materials have strong potential to be utilized in NVM devices, which can operate at very high temperatures as they concurrently exhibits high PR > 100 μC/ cm 2 , large coercive field (EC) >2 MV/cm, and a very high ferroelectric transition temperature (TC) > 1000 °C. 23 Al0.68Sc0.32N-based scaled ferroelectric memory devices have already been demonstrated in multiple reports with robust ferroelectricity even demonstrated in 5 nm thick films. As has previously been observed with similar devices Positive-Up Negative-Down (PUND) measurements offer a time-resolved approach to probe the signature of ferroelectricity and to explore the polarization dynamics of AlScN ferroelectric devices, allowing observation of the ferroelectric response separated from leakage and capacitive charging. Write longevity (Fig. We demonstrate ferroelectric diode based NVM devices with an MIM structure of Ni/native oxide/Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt (111) that can stably operate up to 600 °C. The temperature dependent ferroelectric properties and memory device characteristics were evaluated using quasi-DC, AC and pulsed IV measurements up to 600 °C. The temperature-dependent quasi-DC I-V curves exhibit clear ferroelectric switching up to 600 °C with distinct On and Off states. At 500 °C, these devices exhibit an unprecedented 1 million read cycles and maintain a stable On-Off ratio for over 6 hours. At elevated temperatures the write voltages of the devices remain below 15 V, demonstrating compatibility with SiC based logic devices. The devices demonstrated herein therefore represent a significant step towards realization of digital computing systems capable of operating at high temperatures and in a variety of harsh environment applications. The AlScN thin films containing 32% Sc concentration (Al0.68Sc0.32N) were grown on (111)oriented Pt wafers using a physical vapor deposition (PVD) system. The growth conditions, substrates and some aspects of device fabrication are identical to our prior published reports. To create the pattern for the top electrode, the Al capping layer underwent etching using a 1% HF solution. Subsequently, the Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt (111) samples were coated with a negative photoresist (NR71-3000p), followed by photolithography to define the top electrode pattern. After development using a RD6 developer, a 100 nm thick layer of Ni was deposited as the top electrode metal using a sputtering system (Kurt J. Lesker PVD 75 PRO-Line Sputterer), The deposition rate was set at 2.5 Å/s and took place under low pressure condition of 5 x 10 -7 Torr. Then, the samples were immersed in a Remover PG (Photoresist Remover) for approximately 10 min, gently shaken to lift off any excess metal and then rinsed with deionized water. Finally, the samples were dried using N2 blowing. To study the surface morphology of the top layer of Al0.68Sc0.32N MIM device, AFM topography scans were performed on the AlScN sample using an OmegaScope Smart SPM (AIST-NT) setup. Additionally, scanning TEM characterization and image acquisition were conducted using a JEOL F200 instrument operated at 200 kV acceleration voltage. A cross-sectional TEM sample was prepared using a TESCAN S8000X system. Pt protecting layers were deposited using electronbeam and ion-beam techniques to ensure the preservation of the sample top surfaces and to prevent heating effects during focused-ion-beam milling. The focused-ion-beam milling of the lamella was carried out at 30 keV. Subsequently, an in-situ lift-out technique was used with the assistance of a Kleindiek probe manipulator. The final steps involved thinning and cleaning the lamella at energies of 10 keV and 5 keV, respectively. In order to characterize the device performance, several electrical measurements including currentvoltage (I-V), capacitance-voltage (C-V) and positive-up and negative-down (PUND) measurements were conducted at room temperature. The PUND test involved a voltage waveform consisting of four monopolar pulses. The pulse width, rise/fall times, and delay (interval between subsequent pulses) were specified as 5 μs, 800 ns, and 10 μs, respectively. The RT measurements were performed in air in a Cascade Microtech (MPS-150) probe station using a Keithley 4200A semiconductor characterization system. For temperature-dependent measurements such as DC I-V, pulsed I-V, PUND, the device was placed in a vacuum environment of approximately 10 -4 Torr. These measurements were conducted in a custom MicroXact high temperature probe station using tungsten probes. PUND and DC-IV characterization was performed using the same Keithley 4200A system. Pulsed I-V and write longevity measurements were performed with a Radiant Technologies Multiferroic II Ferroelectric Tester at 10 kHz unless otherwise specified. Read endurance measurements at RT were carried out by a Keithley 4200A semiconductor characterization system with a ±19 V DC pre-soak, followed by 5V, 100 μs square pulses for the read current. Similarly, the 500 °C read endurance measurements were performed with a Keysight B1500A Semiconductor Parameter Analyzer to accommodate limitations in the high temperature probe station consisted of simultaneously measuring On and Off electrodes with a ±13 V DC presoak, followed by 5V, 100 μs square pulses for the read current. Read retention measurements were performed with a Measurement Computing USB-1808X DAQ with the 5V, 10 kHz waveform provided by the Keysight B1500A on electrodes switched in the same manner as the read endurance measurements. All electrical measurements were carried out on top Ni circular electrodes with a 100 μm diameter unless otherwise specified, which were positioned on the Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt samples. Maximum PUND, I-V, and write voltages were varied with changing temperature to account for temperature-variable switching voltage. The positive coercive field decreases with increasing temperature. The negative coercive field decreases with increasing temperature. Note that the negative coercive field value at 600 °C is not shown Fig. This expression allows us to clearly deduce that the On-Off ratio decreases with temperature according to the relation R ∝ exp ( We observed the decrease of On-Off ratio with increasing temperature, whereas the current difference (On current-Off current) was found to increase with increasing temperature. This indicates that the reduction in On-Off ratio is due to a larger global increase in leakage current. that leakage current is a DC effect and is therefore not affected significantly by ramp rate, however higher ramp rates can survive higher voltages. Because the "onset" value of the diode response was not independently measured, it was selected from lower PUND measurements. In general, the PUND maximum started at 5 V and was walked up by 500 mV increments. At low voltages, no pulse or leakage current is evident, and instead only a charging spike owing to capacitance (both device and parasitic) is observed. At diode onset, this charging is rapidly dominated, and this point was used to define diode onset. The noncapacitive current rises quite rapidly at the onset of switching, and thus the onset threshold is not very sensitive to the selected ratio. Device wake-up is a well-known phenomenon whereby depinning and domain wall motion of the ferroelectric domains occurs most notably in the first few switches. This is similar in mechanism to the observed changes seen in Fig. 