Due to its extremely short timescale, the non-equilibrium melting of metals is exceptionally difficult to probe experimentally. The knowledge of melting mechanisms is thus based mainly on the results of theoretical predictions. This work reports on the investigation of ultrafast melting of thin polycrystalline Pd films studied by optical laser pump -X-ray free-electron laser probe experiments and molecular-dynamics simulations. By acquiring X-ray diffraction snapshots with sub-picosecond resolution, we capture the sample's atomic structure during its transition from the crystalline to the liquid state. Bridging the timescales of experiments and simulations allows us to formulate a realistic microscopic picture of melting. We demonstrate that the existing models of strongly non-equilibrium melting, developed for systems with relatively weak electron-phonon coupling, remain valid even for ultrafast heating rates achieved in femtosecond laser-excited Pd. Furthermore, we highlight the role of pre-existing and transiently generated crystal defects in the transition to the liquid state. Melting Apart from Lindemann's and Born's approaches to melting, a number of theories To achieve highly non-equilibrium states like strong crystal superheating, the timescale of the lattice heating must be shorter than that of its melting. It has been demonstrated that strong optical excitation of matter with femto-to picosecond laser pulses can result in extremely high heating rates, typically of the order of 10 14 -10 15 K/s. The ultrafast dynamics of non-equilibrium melting requires a suitable probe to capture the complex, transient states of the photoexcited material. Several time-resolved methods have been used to study ultrafast melting of metals: optical reflectivity Most of the previous studies of optically-driven melting were focused on weak electron-phonon coupling systems, such as Au It remains an open question whether, in the case of strong coupling and fast equilibration between the excited electrons and the lattice, the melting mechanism changes or remains similar to that operating in the weak electronphonon coupling systems. In particular, it is unclear whether at strong excitations the timescale of lattice heating can be distinctly shorter than that of melting. In such a case, the crystal would transiently undergo a significant overheating, and the actual rate of the crystal-liquid transition would be limited by the microscopic melting dynamics, not the lattice heating mechanism. From the experimental point of view, reaching this high energy-density regime would be manifested by saturation of the observed melting rate, with the maximum value characteristic of the transition mechanism. The current work is focused on Pd, for which the electron-phonon coupling parameter was reported to be over five times higher than in Au The sample consisted of multiple X-ray transparent windows etched in a silicon wafer frame and arranged in a regular array (manufactured by Silson Ltd.). One frame contained ~2000 square windows, each of 300 x 300 μm size. The windows consisted of 300 nm thick Si 3 N 4 membranes with a 28 The measurements were performed at the Femtosecond X-ray Experiments (FXE) instrument of the European XFEL (Germany) Femtosecond (pulse duration of 100 fs) X-ray pulses at 9.38 keV photon energy probed the central part (~10 μm diameter) of the laser-excited area. The delay time between pump and probe beams was controlled in the range from -0.1 ps (i.e. the X-ray probe pulse arrives before the optical pump pulse) to +60 ps. The scattered radiation was recorded with the Large Pixel Detector (LPD) available at the FXE instrument. It was placed off-center to monitor a momentum-transfer range up to q  4.5 Å -1 (limited by the diameter of the exit flange of the vacuum chamber). With up to 10 11 photons (approx. 1 mJ total energy) per pulse at European XFEL, even a single X-ray pulse allows transient scattering patterns to be recorded with signal-to-noise ratio sufficient for data analysis without averaging, although the high X-ray fluence leads to subsequent sample modifications ("diffraction before destruction" (47)). After necessary corrections, the 2D diffraction images were azimuthally integrated to obtain 1D intensity vs. momentum transfer I(q) patterns. The time-resolved diffraction experiments are complemented by large-scale molecular-dynamics (MD) simulations coupled to a two-temperature model (TTM) description of the electron dynamics and the electron-lattice energy transfer, realized with our in-house computer code. Interaction of the ultrashort optical pump laser pulses with the Pd film establishes a strongly non-equilibrium situation with electron and ion subsystems having significantly different temperatures. To properly address such a two-temperature state of Pd, its thermal properties, namely the electron heat capacity, C e (T e ), and the electron-phonon coupling factor, G(T e , T i ), were obtained using separate calculations based on the tight-binding MD method The interatomic interactions are taken into account in the MD simulations with a newly developed interatomic potential for Pd atoms (details are provided in the Supplementary Material). The TTM-MD simulation setup consists of a 30 nm thick Pd polycrystalline film sandwiched between two layers of an effective amorphous material representing the Si 3 N 4 substrate and the SiO 2 cap. The polycrystalline structure of Pd is modeled in the first step using the Voronoi tessellation method The in-plane cross-section of our TTM-MD simulation box is 23  20 nm 2 , and periodic boundary conditions are applied in these directions. With such a simulation geometry, we assume that the in-depth (out-of-plane) evolution of the laser-irradiated sample is dominant on the timescales we consider. This assumption is justified since the laser spot size is much larger than the thickness of the Pd layer that absorbs the laser pulse. The lateral (in-plane) heat diffusion that may play a role on long timescale (microseconds and longer) is not taken into account. Heat dissipation from the laser-melted Pd into the substrate and cap proceeds via phonon thermal conductivity accounted with the MD method. A direct coupling of hot electrons in Pd to substrate/cap phonons at the interfaces, which usually becomes relevant for small film thicknesses In a metal, the laser energy is absorbed by the conduction band electrons. The thickness of the Pd layer is comparable to the pump laser penetration depth. Therefore, uniform distribution of the absorbed energy is established fast, approximately within the first picosecond via electronic heat diffusion. Hence, the TTM-MD simulations start at an elevated uniform electron temperature profile, corresponding to a particular absorbed energy density, whereas the metal ions are at room temperature. Fast energy exchange between hot electrons and cold ions through electronphonon coupling results in a rapid increase of the ion temperature, resulting in a simultaneous increase of thermal pressure. This process initiates rarefaction waves into the Pd-layer (and corresponding compression waves into the substrate and the cap) that start at the metal-substrate and metal-cap interfaces. The complex dynamics of pressure waves is captured in our TTM-MD simulations. In the real sample, the Si 3 N 4 and SiO 2 layers have equal thicknesses, but the speed of sound is different. Therefore, the pressure waves traveling in these materials return to Pd at different times after reflecting from the front/rear sides of the sample. To mimic this, we model our substrate and cap layers having different thicknesses, as stated above. With our TTM-MD simulations, we were able to trace the evolution of the laser-irradiated sample over the entire timescale from laser absorption to melting. The spatiotemporal scale of our simulations corresponds to the experimental conditions, which enables a one-to-one comparison with the experimental data. For this purpose, the MD configurations were analyzed and visualized using the OVITO package In the obtained experimental data, the melting transition was manifested by variations of the XRD patterns acquired for different excitation energy densities and different pump-probe delay times. Figure For a detailed analysis of the melting transition, we determine the integrated diffraction signal A C of the fcc (111) Bragg peak (normalized to its value without optical excitation i.e. at negative delay times), and A L of the liquid peak (normalized to the value of the fully molten sample). In addition, to gain information on the variations of the crystalline microstructure on irradiation, we traced the peak width ΔΘ 111 (full width at half maximum -FWHM) of the (111) peak. The melting dynamics is thus expressed in terms of A C , A L , and ΔΘ 111 as a function of t and E. We note that the intensity of the fcc (200) peak was found to be too low (for example, see Fig. MJ/kg, the decreasing vertical gap between the data points for different delay times reflects the increasing melting rate with increasing deposited energy density E. The gap closes at 2.0 MJ/kg, indicating that at this strong excitation levels the melting process is completed in less than 5 ps after the excitation. Figure While the XRD patterns of the transient states of the metallic film provide essential information on its evolution from the crystalline to the liquid state, determining the atomic structures corresponding to those patterns is challenging, as discussed in the previous section. This fundamental problem arises because significantly different atomic arrangements can yield similar diffraction patterns  the non-uniqueness being a consequence of the inverse scattering problem Nevertheless, the MD simulations yield a reliable, physical model of the system during the transition from the (poly)crystalline to the liquid state. An essential issue in matching experiment and simulations is the per-se unknown relation between the deposited energy density in the experiment (derived from the incident pump fluence and measured optical transmission/reflection coefficients of the film) and the theoretical initial energy density used in the TTM-MD simulation. In theoretical studies of optically excited metals, this ratio between the experimental and the theoretical energy density is often treated as a free parameter Another vital aspect of the comparison between the experiment and the simulation is related to the limited size of the simulation box. While in the experiment, the size of the focused X-ray beam is approximately 10 μm, the dimension of the (in sample plane) cross-section of the simulation box is about 20 nm (Figure The qualitative and partially quantitative agreement between the experimental and simulated t and E-dependences of integrated diffraction efficiency, width, and position of the (111) Bragg peak have two important implications. Firstly, it reinforces the interpretation of the experimental data by avoiding the previously mentioned problem of the intrinsic non-uniqueness of the diffraction pattern. Secondly, it justifies further steps of MD data treatment, namely a detailed analysis of atomic configurations corresponding to transient states during laser melting. Figure However, in the cross-section picture, only the surface atoms are visible, and thus the overall information on the CSP distribution is missing. To follow in detail the behavior of the CSP during melting, we analyzed the MD configurations to extract the global variation of the CSP. Figure histogram with time corresponding to the vertical axis shifted by 0.48 ps with respect to the horizontal one. The time shift value was chosen to exceed the dominant period of atomic oscillations in Pd crystal (200 fs, as estimated from high-temperature phonon density of states of Pd At negative delay times, corresponding to the system's evolution at room temperature, the histogram has a single, well-defined maximum located at the origin. The broad and weak "tail" stretched along the diagonal corresponds to atoms belonging to structurally disordered grain boundaries. The off-diagonal, symmetric "patches" (centered around coordinates (2, 6) and (6, 2)) represent atoms in the vicinity of diffusing point defects, which reversibly change the CSP of the involved atoms. For E = 0.48 MJ/kg (corresponding to the experimentally observed melting onset), the initially sharp maximum broadens and shifts along the diagonal up to ~ 2.5, which is attributed to a continuously increasing thermal disorder during lattice heating. In the XRD pattern (see Fig. We note that very similar evolution of the CSP has been observed for an MD simulation of a model system of an infinite Pd single crystal undergoing continuous heating. Furthermore, the model system reasonably reproduces the features observed in the experimental XRD patterns, providing an additional support for our findings. For the detailed results obtained for the model system, see the Supplementary Material. The results of the variation of the crystalline and liquid contributions (integrated diffracted signal of the fcc (111) Bragg peak -A C and of the liquid peak -A L ) presented in Figures While the interpretation of the variation of the Bragg peak intensity is relatively straightforward, the origin of an increasing "broad" contribution, identified by the numerical peak fitting algorithm as A L , is less evident. Apart from the first traces of liquid formed on melting, a weak "broad" signal can easily be confused with other contributions to a diffuse scattering background. In particular, for high lattice temperatures encountered in our experiment, thermal diffuse scattering, compensating for the loss of intensity of the Bragg peaks and caused by inelastic scattering from phonons, make an additional "broad" contribution to the diffraction signal. Besides the thermal effect, lattice defects give rise to the weak, "broad" scattering signal. The displacement field generated by defect sites contributes to diffuse scattering around the Bragg peaks. The effect, known as Huang scattering Furthermore, using the peak deconvolution procedure described above, distinguishing between the diffuse scattering (thermal or defect related) and the actual liquid phase scattering (in particular, when the liquid fraction is low) is challenging. Nevertheless, we suggest that an apparent increase of A L , observed for low deposited energy densities E < 0.8 MJ/kg, is, at least to some extent, related to increasing concentration of lattice defects. This viewpoint is supported by a detailed analysis of the TTM-MD results, discussed in the following part of this section. It should also be noted that crystal defects and the related diffuse scattering will contribute to a decrease in the Bragg peak intensity. The scale of the effect, however, is not expected to be significant, as compared to the thermal effect. As discussed above, an unambiguous interpretation of a single diffraction pattern is challenging. Nevertheless, the temporal evolution (i.e., rate of variation) of the different diffraction features provides means to distinguish effects of heating and melting of the crystalline lattice. In our interpretation, the thermal vibrations of atoms are responsible for the initial, ultrafast decrease of A C dominant at E < 0.8 MJ/kg, while melting sets in only when the fluence of the laser pulse exceeds the melting threshold of 0.8 MJ/kg. The rapid decrease of A C is consistent with the strong coupling between hot electrons and the crystalline lattice of Pd Besides the integrated diffraction signal, the width ΔΘ 111 of the (111) Bragg-peak carries additional information on the physical state of the crystalline structure. Significantly, no variation of ΔΘ 111 is observed during the initial 3 ps, which is consistent with the duration of an ultrafast drop of A C . The decrease of the Bragg peak area without change of its width is characteristic of the thermal disorder effect and thus strengthens the interpretation presented in the previous paragraph. When the instrumental contribution ΔΘ i (determined from the measurement of LaB 6 reference) to the peak width is subtracted from the total width, the remaining width (calculated as √ΔΘ 111 2 -ΔΘ i 2 ) can be attributed either to the finite size of the diffracting domain or distortions of the crystal lattice (microstrain) At first glance, it is tempting to attribute the increase of the peak width to a decrease of the grain size due to meltfronts propagating from the grain boundaries. However, the existence of a maximum in the ∆t-dependence of ΔΘ 111 suggests that the primary origin of the Bragg peak broadening is a transient increase of a non-uniform strain rather than a grain size variation. Since the strain broadening of the Bragg peak can be regarded as an effect of the superposition of multiple shifted peaks, the variations of ΔΘ 111 and the peak position should be correlated, providing information on an acoustic response of the optically excited film. In our interpretation, the initial increase of the width is mainly due to the non-uniformity of the strain, which builds up for approximately 10 ps, during dynamic lattice expansion, evidenced by the peak shift. The subsequent decrease of ΔΘ 111 arises from the homogenization of the strain and occurs once the expansion is completed and the peak position reaches a constant value. We note that the above explanation of the experimental XRD data is supported by the numerical modeling results discussed in the following section. Also, it should be mentioned that the proposed scenario cannot rule out a contribution of the decreasing crystal size to the observed evolution of the ΔΘ 111 . However, the rise of the peak width cannot be considered evidence of heterogeneous melting initiated inside the grain boundaries and propagating into the bulk interior of the grain. The above discussion highlights the complexity of a quantitative XRD analysis of the short-pulse laser-induced melting transition and exposes intrinsic limitations in the interpretation of the experimental data. It follows that a detailed reconstruction of the solid-to-liquid transformation requires realistic computer simulations at relevant temporal and spatial scales. Our assessment is based on a direct comparison of the experimentally measured diffraction patterns with those calculated from the MD configurations. Besides the fundamental constraints of the simulated diffraction patterns discussed in the previous section, it is worth mentioning that the theoretical patterns do not account for all the details of the experiment (geometrical aspects of the setup, detector characteristics etc.), giving rise to the actual form of the measured XRD patterns. Further limitations involve the MD simulations, which do not reproduce all the specific details of the thin Pd films deposited by magnetron sputtering (details of the polycrystalline microstructure, film-substrate interface etc.). It should also be mentioned that electron-phonon coupling at the disordered grain boundaries can be locally increased due to enhanced electron scattering According to the current simulation data, optically induced melting of the polycrystalline Pd film is initiated inside the disordered grain boundary regions. Heterogeneous nucleation of the liquid phase in GBs dominates in the low energy density regime, where the film is molten only partially. During the GB melting, the transformation front propagates into the interiors of the grains at a velocity reaching ~400 m/s (13% of the room temperature sound velocity in Pd). This value is in fair agreement with the previously reported data for metals While the MD snapshots show partial melting starting from the GB regions for low energy densities (Fig. A detailed analysis of the CSP derived for the MD simulations and the corresponding variations in the diffraction patterns provides additional insight into the relationship between the atomic short-and long-range order (SRO and LRO) during melting. In the current study, the CSP quantifies the SRO while the LRO is probed by diffraction. Since melting is essentially a loss of the long-range crystalline order, and the LRO emerges when the short-range interactions are repeated over infinitely great distances, the variations in SRO and LRO are expected to be correlated. An interrelation between the spatial distribution of the CSP, its temporal evolution, and the diffraction patterns exposes this correlation and reveals a comprehensive picture of the melting transition. The results presented in Fig. The first process involves a continuous rise of the CSP-namely occurring via a relatively small variation of the centrosymmetry-from the initial (room temperature) mean value of nearly 0, up to 2.5 close to the melting onset. This variation of the CSP is related to the uniform heating of the crystalline lattice and the increasing thermal atomic disorder throughout the film. It is manifested in the diffraction pattern by a 25% decrease of the (111) Bragg peak intensity occurring at a constant peak width. The second process involves only a fraction of atoms and is a discontinuous, transient increase of the mean CSP up to 7. This variation is consistent with the development of highly mobile lattice defects, in particular vacancies, occurring simultaneously with the heating process. The defects contribute weakly to the diffraction pattern through local lattice distortions, giving rise to diffuse scattering in the vicinity of the Bragg peaks. Since the position of the (111) Bragg peak of Pd fcc coincides with the position of the broad liquid peak, the diffuse contribution from lattice defects is identified by the peak fitting algorithm as an increase of A L before the actual melting threshold is reached (see Fig. The third process sets in when the hot crystal becomes highly defective and involves a continuous, permanent increase of the CSP up to 10the value characteristic for the liquid phase. The experimental indication of melting is the vanishing of the Bragg reflections and the simultaneous emergence of a broad maximum in the diffraction pattern. According to the current results, the loss of LRO on melting is mediated by local degradation of the SRO due to lattice defects. Those defects can be pre-existing (grain boundaries) or generated during ultrafast lattice heating. The heterogeneous melting can be thus viewed as a slight increase of the local atomic disorder in the grain boundaries followed by propagation of the transformation front into the ordered bulk region. Consequently, homogeneous melting occurs once a certain fraction of atoms in the crystal bulk is involved in a defective local environment, i.e., when a critical concentration of defects is reached. We note that a similar criterion for melting has been proposed in the early works of Górecki A detailed analysis of an ideal, infinite single crystal MD system which melts via a purely homogeneous mechanism shows that in the superheated regime, near the melting point, the populations of atoms forming a hot crystal (CSP of 2.5) and atoms involved in a defective environment (CSP of 7) are comparable (deduced from the height of peaks at sub-melting point temperature in Fig. An important aspect of the melting process is the role of the strain waves generated by the fast heating of the film. Given the planar geometry, out-of-plane expansion is more likely than in-plane expansion and thus one can expect 1D expansion in the film's normal/X-ray beam direction. Taking the experimentally observed (111) peak shift of ~0.7 deg and assuming a 1D expansion (57), the resulting strain exceeds 20%, which is far beyond any realistic value for metallic solids. On the other hand, if 3D expansion is assumed, the resulting strain reaches approx. 2%. Given that the volume increase of Pd due to 3D thermal expansion on heating from the room temperature to T m is approximately 6% (72), the corresponding lattice spacing would increase by one third of this valueconsistent with the experimentally observed peak shift of 2%. It must be noted, however, that our current experimental data do not allow a conclusive distinction between the 1D and 3D expansion scenario since our analysis is restricted to a single Bragg peak. With a higher q-range (and thus higher-order Bragg peaks) accessible, the strain geometry could be unambiguously resolved using the approach described in ref. While this study focuses on the melting dynamics and not the acoustic response, we can conclude that the strain evolution in the optically excited films might be non-trivial.. Moreover, the current MD results support the interpretation of the peak broadening being caused by a non-homogenous strain distribution inside the film resulting from strain waves launched at the film boundaries and propagating into the bulk of the film. According to our MD simulations, large tensile stresses are generated when these strain waves overlap. For sufficiently high energy densities this can lead to void formation, fracture, and eventually to ablation of the film. Finally, we point out that we did not observe the formation of intermediate diffraction peaks as reported for Au by Assefa et al. To summarize, we presented a comprehensive experimental and theoretical analysis of optically induced ultrafast melting of polycrystalline thin films of Pd. The discussed physical picture is based on the results of time-resolved Xray diffraction experiments on the photoexcited films and large-scale two-temperature model molecular-dynamics simulations performed on the relevant spatial and temporal scale. Our results demonstrate that with increasing density of deposited energy, the melting mechanism progressively varies from relatively slow, heterogeneous melting, initiated inside the material at the structurally disordered grain boundaries, to homogeneous melting, which proceeds catastrophically in the whole crystal volume on a few picosecond time scale. The experimentally evidenced ultrafast melting in Pd is faster by at least a factor of five than in Au Moreover, thanks to the possibility of the direct comparison of the experimental data with MD simulations, our results emphasize the role of crystal defects in the melting process and correlate the variations in the atomic shortand long-range order. We demonstrate that as the optically excited film's temperature rises, the defects' concentration gradually increases. The melting transitionexperimentally characterized by the loss of long-range order, as evidenced by vanishing Bragg diffraction peaksoccurs when a hot, highly defective crystal transforms into a homogeneous liquid due to an abrupt decrease of the short-range order. In this picture, the grain boundary regions melt prior to the bulk due to their pre-existing structural disorder, which facilitates their promotion to the highly disordered liquid state. Experimental XRD data in a higher q-range are now needed to decouple the thermal and melting effects contributing to the decrease of the Bragg peaks' intensity and fully resolve the acoustic response of the laser-excited films. Samples Figure Experimental setup of the pump-probe experiment Figure In order to extract reliable structural information on the metallic film, a "dark" background signal ("dark current" of the detector) as well as the scattering signal from the SiN substrate and the SiO2 cap, has to be subtracted from the measured data. Furthermore, due to the stochastic nature of the self-amplified spontaneous emission (SASE) X-ray beam at the EuXFEL and the resulting fluctuations of the X-ray pulse energy, the data require proper normalization. Before normalization of the azimuthally integrated patterns, an averaged background signal was subtracted from the data. To eliminate the contribution from the SiN and substrate/cap layers, specially prepared "bare" samples were prepared and measured in course of the experiment. Those samples consisted of Si frames with 300 nm Si3N4 membrane capped with 300 nm of SiO2 -identical to the proper samples, with the only difference being the lack of the metallic layer. Both averaged background signals were removed from the data gathered from the actual Pd sample films. First the "dark" background was subtracted before any normalization, since its intensity was identical for each measurement. The "bare" sample signal had to be scaled to each pattern individually before subtraction. This was achieved by multiplication of the Pd sample pattern by a factor yielding a maximum overlap of the two patterns in the 10-15 deg 2T range. This range was selected for the following reasons: (i) neither crystalline nor liquid Pd produces a diffraction signal between 10 and 15 deg, and thus any signal originates from the Si3N4 and SiO2 layers, (ii) the range is free from incidental spikes in the "dark" background (see Fig. For further analysis, highly noisy or flawed patterns (taken at defective sample windows or with exceptionally low energy X-ray pulses) were rejected and excluded from further analysis. order polynomial and evaluated its double roots. As shown in Figure Figure 