Sr 2 IrO 4 hosts a novel J eff =1/2 Mott state and quasi-two-dimensional antiferromagnetic order, providing a unique avenue of exploring emergent states of matter and functions that are extraordinarily sensitive to any structural variations. While the correlation between the physical property and lattice structure in Sr 2 IrO 4 has been a focused issue in the past decade, a common perception assumes that the magnetic ordering is essentially determined by the Ir-O-Ir bond angle. Therefore, a delicate modulation of this angle and consequently a major modulation of the magnetic ordering, by chemical doping such as Ga at Ir site, has been extensively investigated and well believed. In this work, however, we present a whole package of structure and magnetism data on a series of single crystal and polycrystalline Sr 2 Ir 1-x Ga x O 4 samples, revealing the substantial difference in the Néel temperature T N between the two types of samples, and the T N value for the polycrystalline sample x = 0.09 is even 64 K higher than that of the single crystal sample x = 0.09 (∆T N ~ 64 K at x = 0.09). Our systematic investigations demonstrate the crucial role of the c/a ratio in tuning the interlayer coupling and thereby the Néel point T N , i.e. a higher T N can be achieved as c/a is reduced. The notable differences in structural parameters between the two groups of samples are probably caused by additional strain due to the massive grain boundaries in polycrystalline samples. The present work suggests an additional ingredient of physics that is essential in modulating the emergent properties in Sr 2 IrO 4 and probably other iridates. The family of 5d iridates has been an emergent group of quantum materials for studying new phases of matter arising from the large relativistic spin-orbit coupling (SOC, λ~0.5 eV) that is comparable to other fundamental interactions such as Hubbard interaction U and electronic bandwidth W As a prototype, Sr 2 IrO 4 was first revealed to host the J eff =1/2 Mott state arising from the cooperation of crystal field, SOC, and Coulomb repulsion. A signature character of Sr 2 IrO 4 could be the close correlation between physical properties and lattice degree of freedom Although this scenario has been widely utilized to interpret the properties of Sr 2 IrO 4 , it has encountered challenge to understand the long range antiferromagnetic (AFM) order. First, since both the band gap and J eff = 1/2 moment are associated with φ, it is natural to assume intimate coupling between the Mott state and AFM phase. This is in parallel with the fact that the magnetic interaction (~ 0.1 eV) and band -gap (~ 0.3 eV) of Sr 2 IrO 4 have similar energy scale Chemical substitution has been demonstrated to be very efficient in modulating both the Néel order and crystalline structure of Sr 2 IrO 4 providing advantages to address this issue. Importantly, Ga 3+ is nonmagnetic, and thus doesn't introduce magnetic fluctuations into the system, simplifying the study greatly. Regarding the carrier-doping effect due to the lower valance state of Ga 3+ than Ir 4+ , it can be ignored by simply making a comparison study between single crystal and polycrystalline Sr 2 Ir 1-x Ga x O 4 where the doping effect would be identical. Here, it is worth mentioning that involving polycrystalline samples may lead to further modulation of the lattice and properties, and thus facilitating the comparison. For instance, polycrystalline and single crystal (Sr 1-x La x ) 2 IrO 4 were found to show different lattice parameters and properties In the present work, two groups of Sr 2 Ir 1-x Ga x O 4 samples, including both single crystals with 0≤x≤0.09 and polycrystals with 0≤x≤0.15, have been synthesized. Extensive characterizations such as the crystalline structure, magnetism, and electric transport have been performed on all samples. Our experiments identified dramatically different physical properties between the two groups of samples, which are closely associated with their different lattice parameters. In particular, we found that the polycrystalline samples host generally higher T N than the single crystals, and the difference between the two groups of samples can be as large as ΔT N ~64 K at x=0.09. Structural analysis revealed that the c/a ratio plays a crucial role in tuning T N . A series of Sr 2 Ir 1-x Ga x O 4 (0≤x≤0.09) single crystals were grown using flux method from high-purity SrCl 2 , SrCO 3 , IrO 2 and Ga 2 O 3 . Pt crucible covered with lid was used for the single crystal growth Stoichiometric amounts of high purity SrCO 3 , IrO 2 , Ga 2 O 3 were mixed thoroughly, and then calcined at temperatures (T) ranging from 1050 C to 1200 C for 24 hours each with intermediate grinding sequences. Finally, the obtained black powder was pressed into pellets and sintered at 1250 C for 72 hours in air. Crystalline structure of the two groups of samples were characterized by performing powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) at room temperature. Before the XRD measurements, all samples including the single crystals and polycrystals were crashed thoroughly. Elemental mappings using the energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) were carried out in a Sigma 500 of field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM). The valance state of Ir cation was determined using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Detailed measurements on magnetization (M) as a function of T and magnetic field H were carried out using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID, Quantum Design). During the T-dependence of M measurements, the measuring field was fixed at H=0.1 T. For the c-axis magnetization (M c ) measurements, the sample was fixed on the top of a quartz rod properly to avoid any misalignment, which was then mounted to a copper stick with a hollow core. Low-temperature glue was used to fix the sample. Temperature dependence of resistivity (ρ) were measured using a standard four-electrode method in a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). All samples are pure phase with a tetragonal symmetry, confirmed by the collected XRD spectra. To acquire more details of the crystalline structure, Rietveld-profile refinements of the XRD patterns are performed for all samples. Additional functions were involved in the refinements of single crystal samples, in order to solve the problems arising from preferred orientation. The refined result for Sr 2 IrO 4 single crystal is presented in Fig. The lattice constants a and c are nearly identical for the two samples, while φ of the polycrystalline Sr 2 IrO 4 is about 1.1% larger than the single crystal. Similar discrepancy has been reported in previous studies The derived structural parameters such as a, c, ΔV, c/a, in-plane Ir-O bond length, φ and φ as a function of Ga-content x are plotted in Fig. However, the shrink of the c-axis is as striking as ~ -1.5% at x=0.15 for the polycrystalline samples, far larger than that of the single crystals (~-0.24% at x=0.09). As a consequence, remarked reductions in the c/a ratio and cell volume ΔV are induced in the polycrystalline samples. In the meanwhile, much larger variation in l, φ, and φ are also evidenced for the polycrystalline samples as compared with the single crystals, i.e. Δφ/φ~3.42% for the former and Δφ/φ~2.24% for the later. The remarkable variations in the lattice parameters evidence the active role of Ga cation in tuning the lattice of Sr 2 IrO 4 as compared with other dopants The rigorous structural modulation in the polycrystalline samples is intrinsic, as confirmed by additional characterizations such as EDS and XPS measurements. EDS characterizations were utilized to check elemental distribution and composition of the samples. It is evidenced that all samples are stoichiometric and homogeneous without showing any aggregation of ions. Here we take the sample with x=0.07 as an example, and show the SEM images and EDS mappings in Fig. XPS spectra for both single crystal and polycrystalline samples with x=0, 0.05, and 0.09 are shown in Fig. It is known that oxygen vacancies could affect the properties of Sr 2 IrO 4 evidently Nevertheless, the influence of such non-stoichiometry can be neglected in the present work. First, Sr 2 IrO 4 is expected to have a high T N ~240 K only if the sample has no (or tiny) oxygen vacancies The different structure parameters may lead to different properties between the two groups of samples, since crystalline structure is important to the electronic and magnetic structure of Sr 2 IrO 4 . Because of the collective canting of J eff =1/2 moments, there exists net magnetic moment μ net in each IrO 2 layer. By applying H//ab-plane, the J eff =1/2 moments and thereby μ net can be reversed, resulting in an AFM to weak-ferromagnetic (wFM) transition (also usually called flop-transition) The different magnetic properties between the two groups of samples is further evidenced by M(H) measurements. Fig. Much smaller magnetization M c is identified, confirming the anisotropic magnetism of Sr 2 IrO 4 . Upon Ga-doping, both M ab and M c are reduced gradually, and a magnetic anisotropy M ab /M c ~3 at H=5 T is derived for all samples, consistent with previous works Different M(H) curves are observed for the group of polycrystalline samples, which all exhibit obvious hysteresis with large coercive field (H c ), shown in Fig. Electric transport of the samples is also modulated drastically by Ga-doping. As shown in Fig. The above experimental results have described strikingly different physical properties between the two groups of Sr 2 Ir 1-x Ga x O 4 . In particular, the polycrystalline samples have much higher T N than the single crystals. In the following, we will mainly focus on discussing the structural origin of the discrepancies between the two groups of samples. As aforementioned, the Ir-O-Ir bond angle φ has been the major lattice parameter that most frequently used to understand properties of Sr 2 IrO 4 . According to first principles calculations, the band gap of Sr 2 IrO 4 can be widened (narrowed) as φ is reduced (increased) However, there is no discernible correlation between T N and φ, since the two parameters evolve with x in totally different ways. In fact, the in-plane Ir-O-Ir bond angle φ is more relevant to exchange interactions within the basal plane, while the long range AFM order is triggered by the interlayer coupling At last, we qualitatively discuss the origin of the different lattice parameters between the two groups of samples. In Sr 2 IrO 4 , the rotation angle of IrO6 octahedra is determined by the in-plane bond-lengths of SrO and IrO2 layers; Ir-O bond length is too large to fit with the Sr-O layer and thus IrO6 need to rotate to compensate the difference. Ga doping induces hole-doping, and thus increases the Ir valence state, confirmed by the XPS measurements. Because of that, Ir-O bond length is reduced, and therefore the mismatch of SrO and IrO2 layers is partially reduced, leading to a smaller rotation angle φ. This is revealed by the continuous decrease in l and φ as x<0.07 shown in Fig. This indicates a significant contribution from Ga-O bonds which tend to enhance the overall in-plane bond length, probably due to the smaller electrostatic attraction of Ga 3+ compared with Ir 4+/5+ . The competition of these factors is balanced by the Ga-content x, which determines the variation in l(x) and φ(x), shown in Fig. While the cooperation between φ and l is responsible for the slight increase in the in-plane lattice constant a, the shrink of the c-axis suggests that the IrO2 layers get closer upon Ga-doping. In particular, for the group of polycrystalline samples, the c-value is shortened as large as 1.6% at x=0.15, far larger than the single crystals. As a consequence, the cell volume of polycrystalline samples is reduced by ~1% at x=0.15, while it remains unchanged till x=0.09 for the single crystals. Such remarkable discrepancy implies that there exists additional compressive strain along the c-axis in the polycrystalline samples. The compressive strain should not be ascribed to differences of chemical composition between the two groups of samples, which can be excluded by the EDS and XPS characterizations. Alternatively, it may arise from the massive grain boundaries where grains with different orientations are merged in the polycrystalline samples. In a very recent experimental work Preferred orientation still exists in the re-sintered samples, and therefore additional functions were used during the structural refinements. The derived lattice parameters are listed in Table In summary, we performed a comparison study on structure, magnetism, and electric transport of a series of single crystal and polycrystalline Sr 2 Ir 1-x Ga x O 4 . The experimental results revealed very different physical properties between the two groups of samples, which are strongly associated with the crystalline structure. In particular, the Néel temperature T N of the group of polycrystalline samples are obviously higher than that of the single crystals, which can even reach up to ΔT N ~64 K at x=0.09. Our structure analysis suggested that the c/a ratio is critical for the remarkable enhancement in T N , and the Ir-O-Ir bond angle φ is more relevant to the electric transport of Sr 2 Ir 1-x Ga x O 4 . 