Machine-learning (ML) interatomic potentials (IPs) trained on first-principles datasets are becoming increasingly popular since they promise to treat larger system sizes and longer time scales, compared to the ab initio techniques producing the training data. Estimating the accuracy of MLIPs and reliably detecting when predictions become inaccurate is key for enabling their unfailing usage. In this paper, we explore this aspect for a specific class of MLIPs, the equivariant-neural-network (ENN) IPs using the ensemble technique for quantifying their prediction uncertainties. We critically examine the robustness of uncertainties when the ENN ensemble IP (ENNE-IP) is applied to the realistic and physically relevant scenario of predicting local-minima structures in the configurational space. The ENNE-IP is trained on data for liquid silicon, created by density-functional theory (DFT) with the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) for the exchange-correlation functional. Then, the ensemble-derived uncertainties are compared with the actual errors (comparing the results of the ENNE-IP with those of the underlying DFT-GGA theory) for various test sets, including liquid silicon at different temperatures and out-of-training-domain data such as solid phases with and without point defects as well as surfaces. Our study reveals that the predicted uncertainties are generally overconfident and hold little quantitative predictive power for the actual errors. Machine-learning (ML) surrogate models for interatomic potentials (IPs) trained on ab initio reference data are playing an increasingly important role in condensedmatter simulations. Such MLIPs promise to achieve a converged treatment of the statistical mechanics of the modeled atomistic systems, because they can address both larger system sizes and longer timescales than the computationally much more costly ab initio calculations. Obviously, this also requires the MLIPs to retain an accuracy that is at least comparable to that of the reference data Accordingly, the basic motivation behind MLIPs is essentially the same as that behind classical force fields and semi-empirical interatomic potentials In this paper, we employ a more pragmatic route: Instead of determining the applicability domain via datascience methods, we explore the applicability of MLIPs and their uncertainty estimates for distinct, physically motivated applications. Although frequently used terms such as "different to the training data set", "out-oftraining domain", and "out-of-distribution data" are not well defined in this case, this is still useful, since it facilitates the physical interpretation of the results. Accordingly, we here focus on the reliability of uncertainty estimates obtained by MLIPs for different applications. Obviously, if reliable uncertainty estimates existed, they would also enable the identification of the domain of applicability. Improving this nebulous situation is a pressing issue in the field, since thermodynamic or kinetic simulations are guaranteed to explore also uncommon regions of configurational space that are likely not covered by the training data set. An example may be that a rare event that substantially influences the dynamics may be missed by the MLIP. For instance, the rare, but spontaneous formation of defects is know to be a key trigger for phase transition and for limiting heat transport Uncertainty quantification for ML models is modelclass specific task. For instance, Gaussian potential (GP) models Naturally, the use of ensembles increases the computational workload for predictions considerably compared to a single NN. Accordingly, several recent works have proposed strategies and metrics to aid, improve, and accelerate uncertainty estimates for NN MLIPs In this work, we go beyond the previous studies and explicitly explore the reliability of uncertainties for regions in configuration space that are not necessarily well covered by the actual training data. As discussed above, these test sets are motivated by physical knowledge for a well-known system, elemental silicon. In practice, we thus construct an MLIP for elemental silicon by training an NN ensemble (NNE) on liquid Si, i.e., on the energies and forces observed in high-temperature ab initio MD simulations in the canonical ensemble over a representative range of pressures viz. densities. This ensures that the MLIP training data contains a quite diverse set of configurations, since atoms in the liquid phase visit many local geometries, explore different short-range order and bonding situations. From a physical point of view, it is hence reasonable to assume that the training data largely also covers the physical and chemical situations found at lower temperatures, i.e, in different bulk solids, defects, and surfaces. Next, we benchmarked the NNE MLIP on the eight known crystal phases of Si The structure of this paper is as follows: in section II A equivariant neural network ensembles (ENNE), i.e., the model class for MLIPs discussed in this paper, are introduced together with the adopted training and validation protocol. We then report on the testing of the trained ENNE-IP on liquid configurations not used for training (section II B), the equations of state of the eight known solid phases of silicon (section II C), and defected structures (section II D). Next, in section II E, the reliability of the uncertainty estimates for the trained ENNE-IP is quantitatively analyzed. Figure In this work, the MLIP model class is the E(3) equivariant neural network (ENN) of Batzer et al. Our assessment of the converged size of the ensemble is based on the strategy where the training set is fixed and the members of the ensemble are trained starting from different random initial guesses of the NN parameters. We have looked into the Pearson pair correlation of the errors over a hold-out (test) set of 1 000 configurations in the liquid phase. In practice, the prediction of each NN in the ensemble generates an array where each component is the error ε i for one test configuration and the pair correlation between any two such arrays was recorded. A high Pearson correlation among these arrays signals that the NNs in the ensemble, despite having different values of the training parameters, essentially make the same kind of error on unseen data points. We found (Fig. The performance of the ENNE-IP was at first evaluated by predicting the forces in liquid-Si configurations not used for training, extracted from portion of the AIMD trajectories outside the intervals from which the training data had been extracted. The parity plot for the force components, values predicted by the ENNE-IP vs actual DFT-GGA values are depicted in Fig. Our first prediction examples on data not used for training are still in the liquid phase of silicon, at different temperatures. As mentioned earlier, the training data correspond to T = 2 000 K, and now we study results for temperatures in the range from 1 600 to 2 600 K. A histogram of the actual error of force components for each temperature is shown in Fig. Figure Let us now look at the uncertainty estimates, if they would at least give a warning about the reliability of the results. The left panel of Fig. For reliable uncertainties, the colored bands should contain the ground-truth values (solid lines). Even though the larger the actual error (the vertical distance between the solid and dahsed lines for each phase) the larger the predicted uncertainties tend to be, the latter are still overconfident, i.e., the ground-truth value is outside the range of the predicted uncertainties for most of the volumes in the equations of state, for all phases. To further analyze the relationship between estimated uncertainty and actual error, we have plotted for the cubic-diamond phase these two quantities at all investigated volumes along the equation of state (Fig. The ENNE-IP is applied to more complex cases, the solid phases with point defects as well as surfaces, including diamond vacancy The formation energies of a vacancy and a hexagonal interstitial in Si, as well as the surface energy for the Si(100) surface, were predicted using ENNE-IP. The configurations in geometry optimizations from DFT-GGA calculations were used as the test sets. It is worth noting that the considered structures of vacancy and interstitial are both 5 × 5 × 5 supercell of the eight-atom diamond cubic cell, and that of the surface is 2 × 1 × 10 supercell. These supercell sizes were found to be the converged ones for the DFT-GGA calculations. As shown in panels a and b of Fig. In Fig. We calculated the actual error and uncertainty from the ensemble (30 ENN models) for all configurations in the test sets, including liquid silicon at 2 000 K, solid phases, Si vacancies, Si interstitial, and surface Si(100). This step aims to further understand the connection between uncertainty and actual error. The relationship between the actual error and uncertainty is displayed in Fig. The result for the eight solid phases is shown in Fig. We also checked the validity of these observations at various sizes of the training data set and we found (see Fig. However, by analyzing a test set constructed to mimic a crystal-structure search scenario, for a system that is trained with configurations in the liquid phase, we found that the predicted uncertainty is a poor predictor for the actual error. Not only it is mostly overconfident (uncertainty lower or much lower than the actual error) but both quantity are hardly related. Indeed, we have analysed a few paths in the configurational space where the two quantities change in opposite directions (uncertainty decreases while error increases) or on varies and the other stays constant. This aspect would hamper any attempt to calibrate the uncertainties to create an upper bound for the predicted errors, e.g., by just scaling the predicted uncertainty by a constant factor. In fact, there could always be a region of the configurational space where the error would be even larger than such amplified uncertainty, yet containing relevant, metastable structure, such as technologically important defect structures. Eventually, let us note that it is obviously possible to choose as an upper bound for the trustworthy region an uncertainty σ equal to the maximum uncertainty observed in the liquid-phase test data (∼ 2 meV/atom, see Fig. Further research is needed on how to properly calibrate ensemble MLIPs, and an especially interesting avenue is, in our opinion, to explore whether there is an accuracy-confidence trade-off. In some other ML applications instead of MLIPs, the distance to available data in the latent space of a NN model is proposed to control actual error in chemical discovery All data can be found on the NOMAD archive (https: //doi.org/10.17172/NOMAD/2023.08.25-1) FHI-vibes was used to generate all data and analysis in the paper and are freely available online in the cited publication. All electronic structure calculations were done using FHI-aims, which is freely available for use for academic use (with a voluntary donation) (https://fhi-aims.org/get-the-code-menu/ get-the-code). NequIP was used to construct interatomic potential, and a tutorial notebook can be found on the NOMAD AI Toolkit https://gitlab.mpcdf. mpg.de/nomad-lab/ai-toolkit/tutorial-nequip The first-principle calculations for liquid silicon, solid phases of silicon, diamond vacancy, hexagonal diamond interstitial and diamond surface Si(100) are performed using DFT-GGA with the PW91 exchange-correlation functional The mixed training set was constructed by randomly sampling the same number of configurations from each of the 5 AIMD trajectories. For instance, one configuration was randomly selected from one AIMD trajectory and a total of five configurations were gathered to form the training set. In each experiment, a validation set of N = 500 configurations was used for hyperparameter optimization of the ENNE-IP, and the performance was evaluated on a hold-out test set of 1 000 configurations. To study the uncertainty of liquid silicon at extra temperatures, 5 AIMD simulations were performed at temperatures of 1 600 K, 1 800 K, 2 200 K, 2 400 K, and 2 600 K. These temperatures are between the experimental melting and boiling points of silicon (1 687 K and 2 628 K, respectively) at standard pressure. The simulations were run for 5 000 1 fs time steps with a constant experimental density of liquid silicon, and the initial configuration was taken from the last configuration of the melting trajectory at the same density. A test set consisting of all 5 000 configurations from each AIMD trajectory was created for each temperature. For the potential energy surface, we deformed the lattice to the target volume and relaxed it with respect to the unit cell shape and atomic position, while approximately constraining the volume and also constraining the symmetry to remain that of the initial structure. For diamond vacancy and hexagonal diamond interstitial, the formation energy of 2 × 2 × 2, 3 × 3 × 3, 4 × 4 × 4 and 5 × 5 × 5 supercell of the eight-atom diamond cubic cell are calculated. The formation energies E f were obtained from the total energies of the supercells with a defect, where E d is the total energy of the defected supercell and E bulk is the total energy of the perfect supercell, which we calculate for supercells of the same size as used in the runs with the defects. μ is the chemical potential of silicon, which we take as the total energy of silicon. n d gives the number of silicon atoms that are added (n d positive) or removed (n d negative). For diamond surface Si(100), a (2 × 1) supercell contains a slab of silicon L layers thick (L = 2, 3, ..., 10) and the vacuum thickness between adjacent slabs along the [001] direction is set at 15 Å. The three outermost layers of the slab are allowed to relax, while the atoms of the other layers are kept in their bulk positions. The surface energy γ is calculated from the following expression, where E slab is the total energy of the surface slab. n s is the number of atoms in the surface slab. E bulk is the bulk energy per atom. A is a measure of the surface area. Here, we define A as the number of atoms on the surface (equal to 2) for a better comparison swith defect phases. For a slab, we have two surfaces and they are of the same type, which is reflected by the number 2 in the denominator. The NequIP framework builds-in equivariance by imposing that the features at every hidden layer of the neural network be direct sums of irreducible representations. In 3-dimension space, these can be interpreted as spherical harmonics. For the practical construction of networks, we selected the highest angular frequency or degree for hidden layer features. We trained four different, equal-size, neural networks with lmax of 0, 1, 2 and 3 on the training sets with different sizes of 500, 1 000, 2 000, 3 000, 4 000, and 5 000 configurations. Learning curves for this experiment are presented in Fig. Then, another two key hyperparameters, the multiplicity of the features and the cutoff radius, are optimized. The results show that the optimal feature dimension is 16 and the optimal cutoff radius distance is 5.0 Å for liquid silicon. Finally, networks with optimal hyperparameters are trained using a loss function based on a weighted sum of energy and force loss terms (the weighting of energy and force is 1 and 100 respectively). We normalize the target energies by subtracting the mean potential energy over the training set and scale both the target energies and target force components by the root mean square of the force components over the training set. All models are trained using 4 interaction blocks, a learning rate of 0.01 and a batch size of 1. The invariant radial networks act on a trainable Bessel basis of size 8 and are implemented with two hidden layers of 32 neurons with SiLU nonlinearities between them. Considering the uncertainty of the models, we trained 5 NN models, which have the same architecture but are initialized independently, in all experiments of hyperparameter optimization. Our approach to estimating the uncertainty of the prediction of NNs relies on the prediction of an ensemble model consisting of several instances. In detail, the AIMD database of liquid silicon is randomly sub-sampled into 8 smaller training sets. Then the ensemble model is trained over a given training set by changing each time the initial condition of each NN. Here, the members of the ensemble ideally have the same architecture but are initialized independently via the input of different seeds. For the final prediction of the ensemble, we computed the mean of the models' predictions P i ,