Molten salts are being used or explored for thermal energy storage and conversion systems in concentrating solar power and nuclear power plants. Thermal conductivity of molten salts is an important thermophysical property dictating the performance and cost of these systems, but its accurate measurement has been challenging, as evidenced by wide scattering of existing data in literature. The corrosive and conducting nature of these fluids also leads to time consuming sample preparation processes of many contact-based measurements. Here, we report the measurement of thermal conductivity of molten salts using a modulated photothermal radiometry (MPR) technique, which is a laser-based, non-contact, frequency-domain method adopted for molten salts for the first time. By unitizing the advantages of front side sensing of frequency-domain measurements and the vertical holder orientation, the technique can minimize the natural convection and salt creeping effects, thus yielding accurate molten salt thermal conductivity. The MPR technique is first calibrated using standard molten materials including paraffin wax and sulfur. It is then applied on measuring pure nitrate salts (NaNO3 and KNO3), solar salt (NaNO3-KNO3 mixture), and chloride salt (NaCl-KCl-MgCl2). The measurement results are compared with data from literature, especially those obtained from laser flash analysis (LFA). Our results demonstrate that the MPR is a convenient and reliable technique of measuring thermal conductivity of molten salts. Accurate thermal conductivity data of molten salts will be valuable in developing the next-generation hightemperature thermal energy storage and conversion systems. Molten salts are an important class of heat transfer fluids (HTFs) in high-temperature thermal energy systems including concentrating solar power (CSP), nuclear power plants, and thermal energy storage (TES). Solar salt (NaNO3-KNO3 mixture with wt.% is being used in the state-of-the-art CSP plants with TES capability at temperatures up to 550 o C Thermal conductivity of molten salts is important for the performance and cost of these systems. For instance, the thermal conductivity of molten salts dictates the size and thus the cost of molten salt-steam heat exchangers in a CSP power plant. However, reliable thermal conductivity data of molten salts are difficult to obtain. Even common nitrate salts have shown large discrepancies as reported in the literature. For example, there is around ~40 % difference among the reported thermal conductivity values for the solar salt Their results show more reasonable temperature dependence of thermal conductivity compared to previously reported values and are consistent with their predictions by a phonon gas model for dense and strongly interacting liquids Recently, we have developed a non-contact modulated photothermal radiometry (MPR) technique to measure bulk solids and coatings at high temperatures Figure In this work, we used either a liquid-nitrogen-cooled Hg-Cd-Te (MCT) detector (Kolmar Technologies, Inc., KMPV11-0.25-J1/DC70, 62 ns response time) or an uncooled PbSe detector (Thorlabs, PDA20H-EC, 34 ms response time). The IR detection area was about 0.5 mm and 2 mm respectively for these two detectors. The voltage reading from either detector was converted to temperature through a calibration using a pyrometer (Lumasense Technologies IGA 320/23-LO). We confirmed that both detectors yielded equivalent results when using their respective calibration curves. The heat flux q s in the measurements was calibrated by using a known reference sample. Borosilicate glass was chosen as the reference sample because it has well-known and stable thermophysical properties In the MPR measurement, the molten salt, Inconel 625 cover, and the Pyromark coating formed a three-layer structure (Figure where θ s and q s are the surface temperature oscillation and the heat flux on the top surface, respectively. θ b and q b , on the other hand, are the temperature oscillation and the heat flux on the bottom layer, respectively. The transfer matrix M i is given by: where , l i and α i are the thickness and the thermal diffusivity of the i th layer respectively; e i is the thermal effusivity of the i th layer, defined as e i = √ ρ i c pi k i , where ρ i , c pi and k i are the density, specific heat capacity and thermal conductivity of the i th layer. In the current three-layer case, the 1 st , 2 nd and, 3 rd layer are the Pyromark coating, Inconel 625 sheet, and the molten salt layer, respectively. a(iω), b(iω), c(iω), and d(iω) are the matrix elements of the lumped transfer matrix. With the adiabatic boundary conditions, equation ( where ε and σ are the emissivity of the laser window and the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. T 0 is the ambient temperature (20 o C). The A.C. component can be approximated as: Considering the heat loss through thermal radiation, equation ( An iterative process was introduced to extract the exact radiation heat loss, as shown in Figure between two consecutive steps is monitored. Once the difference is less than a tolerance, e, the radiation heat loss and temperature oscillation, θ s,end , in the last step will be considered as an accurate solution. The surface temperature oscillation amplitude with radiation heat loss can therefore be estimated by the iteration using equation ( The comparison shows that while both models can fit the data where, the model without considering the radiation heat loss overestimated the molten salt thermal conductivity by about 20 % (0.613 vs. 0.506 W m -1 K -1 ). Therefore, it can be concluded that radiation heat loss needs to be included in the model when measuring low thermal conductivity materials at high temperatures. In this work, the MPR experimental data were fitted with the analytical model shown in Equation where θ s exp-i is the measured surface temperature oscillation at a frequency point and θ s sim-i is the simulated surface temperature oscillation based on the known parameters and the initial guess value of the thermal conductivity. The iterative fitting algorithm is based on the following equation where P is the fitting parameters ( k of molten salt here), J is the Jacobin Matrix of fitted parameters, μ is the damping factor, and n indicates the iteration step. The iteration would stop and output the optimal value when the error S is smaller than the specified error allowance, 1 -4 . More details about the iterative algorithm could be found elsewhere Two phase change materials (PCMs), namely, paraffin wax and sulfur, with established thermophysical properties were measured for calibration purpose. Paraffin wax (melting point of 53-58 °C, CAS no. 8002-74-2) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and sulfur (-325 mesh, purity ≥ 99.5 %, CAS no. 7704-34-9) from Spectrum. Three nitrate salts and one chloride salt were measured: NaNO3, KNO3, Solar salt (NaNO3-KNO3 mixture with wt.% 60-40), and NaCl-KCl-MgCl2. NaNO3 (purity ≥ 99 %, CAS reg. no. 7631-99-4) and KNO3 (purity ≥ 99 %, CAS reg. no. 7757-79-1) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used as the precursors of the solar salt. The solar salt was prepared by mixing the two pure nitrate salts based on the specified weight ratio. The salt mixture was melted and mixed repeatably in a clean glass crucible heated by a hot plate to ensure the uniformity of the composition. The entire procedure was performed inside a glovebox with < 0.5 ppm oxygen level. For the chloride salt, NaCl-KCl-MgCl2 was prepared by NREL according to the published protocol (ref The systematic errors could come from the uncertainty in the instruments (IR detector, lock-in amplifier, et), uncertainty of laser heat flux, the calibration curve converting the IR detection voltage to temperature. Specific to molten salt or other liquid measurements, there could be errors introduced by the natural convection effect. For the heat flux, we used a standard reference sample (borosilicate glass) to calibrate the heat flux, which is proportional to the thermal effusivity of the reference sample. The uncertainties due to the heat flux and the instruments were determined to be ~6 % in our earlier work Random error could be caused by optical misalignment for each measurement which could cause small deviation of the heat flux from the calibrated one as well as small deviation of the view factor from the sample surface to the IR detector. To minimize this error, we mounted the laser, sample holder, and IR detectors to fixed positions on an optical table. The random uncertainties were determined from the standard deviation of multiple measurements on the same sample, as shown in Table While literature values of c p of molten salts were used to convert the thermal effusivity to thermal conductivity in the MPR measurements, the melting point and c p of the molten salt mixtures were still measured using a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) (404 F3 Pegasus®, NETZSCH) to confirm the composition and characteristics of the mixtures. During the measurement, nitrogen gas (N2) was used as the protective gas. c p of a sample was determined by using the ratio method The reliability of the MPR measurement with the custom-made molten salt holder is verified by measuring known molten materials, including paraffin wax and sulfur. Figure Furthermore, the measured result is compared to the estimated one based on the rule of mixing, i.e.: where k NaNO3 and k KNO3 are the thermal conductivity of pure NaNO3 and KNO3 respectively from our MPR measurements (shown in Figure Serrano-López et al. (0.480 ± 0.098 W m -1 K -1 ) DiGuilio and Teja They concluded that the thermal conductivity of molten salts should show a decreasing trend with increasing temperature. Recently, Zhao et al. Here we specifically comment on several factors compounding the LFA because it has been a widely used technique in recent years. LFA is a time-domain method based on front side pulsed photothermal heating and back-side infrared thermometry (Supplementary Figure According to discussion found in the literature and our own experience with the LFA, it was found that LFA measurement could be sensitive to various experimental conditions, such as the exact salt loading in the crucibles The MPR method shows several advantages of addressing the issues in LFA (Figure First, the MPR technique is a front side sensing method, which eliminates the influences of the convection effect or gaps between the salt and the backside of crucibles in LFA. Second, the MPR molten salt holder is vertically oriented whereas the LFA sample crucible is typically horizontally positioned. The vertical orientation of the holder avoids the issues due to the salt creeping effect because the salt will always be in contact with the front and back metallic sides of the holder due to their high wettability with the molten salts. The salt creeping in LFA could lead to non-uniform distribution of the horizontal molten salt layer inside the crucible. Lastly, MPR is a frequencydomain technique, so the thermal penetration depth can be controlled to be a few hundred micrometers within the molten salt volume, which minimizes the possible natural convection effect in the salt and heat losses from the crucible to the environment that could be present in a timedomain method. In LFA, typically only data within a certain time window are used for fitting to reduce the errors caused by the convection and heat loss effects The current paper presents the development of a non-contact, frequency-domain MPR technique as a convenient and reliable method of thermal conductivity measurement for molten Photograph of the MPR experimental setup; Natural convection analysis for MPR measurement; Random error analysis; Experimental raw data of molten samples; Experimental details of the LFA method and the measurement results (frequency-domain hot-wire method), Xiong et al. 