With an annual production amounting to 800 kilotons, ferrite magnets constitute the largest family of permanent magnets in volume, a demand that will only increase as a consequence of the rare-earth crisis. With the global goal of building a climate-resilient future, strategies towards a greener manufacturing of ferrite magnets are of great interest. A new ceramic processing route for obtaining dense Sr-ferrite sintered magnets is presented here. Instead of the usual sintering process employed nowadays in ferrite magnet manufacturing that demands long dwell times, a shorter two-step sintering is designed to densify the ferrite ceramics. As a result of these processes, dense SrFe 12 O 19 ceramic magnets with properties comparable to state-of-the-art ferrite magnets are obtained. In particular, the SrFe 12 O 19 magnet containing 0.2% PVA and 0.6% wt SiO 2 reaches a coercivity of 164 kA/m along with a 93% relative density. A reduction of 31% in energy consumption is achieved in the thermal treatment with respect to conventional sintering, which could lead to energy savings for the industry of the order of 7.10 9 kWh per year. Hexaferrites, particularly SrFe 12 O 19 (SFO), cover 80% of the volume of magnets that are sold every year, reaching an annual production of 800 kilotons. This is due to the main advantages they offer that include availability, price and environmental friendliness during both mining and production The pre-consolidation processing of the powder is important to ensure a low degree of agglomeration of the ferrite particles for subsequent magnetic alignment and compaction. One of the key balances in hexaferrite ceramics comes from the fact that massive grain growth, which damages coercivity, is activated at the temperatures required for proper densification Given the remarkable volume of ferrite magnets that is produced every year, efforts towards reducing the dwell time associated with their sintering could lead to significant energy savings. An alternative sintering treatment, that allows reducing the dwell time during sintering treatment, is the well-known two-step sintering (TSS) process In this work, we analyze the possibility to obtain high density and high coercivity SrFe 12 O 19 sintered magnets by combining for the first time a pre-processing of the hexaferrite starting powder with a TSS schedule that significantly reduces the overall duration of the consolidation step. Firstly, 0.2 wt% of PVA (Aldrich Chemical Company, Inc.) was added to an aqueous dissolution of commercial SrFe 12 O 19 (SFO) powders (Max Baermann GmbH 99.9%). This dissolution was homogenized and dispersed with the help of a high-shear mixer (Dissolver Simplex SL-1) by using a 5 cm in diameter cowless rotor and high solid content in water suspension, typically 60% wt, by applying 1500 rpm during 10 min. Afterwards, different percentages of SiO 2 (0.2-0.4-0.6-1 %wt) were added to the SFO/PVA solution and dispersed again with the help of Disolver Simplex SL-1. The resultant mix was dried, pressed under 200 MPa and sintered by way of a two-step sintering (TSS) process. In our sintering treatment (Fig. Next, we subjected selected samples (SrFe 12 O 19 -0.2% wt PVA with 0.6% wt of SiO 2 ) to a Spray drying process (SDP). The Spray drying method consists of two phases: 1) Particle formation: the atomization and the solvent evaporation take place and 2) Particle collection: dry and rounded particles are obtained. The rounded and dried powder obtained was pressed (while applying an external magnetic field in the final samples) and sintered by TSS. The morphological and microstructural characterizations were carried out by means of secondary electron images of field emission scanning electron microscopy, FE-SEM (Hitachi S-4700). Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) data were collected in a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer equipped with a Lynx Eye detector and a Cu target (λCuα1 = 1.54060 Å), after milling the sintered dense ceramics to powder. The PXRD data were fitted to a Rietveld model including SrFe 12 O 19 as the only phase and using the software FullProf. Crystallographic densities were calculated based on the refined unit cell parameters, a and c, and assuming all atomic sites of SrFe 12 O 19 are fully occupied by the due atoms. The relative density values were measured using by the Archimedes method and 5.1 g/cm 3 as the density value of SrFe 12 O 19 , which was calculated from the PXRD patterns Fig. After mixing with PVA (Fig. Once the PVA is optimally dispersed around the SFO particles, different SiO 2 contents (0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 1 %wt) were added to the mixture. As discussed in previous studies SFO pellets of samples with different SiO 2 contents (0.2-0.4-0.6-1 % wt) and containing 0.2%wt PVA were pressed. The green bodies, with relative densities between 63 and 67% (density of SFO is 5.1 g/cm 3 ), were then subjected to various TSS processes. The magnetization curves are shown in Fig. Increasing T2 in TSS treatments increases relative density at the expense of Hc. This competition between density and coercivity is common in SFO ceramics, as usually higher density is associated with slightly larger grain sizes. Indeed, for T2 = 1225 • C, the highest Hc and lower densities are measured. The grain growth inhibition promoted by SiO 2 is a process that involves two different chemical reactions: the dissolution of Si inside the SFO grains (which is the one that actually opposes grain growth) and the decomposition of SFO onto α-Fe 2 O 3. These two competing reactions have different kinetics and thermodynamic windows The H c values measured here are significantly higher, on average 15%, than the ones reported in our previous work using a conventional sintering procedure with a 4 h dwell time. Fig. The coercivity of these systems is commonly described by the equation Where H A is the anisotropy field of SFO, which is approximately 1.8 T Given that the single-to-multi-domain grain size threshold for SFO is slightly below 1 μm and the grain sizes observed in Fig. At this stage, after choosing the appropriate additive contents (SiO 2 and PVA) and optimizing the TSS parameters, the effect of processing the powders with a Spray Drying Process (SDP) was investigated. Fig. On the other hand, the improvement in the dispersion of the additives (SiO 2 and PVA) in the ceramic matrix should be highlighted. If we focus on Fig. The table displays the values of coercivity (H c ), magnetization at 1.3T (M 1.3T ), and relative density for all SiO 2 content and each TSS treatment. PVA to float so that when the solution dries, it accumulates or agglomerates on the surface of the SFO particles. It should be noted here that the role that PVA plays in this process is to keep the SiO 2 nanoparticles dispersed on the surface of the ferrite particles. In this sense, the high shear dispersion process favors the dispersion of micro and nanoparticles. The subsequent fast drying process in the SDP ensures that the encapsulation of the ferrite particles is maintained. To further fine tune the properties, samples were then sintered using two different firing profiles: 1100-1225 [10 min dwell]-1100 will be called TSS 1 and 1100-1250-1100 will be named TSS 2. Fig. As can be observed in Table With the aim of comparing sintered magnets fabricated following our procedure with current commercial ferrite magnets, the magnetization curves of different oriented dense pellets are represented in Fig. Table Our Mr/M 1.3T ratio is in the 0.78-0.82 range, while the commercial magnet reaches 0.93. This is likely the consequence of the fact that our orientation method, which is a delicate process, is not as optimized as that of industrial magnet manufacturers. Tokar's study demonstrated that the degree of orientation increased during sintering It is important to remark that, through the processing developed here, state-of-the-art nominal magnetic performance values are reached using a sintering schedule without dwell time. This implies a significant reduction in the energy consumption required to sinter ferrite magnets. 4 h at 1200 • C demand approximately 29 kWh, while TSS employs 20 kWh, leading to energy savings of the order of 30%. Given the 800 kilotons of ferrite magnets produced every year; industrial implementation of the sintering process presented in this work would lead to a global annual reduction in energy consumption of the order of 7⋅10 9 kWh. With the purpose of developing a greener SFO ferrite magnet manufacturing process, the sintering parameters of a TSS schedule are optimized. The influence of additives such as SiO 2 and PVA on the microstructure has been studied, as well as the application of the Spray drying process to modify the morphology of the SFO particles. By combining the encapsulating capacity of PVA with a high power dispersion (SDP) process, more dispersed and agglomerate-free/smaller particles are obtained. As expected, increasing the SiO 2 content in SrFe 12 O 19 -0.2%wt PVA mixtures increases the coercivity (H c ) value. Similarly, an increase in T2 in TSS treatments generates an increase in the relative density values. It is found that annealing up to 1100 • C at 3 • / min and subsequently rapidly increasing the temperature to 1225-1250 • C before cooling back down leads to the best density and magnetic properties. The refinement of the grain size in the TSS treatment causes the notable increase of coercivity in sintered samples. Finally, the samples were oriented and compared with a commercial ferrite magnet (Y-35). Using the novel methodology proposed here for producing sintered ferrite magnets, that leads to energy savings of the order of 31%, we obtain practically the same coercivity (164 kA/m), magnetization (58 Am 2 /kg) and relative density (93%) as for commercial ferrite magnets. Our results open the door to implementing significantly greener sintering cycles for ferrite magnets with no loss of magnetic performance. Sample Relative density (%) SFO-PVA-SiO 2 SDP TSS 1 94 SFO-PVA-SiO 2 Non-SDP TSS 1 92 SFO-PVA-SiO 2 SDP TSS2 97 SFO-PVA-SiO 2 Non-SDP TSS 2 92