Linear magnetoelectric effect is an attractive phenomenon in condensed matters and provides indispensable technological functionalities. Here a colossal linear magnetoelectric effect with diagonal component α 33 reaching up to ~480 ps/m is reported in a polar magnet Fe 2 Mo 3 O 8 , and this effect can persist in a broad range of magnetic field (~20 T) and is orders of magnitude larger than reported values in literature. Such an exceptional experimental observation can be well reproduced by a theoretical model affirmatively unveiling the vital contributions from the exchange striction, while the sign difference of magnetocrystalline anisotropy can also be reasonably figured out. or control of polarization (P) by magnetic field H, which provide fascinating functionalities to develop next-generation electronic devices, e.g. ultra-sensitive sensors and energy-saving memories Thermodynamically it is well known that α ij is just bounded by the permittivity ε ii and permeability μ jj of solids, i.e. α ij 2 <ε ii μ jj In fact, the integration upon H is the total change of P (i.e. P). With fixed P, the larger α, the narrower operating H-window. Such a trade-off between ME sensitivity and operating window makes it difficult to obtain an optimal system with superior performances in both sides (large α & wide H-window), once the total P generated by magnetism is small. Therefore, alternative routes should be developed. It has been well recognized that the symmetric exchange striction allows much larger P's (e.g. on the order of ~1 μC/cm 2 in E-type antiferromagnetic (AFM) manganites) while other mechanisms for magnetism-driven polarization (e.g. the inverse Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) and the spin-dependent p-d hybridization) rely on the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and typically lead to small P's (~0.001-0.1 μC/cm 2 ) Nevertheless, only large P's from exchange striction is not sufficient. In fact, some magnetic textures (e.g. E-type phase in o-LuMnO 3 By applying H//c-axis above a critical field H cri , a FRM phase is stabilized where the Fe In the following, we performed extensive measurements of magnetization and electric polarization over a large H range up to ~58 T using a pulsed high magnetic field apparatus, which allows in-depth exploration of the linear ME of the FRM phase. As shown in Fig. An interesting phenomenon is that both ΔP c (H) and M c (H) show similar linear behavior above H 2 . In particular, M c (H) exhibits considerable enhancement when H>H 2 , suggesting drastic modification of the spin arrangement. This is distinctly different from the case of linear magnetoelectrics based on the single-site mechanisms such as the g-factor mechanism and single-ion anisotropy mechanism, which exhibit nearly saturated M(H) behavior as appeared in (Fe 1-x Zn x ) 2 Mo 3 O 8 and Ga 2-x Fe x O 3 Therefore, the crossover at H 2 could be ascribed to a transition from complex ME response to pure linear ME, namely from individual magnetic-site effect to two-site mechanism. Comprehensive characterizations of M c (H) and ME response have been performed over a broad T-range from 1.6 K to 50 K. As shown in Fig. Because of SOC, Fe T has a much higher magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy (MAE) than Fe O . According to our DFT study, the easy axis of Fe T is along the c-axis, with a large MAE coefficient A T =-5.11 meV/Fe. However, unexpectedly, the c-axis is a hard axis for Fe O , with a weaker MAE A O =1.97 meV/Fe. Since A T is much larger than A O , the overall MAE prefers the easy axis along the c-axis, consistent with the neutron experiments Under a magnetic field along the c-axis, the magnetic state first transits from the AFM to FRM phase at H cri , with a net magnetization ~0.5 μ B /f.u. along the c-axis. In other words, the magnetic moment of Fe T (Fe O ) is parallel (anti-parallel) to the magnetic field (i.e. c-axis). Further increasing of magnetic field can only lead to the magnetic canting of Fe O . Then the free energy during this spin rotation process can be expressed as: where J ab (J c ) is the Heisenberg-type effective exchange between in-plane (out-of-plane) nearest-neighboring Fe O and Fe T ; θ is the moment angle of Fe O as indicated in the inset of Fig. . The third item is the MAE of Fe O ; and the last item is the Zeeman energy of Fe O . Here the MAE and Zeeman energy of Fe T is not explicitly expressed since they are not changing during the process and thus can be absorbed into the free energy base F 0 . According to Eq. Based on above experimental results and theoretical calculations, a (H, T) phase diagram is summarized in Fig. α 33 =480 ps/m at 20 K. (a), M c (H) measured with H//c-axis at T=10 K also displays a clear AFM-FRM transition with a very high critical field H Fig. the M c -H curve is indeed linear with a slope m O 2 /2A O , reaching ~7.5 μ B /f.u. at 58 T. Note the three independent coefficients (J c , 3J ab +J c , A O ) used in our model are very close to the DFT extracted ones (-0.07 meV, 10.55 meV, 1.97 meV).