Broken spatial inversion symmetry in semiconducting materials with time-reversal pair valleys can exhibit valley polarization. Based on first-principles calculations, here we propose a lateral heterostructure of kagome lattice of hBN and hexagonal graphene domains that exhibits opposite Berry curvature in inequivalent K and K ′ valleys. Explicit consideration of excitonic scattering processes within GW and Bethe-Salpeter equation formalism confirm insignificant intervalley coupling and consequent valley polarization ability along with 0.46 eV higher binding energy of triplet excitons. Such heterostructure with large charge carrier mobility can be exploited for advanced valleytronic and optoelectronic applications. The quantum degrees of freedom of electrons can serve as the foundations for information storage and processing. Controlled modifications of lattice structures can induce such functionalities in experimentally conducive 2D materials. Recently, 2D kagome lattice comprising of polymerized hetero-triangulene units has been shown computationally to exhibit unique electronic behaviour, featuring a Dirac band enclosed by two flat bands, that can be further engineered to obtain semimetallic or semiconducting properties. First, we construct the kagome lattice hBN, cutting it out from its monolayer and name it hBNK. We passivate the edges by hydrogen atoms to eliminate the dangling bonds to avoid any edge reconstruction. The unit cell of the system in nonmagnetic ground state with lattice constant 12.67 Å is shown in Fig. Furthermore, these bands can induce enhanced intervalley coupling as has been seen in case of monolayer hBN. The less dispersive bands from Γ to M high-symmetry direction in hBN leads to the intervalley coupling and suppresses its valley polarization ability. where the summation is over all the occupied valence bands, v x(y) is the velocity operator along the x(y) direction and ε n is the n th eigenstate energy. From Fig. where Σ is the self-energy operator within the GW approximation and ε QP nk and ψ QP nk are the quasiparticle energies and wave functions, respectively. The term V ext is potential energy due to the ion-electrons interactions and V H is the Hartree energy. The electronic self-energy correction results in an enhanced quasiparticle gap of 3.5 eV at the valleys, as can be seen in Fig. We further explore the excitonic wave functions within BSE formalism where ν (c) represents the valence (conduction) band index, A S νck is the envelope function of exciton, Ω S excitation energy of exciton state |S >, and K eh is the electron-hole interaction kernel. Using the solution of the above equation, the absorption spectra is obtained from the imaginary part of the dielectric function ε 2 (ω): where P is the polarization of incoming photon, e is the electronic charge, v is the velocity operator, < 0| is the fock space within the DFT level, and |S > is the excitonic wave function. The convergence parameters of BSE calculations are provided in the SM. We calculate the absorption spectra of hBNK-G in presence of linear polarized light, considering 3 valence and 4 conduction bands to attain the convergence and plot the same in Fig. Note that, below the DOS corresponding to the bright singlet exciton peak A, there appears a dark singlet exciton, characterized by negligible oscillator strength as compared to the bright one. That is why, the singlet-triplet splitting is calculated with respect to the bright singlet exciton i.e, peak A. To investigate this large splitting, we explore the optical transitions among few valence and conduction bands that are marked with numerical indices in Fig. where A νck is the amplitude of the particular excitation. We present the corresponding data in Table .I. We find that the singlet excitons get formed majorly due to the transition from the top of the valence band (ν = 1) to the bottom of the conduction band (c = 1). However, excitations among bands, ν = 1, 2 and c = 1, 2 show substantial contributions towards the triplet exciton. To gain further insight, we investigate the k-resolved optical transitions for both the first bright singlet (peak A) and first triplet (peak B) excitons in terms of the k-resolved envelope function and plot i |A S i k | 2 in Fig. This can be attributed to the attractive direct electron-hole screened Coulomb interaction term in the interaction kernel, which contributes towards the formation of both singlet and triplet excitons. Further investigation reveals that, the triplet exciton formation at valleys is a consequence of only ν = 1 to c = 1 transitions (see Fig. where σ ± indicate different chiralities of the circular polarized light, v x (v y ) is the component of the velocity operator in x (y)-direction and â is the corresponding unit vector. As mentioned before, the doubly degenerate eignestates corresponding to the bright singlet exciton get splitted while interacting with the left (σ + ) and right (σ -) circular polarized lights and we plot the corresponding oscillator strengths in Fig. Therefore, the hBNK-G system can exhibit efficient circular dichroism valley-Hall effect. To summarize, based on first-principle calculations, we propose the 2D lateral heterostructure of kagome lattice of hBN and hexagonal graphene domains that can exhibit promising electronic and optical properties. An optical gap of 2.78 eV with 0.72 eV binding energy for singlet excitons and high charge carrier mobility of 1.4 × 10 3 cm 2 V -1 s -1 indicates efficient optoelectronic properties of this hBNK-G system. Furthermore, this system is capable of stabilizing the triplet exciton over the singlet one by 0.46 eV that can enhance exciton life-time and the quantum efficiency of optical absorption. with e-h A where h is the reduced Plank constant, K B is the Boltzmann constant, e is the electronic charge, and the temperature T is set as room temperature. The C 2D is the in-plane stiffness under the applied strain (δ, in percentage) along a particular direction, i.e., x or y. Here we apply the strain only along the x-direction since the hBNK-G structure is isotropic in nature. It takes the following form: where E T otal is the total energy of the unit cell and A 0 is the area of the unit cell within equilibrium conditions. The deformation potential, E I is the change of conduction band minima (CBM) position with applied strain. It can be expressed as: The effective mass of the electron with zero-strain condition is given by The calculated values of these parameters are listed in Table With a fixed dielectric matrix cut-off at 8 Ry, we further test the convergence for the bare Coulomb cut-off with same number of bands and coarse k-point grid, as shown in Table We find 50 Ry as the converged bare Coulomb cut-off. Finally, we test for the coarse k-point grid for the GW calculations, as shown in Table Here we provide the original plots of Fig. 