A topological transition in high-temperature superconductors FeTe1-xSex, occurring at a critical range of Se concentration x, underlies their intrinsic topological superconductivity and emergence of Majorana states within vortices. Nonetheless, the influence of Se concentration and distribution on the electronic states in FeTe1-xSex remains unclear, particularly concerning their relationship with the presence or absence of Majorana states. In this study, we combine density functional theory (DFT) calculations, pz-dxz/yz-based and Wannier-based Hamiltonian analysis to systematically explore the electronic structures of diverse FeTe1-xSex compositions. Our investigation reveals a nonlinear variation of the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) gap between pz and dxz/yz bands in response to x, with the maximum gap occurring at x = 0.5. The pz-pz and dx2-y2-pz interactions are found to be critical for pd band inversion. Furthermore, we ascertain that the distribution of Se significantly modulates the SOC gap, thereby influencing the presence or absence of Majorana states within local vortices. The iron chalcogenide family has emerged as an intriguing platform to study unconventional superconductivity and novel quantum state transitions The coexistence of TSS and superconductivity gives rise to MBS in vortices, which can be detected using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy Exploring the chemical composition effect on the electronic states of FeTe1-xSex poses considerable challenges from both experimental and theoretical perspectives. High-quality growth of FeTe1-xSex crystals with precise composition control remains a difficult task. The atomic structures are highly sensitive to the Se/Te concentration, and there are limited reports available Here, we focus on studying the relation among chemical composition, orbital interaction, and electronic structures. By combining DFT calculations, Wannier-based TB, and a pz-dxz/yz-based effective Hamiltonian analysis together, we systematically study the chemical composition effect on electronic states of FTS, especially the bands variation along -Z around Fermi level. The dependence of orbital interaction with x are clarified. Variation of Se concentration x in FeTe1-xSex crystals changes not only Se/Te proportion but also atomic structures. The structures of FTS are limited reported and slightly vary with preparation and measurement methods Although DMFT and other beyond DFT methods give better description of correlation and coupling effects, all these calculations show x-dependent and orbital-dependent band renormalzation compared to ARPES data DFT calculations with GGA-PBE 2. Wannier TB Tight-binding (TB) Hamiltonians based on maximally localized Wannier functions of FeTe1-xSex systems are constructed using Wannier90 The optimized atomic structures of FeTe1-xSex (x = 0.0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5, 0.625, 0.75, 0.875, and 1.0, respectively) are shown in Fig. Neither obvious atomic distortion nor rearrangement is found when x changes. Fig. Interestingly, as x progresses from 0 to 1, the magnitude of the SOC gap experiences a nonlinear evolution: it begins at 0.0 meV, reaches its maximum value of 48.2 meV at x = 0.5, and subsequently recedes back to 0.0 (see Fig. As shown in Fig. These fluctuations account for the presence and absence of MBS in vortices. In conclusion, our study explores the intricate relationship between Se composition and electronic states in FeTe1-xSex. By combining DFT calculations and Hamiltonian analysis, we uncover a nonlinear variation of the SOC gap between pz and dxz/yz bands in response to x, and find the critical role of pz-pz and dx2-y2-pz interactions in pd band inversion. Importantly, our findings underscore the substantial impact of Se distribution on the SOC gap, subsequently influencing the presence or absence of MBS within local vortices. This study reveals the intricate interplay between chemical composition, electronic structure, and Majorana in FeTe1-xSex, providing a novel perspective to understand the appearance and disappearance of MBS.