To overcome the challenges associated with poor temporal stability of perovskite solar cells, methods are required that allow for fast iteration of fabrication and characterisation, such that optimal device performance and stability may be actively pursued. Currently, establishing the causes of underperformance is both complex and time-consuming, and optimisation of device fabrication thus inherently slow. Here, we present a means of computational device characterisation of mobile halide ion parameters from room temperature current-voltage (J-V) measurements only, requiring ∼ 2 hours of computation on basic computing resources. With our approach, the physical parameters of the device may be reverse modelled from experimental J-V measurements. In a drift-diffusion model, the set of coupled driftdiffusion partial differential equations cannot be inverted explicitly, so a method for inverting the drift-diffusion simulation is required. We show how Bayesian Parameter Estimation (BPE) coupled with a drift-diffusion perovskite solar cell model can determine the extent to which device parameters affect performance measured by J-V characteristics. Our method is demonstrated by investigating the extent to which device performance is influenced by mobile halide ions for a specific fabricated device. The ion vacancy density N 0 and diffusion coefficient D I were found to be precisely characterised for both simulated and fabricated devices. This result opens up the possibility of pinpointing origins of degradation by finding which parameters most influence device J-V curves as the cell degrades. Lead-halide perovskites (LHPs) have attracted intense research activity as light harvesting layers in solar cell devices due to power conversion efficiency (PCE) increases of 9-25.8% since 2009 To find strategies and fabrication techniques in addressing these problems, a large number of parameters is required to specify layer widths and materials parameters for the perovskite layer and the electron and hole transport layers (ETL, HTL respectively). These parameters are often not accurately known and may vary from device to device. Identifying which of these parameters is sensitive to the fabrication method and extent of degradation of a specific fabricated device gives important insights on the origins of subpar device performance. The PSCs can be characterised by experimental measurements of, for example, current-voltage (J-V) characteristics at varying voltage scan rates. These characteristics do not however give directly the device and materials parameter values. Here we present a method for reverse modelling, namely mapping from J-V device measurements to device and materials parameters. We do so by solving the inverse parameter problem where a drift-diffusion (DD) simulation is combined with Bayesian parameter estimation, BPE. It is not possible to invert explicitly the coupled partial differential equations in the DD model. Despite strong evidence for the migration of halide ions, and an understanding of its effect on device performance, it is not clear how to determine whether performance losses in a specific device may be attributed to ion migration. For example, a recent study has been made of degradation pathways linked to iodide diffusion and iodide reactions. As shown by density functional theory (DFT) calculations In our approach, BPE Solving the inverse problem of mapping from J-V device measurement to device parameters requires a model of the forward relationship (device parameters to J-V measurement) which may then be inverted. Here, this forward relationship has been approximated by utilising a coupled electron-hole-ion drift diffusion device model, namely IonMonger p(y|θ) is the likelihood of obtaining the measured outcome y from θ, p(θ) is the prior distribution over θ, and θ p(y|θ)p(θ) is a normalising factor. In this application, θ is the set of fundamental physical device parameters associated with a PSC device (see Table The prior distribution over perovskite parameters p(θ) was assumed to be a uniform distribution over each parameter, representing the inherent epistemic uncertainty prior to any measurement of the device. Table where the covariance is determined by the set of experimental uncertainties in each measured J-V characteristic σ, assumed to be ±0.1%. The dominating uncertainty originates from measurement of the current density, as shown by Brandt et al. It was also found possible to decrease the variance of final posterior distributions over mobile ion vacancy parameters by including J-V characteristics measured from multiple voltage scan-rates. The set of characteristics y used in the method above was therefore the concatenation of two sets of characteristics for scan-rates of 0.1V/s and 1.0V/s. Previous studies To evaluate the method, a TiO 2 -MAPbI 3 -Spiro architecture was simulated by IonMonger and J-V measurements taken at 0.1V/s and 1.0V/s scan-rates. Using the BPE method presented, posterior distributions over mobile ion vacancy parameters, vacancy density N 0 and diffusion coefficient D I , were determined (see Figure It can be seen from Figure Further, observed J-V characteristics exhibit a strong dependence on the scan-rate at which the device was measured As shown in Table The method was tested experimentally with J-V measurements on a TiO 2 -MAPbI 3 -Spiro architecture from Cave et al. where the high temperature diffusion coefficient D I,∞ = 3 × 10 -8 m 2 s -1 for a vacancy hop attempt frequency of 1THz The vacancy hop activation energy E a may be predicted from this relationship and was calculated to be 0.35 eV. This prediction lies within experimentally obtained activation energies of 0.36-0.43 eV. Additionally, an analysis of the assumptions of the numerical simulation model, IonMonger, leads to further potential insight. Specifically, IonMonger assumes that all ion vacancies are mobile -an assumption which is known not to hold in fabricated PSCs due to, for example, grain boundary dominated migration The efficiency of the BPE method, and most importantly the efficiency of the Metropolis-Hasting algorithm, was observed to be strongly dependent on jumping distribution variance (see Figure Future work may look to improve the efficiency of this method via superior MCMC algorithms such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) Application specific efficiency improvements may also be obtained by constraining the device parameter space with prior device knowledge. In the examples presented here, prior distributions over device parameters were uninformative uniform distributions over the full range of plausible values for MAPbI 3 . Reducing the parameter space over which the method is performed would decrease the number of MCMC iterations required and may be achieved by application-specific informative prior distributions. For example, the prior distribution over perovskite layer width ranged from 400nm-900nm; however, the layer width is commonly characterized previously to J-V measurement. The prior distribution over this parameter may therefore be specified by a normal distribution centered on the measured value with variance given by the measurement uncertainty. This may be extended to any number of device parameters that have previously been characterized, greatly decreasing the searched parameter space. A method for fast (∼ hours) reverse modelling, mapping from J-V device measurements to device and materials parameters, has been presented. We have demonstrated that mobile halide ion parameters can be deduced from room temperature J-V measurements only, requiring no further experimental protocols. In our method, Bayesian Parameter Estimation is coupled with a drift-diffusion PSC model, to determine posterior distributions over mobile ion parameters which were found to precisely characterise the Figure The method presented here can also be applied in a digital twin-style setting, where a virtual model of a laboratory device is created and continuously updated to reflect the current output of the device. The digital twin would use our drift diffusion code combined with Bayesian Parameter Estimation to find values for the drift-diffusion model input parameters that reproduce measurements of the PSC being studied, such as its current-voltage (J-V) characteristics. If the device changes over time, e.g. due to degradation, this method would be able to identify the causes of changes in device performance and track these over time. This approach could be of value, not only in current efforts to improve PSC by helping to determine underlying physical processes, but also in the future by employing it in operational settings, where methods for monitoring and optimising devices would be needed. High-performance computing (HPC) may be leveraged to further reduce the characterisation time, potentially allowing for full device characterisation in minutes, requiring only J-V measurements as input. Further methodological improvements may also be investigated such as improved MCMC sampling and active learning methods.