Here we report the structural, elastic, bonding, thermo-mechanical, optoelectronic and superconducting state properties of recently discovered XIr 3 (X = La, Th) superconductors utilizing the density functional theory (DFT). The elastic, bonding, thermal and optical properties of these compounds are investigated for the first time. The calculated lattice and superconducting state parameters are in reasonable agreement to those found in the literature. In the ground state, both the compounds are mechanically stable and possess highly ductile character, high machinability, low Debye temperature, low bond hardness and significantly high melting point. The thermal conductivities of the compounds are found to be very low which suggests that they can be used for thermal insulation purpose. The population analysis and charge density distribution map confirm the presence of both ionic and covalent bonds in the compounds with ionic bond playing dominant roles. The calculated band structure and DOS profiles indicate metallic character of XIr 3 compounds. It is also found from the DOS profile that the Ir 5d-states dominate near the Fermi level. Unlike the significant anisotropy observed in elastic and thermal properties, all the optical constants of XIr 3 compounds exhibit almost isotropic behavior. The optical parameters' profiles correspond very well with the electronic band structure and DOS features. We have estimated the superconducting transition temperature (T c ) of XIr 3 compounds in this work. The calculated values of T c for LaIr 3 and ThIr 3 compounds are 4.91 K and 5.01 K, respectively. We have compared and contrasted all the physical properties of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds in this study. Superconductivity is one of the most interesting and significant topics in both theoretical and experimental condensed matter physics. Nowadays the investigation of superconductors has piqued the interest of modern society owing to their features suitable for wide range of applications. Many binary systems made of rare earth and transition metals have been found to exhibit superconductivity. The addition of rare earth and 5d transition metal element such as Ir (Iridium) can create a compound that displays superconductivity and other attractive Therefore, it is obvious from the preceding discussion that many physical features of these compounds remain unexplored. In this study, we want to overcome this research gap, which is the key motivation for the current investigations. Hence, it is our crucial theoretical interest to study the structural, elastic, mechanical, bonding, acoustic, optoelectronic, thermal and superconducting state properties of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds thoroughly in this paper. It is worth keeping in mind that information on all these hitherto unexplored physical properties are essential to unlock the potential of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) for possible applications. The remaining part of this study is organized as follows: In Section 2, we provide an overview of our computational scheme. We discussed the calculated results of various properties of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds in Section 3. Finally, the major findings of this investigation are summarized in Section 4. The CASTEP (CAmbridge Serial Total Energy Package) code To execute the pseudo atomic operations, the valence electron configurations used in this study were [5s 2 5p 6 5d 1 6s 2 ] for the La atom, [6s 2 6p 6 6d 2 7s 2 ] for the Th atom, and [5d 7 6s 2 ] for the Ir atom, respectively. In this work, the plane-wave cut off energy was set at 400 eV to obtain the total energy convergence. The sampling of the Brillouin zone of XIr 3 compounds was performed using a mesh size of 11×11×2 k-points based on the Monkhorst-Pack scheme After the geometry optimization, the elastic constants, Mulliken bond population, charge density distribution, band structure, density of states (DOS) and optical properties were evaluated. The stress-strain approach and the total charge that exists on an atomic species A can be stated as: where Z A refers to the charge of the atomic core. All the optical parameters of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) in the ground state can be fully investigated by utilizing the complex dielectric function, ε(ω) = ε 1 (ω) + iε 2 (ω). Utilizing the Kramers-Kronig equations, we can simply determine the real part of the dielectric function from its imaginary part. CASTEP computes the imaginary part, ε 2 (ω), by employing the following formula In the above equation, ω refers to the angular frequency of the electromagnetic wave, Ω denotes the volume of the unit cell, e is the electronic charge, and at a particular wave-vector k, and represent the valence and conduction band wave functions, respectively. The other optical parameters, such as the refractive index, reflectivity, absorption coefficient, optical conductivity, and energy loss function can be evaluated from the complex dielectric function, ε(ω) by employing the following set of relations where, n(ω) and k(ω) are the real and imaginary parts of the complex refractive index, R(ω) is the reflectivity, α(ω) is the absorption coefficient, σ(ω) is the optical conductivity, W cv refers to the transition probability per unit time and L(ω) is the energy loss function. As we described in the earlier that XIr 3 (X = La, Th) crystallize in the rhombohedral structure (space group R-3m, No.166) The geometry optimization yields the fully relaxed lattice parameters of the chosen compounds. Table Elastic constants are the physical properties that measure the response of a material to external stress. They determine the stiffness of material, and are used to calculate how the material behaves when subjected to a given force on different crystal planes. A compound with rhombohedral crystal structure has six independent elastic constants (C ij ), which are C 11 , C 12 , C 13 , C 14 , C 33 and C 44 . These single crystal elastic constants are utilized to calculate the various other elastic parameters of our chosen compounds. The computed values of the single crystal elastic constants of our chosen compounds are shown in Table At zero pressure, all of the computed elastic constants of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds meet the above mechanical stability conditions. This implies that all of the compounds under study are mechanically stable. The results presented in Table The single crystal elastic constants may be used to calculate different polycrystalline elastic moduli, Pugh's ratio, and Poisson's ratio. To evaluate the values of polycrystalline bulk modulus (B), shear modulus (G), Young's modulus (Y), and Poisson's ratio (η), following equations The Voigt The bulk and shear moduli of crystals can be utilized to evaluate their overall mechanical behaviors. Bulk modulus describes the resistance of a material to volume deformation by hydrostatic pressure while shear modulus measures the resistance to shape deformations caused by shearing stress The Young's modulus of a material can be used to estimate its stiffness and thermal shock resistance The failure mode (ductile or brittle nature) of a given system can be explained from the ratio of B to G, which is called the Pugh's ratio (B/G) The Poisson's ratio (η) is another elastic parameter that can be used to understand nature of the bonding forces and to predict the crystal stability against shear. Materials with low values of Poisson's ratio possess stability against shear In order to calculate the dimensionless Kleinman parameter (ζ), machinability index (μ M ), bulk modulus under uniaxial strain (B a , B b and B c ) and isotropic bulk modulus (B relax ), the following formulae are employed with, Λ = C 11 +2C 12 α+C 22 α 2 +2C 13 β+C 33 β 2 +2C 33 αβ To understand a material's mechanical behavior in practical applications it is essential to calculate its hardness value. There are a number of theoretical schema for determining the hardness as a function of Poisson's ratio (η), Young's modulus (Y), bulk modulus (B), and shear modulus (G). Some of the prominent schemes are given by N. Miao et al. ( ( where, ( ) is a function of the Poisson's ratio (η), which can be obtained from:  is a dimensionless constant with a value of 0.096. It is observed from the Table The formation of cracks, particularly in metals and ceramic materials, is one of the major issues with surface hard coatings on heavy-duty devices. Fracture toughness, K IC , of a material is a measure of its resistance to surface crack formation. This parameter plays a vital role in the design of engineering materials. The following equation is used to calculate the fracture toughness (K IC ) where, V 0 is the atomic volume; α 0 = 8840 GPa; ξ(η) is a function of the Poisson's ratio (η) which can be found from: The fracture toughness is also shown in Table Table with, The shear anisotropy parameters A 1 , A 2 , and A 3 correspond to the shear planes {100}, {010}, and {001}, respectively. It is seen from the Table For an isotropic crystal, the three-dimensional (3D) directional variation of Young's modulus (Y), compressibility (β), shear modulus (G), and Poisson's ratio (η) should be spherical in shape, and any deviation from this configuration would indicate a level of elastic anisotropy. In this study, we have obtained 2D and 3D visualization of Y, β, G, and η by using elastic tensor analysis (ELATE) The Mulliken bond population analysis is a widely used method in quantum chemistry to comprehend the nature of chemical bonds (ionic, covalent and metallic) in a material. In this section, we have employed both Mulliken population analysis (MPA) The charge spilling index determines how much valence charge is missing in a projection. A low value of this parameter suggests that electronic bonding is efficiently represented in the MPA. Table The analysis also shows that the Mulliken and Hirshfeld charges are positive for the X (X = La, Th) atoms (act as cation) while these charges are negative for the Ir atom (acts as anion). The value of Mulliken charge and Hirshfeld charge (see Table The difference between the formal ionic charge and the computed Mulliken charge is known as the effective valence charge (EVC) of an atom Hardness is a fundamental mechanical property of a material which measures its resistance to deformation, abrasion, or indentation. It also describes the ability of a material to endure localized stresses without considerable plastic deformation or damage. In industry, the relative hardness of a material is also frequently employed. A material's hardness is a crucial physical parameter to comprehend its applicability, particularly when used as an abrasive and radiation tolerant element In general, the hardness of a single crystal is regarded as intrinsic, whereas the hardness of polycrystalline materials is considered as extrinsic. The bond hardness is an useful intrinsic measure of a material and can be obtained by using the following expressions where, signifies the bond hardness of the μ-type bond, H v is the total hardness of the compound, P μ and P μ ́ are the Mulliken bond overlap population and metallic population, n free is the number of free electrons, V 0 is the cell volume, EF and E P refer to the energy at the Fermi level and at the pseudo-gap, n μ denotes the total number of μ-type bond, refers to the bond volume of μ-type bond, d μ is the bond length of μ-type bond, and refers to the μ-type bond density per cubic angstroms. The metallic nature of bonds in a solid can also be estimated from the Mulliken bond population analysis. In this study, we have calculated the metallicity (f m ) of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds by using the following equations The calculated number of free electrons, bond length, Mulliken and metallic population, total number of each type of bonds, metallicity, bond volume and bond hardness of each type of bonds and the total hardness of our investigated compounds are listed in Table The electronic charge density distribution map illustrates detailed information about the bonding nature and amount of charge transfer among the atoms of a compound. To estimate the bonding nature of the XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds, we have computed the electronic charge density distribution maps within the (110) and (111) crystal planes using LDA functionals and the obtained results are depicted in Figure One of the most significant topics of condensed matter physics is the study of electronic band structure, which is strongly linked to a compound's electrical conductivity, thermopower, heat capacity, bonding features, Hall effect, optoelectronic properties, magnetic properties, and superconductivity. The electronic energy band structures of optimized XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds have been calculated along the path Γ-A-H-K-Γ-M-L-H in the first Brillouin zone (BZ). The results obtained from the band structure calculations are depicted in Figure The electronic energy density of states (DOS) of a crystalline material is linked with the electronic, optical, superconducting, and magnetic features of a material. The DOS of a material is also crucial to understand how each atom contributes to bonding and anti-bonding states. In this study, we have computed the total and partial density of states (TDOS and PDOS, respectively) of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) to gain a better understanding of the electronic features. The results obtained from the TDOS and PDOS calculations of our chosen materials are depicted in Figure At E F , the TDOS values of the investigated compounds are quite large (see Figure In order to understand the contribution of X (X = La, Th) and Ir atoms in the TDOS separately, we have computed the PDOS of each atom at different energies. It is seen from Figure The existence of a deep valley in the TDOS plot close to the E F is referred to a pseudogap or quasi-gap. It is linked to a material's electronic stability and distinguishes the bonding states from the antibonding states In solid-state physics, the Debye temperature (θ D ) of a material determines the highest energy mode of lattice vibration and acts as a cutoff for the phonon energy distribution. This parameter also gives useful information on the lattice dynamics, specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity, melting temperature, and elastic constants of a material. In this study, we have employed the Anderson method In the above equation, V 0 signifies the cell volume, n defines the total number of atoms in the cell, h refers to the Planck's constant and k B denotes the Boltzmann's constant. The following expression can be used to calculate the average sound velocity (v a ) here, v l and v t refer to the longitudinal and transverse sound velocities, respectively. The v l and v t can be obtained from: where, ρ refers to the density of the solid. The calculated values of θ D of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds along with the mass density (ρ) and acoustic velocities (v l , v t and v a ) are presented in Table It is seen from the table 10 that the calculated v a and θ D of LaIr 3 are considerably larger than that of ThIr 3 . This happens due to the lower mass density of LaIr 3 compounds than the ThIr 3 compounds. Moreover, the values of v t are found to be much lower than v l (see Table A solid's acoustic velocity is an essential feature that is linked to its thermal and electrical properties. A solid's atoms produce three vibrational modes: two transverse (v t1 and v t2 ) modes and one longitudinal (v l ) mode. These vibrational modes are excited by sound wave when it travels through a solid. The presence of elastic anisotropy in a solid can be detected by the anisotropy in sound velocities, and vice versa. For rhombohedral crystal structure, the pure longitudinal and transverse modes can be determined only along [100] and [001] crystallographic directions. In this work, we have measured the acoustic velocities of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds along the [100] and [001] propagation directions in order to comprehend the anisotropic nature of acoustic velocities. We have employed the following equations [100] direction: [001] direction: here, v l denotes the longitudinal mode, v t1 refers to the first transverse mode and v t2 denotes the second transverse mode. Table Table The transfer of heat via thermal vibrations is dominated by the propagation of elastic waves. Since both the compounds under study are elastically anisotropic, they will have anisotropy in minimum thermal conductivity. The k min of XIr 3 materials along different crystallographic directions can be obtained by using the estimated acoustic velocities of the materials. In this study, we have employed the Cahill and Clarke where, n denotes the number of atoms per mole. The values of k min estimated from the Cahill and Clarke model are presented in Table A material's thermal expansion coefficient (α) is a physical parameter that measures how much its dimensions change in response to a change in temperature. The potential of a material to be employed as a TBC material is strongly correlated with this parameter. This parameter is also linked to a variety of other physical properties, such as the thermal conductivity, melting temperature, specific heat, and so on. It is known that the α of a material is inversely related to its melting temperature (T m ), as follows: α ≈ 0.02 / T m Another essential thermophysical parameter is the heat capacity per unit volume (ρC P ). This parameter is also known as volumetric heat capacity. The change in heat energy of a unit volume in a material by one degree Kelvin change in temperature is called the ρC P of the material. It measures a material's capacity to store thermal energy as well as its thermal response to temperature changes. Phonons are responsible for the heat and sound energy transmission in solids. It is defined as the quanta of lattice vibrations. Phonon plays a crucial role to determine the thermal conductivity, heat capacity and many other thermal and electrical properties. The wavelength corresponding to the peak of the phonon distribution function is known as the dominant phonon wavelength (λ dom ). In this section, we have estimated the α, ρC P and λ dom of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) by using the relationships In the above expressions, G is the shear modulus, Ω denotes the volume per atom, and v a is the average sound velocity. It is seen from the Table A material's melting temperature, also known as its melting point, is the temperature at which it transforms from a solid to a liquid phase at a certain atmospheric pressure. Nowadays the melting temperature (T m ) of a material is a fascinating and necessary topic of research. Higher melting temperature materials have lower thermal expansion, higher cohesive energy, and higher bonding energy The calculated values of T m of XIr 3 materials are listed in Table Table The optical properties of a material are essential for understanding how the material interacts with light and how light is reflected, refracted, absorbed, scattered, and transmitted as it travels through it. A number of energy-dependent optical parameters, including the absorption coefficient α(ω), reflectivity R(ω), optical conductivity σ(ω), refractive index n(ω), dielectric function ε(ω), and energy loss function L(ω), can be used to predict the overall optical response of a material. In this study, we have calculated these optical parameters for XIr 3 (X La, Th) compounds and the outcomes are depicted in Figures Since both the compounds under study are metallic in nature, Drude damping must be included while analyzing the optical parameters The absorption coefficient (α) of a material determines the amount of photon energy absorbed by the material. From the absorption spectra, we can estimate the electronic nature of a material (metal, semiconductor or insulator). This parameter also provides information on the optimal solar energy conversion efficiency. The absorption spectra of XIr 3 compounds are shown in Figures The computed frequency dependent optical reflectivity (R) profiles of XIr 3 compounds along The conductivity (σ) spectra of a material can be used to understand its electromagnetic response in the presence of a time-varying electric field. This parameter also provides important details regarding the electronic band structure and photoconductivity of a material. Figures The real (Re), n(ω) and imaginary (Im), k(ω) parts of refractive index are two important optical constants. The imaginary part k(ω) is also known as the extinction coefficient. The n(ω) of refractive index determines the phase velocity of an electromagnetic wave and the amount of bending of light, while the extinction coefficient governs the amount of absorption or attenuation of light within the medium. For the optimal design of photoelectric devices, accurate knowledge of the complex refractive index of a material is necessary. The variation of n(ω) and k(ω) of XIr 3 materials for [100] and [001] polarizations of the incident electric field are shown in Figures The complex dielectric function, ε(ω) of a material can be used to calculate the other optical constants, including optical conductivity, refractive index, reflectivity, energy loss function and absorption of light. The real (Re), ε 1 (ω) part of the dielectric function describes the polarization of the material. This part is also connected to the permittivity component. On the other hand, the imaginary (Im), ε 2 (ω) part of the dielectric function corresponds to the dielectric loss in the optical system. Figures The energy loss function, L(ω) of a material provides valuable information about the electronic structure, plasmon resonance, absorption coefficient and reflectivity of the material Superconducting materials possess some very special electrical and magnetic properties which make them useful for a variety of technological applications. The superconducting state of a material is largely influenced by the electron-phonon coupling constant ( e-p ) of the material. In this section, we have employed the well-known McMillan equation here, θ D is the Debye temperature and μ * refers to the repulsive screened Coulomb part (also known as the Coulomb pseudopotential) of the material. We have calculated the μ * of XIr 3 materials by employing the equation given below where, N(E F ) is the value of the TDOS of the compound at the Fermi level. The strength of the electron-phonon coupling of a material is described by the constant  e-p . In this study, we have calculated the  e-p of XIr 3 materials by using the following expression In the above expression, γ exp is the experimental linear coefficient of the electronic specific heat and γ cal is its theoretical counterpart calculated from the TDOS at the Fermi level found from the band structure calculations. In this work, we have calculated γ cal of XIr 3 materials by using the following equation The calculated values of superconducting parameters including the critical temperatures of XIr 3 compounds are presented in Table For ThIr 3 compound, the value of  e-p calculated from Eqn. ( A large number of unexplored physical properties of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds have been investigated in details. Some of the properties have been revisited and fair agreements with previous results are found. The compounds under study are mechanically stable, highly ductile, elastically anisotropic, and extremely machinable with moderate hardness. The computed Debye temperatures, minimum thermal conductivities are low. At the same time, the melting temperatures are high. High ductility, machinability, dry lubricity, and high fracture toughness indicates that the XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds have desirable traits for structural engineering applications. Low phonon thermal conductivity and high melting point imply that these to materials can be used for thermal insulation at high temperatures. The bonding nature has been investigated in details. Both the compounds show prominent ionic character with some covalent contributions. The optical properties were investigated thoroughly for the first time. The optical parameters show weakly anisotropic features and reconfirm the metallic characters. The compounds are found to be efficient absorber of ultraviolet light. They are also good reflector (R > 50%) of visible light that suggests that these materials can be used as efficient solar energy reflector. Very high values low energy refractive index [n(0) > 10] further suggest that XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds possess features suitable for optoelectronic device applications. Nearly same plasma frequency for both the compounds indicates that carrier effective mass and concentrations are almost identical. Highly dispersive bands are seen near the Γ-point in the band profiles of the compounds which implies low effective mass and high mobility of the charge carriers. It is found from the DOS profiles of XIr 3 compounds that the Ir-5d states largely contribute to the TDOS near the Fermi level. This indicates that the metallic conductivity in the compounds is governed mainly by the 5d states of Ir atom. The calculated values superconducting transition temperatures of XIr compounds are in close agreement with the previously estimated experimental values. Interestingly, the Fermi level of LaIr 3 is located at a rapidly changing part of the TDOS profile. Therefore, any shift in the Fermi energy due to applied pressure or suitable atomic substitution is expected to the N(E F ) significantly. Such modifications should significantly change the normal state charge transport properties, superconducting transition temperature, and superconducting condensation energy To conclude, a large number of physical features of the XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds have been investigated theoretically in this article. Most of the studied physical features are novel and can be used as references in further research. ij (in GPa) and Cauchy pressure (C 12 -C 44 ), (in GPa) of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds. dimensionless Kleinman parameter (ζ), machinability index (μ M ), isotropic bulk modulus (B relax in GPa), and bulk modulus under uniaxial strain (B a , B b and B c in GPa of XIr 3 (X = La, Th). A compound's resistance to stretching and bending forces can be estimated from the Kleinman parameter (ζ) Zener anisotropy parameter (A), shear anisotropy parameters (A 1 , A 2 , and A 3 ), anisotropy in compressibility (A B ) and anisotropy in shear (A G ) of XIr 3 (X = La, Th). spilling parameter (%), orbital charges (electronic charge), atomic Mulliken charge (electronic charge), EVC (electronic charge), and Hirshfeld charge (electronic charge) of XIr 3 (X = La, Th). calculated number of free electrons (n free ), bond length (d μ in Å), bond number (n μ ), Mulliken bond overlap population (P μ ), metallic population (P μ ́) , metallicity (f m ), bond volume ( in Å 3 ), bond hardness of the μ-type bond ( in GPa), and total hardness (H v in GPa) of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) compounds. l , v t and v a , all in m/sec) and Debye temperature (θ D in K) of XIr 3 (X = La, Th) along with the previously estimated experimental (Expt.) values.