During a band-gap-tuned semimetal-to-semiconductor transition, Coulomb attraction between electrons and holes can cause spontaneously formed excitons near the zero-band-gap point, or the Lifshitz transition point. This has become an important route to realize bulk excitonic insulators -an insulating ground state distinct from single-particle band insulators. How this route manifests from weak to strong coupling is not clear. In this work, using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and high-resolution synchrotron x-ray diffraction (XRD), we investigate the broken symmetry state across the semimetal-to-semiconductor transition in a leading bulk excitonic insulator candidate system Ta 2 Ni(Se,S) 5 . A broken symmetry phase is found to be continuously suppressed from the semimetal side to the semiconductor side, contradicting the anticipated maximal excitonic instability around the Lifshitz transition. Bolstered by first-principles and model calculations, we find strong interband electron-phonon coupling to play a crucial role in the enhanced symmetry breaking on the semimetal side of the phase diagram. Our results not only provide insight into the longstanding debate of the nature of intertwined orders in Ta 2 NiSe 5 , but also establish a basis for exploring band-gap-tuned structural and electronic instabilities in strongly coupled systems. When the indirect band gap of a material is continuously reduced from positive to negative, band theory predicts a semiconductor-to-semimetal Lifshitz transition. However, such a transition may never be reached in the presence of electron-hole Coulomb attraction. It is postulated that poor screening in low carrier density semimetals and strong electronhole binding in narrow gap semiconductors can both result in the spontaneous formation of excitons However, interband electron-phonon interaction can also lead to a gapped charge-density- above transition temperature T s (upper panel). The lattice distortion in the monoclinic phase is exaggerated. Symbolic sketch of a minimal lattice model of the system used to describe the low-energy interactions in the system (lower panel). ε c k and ε v k are kinetic energies of conduction and valence electrons. ω q is the chain-shearing B 2g phonon frequency. g is the interband electronphonon coupling vertex. V is the electron-hole Coulomb interaction potential. wave state that occurs concurrently with the exciton condensation Band-gap-controlled materials that undergo semimetal-to-semiconductor transitions provide an ideal platform to investigate this issue. However, the experimental realization of such a transition in bulk systems has been challenging. Divalent metals under hydrostatic pressure and uniaxial strain were first proposed as promising candidates We first track the evolution of the broken symmetry phase boundary in Ta 2 Ni(Se,S) 5 with direct measurements of the structural order parameter. In bulk excitonic insulators, exciton condensation is always tied to a simultaneous lattice distortion We find the structural phase transition remains second-order throughout the entire S-doping range. The ground-state order parameter β(T = 0) monotonically decreases with increasing S-doping (Fig. Previous studies have reported conflicting values of p L from resistivity, Raman measurements One possibility is a heavy-hole Wigner crystal phase With the quantized phonon modes, a zero-point fluctuation leads to the zero-coupling base- Solved with exact diagonalization, |x ph | for various E g and coupling strengths are shown in Fig. On the high-temperature fluctuations, previous investigations have identified a normal-state spectral "pseudogap", characterized by an anomalous spectral weight accumulation near the conduction band bottom. This phenomenon is interpreted as the signature of preformed excitons due to strong electronic correlation or electron coupling to lattice fluctuations Single crystals of Ta 2 Ni(Se,S) 5 were grown by the chemical vapor transfer method with iodine (I 2 ) as the transport agent. Starting materials composed of Ta powder (99.99%), Ni powder (99.99%), Se powder (99.99%), and S powder (99.99%) with a nominal molar ratio 2:1:5(1-x):5x (x is the nominal doping level of S) were fully ground and mixed together inside the glovebox. About 50 mg of iodine (I 2 ) was added to the mixture of the starting powder. The mixture was then vacuumed, back-filled with 1/3 Argon, and sealed inside a quartz tube with an inner diameter of 8 mm, an outer diameter of 12 mm, and a length of about 120 mm. The sealed quartz tube was placed horizontally inside a muffle furnace during the growth. The hot end reaction temperature was set to 950 • C, and the cold end was left in the air with the temperature stabilized at 850 • C. Long and thin single crystals were harvested by quenching the furnace in the air after one week of reaction. Excess iodine was removed from the surfaces of the crystals with ethanol. Electrical resistivity measurements were carried out on a commercial PPMS (Quantum Design) by the four-probe method with the current applied along the a-axis of the Ta 2 Ni(Se,S) 5 single crystals. Synchrotron-based ARPES measurements were performed at the beamline BL5-2 of Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SSRL), SLAC, USA, and the BL 7.0.2 of the Advanced Light Source (ALS), USA. The samples were cleaved in situ and measured under the ultra-high vacuum below 3×10 -11 Torr. Data was collected by the R4000 and DA30L analyzers. The total energy and angle resolutions were 10 meV and 0.2 • , respectively. High statistics measurements were done with a signal-to-noise ratio of 100∼150 at the Fermi level on the energy distribution curve taken at the Fermi momentum. This enables electronic structure restoration up to 4.5∼5 k B T after Fermi function division Hard X-ray single-crystal diffraction is carried out at the energy of 44 keV at the beamline QM2 of the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). The needle-like sample is chosen with a typical lateral dimension of 100 microns, then mounted with GE Varnish on a rotating pin before being placed in the beam. A Pilatus 6M 2D area detector is used to collect the diffraction pattern with the sample rotated 365 • around three different axes at a 0.1 • step and 0.1s/frame data rate at each temperature. The full 3D intensity cube is stacked and indexed with the beamline software. Ab initio calculations are performed using the Quantum ESPRESSO package The crystal structure relaxations are performed using the r2SCAN functional We consider the two-band model with inter-band e-ph couplings to describe the physics in the Ta 2 Ni(Se,S) 5 systems, whose Hamiltonian reads as where c † kσ (c kσ ) creates (annihilates) an electron at the conduction band (primarily Ta 5d) for momentum k and spin σ, with dispersion given by ε c k ; and the f † kσ (f kσ ) creates (annihilates) an electron at the valence band (primarily Ni 3d), with dispersion given by ε v k (Fig. Here, E g = 0 indicates the Lifshitz transition where ε c k=0 = ε v k=0 , while E g = 0.3 eV reflects the situation of Ta 2 NiS 5 . To approximate the lattice distortion in a finite-size simulation, we employ the average displacement of phonons where ρ is the density matrix of the e-ph system and xph = (a † 0 + a 0 )/N is the uniform phonon displacement operator High statistics and energy resolution ARPES measurements are performed on Ta 2 Ni(Se,S) 5 family at both the high-temperature orthorhombic phase and the low-temperature monoclinic phase (except for at 100% S-doping where no structural phase transition is observed) to trace the evolution of electronic structure with S-doping. Since the structural phase transition is second order in nature, we plot the structural order parameter at the temperature of ARPES measurement in Fig. To check the spatial homogeneity of sulfur doping within each doped sample, we performed energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) mapping over the sample surface, and Fig. In order to gain deeper insights into the influence of the parameter V , we perform a mean-field (MF) analysis on the many-body Hamiltonian [Eq. (1) of the main text]. Specifically, we consider the MF excitonic order parameter ∆ ext = iσ ⟨f † iσ c iσ ⟩/2N and ∆ ′ ext = iσ ⟨f † iσ c i+1,σ ⟩/2N , which are identical when the reflection symmetry is preserved, and the MF lattice order parameter X ph = ⟨x ph ⟩. The MF decomposition of Eq. ( where the V contributions to the diagonal terms reflect the Hartree shifts between two bands, and X ph is calculated by minimizing the ground-state energy. Solving the mean-field Hamiltonian yields the single-particle gap, which is jointly determined by the Hartree shift and the hybridization arising from the (off-diagonal) order parameters. As shown in the upper panels of Fig. When incorporating the Coulomb interaction V into this MF analysis, its contribution to the order parameters is found to be minor, reflected by the slight lowering of iso-intensity curves when contrasting the middle and left panels. Instead, its primary contribution lies in uniformly shifting the complete phase diagram towards smaller E g values. Therefore, the Ta 2 Ni(Se,S) 5 transition is primarily dictated by the strong e-ph coupling, as opposed to the electronic Coulomb interactions. The inefficiency of the Coulomb interaction in forming excitons results from the small Fermi momentum and the opposite parity of the low-energy bands, which has been discovered by earlier experimental and theoretical studies 