To address the increasing computational demands of artificial intelligence (AI), compute-in-memory (CIM) integrates memory and processing units into the same physical location, reducing the time and energy overhead of the system. AI applications of CIM residing beyond matrix multiplication, such as parallel search, remain relatively unexplored. We propose an analog content-addressable memory (ACAM) that executes parallel search in the analog domain using over 40 distinct match windows, alleviating the challenges of current parallel search architectures, including low density, high power consumption, and extensive peripheral components. From database querying to graph analytics, parallel search is indispensable for gleaning insights from massive, often unstructured, datasets. Hence, building efficient inmemory parallel search can markedly enhance the capabilities of existing CIM systems, opening avenues for more comprehensive data processing and facilitating richer AI applications. SUMMARY: Despite recent advancements in non-volatile memory (NVM) for matrix multiplication, other critical data-intensive operations, like parallel search, remain largely overlooked. Current parallel search architectures, namely content-addressable memory (CAM), often use binary, which restrict density and functionality. We present an analog CAM (ACAM) cell, built on two complementary ferroelectric field-effect transistors (FeFETs), that performs parallel search in the analog domain with over 40 distinct match windows. ACAM not only offers a projected 3x denser memory architecture than ternary CAM (TCAM) but yields a 5% increase in inference accuracy on similarity search for few-shot learning simulated with the Omniglot dataset, with an estimated speedup per similarity search of more than 100x when compared to a central processing unit (CPU) and graphics processing unit (GPU) on scaled CMOS nodes. Furthermore, we demonstrate 1-step inference on a kernel regression model in ACAM, with simulation results indicating 1,000x faster inference than a CPU and GPU. In the rapidly evolving field of artificial intelligence (AI), processing vast amounts of data efficiently is critical. Computing architectures that incorporate in-memory processing are gaining traction, as they offer to potentially reduce power consumption and cost Content-addressable memory (CAM) is well-suited to execute operations that match an input datum to a collection of data patterns stored in the CAM array In this work, we report an experimental demonstration of a non-volatile and compact ACAM cell based on two complementary FeFETs. Our ACAM cell utilizes the adjustable threshold voltages of FeFET devices to store over 40 distinct windows within each cell and examines an analog input against this stored range to identify a match or a mismatch. This cell neither requires additional transistors nor an external analog converter circuit -it only requires a single search line. Two key advantages arise from this design: (i) Parallel search is conducted where the data resides, eliminating the power and latency costs of data transportation between separate computing and memory units; (ii) Computation and analog-to-digital conversion are merged, offering higher memory bit-densities and reduced power usage for a broader set of applications. We go on to evaluate the performance of our ACAM design for similarity search in a fewshot learning application, using matching networks for inference on the Omniglot dataset and benchmarking both the accuracy and runtime of ACAM against a central processing unit (CPU), graphics processing unit (GPU), and TCAM. Additionally, we can interpret the match operation in ACAM as a kernel and hence deploy ACAM for kernel regression, a model for fitting non-linear functions. Kernels in machine learning are used to model the similarity between two inputs and form the basis for a wide variety of models, including support vector machines (SVMs), kernel regression and classification models, and, most recently, neural tangent kernels for deep learning. Such models typically require intensive computation of pairwise similarity between a test data point and each training data point during inference that could benefit greatly from parallel search. Different from conventional CAM architectures in which the digital query and keys are compared for identifying exact matches or mismatches (shown in Fig. We will now discuss how the complementary FeFETs in the ACAM cell store analog match windows to compare against the input search value. To begin, the ML is connected to NMOS FeFET and PMOS FeFET in parallel. Further, the ML stays high for a match outcome when the SL voltage is lower than the threshold voltage of the NMOS FeFET and higher than the threshold voltage of the PMOS FeFET, thus maintaining both FeFET channels in a cut-off state. As shown in Fig. In order to substantiate our circuit design and delve deeper into the concept of complementary FeFET-based ACAM, we perform experimental measurements of ACAM circuit operation on HZO Si CMOS FeFET chips (for more details, refer to the supplementary materials). We first present the programmable threshold voltages in both NMOS FeFETs and PMOS FeFETs. These threshold voltages serve to define the upper and lower bounds of the ACAM match window, respectively. We note that we achieve these programmable threshold voltages through partial polarization switching, a process that can be implemented by biasing short electrical pulses at the gate electrode of the FeFETs An ACAM cell can store real-valued intervals, as opposed to bits in a binary or ternary memory cell, giving us a new way to search and retrieve directly in the analog domain without converting signals into their digital counterparts. Similarity search is a key problem in machine learning, forming the building block for many applications, such as content retrieval, where a user seeks to recover sentences, audio files, or images that are similar to a given query. Machine learning models, including k-nearest neighbor classifiers, support vector machines (SVMs), and kernel machines, have similarity search as a key component of their inference mechanism. A growing body of existing work has therefore been devoted to accelerating these computations As image classification systems begin to tackle more and more classes, the cost of annotating a massive number of images, as well as the difficulty of procuring images of rare categories, increases. This challenge has fueled interest in few-shot learning, a type of learning where only a few labeled samples per class are available for training. The key idea behind current few-shot learning methods is to train a model to distinguish inputs, say images of different categories, from each other. This strategy is different from classical supervised learning, which seeks to predict the category of an input image. Features learned in such models using large datasets, such as the ImageNet-21K dataset (14.2 million images from 21,814 different categories), can be fruitfully used to distinguish between images of entirely new categories using very few new images (i.e., "few-shot") Similarity search in few-shot learning can be mapped to ACAM as follows. In software, the support embeddings are stored in an array of size n • k × 64, while the query sample is represented as a 64-dimensional array. Similarly, an (n • k × 64)-dimensional ACAM array is used to store the features of few-shot labeled images embeddings, where the (i, j)th element corresponds to the jth element of ith support embedding. Programming of the support embeddings into ACAM involves selecting a window size, typically held constant across all ACAM cells and then positioning the window such that the (i, j)th element lies at the center of its window for all i = 1, . . . , n • k and j = 1, . . . , 64. Recall that the central position of the match window can be adjusted by gradually applying voltage pulses to the NMOS FeFET or PMOS FeFET, pictured in each ACAM cell of the Fig. , where 1(•) is the indicator function. In contrast, ACAM computes a "generalized" Hamming distance within the analog domain, which can be expressed as , where a i,j and b i,j are the endpoints of the match window in the ACAM cell corresponding to the jth element of ith support embedding. To reiterate, the main advantage of ACAM over binary and ternary CAM is that it computes similarity directly in the analog domain via generalized Hamming distance. Selection of the matching window size and impact of added noise within ACAM will now be discussed in the context of similarity search. Figs. It is important to compare the density of ACAM versus TCAM. Analog representations in ACAM are far more expressive than the digital representations in TCAM, which in turn yields denser memory storage while maintaining high-accuracy results. Specifically, binary/ternary representations require the use of locality-sensitive binary codes. It is shown that binary classification on 14,871 images of dimension 320 taken from the LabelMe database result in a diverse set of precision-recall curves when locality-sensitive binary codes are used to embed the test data with various code sizes Lastly, the performance of matching networks with ACAM will be benchmarked with respect to accuracy and runtime. After executing inference on 423 characters, Fig. We next demonstrate how to use ACAM for inference in a kernel regression machine There are many kernels K(x, x′) that can be used in this procedure. One popular choice involves a radial basis function (RBF) kernel K(x, x′) = exp(-‖x -x′‖ 2 2 / 2γ 2 ), which computes the probability of the test datum being drawn from a Gaussian distribution centered at one of the training data points, as seen in Fig. It will be shown that ACAM enables rapid, 1-step inference. All that is required is for a test data point to be placed on the search lines of the ACAM. The surrogate Gaussian kernel can be computed in O(1) time. Fig. , the predicted label f ̂(x′) under kernel regression. Hence, ACAM is able to achieve 1-step inference for kernel regression. To evaluate the ability of ACAM to perform such inference, 1-dimensional synthetic data was generated by randomly sampling f(x) = sin(5x), known as the ground-truth function, and adding noise randomly sampled from a normal distribution with mean μ = 0 and standard deviation σ = 0.2. This process is then used to generate both the training and test data. Like in the case of few-shot learning, the ACAM-based kernel regression model exhibits robustness to noise. As seen in Fig. Lastly, benchmarking of the time required to complete inference on a single test data point shows that ACAM (45 nm node), performs 3 orders of magnitude faster than CPU and GPU (12 nm nodes) similar to the above demonstration of few-shot learning. See supplementary materials for a justification on why CPU and GPU have been placed in the same column. Furthermore, Fig. In summary, we demonstrate an ACAM CIM architecture based on complementary FeFETs. We experimentally validate the operation and function of individual ACAM cells on HZO Si complementary FeFET devices and then use simulation tools to compare ACAM performance in similarity search and kernel regression. We demonstrate that our ACAM architecture at 45 nm CMOS node can outperform CPU and GPU at 12 nm CMOS node in similarity search by two orders of magnitude and by three in kernel regression. Given these advantages of our ACAM CIM over CPU and GPU, the question becomes what kind of CIM-based pattern matching architecture to use. Among CAMs, the choice is between digital TCAM or our presented ACAM. TCAM requires extensive ADC and DAC operations that significantly reduce both power and speed, providing a limited advantage in pattern matching performance over algorithms on CPU and GPU. As a result, the proposed ACAM in this work represents a strong candidate for accelerating pattern matching in machine learning. In the future, CAM-based pattern matching architectures could be mapped to other machine learning or robotics tasks, including visual scene understanding, kernel support vector machines, or even attention in large-language models, like transformers. Lead Contact Further information and requests for resources should be directed to the lead contact, Deep Jariwala (dmj@seas.upenn.edu). This study did not generate new unique reagents. The data and code that support the conclusions of this study are also available from the lead contacts upon reasonable request. NMOS FeFETs and PMOS FeFETs were fabricated in the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) student-run fabrication facility on 1 -10 Ω • cm base resistivity silicon wafers using the RIT CMOS process consisting of LOCOS isolated field-effect transistors with ion-implanted source and drain regions. Custom masks were designed using Mentor Graphics Pyxis and fabricated using the Heidelberg DWL 66+ laser writer. Photolithography was performed using an i-line ASML PAS 5500/200 stepper. FeFET device fabrication was performed at Namlab, Germany, with 11 nm thick Hf 0.5 Zr 0.5 O 2 (HZO) films deposited via atomic layer deposition (ALD) by alternating cycles of HfO 2 and ZrO 2 using HfCp(NMe 2 ) 3 and ZrCp(NMe 2 ) 3 as metal-organic precursors and ozone as an oxidant on a native SiO 2 layer on Si. A TiN top electrode was deposited via sputtering under ultra-high vacuum. Both films were annealed at 500°C for 20 s in N 2 . Measurements on a metalferroelectric-metal capacitor structure fabricated in the same deposition run as the FeFET devices showed remanent polarization (P r ) values of about 20 μC/cm2. Current-voltage measurements were performed in air at ambient temperature using a Keithley 4200A semiconductor characterization system. The ACAM array inference is simulated using SPICE simulation. This simulation fully incorporates the ACAM array, under the assumption that the peripheral circuits, inclusive of the MLSA, are grounded in 45 nm silicon CMOS technology. In terms of inference applications, the focus is solely on benchmarking the search operation. Given that inference does not include a write operation, the characteristics of the ACAM cell are simulated using parameters from 45 nm silicon CMOS technology transistors. the NSF. The authors thank Roy H. Olsson at UPenn to allow them access to probe station in his lab for electrical measurements. The highlights of the fabrication process are listed below. Transient simulations for a 64×64 FeFET-based ACAM array during a search operation are performed using SPICE (Fig. We will now discuss how ACAM could facilitate strong bit densities and how a single ACAM cell could represent equivalent bits within TCAM. To accomplish superior bit density, a single ACAM cell should feature more non-overlapping matching windows and narrower windows, as illustrated in Fig. A Mercer kernel is symmetric, continuous function K(x, x′) ∶ X × X → R. In this work, the kernel function is defined on the Euclidean instance space X = R d . The output of a Mercer kernel captures the similarity between d-dimensional vectors x and x′. The training data can be written D Tr = {(x i , y i )} i=1 m . A kernel regression model requires computing the pairwise similarity between each training data point and storing it in a matrix K[i, j] = K(x i , x j ), where K ∈ R m×m is called a Gram matrix so long as it is positive semi-definite. This work is interested in specifically a Gaussian kernel, also known as the radial basis function (RBF) kernel, K(x, x′) = exp(-‖x -x′‖ 2 2 / 2γ 2 ). The training process is then described by the following equation, α ̂= (K + λmI m ) -1 y, where K is the Gram matrix, λ is a regularizer parameter, m is the number of training data points, I m is the m × m-dimensional identity matrix, and y is the vector of training data labels. The regularizer parameter λ tunes how much importance is placed upon generating a "simple" solution α ̂. A simple solution can be thought of as one where weights α ̂ remain close to the origin. A larger λ yields a simpler solution but typically at the cost of more bias. As a result, it is standard to perform cross-validation to determine the best λ parameter. Following the expanded definition of a Mercer kernel, Gram matrix, and regularization, the remainder of this section will expand on the ACAM implementation of kernel regression. First, recall that a constant-time procedure is described to obtain the surrogate Gaussian kernel. Fig. Lastly, in order to justify the claim that a dataset can be scaled in order to ensure that γ = 0.1 V is the optimal parameter, two experiments were executed, whose results are summarized in Figs. 