Solubility and interfacial energy are two fundamental parameters underlying the competitive nucleation of polymorphs. However, solubility measurement of metastable phases comes with a risk of solventmediated transformations which can render the results unreliable. In this work, we present a rapid microfluidic technique for measuring aqueous solubility of the metastable form using KDP Phase IV as a model system. This bracketing approach involves analyzing the dissolution behavior of crystals in contact with supersaturated microdroplets generated via evaporation. Then, with the help of our recently developed nucleation time measurement technique, together with Mersmann calculation of interfacial energies from solubilities, we were able to access the interfacial energies of both metastable and stable phases. To gain further insights into the observed nucleation behavior, we employed the Classical Nucleation Theory (CNT) to model the competition of polymorphs using our measured solubility and calculated interfacial energies. The results show that the stable form is favored at lower supersaturation while the metastable form is favored at higher supersaturation, in good agreement with our observations and experimental reports in the literature. Overall, our microfluidic approach allows access to unprecedentedly deep levels of supersaturation and reveals an interesting interplay between thermodynamics and kinetics in polymorphic nucleation. The experimental methods and insights presented herein can be of great interest, notably in the mineral processing and pharmaceutical industry. The solubility of metastable polymorphs with respect to the stable form is an important information required in quantifying the kinetics of competitive polymorphic nucleation. However, obtaining the solubility of the metastable phases can be challenging due to the risk of solvent-mediated transformation during measurement. This is the case for potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KH2PO4 or KDP), one of the most important optoelectronic materials. In this work, we report a rapid microdroplet approach to estimate the ambient aqueous solubility of the metastable Phase IV KDP. This involves analyzing the dissolution behavior of crystals of the metastable phase in contact with supersaturated microdroplets, with respect to the stable phase, generated via evaporation. Moreover, with the help of our measured solubility and classical nucleation theory, we calculated its interfacial energy by employing our recently-developed microdroplet-based nucleation measurement technique. Solubility Measurement. The schematic diagram of the setup is shown in Figure with P(t) as the fraction of microdroplets nucleated after time t, V(t) droplet volume at time t, tsat time at which the microdroplet becomes saturated and tnuc nucleation time. For the primary nucleation rate J(t), we used the classical nucleation theory (CNT) as where A is the pre-exponential factor, γeff is the effective interfacial energy, ρs is the number density of formula units in the solid (2.27 × 10 28 m -3 for NaCl), kbT is the thermal energy, S(t) is the supersaturation expressed as the ratio of concentrations (concentration at nucleation / concentration at saturation) at nucleation at time t (more details in Ref Initially, we have observed that the crystal nucleated from microdroplet dissolves in the presence of the stable crystal (see Video 1 of SI), suggesting the formation of a more soluble metastable phase. To identify this phase, we characterized the crystals using powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) and compared it with the simulated patterns of known polymorphs. The result is shown in Figure To demonstrate this approach, the snapshots of the solubility measurement in shown in Figure Figure Table Supersaturation Ratio S with respect to the stable form Outcome 1.5 dissolve 1.6 dissolve 1.7 dissolve 1.8 ~constant 1.9 grow 2.5 grow We found that at S=1.8, the crystal essentially undergoes neither dissolution nor growth, indicating an equilibrium. Thus, the solubility can be conservatively estimated at S = 1.8 ± 0.1 (corresponds to around 45 ± 2 g KDP per 100 g water at 25 o C) 12 With the knowledge of the solubility of the metastable polymorph, we would be able to measure its interfacial energy from its probability distribution of nucleation times using the experimental setup in Ref In general, metastable forms are expected to have lower γeff in comparison with the stable form. To estimate the γeff of the stable form, we employ the empirical correlation by Mersmann with γSL as the interfacial energy (between crystal and solution), K as an empirical constant (identical for both polymorphs), and c sol and c sat as the equilibrium solid-state and liquid-phase concentrations (in mol/m 3 ) respectively. For the stable Phase II at ambient conditions, c sol = 17179 mol/m 3 and c sat = 1621.8 mol/m 3 (see Table Using our measured solubility ratio of 1.8, the Mersmann correlation yields γstable/γmetastable = 1.35. Knowing that γmetastable= 58 mJ/m 2 , the effective interfacial energy barrier of the stable form (Phase II) is then predicted to be around 78 mJ/m 2 . With the knowledge of the interfacial energies γeff of both the stable Phase II and metastable Phase IV, we can proceed to model the competitive nucleation of the two polymorphs using classical nucleation theory (equation 2). Given that the mass transfer properties of the supersaturated solution (i.e. diffusivity, viscosity, etc) are identical in the liquid phase for both polymorphs, we can suppose that the parameter A (related to the mass transfer rate of the monomers towards the nucleus) is similar for both polymorphs, as in the analysis of Sato Figure We observe that the stable form is favored at low supersaturations while the metastable one at high supersaturations. This result is consistent with the experimental observation of Lee et al. In this work, we demonstrate a rapid microfluidic approach to measure the aqueous solubility and interfacial energy of a metastable polymorph using KDP Phase IV as a model compound. Using our measured solubility, we estimated its interfacial energy from its nucleation time statistics. Our results reveal that the KDP Phase IV is about 1.8 times more soluble in water than the stable Phase II, and its estimated aqueous interfacial energy is around 58 mJ/m 2 . Applying Mersmann correlation 7 , the interfacial energy of the stable phase II is predicted to be around 78 mJ/m 2 . With these interfacial energies, we used the classical nucleation theory to model the competitive nucleation of both polymorphs and the results show that the stable phase is favored at lower supersaturation while the metastable phase is favored at higher supersaturation, which agrees with our observations and experimental reports in the literature. Indeed, these findings reveal an interesting interplay between thermodynamics and kinetics in competitive polymorphic nucleation. Moreover, our results also highlight the advantage of the small volume (pL range) achieved in our microdroplet approach which permits access to unprecedentedly deep levels of supersaturation that would otherwise be unattainable with μL scale experiments. Our results also open routes for future investigations. Knowing that the stable form is favored at low supersaturations, it would be interesting to develop microfluidic platforms that offer a wider range of accessible concentrations and volume . Furthermore, our results can be used for comparison with other experimental approaches. For instance, interfacial energies can be accessed by measuring the contact angle of the saturated solution with the crystal face. 