Following the recent report of superconductivity in the bilayer nickelate La3Ni2O7 under pressure, we present an analysis of the electronic and magnetic properties of La3Ni2O7 as a function of pressure using correlated density functional theory methods (DFT+U ). At the bare DFT level, the electronic structure of the ambient and high-pressure phases of La3Ni2O7 are qualitatively similar. Upon including local correlation effects within DFT+U and allowing for magnetic ordering, we find a delicate interplay between pressure and electronic correlations. Within the pressure-correlations phase space, we identify a region (at U values consistent with constrained RPA) characterized by a high spin to low spin transition with increasing pressure. In contrast to previous theoretical work that only highlights the crucial role of the Ni-d z 2 orbitals in this material, we find that the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 orbitals are active upon pressure and drive this rich magnetic landscape. This picture is preserved in the presence of oxygen deficiencies. The recent observation of superconductivity in lowvalence layered nickelates has produced tremendous excitement in the community in the last few years, first in the infinite-layer compounds RNiO 2 (R = rare-earth) Despite many structural, chemical, and electronic similarities to the cuprates Very recently, a breakthrough T c near 80 K has been reported in the bilayer Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) nickelate La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at modest pressures (P ∼ 14 -42 GPa) Work on La 3 Ni 2 O 7 prior to the discovery of superconductivity had focused on analyzing some of its structural Here, we study the electronic structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under the influence of pressure using DFT and DFT+U methods with different double-counting corrections. Within our methodology, we find a delicate interplay between pressure and electronic correlations with different phases closely competing in energy. Within the pressurecorrelations phase diagram, we find that the region of U s consistent with constrained RPA (cRPA) calculations In addition to the report of superconductivity, the experiments performed in Ref. 10 reveal a structural transition in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 from a low-pressure Amam phase to a high-pressure Fmmm phase. Hence, we start by carrying out structural optimizations under pressure for La 3 Ni 2 O 7 using first principles calculations. The experimental lattice parameters were adopted at the following pressures: P = 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 29.5 GPa B. Electronic structure and magnetism 1. Electronic structure at the LDA level A summary of the electronic structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at ambient and high (P = 29.5 GPa) pressure within LDA is presented in Fig. Turning to the electronic spectrum of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at high pressure (P = 29.5 GPa, F mmm phase), we find that the overall electronic structure within LDA is qualitatively similar to the ambient pressure Amam phase, with some quantitative differences. The Ni d x 2 -y 2 dispersion increases to 4 eV, the bonding-antibonding Ni-d z 2 splitting increases to ∼ 1.5 eV, and the charge-transfer energy ∆ value increases to 3.6 eV. Also, the Ni-t 2g bands are pushed farther away from the Fermi level. Similar to the ambient pressure case, the dominant DOS around the Fermi level (ε F ) for the non-magnetic calculation at 29.5 GPa is that coming first from Ni-d z 2 orbitals followed by that of the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. The corresponding LDA Fermi surfaces at ambient pressure and at P= 29.5 GPa are shown in Figs. Experiments suggest a complicated electronic and magnetic structure for La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . Transport and magnetic susceptibility measurements hint at charge and spin ordering similar to the trilayer La 4 Ni 3 O 10 Ruddlesden-Popper nickelate, and point to the presence of antiferromagnetic correlations On this note, we explore the pressure and correlation phase space to reveal magnetic tendencies in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 within an LDA+U framework. We note that a careful choice of the DFT+U implementation is important to capture the physics of these nickelates Figure With the two distinct U -dependent regimes identified, we now explain how the electronic structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 evolves as a function of pressure. In the high-U regime, the HS AFM ground state at all pressures portrays a van Hove singularity pinned at the Fermi level which would make the AFM order unstable (see Supplementary Note 5B). For this reason, we focus here on the region of the pressure-correlations phase space in which a spin-state transition takes place (for 2 eV < U <4 eV), that is consistent with the U = 3.4 eV derived for La 3 Ni 2 O 7 from cRPA The evolution of the band structure across the spinstate transition is shown in Fig. In Fig. Based on this derived spin-state transition with very clear changes in the electronic structure with pressure, we speculate that the HS (ambient pressure) solution is likely unfavorable for superconductivity in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . Importantly, the LS ground state obtained at high pressure (where superconductivity arises) that is dominated by Ni-d x 2 -y 2 orbitals suggests that the physics La 3 Ni 2 O 7 could share similarities with the high-T c cuprates. We have studied the evolution of the electronic structure of the bilayer RP nickelate La 3 Ni 2 O 7 with pressure using a correlated density-functional theory framework. We capture the experimentally observed structural transition from Amam to Fmmm (which corresponds to the suppression in the tilts of the NiO 6 octahedra) and find a possible transition to a tetragonal I4/mmm space group that preserves the suppression of octahedral tilts. At the LDA level, the electronic structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at ambient and high-pressures is qualitatively similar: hybridized Ni-e g (d z 2 +d x 2 -y 2 ) states are dominant near the Fermi level with additional weight from the O(2p) orbitals without the involvement of rare-earth bands in the low-energy physics, in contrast to the superconducting (infinite-)layered nickelates. Using LDA+U , we explore the pressure and correlation phase space and find crucial differences with respect to the uncorrelated electronic structure. At low U values (between 2 and 4 eV, consistent with cRPA) a spin-state (HS to LS) transition with pressure takes place. This transition is driven by a redistribution of the (dominant) Ni-d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. The active role of the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 orbitals is preserved upon variations in oxygen stoichiometry. Based on our derived spin-state transition in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 , we hypothesize that the HS solution is unfavorable for superconductivity in this material while the LS solution may promote it instead. Overall, we conclude that in the bilayer RP nickelate the d x 2 -y 2 states dominate the low energy physics, with the d z 2 states acting largely as spectator-like in nature. For the structural relaxations the internal coordinates of the atomic positions were optimized using the planewave pseudopotential DFT code VASP The electronic structure for each structure was then calculated within DFT as implemented in the allelectron, full-potential code wien2k The experiments in Ref. Experimentally, the structure of La 3 Ni 2 O 6.94 has been previously resolved in the Fmmm space group To gain further insight into possible Fermi surface instabilities, we calculate the static susceptibility using the LDA non-magnetic band structure. We start by performing a paramagnetic calculation within La 3 Ni 2 O 7 using Fmmm coordinates at ambient pressure. The obtained LDA bands are shown in Fig. To calculate the static susceptibility χ nn ′ (q, ω = 0) from the LDA bands (subscripts are the band indices), we interpolate the near Fermi level bands using a Fourier spline series. Specifically, a Fourier series spline fit As a best practice, DFT+U requires careful analysis of the selected double-counting correction. Here, we track the influence of the choice of double-counting correction (AMF or FLL) on the energetics and the magnetic moments of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at 0 GPa and 29.5 GPa. Figure As described in the main text, for larger values of U we find that the ground state of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 does not change with pressure and remains in the AFM-A magnetically ordered phase. The electronic structure for the AFM-A (HS) solutions at U = 4.5 eV (J H = 0.7 eV) for three representative pressures is summarized in Fig. Figure Figure 