The charge density wave (CDW) material 1T-TaS2 exhibits a pulse-induced insulator-to-metal transition, which shows promise for next-generation electronics such as memristive memory and neuromorphic hardware. However, the rational design of TaS2 devices is hindered by a poor understanding of the switching mechanism, the pulse-induced phase, and the influence of material defects. Here, we operate a 2-terminal TaS2 device within a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) at cryogenic temperature, and directly visualize the changing CDW structure with nanoscale spatial resolution and down to 300 μs temporal resolution. We show that the pulse-induced transition is driven by Joule heating, and that the pulse-induced state corresponds to nearly commensurate and incommensurate CDW phases, depending on the applied voltage amplitude. With our in operando cryo-STEM experiments, we directly correlate the CDW structure with the device resistance, and show that dislocations significantly impact device performance. This work resolves fundamental questions of resistive switching in TaS2 devices critical for engineering reliable and scalable TaS2 electronics. 1T-TaS2 is a layered, two-dimensional (2D) quantum material which undergoes an insulator-tometal transition induced by voltage pulses (Fig. Here, we operate a 2-terminal TaS2 device within a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) at cryogenic temperature. Through time-resolved electron diffraction and 4D-STEM imaging, we quantify the CDW order parameter during electric biasing and, via strain analysis, we measure the local sample temperature. By directly correlating the CDW structure, flake temperature, and device resistance during switching, we unequivocally show that Joule heating drives the switching process, both for steady-state bias and short voltage pulses. Accordingly, the bias-induced phases correspond to thermal CDW states. We also show coupling between the CDW order parameter and the device resistance, and we demonstrate how local microstructural features (dislocations) influence device operation. These findings are crucial for the engineering and optimization of TaS2 devices for beyond-silicon technology. The studied device is shown in Fig. where a is the atomic lattice parameter, and Δφ and Δk are the differences in φ and k relative to their commensurate values We first study the CDW behavior as a function of temperature. Figure Next, we study bias-induced CDW switching using triangular voltage ramps with durations of 20 s (Fig. To provide an independent confirmation of Joule heating, we plot the membrane temperature during the voltage ramps, as measured with the Pt coil on the TEM chip (Fig. It follows from the Joule heating hypothesis that the time needed for switching ts should scale inversely with the applied voltage The partial irreversibility of pulse-induced switching suggests CDW pinning on local microstructural features. Indeed, there are many TaS2 biasing experiments which suggest increased CDW pinning in thin flakes By operating a 2-terminal TaS2 device within the STEM at cryogenic temperature, we demonstrate that bias-induced switching is driven by Joule heating and a rapid thermal transition from the C to the NC and IC phases. In our device, this mechanism is operative for both steady-state biasing and μs voltage pulses. Our data also indicates that Joule heating can drive switching on the ns timescale. Based on this knowledge, we suggest engineering heat management of TaS2 devices, e.g. the thermal conductivity of the substrate and the electrode geometry, in order to efficiently reach Tc with minimal losses. While most of reports of TaS2 switching are consistent with Joule heating, we note recent claims of picosecond switching, with a switching energy seemingly below the heat needed for Joule heating 