Multiband superconductors are sources of rich physics arising from multiple order parameters, which show unique collective dynamics including Leggett mode as relative phase oscillations. Previously, it has been pointed out that the Leggett mode can be optically excited in the linear response regime, as demonstrated in a one-dimensional model for multiband superconductors [T. Kamatani, et al., Phys. Rev. B 105, 094520 (2022)]. Here we identify the linear coupling term in the Ginzburg-Landau free energy to be the so-called Lifshitz invariant, which takes the form of , where d is a constant vector and Ψi and Ψj (i ̸ = j) represent superconducting order parameters. We classify all pairs of irreducible representations of order parameters in the crystallographic point groups that allow for the existence of the Lifshitz invariant. We emphasize that the Lifshitz invariant can appear even in systems with inversion symmetry. The results are applied to a model of s-wave superconductors on a Kagome lattice with various bond orders, for which in some cases we confirm that the Leggett mode appears as a resonance peak in a linear optical conductivity spectrum based on microscopic calculations. We discuss a possible experimental observation of the Leggett mode by a linear optical response in multiband superconductors. Superconductivity embraces rich order parameter dynamics, as shown by the macroscopic Ginzburg-Landau (GL) and microscopic BCS theories. They tell us that there are typically two types of collective modes in singleband superconductors: one of them is the Higgs (amplitude) mode Since Higgs mode does not linearly couple to electromagnetic fields in ordinary situations, previous studies have focused on the investigation of nonlinear optical responses of superconductors The physics of superconductors with multiple order parameters is even richer than the single-band case. Many superconductors of interest, such as iron-based super-conductors Recently, it has been shown that a term containing only a single spatial derivative, responsible for the linear order Leggett-light coupling, could in principle appear in the GL free energy, and its existence was demonstrated in a one-dimensional two-band superconducting model In the present work, we point out that the singlederivative term corresponds to the so-called Lifshitz invariant d • Ψ * i ∇Ψ j -Ψ * j ∇Ψ i (i ̸ = j), which is invariant under symmetry operations of the system. The possi- Im[ ] Figure We also found that the inversion symmetry is not crucial, and, the system could have the Lifshitz invariant even in the presence of the inversion symmetry. The condition for the Lifshitz invariant to appear in multiband superconductors with sublattice degrees of freedom is determined by the induced representation of the crystallographic point group, which is induced by the trivial representation of the site-symmetry group for each Wyckoff position of lattice sites. As a result, a wide range of multiband superconducting systems are shown to be able to have the Lifshitz invariant. As an application, we study a family of twodimensional microscopic models on the Kagome lattice. Kagome materials are intensively studied experimentally and theoretically in the context of spin liquids and antiferromagnetism This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we review the GL free energy framework of a two-band superconductor. While we focus on the two-band case, the argument can be straightforwardly extended to cases of a larger number of bands. Within the GL approach, we perform a group theoretical analysis of the Lifshitz invariant in Sec. III. We apply the group theoretical techniques to some models in Sec. IV to see that the inversion symmetry is not crucial to discuss the Lifshitz invariant in multiband superconductors. In Sec. V we study a family of Kagome models and explicitly compute signatures of collective phase modes in the linear optical conductivity using an imaginary time path integral approach. The paper is summarized in Sec. VI. We set ħ = 1 throughout the paper. This section reviews a phenomenological theory of multiband superconductors within the GL free energy framework We shall consider the GL free energy density F for a two-band superconductor given below where a i = a 0,i (T -T c ), a 0,i and b i are positive constants, T is the system's temperature, T c is the transition temperature, m * i is the effective electron mass, and D = -i∇e * A is the covariant derivative with an electric charge of a Cooper pair e * = 2e and the electromagnetic vector potential A. See Appendix. A for a microscopic derivation. The first line in Eq. ( The remaining terms represent couplings between the two order parameters, with coefficients ε, η and a constant vector d. Here, the term proportional to ε corresponds to the Josephson (proximity) coupling. The term proportional to η is interpreted as a drag effect Of particular relevance in the context of the present study is the term proportional to d. It is responsible for inducing the Leggett mode in the linear response regime as we will see below We now expand the free energy around the mean-field ground state Ψ 1,0 and Ψ 2,0 , where H i and θ i describe amplitude and phase fluctuations, respectively. The overall phase θ 1 + θ 2 can be removed by gauge transformation due to the Anderson-Higgs mechanism. The only relevant phase degree of freedom will be θ 1θ 2 . In general, one has n -1 phase degrees of freedom, where n is the number of order parameters. In the expansions, we only keep terms including the electromagnetic vector potential up to the second order. Additionally, we restrict ourselves to the uniform limit ∇H i = ∇θ i = 0. A uniform solution usually has a lower free energy. In the presence of the Lifshitz invariant, however, it is not obvious. As we show in Appendix. B, if the magnitude of the vector d is sufficiently small, the uniform solution has a lower free energy, and the order parameters are not spatially modulated at the ground state. We obtain where and The first term, F 1 , represents the nonlinear coupling between the amplitude fluctuation (Higgs mode) and the external field for each band The second term, F 2 , is a linear coupling of the electromagnetic vector potential to the collective modes. It describes the collective mode contribution to the linear response. The real part induces the linear response of the Higgs modes, while the imaginary part is responsible for the Leggett mode. In superconductors, the particle-hole symmetry is an effective (approximate) low-energy symmetry, that acts as Ψ i → Ψ * i , or It is thus clear that only the Leggett mode linear response contribution is invariant under the particle-hole symmetry. The constant vector d is in fact purely imaginary according to the microscopic calculation (see Appendix. A). Consequently, the amplitude contributions are suppressed in the linear response. Potential observations of collective modes in the linear response therefore require a multiband structure of superconductors. The term F 2 may further be restricted by spatial symmetries of the underlying crystal lattice. Symmetry requirements that allow for the presence of the linear Leggett coupling will be discussed in Sec. III. The term F 2 in Eq. ( in Eq. The above term takes the form of the so-called Lifshitz invariant This section presents the symmetry analysis of the Lifshitz invariant in multiband superconductors. Although the Lifshitz invariant has been studied in many contexts The basic strategy to determine whether the Lifshitz invariant is allowed or not is as follows To identify the representation of the order parameter, we need to specify the physical degrees of freedom that the order parameter has. As an example, let us assume that the pairing symmetry is s-wave and the order parameter has sublattice degrees of freedom, i.e., the order parameter is defined on each lattice site in the unit cell. These order parameters on different sites can be interchanged by symmetry operations, and may belong to a nontrivial representation, which determines whether the Lifshitz invariant can appear or not. We first give a general procedure to derive the representation of the order parameters with sublattice degrees of freedom, which can be constructed from the induced representation induced by a site-symmetry group (a subgroup of the crystallographic point group that fixes a certain lattice site). The obtained representation is used to see whether the system can have the Lifshitz invariant or not, which results in a classification table of pairs of the order parameter representations for each crystallographic point group allowing the Lifshitz invariant. Let us consider the general construction of the representation of the order parameter induced by sitesymmetry groups where g α ∈ G. The induced representation of G written by ρ H;G := ρ H ↑ G is produced by each representation ρ H of H. We can explicitly construct a representation ρ H;G from the representation ρ H . To be precise, if the rows and/or columns of ρ H are labeled by i and j, then the rows/columns of ρ G can be labeled by iα and jβ. Here, α and β vary over the cosets g α H in Eq. ( where h ∈ G and This is the general construction derived from group theory. In our case, the group G corresponds to the crystallographic point group that describes the whole system, while the group H corresponds to the subgroup of G that describes the site-symmetry group. If one takes the trivial representation of H (i.e., the one-dimensional representation [ρ gives the representation of the sublattice degrees of freedom of the superconducting order parameter, where α and β correspond to sublattice indices. Here we assume that the superconducting pairing (swave, p-wave, etc.) and the sublattice degrees of freedom are transformed independently under symmetry operations. That is, the representation is assumed to be the direct product of the pairing and sublattice degrees of freedom. In addition, when we consider the representation of Ψ * i ∇Ψ j , the product of two superconducting pairings always yields the trivial irreducible representation because the two order parameters have the same pairing symmetry. The site-symmetry group H depends on each lattice site in the unit cell. However, if one classifies lattice sites in the unit cell by Wyckoff positions, then for each Wyckoff position the site-symmetry group is isomorphic to each other. Thus, the site dependence of H in each Wyckoff position does not affect the resulting induced representation. When different sites belong to the same Wyckoff position, more precisely we need to consider the orbit of the group, and this allows for the correspondence with the sublattice degrees of freedom. However, when the group orbits are different but at the same Wyckoff position, they will only appear identical in their representation. Model (b) below is one of the examples of this case. After obtaining the representation of the order parameter, we calculate the direct product of the representations Ψ * i ∇Ψ j , which is then decomposed into the direct sum of the irreducible representations by the reduction formula. The representation of ∇ is solely determined from the crystallographic point group. After checking whether the trivial representation is contained in Ψ * i ∇Ψ j , we can classify pairs of the irreducible representations of the order parameters that permit the Lifshitz invariant to show up. To show how our classification is obtained, let us take D 3h as an example. Since ∇ has the same transformation property as the coordinate r = [x, y, z] T , the representation of ∇, ρ ∇ , follows from the direct sum of the representations of the basis functions x, y, and z. The basis functions and direct products of the representations of crystallographic point groups are in detail given in Now we turn to the representations of order parameters. For the pair (Ψ i , Ψ j ) = (A ′ 1 , A ′′ 2 ), for instance, we can evaluate the representation of Ψ * i ∇Ψ j as which allows the Lifshitz invariant because it has the trivial irreducible representation A ′ 1 . For the pair (Ψ i , Ψ j ) = (A ′ 2 , E ′′ ), on the other hand, we can calculate as which does not allow the Lifshitz invariant since it does not have A ′ 1 . Here we give Table We note that the results in Table We apply the general group theoretical classification obtained in the previous section to several models to check the validity of our approach. In the following, we assume s-wave superconductivity with a single atomic orbital on each lattice site in each model. For the Lifshitz invariant to appear, it is not necessary to break the inversion symmetry in multiband superconductors as seen in the previous section and we will see concrete examples below. We start by analyzing the Rice-Mele model We can cover all the cases with/without the inversion symmetry and with/without the Lifshitz invariant in ), (A2, T1), (E, T1), (E, T2), (T1, T1), (T1, T2), (T2, T2) these models. We take (a) and (b) to confirm the consistency with the previous research by Before we delve into the specific models, let us review the useful method. We practically do not have to construct the induced representation ρ H;G explicitly. Instead, for each symmetry operation of G we can evaluate the character χ ρ H;G of the induced representation directly by considering how the lattice sites in the unit cell are interchanged by the symmetry operation. The resulting character table uniquely determines the decomposition of the induced representation into a set of irreducible representations by the reduction formula. The Rice-Mele model without on-site potentials (Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model The system has a bond-centered inversion symmetry, resulting in the point group C i = {E, i}. The two sites in the unit cell are exchanged under inversion, meaning that the subgroup is C 1 . Therefore, the two-dimensional reducible representation ρ, under which the pair of order parameters (Ψ 1 , Ψ 2 ) transform, has the following characters: It is then clear that the decomposition of ρ C1;Ci into irreducible representations of C i is ρ C1;Ci = A g ⊕ A u . The two order parameters can be decomposed into a symmetric A g component and an anti-symmetric A u component T1u (A1g, T1u), (A2g, T2u), (Eg, T1u), (Eg, T2u), (T1g, A1u), (T1g, Eu), (T1g, T1u), (T1g, T2u), (T2g, A2u), (T2g, Eu), (T2g, T1u), (T2g, T2u) Table Next, we assess the transformation properties of the Lifshitz invariant Ψ * i ∇ α Ψ j . The derivative transforms like a vector, i.e., under the representation 3A u of C i . Thus, the Lifshitz invariant transforms as The Lifshitz invariant includes six invariant components that transform under the trivial representation A g and is thus allowed in the free energy. These correspond to A g ∇ α A u and A u ∇ α A g . Terms of the form A g ∇ α A g , A u ∇ α A u must vanish due to the symmetry. These results are summarized in the second row of Table In summary, the symmetry analysis shows that the Leggett mode can appear in the linear response for the Rice-Mele model without on-site potential, consistent with that in Ref. The Rice-Mele model with a uniform hopping. Next, we consider the Rice-Mele model with uniform hopping (i.e., t = t ′ ). We also introduce an on-site potential that is different for the two sublattices, as indicated by blue and red colors in Fig. from which it follows that ρ Ci;Ci = 2A g . In this representation, the term Ψ * i ∇Ψ j no longer contains an invariant, since it transforms as 2A g ⊗ 3A u ⊗ 2A g = 12A u . Hence the Lifshitz invariant cannot appear in this model and the Leggett mode does not appear in the linear response regime. This result is consistent with Ref. The previous models both have C i symmetry, yet only the first case exhibits a linear collective mode response. This example illustrates that both the point group and the specific representation of the order parameters determines the presence of the Lifshitz invariant, according to the classification of Table For simplicity, we denote ρ H;G as ρ and χ ρH;G as χ from now. Honeycomb lattice. We shall next study a Honeycomb model with broken inversion symmetry, illustrated in Fig. from which it follows that ρ decomposes into the trivial irreducible representations of D 3h , i.e., ρ = 2A ′ 1 . The Lifshitz term transforms as 2 ), which does not contain any invariant and must therefore be absent in accordance with Table Kagome lattice. We next turn to a model of the Kagome lattice depicted in Fig. from which it follows that ρ is reduced to We find that neither A 1g nor E 2g can support the Lifshitz term, since they are both even under inversion. To change the symmetry, we add a trimerized hopping pattern to our model as shown in Fig. and ρ decomposes into In this representation, the Lifshitz variant is symmetryallowed according to Table We can further reduce the symmetries of our model by introducing sublattice-dependent on-site potentials shown by white and black squares in Fig. yielding the representation ρ = 2A 1 ⊕ B 1 of the three on-site order parameters. The Lifshitz term is still present, since lowering the point group leads to even fewer symmetry restrictions on the free energy. Kagome lattice with CDW. Finally we shall examine a Kagome lattice model with a charge-density wave (CDW) in a tri-hexagonal pattern (3Q-pattern). Such structures have, e.g., been experimentally suggested in CsV 3 Sb 5 The model has 12 onsite order parameters that transform according to the representation ρ with characters The reduction formula gives a decomposition representation Importantly, ρ includes both even and odd irreducible representations, which indeed leads to allowed Lifshitz terms and optical collective mode response according to Table In this section, we perform microscopic calculations of collective modes and the linear optical conductivity, since the group-theoretical classification just gives the necessary condition for the Lifshitz invariant and we should examine how the contribution of the Lifshitz invariant quantitatively appears in the optical responses. We compute the optical conductivity σ(ω) within the effective action approach in imaginary time, focusing on the fluctuations of the order parameters. We use the Kagome lattice model as a concrete example. In the following, we abbreviate the k-dependence of functions whenever appropriate. Our starting point is the Hamiltonian H = H 0 + H int that describes a multiband superconductor with a singlet on-site pairing, where is the kinetic part, and is the interaction part. We have set the volume size of the system to one. Here c † and c are the creation and annihilation operators, α = 1, 2, . . . n is the band index, ξ α,α ′ (k) represents the matrix elements of the kinetic term, and σ =↑, ↓ denotes spin. To include the effect of an external electromagnetic field by a vector potential A, we replace k by k-eA (Peierls substitution) and expand the kinetic part as where e is the electric charge. Since we are interested in the linear optical conductivity, we only need to expand ξ αα ′ to the first order in the vector potential A. Then the full Hamiltonian is given by where We use the path integral approach in imaginary time τ We perform the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation to decouple the fermionic interaction [Eq. ( After performing the path integration over the fermionic degrees of freedom, we divide the action into the mean-field part and the fluctuation part, where we take the vector potential A up to the first order. Integrating out the fluctuations ∆ μα (μ = x, y) and after analytic continuation of the Matsubara frequency iΩ → ω + i0 + , we obtain the fluctuation part of the effective action S FL as with a, b = x, y in the two-dimensional case. Here we have introduced the current-current correlation function Φ ab (iΩ): with the velocity operator with ∂ a = ∂/∂k a and Green's function H BdG (k) is the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian where ∆ 0 is defined by the saddle-point equation To simplify the notation, we have introduced the band representation τ μα,jl := ⟨φ j |τ μα |φ l ⟩ and v jl := ⟨φ j |v|φ l ⟩ with j, l = 1, 2, • • • 2n, where τ xα and τ yα are the generalized Pauli matrices where [A α ] γγ ′ = δ αγ δ γγ ′ , |φ l ⟩ is the l-th eigenvector of H BdG (k) with an eigenvalue E l and E lj := E l -E j . We have also introduced the polarization bubble Π(iΩ), the effective interaction U eff within the random phase approximation (RPA), and the vector Q a (iΩ), Here we introduce f jl := f (E j )f (E l ), where f is the Fermi distribution function at zero temperature, i.e., f = 1 for occupied bands and f = 0 for unoccupied bands. We can get the real frequency forms of U eff and Q a by analytic continuation iΩ → ω + i0 + . The diagram for the effective interaction U eff (ω) is depicted in Fig. We take the functional derivative of S FL with respect to A b (-ω) to obtain the linear optical conductivity σ ab (ω) via the current density j b (ω) = E a (ω)σ ab (ω) (E a (ω) is the electric field): where [σ and we used E a (ω) = iωA a (ω). Here σ 1 (ω) is responsible for the quasi-particle response, and σ 2 (ω) for the collective mode one. The diagrams for the linear optical conductivities are shown in Fig. Note that this formalism does not rigorously decompose the fluctuation of the order parameters into amplitude and phase. Nevertheless, one can see that the collective modes come from phase fluctuation (the Leggett mode). To see this, we shall write the bosonic field ∆ α as (∆ 0α + δ∆ α )e iθα . Assume that δ∆ α and θ α are small. Then we put The first approximation is valid as long as we use the RPA. In the second approximation we neglect the amplitude fluctuation δ∆ α . This approximation is not always valid in general, but we can check that the amplitude fluctuation is small by calculating only the τ xα part and neglecting the τ yα in the linear optical conductivity. In Appendix. C, the linear optical conductivity is decomposed into two parts (τ x and τ y channels) and we can confirm that the amplitude fluctuation is small. Moreover the Higgs mode is forbidden in the linear response because the real part of the constant vector d responsible for the Higgs mode linear response is zero (see Appendix. A). We thus focus on the phase fluctuation. In principle, it is possible to completely decompose the fluctuation into amplitude and phase as is done in As a concrete model for a multiband superconductor showing the linear Leggett mode, we take a Kagome lat-tice model with two kinds of nearest-neighbor hoppings (t ± δt) and an attractive on-site interaction U shown in Fig. where we denote the chemical potential by μ and the onsite potential by m. Refer to Appendix. D for the details of derivation. In this model, there is no on-site potential and m is set to be zero. In the model of Fig. Here we shall see the linear response of superconductors with the Lifshitz invariant using the trimerized Kagome model depicted in Fig. Next, we consider the trimerized Kagome model with on-site potentials depicted in Fig. We have studied the Lifshitz invariant in multiband superconductors and its effect on optical conductivities. We first used the macroscopic GL theory to see the linear coupling between the phase of the order parameter and the external field, interpreted the term to be the Lifshitz invariant, and classified all the combinations of irreducible representations of order parameters in crystallographic point groups that allow the Lifshitz invariant to appear by the conditions for the free energy to be invariant under symmetry operations. The Lifshitz invariant in multiband superconductors has been shown to be interpreted as a coupling between the "internal field" and the "current" of the overlaps of the order parameters, which is controlled by the lattice geometry. Because of the "internal field", it was possible for the phase of the order parameter to linearly connect to the external field. We also showed that the wide range of multiband superconductors can have the Lifshitz invariant according to the group theory. The reason that there has not been experimental detection of the Leggett mode in the linear response so far may be that the constant vector d in the GL theory would be practically small in many systems. Another possible explanation is that impurities in the real materials would suppress the Leggett mode in the linear response, whose effect has been neglected in our clean limit model. In previous papers The condition for the Lifshitz invariant to appear is whether the system follows the nontrivial representation due to the sublattice geometry. As we saw in Sec. IV, the inversion symmetry itself is neither a necessary nor sufficient condition, and both of the cases with and without the inversion symmetry can have the Lifshitz invariant, which is different from the previous studies where the Lifshitz invariant had commonly been related to the broken inversion symmetry We would like to comment on open issues about the treatment of the order parameters in the group theoretical argument. We implicitly assumed that the order parameters are defined on each lattice point. This assumption seems to be well justified because the order parameters reflect the symmetry of the system even though the size of Cooper pairs is much larger than the lattice constant. Nevertheless, this situation may not be valid when we consider the retardation effect of phonons seriously. We also assumed that sublattice and other degrees of freedom form a direct product in the order parameter representation. If the system has a symmetry that intertwines these degrees of freedom (which cannot be represented by the direct product), there will be other interesting situations that are not studied in the present work. We additionally constructed the microscopic threeband superconducting models based on the Kagome lattice to see the linear Leggett mode in the optical conductivity. The degeneracy of the Leggett mode was resolved by adding the on-site potentials and reducing the symmetry. Finally, we list possible experimental observations of the linear Leggett mode. One possible candidate is CsV 3 Sb 5 (electron here). exp -U We introduce the Nambu basis Ψ † k and Ψ k to express the action in a concise way: Note that we implicitly assumed that the creation/annihilation operators depend on the imaginary time τ . Then the action S c † , c, ∆ * , ∆ can be written as where is the inverse Green function with I n being the n × n unit matrix. For simplicity we abbreviate I n from now. We used the time-reversal symmetry in the second equality, [∆(τ )] αα ′ = ∆ α (τ )δ αα ′ , ∆ α (τ ) = ∆ 0,α + δ∆ α (τ ), and ∆ 0,α is the gap value at the saddle point (corresponding to the mean-field value). Here we used the following relationship: and where we used the periodicity of the operators. Then we move to the Fourier space by This puts the imaginary time derivative ∂ τ into -iω n , and we obtain the action expressed in Fourier space. where is inverse Green's function in Fourier space. Here, we define δ∆(iω miω n ) and A a (iω miω n ) by so that both δ∆ and A a have the same dimension before and after the transformation. We omit the δ∆ terms in the first order because they offset with unimportant terms (the L = 1 term in the expression below). Performing the fermionic path integral yields the action S[∆ * , ∆]: Tr ln -G -1 (iω m , iω n ; k) . (A17) Choosing the reference state, and corresponding Green's function G 0 and the self-energy Σ to be G -1 = G -1 0 -Σ, we rewrite the trace term as There are two important ways to choose the reference state. One is normal and the other is the superconducting ground state. The Ginzburg-Landau effective action. We first derive the Ginzburg-Landau effective action S eff in the equilibrium superconducting state. We first decompose Green's function into two parts; reference state Green's function and the self-energy. We neglect the electromagnetic parts to obtain the action in an equilibrium state. We are interested in the linear d term, or the term with ∆ * and ∆. Hence we focus on the term L = 2: We shall consider the simpler form of Green's function. By defining the normal state Green function g(iω n ; k) := (iω nξ(k)) -1 , we can write the reference state Green function in the form of Then we put At last, we get the effective action S eff : (1) We use the property of the normal state Green function g(iω; k) to derive the Lifshitz invariant term in the free energy in Using this property and defining the vector d αα ′ as we expand the second term of (A24) with respect to k. We pick up the linear q terms to see the Lifshitz invariant terms, paying attention to the fact that q is treated as a canonical momentum in coordinate space. Here we restrict ourselves to the two-band case (α, α ′ = 1, 2). In this case the vectors we have to consider are d = d 12 and d * = d 21 . Taking this into account, F where iω n is replaced by -iω n of the second term in the first equality. F αα ′ similarly puts We move on to the coordinate space (q → D and -q → D * ) and obtain which is exactly the Lifshitz invariant term in the free energy except for the coefficient. We can prove that the vector d αα ′ is purely imaginary in usual lattice models. Fourier transformation gives the wavenumber dependence k via the plane wave e ik•r = cos (k • r) + i sin (k • r) and the real (imaginary) components of the kinetic part of the BdG Hamiltonian ξ(k) is even (odd) function of k. Hence ξ(k) has the preperty ξ(-k) = ξ T (k). With this relation we can say that and combining this relation with (A27) we get We thus prove that d αα ′ is purely imaginary: and the Higgs mode does not contribute to the linear response. We can also prove that the vector d αα ′ is produced by the imaginary part of the kinetic term ξ(k). When the system has no hopping difference, ξ(k) is real and satisfy the condition ξ(k) = ξ * (k) = ξ(-k). Because of this property it follows that By the similar procedure of (A36) we can obtain which shows that d αα ′ is real and becomes zero because it is purely imaginary. Therefore the Leggett mode in the linear response is induced by the imaginary part of the kinetic component ξ(k), or the hopping difference in the system. Gap equation. In this case, we are interested in the gap equation for the saddle point (the mean-field) value and the free energy, or the effective action in equilibrium. Thus we choose the reference state as the superconducting ground state and neglect the electromagnetic terms and the fluctuations of the order parameters. This puts inverse Green's function to be The effective action is given by neglecting fluctuations. The gap equation for ∆ 0,α is derived by the minimization of the effective action concerning ∆ * 0,α ; The functional derivative of the trace term proceeds as where the Green function is defined without β. By definition, the functional derivative of the inverse Green function becomes where are the generalized Pauli matrices. Thus we put We finally reach the gap equation for ∆ 0,α : Note that the summation over the frequency index m and the Kronecker delta δ mn gives β. Linear optical conductivities. We are interested in the optical conductivities of quasiparticles and collective modes here. Hence we choose the reference state to be the superconducting ground state and put We expand the action S[∆ * , ∆] at the Gaussian level (L = 2) and use RPA to obtain the effective action. Since we direct our attention to linear optical conductivities, we just keep the vector potential A in the first order. Besides, we decompose the fluctuation δ∆ α into ∆ x,α -i∆ y,α for calculation (we omit δ after the decomposition for simplicity). Note that we should include the effect of the non-trace term where μ specifies the index of the Pauli matrix and the imaginary part vanished by the summation over (iω m ). Now we proceed to the trace term (L = 2). Before calculation, we define the velocity operator v a (k): The trace term is written as Then we have (with ω → -ω) To compute the current j a (ω) (we focus on the two-dimensional case a = x, y), we take a functional derivative of S about A a (-ω). Here we exploit the properties Φ ab and finally With these preparations, we can calculate the first-order current for each direction j b (ω) by taking the functional derivative of the effective action S eff about A b (-ω). For simplicity, we assume that the frequency ω for the functional derivative is positive (the same argument holds for the negative ω). Note that the integrals in S FL are written as Now we can take the functional derivative with peace of mind. We can compute the first-order current j b (ω) as Since the vector potential A a (ω) is connected to the electric field for a-direction by E a (ω) = iωA a (ω), we arrive at the expression Using the definition of the optical (or electrical) conductivity in Fourier space j b (ω) = a E a (ω)σ ab (ω), we put the optical conductivity σ ab (ω) as Note that the condition m * i > 0 should be satisfied as well. To minimize the free energy, we take a functional derivative in terms of φ: δF δφ = -2ψ 1,0 ψ 2,0 ε + ηq 2 sin φ + 4ψ 1,0 ψ 2,0 (d I • q) cos φ = 0. (B5) We then obtain tan φ = 2(d I • q) ε + ηq 2 . (B6) This yields This expression is valid independent of the sign of ε + ηq 2 . For simplicity we put The above condition corresponds to the state that every site is equivalent. For large q, Then the free energy is reduced to This must be stable, suggesting that 1 m * + 2η > 0 (B10) is satisfied. Under this condition, we now focus on the small q case. Here we assume that d I and q point in the same direction. Hence for small q we have We should classify the cases depending on the sign of ε. When ε < 0, meaning that the Josephson-like coupling between the order parameters is attractive, there are two cases as below. which is still valid even when we substitute the expression with ħ. Therefore, we can conclude for the system with negative ε that if d 2 I is large enough, the order parameters are modulated spatially. If not, there is no spatial modulation of the order parameters. On the flip side, when ε > 0, namely that the Josephson-like coupling is repulsive, the coefficient of q 2 in the free energy is always positive. Hence the free energy becomes the lowest at q = 0, or tan φ = 0. This has two options φ = 0 and φ = π. Looking at the expression (B7), the free energy is found to be the lowest for φ = π. This indicates that the two order parameters are in the opposite phase, which can be interpreted as the system having a spatially modulated order. I is small enough to satisfy the condition of q = 0, and thus we can conclude that in this case the superconducting order parameter is not spatially modulated by the Lifshitz invariant. the nearest neighbor hopping and derive the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian. We impose an on-site potential and chemical potential on each lattice point. We call the point 1, 2, or 3 depending on the vector b specifying the point. Every lattice point r is specified by n 1 , n 2 and i = 1, 2, 3: where and a is the lattice constant. We take a = 1 unit and n 1 , n 2 are integers. Each lattice point has an expression r(n 1 , n 2 ; 1) = 2n Inserting the expressions into the original kinetic part of the Hamiltonian, we get that in the wavenumber space. Since the whole expression is lengthy, we write down the coefficients of the pairs of the operators c † c. of the order parameters. The fact that the peak does not appear in σ xy (ω) in Fig. h Tu (Ag, Tu), (Eg, Tu), (Tg, Au), (Tg, Eu), (Tg, Tu) O h