Light-concentrating truncated Si micropyramidal arrays with 54.7 ̊ sidewall angles were successfully integrated with PtSi Schottky barrier photodetectors. Four different devices consisting of 10 x 10 photodetectors with 60 μm pitch combined in parallel were tested, where significant enhancement capability was demonstrated by the Si micropyramids. The device consisting of one hundred 22 μm square detectors monolithically integrated with the light-concentrating micropyramidal array displayed signal enhancement of up to 4 times compared to the same size 22 μm square photodetector device without the light concentrators. The primary goals of this research were to fabricate truncated Si micropyramidal arrays, integrate them with platinum/silicide (PtSi) Schottky barrier photodetectors, and to optically test thus fabricated devices in comparison with the reference planar photodetectors of the same size in order to compare the signal enhancement gained from the proposed mcropyramid designs. The quantum efficiency (QE) of conventional planar Si based photodetectors is limited because of Si's indirect band gap, which results in low absorption and collection of photocarriers. Due to light-concentrating capability of Si micropyramids, after integration with the photodetectors, the proposed structures have a high potential for increased absorption and, hence, enhanced QE and photoresponse. An additional advantage is related to the fact that the size of the photodetector mesa located near the top of the truncated micropyramid can be reduced in comparison with the standard planar devices, which can result in decreased thermal noise of the proposed devices and, potentially, increase their operation temperature A Schottky barrier is created at the interface between a metal such as Al, Ni, or Pt and a Si substrate. After annealing, a layer of metal/silicide is formed which can operate either as a mid-wave infrared (MWIR) or short-wave infrared (SWIR) photodetector due to electron-hole pair generation and separation when a reverse bias is applied to the Schottky barrier. Recently, the ability to quickly fabricate Si micropyramidal arrays via low-cost anisotropic wet etching techniques has enabled the straightforward integration of Si micropyramidal arrays with photodetectors through either monolithic or heterogenous means In our designs, we proposed suitably large micropyramids with their truncated tops optically coupled to photodetectors Afterwards, 22 μm square PtSi Schottky barrier photodetectors were fabricated directly on the tops of these micropyramids, as well as on flat regions undisturbed by the micropyramid etching process for direct comparisons on the same sample. These fabrication steps are described in Fig. In order to first create the photodetector mesas, photolithography was necessary to create the photoresist pattern as shown in Fig. The next step was to passivate the sample in order to isolate the photodetectors. 200 nm of SiO2 was deposited through plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), then ~6.2 μm thick AZP4620 photoresist was spin coated and exposed to reveal the result shown in Fig. The final fabrication step was to deposit metal to create electrical contacts for testing, as well as to combine all 100 individual photodetectors together in parallel to simplify characterization. Similar photolithography steps were utilized with AZ15nXT photoresist. Afterwards, 5 nm of chromium (Cr) and 300 nm of gold (Au) were deposited with an e-beam evaporator to create the n-contact on the PtSi layer, as well as the p-contact on the doped Si as shown in Fig. These two measurement techniques, QE and spectral photoresponse, allow for direct comparisons between the four devices. By measuring the photoresponse, the photodetector's spectral sensitivity between 2-6 μm was determined, but the comparison of photocurrents produced by different devices was made difficult because of the not completely reproducible illumination conditions in our setup. On the other hand, by measuring the QE, the photoresponse scaling factor for each device was determined because the incident flux of photons was carefully taken into account, and the devices could be directly compared. An example of such comparison for different structures is illustrated in Fig. The most important result is that although the photon collection efficiency of the micropyramids with 60 μm large base size was found to be imperfect because of the optical losses inside the micropyramid, the optical signal detected at the smaller base was still significantly higher than that for the conventional planar 22 μm square photodetector device. This suggests that although a fraction of the total power incident on the large base escaped from the micropyramids, either through sidewall leakage or due to reflection in a backward direction, still a significant fraction of the total power incident on the larger base was delivered to smaller base with the photodetector. Comparison with the same size (22 μm) planar photodetector in Fig. The potential advantages of the proposed Si-based micropyramidal arrays integrated with photodetectors compared to standard planar FPAs are many-fold: i) They allow for a reduction in the size of the photodetector mesa while still retaining significant photoresponse. ii) Reduction of the mesa size means that the thermal current noise can be reduced and operational temperature of the device can be increased. iii) In the fabricated structures a significant fraction (~25%) of the EM power incident on the larger base was delivered to the smaller base coupled to the photodetector, but the rest of the power was lost. Despite this loss, the delivered power was up to 4.1 times larger than the signal measured by the same size (22 μm) detector operating without micropyramid. iv) This power loss is not necessarily a fundamental limitation of the proposed technology since, potentially, it can be reduced by optimizing the geometrical parameters of the micropyramids and improving the technology. v) Micropyramids are capable of trapping light resonantly inside the active region of the photodetector, thus increasing the pathlength for the photons, the probability of their absorption, and the QE of the photodetectors, thus solving a major underlying problem of Si-based photodetector FPAs with significant application in uncooled MWIR cameras and thermal sensor devices. Proc. of GOMACTech conference, San Diego, March 20-23 (2023).