A coupled oscillator network may be able to perform an energy-efficient associative memory operation. However, its realization has been difficult because inhomogeneities unavoidably arise among the oscillators during fabrication and lead to an unreliable operation. This issue could be resolved if the oscillator network were able to be formed from a single oscillator. Here, we performed numerical simulations and theoretical analyses on an associative memory operation that uses a virtual oscillator network based on a spin-torque oscillator. The virtual network combines the concept of coupled oscillators with that of feedforward neural networks. Numerical experiments demonstrate successful associations of 60-pixel patterns with various memorized patterns. Moreover, the origin of the associative memory is shown to be forced synchronization driven by feedforward input, where phase differences among oscillators are fixed and correspond to the colors of the pixels in the pattern. The human brain has a sophisticated function called associative memory 1 , whereby it can remember a pattern when shown a portion of that pattern. This function has been modeled in various ways with the goal of achieving a better understanding of brain activity and realizing energy-efficient bio-inspired computing. Since the development of an autocorrelation model in the 1970s 2-4 , several theoretical models, such as the Hopfield model 5 , have been developed that draw their inspiration from the characteristics of neural activity There are two major issues with using an oscillator network for the associative memory operation. One is unstable operation due to inhomogeneity in the oscillator's parameters. For example, variations in frequency among the oscillators are unavoidable in experimental realizations; they prevent a synchronization between the oscillators and decrease the accuracy of the associative memory In this work, we demonstrate an associative memory operation by a virtual oscillator network through numerical simulations and theoretical analyses. First, we provide a detailed description of the virtual oscillator network consisting of a single physical oscillator. In particular, we discuss the principles involved, i.e., those of the coupled oscillator networks and feedforward neural networks. Next, we show that a virtual oscillator network consisting of a single STO can recognize several different 60-pixel patterns by numerically simulating the motion of the STO. We reveal that the feedforward input in the virtual network forces the virtual oscillators to synchronize and that this phenomenon results in the associative memory operation. The associative memory operation studied here is to associate a pattern, called the pattern to be recognized, with a pattern in a stored set of patterns, called memorized patterns. For example, suppose that the three patterns, "0", "1", and "2", shown in Fig. Examples of memorized patterns and a pattern to be recognized. (a) Three (N m = 3) memorized patterns, "0", "1", and "2". (b) The pattern to be recognized resembles memorized pattern "1". The oscillator network tries to associate the pattern to be recognized with the pattern "1". In an associative memory operation performed by a system consisting of N oscillators, the color of the ith (i = 1, 2, • • • , N) pixel is determined by the phase ψ i of the corresponding oscillator. The color is white (black) when the phase difference, ∆ψ i = ψ i -ψ 1 , is 0 (π). The color is on a gray scale when the phase difference is 0 < ∆ψ i < π. 10(rows)×6(columns)= 60-pixels patterns for memorized patterns and patterns to be recognized. In the following subsections, we describe the concept of our virtual oscillator network after briefly reviewing a conventional oscillator network for comparison. Then, we demonstrate through numerical simulations that the virtual oscillator network can perform the associative memory operation. The associative memory operation by a conventional coupled oscillator network consists of two steps where ξ R i = +(-)1 when the color of the pattern to be recognized at the ith pixel is white (black). Thus, w i j = +(-)1 when the colors of the ith and jth are the same (opposite). The second step is to replace the weights by the following ones, which can be regarded as an average of the weights among the memorized patterns, w where N m is the number of memorized patterns. The symbol m = 1, 2, • • • , N m is used to distinguish the memorized patterns. For example, the memorized patterns "0", "1", and "2" in Fig. The associative memory operation by a virtual oscillator network consists of three steps. First, we measure an oscillation of a single oscillator and divide it into N parts, as schematically shown on the first line of Fig. (2) i j . Eventually, the phases saturate to the values corresponding to the memorized pattern most resembling the pattern to be recognized. phase of each part is arbitrary, and therefore, the pattern arising from it is random. The measured data should be stored in a computer in order for it to be used in the next step. Second, we excite another oscillation and divide the measured data into N parts again. At the initial time of each part, the phase, as well as the pattern determined from it, is arbitrary, as shown in the middle of Fig. where H denotes the amplitude and y (1) j is the output from the jth oscillator measured in the first step [see also Methods for the detailed definition of y (1) j in the numerical simulations]. Therefore, Eq. ( Third, we perform a measurement similar to one in the second step but the magnetic field applied during the ith part is replaced by where H ′ denotes the amplitude, while y j is the output from the jth oscillator measured at the second step (see also Methods pertaining to the numerical simulations). The weights w (2) i j are given by Eq. ( There are several differences between the conventional and virtual oscillator networks (see also Methods for the models). For example, the oscillators in the conventional oscillator network interact instantaneously, and their phase differences saturate to values corresponding to pixel colors as a result of mutual synchronization. On the other hand, the oscillators in the virtual oscillator network do not interact each other instantaneously. As can be seen in Eqs. ( As an oscillator in the virtual oscillator network, we use a vortex STO, which has various advantages for practical applications and has been frequently used in spintronics experiments on bio-inspired computing where X = (X,Y, 0) represents the position of the vortex core in the xy plane. While the physical meanings and the values of many parameters are explained in Methods, two quantities should be explained here. The first is the current density J, which 4/15 causes a limit-cycle oscillation of the vortex core. The other is the external magnetic field H, which is used to excite a torque. It is useful to notice that Eq. ( where s = |X|/R (0 ≤ s ≤ 1) is the distance of the vortex core from the center of the ferromagnet normalized by the disk radius R, while ψ = tan -1 (Y /X) is the phase. Here, a = (|D|κ/G 2 )[(J/J c ) -1] and b = (|D|κ/G 2 )(ξ + ζ ), where J c = |D|κ/(Ga J p z ). The magnetic field H is assumed to have only a y component H y . Note that Eqs. ( Figure (2) j . Consequently, even though the initial pattern is random, the oscillator phases finally saturate to values corresponding to one of the memorized patterns [Fig. The associative memory operation becomes more difficult when there are similar memorized patterns. To clarify this point, let us examine what happens when the number of the memorized patterns is increased, as shown in Fig. This failure of the associative memory operation is due to two reasons. The first is that the pattern "7" is similar to the pattern "1", which should be the one associated. When "7" is excluded from the memorized patterns, the association succeeds, as shown in Fig. To quantify the similarity between patterns A and B, we introduce the degree of overlap: where when the ith pixel is white (black)]. The overlap becomes 1 when the two patterns are completely identical or their black and white colors are all exchanged (see also Methods for the definitions of color and overlap). For example, in the example shown in Figs. It isO(ξ ξ ξ R , ξ ξ ξ 2 ) = 44/60 ≃ 0.73 for pattern "1", and O(ξ ξ ξ R , ξ ξ ξ 3 ) = 6/60 = 0.10 for pattern "2" (the memorized patterns are labelled as m = 1, 2, 3, • • • while the examples of memorized patterns in this work are "0", "1", "2", etc; thus, the label m and the corresponding number are off by one). Since the degree of overlap of the pattern to be recognized and "1" is large in the examples in Figs. the overlap between the pattern to be recognized [Fig. In addition, the overlap between the memorized patterns "1" and "7", O(ξ ξ ξ 2 , ξ ξ ξ 8 ) = 28/60 ≃ 0.47, is also relatively large compared with those between the other patterns; for example, the overlap between "1" and "8" is O(ξ ξ ξ 2 , ξ ξ ξ 9 ) = 2/60 ≃ 0.03 (see also Supplementary Information, where the overlaps of the ten memorized patterns are summarized). Accordingly, when the memorized patterns include "1" and "7", the virtual oscillator network cannot associate a correct pattern, and the final pattern produced corresponds to none of the memorized ones. Similarly, when the number of memorized patterns is large, there might be patterns having large overlaps and the association fails. In summary, we have shown that the virtual oscillator network based on the algorithm in Fig. We examined the associative memory operation for various cases, i.e., for different patterns to be recognized, and studied the rate of the accurate association; see Supplementary Information. Here we discuss the principles of the associative memory operation analytically by using Eqs. ( , is also approximately constant (see also Methods for the analytical solution of the Thiele equation). The phase in the second step obeys, i . Thus, the phase difference between the ith and jth parts obeys, The steady state condition on the phase difference leads to Note that ξ R i = +(-)1 when the color at the ith pixel of the pattern to be recognized is white (black). Therefore, ψ (1) j will be in-phase ψ (1) i = ψ (1) j ± π] when the colors of the ith and jth pixels are the same (opposite). As a result, the phase differences in the second step saturate to 0 or π corresponding to the white or black in the pattern to be recognized. Note that this synchronization is caused by a feedforward input from the first step, which corresponds to the second term on the right-hand side in Eq. ( l in Eq. ( We also note that, when y l is a simple trigonometric function, its linear combination, l , is also a trigonometric function with the same frequency and a different phase. According to the above discussion, the phase of the term ∑ N l=1 ξ R l y (1) l does not play any role to excite forced synchronization among the N parts. Thus, the term l could be replaced by, for example, y 1 . In this case, it is unnecessary to measure other (N -1) y l (l = 2, 3, • • • , N) in the first step in Fig. Next, we focus on the third step, where the phase during the ith part obeys l cos ψ i . Since the oscillators in the second step are in the synchronized state, the output y l can be expressed as y (2) 1 , where y 1 is the output of the first part in the second step. We substitute this relation into Eq. ( where the symbol A corresponds to a pattern in the memorized patterns that resembles the pattern to be recognized. The assumption (13) means that only a pattern having a large degree of overlap with the pattern to be recognized contributes to the feedforward input. The other memorized patterns, which are greatly different from the pattern to be recognized, do not contribute to the feedforward input because of their small overlap. When the assumption is satisfied, Eq. ( i . Equation ( i -ξ A j cos ψ (3) Equation ( The operation principle is based on Eq. ( Our analysis also assumed that the oscillation frequencies of the N parts are the same. This assumption is a natural one because each part is obtained from a single oscillator. Technically speaking, the oscillation frequency in each part is varied by changing the magnitude of the electric current. If the oscillation frequencies of the ith and jth parts, denoted as Ω i /(2π) and Ω j /(2π), are different, the right-hand side of Eq. ( In conclusion, we described the concept of the associative memory operation by a virtual oscillator network and performed numerical simulations. The operation consists of three steps, where the output of one step is sent to the next step with weights defined by the Hebbian rule. In this sense, the virtual oscillator network can be regarded as a hybrid combination of a coupled oscillator network and a feedforward neural network. The network successfully associated black-and-white patterns with a few memorized patterns. However, it failed to make an association when the number of memorized patterns was large (ten compared to three) and some of the memorized patterns resembled each other. We also developed a theoretical analysis and clarified that the origin of the associative memory operation is forced synchronization driven by feedforward input. Either in-phase or anti-phase synchronization was excited among the oscillators and provides appropriate correspondence between the oscillator phases and the colors in the patterns. The virtual oscillator network is more reliable than a conventional oscillator network, which is affected by unavoidable inhomogeneities among the oscillators. By convention, the first pixel (the pixel in the top left-hand corner of a pattern) is always white. The pattern should be regarded as the same even when all of the black and white pixels are swapped for each other, Mathematically, this means that ∑ N i=1 ξ A i ξ B i = N when the patterns A and B are completely the same, and ∑ N i=1 ξ A i ξ B i = -N when patterns A and B represent the same pattern but their black and white colors are completely swapped. According to this definition of the same figure, the maximum number of the difference between two patterns is N/2; in this case, the degree of overlap is zero (see also the discussion on noise in Supplementary Information). The conventional oscillator network for the associative memory operation where ω/(2π) is the oscillation frequency while Q is the interaction strength. For simplicity, we will assume that all oscillators share the same values of ω and Q. The weight w i j is given by Eq. ( In a limiting case of only two oscillators (N = 2), the phase difference obeys and the in-phase (anti-phase) synchronization of θ 1 and θ 2 is a stable fixed point when Qw 12 is negative (positive). The phase differences of θ i -θ j = 0, π are always fixed points even when there are a large number of oscillators (N ≥ 3). Accordingly, the phase differences in the conventional oscillator network saturate to the in-phase or anti-phase state, which thereby enables the associative memory operation. In the presence of frequency variations, the right-hand side of Eq. ( The Thiele equation is slightly different from the Kuramoto model in the following ways. First, the Thiele equation uses the phase ψ, which describes the vortex core's position in the xy plane, instead of a generalized phase. This is because the quantity measured in experiments is the vortex core's position, and the phase synchronization studied in the experiments Spin torque oscillators (STOs) mainly consist of a ferromagnetic metal/insulating layer/ferromagnetic metal trilayer. The first ferromagnetic layer of the trilayer is called the free layer and is where the magnetic vortex forms. The second ferromagnetic layer having a uniform magnetization is called the reference layer. When electric current is injected into STOs, spin-transfer torque The definitions and physical meanings of the parameters in Eq. ( of the polarity p(= ±1) of the vortex core, the saturation magnetization M, the thickness L of the ferromagnet, the gyromagnetic ratio γ, the Gilbert damping constant α, and the vortex radius R 0 . The chirality c(±1) of the vortex core also appears in Eq. ( The dimensionless parameter ξ is introduced to describe the nonlinear damping in a highly excited state The material parameters used in this study were taken from typical experiments and simulations We do not include field-like torque in the Thiele equation, which is expressed as -cb J JRp x e y in Eq. ( The Gilbert damping constant α is often small, in such cases, |D|/G ≃ α ≪ 1. Also, the radius R 0 of the vortex core is much shorter than the disk radius, R. Therefore, by neglecting terms related to R 0 and higher-order terms of α, we can approximate Eq. ( These equations are identical to the Stuart-Landau equation The solution of s obtained from the exact Thiele equation, Eq. ( According to Eqs. ( One might be of interested in the applicability of the Thiele equation. While the original Thiele equation assumes a translation symmetry in an infinite space, a finite-size effect of nanostructured may restrict the applicability of the equation. Therefore, the Thiele equation had been applied to analyses on small-amplitude dynamics The associative memory operation in the virtual oscillator network consists of three steps. The initial state of the vortex core in each step is prepared by adding a thermal activation to the Thiele equation and solving it in the absence of magnetic field, as is done in Ref. l and y (2) l in Eqs. ( (1) l . When defining the magnetic field in Eq. ( l is made from y l as follows, y where Θ(t) is a step function. Note that Θ(tnt p ) -Θ[t -(n + 1)t p ] is 1 for nt p ≤ t < (n + 1)t p and is zero for the other times; thus, it has a pulse shape. Equation (22) means that the input strength is constant for nt p ≤ t < (n + 1)t p and is proportional to y l (t) at t = nt p . ñ is the number of input pulses. There are two reasons to shape the output y into a pulse. The first one relates to numerical simulations. In this work, the Thiele equation was solved within a time increment of ∆t = 0.005 ns, which is shorter than the pulse width t p . It was, however, impractical to store the output at each ∆t step because the amount would have been huge. Second, there is a technical limitation in real experiments on a measurable time step. The value we used, t p = 0.125 ns, is close to shortest possible time step in an experiment l used in the magnetic field, Eq. ( The strength of the input H in the second step is 1.0 Oe, while that in the third step is H ′ = N m × 0.2 Oe. Here, we increase H ′ as the number N m of memorized patterns increases. This is because the time necessary to reach a steady state becomes long as N m increases; therefore, to perform the numerical simulations efficiently, the input strength should be made to increase with N m .