In this manuscript, we show through an experimental-computational proof of concept the native oxide formation into superconducting TaN films. First, TaN was synthesized at an ultra-high vacuum system by reactive pulsed laser deposition and characterized in situ by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The material was also characterized ex situ by X-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, and the four-point probe method. It was detected that TaN contained considerable oxygen impurities (up to 26 %O) even though it was grown in an ultra-high vacuum chamber. Furthermore, the impurified TaN evidence a face-centered cubic crystalline structure only and exhibits superconductivity at 2.99 K. To understand the feasibility of the native oxide in TaN, we study the effect of incorporating different amounts of O atoms in TaN using ab-initio calculations. A thermodynamic stability analysis shows that a TaOxN1-x model increases its stability as oxygen is added, demonstrating that oxygen may always be present in TaN, even when obtained at ultra-high vacuum conditions. All analyzed models exhibit metallic behavior. Charge density difference maps reveal that N and O atoms have a higher charge density redistribution than Ta atoms. The electron localization function maps and line profiles indicate that Ta-O and Ta-N bonds are mainly ionic. As expected, stronger ionic behavior is observed in the Ta-O bonds due to the electronegativity difference between O and N atoms. Recent evidence points to superconductivity in bulk TaO, confirming the asseverations of superconductivity in our samples. The results discussed here highlight the importance of considering native oxide when reporting superconductivity in TaN films since the TaO regions formed in the compound may be key to understanding the different critical temperatures reported in the literature. Superconducting materials have a wide range of applications, including superconducting devices. In this regard, superconducting tantalum nitride (TaN) has attracted attention due to its applications in the detection of low-energy photons in superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPD) Tantalum nitride is a transition metal nitride (TMN) that presents a wide variety of crystalline phases, for example, β-TaN0.05, γ-Ta2N, δ-TaN1-x, ε-TaN, Ta5N6, Ta4N5, Ta3N5, among others Gerstenberg et al. synthesized for the first time superconducting TaN thin films with a Tc of 4.84 K measured resistively Experimental evidence points out that TaN thin films present oxygen impurities regardless of the synthesis method or the employed gas mixture Cristea et al. reported face-centered cubic (FCC) tantalum oxynitride (TaOxNy) thin films growth by DC reactive magnetron sputtering First, we grow tantalum nitride thin films at ultra-high vacuum conditions and analyze their composition in situ. Samples possess a considerable amount of oxygen, but the FCC structure remains, and it depicts superconductivity at 2.99 K, a temperature within the well-known range reported in the literature for tantalum nitride. Since oxygen appears on the samples even at ultra-high vacuum conditions, we determine the stability of various FCC TaOxN1-x sub-stoichiometries with different amounts of oxygen (0 < x ≤ 0.50) by density functional theory (DFT) calculations and analyze the impact of the oxygen content on their structural and electronic properties. In each case, oxygen atoms take on nitrogen sites in the TaN crystal structure for a large growth range. We also considered the limit cases when x takes values of 0 or 1. Metallic characteristics emerge in each oxide concentration. Both Ta-N and Ta-O bonds are ionic, but Ta-O shows a stronger ionic character. The evidence of native oxygen in tantalum nitride films points to the importance of discussing the critical temperature in terms of the tantalum oxygen regions formed in the films. The TaN thin film was synthesized by reactive pulsed laser deposition (PLD) in a modified RIBER LDM 32 ultra-high vacuum system with a base pressure of 5x10 -9 Torr. A 99.99% pure tantalum target from Kurt J. Lesker was employed to obtain the Ta atoms. A 6 ns and 266 nm pulse from a Surelite Continuum Nd:YAG solid-state laser was used to ablate the target. The laser has a fundamental wavelength of 1064 nm, a second harmonic generator of 533 nm, and a fourth harmonic generator of 266 nm. The working pressure of the chamber was set at 0.09 Torr of ultra-high purity N2 gas (99.999%). Then, the tantalum nitride thin film was deposited on FCC MgO (100) substrate from Sigma-Aldrich to achieve epitaxial growth at 850 oC for 220 min. The chemical composition was analyzed in situ by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). All other characterizations were measured ex situ. The XPS spectra were registered with a SPECS PHOIBOS hemispherical analyzer, where the X-rays were produced with a monochromatic source of Al Kα (1486.6 eV). Firstly, a low-resolution spectrum was measured at pass energy of 100 eV and a data acquisition time of 0.1 s to identify the elemental components of the film. Next, the high-resolution spectra of the Ta 4f, N 1s, and O 1s peaks were measured at a pass energy of 10 eV and a data acquisition time of 0.5 s to quantify the previously identified components; the Ta 4p3/2 peak was also measured because it overlaps with N 1s. Then, background noise was subtracted by the Shirley method The crystal structure was subsequently identified by XRD with a Panalytical X'pert Pro MRD diffractometer in the 2θ range from 30o to 80o using a glancing angle of 0.1°, a step of 0.02°, and a data acquisition time of 0.5 s. The X-rays were produced by a Cu Kα source (λ = 1.5406 Å). The sample reflections were indexed with the ICDD database. The data were processed with the HighScore Plus software The resistance vs. temperature curve was measured with the four-point probe method in a Quantum Design DynaCool Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) to identify the superconducting Tc. The sample was cooled down from room temperature to 2 K and measured at a constant direct current of 0.05 mA. The atomic-scale description of the TaOxN1-x was performed in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) Since we are treating different oxygen concentrations, the total energy of these structures is not a good parameter to determine the models' stability. Instead, the defect formation energy (DFE) formalism In order to apply the DFE formalism, equilibrium thermodynamic is considered between TaN and their constituents, implying that: where, μ + is the chemical potential of the ith species and ΔH * is the enthalpy of formation of TaN. Calculated ΔH * is -1.70 eV/atom, in agreement with previous reports Where E slab is the total energy of the system at hand, E ref is the total energy of an arbitrary reference, which in this case is the pristine TaN, and Δni is the excess or deficit of ith atoms with respect to the reference. In this analysis, all atomic configurations have the same number of Ta atoms, while the N and O atoms vary. Therefore, we vary the chemical potential to evaluate the DFE in a range from Orich conditions with μ 3 = μ 3 2 ()% to O-poor conditions with μ 3 = μ 3 2 ()% -E 4)h2/+52 , where E 4)h2/+52 is the cohesive energy for the oxygen atoms. The chemical composition of the thin film was identified from the XPS survey spectrum shown in Figure The inset in Figure shows the high-resolution spectrum of the region containing the Ta 4p3/2 and N 1s peaks from 390 eV to 412 eV where the maximum binding energy appears at 397.9 eV; it also shows the curve fitting of each peak separately, in which the N 1s associated to tantalum nitride was proposed at 397.7 eV, and the N 1s associated to tantalum oxynitride was proposed at 398.5 eV; on the other hand Ta 4p3/2 was proposed at 402.9 eV. The envelope exhibits a good fit with the experimental data. The black line in the graph corresponds to the experimental data, the blue line to the N 1s associated to Ta-N, the green line to the N 1s associated to Ta-ON, the dark yellow line to the Ta 4p3/2, the cyan line to the background, and the magenta line to the fitting envelope. The shift to higher binding energies of the Ta 4p3/2 signal confirms the Ta-N bond formation since the signal for metallic Ta is reported at 400.9 eV shows the high-resolution spectrum of the Ta 4f peak from 19 to 32 eV. The spectrum exhibits the characteristic doublet constituted of the Ta 4f7/2 and Ta 4f5/2 peaks with a separation of 1.9 eV, which coincides with the values reported in the literature The TEM microscopy is used to characterize the film's local crystalline growth, as seen in Figures The micrographs and diffraction patterns of the thin film cross-section contain information about the local crystal structure of the material and its interplanar distance. planes are associated with it. From the X-ray diffractogram, the FCC crystalline phase of TaN is detected, as seen in Figure Also, it is noticed one peak related to the (111) plane of FCC TaO. No diffractions of monoclinic TaON or orthorhombic Ta2O5 phases appear. That demonstrates the control in our experiment since the phases mentioned above are the most stable. These phases are absent in the micrographs as well. In low-magnification micrographs, it is observed that the film thickness is ~35 nm. Since our sample was grown at 850 oC, the obtained preferential orientation is the (200) reflection as we shown in the XRD pattern, which coincides with the behavior reported by Elangovan et al., which evidenced that above 600 oC, the preferential orientation changes from ( Figure In this section, by DFT calculations, we investigate the presence of oxygen in the TaN structure. Oxygen is randomly distributed to avoid initial clustering. In the experiment, few oxygen atoms were available in the ultra-high vacuum chamber. As discussed in the experimental section, insufficient oxygen is available to get clustering. Also, experimental evidence suggests that oxygen is taking on the places of N atoms in the TaN lattice. To analyze the viability oxygen has to replace nitrogen atoms from the TaN lattice, we proceed to evaluate the defect formation energy. On the other hand, all substitution models are viable at O-rich conditions -such energies demonstrate the spontaneous oxygen incorporation-, even the TaO0.03N0.97 system, the one with the lowest oxygen content. The stability of each model increases as oxygen atoms replace nitrogen from the TaN lattice until they reach the TaO0.50N0.50 system. After that, it is expected to decrease in stability until reaching TaO. Notice that we included TaO as a limit case. However, in the experiment, it is not expected to observe such oxygen quantities since we are working at an ultra-high vacuum system. As mentioned in the experimental part, the small oxygen content in the chamber may be due to the N2 flux. It should be noted that the compositions studied in this work are less stable than hexagonal TaN, monoclinic TaON, and orthorhombic Ta2O5 (the most stable phases of the three compounds). Still, the FCC TaN can be induced using a Physical Vapor Deposition technique on MgO, Si, or sapphire substrates Our defect formation energy analysis evidences that even at low oxygen concentrations, the TaN is proclive to oxidize, so tantalum oxynitride must always be considered when discussing the superconductivity measurements, which has been overlooked in the existing literature. As another piece of evidence about the spontaneous formation of tantalum oxynitride, some authors have reported that ε-TaN may not exist as a binary nitride To analyze the behavior of the most stable tantalum oxynitride structure, we investigated the electronic properties of the TaO0.5N0. and Ta-N which suggest an ionic interaction. This fact is corroborated by ELF line profiles shown in Figure Tantalum nitride was synthesized by reactive PLD on a MgO substrate. It showed superconducting characteristics at Tc= 2.99 K. XRD analysis confirmed an FCC TaN structure. Not secondary phases were observed. Also, TEM analysis evidenced a local epitaxial growth in the thin film. The lattice parameter of the film is smaller near the substrate and larger as it moves away from it, but in both cases it remains similar. The thickness of the film was 35 nm. The electron diffraction patterns showed that both the film and the substrate present the same crystalline structure (FCC). However, elemental analysis by in situ XPS evidences the presence of native oxide in the sample up to 26% at. By DFT calculations and thermodynamics criteria, we have evidence that oxygen can occupy the N sites of the crystal without structural modifications. Our experimental and theoretical findings support the idea that TaN does not exist in pure form but as tantalum oxynitride. Therefore, it is important to consider the presence of oxygen in the superconductor and how it modifies its properties, a fact not considered previously in the literature and may be the reason for the different critical temperatures measured in tantalum nitride materials.