We study superconducting three-band systems within strong-coupling Eliashberg theory. In particular, we search for phase-frustrated superconducting systems with spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) states. The emergence of TRSB states in multiband systems has so far been studied using microscopic weak-coupling BCS theory or more phenomenological effective field theories such as multi-component Ginzburg-Landau theories. For systems with three disjoint Fermi surfaces whose electrons experience interactions mediated by phonons, we present a microscopic analysis showing that TRSB states also exist within a strong-coupling microscopic theory. The systems we consider have sizable electron-phonon couplings, putting them into the strong-coupling regime. They are thus a fitting description for strong-coupling materials such as some of the iron pnictides. Moreover, as the TRSB states are challenging to find numerically, we calculate the free energy of multiband systems within strong-coupling theory and make explicit use of it to pin down the TRSB states' elusive nature. Since Eliashberg theory is well incorporated with first-principles calculations, our strong-coupling approach might help facilitate a more efficient search for candidate materials that can exhibit TRSB. Superconductors represent a remarkable quantum state of matter where photons acquire a mass through the Higgs mechanism (the Meissner effect) when metals are cooled below their critical temperature. When combined with spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB), this extraordinary quantum state exhibits even more fascinating features due to the interplay between multiple broken symmetries. TRSB may occur in multiband superconductors where several bands (more than two) cross the Fermi surface. Many multiband superconductors exist An elegant approach to strong-coupling Eliashberg theory was recently realized The novel functional-integral approach to Eliashberg theory has already been employed in several models, e.g. graphene multilayers An uncharted area of interest in this regard is the field of multiband superconductors. Since the discovery of superconductivity in MgB 2 Despite its simplicity, the s ± -phase explains quite well the anomalous experimental findings in multiband systems As previously mentioned, in most studies, multiband states with broken TRS are treated using BCS theory or by effective field theories (e.g., Ginzburg-Landau theories) derived from BCS theory following the original calculation of Gor'kov The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec. II, by using the functional-integral formalism, we derive the multiband Eliashberg equations and the free energy of superconducting multiband systems. In light of this, we discuss the prerequisites for having spontaneous TRSB states in strong coupling in Sec. III. While these two sections are general and may apply to several models, we then consider a microscopic model in IV and derive the Eliashberg equations specific to this model. In Sec. V, we first demonstrate the spontaneous breaking of TRS in strong coupling and subsequently elucidate its origin. We discuss the experimental consequences of our results and some of the advantages of employing a strong-coupling theory. The conclusions are finally presented in Sec. VI. The purpose of this section is to derive the free energy for multiband systems with dynamic interactions as well as the associated Eliashberg equations. The latter has been carried out in the single-band case Ref. Within the imaginary time functional-integral formalism, the dynamics of a multiband system of fermions is governed by the action S. If the interactions in the system are densitydensity interactions, one can perform Hubbard-Stratonovich (HS) decoupling in three different channels -Cooper, density, and exchange where we introduced the shorthand notation k = (ω n , k) with ω n being the fermionic Matsubara frequency ω n = π(2n + 1)/β and β = 1/T being inverse temperature, where we use natural units is the Grassmann field representing the annihilation (creation) operator of an electron with spin σ belonging to band i. ξ i (k) is the dispersion relation ε i (k) of band i, relative to the chemical potential ξ i (k) = ε i (k)μ. We have also assumed the Cooper channel to only have pairings with opposite momentum. For the interaction V ij (kk ′ ) to be separable in the band indices as in Eq. ( With the path integral measure DψD ψ, the grand canonical partition function Z at fixed chemical potential is given by Z = DψD ψe -S[ ψ,ψ] = e -βF , where F is the free energy (or more precisely, F is the grand potential, which we take to be equal to the free energy when fixing the chemical potential) of the system. So, in keeping with conventional HS decoupling, we may write where a summation over repeated spin indices is implied. The inverse interaction V -1 il (k 1k) is a function which obeys the relation We discuss the inverse interaction in detail later. Φ, Φ and Σ σ are shifted to get rid of the quartic terms in Eq. ( The imaginary shift of Σ σ i (k) is due to the fact that in the density channel, the interaction is repulsive. Inserting Eq. (2) into Eq. ( The action in Eq. ( where the inverse Green's function G -1 i is band dependent and given by with The first term in Eq. ( To proceed, we integrate out the fermionic sector such that the effective action becomes where the trace is over momentum, frequency and band indices. To find the mean-field values of the HS fields, we impose stationary point conditions on the action and make use of the identity δ δχ Tr ln(f (χ) = Tr[f -1 (χ) δ δχ f (χ)] to obtain (see Ref. which can be inverted by summing over k i V li (k ′k) on both sides and using Eq. (3). After a suitable relabeling of variables, the gap equation is given as . (10) Since the system described by Eq. (1) has spin-rotational symmetry, can then be omitted. This simplifies the stationary point conditions 0 = δS[ Φ,Φ,Σ] δΣ σ i , which are found analogously to those of Φ i (k) Equations. it follows that Inserting Eq. ( whereas the gap equation becomes In the case of only one band, Eqs. ( After integrating out the fermions, the free energy of the system is most easily expressed using the HS fields By expanding S around its saddle point and neglecting higherorder contributions, one obtains where we used that Tr ln(G -1 ) = ln det(G -1 ). To make use of the free energy in Eq. ( In writing down Eq. ( The complex phases of Φ i (k) in the free energy in Eq. ( Note that the global phase of each gap need not be the same, θ i ̸ = θ j . We will often employ the shorthand notation The GPA is further supported by the fact that in systems with phonon-mediated interactions we have considered, we have not observed any numerical solutions to the multiband Eliashberg equations that do not obey this symmetry. Using the GPA allows us to make significant headway analytically. Although we cannot ascertain that the states we find are the only states satisfying the Eliashberg equations, the states we do find using the GPA clearly do. Another property of the gap presented in Ref. The symmetry considerations above leave Φ i (ω n ) with almost the same characteristics as the gaps used in multiband BCS theory; spin-singlet s-wave gaps with global phases, but with an additional frequency dependence accounting for retardation effects. The similarity allows us to study multiband phenomena previously found in BCS theory, only now in the strong-coupling regime. One of these phenomena is the TRSB states arising in systems where the coupling between the gaps causes phase frustration that, in some cases, spontaneously breaks TRS. In BCS theory, the microscopic conditions under which TRSB occur have been outlined in detail An alternative way of understanding the criteria for TRSB to occur in multiband BCS theory is to consider the free energy. This approach is used in Ref. is symmetric, so the distinct off-diagonal elements are a BCS 12 , a BCS 13 , and a BCS 23 . Now, to have phase frustration in the three-band case, either one or all three of the off-diagonal elements in a BCS ij must be positive, akin to how a spin system on a triangular lattice is frustrated if all couplings are antiferromagnetic or if two are ferromagnetic and one is antiferromagnetic. The signs of the couplings are decided by [V BCS ] -1 ij . For the phase frustration to give TRSB, the amplitude of the couplings must be such that the phases that minimize the free energy are not multiples of π. If this is the case, the ground state is twofold degenerate and related by timereversal symmetry (complex conjugation). As the system enters one of these two distinct states, it breaks a Z 2 symmetry, which, in this case, corresponds to spontaneously breaking time-reversal symmetry. By inserting Eq. ( with where we used that Z i (ω n ) is positive for all ω n Having kept the discussion rather general until now, we will in this section introduce the microscopic model that adheres to the action in Eq. ( We consider interactions between the electrons that are mediated by phonons. A complete derivation of the effective interaction in such systems using functional-integral formalism can be found in Ref. , where g k is the electron-phonon coupling, depending, in general, on momentum, and D 0 (k) is the phonon propagator, defined as where π n is a bosonic Matsubara frequency and ω k is the phonon frequency at momentum k. We also inserted β -1 in the interaction to ensure that it carries units of energy squared in real and momentum space with our Fourier transform conventions. To obtain a multiband interaction, we will make some changes to the interaction above. Firstly, to account for the different geometries of the Fermi pockets and how the electrons belonging to a pocket couple to phonons, we take the electron-phonon coupling to depend on which bands are involved in the scattering. For example, one can imagine that pockets i = 1 and i = 2 are spherical but the radius of the i = 1 Fermi pocket is larger. The average momentum transferred is then larger in scattering processes for electrons belonging to pocket i = 1. So when we approximate the electron-coupling to be momentum independent, we account for this by including band indices in We make a second simplification in assuming that all phonons have frequency ω E , similar to an Einstein solid. As we will see later, this is not an essential simplification, but we note that it has been used in similar works on strong coupling which is the interaction we will use in the following. It is convenient to split the interaction into a band part and a frequency part. To denote the former, we introduce the such that all elements in B are nonnegative. The frequency dependence comes from the phonon propagator D 0 (ω nω m = π n ), always evaluated at the difference between two fermionic Matsubara frequencies which is itself a bosonic one. We now carry out the steps required to calculate the inverse interaction, as outlined in Eq. (26) The matrix inverse of Eq. ( To complete the derivation of the inverse interaction, we return to Fourier space with ; -e -βωE ) F (a, b; c; z) is the hypergeometric function (3). This is straightforward to demonstrate when expressing V ij (π n ) and V -1 ij (π n ) in their imaginary time representation v(τ ) = (e βωE -1)(e ωE(β-τ ) +e ωEτ ) -1 and 1 v(τ ) , respectively, Now, with the inverse interaction at hand, we reiterate one of the main messages from Sec. III: While it is the interaction that determines the solutions to the Eliashberg equations (requiring numerics), the conditions under which TRSB may occur can be gleaned directly from the inverse interaction. In particular, the signs of a ij are the same as B -1 ij in all the systems we have considered, meaning that the double frequency sum in a ij , converges to a positive number. We again note that a ij is symmetric. Thus, a necessary condition for spontaneously breaking TRS is that one or all three of the off-diagonal elements in B -1 ij are positive. If not, there is no phase frustration and consequently no TRSB. An intriguing way of generalizing the interaction considered here is outlined in Appendix B in Ref. where k F is the Fermi momentum, Ṽ (π n ) is the renormalized potential, and f (q) is a dimensionless function determined by the dimensionality of the system. To generalize Eq. ( To close this section, we simplify the Eliashberg equations and the free energy in Sec. II. The momentum sums can be carried out analytically since the Eliashberg fields only depend on frequency. As the momentum dependence is only in ξ i (k), the sums can be transformed into energy integrals in standard fashion Similarly, following the procedure of Ref. Here, we introduced the free energy density f ≡ F/N , where N is the number of unit cells. The Eliashberg equations above coincide with the multiband Eliashberg equations used in previous works In this section, we will showcase a system that spontaneously breaks TRS in strong coupling, manifesting in nonanalytical behavior in both the phases and amplitudes of the gaps due to a Z 2 -breaking Ising phase transition at T = T * . We will discuss other systems that might exhibit TRSB later. The system under consideration here consists of three coupled bands. Two of the bands have strong intraband interactions of different magnitudes. The remaining interactions are weaker, g 11 ≈ g 22 ≫ g ij . In units of g = 85 meV, the electron-phonon couplings between the different bands are g 22 = 1.4g, g 33 = 0.005g, g 12 = 0.0001g, g 13 = g 23 = 0.003g, while the intraband coupling in the first band g 11 can vary but is, in general, of the same order as g. For simplicity, we set the density of states at the Fermi level equal for all three bands N F,i = 0.5 • 10 -2 meV -1 , and the Einstein frequency and temperature are 20 meV and 1 meV, respectively. With these values for g ij , one obtains B -1 12 ≈ 2•10 -10 , B -1 13 ≈ -5 • 10 -5 and, B -1 23 ≈ -3 • 10 -5 , all in units of meV -2 . Before showing results from this system, it is worth considering the type of physical systems where TRSB may be realized. Firstly, we consider two intraband couplings approximately equal to g = 85 meV, putting the system into the strong-coupling regime. The system is also one where the interband electron-phonon coupling is severely suppressed. This is the case in iron pnictides Lastly, a possible realization of the small intraband interaction in the third band is the following: As explained in Sec. IV, the electron-phonon coupling depends on the momentum transferred in the scattering. Moreover, for the case of Einstein phonons, g k ∝ |k| It is instructive to see how and why this causes TRSB, which follows directly from the expression for a ij in Eq. Following the numerical scheme in Appendix A, we solve the multiband Eliashberg equations in Eqs. ( Both gaps display the same monotonic decreasing behavior with |ω n |. This is not the case for the smallest gap, as |∆ 3 (ω n )| increases slightly with |ω n |, quickly reaching its peak before it becomes monotonically decaying as well. To elucidate the behavior of the third gap, it is useful to consider the mechanisms sustaining the different gaps. The bands with strong electron-phonon coupling are superconducting in their own right; both ∆ 1 (ω n ) and ∆ 2 (ω n ) survive if the interband couplings vanish. Their amplitude would barely change. For ∆ 3 (ω n ), however, g 33 is far too weak to drive the superconductivity by itself. Instead, ∆ 3 (ω n ) is sustained by the other two gaps, from j = 1 and j = 2 on the right-hand side in Eq. The gaps, unlike Z i (ω n ), exhibit a more abrupt change when g 11 increases in Fig. As expected, increasing g 11 causes |∆ 1 (0)| to be larger, while |∆ 2 (0)| remains the same. It is more surprising that the small change in g 11 also increases |∆ 3 (0)| by a factor of 4. This can be understood from the fact that ∆ 1 (ω n ) and ∆ 2 (ω n ) are now less antagonistic in their support of ∆ 3 (ω n ). In Fig. The antagonistic mechanism can also explain the small bump in Conversely, in the system in Fig. To elucidate the transition between the TRS and TRSB states, we have solved the Eliashberg equations as a function of g 11 , where the results are shown in Fig. We emphasize that while ∆ 3 (ω n ) is orders of magnitudes smaller than ∆ 1 (ω n ) and ∆ 2 (ω n ), it still plays a pivotal role in breaking TRS. If ∆ 3 (ω n ) = 0, it follows immediately from Eq. ( FIG. gap is small for the following reasons: In three-band microscopic models with TRSB, one can map such models to an effective Ginzburg-Landau functional with only two gaps where the TRSB is explicitly imposed To understand the phase transition at T * , we repeat that there are two criteria for TRSB to occur: a ij must have the appropriate sign combinations, and a ij must be of similar magnitudes. The first criterion is satisfied since the B -1 ij decide the sign of a ij . B -1 13 and B -1 23 are negative while B -1 12 is positive, and thus a ij has a sign combination that allow for TRSB. We explain the second criterion in more detail in Appendix A, but from the fact that θ 13 and θ 23 are zero above T * in Fig. In superconductors with an additional phase transition below T c , one of its signatures is a jump in the heat capacity, which is most often associated with spontaneous TRSB TRSB states are well understood in weak coupling. Hence, some comparisons to our results are in order. The conventional starting point for obtaining such states in BCS theory is systems with attractive intraband and repulsive interband interactions Two potential candidates in this regard are the Coulomb interactions between the electrons or interactions mediated by spin fluctuations, where the latter are believed to be relevant in the superconducting iron pnictides We lastly note that the different interactions considered in the previous paragraph are all easily integrated into Eliashberg theory using modern first-principles calculations In this paper, we have studied multiband superconducting states that spontaneously break time-reversal symmetry. These states have been intensely researched in the previous decade following their initial theoretical discovery Our most important finding is that the TRSB states may indeed emerge in strong-coupling models. They are more elusive than in weak coupling, as the time-reversal symmetric states also satisfy the Eliashberg equations that fixed-point schemes tend to favor. To compensate for this, we have derived the free energy of the system and used it to guide the numerical solver towards TRSB states when they were more energetically favorable than their TRS counterparts. In particular, we have considered a system where two large gaps are weakly coupled to each other and a significantly smaller third gap. Although the third gap is small, the phase frustration in the system still drives the spontaneous breaking of TRS either at a critical electron-phonon coupling or at T = T * . We have discussed how one expects the emergent physics to be similar to that of TRSB three-band systems with equal gap amplitudes, namely spontaneous currents and magnetization arising near defects The strong-coupling approach we have used is a generalization of the recent work of Ref. Finally, we have compared our results for TRSB in strong coupling with BCS theory. Although the gap equation is more numerically demanding in the former, the resulting TRSB states are still similar; the spatial symmetries of the gaps are the same (s-wave), and there is no frequency dependence in their phases, only in their magnitude. However, there are several benefits of employing strong coupling. The renormalization effects of the electrons are accounted for, and materials with large electron-phonon couplings can be investigated. Moreover, Eliashberg theory has the advantage of being well incorporated with first-principles calculations. So, the framework for studying TRSB in strong coupling presented here may apply these directly, thus facilitating a more effective search for candidate materials. a 13 , and a 23 must be positive. Since the sign of a ij is determined by B -1 ij , it suffices to look at the general expression for off-diagonal elements for a 3 × 3 matrix A A where l ̸ = i ̸ = j. Since B ij = |g ij | 2 , all its elements are nonnegative, causing severe restrictions on the possible choices of B -1 ij that can cause phase frustration, as we will now see. As discussed in Sec. V, in BCS theory, the conventional choice is to have attractive intraband and repulsive interband interactions, which straightforwardly yields all positive [V BCS ] -1 ij from Eq. (B1), supposing that the determinant of V BCS is positive. In the model we employ, there is no way of having negative coupling constants in B ij unless one includes additional scattering mechanisms such as Coulomb repulsion and interactions mediated by spin fluctuations, as discussed in the main text. However, positive values in B ij may still result in emergent TRSB, as demonstrated in e.g., Fig. Interband electron-phonon couplings are small in iron pnictides 12 is orders of magnitudes smaller than B -1 13 and B -1 23 , |∆ 1 (ω n )| and |∆ 2 (ω n )| must be approximately the same number of orders of magnitudes larger than |∆ 3 (ω n )| for the amplitudes of a 12 , a 13 , and a 23 to satisfy b > 0. Since the gaps grow with their respective intraband couplings, this is accomplished by having g 33 ≪ g 11 , g 22 .