Type-II Weyl semimetal MoTe2 exhibits a first-order structural transition at Ts ∼250 K and superconducts at Tc ∼0.1 K at ambient pressure. Both Ts and Tc can be manipulated by several tuning parameters, such as hydrostatic pressure and chemical substitution. It is often reported that suppressing Ts enhances Tc, but our study shows a different behaviour when MoTe2 is hole-doped by Ta. When Ts is suppressed by Ta doping, Tc is also suppressed. Our findings suggest that the suppression of Ts does not necessarily enhance superconductivity in MoTe2. By connecting with the findings of electron-doped MoTe2, we argue that varying electron carrier concentration can effectively tune Tc. In addition, the Hall coefficient is enhanced around the doping region, where Ts is completely suppressed, suggesting that the critical scattering around the structural transition may also play a role in suppressing Tc. Superconductivity is found, often by tuning the electronic properties via the application of hydrostatic pressure, in many topological semimetals, such as Cd 3 As 2 Type-II Weyl semimetal MoTe 2 Owing to its low T c , it is challenging to experimentally study the superconductivity of MoTe 2 . Finding a suitable way to control its T c becomes an outstanding issue. Meanwhile, the competition between structural and superconducting transitions in MoTe 2 has been reported in previous studies using a variety of tuning parameters. Through the application of pressure The superconductivity of hole-doped MoTe 2 has not been studied to the same extent as the electron-doped counterpart. The introduction of hole carriers in monolayer MoTe 2 through gating has been shown to reduce its T c Nevertheless, it remains uncertain how T c evolves and what the correlation of T s and T c is upon hole doping. Understanding these issues can help us reveal the key factors that control T c of MoTe 2 . In this article, we study the effect of hole doping on MoTe 2 via the substitution of Mo by Ta. Transport measurements were conducted down to ∼30 mK to track the evolution of both T s and T c , and surprisingly, we found that both T s and T c are suppressed and eventually vanish with increasing hole doping, contrary to the anticorrelation between T s and T c established in MoTe 2 controlled by other tuning parameters. Enlarged XRD spectra near the peak of (002). The (002) peak shifts progressively toward a higher diffraction angle 2θ when x increases. Single crystals of Mo 1-x Ta x Te 2 were grown by the selfflux method. The mixture of Mo powder (99.999%, Alfa Aesar), Te (99.99999% lumps, Ultimate Material), and Ta powder (99.99%, Sigma Aldrich) were first placed into an alumina crucible, with a stoichiometric ratio of Mo:Ta:Te = 1-x:x:20. The alumina crucible was inserted into a quartz tube before the quartz tube was sealed under a vacuum. The sealed ampule was then heated to 1100 • C within 24 hours and stayed for 24 hours, followed by slow cooling to 880 • C for 400 hours. Finally, the ampule was taken out from the furnace at 880 • C and centrifuged to remove the excess Te flux. Xray diffraction (XRD) data were collected at room temperature by using a Rigaku X-ray diffractometer with CuK α radiation. The chemical compositions were characterized by a JEOL JSM-7800F scanning electron microscope equipped with an Oxford energy-dispersive Xray (EDX) spectrometer. A standard four-probe method was used to measure temperature-dependent resistance in a Bluefors dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 30 mK. A standard six-probe method was used to measure the Hall effect in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System with a temperature range from 300 K to 2 K and a magnetic field of ±14 T. that all crystals are single-crystalline 1T ′ -MoTe 2 at room temperature. Figure To probe the evolution of the Fermi surface of Mo 1-x Ta x Te 2 , we conducted the Hall effect measurements. Figure To further visualize the temperature evolution of the Hall effect of Mo 1-x Ta x Te 2 , we extract the Hall coefficient R H from the slope of ρ xy (B) in the linear region, and the temperature evolution of R H is plotted in Fig. We summarize our results and construct a temperature-doping phase diagram of Mo 1-x Ta x Te 2 in Fig. To shed light on the issue of why the superconductivity of MoTe 2 is suppressed upon hole doping, a contour plot of R H is overlaid in Fig. Another possible explanation for the suppression of su- perconductivity is related to the change in the Fermi surface topology upon hole doping. Cho et al. To further elaborate on this idea, we connect our holedoping phase diagram with the electron-doping phase diagram (based on the result of Te-deficient MoTe 2 from Cho et al. Meanwhile, although the critical scattering around the structural transition may contribute to the suppression of superconductivity, our result shows that the tuning of the carrier concentration, which controls the phonon nesting vector(s), provides an effective means to vary the T c of MoTe 2 , regardless of the suppression of T s . These findings provide experimental evidence that enhancing the T c of MoTe 2 by solely increasing the electron carrier concentration while preserving the topologically nontrivial T d phase is possible. Such property can potentially boost the progress of the search for topological superconductivity in MoTe 2 , which is currently hindered by its low T c . In summary, we have investigated the phase diagram of Ta-doped MoTe 2 , Mo 1-x Ta x Te 2 , with x = 0 -0.173 through magnetotransport measurements. Single crystals of Mo 1-x Ta x Te 2 were successfully grown by the selfflux method. X-ray diffraction and energy-dispersive Xray spectroscopy have confirmed that Mo is partially substituted by Ta in the doped samples. By measuring the temperature dependence of resistivity and the Hall effect, we have revealed that the structural transition temperature T s is completely suppressed at x ∼ 0.11, while the superconducting transition T c generally decreases upon Ta doping and finally vanishes at x ∼ 0.08. This behaviour is in contrast to the previous phase diagrams constructed based on applying pressure, isovalent doping, or electron doping, which show the enhancement of T c when T s is suppressed. Moreover, the Hall coefficient is found to be enhanced at low temperatures around the region where T s is suppressed to zero, suggesting that the critical scattering arising from the structural temperature may have some contributions to the suppression of T c . By comparing our findings with the phase diagram of electron-doped MoTe 2 , we argue that the electron carrier concentration in MoTe 2 is a key factor in controlling T c , which offers a straightforward way to boost the T c of MoTe 2 . Notes added: After the first submission of this article, we noticed a recently published article [39] used a different crystal growth condition. Second, we determine our T c values based on the observation of zero resistivity while Ref. 