Single-atom catalysts are considered as a promising method for efficient energy conversion, owing to their advantages of high atom utilization and low catalyst cost. However, finding a stable two-dimensional structure and high hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance is a current research hotspot. Herein, based on the first-principles calculations, we identify the HER properties of six catalysts (TM@MoSi2N4, TM = Sc, Ti, V, Fe, Co, and Ni) comprising transition metal atoms anchored on MoSi2N4 monolayer. The results show that the spin-polarized states appear around the Fermi level after anchoring TM atoms. Therefore, the energy level of the first available unoccupied state for accommodating hydrogen drops, regulating the bonding strength of hydrogen. Thus, the single transition metal atom activates the active site of the MoSi2N4 inert base plane, becoming a quite suitable site for the HER. Based on ΔGH*, the exchange current density and volcano diagram of the corresponding catalytic system were also calculated. Among them, V@MoSi2N4 (ΔGH* = -0.07 eV) and Ni@MoSi2N4 (ΔGH* = 0.06 eV) systems show efficient the HER property. Our study confirms that the transition metal atom anchoring is an effective means to improve the performance of electrocatalysis, and TM@MoSi2N4 has practical application potential as a high efficiency HER electrocatalyst. As an emerging and promising energy source, hydrogen has shown its ability to be a substitute for fossil energy Single-atom catalysts (SACs) have the advantages of high utilization efficiency and clarity of the active site, which provide a boost to the design of catalysts. All kinds of transition metal (TM) atoms supported by two-dimensional materials showed excellent catalytic performance in the catalytic reaction. For example, Pt, Ir, Ru, Pd, Fe, and Ni atoms dispersed on graphene Recently, a new seven-layer material, MoSi2N4, has been prepared with excellent stability in the natural environment More crucially, these systems require cumbersome synthesis processes and sophisticated equipment that are difficult to implement in experiments. In this work, based on first principles calculation, the feasibility of TM atoms modified MoSi2N4 for electrochemical HER reaction was discussed. We have identified six catalysts with potential HER applications, namely TM atoms anchored to the surface of MoSi2N4 (represented by TM@MoSi2N4, where TM = Sc, Ti, V, Fe, Co, and Ni), Among them, V@MoSi2N4 (ΔGH* = -0.07 eV) and Ni@MoSi2N4 (ΔGH* = 0.06 eV) have the best HER activity. The SACs composed of the TM@MoSi2N4 system regulate and optimise the empty and occupied states of the d-orbitals, making them favorable for the adsorption of H + and the desorption of H2, thereby improving the efficiency of the HER process. These findings can provide new research ideas for the application of MoSi2N4 materials in the field of catalysis, and identify six kinds of HER catalysts with excellent catalytic performance. A 2 × 2 × 1 supercell MoSi2N4 system was established, and then the SACs were simulated by depositing a transition metal atom (Figures The cutoff energy of the electron wave function is set as 500 eV, and the convergence standards of energy and force are set as 10 -6 eV and 0.002 eV/Å, respectively. The calculation of K-point sampling for geometric optimization of all systems is 6 × 6 × 1, and 12 × 2 × 1 for the electronic properties. With a Nose-Hoover thermostat at 300 K for 5 ps, We use ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations to verify the thermodynamic stability of the corresponding systems Calculating details for HER. The Gibbs free energy (ΔGH*) is a descriptor proposed by Nørskov and collaborators to describe HER processes. Where ΔEH* is the adsorption energy of H, and * is the adsorption site on the surface of MoSi2N4. At 298.15 K, ΔEZPE is the change of zero point energy of adsorption H and gas phase H2, and the corresponding entropy change is ΔSH*. Volcano Curve. At pH = 0, based on the theoretical method proposed by Nørskov and the average ΔGH* Where k0 represents the reaction rate constant, and its value is set to 1 when the overpotential is 0. kb is expressed as Boltzmann's constant. The binding energy Eb of TM atom anchored into MoSi2N4. Compared to conventional metal catalysts, SACs typically exhibit higher catalytic performance due to their higher low coordination ratio. When ΔGH* value is zero, the catalytic activity of HER reaches the best. Positive values indicate that the catalyst surface is thermodynamically unfavorable to H + adsorption, and negative values indicate that it is unfavorable to H * desorption. For comparison, ΔGH* of the initial MoSi2N4 is also calculated separately, at 3.93 eV (Hollow site), 2.83 eV (Si site), and 2.71 eV (N site) (see Figure In addition, at the equilibrium potential, the inherent rate of electrons in HER process can be reflected by the calculated exchange current density i0, and the peak of the volcano indicates that the system has the best HER performance. In Table To discuss the activity of different sites in all systems, the Fukui function is calculated. It can be defined by the following equation For systems with N-1, N, and N+1 electrons, the charge densities are denoted by nN-1, nN, and nN+1, respectively. All use the same crystal structure to ensure the same external potential. For the initial MoSi2N4, as shown in Figure Unlike the case of MoSi2N4, the Fukui functions (Figures As shown in Figure show that the energy barrier of Tafel reaction is 3.89 eV and that of Heyrovsky reaction is 1.55 eV. By comparing the barriers, it can be seen that Ni@MoSi2N4 prefers the Heyrovsky reaction to the Tafel reaction in the HER process. In conclusion, through theoretical calculation, we screened six kinds of TM atoms (including Sc, Ti, V, Fe, Co and Ni) anchored on the MoSi2N4 base plane as the active sites for HER. We found that almost all TM@MoSi2N4 are well stabilized and the TM can be stabilized to anchor to the surface. More interestingly, ΔGH* values of most systems are significantly lower than those of the original MoSi2N4 system. In particular, V@MoSi2N4 and Ni@MoSi2N4 calculated ΔGH* to be only -0.07 eV and 0.06 eV. It indicates that TM atom anchoring is an effective method to improve HER performance of MoSi2N4. This is caused by the introduction of impurity levels in the band gap by TM atoms, which can increase the HER activity by decreasing the band gap to increase the conductivity. Our results provide a viable pathway to trigger HER catalytic activity of MoSi2N4 monolayer, thus expanding its application. The authors declare no competing financial interest. Parameters for the pure TM@MoSi2N4 and H adsorbed TM@MoSi2N4: adsorption site (Sad); binding energies of TM atom (Eb-TM in eV/atom); charge lost from the adsorbed TM atoms (QTM in e -/atom); average TM-N bond length (lTM-N in Å); hydrogen absorption energy (EH* in eV/molecule) ; TM-H* bond length (lTM-H* in Å); charge gained by the adsorbed H* (QH* in e -/atom) and Gibbs free energy of adsorption of hydrogen (∆GH* in eV).