The recent claim of room temperature superconductivity in a copper-doped lead apatite compound, called LK-99, has sparked remarkable interest and controversy. Subsequent experiments have largely failed to reproduce the claimed superconductivity, while theoretical works have identified multiple key features including strong electronic correlation, structural instabilities, and dopability constraints. A puzzling claim of several recent theoretical studies is that both parent and copper-doped lead apatite structures are dynamically unstable at the harmonic level, questioning decades of experimental reports of the parent compound structures and the recently proposed copper-doped structures. In this work, we demonstrate that both parent and copper-doped lead apatite structures are dynamically stable at room temperature. Anharmonic phonon-phonon in- Copper-doped lead apatite Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O with 0.9 < x < 1.1, known as LK-99, has been recently claimed to exhibit superconductivity above room temperature and at ambient pressure On the theoretical front, initial density functional theory calculations reported an electronic structure exhibiting relatively flat bands near the Fermi level for a simple model of copper-doped lead apatite These state-of-the-art electronic structure calculations all assume a specific structural model as a starting point, often suggested by experiment. However, other theoretical works have questioned the suitability of these structural models both in terms of the thermodynamic feasibility of copper doping In this work, we demonstrate that both parent lead apatite and copper-doped lead apatite compounds are dynamically stable at room temperature. The parent compounds are largely stable at the harmonic level, with some exhibiting very slight instabilities which are suppressed by quartic anharmonic terms. For the copper-doped compounds, dynamical stability at the harmonic level depends on the doping site, but even those that are dynamically unstable at the harmonic level are overall stable at room temperature with the inclusion of anharmonic phonon-phonon interactions. Lead apatite is a compound that was first experimentally reported over 70 years ago The phonon dispersion of the parent Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O and Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 compounds is shown in Fig. Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 is dynamically stable at the harmonic level. Earlier works reported that Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 is dynamically unstable In our calculations, we use the latter as it is computationally more efficient. We highlight that our strategy, combining a nonuniform Farey grid Overall, we find that both lead apatite compounds Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O and Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 are dynamically stable, a conclusion that is in full agreement with multiple experimental reports of the structure of lead apatite over the past 70 years Copper doped lead apatite The claim of room temperature superconductivity in LK-99 is based on copper doping of lead apatite, with copper replacing about 1 in 10 lead atoms leading to a Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O stoichiometry. There are two symmetrically distinct lead sites, labelled Pb(1) and Pb(2) in the literature (see Fig. Computational works find that the relative energy between the two doping sites depends on the exchange-correlation functional and the magnitude of the Hubbard U parameter used on the copper atom, with most choices favouring doping at the Pb(2) site, a prediction we confirm with our own calculations. For completeness, in this work we explore doping at both sites. The electronic structures of Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O with copper on the Pb(1) and Pb(2) sites are shown in Fig. The actual role of spin-orbit coupling, which lifts the orbital degeneracy, can be replicated by selecting a suitable level of theory, as evidenced by hybrid We hereafter present the phonon dispersions of the non-magnetic state calculated using PBEsol+U without spin-orbit coupling. The phonon dispersions of Pb 9 Cu(PO 4 ) 6 O with copper on the Pb(1) and Pb(2) sites are shown in Fig. Interestingly, the relative energy of the P 3 structure compared to the Γ-distorted P 1 structure is strongly dependent on both the volume and the electronic correlation strength as measured by the Hubbard U parameter. Specifically, we find that harmonic instabilities favouring the P 1 phase occur for large values of U and large volumes, while the harmonic instability of the P 3 phase completely disappears for small values of U and small volumes. This is evident from the phonon dispersion of the P 3 phase for different U values and volumes (Fig. These observations suggest that controlling volume, for example through hydrostatic pressure or strain, and controlling the degree of electronic correlation, for example by applying a gate voltage or doping, can be used to navigate the structural phase diagram of compounds based on lead apatite. Specifically, it may be possible to observe a temperature-driven structural phase transition between a low temperature P 1 phase and high temperature P 3 phase in a regime with a large harmonic dynamical instability. Finally, we note that electronic correlation beyond the static description provided by a Hubbard U correction may play an important role on this phase diagram Since the original claim of room temperature superconductivity in LK-99, seven phonon dispersion calculations have been reported in the literature. Of these, parent We attribute these puzzling and contradictory conclusions about the dynamical stability of lead apatite to the complexity of harmonic phonon calculations in this system, with a unit cell containing at least 41 atoms, and to the subtle interplay between volume, electronic correlation strength, and phonons. First, we find that fully converged phonon calculations for the parent compound Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 require relatively large coarse q-point grids, specifically incorporating the Γ, M, K, and A points. However, none of the previously reported calculations include all these points, and as a result they incorrectly conclude that this compound is dynamically unstable at the harmonic level. Second, we find that dynamical stability for the copper-doped compounds at the harmonic level depends on both the value of the Hubbard U parameter and the volume of the system (Fig. Beyond clarifying the dynamical stability of lead apatite at the harmonic level, we have shown that anharmonic phonon-phonon interactions play a key role in stabilising multiple lead apatite compounds. Overall, our calculations indicate that both parent and copper-doped lead apatite compounds are dynamically stable at room temperature. We believe that lead apatite is a nice example to illustrate the ability of state-of-the-art first principles methods to fully characterise a complex and experimentally relevant system. However, our work also demonstrates that reliable results and conclusions can only be reached with a careful consideration of convergence parameters, such as the size of the q-point grid, and physical models, such as the inclusion of anharmonic phonon-phonon interactions. We show that the experimentally suggested structures of lead apatite and copper-doped lead apatite are dynamically stable at room temperature. Most structures are dynamically stable at the harmonic level, but some key structures, including the structure claimed to be responsible for superconductivity at ambient conditions, only becomes dynamically stable with the inclusion of anharmonic phonon-phonon interactions. Our results resolve a puzzling suggestion by multiple earlier computational works that claimed that the experimentally reported structures of both parent and copper-doped lead apatite compounds were dynamically unstable, and fully reconcile the current experimental and theoretical description of the structure of lead apatite. Electronic structure calculations. -We perform density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the Vienna ab initio simulation package vasp We find that experimental lattice parameters agree well with those predicted by PBEsol, and the data presented in the main text has been obtained using PBEsol (see comparison between PBE and PBEsol in Supplementary Figure Converged results are obtained with a kinetic energy cutoff for the plane wave basis of 600 eV and a k-point grid of size 4 × 4 × 5 and 6 × 6 × 8 for the primitive cell of the parent and copper-doped lead apatite, respectively (see convergence test results in Supplementary Note 1). The geometry of the structures is optimised until all forces are below 0.01 eV per Å and the pressure is below 1 kbar. Harmonic phonon calculations. -We perform harmonic phonon calculations using the finite displacement method in conjunction with nondiagonal supercells To evaluate the force derivatives, we use a three-point central formula with a finite displacement of 0.02 bohr. The underlying electronic structure calculations are performed using the same parameters as those described above. We have also cross-checked the phonon dispersions by performing additional calculations with castep Anharmonic phonon calculations. -We perform anharmonic phonon calculations using the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (SSCHA) the conventional diagonal supercell method with a regular grid. This approach drastically reduces the maximum number of atoms required for a supercell, from 3168 to only 132, enabling us to obtain the converged phonon dispersion for Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 . We note that all earlier phonon calculations for the Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 compound in the literature use coarse q-point grids of sizes 1 × 1 × 1 The anharmonic potentials have a dominant quartic term that suppresses the instability to a maximum of 0.2 meV per formula unit for the K point, with smaller instabilities for the M and H points. By comparison, the thermal energy associated with room temperature is about 26 meV, suggesting that these shallow double well potentials can be overcome by thermally-induced anharmonic vibrations. We confirm this in the main text by performing self-consistent harmonic calculations at 50 K that deliver a dynamically stable phonon dispersion. The structure is likely dynamically stable at even lower temperatures, possibly at 0 K where it would be stabilized by quantum fluctuations. In the main text, we present the phonon dispersions of the non-magnetic state. This is because (i) the ferromagnetic state is not consistent with experiment, and (ii) the dynamical stability properties of lead apatite are largely independent of the precise electronic structure of the system, as discussed in Section 3.1 above. In addition, in this section, we provide both electronic structures and phonon dispersions of both non-magnetic and ferromagnetic states with and without spin-orbit coupling, aiming for a full picture of the system. We find harmonic instabilities in both non-magnetic and ferromagnetic states (see Fig. Finally, remember that the P 1 structure originally arises from an instability of the P 3 structure at the Γ point. The fact that this instability disappears for a narrow volume range (Fig. 