We demonstrate that two phenomena, the kinetic magneto-electric effect and the non-linear Hall effect, are universal to polar metals, as a consequence of their coexisting and contraindicated polarization and metallicity. We show that measurement of the effects provides a complete characterization of the nature of the polar metal, in that the non-zero response components indicate the direction of the polar axis, and the coefficients change sign on polarization reversal and become zero in the non-polar phase. We illustrate our findings for the case of electron-doped PbTiO3 using a combination of density functional theory and model Hamiltonian-based calculations. Our model Hamiltonian analysis provides crucial insight into the microscopic origin of the effects, showing that they originate from inversion-symmetry-breaking-induced inter-orbital hoppings, which cause an asymmetric charge density quantified by odd-parity charge multipoles. Our work both heightens the relevance of the kinetic magneto-electric and non-linear Hall effects, and broadens the platform for investigating and detecting odd-parity charge multipoles in metals. The idea of combining electric polarization with metallicity, against the common belief that polarization is screened by itinerant carriers, was first conceived by Anderson and Blount more than fifty years ago In the present work, we point out two such effects, the kinetic magneto-electric effect (KME) and non-linear Hall effect (NHE), which are universal to all polar metals. While these effects have been sporadically investigated in some candidate polar metal systems The kinetic magneto-electric effect is a linear effect, describing electric field (E) induced magnetization M j = K ij E i in a nonmagnetic metal Here τ , ε adc , e, n, f 0 and ⃗ Ω are respectively the relaxation time-constant, Levi-Civita symbol, the electronic charge, band index, equilibrium Fermi distribution function and Berry curvature. Both the reduced KME response Kij and the BCD are intrinsic properties of a material and are given by, and, Both Kij and D ij are allowed in nonmagnetic metals with gyrotropic point group symmetry We illustrate these concepts by explicitly considering the case of electron-doped PbTiO 3 (PTO) as an example material. Undoped PTO is a prototypical conventional ferroelectric insulator The remainder of this manuscript is organized as follows. We start by describing the computational details in section II. This is followed by the results and discussions in section III, where we present our computational results for doped PTO, describing the existence and tuning of KME and NHE, the momentum space distribution of the orbital moment and Berry curvature that determine these effects, their microscopic origin within the model Hamiltonian framework, and the role of odd-parity charge multipoles. Finally, we summarize our results in section IV and give a proposal for measuring these effects. The responses Kij and D ij are computed using the QUANTUM ESPRESSO We start with the electronic structure of PTO, which crystallizes in the non-centrosymmetric tetragonal (P 4mm) structure with the polar C 4v point group symmetry The doping electrons in doped PTO occupy the CBM, leading to a metallic band structure within the rigid band approximation. In order to compute Kij and D ij , we first project the computed ab-initio wave functions onto maximally localized Wannier functions, and then disentangle the relevant bands (see section II for computational details) from the rest using the Wannier90 code The computed non-zero components of the reduced KME response, Kxy (blue circle), Kyx (red circle), and BCD D xy (blue circle) and D yx (red circle) are shown as a function of energy in Fig. We note from Fig. To see the effect of the polarization direction, we reverse the direction of the displacement of the ions, leading to the -P structure (see Fig. We further artificially decrease the amount of the Ti respectively, together with the values for +P . We find that both Kxy and D - xy have smaller magnitude for +P 1 compared to +P , suggesting that both effects not only depend on the direction of polarization but also depend on the magnitude of the polarization. It is important to point out here that polarization is not the only factor that contributes to the value of the responses. For example, both responses also depend on the details of the electronic structure (see Eqs. 2 and 3). As a result, the situation can be more complicated if there is a drastic change in the band structure with the change in electric polarization. Nevertheless, our analysis clearly shows that the polarization is an important factor and that both KME and NHE are tunable by changing the direction or magnitude of the electric polarization. Furthermore, to understand the dependence on the spin-orbit coupling (SOC), we also perform additional calculations with the SOC turned off in our computations. Comparisons of the computed K- , given in Eq. ( xy exist even without the SOC. This suggests that both effects occur due to the symmetry of the structure and the presence of SOC is not necessary. Indeed, in the absence of SOC, the KME response is driven by the orbital contribution. With the inclusion of SOC, the orbital degrees of freedom couple to the spin degrees of freedom, and consequently, it leads to additional current-induced spin magnetization in the system. The inclusion of SOC, therefore, increases the magnitudes of both effects. It is important to point out here that unlike these responses, the spin-splitting of the bands and the resulting unconventional magnetic Compton scattering To better understand the responses, we further compute the k-space distributions of the relevant orbital magnetic moment components m orb x ( ⃗ k), m orb y ( ⃗ k) and Berry curvature components Ω x ( ⃗ k), Ω y ( ⃗ k) in the k x -k y plane. Since, the Kij response is dominated by the orbital contribution, here for simplicity we only consider the orbital magnetic moment distribution. The orbital magnetic moment is computed within the modern theory by evaluating the expectation value of the orbital magnetization operator -e 2 (⃗ r × ⃗ v) Here, ε n k and u n k are the energy eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian H( ⃗ k) obtained from Wannierization, and ε F is the Fermi energy. We note that since the KME response is a Fermi surface property (see Eq. 1), the second term in Eq. 4 does not contribute to the KME response. This can be seen easily by recognizing that ∂f0 , and so has a non-zero value only if ε n k = ε F , in which case the second term in Eq. ( where that dictate: In contrast, m orb y (Ω y ) is equal and opposite at ±k x , while having the same sign at ±k y due to the same σ v symmetries, that is, Furthermore, the x and y components of ⃗ m orb ( ⃗ k) ( ⃗ Ω( ⃗ k)) are related to each other by the mirror M 1 10 symmetry (see Fig. ---→ -m orb y (k y , k x , k z ). Moreover, since the velocity operator transforms as (v x , v y , v z ) ---→ (v y , v x , v z ) under the mirror M 1 10 symmetry, Eq. ( Model Hamiltonian-To understand the microscopic origin of these effects, we construct a minimal tightbinding (TB) model in the basis set of the Ti-t 2g orbitals, {d xy , d yz , d xz }. For small doping, the doped electrons occupy the bands around the Γ point of the BZ that correspond to the CBM for the undoped case, indicated by the black circles in Fig. Here H inv is the inversion symmetric part of the Hamiltonian, and is given by, with the explicit analytical forms of the elements h ij up to quadratic order in k given below: Here a and c are the lattice constants for the tetragonal unit cell. Note that since H inv is inversion symmetric, it contains only terms that are even in k. The effective hopping parameters t i eff , i = 1, 9 are linear combinations of the different effective t 2g -t 2g electronic hopping parameters that we extract using the N th order muffin-tin orbital (NMTO) downfolding technique On the other hand, H BI includes the hopping parameters that are induced by the broken I symmetry. It can be written in terms of the components of the orbital angular momentum operator ⃗ L, The parameters α, β, γ are determined by the broken Isymmetry-induced hopping parameters and have opposite signs for +P and -P . In centrosymmetric PTO, α, β, γ are zero so that H = H inv . In addition, t 8 eff = -2(t x -t y ) = 0 in the centrosymmetric structure, where t x and t y are the fourth nearest neighbor inter-orbital hopping integrals, which we discuss in detail later. The components of the orbital angular momentum operator in Eq. ( The advantage of writing H BI in terms of the ⃗ L operators is that we can readily identify the resulting orbital texture in momentum space. For example, the first term in Eq. Here, for simplicity, we do not include SOC in our model Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Role of odd-parity charge multipoles-Interestingly, each term of different order in ⃗ k in the Hamiltonian H BI of Eq. ( To verify the existence of the local electric dipoles and octupoles in PTO, we decompose the T symmet-ric density matrix ρ lm,l ′ m ′ , computed within the DFT framework, into parity-odd tensor moments and explicitly compute the atomic-site electric dipole and octupole moments, for which only the odd l -l ′ terms contribute Note that the second term in Eq. ( Further to gain insight into the origin of these two effects, we switch off the linear term in Eq. of the KME response, proposed by Hayami et. al. based on symmetry analysis It is important to point out here that the KME, although universal to all polar metals, can also occur in noncentrosymmetric but non-polar systems, e.g., chiral materials, in which case other multipoles such as the monopole of the electric toroidal dipole moment will dictate the symmetric part (with the trace) of the KME response We further note that the fourth NN (see Fig. To understand why the fourth NN hopping parameters are crucial, we first note that the non-zero β and t 8 eff resulting from the fourth NN hopping parameters appear in the third term of Eq. ( To summarize, taking the example of doped PTO, we have shown that both the KME and the NHE, are universal to all polar metals and can be used for a complete characterization of this class of materials. Our work paves the way for the broad applicability of these two effects in polar metals in general, going beyond their earlier investigation in topological systems Proposal for experiments. Before concluding, here we briefly discuss possible routes to detecting the two effects. The second-order NHE in polar metals can be detected by measuring the second harmonic current J 2ω at a frequency 2ω for an applied ac electric field ⃗ E of frequency ω, Here ⃗ p is the direction of the electric dipole moment, which is along ẑ for doped PTO. This suggests that for ⃗ E along ẑ (i.e., with polar angle θ = 0), the Hall current vanishes as we found also from our explicit calculations discussed above. Furthermore, for a general form of the field, ⃗ E = Ee iωt (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ), it is also easy to see from Eq. ( The current-induced magnetization in the KME should be detectable using the magneto-optical Kerr effect. In doped PTO the generated magnetization is dominated by the orbital moment for a reasonable doping concentration (see the inset of Fig. In the present work, we considered a rigid band approximation to describe the doped PTO case. While we expect this to provide a good description of the NHE and KME for the small doping concentration achievable in the measurements, future work should investigate computationally how electron doping affects the electronic structure of PTO. The dominance of the orbital magnetization in the KME response of doped PTO that emerges from our work, opens the door for the application of polar metals in orbitronics with the additional advantage of switchable orbital texture by reversal of the electric polarization. We hope that our work will motivate both theoretical and experimental work in these directions in the near future.