Mie resonators as lattice resonant metasurfaces have the capability to produce structural colour. However, design criteria for these metasurfaces are still being investigated. In this work, we numerically examine how the twodimensional nanostructure shape in a lattice array affects the colorimetric response of the metasurface under linearly polarised light excitation. First, the transformation from a square-shaped to rectangle-shaped nanostructure array resulted in polarisation-sensitive metasurfaces with colorimetric outputs bound along a line on the CIE 1931 2-degree Standard Observer colour space. The bounds of the colorimetry line were tuneable to any desired chromatic range. Second, the removal of the corners in square-or rectangle-shaped nanostructures to create t-shaped nanostructure arrays displayed a dampening effect on the high-order resonance. Finally, we analytically determined that the colour saturation could increase when moving from rectangle-shaped to t-shaped nanostructure arrays. From these results, we present two design guidelines for lattice resonant metasurfaces: (1) Constructing the nanostructure to support fundamental resonances at different wavelengths enables two-colour-bound movement when excited by successive angles of linearly polarised light; (2) Removing portions of the nanostructure that only support high-order resonances dampens these modes while maintaining support for fundamental resonances. These results present first-principles guidelines for engineering nanoparticles in lattice resonant metasurfaces, offering a new toolbox for polarised-light sensing and colorimetric applications. Structural colour arises from the scattering, diffraction, and dispersion of light by interactions with subwavelength structures Structural colours offer vivid saturations with enhanced resolution, tunability, and durability compared to their chemical counterparts Research has explored the generation of structural colours for various applications: biomedical sensing Metasurfaces -engineered periodic arrangements of sub-wavelength nanostructures -offer efficient, tuneable systems for generating structural colour. These colorimetric metasurfaces can consist of (i) plasmonic Dielectric structures can support Mie resonances, which depend on the size and geometry of the particles interacting with incident electromagnetic waves All-dielectric colorimetric metasurfaces have been demonstrated using one-dimensional subwavelength features, such as gratings This lattice resonant effect has been utilised to generate structural colours in reflectance using square-shaped nanostructure arrays made of silicon nitride This work introduces new criteria for the design of nanostructure arrays aimed at dampening or extinguishing high-order resonances. Finite element method simulations were conducted to study square-and rectangle-shaped nanostructure arrays. The rectangle-shaped nanostructure arrays demonstrated two distinct structural colour outputs in reflectance when excited by linearly polarised light aligned with either the vertical or horizontal axis; this is attributed to the separate Mie resonances arising from the different periodicities along those axes The examination of near-field effects in the lattice arrays led to the hypothesis that removal of specific sections in the nanostructures that solely contribute to high-order resonances would dampen or extinguish them. In this work, the corners of the nanostructures met this criterion and removing them led to the predicted outcome. When the corners were removed without destabilising the fundamental resonances, the analytically calculated colour saturations increased. These findings emphasise how the intentional design of nanoparticles to selectively suppress or enable resonant modes offers an additional degree of freedom for tuning metasurfaces in polarised light-sensing applications. Lattice arrays consisting of silicon nitride particles on a silicon dioxide substrate were modelled in COMSOL Multiphysics ® v5.6 89 , a finite element method simulation software, using the Wave Optics module 90 and solved at the San Diego Supercomputer Center An increase in aspect ratio from 1:1 to 1:2 with constant volume in rectangle-shaped nanostructure arrays (see Supplementary Material, Section S4 for parameters) resulted in a linear blue-shift in resonance location when excited with linearly polarised light at the 0 rad angle (Figure When maintaining a constant aspect ratio of 1:1.25 and exciting the nanostructure with linearly polarised light oriented at the π/6 rad, π/4 rad, and π/3 rad angles, hybrid signals of the resonances from the 0 rad and π/2 rad polarisations were observed (Figure However, some volumes of rectangle-shaped nanostructures displayed additional, unwanted resonances in the lattice array configurations. For example, a rectangleshaped nanostructure with dimensions of 327.4-nm-by-247.5-nm displayed two resonant peaks when excited by linearly polarised light at 0 rad (Figure Overall, these cuts to the corners resulted in a suppressed high-order resonance, a blue-shifted fundamental resonance wavelength, an increased amplitude of the fundamental resonance wavelength, and an increased electric field norm magnitude of the fundamental resonance. We hypothesise the blue-shift observed for the fundamental resonance wavelength can be minimised with appropriate increases to the effective dimension along the axis of polarisation -in this case, periodicity along the y-axis. We also noticed decreases to the full width at half-maximum of the fundamental resonance wavelength as the corners were cut (see Supplementary Material, Sections S5 and S6 for reported full widths at half-maximum and more examples of this phenomenon). When combining this observation with the increase in amplitude of the fundamental resonance wavelength in the second t-shaped nanostructure array, we can hypothesise there exists a trade-off between the available bandwidths for resonance formation and the peak intensity due to the laws of conservation. In addition, this sharpened resonance due to the decreased full width at half-maximum can improve the saturation of the colorimetric output resultant from the reflectance spectrum. When exciting the rectangle-shaped, first t-shaped, and second t-shaped nanostructure arrays with linearly polarised light at the π/6 rad, π/4 rad, and π/3 rad angles, hybrid signals comprising the resonances from the 0 rad and π/2 rad polarisations were observed (Figure Based on the numerical studies conducted in this work, the following design criterion for nanostructures in lattice arrays can be identified: Removing sections of the nanostructure that solely contributed to high-order resonances dampened or extinguished those resonances while maintaining support for the fundamental resonances. This was established by investigating the near-field effects of the high-order and fundamental resonances of the rectangle-shaped nanostructure arrays. The high-order resonances exhibited activity at the corners and centres of the nanostructures, whereas the fundamental resonances only displayed activity at the centres of the nanostructures. Removal of the corners resulted in the dampening and extinction of the high-order resonance, as demonstrated in Figure This work reveals a new avenue for the design of nanostructures in lattice arrays. It holds potential in the development of two-colour-bound colorimetric sensors for incident linearly polarised light with rectangle-shapedturned-t-shaped nanostructure arrays. And it can be extrapolated to the design of single-colour pixels using square-shaped-turned-t-shaped nanostructure arrays (see Supplementary Material, Section S6 for results and discussion). Moreover, t-shapes are not likely the sole type of shape transformation enabling the dampening of highorder resonances. Future research can explore optimisation techniques for selectively removing sections of nanostructures to destabilise high-order resonances while maintaining support for fundamental resonances. Our work removed all four corners of the rectangle-shaped structures, but investigating the effects of removing one, two, or three of the corners could yield new findings, especially when examining effects of asymmetric corner removal for creating chiral structures for the colorimetric sensing of incident clockwise and counterclockwise circularly polarised light without the need for circular dichroism setups Altogether, it was possible to determine a new methodology for designing lattice arrays by examining near-field effects and removing portions of the nanostructure that support unwanted resonances. Supporting Information Available: The supplementary material text includes methods, calculations, additional data, details on the programming environments and scripts, and descriptions of all attached files. These files include the codes used to analyse the data of this work (see Supplementary Material, Section S7) and the data analysed in this published work (see Supplementary Material, Section S8). This material The COMSOL Multiphysics ® v5.6 base software [1] and the Wave Optics Module [2] were used to for this study. The COMSOL Multiphysics ® file was created with an "Electromagnetic Waves, Frequency Domain" layer in the three-dimensional (3D) space. The file is created with an empty study. Three sub-layers were created underneath the default "Global Definitions" layer: (i) "Nanostructure Parameters", (ii) "Model Parameters", and (iii) "Optics Parameters". The attributes and entries contained in these layers can be seen in Tables S1-S3 In the "Definitions" layer of "Component 1", a sub-layer is created: "Electric mode field amplitudes". Table In the "Geometry 1" layer of "Component 1" four sub-layers are added: (i) "Block" layer renamed to "Domain"; (ii) "Work Plane" layer renamed to "Nanostructure Work Plane"; (iii) "Extrude" layer; and (iv) "Form Union" layer. (i) The settings for "Domain" layer can be seen in Figures S1. (ii) The settings for "Nanostructure Work Plane" layer can be seen in Figure (iii) The settings for "Extrude" layer can be seen in Figure (iv) The settings for "Form Union" layer were set to "Form a union" for "Action:" and "Automatic" for "Repair tolerance:". Plane". The "r1" and "r2" objects in the settings refer to the "Rectangle A" and "Rectangle B" sublayers, respectively. . The settings used for the "Extrude" layer of "Geometry 1". The "wp1" object in the settings refer to the "Nanostructure Work Plane" layer. Three materials were added using the in-built COMSOL Multiphysics ® v5. The "Formulation" of the "Electromagnetic Waves, Frequency Domain" layer is set to "Full field". By default, three sub-layers are provided with this layer: (i) "Wave Equation, Electric 1"; (ii) "Perfect Electric Conductor 1"; and (iii) "Initial Values 1". Figure Moreover, four additional sub-layers are created: (iv) "Port" layer named "Port 1"; (v) "Port" layer named "Port 2"; (vi) "Periodic Condition" layer named "Periodic Condition 1"; (vii) "Periodic Condition" layer named "Periodic Condition 2". (iv) "Port 1" layer settings are provided in Figure (v) "Port 2" layer settings are provided in Figure The "Physics-controlled mesh" was chosen for "Sequence type:". The chosen "Element size:" was "Normal". Settings and mesh can be seen in Figure The reflectance spectra generated from section 1 were utilised to predict the structural colour output on the CIE 1931 2 o Standard Observer colour space [6,7]. The XYZ tristimulus values quantify the amount of red, green, and blue recorded by the human eye and were calculated using the following equations: The spectral distribution for a wavelength λ was denoted by φ λ (λ), [8], where λ ranged between 400 nm and 700 nm. x̅ , y ̅, and z̅ represent the colour matching functions of a standard colorimetric observer (Figure S(λ) is the spectral distribution of a selected illuminant [8]; in this work, the D65 illuminant was chosen [10,11] (Figure The choice of D65 is arbitrary. The illuminant spectrum was obtained from an open-source Python library called Colour (see Section S7.1 for programming details) [9]; and cross-checked with those provided by the International Commission on Illumination [15,16]. The calculated XYZ tristimulus values from section 2 were converted to the L*a*b* colour space (Section S3.1) [14,15]. The resulting L*a*b* values were used to determine the colour saturation, S LAB , as ratio of chroma, C ab * , to lightness, L [16-19]: In the above equation, a * and b * correlate with red-green and blue-yellow chroma perceptions [15]. Y n is the tristimulus Y value of the illuminant (Y = 100 for the D65 white point [20]) [11,15]. A qualitative comparison was conducted to assess the colour saturation of the colorimetric outputs of rectangle-shaped (or square-shaped) nanostructure arrays and their corresponding tshaped nanostructure arrays. The authors are aware that Ref [19] finds discrepancies between this measure and the empirically-measured human perceptions of saturation. Nonetheless, saturation will be defined hereon as described above as it is the most accurate existing measure to the best of our knowledge. The L * , a * , and b * quantities of the L*a*b* colour space correlate light-dark, red-green, and blue-yellow chroma perceptions, respectively. They are defined as follows [14,15]: In equations 8-10, X n = 95.04, Y n = 100.00, and Z n = 108.88 are the tristimulus values of the D65 white point [20]. Figure Using a 327.4-nm-by-327.4-nm square-shaped nanostructure array as a control, two resonance peaks were observed under excitation by linearly polarised light at 0 rad (Figure A third corner cut of the t-shape to arm thicknesses of 162.6 nm along both the vertical and horizontal axes (Figure Examining the electric field norms of the four nanostructure arrays at the high-order resonance peaks (Figures V/m with the control structure to 6.94E8 V/m, 3.61E8 V/m, and 1.7E8 with the first, second, and third corner-cut structures, respectively. In contrast, the electric field norms of the four nanostructure arrays at the fundamental resonance peaks (Figure The high-order resonances exhibited activities centred at the corners and centres of the nanostructures, while the fundamental resonances showed activity only in the centres of the nanostructures. Exciting the control and first corner-cut nanostructure arrays with linearly polarised light at angles of 0 rad, π/6 rad, π/4 rad, π/3 rad, and π/2 rad resulted in identical reflectance spectra across all polarisations (Figures In contrast, exciting the second corner-cut nanostructure array, where the corners were asymmetrically cut, with linearly polarised light resulted in hybrid signals comprising resonances from the 0 rad and π/2 rad polarisations (Figure Figure Nevertheless, the Mathematica code is provided in a file named, "SpectralAnalysis.nb". Further details of the code's implementation are provided in Section S7.2.1. The code within "SpectralAnalysis.nb" can be split into four sections (labelled within the code): (iii) "COMSOL Data Import": Imports the spectra data collected from the COMSOL Multiphysics ® simulations. (iv) "Calculate LAB co-ordinates of Spectra, their Distance to D65 and Saturation": Calculates the L * , a * , and b * quantities of the imported spectra and their corresponding saturation scores (see Main Text, Methods, Section 3, Equation To note, this code provides additional data calculations and visualisations not described above. However, what is described above is predominantly what was used for the qualitative comparisons with the data processed in Python that was reported in the Main Text. Section S8. • "0degpol" correspond to 0-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "30degpol" correspond to π/6-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "45degpol" correspond to π/4-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "60degpol" correspond to π/3-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "90degpol" correspond to π/2-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "Study00" correspond to the 247.5-nm-by-247.5-nm square-shaped nanostructure array (1:1 aspect ratio). • "Study01" correspond to the 221.4-nm-by-276.7-nm rectangle-shaped nanostructure array (1:1.25 aspect ratio). • "Study02" correspond to the 202.1-nm-by-303.1-nm rectangle-shaped nanostructure array (1:1.5 aspect ratio). • "Study03" correspond to the 187.1-nm-by-327.4-nm rectangle-shaped nanostructure array (1:1.75 aspect ratio). • "Study04" correspond to the 175-nm-by-350-nm rectangle-shaped nanostructure array (1:2 aspect ratio). Section S8. • "0degpol" correspond to 0-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "30degpol" correspond to π/6-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "45degpol" correspond to π/4-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "60degpol" correspond to π/3-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "90degpol" correspond to π/2-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "Study00" correspond to the 327.4-nm-by-247.5-nm rectangle-shaped nanostructure array. This nanostructure array acts as the bound for the remaining t-shaped structures in this folder. • "Study01" correspond to the rectangle-bound 247.5 nm & 187.1 nm arms thicknesses t-shaped nanostructure array. • "Study02" correspond to the rectangle-bound 247.5 nm & 143.0 nm arms thicknesses t-shaped nanostructure array. • "Study03" correspond to the rectangle-bound 247. • "0degpol" correspond to 0-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "30degpol" correspond to π/6-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "45degpol" correspond to π/4-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "60degpol" correspond to π/3-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "90degpol" correspond to π/2-rad linearly polarised light excitation. • "Study00" correspond to the 327.4-nm-by-327.4-nm square-shaped nanostructure array. This nanostructure array acts as the bound for the remaining t-shaped structures in this folder. • "Study01" correspond to the square-bound 234.4 nm & 234.4 nm arms thicknesses t-shaped nanostructure array. • "Study02" correspond to the square-bound 234.4 nm & 162.6 nm arms thicknesses t-shaped nanostructure array. • "Study03" correspond to the square-bound 234.4 nm & 90.7 nm arms thicknesses t-shaped nanostructure array. • "Study04" correspond to the square-bound 162.6 nm & 162.6 nm arms thicknesses t-shaped nanostructure array. 1: Square-shaped nanostructure arrays Four .csv files are provided containing reflectance, transmittance, and absorptance data of square-shaped nanostructure arrays excited by π/2-rad linearly polarised light: Z