Second-harmonic generation (SHG) has emerged as a promising tool for detecting electronic and magnetic structures in noncentrosymmetric materials, but 100% spin-polarized SHG has not been reported. In this work, we demonstrate nearly 100% spin-polarized SHG from half-metallic ferrimagnet Mn2RuGa. A band gap in the spin-down channel suppresses SHG, so the spin-up channel contributes nearly all the signal, as large as 3614 pm/V about 10 times larger than that of GaAs. In the spin-up channel, χ (2) xyz is dominated by the large intraband current in three highly dispersed bands near the Fermi level. With the spin-orbit coupling (SOC), the reduced magnetic point group allows additional SHG components, where the interband contribution is enhanced. Our finding is important as it predicts a large and complete spin-polarized SHG in a all-optical spin switching ferrimagnet. This opens the door for future applications. The interaction between an intense optical field and a material is always fascinating. This gave birth to nonlinear optics In this work, we predict a strong SHG signal from the half-metallic Heusler Mn 2 RuGa. We show that a single spin channel mainly contributes to SHG in Mn 2 RuGa. The band gap in the spin-down channel is open and limits SHG, resulting in SHG mainly from the spin-up channel. Surprisingly, χ The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. In Sec. II, we show our theoretical methods. Then, the results and discussions are given in Sec. III. Finally, we conclude our work in Sec. IV. The electronic structures of Mn 2 RuGa are calculated within the first-principle density functional theory using the projector-augmented wave (PAW) (1) The first term is the kinetic energy and next three terms are the potential energy, the Coulomb, and the exchange interactions, respectively. m e is the electron mass and n( r) is the electron density. ψ n k ( r) denotes the Bloch wave function of band n at crystal momentum k, and ε n k is the band energy. The cutoff energy is set to 500 eV. The structural optimizations and self-consistent are carried out by Γ-centered k-point mesh of 15×15×15. The density of states (DOS) is calculated using a denser k-point mesh of 21×21×21. In order to obtain accurate results, we set the energy convergence less than 10 -6 eV. We use the length gauge to compute SHG where the subscripts 2ph and 1ph represent two-and onephoton transitions, respectively. The interband and intraband transitions are The detailed expressions We know that χ abc mod in Eq. ( , where υ a nm (k) is the a component of the velocity matrix elements, and where f (hω n ) is the Fermi Dirac function. The matrix elements of position operator r mn (k) is given by r a mn (k) = -iυ a nm (k)/ω mn (k), and The matrix elements of position operator r mn (k) are directly computed by the first-principle calculations, which accounts for the effect of non-local potentials |χ (2) | |χ (2) [39] CaCoSO 6.9 1.17 Ref. In order to understand the nonlinear optical properties of Mn 2 RuGa, we have calculated the second-order nonlinear optical susceptibilities. Nonmagnetic Mn 2 RuGa belongs to the point group T d . There are six equivalent nonvanishing SHG susceptibilities χ zyx . When the antiferromagnetic coupling appears along the z direction, the symmetry is reduced from 24 to 8, belonging to the magnetic point group -42m. This changes SHG. The system contains three independent nonvanishing elements, namely, χ yzx , and χ (2) zyx . The SHG susceptibility satisfies the intrinsic permutation symmetry, that is χ acb . Thus, there are only two independent nonvanishing elements, χ yzx , and χ (2) xyz , the absolute value of the spin-up channel is given by the red solid line in Fig. xyz | is at the maximum value of 11670.76 pm/V when the photon energy approaches 0 eV. Due to the metallic nature for the spin-up channel in Mn 2 RuGa, the intensity of |χ xyz | in GaAs is only about 358.19 pm/V at 1.8 eV, which is about 10 times smaller than the spin-polarized SHG of Mn 2 RuGa. The SHG susceptibilities for other materials are also presented in Table To reveal insights into this nearly 100% spin-polarized SHG, we resort to the band structure of Mn 2 RuGa, as shown in Fig. Next, we further analyze the difference between the spin-up and the spin-down χ xyz of Mn 2 RuGa by examining the real and imaginary parts separately. For the spin-up channel, the real and imaginary parts of χ xyz ), a Lorentzian-like resonance appears in the energy range between 0 and 0.4 eV. Compared with the real part, its first negative peak shifts to the lower energy by about 0.06 eV, and the intensity is decreased to 7768.47 pm/V. When the photon energy further increases, the spectrum oscillates. In general, the imaginary part of χ xyz reflects the optical absorption in NLO experiments. From the band structure, the optical absorption involves in the intraand interband currents. Thus, we decompose Im(χ xyz ) into the inter-and intraband parts for the spin-up channel, as shown in Fig. xyz ) in this energy range. Thus, the negative characteristic peak of Im(χ xyz ) in the lower energy is determined by the intraband current. In other words, the interband current contributes little to the negative characteristic peak in the lower energy. We know that the negative characteristic peak locates in the energy range of 0-0.4 eV. The two-photon resonance would correspond to the energy range of around 0-0.8 eV. In this perspective, the bands related to the intraband current would locate in the energy range from -0.4 to 0.4 eV near the Fermi level. As shown in Fig. We also notice that there exist two regions for the interband transitions among these three bands. One is located near the L point along the L-Γ direction, where the double degenerate bands of W 1 and W 2 form the conduction bands while the band W 3 is the valence band. The other interband transition appears near the X point along the Γ-X direction, where the band W 1 is the conduction band while the two-fold degenerate bands of W 2 and W 3 are the valence bands. According to the selection rules, the interband transitions from these two regions are largely limited. This is because these three bands are mainly formed by the d xy , d yz and d xz orbitals of Mn atoms [see Fig. In the case of spin-down channel, the real and imaginary parts of χ xyz ) into the inter-and intraband contributions, as shown in Fig. To further confirm the contribution of SHG from the spin-up quadratic bands in Mn 2 RuGa, we artificially remove the Ru atoms in Mn 2 RuGa and obtain the crystal structure of Mn 2 Ga For Mn 2 Ga, SHG has two independent nonvanishing elements, namely, χ xyz is displayed in Fig. (2) xyz is similar to that of the spin-up channel, but the intensity is much larger. However, this is contrast to that of the spin-down channel in Mn 2 RuGa, where χ xyz is much smaller. This is because no band gap appears in the spindown channel of Mn 2 Ga and three metallic bands cross the Fermi level. More importantly, one of them disperses quadratically with k near the Γ point, which largely contributes to the intraband part of χ xyz ) of the spin-down channel into the inter-and intraband contributions, as shown in Fig. With SOC, the spin-up and the spin-down channels mix together. The band structure of Mn 2 RuGa is shown in Fig. In fact, if we only include SOC, but ignore the magnetic field direction, the symmetries of the system remain unchanged. In real calculations, SOC is considered through a tiny magnetic field applied along the z-axis. The symmetry is reduced and belongs to the magnetic point group of -4. The remaining four symmetry operations are the identity operation E, the twofold rotational symmetry C 2z with the binary axis as the z axis, and two combination operations IC 4z and IC -1 4z . IC 4z denotes the rotation of π/2 around the z-axis, followed by a mirror symmetry σ xy . IC -1 4z is similar to IC 4z , but with a rotation -π/2 around the z-axis. As a result, there are six independent nonvanishing elements, χ yzy , and χ zyy . Based on the intrinsic permutation symmetry, only four components indeed appear, χ yzy , and χ zyy . It should be noted that χ -4000 zxy . It clearly shows that those two SHG spectra are nearly the same as that of the spinup channel [see Fig. The transformations of position operator under these four symmetry operations are as follows. E: (x, y, z) → (x, y, z), C 2z : (x, y, z) → (-x, -y, z), IC 4z : (x, y, z) → (y, -x, -z), and IC -1 4z : (x, y, z) → (-y, x, -z). As a result, we can get: xxz → χ (2) xxz , C 2z : χ (2) xxz → χ xxz , IC 4z : χ (2) xxz → χ (2) It clearly shows that these four SHG susceptibilities do not cancel out each other. We can obtain these induced SHG spectra via the above symmetry analysis, where χ xxz and χ -yyz are protected by C 2z and IC 4z , respectively. The reduced magnetic point group is closely related to SOC and the applied magnetic filed direction. This means that the induced SHG spectra must have a deep relation to them. Here, we take χ xxz are displayed in Fig. xxz ) into the inter-and intraband parts, as shown in Fig. xyz , which stems from three highly dispersed bands near the Fermi level. In addition, SOC under the z-axis magnetization field induces additional SHG susceptibilities such as χ Due to the metallic nature for the spin-up channel in Mn 2 RuGa, the nonlinear optical response at zero frequency must be estimated, because the energy difference hω nm = E n -E m is zero for those metallic states near the Fermi level. As a result, ω nm -ω or ω nm -2ω in the denominators of Eqs. ( where σ 0 is the DC Drude conductivity without the external magnetic field and τ is the relaxation time. At zero frequency, we can see σ(ω) reduces to σ 0 = ne 2 τ /m with n, e, and m being the electron density, the electron charge, and the electron mass, respectively. This shows the failure of zero-frequency response already exists in the linear response, which would be our future research focus of SHG. When the photon energy is further increased to about 0.38 eV, a stable peak of spin-up |χ Im(χ zxy ) (pm/V) χ zxy (pm/V) χ zxy (pm/V) Next, the absolute value of the SHG susceptibility χ (2) zxy for Mn 2 RuGa without SOC is given in Fig. xyz . This is because the spin-up channel has no band gap, while a gap in the spin-down channel limits SHG. The real and imaginary parts of the spin-up channel for χ (2) xyz of the spin-up channel into the inter-and intraband contributions, as shown in Fig. xyz and χ (2 zxy are similar to the spin-up χ It shows that SOC has little effect on these two components. On the contrary, the reduced symmetries induce χ 