Tailoring microstructures represents a daunting goal in materials science. Here, an innovative proposition is to utilize grain boundary (GB) complexions (a.k.a. interfacial phases) to manipulate microstructural evolution, which is challenging to control via only temperature and doping. Herein, we use ZnO as a model system to tailor microstructures using applied electric fields as a new knob to control GB structures locally via field-driven stoichiometry (defects) polarization. Specifically, continuously graded microstructures are created under applied electric fields. By employing aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (AC STEM) in conjunction with density functional theory (DFT) and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD), we discover cationdeficient, oxygen-rich GBs near the anode with enhanced GB diffusivities. In addition, the fielddriven redistribution of cation vacancies is deduced from a defect chemistry model, and subsequently verified by spatially resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy. This bulk stoichiometry polarization leads to preferential formation of cation-deficient (oxidized) GBs near the anode to gradually promote grain growth towards the anode. This mechanism can be utilized to create continuously graded microstructures without abnormal grain growth typically observed in prior studies. This study exemplifies a case of tailoring microstructural evolution via altering GB complexions locally with applied electric fields, and it enriches fundamental GB science. The endeavor to tailor microstructures represents a significant objective in material science. Here, an emerging concept is to utilize grain boundary (GB) phases, referred to as "complexions" to distinguish them from bulk phases Continuously graded microstructures have been created for metals, e.g., via surface mechanical treatments Notably, a recent study discovered that an applied electric field could alter grain growth by inducing a GB transition Herein, we use undoped ZnO as a model system to show the feasibility of creating continuously graded microstructures with electric fields via altering GB complexions locally via field-driven stoichiometry (defects) polarization in a controlled manner. By coupling aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (AC STEM) with density functional theory (DFT) and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD), we reveal an anode-side GB oxidation transition to increase GB diffusivity. We further show that field-driven redistribution of cation vacancies results in preferential GB oxidation to gradually enhance grain growth towards the anode. This newly discovered anode-side GB oxidation transition, which arises from GB enrichment of cation vacancies, is likely more general and more controllable. This discovery not only enables the creation of continuously graded microstructures with applied electric fields via altering GB complexions locally through field-driven stoichiometry polarization, but also advances the emerging GB complexion theory Using a simple undoped ZnO as our model system, we first demonstrated the creation of continuously graded microstructures via an applied electric field. An example of a continuously graded microstructure created via annealing a ZnO polycrystalline specimen under an applied electric field is shown in Figure The graded microstructure can be controlled through changing the applied electric field. As shown in Figure To quantify the grain growth kinetics, the microstructure evolution of ZnO specimens annealed under a constant applied voltage of 2.80 V for different durations was studied (Figure We can fit the local grain size kinetics to a power law: where dt and d0 are the grain sizes at time t and t = 0, respectively, n is the grain growth exponent, and k is a kinetic constant. For undoped ZnO, n = 3 was consistently observed in the previous grain growth studies To elucidate the atomic-level mechanism of the anode-side GB mobility enhancement, the GB structures were examined with AC STEM, in conjunction with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). Nine (9) randomly selected GBs were lifted out using a focus ion beam (FIB) from the cathode and the anode sides of the ZnO specimen after annealing under an applied electric field for AC STEM and EDS characterization. Five (5) GBs randomly selected from the anode side (Figure In contrast, stoichiometric GBs were observed for all four (4) GBs randomly selected from the cathode side, as shown in the HAADF images in Figure Furthermore, the compositional line profile was extracted across the GB, which shows O enrichment and Zn depletion at the anode-side GB quantitatively (Figure We should emphasize that all nine (9) GBs were randomly selected from the polycrystalline specimen (prepared using a focused ion beam). We have HAADF images for five (5) randomly selected GBs (Fig. In summary, the microstructure and GB characterization results collectively suggest that oxidized GBs (with Zn deficiency) formed near the anode, which led to enhanced grain growth. This resulted from preferential GB oxidation near the anode due to the field-driven stoichiometry polarization that altered GB structures locally. Further analyses of defects and a GB model, as well as validation by spatially resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy, suggest that the field-driven defects redistribution (enrichment of Zn vacancies near the anode) can cause preferential Zn vacancy segregation to form such oxidized GBs at the anode side. To verify the enhancement of GB kinetics in oxidized GBs and further investigate the underlying mechanism, we perform first-principles DFT calculations and subsequently AIMD simulations based on the DFT-relaxed GB structures. Based on the STEM images, we constructed three asymmetric GB structures to represent general GBs for DFT calculations. For each model GB, we typically set one grain terminal plane to mimic a low-index grain surface observed in a STEM image and selected the other matching grain surface to satisfy a periodic boundary condition to enable DFT and AIMD calculations. We selected asymmetric GBs to represent more general GBs. The details of the three model GBs selected are documented in the Materials and Methods section. For each model GB, we first obtained a DFT-relaxed interfacial structure for the stoichiometric GB. Subsequently, we removed Zn atoms from the GB region and relaxed the interfacial structure by DFT again to represent the Zn-deficient, oxidized GB for each case. Note that we could alternatively obtain similar results for the oxidized GBs via adding O atoms and conducting DFT relaxation, which produced consistent results (Supplementary Figure The DFT-optimized stoichiometric and oxidized (a.k.a. Zn-deficient) GB structures of the first asymmetric GB (denoted as "GB I") are shown in Figure The large-scale AIMD or ab initio molecular dynamics simulations were subsequently applied to calculate and compare the GB diffusivities for DFT-relaxed stoichiometric vs. oxidized GBs for all three asymmetric GBs (>200 atoms in each simulation cell). Figures 4g shows the calculated GB diffusivities of Zn and O atoms in both stoichiometric and oxidized GBs at 1573 K for GB I. To show the generality, similar AIMD simulations were performed for GB II and GB II, and simulated GB diffusivities are shown in Figure Taking GB I as an example, we plotted mean squared displacement (MSD) and potential energy vs. simulation time curves in Supplementary Figures In all three cases, the GB diffusivities of both Zn and O atoms are markedly higher in the Zndeficient, oxidized GBs than those in stoichiometric GBs (Figure It is well known that applied electric fields can cause stoichiometry (defects) polarization in ionic oxides, leading to gradients in the concentrations and chemical potentials of charged defects (e.g., oxygen vacancies) due to electrochemical coupling effects (see, e.g., Waser, Baiatu, and Härdtl's classical work on SrTiO3 Figure •• ] and n = [Zn i • ], respectively). Between the p and n regions, an ionic region can exist within a narrow PO2 range with the charge neutrality condition of ]. However, conduction may still occur though electrons and holes in our specimens under electric fields between the p-and n-regions to maintain the continuity (that will be discussed subsequently) in this nominally "ionic (i) region". We can estimate the electrostatic potential vs. PO2 relation in the p and n regions based on the Brouwer diagram shown in Figure where x is the spatial variable, σ i is the conductivity, z is the charge of the mobile specie, F is the Faraday constant, η i (≡ μ i + zFφ) is the electrochemical potential, μ i is the chemical potential, and φ is the electrostatic potential. ZnO is known as an electronic conductor. In addition, the ZnO specimen was placed between two ion-blocking Pt electrodes during our grain growth experiment under an applied electric field. Thus, we assume no ionic current at the steady state. For an ionic specie, Ji = 0 at the steady state gives: Integration of Eq. ( where R is the gas constant, T is specimen temperature, and C i (x) is the defect concentration at location x. Here, we assume that defects form ideal (dilute) solutions. Then, we estimated the electrostatic potential drops (∆φ) for different segments shown in Figure • ], respectively. We labeled the calculated ∆φ values on the top of Figure Figure The available data (e.g., the Sukkar-Tuller model At the steady state, a forward biased p-i-n junction may form (Figure In the p region near the anode, the dominate defects are V Zn ′ and holes. We assume that both the charge neutrality condition (p = [V Zn ′ ] so that dμ V Zn ′ = dμ h ) and defect equilibria hold locally. For V Zn ′ ions (z = -1), we can derive from Eq. ( The steady current density is given by: which suggests the electric field follows E = -dφ/dx = j SS /(2σ h ) in the p region. Likewise, we can derive E = j SS /(5σ e ) in the intermediate n region and E = j SS /(2σ e ) in the n region near the cathode following similar assumptions. Note that we cannot determine the exact location of the pi-n junction due to the unknown boundary conditions (PO2 values) at the two surfaces of the specimen. The conduction in the nominally ionic (i) region can be more complicated. Conduction through the p-i-n junction may still occur through electrons and holes (as they drift into the p-i-n junction and recombine in the nominally ionic region). This is because (1) electron and hole concentrations are only slightly lower than those of ionic species and (2) converting an electronic current to an ionic current would need internal defect reactions to generate and annihilate the ionic species to ensure mass conservation. Nonetheless, Eq. ( ). This can be circumvented by breaking the local charge neutrality (to form a space charge zone at the pi-n junction) and/or by deviating from the local defects equilibria. It is also possible to generate an ionic current with internal defects reactions to obey both mass and charge balances in conservative ensembles Since the hole and electron conductivities (σ h and σ e ) depend on the carrier concentrations (p and n), the electric field is not a constant (so that the applied electric fields in our experiments are nominal or represent average values across the specimens). The steepest electrostatic potential drop (i.e., the highest local field) is likely at the p-i-n junction where the carrier concentrations (p and n) are the lowest (Figure It is also noted that the cathode-side AGG in YSZ and CeO2 occurs through a bulk mechanism (reduction-enhanced bulk diffusion) Tuller also proposed the GBs in ZnO can preferentially oxidize to form V Zn ′ (and even V Zn ′′ ) when the zinc vacancies are not the dominant defects in air where Γ V Zn ′ GB is the amount of "V Zn ′ vacancies" at the GB core (that is put in quotation marks because they should possess a different character than the well-defined vacancies in the bulk ZnO structure due to a different bonding environment at GBs), Γ 0 is the maximum amount, and Δg V Zn ′ seg. is the free energy of segregation per V Zn ′ vacancy. Without applying an electric field, the [V Zn ′ ] in the bulk phase is low (in air, as shown in Figure Thus, the effective Δg V Zn ′ seg. value is negative and significant. When an electric field is applied, in the bulk phase can increase substantially in the anode side due to the stoichiometry polarization, which can subsequently raise Γ V Zn ′ GB at the GB core to form Zn-deficient, oxidized GBs. In the real GB structure, an individual cation vacancy may not be well-defined at the GB core (due to a different bonding environment), and its effective charge can also change (e.g., by further oxidation), particularly in the presence of a high effective concentration and a more oxidized environment. Instead, the GB core should undergo a structural transition to become Zn-deficient and O-rich, which is also likely to become more disordered. The realistic GB structures can be better modeled by the DFT relaxation (Figure In addition, the preferential GB oxidation can also cause a negatively charged GB core, which will lead to the enrichment of holes in the space charge region near the GB, as schematically illustrated in Figure To probe the defect concentrations across the specimen to validate the above prediction from the defect chemistry model, we used spatially resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy to quantify Zn vacancies (the dominant defects at the anode side, predicted by the model) across the ZnO specimen annealed under a constant voltage of 3.8 V for 4 h, as shown in Figure Differing from YSZ, CeO2, and SrTiO3, oxygen vacancies are not the dominant defects in any region in ZnO in the current case. However, the PO2 (or oxygen vacancy concentration) changes drastically from anode to cathode, depending on the concentration of dominant Zn defects ([V Zn ′ ], ). Thus, we need to analyze and probe the concentration of dominant Zn defects (e.g., [V Zn ′ ] near the anode) to determine the local PO2 (redox environments, as the concentration of oxygen vacancies in the bulk structure is too low to be directly detectable. While it is long known that applied electric fields can alter grain growth in ceramics This study not only points to a new opportunity to tailor microstructural evolution with electric fields, but also advances the emerging GB complexion theory In a broader perspective, electric fields are widely used for innovative materials processing technologies (e.g., spark plasma sintering In this study, we have used ZnO as a model system to show the controlled generation of continuously graded microstructures with electric fields. Moreover, we have revealed a new cation-vacancy induced GB oxidation mechanism that can alter grain growth gradually and locally through field-driven stoichiometry polarization. This work has also advanced fundamental GB science, in particular, enriched the emergent GB complexion theory. It exemplifies a case of using GB complexions to tailor microstructures, specifically creating continuously graded microstructures under applied electric fields by locally altering GB complexions through fielddriven stoichiometry (defects) polarization. ZnO powders (99.98% purity, 18 nm, US Nanomaterials) was first sintered into dense pellet using spark plasma sintering (SPS) at 840 C for 5 min under a uniaxial pressure of 50 MPa in vacuum (10 -2 Torr) using a graphite die. The pellet was then annealed in air at 700 C for 9 hours to remove residual carbon. All sintered pellets reached >99% of the theoretical densities. The sintered pellets were cut into pieces of the size: ~4 × ~3 × ~1.5 mm 3 . Pt was sputtered onto both sides of the specimens to form electrodes. For the grain growth experiment under an applied electric field, an external direct current was applied to the specimen while maintaining a constant voltage. The grian growth experiments were conducted in a tube furnace isothermally with a home-made fixture. Tektronix DMM 4040 digital multimeters were used to record the current and electrostatic potential readings. The sample temperature was higher than the furnace temperature because of the Joule heating. The sample temperatures were estimated based on the black body radiation model The cross-sectional microstructures were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a FEI Apreo microscope equipped with an Oxford System electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) detector. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) lamellas were fabricated using a Thermo Scientific Scios dual beam focused ion beam (FIB)/SEM system. The atomic level GB structures were characterized with an aberration corrected scanning TEM (AC STEM) using a JEOL JEM-300CF microscope operating at 300 kV, in conjunction with X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). To study the defects polarization of the specimens annealed under applied electric fields, spatially resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy was conducted on the sample cross sections on a Leica SP5 confocal microscope. The wavelength range was from 400 to 700 nm. We used the GBGenerator code in Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen) library to construct ZnO GB structures for first-principles DFT calculations Three types of asymmetric Zn GB structures are considered. For the first model GB (denoted as "GB I"), we fixed the lower index plane as (112 ̅ 0) plane and rotated the other plane along the [100] axis with a rotation angle ~53 °. This process generated an asymmetric GB with Σ = 5, and its triclinic cell has following lattice parameters: a = 6.24 Å, b = 14.49 Å, c = 39.47 Å, α = 109.90 o , β = 74.73 o , and γ = 74.73 o . The total number of atoms in simulation cell for GB I is 238. For the second model GB (denoted as "GB II"), the lower index plane was also fixed to (112 ̅ 0) plane and we rotated the other plane along the [101 ̅ 0] axis with a rotation angle ~136 °. This process generated an asymmetric GB with Σ = 7, and its triclinic cell has following lattice parameters: For the third model GB (denoted as "GB III"), the lower index plane was fixed to (011 ̅ 0) plane and we rotated the other plane along the [112 ̅ 3] axis with a rotation angle ~127 °. This process generated an asymmetric GB with Σ = 5, and its triclinic cell has following lattice parameters: a = The Vienna Ab-initio Simulations Package (VASP) was used to perform all DFT calculations Following with the DFT-optimized GB structures, we performed ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations under the NVT ensemble with a Nose-Hoover thermostat to calculate GB diffusivities. The temperature was set at 1573 K (1300 °C), close to the experimental condition. The overall simulation time was set to 2000 fs with a time step of 1 fs. Although the overall simulation time is short (due to the limitation of very large simulation cells), the GB structure can reach equilibrium based on monitoring the potential energy vs. time. The k-point grid was 1×1×1 (Γ point only). The atoms' trajectories during AIMD simulations were used to calculate the mean squared displacement (MSD) over time (t). Finally, the GB diffusivities for Zn and O were obtained by linearly fitting the corresponding MSD vs. t curves for both stoichiometric and oxidized (Zn-deficient) GBs for comparison. The average GB diffusivities were calculated based on five different trajectory paths during the AIMD simulations, and the standard deviations were used as the error bars. 