We study the low-energy eigenstates of a topological superconductor wire modeled by a Kitaev chain, which is connected at one of its ends to a quantum dot through nearest-neighbor (NN) hopping and NN Coulomb repulsion. Using an unrestricted Hartree-Fock approximation to decouple the Coulomb term, we obtain that the quality of the Majorana end states is seriously affected by this term only when the dependence of the low-lying energies with the energy of the quantum dot shows a "diamond" shape, characteristic of short wires. We discuss limitations of the simplest effective models to describe the physics. We expect the same behavior in more realistic models for topological superconducting wires. In recent years, topological superconducting wires has been a field of intense research in condensed matter physics, because of both the interesting basic physics involved A difficulty of these experiments is to identify unambiguously that the zero modes are of topological origin, which implies that they remain at zero energy and localized at the end of the nanowire if small perturbations are applied to the system. Several authors studied the system consisting of a topological superconducting wire and a quantum dot (QD) In general, the energy of the dot level is varied changing the gate potential, and the low-energy levels detected by the conductance show either a crossing ("bowtie" shape like in Fig. Compared to the large amount of theoretical works studying non-interacting superconducting wires, studies of the effects of interactions are rare Recently it has been pointed out that Coulomb repulsion between the electrons of the dot and the nanowire might lead to spoiling of the quality of the MZMs due to an effective increase of the coupling between the MZMs localized at the left and at the right of the nanowire where n d is the number of electrons in the dot and n w is the total number of electrons in the superconducting wire. In terms of creation and annihilation operators of spinless fermions at each site, it can be written as n w = c † j c j . The authors replaced this operator by the parity operator at low energies (neglecting the excited states), where γ ν is the Majorana at the end ν (left or right) of the wire at a given chemical potential. We discuss this approximation in Section III A. Neglecting the states at higher energy, the authors estimate the value of V , solve exactly the effective lowenergy model and show that H V contributes to the displacement of the MZMs from zero energy, spoiling the Majorana quality and the topological properties. Typically, the low-energy effective Hamiltonian serves as an excellent approximation to the full Hamiltonian. An illustration of this is the quantitative agreement observed in both descriptions for the Josephson current between two topological superconducting wires In addition, Eq. (1) assumes the same repulsion to all sites of the chain. However, since the wire has induced superconductivity, there is no electric field inside it, and therefore, one expects that the Coulomb repulsion between the QD and the end of the wire opposite to it is negligible. In Ref. In this work we calculate the low-energy spectrum of a Kitaev chain in which the leftmost side has a hopping and also a repulsion to a QD state. A scheme of the model is presented in Fig. The Hamiltonian of the Kitaev chain interacting with a QD is where The first two terms of Eq. ( We note that our model is different from that of Ricco et al., who considered repulsion with all the sites of the wire with the same intensity We take t = 1 as the unit of energy and choose ∆ = 0.2. For later comparison, we discuss first the isolated Kitaev chain (without the quantum dot) for two different lengths of the chain. The resulting energies are shown in Fig. We have also investigated the low-energy part of n w = c † j c j and n 1 = c † 1 c 1 in the topological phase. Clearly after changing the basis to the eigenstates of the chain, and taking the lowest-energy part of the operator, one has n w ∼ Af † f + Bf f † , where A and B are positive real numbers and f † is the eigenstate of lowest positive The electron-hole symmetry of the isolated Kitaev chain c † j → (-1) j c j , transforms H(μ) into H(-μ) and f † f into 1 -f † f . Therefore using the form n w ∼ Cf † f + B, with C = A -B, C should be an odd function of μ and for μ = 0, A = B = 1/2 and C = 0, as we confirm numerically. This result can be analytically derived in a straightforward manner within the exactly solvable limit (|∆| -|t| = μ = 0) of the Kitaev chain. For other values of μ inside the topological phase, we find that B ∼ 1/2 and C is of the order of 0.01 (0.001 or less) for N = 20 (N = 50). This factor C is lacking in the approximation of Eq. ( Similarly, the low-energy part of n 1 containing two f operators has the form For other values of μ, the order of magnitude of C = 1 is 0.01 (10 -5 ) for N = 20 (N = 50). The findings presented in the subsequent section, especially for short chains and when μ ∼ 0 showing a significant splitting of the low-energy modes (see Fig. In addition, the adjustment of the MZMs to a new configuration, remaining near zero energy, particularly when μ is varied within the topological phase, implies a necessary mixing of low-energy modes (described by f ) with higher energy counterparts. Otherwise, the splitting would increase linearly with the change in μ, contrary to what is shown in Fig. Including the QD and to facilitate the discussion of the effects of the nearest-neighbor repulsion V , we represent in Fig. As expected, the occupancy of the dot is near 1 when its energy is negative and large in magnitude compared to t ′ (-ε d ≫ t ′ ), it is equal to 1/2 for ε d = 0 and it is near 0 for ε d ≫ t ′ . In contrast, the occupancy of the first site of the dot ⟨n 1 ⟩ follows qualitatively the opposite behavior: when ⟨n d ⟩ > 1/2, the first site feels the repulsion with the electrons in the dot and its occupancy decreases, but its hopping with the rest of the chain moderates this effect and the occupancy deviates from 0.5 in less than 0.2. The expectation value of the hopping ⟨d † c 1 ⟩ follows qualitatively the behavior expected for a diatomic heteronuclear molecule, with a single orbital per atom, in which the two atomic states are hybridized. The expectation value is maximum when both atomic levels coincide (ε d = 0) and decreases symmetrically with the difference between atomic levels. The half width of the curve is expected to be of the order of the effective hopping, which in this case is t ′ eff = t ′ + V ⟨d † c 1 ⟩. For ε d = 0, this value is near 0.5, consistent with the resulting half width and more that two times larger than the bare value t ′ = 0.2. The pairing expectation value ⟨d † c † 1 ⟩ follows qualitatively a similar dependence with the dot energy as the hopping contribution discussed above, but with smaller values. Its dependence with ε d is also narrower. Its physical origin is a proximity induced p-wave superconductivity, which is larger when the energy of the dot is nearer to the chemical potential of the wire. The resulting eigenvalues of the system as a function of the dot energy for V = 0 and V = 1 are compared in Fig. When V is included, the eigenergies (except the two nearer to zero) are modified, particularly those related with the mixing of the dot state near ε d = 0. Since as explained above, the effective hopping between the dot and the first state of the chain increases from t ′ = 0.2 to t ′ ∼ 0.5, when V is increased from 0 to 1, a similar change takes place for the energies that are near ±t ′ in Fig. As expected, the state is a mixture of the MZMs at the ends with negligible weight in the middle of the chain. However, in contrast to the isolated Kitaev chain, there is a significant weight of the state also at the dot, with a probability which is about 1/10 compared to that of the first site in the chain. This probability increases with decreasing |ε d |. Finally in Fig. In contrast to the previous cases, now the effect of adding the Coulomb repulsion is significant, leading to a strong further splitting of the MZMs, of the order of a fraction of t ′ . FIG. We have solved a model for a Kitaev chain involving a Kitaev chain on a lattice, linked to a quantum dot at one of its ends through a hopping term and subject to Coulomb repulsion between the relevant state of the quantum dot and the terminal site of the chain. In realistic semiconductor-superconductor heterostructures, crucial for creating Majorana zero modes (MZMs), shortrange repulsions are anticipated to play a pivotal role. However, theoretical investigations into the effects of these interactions are scarce. As the energy of the state of the quantum dot is varied, the energies of the two eigenstates of the system closest to zero exhibit one of the characteristic shapes observed in experiments and prior theories, signaling the presence of Majorana zero modes (MZMs) at the ends of the wire, coupled between them. In one of them ("bowtie" shape), the energies of the two states cross when the energy of the quantum dot is near to the Fermi energy. In this case, the coupling between MZMs is weak and analyzing the wave function of these eigenstates, one sees that a MZM has a substantial weight at the quantum dot. Employing the unrestricted Hartree-Fock approximation to account for interatomic Coulomb repulsion, we determine that this repulsion does not significantly impact the quality of the MZMs. In contrast in the alternative scenario, in which the energies of the low-lying states as a function of the dot level have a "diamond" shape, signaling a stronger coupling between the MZMs (shorter chains), the effect of the interatomic Coulomb repulsion is significant splitting further the MZMs. In this case, the wave function of the MZM at the opposite end of the dot extends to the site adjacent to the dot and therefore it fills a significant repulsion with the dot. Consequently, this outcome aligns with the observations in Ref. We believe that our conclusions are also valid for more realistic models for the topological superconductors, such as that of Refs. If the experimental observation of a "diamond" shape in the low-energy spectrum as a function of dot energy, as documented in Ref. To summarize the aforementioned results, in situations where the mixing between MZMs in an isolated wire is weak, as expected in systems with well-defined MZMs, the repulsion between the quantum dot and the end of the wire does not compromise the quality of the MZMs. This is a noteworthy and positive outcome for the utilization of quantum dots as indicators of Majorana quality.