Motivated by recent experimental results we calculate from first-principles the lifetime of low-energy quasiparticles in bilayer graphene (BLG). We take into account the scattering rate arising from electron-electron interactions within the GW approximation for the electron self-energy and consider several p-type doping levels ranging from 0 to ρ ≈ 2.4 × 10 12 holes/cm 2 . In the undoped case we find that the average inverse lifetime scales linearly with energy away from the charge neutrality point, with values in good agreement with experiments. The decay rate is approximately three times larger than in monolayer graphene, a consequence of the enhanced screening in BLG. In the doped case, the dependence of the inverse lifetime on quasiparticle energy acquires a non-linear component due to the opening of an additional decay channel mediated by acoustic plasmons. Bilayer graphene (BLG) has attracted much attention due to its unique fundamental properties as well as its potential for applications in electronics iii) the linear dependence (i.e. the proportionality factor const) is insensitive to the doping levels. Motivated by the experiments in Ref. According to the experiment in Ref. with E F < E mk-q < E el . Similarly, for a quasi-hole excited into an electronic state |nk⟩ with energy E h < E F , one has: with E h < E mk-q < E F . In these equations G and G ′ are reciprocal lattice vectors, and M G n,m (k, q) = ⟨mk|e i(q+G)r |nk -q⟩. The Coulomb potential v is truncated according to Ref. . This compares very well with our calculated results ImΣ(E = 125 meV) = 9.5 ± 1 meV, with the relatively small difference being attributed to other scattering mechanisms not included in our calculations, e.g. to electron-phonon scattering For comparison we have also included (black line with square symbols) in Fig. Figure To understand the origin of the aforementioned non-linear component we need to first consider the emergence of acoustic plasmons in doped BLG. Indeed, based on simple dimensionality arguments, free carriers in 2D systems lead to the formation of plasmons with energy approaching zero in the long wavelength limit: ω pl (q) ∼ √ q. Figure The peak in Imε -1 (ω) indicates a plasmonic excitation, whose weight decreases as q increases -due to overlap with interband electron-hole transitions Next, we focus on a particular doping level such as the one characterized by We note that experimentally the linear behavior of τ -1 with QP energy away from E F is insensitive to the doping level, i.e. the non-linear features that we calculate are not observed experimentally In conclusion, we have presented a first principles study of the lifetime of lowenergy QP in BLG with contribution from the electron-electron scattering channel. For undoped BLG we find that τ -1 shows linear dependence with the QP energy E for |E -E K | > few meV, while the QP lifetime is significantly shorter than in graphene due to enhanced electronic screening. For doped BLG, the opening of an additional decay channel mediated by acoustic plasmons leads to a non-linear feature in τ -1 . While the calculated lifetime is in very good agreement with experiment Ref. 