A non-volatile optical phase shifter is a critical component for enabling large-scale, energy-efficient programmable photonic integrated circuits (PICs) on a silicon (Si) photonics platform, facilitating communication, computing, and sensing 1 . While ferroelectric materials like BaTiO3 offer non-volatile optical phase shift capabilities 2 , their compatibility with complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) fabs is limited. Hence, the search for a novel CMOS-compatible ferroelectric material for nonvolatile optical phase shifting in Si photonics is of utmost importance. Hafnium zirconium oxide (HZO) is an emerging ferroelectric material discovered in 2011 Although extensively studied for ferroelectric transistors and memories 6,7 , its application in photonics remains relatively unexplored Silicon (Si) photonics have experienced remarkable advancements over the past two decades, playing a pivotal role in facilitating the exponential growth of optical fiber communication traffic While the TO phase shifter has a simple structure and can be easily integrated, its drawback lies in its large power consumption, which poses challenges for large-scale integration Low-power and low-loss optical phase shifters have been reported using III-V/Si hybrid integration In this work, we investigate the non-volatile optical phase shift in orthorhombic Hf0.5Zr0.5O2 (HZO) which was discovered to exhibit ferroelectricity in 2011 However, the optical properties of the HfO2-based ferroelectrics have been not fully explored yet To evaluate the electric field induced refractive index change in HZO, we prepared a SiN optical waveguide surrounded by HZO (10 nm)/Al2O3 (1 nm) stacks (See Method and Extended Data Fig. A bias voltage was applied to generate a horizontal electric field across the waveguide, as displayed in Fig. We prepared an asymmetric Mach-Zehnder interferometer (AMZI) with 4.5-mm-long phase modulators, enabling us to evaluate the phase shift through the resonance wavelength peak shift in its transmission spectrum. To evaluate the change in the optical loss with respect to the application of a bias voltage, we also prepared straight optical phase modulators. We also fabricated the samples with nonferroelectric HfO2 or SiO2 cladding layer as references (See Extended Data Fig. Figure First, we evaluated the properties of the HZO/Al2O3 stacks prepared on a Si substrate, as shown in Fig. Next, we measure the transmission of the fabricated waveguide devices to evaluate the refractive index change of the HZO layer in response to an applied voltage. The measurement was conducted by injecting a continuous-wave laser light with wavelengths ranging from 1480 nm to 1580 nm through grating couplers (see Method). As shown in Extended Data Fig. Then, we proceeded to directly assess the optical phase shift using the AMZI configuration by applying a bias voltage to one of the MZI arms, as illustrated in Fig. The transmission spectrum of the AMZI before bias voltage application is represented by the black line in Fig. Importantly, the blue-shifted wavelength peak remained unchanged even upon returning the bias voltage to 0 V, indicating the attainment of a non-volatile optical phase shift. The change in the effective refractive index of the pristine HZO device in response to an applied voltage is depicted by the green circular symbols in Fig. Although no notable change in the effective refractive index occurred within the range of applied voltages from 0 V to 120 V, a substantial negative change in the effective refractive index became evident when the applied voltage exceeded 120 V. Upon reverting the applied voltage from 210 V back to 0 V, the change in the effective refractive index remained relatively constant, as depicted in Fig. In order to delve into the underlying physical mechanism behind the non-volatile optical phase shift in ferroelectric HZO, we conducted ACOM-TEM on the HZO layer. This analysis allowed us to explore the alteration in the orientation of the orthorhombic phase induced by the application of an electrical field. Figure Figures Taking into account the rotation of the polarization axis of HZO along the direction of the applied electric field, as observed in Fig. In conclusion, we successfully demonstrated the non-volatile optical phase shift induced by applying a voltage to ferroelectric HZO deposited on a SiN waveguide. This observed phenomenon can be attributed to the rotation of the polarization axis of orthorhombic HZO along the direction of the external electric field. The non-volatile optical phase shift observed in HZO holds significant utility for reconfiguring programmable PICs, as well as for adjusting initial optical phase errors that are inevitably caused by fabrication variations. Presently, due to limitations in the measurement equipment, applying a voltage higher than 210 V is not feasible. Nevertheless, it is anticipated that employing a larger electric field on HZO could yield an even more substantial optical phase shift. In the present paper, the linear electro-optic effect, the Pockels effect has not been observed in HZO. However, there is a possibility of observing the Pockels effect in HZO by applying a larger electric field using a slot waveguide or plasmonic waveguide. We anticipate that that our paper will trigger and promote the study of optical nonlinear effects in HZO, leading to the progress of Si PICs employing ferroelectric HZO and making significant contributions to the evolution of communications, computing, and sensing. The SiN waveguide with the HZO/Al2O3 stack was fabricated as follows (See Extended Data Fig. A precision source/measure unit (Agilent, B2902A) was used for the voltage application and the current measurement. As the thickness of the Al2O3 capping layer increases, the remanent polarization increases and saturates with a 1-nm-thick Al2O3. 