The Rashba-Edelstein effect (REE), which generates interfacial spin polarization and subsequent spin current, is a compelling spin-charge conversion mechanism for spintronic applications, since it's not limited by the elemental spin-orbit couplings. In this work, we demonstrate REE at Pt/ferroelectric interfaces using the recently elucidated spin-Hall Hanle effects (SHHE), in which a Larmor precession of spin polarization in a diffusion process from the interface manifest as magnetoresistance and Hall effect. We show that REE leads to a three-fold enhancement of the effective spin Hall angle in ferroelectric interface Pt/h-LuFeO3 compared to that of Pt/Al2O3, although the difference in the spin relaxation time is negligible. Modeling using SHHEs involving REE as an additional source of interfacial polarization suggests that REE can lead to an interfacial spin Hall angle (≈ 0.3) that is one order of magnitude larger than the bulk value of Pt. Our results demonstrate that a ferroelectric interface can produce large spin-charge conversion and that SHHEs are a sensitive tool for characterizing interfacial spin transport properties. Charge-spin current conversion is a fundamental process in spintronics The charge-spin conversion efficiency induced by REE is not limited by the elemental spin-orbit coupling, which is appealing for spintronic applications. In this regard, it is hypothesized that a metal/ferroelectric interface may have greatly enhanced spin-charge conversion efficiency via REE due to the large interfacial potential gradient with the advantage of non-volatile electric-field control Here we reveal the presence of REE in Pt/ferroelectric interfaces by employing the spin Hall Hanle effects (SHHEs) technique We focus on one prototypical ferroelectric family, i.e., hexagonal ferrites (h-RFeO3, R = Y, Sc, Ho-Lu) Figure The MRs in both samples show a symmetry curve that is consistent with reported SHHE in ρL, i.e., MR(Bz) and MR(Bx) are almost identical and much larger than MR(By), similar to that of spin Hall magnetoresistance To determine θSH in Pt/h-LuFeO3, the spin diffusion λs length is needed. where ρ L0 is zero-field longitudinal resistivity, d is the film thickness, κ = (1 -iΩτ s ) 1/2 is a complex quantity with i= √-1, Ω = gμ B B z /ħ is the Larmor frequency with g the gyromagnetic factor, μ B the Bohr magneton, and ħ the reduced Planck constant. The real and imaginary parts of SHHE represent the longitudinal L,SHHE and the transverse T,SHHE, respectively. It is shown that at low field regime, T,SHHE would be linear to Ω (or Bz) Once s is determined, the spin Hall angle θSH and spin relaxation time τs can be extracted subsequently from the MR ΔL(Bz) and Hall effect T(Bz) simultaneously. As shown in Fig. All the curves can be well fitted using Eq. ( Below we provide a model in which REE at the Pt/ferroelectric interface can lead to the enhancement of θSH. At the Pt/ferroelectric interface, the large electric potential difference and spin-orbit coupling adds a Rashba term in the Hamiltonian of the itinerant electrons, i.e., H ̂R ∝ σ ⃗ ⋅ (p ⃗ × z), where σ ⃗, p ⃗, and ẑ are the Pauli matrices representing the electronic spin, momentum, and surface normal unit vector To model the extra spin accumulation via REE, we use the following equations that govern the spin transport at the Pt/ferroelectric interface where q i and q ij (i, j = x, y, z) are the components of the charge and spin current density respectively in (unified) units of particle per unit time per unit area Eq. ( Eq. ( SHHEs are utilized to study the spin accumulation at the Pt/ferroelectric interface due to the Rashba-Edelstein effect. A three-fold enhancement of effective spin Hall angle was observed compared to that in Pt/Al2O3 whereas the spin relaxation times remain unchanged, corroborated by the modeling using the spin Hall Hanle process involving the Rashba-Edelstein effect as additional source of interfacial spin accumulation. The effective interfacial spin Hall angle was extracted as one order of magnitude larger than the bulk value. These results suggest that ferroelectric interfaces are promising for efficient spin-charge interconversion for future spintronic applications. We basically add a "source" of the spin polarization L R ≈ 1 when d ≫ L R , the dimensionless parameter β represents the strength of the Rashba-Edelstein effect. Given q ⃗ is only along the x direction, this source will only contribute to P y . Considering the sample geometry and follow the steps: Step (1) charge current q x ≈ -μE x = q x0 , q y ≈ 0, q z ≈ 0 Step (2) spin current q xx = -μE x P x , q xy = -μE x P y , q xz = -μE x P z q yx = 0, q yy = 0, q yz = 0 , k = √1 -jΩτ s . The corresponding spin current is where P 0 ≡ λ s D q x0 is used. The corresponding charge current is Here P x is the imaginary part of field-dependent part of P y . One can tell that the field dependent part of P x and P y are imaginary and real parts of the same complex value, which is the same case as that of the no Rashba effects. In the end, we will get a similar effect like that in SHHE but with a rescaled spin Hall angle ). Eqs. ( q