We propose and investigate an extension of the Caspar-Klug symmetry principles for viral capsid assembly to the programmable assembly of size-controlled triply-periodic polyhedra, discrete variants of the Primitive, Diamond, and Gyroid cubic minimal surfaces. Inspired by a recent class of programmable DNA origami colloids, we demonstrate that the economy of design in these crystalline assemblies -in terms of the growth of the number of distinct particle species required with the increased size-scale (e.g. periodicity) -is comparable to viral shells. We further test the role of geometric specificity in these assemblies via dynamical assembly simulations, which show that conditions for simultaneously efficient and high-fidelity assembly require an intermediate degree of flexibility of local angles and lengths in programmed assembly. Off-target misassembly occurs via incorporation of a variant of disclination defects, generalized to the case of hyperbolic crystals. The possibility of these topological defects is a direct consequence of the very same symmetry principles that underlie the economical design, exposing a basic tradeoff between design economy and fidelity of programmable, size controlled assembly. forts to design "programmable" building blocks to realize synthetic analogs of hierarchically-organized biological materials DNA nanotechnology, in particular, has multiple strategies to implement addressable assembly, and has been exploited to target and realize assemblies with a precisely defined, complex structures Design of size-controlled triply-periodic minimal surface assembly from programmable triangular particles.(A) A pair of integers (h, k) is used to define a triangulation vector, L, which connects a pair of vertices on a triangular lattice, defining the fundamental hexagonal patch. The hexagons in red, blue, and green are built with L vectors corresponding to the triangulation numbers T = 1, 3 and 7. (B) Underlying triangular faces associated with each fundamental hexagon. Triangles with the same colors represent the same subunit type. (C) From top to bottom: 2×2×2 subsets of primitive (P), gyroid (G), and diamond (D) TPMS. In each case, transparent boxes are used to highlight a single cubic unit-cell. Each cubic unit-cell is triangulated with the corresponding fundamental hexagon shown in panel (B). The shaded areas on each triangulated unit cell highlight the fundamental hexagon used in the construction. get diameters are regulated by programming their curvature, achieving finite sizes that are much larger than the subunits. The design strategy for size-controlled shells In this article we propose and explore the extension of the symmetry-based principles of CK to an entirely distinct class of programmable assemblies, triply-periodic polyhedra We show here that the high symmetries of the P, G and D structures facilitate a similar economy of design as CK capsids, arising from the commensurability of their crystallographic space-groups with their decomposition into triangular building blocks. Like CK designs of closed shells, we show how the combination of interaction specificity, encoded in specifically binding edge types, and geometric specificity, encoded by the target edge lengths of and dihedral angles between subunits, allows the programming of unit cell sizes that are, essentially, arbitrarily large compared to the subunit size. We analyze the economy of design in triply-periodic polyhedral assem-blies in terms of the scaling of the number of distinct subunits needed to achieve a given target periodicity in the crystal, and show that these "inverted" structures achieve similarly optimal scaling with increasing target size in comparison to icosohedral shells. While the economy of design deriving from symmetry guarantees a unique target ground state, it does not guarantee that it correctly assembles, and if so, at reasonable rates or under physical conditions realizable in experiments. Notably, recent experiments on self-closed tubular assemblies of DNA particles show that subunit flexibility, specifically dihedral bending, gives rise to significant off-target assembly into structures of undesired diameter The economy of the CK construction for quasispherical assemblies stems from the fact that spherical shells can be decomposed into regular triangular "subunits", corresponding to geometric structures known as deltahedra. In the original CK construction, subunits were themselves triplets of proteins that form the viral capsid CK argued that subtriangulations of the original triangular net that preserve icosahedral symmetry lead to the fewest symmetry-inequivalent positions on the closed shell, and thus require the fewest distinct subunits. Such subtriangulations are constructed from triangular subregions of a planar triangular lattice ( As shown in Fig. We use these triply-periodic triangulations of E 3 as the basis for triangular subunit designs that target the assembly of TPMS whose vertex positions map onto the corresponding minimal surface for arbitrary subtriangulation. We denote these polyhedral target structures as P T , D T and G T according to the respective cubic surface and T number. The geometric and topological data of the embedded structure -edge length, connectivity and dihedral angles -are then used to design target values for the subunit shape and interactions. In our construction, the mean edge length of a basic triangular element is fixed for all structures, while the projection subtriangulation can introduce variation in edge lengths. Fig. Unlike the CK structures, triply-periodic P T , D T and G T polyhedra have infinite genus in their target (bulk) state. Nevertheless, each structure can be characterized by a well-defined, finite size, roughly corresponding to the characteristic pore size of the structure. To quantify and compare this programmable size scale, we computed the maximal medial thickness D of each triply-periodic polyhedra The economy of design of our construction for triplyperiodic polyhedra depends on the combination of both the interaction specificity between different edge types and the geometric specificity of the edge-edge contacts. To understand the physical limits for the fidelity and assembly yield of these structures, we implemented a coarse-grained model of triangular particle assembly employed in Tyukodi et al. Here, the energy of an assembly derives from interactions of bound edges indexed by i and j, The first term describes the binding energy of the edges. We assume that edge i and edge j have a common binding affinity, ε ij = ε bind if they are programmed to interact, but do not bind otherwise. Notably, this interaction specificity, which is crucial for forming a target triplyperiodic polyhedra, is an important contrast to previous studies of capsid assembly in which all subunit interactions were identical where ⟨|l is the mean-square target edge length. To model near-equilibrium assembly behavior, we perform grand canonical Monte Carlo simulations (see Methods), which consider a single cluster of bound, triangular units held at fixed chemical potential with respect to a population of free subunits (i.e. monomers) composed of a mixture of all the triangular species needed to assemble a given triply-periodic polyhedron. To test the efficiency and quality of targeted assembly, an initial seed of the preassembled structure is prepared, and the MC algorithm considers three types of moves: 1) addition/removal of free subunits to an appropriately unbound triangle edge of the cluster; 2) vertex displacement of assembled particles; and 3) fission/fusion of edges between bound/unbound edges of the assembled cluster. Moves are accepted with the Boltzmann-weighted probability according to the change in energy, Eq. ( To consider the role of geometric specificity, we choose ε bind = -6.5k B T and chemical potential μ = -4.5k B T and vary the elastic/binding ratios. We introduce N total , the average number of assembled units in the particle cluster, as a measure of assembly efficiency. To capture the fidelity of the assembly we quantify the meanquadratic strain which is computed from the elastic ground-state of the ultimate structure to remove the influence of thermal fluctuations. We terminated simulations at 50 × 10 6 MC sweeps, or when N total = 5000. We simulated assembly trajectories for P, G, and D structures for a range of T -numbers and varying the elastic/binding ratios over four orders of magnitude: Fig. high-flexibility regime is the regime of low fidelity as indicated by the large, non-zero residual strain values Ξ. These Ξ > 0 values are evidence of assemblies that form with the correct edge matching specificity, but nevertheless have a topology that is incompatible with the target edge lengths and dihedral angles. In other words, while assembly is rapid when subunits are flexible, η s ≪ 1 or η b ≪ 1 result in highly defective, "off-target" structures, as shown for a structure like Fig. The smaller panels of Fig. These overall trends reveal that interaction specificity alone is not sufficient for reaching target assemblies. This is indeed consistent with the fact that P T , G T and D T have an identical interaction matrix for each given T , but differ in terms of the target edge lengths and dihedral angles. It is instructive to compare these observations to results of models for positive curvature capsids. While we find that interaction specificity (edge-type binding specificity) is essential for assembly of target triply-periodic polyhedral structures, small capsid structures can assemble without interaction specificity, i.e. from systems of identical subunits, within certain ranges of bending and stretching moduli In our model of triply-periodic polyhedra, bound subunits have perfect type-specificity, and hence, off-target assemblies must have the same local network of subunits but the wrong global geometry. Here, we show that the primary mechanism of mis-assembly derives from topological defects of the quasi-2D crystalline assembly. These defects take the form of point disclinations, defined relative to the target polyhedral assembly (see Fig. In summary, we have extended the economical design principles of the CK construction of closed shells to triply-periodic, negative curvature programmable assembly. In both cases, economy derives from the commensurabilty of the symmetries of a subtriangulation with the symmetry elements of the target structure. For triplyperiodic polyhedra, this requires constraining the vertices and centers of the base tile to the Wyckoff sites of appropriate symmetry. Preserving these symmetries in the sub-triangulation guarantees that the subtriangulation is composed of "redundant" copies of relatively few symmetry-inequivalent particles. However, while the high-symmetry is necessary for design economy, it is also the source of off-target misassembly. Notably, the very same rotational symmetries that anchor the sub-tilings of P T , D T and G T are sites where disclinations are possible, and these disclinations proliferate if the geometric specificity of the binding between subunits is too low. Indeed, as the example in Supporting Fig. These estimates suggest this system may be ideal for harnessing the economy of P T , D T and G T for programmed assembly of crystal structures with unit cells that are tunable to dimensions larger than those of the subunits, which is currently a challenge with assembly of colloidal or supramolecular building blocks. This limitation applies to current approaches to program the assembly of complex crystals of DNA functionalized particles Finally, we note that recent approaches to synthetic protein design have assembled icosohedral shells of highly-modular size and structure, realizing CK structures in the range of T = 4 -100 Appendix A: Triply-periodic triangulations and interaction rules Our construction of triangulations of P , G and D are based on projecting portions of planar triangular graphs on the level-set models of these minimal surfaces, in a way the preserves the symmetries of the *246 tiling of the H 2 in the respective cubic space groups of E 3 Higher T number triangulations follow from a procedure (described in detail in SI Text Sec. 1) where by the planar base triangle a, b, c, is subtriangulated according the identical construction as CK, followed by a projection of the vertex positions from the planar bases (arranged according to the space group symmetries) onto a level set model of P, G or D via simple gradient flow. This procedure, in general, results in distortions of the dihedral angles between edge-sharing triangular faces, as well as lengths of edges, geometric information which we then record and define to set the target values on triangular subunits and their selective interactions (see SI Text Sec. 2). For the assembly simulations, we use a model previously developed for icosahedral shell self assembly Each triangular subunit consists of 3 edges, each of which may be of distinct interaction type. The interaction matrix defines which type is allowed to bind to which type. If there are n s subunit species in the simulation, there are at most 3n s edge types with (3n s ) 2 different interactions, i.e. binding energies, bending moduli and dihedral angles. In addition, each of the 3n s edge types may have their own stretching moduli and rest lengths. In the simulations presented in the main text, we fixed the binding energies for all allowed edge pair types to the same value. Similarly, bending moduli for all pairs and stretching moduli for all edge types are also set to the same value. Moreover, each allowed edge type pair has its own dihedral angle. The simulation follows the growth of a single structure in the grand canonical ensemble, i.e. the structure is immersed in a bath of freely diffusing subunits held at fixed concentration. Concentrations (or, equivalently, the chemical potentials) for all species are set to be equal. The dynamics is governed by a series of Monte Carlo moves with fixed relative rates. The moves allow for subunit exchange between the structure and the bath, internal binding and unbinding of edges and thermal fluctuation of vertices with no change in topology. There are a total number of 11 moves and each move is carefully designed to satisfy detailed balance with its reverse move Given a structure assembled with the matching rules of triply-periodic polyhedra, we can determine disclination charges by considering closed paths around encircling the disclinations like the one shown on the Supporting Fig. where Φ is the desired angle around disclination vertex v whose absolute value can be found can be determined as |Φ| = arccos[(Tr( Rv ) -1)/2]. With the rotation angle Φ the disclination charge of a defect is defined as the angle deficit s = 2π -|Φ|.