The Am 5d-5f resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) data of americium sesquioxide were measured at incident photon energies throughout the Am O4,5 edges. The experiment was supported by calculations using several model approaches. While the experimental Am O4,5 x-ray absorption spectrum of Am2O3 is compared with the spectra calculated in the framework of atomic multiplet and crystal-field multiplet theories and Anderson impurity model (AIM) for the Am(III) system, the recorded Am 5d-5f RIXS data are essentially reproduced by the crystal-field multiplet calculations. A combination of the experimental scattering geometry and theoretical analysis of the character of the electronic states probed during the RIXS process confirms that the ground state of Am2O3 is singlet Γ1. An appearance of the low-intense charge-transfer satellite in the Am 5d-5f RIXS spectra at an energy loss of ∼5.5 eV, suggests weak Am 5f -O 2p hybridization which is in agreement with AIM estimations of the 5f occupancy from spectroscopic data in Am2O3 as being 6.05 electrons. The importance of americium oxides in the nuclear cycle is well recognized. Besides the intention to have them as a part of fuels for the fourth generation (GEN IV) nuclear reactors, the use of these oxides for the power sources in the deep space missions is also being exploited X-ray spectroscopy is an important tool for this type of studies and allows for measurements on very small quantities of material in question. It can provide information about the chemical state of actinides in various systems, (non)stoichiometry, oxygen/metal (O/M) ratio, local symmetry of the environment and charge distribution, as well as other parameters important for nuclear fuel performance. One of the attractive techniques is resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) which is very sensitive to changes in chemical state and in symmetry of the environment of the studied element, in particular by probing the elementary low-energy excitations (5f -5f excitations in case of actinide systems). The availability of high resolution allows one to monitor the distribution of the electronic states in greater detail. In contrast to commonly used x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), the RIXS resolution is not limited by the core-hole lifetime broadening and depends solely on the instrumental resolution. However, a number of pioneering valence-tocore RIXS studies at U 3d edges of uranium compounds Soon after the experimental proof At actinide 5d thresholds, the main absorption edge is very broad due to so-called autoionization processes as it can be seen from XAS measurements (see e.g. Refs. Although, initially pioneering 5d-5f RIXS studies at the actinide O 4,5 edges were carried out for oxides of uranium Here we present first Am 5d-5f RIXS data of Am 2 O 3 recorded at a number of incident photon energies at the Am O 4,5 edges. The data are analyzed with help of the model calculations. The many-particle theoretical approaches turns out to be successful in reproducing the experimental spectra due to a significant localization of the 5f states in Am 2 O 3 . The Am oxide sample used for measurements was fabricated by technique used to prepare radionuclide counting plates at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL; see the "Preparation of counting sources" subsection in Ref. A specially designed sample holder, which is described in Refs. Experiments in the energy range of the Am O 4,5 xray absorption edge (5d → 5f, 7p transitions) of Am 2 O 3 were performed at beamline 7.0.1 of the ALS, LBNL employing a spherical grating monochromator The XAS spectra at the actinide 5d edges were calculated using the formalism described in Ref. To simplify the calculations of the Am 5d-5f RIXS map around the Am(III) O 4,5 thresholds, the crystalfield multiplet theory approach was used because the Am 5f -O 2p charge-transfer effects were not expected to be significant in americium sesquioxide (see e.g. Ref. where, |g⟩, |m⟩, and |f ⟩ are the ground,intermediate, and final states with energies E g , E m , and E f , respectively, while ω ′ and ω represent energies of incident and scattered photons, respectively. D q is the dipole operator, Γ stands for the intermediate state lifetime (Lorentzian FWHM) and q and q ′ are polarizations of the light with respect to the quantization axis. The experimental geometry for RIXS measurements was taken into account in the calculations as described in Ref. The required Slater integrals F k , G k and R k , spinorbit coupling constants ζ and matrix elements were obtained with the TT-MULTIPLETS package which combines Cowan's atomic multiplet program The recorded Am O 4,5 XAS spectrum of Am 2 O 3 is displayed in Fig. Fig. It has been established (see e.g. In the crystal-field multiplet calculations, Wybourne's crystal field parameters were set to B 4 0 =-0.835 eV and B 6 0 =0.100 eV based on the estimates for the case of Am(III) in ThO 2 Furthermore, the Am O 4,5 XAS spectrum of Am 2 O 3 was calculated using the AIM approach (which also included the full multiplet structure) as shown in Fig. An inspection of Fig. To make a comparison with experimental RIXS data, we calculated the Am 5d-5f RIXS map of Am 2 O 3 for incident photon energies varying throughout the Am O 4,5 edges as shown in Fig. The experimental Am 5d-5f RIXS spectra of Am 2 O 3 recorded with the 400 lines/mm grating at several incident photon energies at the Am O 4,5 edges are compared with the calculated results in Fig. An inspection of Fig. The first RIXS structure at the energy loss of ∼360 meV corresponds to transitions to the Γ 4 and Γ 3 states which are split by 0.001 eV. This structure is characteristic for the Am(III) chemical state (see Fig. For RIXS spectra displayed in Fig. In RIXS spectra recorded at excitation energies between 113.5 and 117.0 eV, a new structure at ∼5.5 eV below the elastic peak can be identified which behavior upon changing excitation energy is indicated by a dashed line. This structure follows the increasing excitation energy (follows the elastic peak) and can be assigned to RIXS structures. Since the crystal-field multiplet calculations do not suggest the existence of the significant RIXS structures at the energy losses higher than 4.6 eV, the new structure can be attributed to the result of the Am 5f -O 2p charge transfer (charge transfer satellite). For the description of the ground state as a mixture of the 5f 6 and 5f 7 υ 1 configurations, the RIXS transitions to the anti-bonding combination of the Γ 1 character is also forbidden in the scattering geometry employed, while some transitions to the weakly bonded states of the 5f 7 υ 1 configuration are allowed (see also discussion in Ref. The observed 5.5-eV energy loss of the charge-transfer satellite is consistent with the choice of the value of Am 5f -O 2p charge-transfer energy ∆=6.5 eV as a parameter in our AIM calculations (see also Ref. The obtained Am 5d-5f RIXS data helps characterize the electronic structure of Am 2 O 3 . The observed agreement between recorded RIXS spectra and calculated results using the crystal-field multiplet approach indicates the significantly localized character of the Am 5f states in this oxide. The analysis of the RIXS structures by comparing the experimental and calculated data confirms that the ground state of Am 2 O 3 is singlet Γ 1 of the 5f 6 configuration. The experimental scattering geometry used, which leads to restrictions for specific RIXS transitions, made the analysis easier, despite the presence of the intense elastic peak due to high reflectivity contribution. The observation of the weak charge-transfer satellite in the Am 5d-5f RIXS spectra at the energy loss of ∼5.5 eV is consistent with Am 5f -O 2p charge-transfer energy ∆=6.5 eV used in the AIM calculations of XAS and x-ray photoemission spectra of Am 2 O 3 (Ref. 