Based on the first-principles electronic structure calculations, we investigate the magnetic and electronic properties of transition-metal-doped Pb10(PO4)6O with the Pb atom substituted by various transition metals. The 3d orbitals of the doped transition metals are distributed near the Fermi energy and exhibit strong spin-polarization, resulting in the local magnetic moment. With the doped metal varying from V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, to Zn, the moment changes gradually from 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 4.0, 3.0, 2.0, 1.0, to 0 μB, while the electronic structure is modulated progressively due to the continuous change of total charge. Moreover, the flat bands near the Fermi energy are also found in the V, Cr, and Fe-doped lead-apatite, similar to the Cu-doped system. Our work not only provides the critical comparative information for investigating the Cu-doped lead-apatite, but also suggest a category of diluted magnetic semiconductor. The realization of superconductivity at room temperature and ambient pressure has always been a longstanding target in physics, chemistry, and materials science. Although some great achievements have been made in the superconductivity field in the past years In the theoretical researches, Griffin first posted the theoretical analysis of the electronic structure of Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O and the flat bands near the Fermi energy, which is usually related to the strong electronic correlation and lead to the novel physics Up to now, apart from Cu, other 3d transition metals (TM) have not been used to prepare the sample in experiments. At the same, there is few theoretical studies to involve other 3d metals doping. We know that the doping of Cu and other 3d metals are very likely to induce the similar physical phenomenon in the lead apatite. Different 3d elements doping can effectively modulate and manipulate the magnetism in modified lead apatite because of the continuous adjustment of d electron number from one to another. At present, the sharp resistivity jump, ferromagnetism, soft ferromagnetism, and diamagnetism have been observed in the different experiments, and the reason of resistivity jump and the true magnetism are still unknown and mysterious. We believe that different 3d transition metals doping can provide an important reference and comparison for investigating the Cu-doped lead apatite. Therefore, what changes in the magnetic and electronic properties will be brought about by the different 3d metals doping is a topic worth paying attention to. The plane wave pseudopotential method enclosed in Vienna Ab initio simulation package (VASP) The atomic structure of Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O compound is sketched in Fig. In the calculations, the Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O with x = 1 is adopted to simulate the Pb 10-x Cu x (PO 4 ) 6 O (0.9 ≤ x ≤ 1.1) synthesized in experiments. The 3d TM elements from V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, to Zn are used to act as the dopants because their 3d electrons increase one by Secondly, the 6h site is not always the energetically favorable site for all TM atoms. Namely, V, Mn, Co, Ni, Zn dopants in 4f site correspond to the lower energy and more stable configurations, while Cr, Cu, and Fe dopants favorite the 6h site. To show this clearly, we build the Table . II and use the checkmarks to mark the low energy structure. To our knowledge, the selective substitution dependent on the TM element type in the doped compound is rarely reported. Although which of 6h and 4f sites has been identified to be favorable energetically for a specific TM atom dopant, the 6h or 4f site with higher energy is likely to be filled under some preparation conditions and processes in experiments. To provide more information for other researchers, we present the simulated electronic structures for the two substitution cases. The electronic structure of Pb 9 TM(PO 4 ) 6 O with the TM replacing Pb(1) and Pb(2) is computed with the GGA + U method with the empirical Hubbard U values. For the Pb(1) replacement case, the total density of states (DOS) and projected DOS on the atomic orbitals are presented in Fig. Fig. The continuous adjustability of electronic structure is a unique feature of TM-doped lead apatite. When the . III. To explain the variation of electronic structure including the magnetic moment, we display the projected DOS on 3d orbitals of the doped TM atom in the case of replacing Pb(1), shown in Fig. For Cu-doped lead apatite, the 1 × 1 × 2 and 2 × 1 × 1 magnetic supercells are built to study the exchange coupling between two Cu moments. The exchange coupling of two Cu atoms in the 1 × 1 × 2 supercell or 2 × 1 × 1 supercell represents the magnetic coupling along c or a axis direction (a is equal to b axis). With the dopant Cu at 6h site, the weak exchange coupling along c direction is less than 0.08 meV, and in the ab plane, the coupling less than 0.005 meV. Therefore, although there is large local moment around the dopant, the coupling between them is too weak to form the stable magnetic order in the Cu-doped Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O, which make the compound to take on some paramagnetic properties. Other TM-doped lead apatite compounds are similar to the Cu-doped Pb 10 (PO 4 ) 6 O. By the first-principles calculations, we study the crystal, electronic, magnetic properties of TM-doped leadapatite. For different TM atoms in Pb 9 TM(PO 4 ) 6 O, the preferred Wyckoff site, 6h or 4f , is identified. The electronic state near the Fermi energy is dominated by the TM 3d and O 2p orbitals, and the spin polarization of TM 3d electrons result in a local moment. From Mn to Zn, their moments vary continuously with the element number increasing. These moments are separated in the compound with a diluted state and there are very weak interactions between each other. Most of Pb 9 TM(PO 4 ) 6 O compounds are determined to have a semiconducting ground state with the energy gap larger than 2.0 eV except for 0.9 eV of Cu-doped system. More importantly, the features of flat band and sharp DOS peak near the Fermi are found in the V, Fe, and Cr-doped lead apatite compounds, and similar physical properties like the Cu-doped system can be expected to be measured in them. FIG. 2. Total DOS and Projected DOS of Pb9TM(PO4)6O with the different TM atom doping at the 6h site.