Nonlinear optical (NLO) responses have garnered tremendous interest for decades due to their fundamental and technological interests. The theory and calculations of NLO responses including electron-hole interactions, which is especially crucial for reduced-dimensional materials, however, remain underdeveloped. Here, we develop an ab initio approach to calculate second-order nonlinear responses (such as second harmonic generation (SHG) and shift current) with excitonic effects in an exciton-state basis, going beyond the independentparticle approximation. We compute SHG in monolayer h-BN and MoS2 employing exciton states from GW-Bethe-Salpeter equation (GW-BSE) calculations and show both materials exhibit huge excitonic enhancement. The physical origin of the enhancement is directly understood through the coupling amplitudes among exciton states, assisted with diagrammatic representations. Our method provides an accurate and ab initio description of second-order NLO responses, capturing self-energy and electron-hole interaction effects. In low-dimensional semiconductors, strongly correlated electron-hole pairs known as excitons (either strongly bound or in resonance with the two-particle continuum) dominate the low-energy excitations and play a key role in light-matter interactions. Understanding excitonic effects in various optical responses is essential for developing optoelectronic devices and applications for quantum information and sensing, as well as energy harvesting. It is by now established that strong excitonic enhancement in light absorption in linear response in lowdimensional materials is a consequence of quantum confinement and reduced screening Second harmonic generation (SHG) is a typical nonlinear optical (NLO) response where the emitted light frequency is twice that of the incident light Direct current (DC) generation from second-order optical responses (without p-n junction, called the bulk photovoltaic effect) is another topic of great fundament and practical interests such as in photovoltaic devices. Shift current is an intrinsic mechanism for the bulk photovoltaic effect and has drawn much attention through the years Ab initio methods for calculating second order optical responses such as SHG and shift current within the independent particle (IP) approximation are well-established Motivated by these considerations, we develop in this work an ab initio approach based on an exciton-state formalism to study second order optical responses such as SHG and shift current at the GW-BSE level. As examples, we apply this approach to investigate SHG of monolayer h-BN and MoS2. We show that both materials exhibit strong excitonic enhancement in SHG, while the origin of the enhancement is different for the two materials. Through an analysis assisted by Feynman diagrammatic representations, we identify that the large excitonic enhancement for monolayer h-BN is because of the concurrence of bright 1s and 2p exciton states in the same material; on the other hand, in monolayer MoS2, it is due to the existence of multiple bright C-series excitons and the strong inter-exciton coupling among them. Applying a perturbative approach to the equation of motion of the interacting density matrix !,"# (2ω ; ω , ω ) where e is the electron charge and V is the total volume of the crystal. The notation (λ ↔ ν) , where r -,k " is the single-particle matrix element of the electron coordinate r between electronic states |ck⟩ and |vk⟩. Treating the inter-band and intra-band matrix element of r separately, the interexciton coupling matrix elements are expressed as R () " = Y () " + Q () " , where . In the expression of Q () " matrix elements, we introduce the generalized derivative operator being intraband Berry connections. This generalized derivative operator appears naturally due to the intraband coupling in the length gauge The terms in Eq. 1 can be visualized using Feynman diagrams. The Feynman diagram approach for NLO responses was systematically introduced in Refs. As shown in Fig. We compute the susceptibility tensor χ !"# by first solving the GW-BSE equation to obtain the excitons' excitation energy and envelope functions As a demonstration, we first study the SHG responses of monolayer h-BN, which is a large bandgap semiconductor with strong excitonic effects In the following, we investigate in more details the part of the spectrum with frequencies being half of the linear optical transition energies. This frequency region, in which the peaks denoted with 1/2 occur, is commonly focused on in SHG experiments The coupling between 1s-like states and 2p-like states is not sufficient to yield a large coupling amplitude for N 7<AB,8<CD . The oscillator strength of the 2p-like states (i.e., excitation from the ground state) should be large as well, which is not common in conventional materials with dipole-allowed interband transitions. It was found that monolayer h-BN is quite unusual because one of the 2p-like excitons are also optically bright The excitonic enhancement in SHG at low frequencies of monolayer h-BN is however not a general feature of other materials. It is well-known that peak A in the monolayer MoS2 absorption spectrum originates from the 1s excitons at the K and K′ valley. Above the band gap, peak C, which consists of electron-hole pairs near Γ, K and K′ valleys, is the most pronounced peak In Fig. To understand the distinctive enhancement effects on peak C1/2 and A1/2, we again analyze the exciton optical coupling matrix elements and the product coupling amplitude N 78 for monolayer MoS2. Figure The peak C1/2, on the other hand, is related to a larger set of coupling amplitudes, as depicted by the upper orange brackets in Fig. ) can be simultaneously large, leading to a substantial product coupling amplitude, as indicated in the diagram in Fig. In conclusion, we have developed an efficient method based on an exciton-state basis formulation to compute nonlinear optical responses with excitonic effects from first principles. Applying this method to monolayer h-BN and MoS2, we have elucidated the microscopic origin of excitonic enhancements on their SHG responses. A comparison of the two materials suggests strong trigonal warping is essential for large excitonic enhancement in this class of hexagonal 2D materials 