The properties of liquid Si-Ge binary systems at melting conditions deviate from those expected by the ideal alloy approximation. Particularly, a non-linear dependence of the dielectric functions occurs with the reflectivity of liquid Si-Ge reaching a maximum at 50% Ge content, being 10% higher than in pure Si or Ge. Using ab initio methodologies, we modelled liquefied Si-Ge alloys, unveiling very high coordination numbers and poor symmetry in the first coordination shell with respect to Si and Ge, related to different bonding properties. We simulated optical functions, quantitatively replicating the aforementioned reflectivity trend and we highlighted a direct relationship between atomic structure and optical properties, indicating that the unusual optics arises from Si-Ge higher local coordination characterized by low symmetry. We forecast further implications for the overall class of these alloys. These findings expand our comprehension of liquefied semiconductors and are essential for implementing controlled laser melting procedures to highly dope these materials for advanced transistors, superconductors, sensors and plasmonic devices. Group IV based materials constitute an intriguing type of systems since they manifest a variety of crystal structures, allotropes and polytypes with a consequent richness of related electroptical properties. We performed Car-Parrinello MD, making use of 288 atoms 3 × 3 × 4 supercells, shown in Figure We utilized key functions to examine structural properties in our MD study: the radial distribution function g(r), representing the likelihood of finding a particle at a distance r from a reference particle, n(r), indicating the number of coordinated atoms within a sphere of radius r, and the angular distribution function g(θ), determining the probability of bond angles. function further indicates that the distribution of bond angle in Si-Ge is uneven, suggesting a lack of symmetry within the first coordination shell. On overall, these data demonstrate that Si-Ge exhibits higher coordination than pure elements due to the formation of a closer packed first coordination shell, whom indeed stems from the chemical bonds involved in Si-Ge. By decomposing the Si-Ge n(r) function into inter-and intra-element contributions in Figure Summing up all these data, the increased coordination in the alloy stem from Si atoms in the first coordination shell prioritizing the formation of stronger, more directional σ bonds with neighboring Si atoms, while, also bonding with Ge atoms. This would nearly double the total number of bonds, being at the origin of the overall enhanced Si-Ge coordination. The liquid alloy structural properties differ from those of crystals, where bond lengths follows the trend Si (2.31 Å). < Si-Ge (2.42 Å) < Ge (2.50 Å), CNs are ∼ 4.0 for both Si-Ge and pure elements and bonding energies/patterns change linearly with the increased Ge content (For more details see Figure Having understood the structural and bonding properties of the liquids at their melting point, we turned to optical functions. The reflectivity (R) trends at the melting point, shown in Figure To deepen our understanding of optical results, we analyzed the real and imaginary components of the dielectric functions in Figure (1) where ω is the excitation energy, ω p is the plasmon energy, and Γ is the damping factor. Consistently with previous studies, As indicated by our previous study, In conclusion we compared the structural and optical properties at the melting point for liquid Si, Ge and Si-Ge from ab initio molecular dynamics. From the structural side, our results highlight a significant difference among the three systems with Si-Ge presenting, a higher coordination number of 8.6 than 5.7 (4.8) of Si (Ge) and a lower symmetry of the shell. Concerning the optical properties, Si-Ge shows higher reflectivity values of the liquid near the melting point if compared to the pure elements, in agreement with experimental stud-ies. 