A lightly doped single-band Hubbard model on a two leg ladder exhibits a Luther-Emery phase, while the three-band Hubbard ladder behaves as a Luttinger liquid upon hole doping. In order to understand this discrepancy, we present a systematic density-matrix renormalization group study of the three-band Hubbard model on two-leg cylinders with further-neighbor particle hoppings. The inclusion of the longer-range hopping is motivated by the studies of the single-band Hubbard model in which the further-neighbor hopping terms are suggested to be crucial for the unconventional superconductivity. When the longer-range hopping parameters are small, the ground state is a Luttinger liquid having mutually commensurate superconducting, charge and spin density wave correlations. Increasing the longer-range hopping drives a transition into a Luther-Emery phase with quasi-long ranged superconducting and charge orders but short-ranged spin-spin correlations. By down-folding the three-band Hubbard model into an effective t-t ′ -J-J ′ model, we find that in the Luther-Emery phase, both the nearest and second neighbor kinetic energies are enhanced due to an effective increase of copper-oxygen hybridization. Amplifying inter-cell oxygen orbital hopping mirrors the benefits of reducing the charge transfer energy, causing doped holes to favor oxygen orbitals and strengthening superconducting pairing. The three-band Hubbard model, which is first proposed by Emery In the context of high temperature superconductivity, extensive studies have been conducted on the single-band Hubbard model However, discrepancies between these two models are not negligible. Although it has been extensively studied in the context of high temperature superconductivity, no evidence of PDW has been found in the single-band Hubbard model. More strikingly, the single-band Hubbard ladder exhibits a Luther-Emery phase with dominant superconducting and charge orders upon light doping In order to understand these discrepancies, we study the three-band Hubbard model with longer-range hopping on a two-leg ladder. The inclusion of the longerrange hopping is motivated by previous studies on the single-band Hubbard model, in which the further neighbor particle hoppings are essential for superconductivity The rest of the manuscript is organized as follow: in Sec. II we describe the model Hamiltonian and illustrate the phase diagram; in Sec. III we show various ground state correlations and discuss how the hopping parameters affect the ground state properties; in Sec. IV we present an analysis of down-folding the three-band Hub-bard model to an effective t-t ′ -J-J ′ model using the exact diagonalization (ED) method; and finally in Sec. V we summarize our results. We use the density-matrix renormalization group (DMRG) method We study the following model Hamiltonian in the hole language: where the kinetic term is defined as T αβ = i,j;σ t αβ (c α † i,σ c β j,σ + h.c.), and α, β belongs to each kind of orbitals. We take into account four types of hopping terms in this model as shown in the top panel of Fig. We calculate the following correlation functions to study the ground state properties of the systems. These include the spin-spin correlation function the charge density-density fluctuation correlation function the single particle Green function and the spin-singlet SC pair-pair correlation function Here ∆ † represents the spin-singlet Cooper pair creation operator between neighboring sites In the bottom panel of Fig. When t dd and t ′ pp are both small and positive, the ground state of the system is consistent with that of the Luttinger liquid phase with power-law single particle, PDW, SDW and CDW correlations. However, different with the single-band Hubbard model, the SC correlation (Fig. If the value of B ≤ A, the overall fluctuation has a spatial oscillation around zero, which suggests the presence of the PDW order. Our results are consistent with this, where we find that A ≈ 0.01, B ≈ 0.001 when t dd = t ′ pp = 0. For t dd = t ′ pp = 0.2, we find that A ≈ 0.006, B ≈ 0.02. The charge density properties of the system can be described by the charge density profile n α (x, y) and its rung average ρ α (x) = Ly y=1 n α (x, y)/L y . Consistent with previous studies where A Q and A 2Q are the amplitudes, φ 1 and φ 2 are the phase shifts and n 0 is the mean density. It has been shown that the 2Q charge order usually competes with the superconductivity By increasing the parameters to the larger positive values, the system enters a distinct d-wave SC phase with dominant power-law superconducting correlations but exponentially decaying single-particle and spin-spin correlations. In the d-wave SC phase, the short-ranged spin-spin correlation is mutually commensurate with the charge correlation at the wavevector Q, although both of them are incommensurate on the finite lattice with open boundaries in the longer direction. Contrary to the Luttinger liquid phase with small further neightor electron hoppings, we find that in this dwave SC phase the coefficient B is greater than A . Moreover, the charge density modulation has only one characteristic wave vector Q (Fig. The results above show that the inter-cell hopping terms enhance the SC correlations while suppressing the spin-spin correlation. This is closely connected to the results of charge transfer energy which also suggests that the density distribution is associated with the intertwined orders in the charge transfer insulators As a complementary comparison, we have computed the SC pairing correlation for different charge transfer energies ∆ pd while all the other parameters remain the same. In Fig. The low energy physics of the three-band Hubbard model (or CuO 2 plane) can be mapped to an effective t-t ′ -J-J ′ model in Eq. 11. Following the prescription in Ref. To further support this argument, we have also calculated the ground state properties of the t-t ′ -J-J ′ model on a N = 64 × 2 ladder with DMRG, using the parameters listed in Table To summarize, we have studied the ground state properties of the lightly doped three-band Hubbard model with longer-range hopping terms on two-leg cylinders. By tuning these hopping coefficients positively, we observed a quantum phase transition from a Luttinger liquid phase characterized by intertwined PDW, CDW, and SDW correlations to a d-wave SC phase (i.e., Luther-Emery phase). Through this transition, the pairing order intensifies, changing from a mixed SC and PDW order to a predominantly d-wave symmetry SC order. This transition is underlined by modifications in the band structure and density distributions stemming from the tuning of hopping parameters. Our computational analyses pinpointed an intriguing correlation: the increase in the t ′ pp parameter mimics the effect of a reduced effective charge transfer energy, ∆ pd . By down-folding the three-band Hubbard model to the effective t-t ′ -J-J ′ model, we observed an increase of both the nearest and second neighbor hopping parameters and the ratio of J/t, when entering the Luther-Emery phase. This finding sheds light on the question "why the lightly doped three-band Hubbard ladder behaves as a Luttinger liquid but not the Luther-Emery liquid, as the singleband Hubbard model does". From our small cluster study we found that although these two models were closely related, the parameters of the original three-band Hubbard model did not have a strong enough hybridization between orbitals. However, by introducing longerrange hopping terms, the Luther-Emery phase emerges in the vicinity of the Luttinger liquid phase. In this study, we have examined the effect of furtherneighbor particle hopping terms on the ground state properties of the three-band Hubbard model on two-leg cylinders. It is worth noting that the recovery of the Luther-Emery phase on the three-band Hubbard model can also be achieved by introducing long-range Coulomb interactions Nevertheless, the doped holes (the increase of the hole density upon doping) have both t dd and t ′ pp dependencies. With the increase of t ′ pp , the doped holes on both O x and O y decreases. With the increase of t dd , the doped holes on O x and O y have opposite trends, and the number of doped holes on copper sites decreases. 