We study the current-phase relation (CPR) of an InSb-Al nanowire Josephson junction in parallel magnetic fields up to 700 mT. At high magnetic fields and in narrow voltage intervals of a gate under the junction, the CPR exhibits π-shifts. The supercurrent declines within these gate intervals and shows asymmetric gate voltage dependence above and below them. We detect these features sometimes also at zero magnetic field. The observed CPR properties are reproduced by a theoretical model of supercurrent transport via interference between direct transmission and a resonant localized state. A Josephson junction (JJ) consists of two superconductors (S) and a weak link between them that supports transport of Cooper pairs in the form of a non-dissipative supercurrent A π-shift in the current-phase relation (CPR) of a JJ can occur due to spin-splitting of the Andreev levels in an external magnetic field. Once the splitting is of the order of the superconducting gap, the minimum of the ground state energy moves from the 0-phase to the π-phase, and the junction undergoes a 0π transition In the above works that study JJs in hybrid semiconductor-superconductor nanowires, the CPR has been measured only at low parallel magnetic fields (up to several tens of mT). Studying CPR of nanowire JJs in high parallel fields is motivated by various proposals for detecting signatures of a topological phase transition in supercurrent measurements In this Letter, we embed two hybrid InSb-Al nanowire JJs into a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) and we study the CPR of one JJ at parallel magnetic fields that are unprecedentedly high for Albased nanowire JJs -exceeding 700 mT. At zero magnetic field, localized states in the junction are identified by observing resonances in the normal-state conductance. When the localized states become involved in the superconducting transport as they are tuned close to the Fermi energy by a gate under the junction, the supercurrent exhibits asymmetric amplitude modulation by the gate. In these gate intervals at zero magnetic field, either pairs of 0π transitions give rise to π-regions in the CPR, or the supercurrent is enhanced with constant phase. We further investigate the CPR of the nanowire JJ by increasing parallel magnetic field and find that high fields can enlarge π-regions or drive 0π transitions in the CPR. In order to understand these phenomena, we develop a model involving a transmission channel and a localized resonant state inside a single nanowire JJ. This model can reproduce the main interesting features observed in the experiment by considering the interference between the transmission channel and the localized state. This interference effect of supercurrent represents a novel, superconducting version of the well-known Fano effect The nanowire SQUID is introduced in Fig. We characterize the SQUID in the standard fourterminal setup where a bias current I b is applied and a voltage drop V is measured between the source and drain. V -I b traces are measured while the flux through the loop is swept by varying B y . The measurement is performed at B z = 0 mT and B z = 600 mT (see Fig. We first pinch-off the reference arm and measure the differential conductance dI/dV b of JJ1 in a two-terminal setup with the standard lock-in configuration We proceed by studying the CPR in another gate voltage interval, that is above the one presented in Fig. Common features in Fig. The simultaneous presence of the localized state and the background transmission motivates us to explain the asymmetric resonant features by considering the interference between the localized state and direct transmission. Our motivation originates from such mechanism giving rise to the peculiar asymmetry of Fano resonances We develop a model for the transport through a nanowire JJ, in which a localized state and a directtransmission channel are involved. The top panel in Fig. 1 , E 1 in order for the second dot to model the transmission channel. Then, we can neglect the influence of the gate voltage and magnetic field on the second dot, and we also neglect its charging energy. Importantly, there is a direct tunnel coupling with the rate κ between the two dots, that allows for the interference between them. Additional non-trivial elements are tunneling rates γ L,R that cannot be ascribed to a certain dot, but are required to describe tunneling of a superposition state of the two dots. These parameters are at an intermediate scale, The charging energy U of the first dot in general cannot be neglected. In Fig. Figure The theoretical model reproduces the magnetic fielddriven 0π transitions reported in the experiment. The supercurrent suppression inside the π-regions and the asymmetrical modulation outside the π-regions have been captured by the model in which the interference between the direct-transmission channel and the localized state is considered. 0π transitions at zero magnetic field are also reproduced by the model with a sufficiently large on-site interaction and the typical features of suppressed supercurrent inside the π-regions and the asymmetrical modulation outside the π-regions still remain (see Fig. In conclusion, we report on the CPR properties of an InSb-Al nanowire JJ in high magnetic fields. The supercurrent of the device is sharply and asymmetrically modulated in narrow intervals of the junction electrochemical potential where a localized state is involved in the transport. In these intervals, high parallel magnetic fields can drive 0π transitions with π-shifted CPR inbetween two 0-regions. The 0π transitions are favored by the on-site interaction in the localized state and can also occur at zero magnetic field. These phenomena can be explained by a theoretical model which involves a direct-transmission channel and a resonant localized state inside a single JJ. When one considers the interference between the direct transmission and the localized state, the supercurrent obtained in an effective Fano-resonance regime exhibits CPR features as in the experiment. Our study, thus, introduces a superconducting counterpart of the Fano effect and shows how such effect can lead to 0-π transitions in high magnetic fields. All transport measurements are performed at ∼ 20 mK base temperature inside a dilution refrigerator equipped with a vector magnet. The conductance measurement in Fig. The switching current measurements are performed in a four-terminal setup in which two terminals are connected to a current-source setting a bias current I b , and the other two terminals are connected to a voltmeter measuring a voltage drop V across the device. Depending on the way how I b is ramped, either a slow or a fast method for switching current measurement is used. When using the slow method, I b is swept in steps of 20 -40 pA, and V is recorded for each I b . Switching current can then be extracted from the recorded V -I b traces. The slow method was used for the 2D-maps in Fig. A scheme of the setup for fast switching current measurements is shown in Fig. V ib V ic . In our work, I c was extracted for five AWG periods for each parameter set-point. The final I sw was calculated as an average of the five I c values. Delays due to the parasitic capacitance in the circuit, in principle, can cause an overestimate of I c -as the V ic output is updated with a delay with respect to the switch in V . However, from the specifications of the components used in our setup, this delay is estimated to be ∼ 25 μs at the given frequency and thus has practically negligible effect in our measurements where each ramp takes 100 ms. In this Section, we establish a theoretical model to describe the normal and superconducting transport in the situation where a featureless direct transmission in a single channel is combined with that via a resonant state. Technically, it is derived from a two quantum dot model where the channel is represented as a dot with the level width that exceeds much the level width of the dot representing the resonant state. We believe that the model is applicable and useful in many situations not being restricted to concrete experimental conditions at hand. This is why we give here a detailed derivation, include the factors like strong spin-orbit interaction that are not manifested in our experiment, and provide the general examples not necessarily related to the current observations. In this subsection, we give the Hamiltonians of the constituents of our model. We start with a dot Hamiltonian. It involves on-site annihilation operators dα , α being the spin index, and reads nα = d † α dα . The single-particle Hamiltonian reads B being the magnetic field, σ being the vector of Pauli matrices. Importantly, we treat the interaction in the mean-field approximation. If there is a natural quantization axis (that can be absent in the presence of spin-orbit interaction in the coupling to the leads), the mean field gives the following additions to the single-particle Hamiltonian, In general situation, The advantage of this mean-field scheme is that it delivers exact results in the absence of tunnel coupling. In particular, at zero magnetic field the ground state corresponds to single occupation of the dot in the interval U > Eμ > 0. At the ends of the interval, sharp transitions bring the dot to the states of zero and double occupation. The scheme is approximate in the presence of tunnel coupling, yet we use it for the lack of better general approach to interaction. We introduce annihilation operators in the leads ĉk,α where k labels the states of quasi-continuous spectrum in the leads. The states k are distributed over the leads and those are labelled with a. We assume the states k are invariant with respect to time inversion. The leads are described by the usual BSC Hamiltonian ξ k are the energies of the corresponding states. The superconducting order parameter ∆ a is different in different leads. To describe normal leads, we just put ∆ a = 0. The tunnel coupling to the states is described by the following Hamiltonian For time-reversible case, the tunnel amplitudes are given by with real t k , t k . Of course, the multitude of tunneling amplitudes comes to the answers only in a handful of parameters. One of such parameters is the decay rate from the dot to the continuous spectrum of the lead a, One can disregard the dependence of the rates on the energy ε. In this subsection, we will derive the currents in the nanostructure assuming the leads are normal and are kept at different filling factors. We do this derivation for an arbitrary number of the leads and dots, and later specify this for two dots and two terminals. Let us consider the following Hamiltonian where we do not specify spin or dot structure The Heisenberg equations read The current operators are thus given by We solve for operators ĉk , , and subsequently for dα , where the Green's function obeys and It is also useful to introduce partial Σ that describe the decay to a certain lead, With this, in the above expression, we assume summation over t ′ , t ′′ , k ′ . We substitute this into the current operator, average over the quantum state replacing ⟨ĉ 0 † k ĉ0 k ⟩ = f k and get two contributions corresponding to two terms in Eq. 14. The contribution A depends only on the filling factor in the lead a and reads where Ḡ(t, t ′ ) ≡ G † (t ′ , t), The contribution B depends on filling factors in all leads We switch to the energy representation. To deal with the tunnel amplitudes, we will use the following relation Γa characterizing the decay from all dots to the lead a. Conventionally, we will disregard the energy dependence of Γ (since we are working close to the Fermi level). With this, where we have taken into account that the filling factor depends on energy only, and disregarded real part of Σ (that would lead to a renormalization of the dot Hamiltonian). With this, the Green function is given by Γ ≡ a Γa . The B contibution for the current for all b ̸ = a can be written as P ab being the probability to scatter from all channels of terminal b to the channels of terminal a, This is in accordance with the corresponding part of Landauer formula for multi-terminal case. The contibution A reads: We use the relation to represent the contribution A in the form summing everything together, we reproduce the Landauer formula Let us construct a scattering matrix corresponding to the situation. The scattering to a terminal a is described by Γa . Let us represent this matrix as Γa = W † a Wa . So-introduced Wa is a matrix where the second index goes over the dots and the first one over the channels of the terminal a. The matrix Wa is apparently an ambiguous representation of Γa , but the same ambiguity pertains the scattering matrix: both are defined upon a unitary transformation in the space of the channels in each lead. We combine all matrices W a block by block introducing the matrix W where the first index goes over all channels in all terminals. We note W † W = Γ. With this, a scattering matrix describing the situation reads Its unitarity can be proven with using the relation We concentrate on the case of two dots and two terminals. It seems a trivial consequence of the above fomulas but requires some elaboration for the limit where Γ in the dots are very different, this is the case under consideration. To warm up, let us first consider a single dot. We note that Γ a in this case are diagonal in spin owing to time-reversability and can be regarded as numbers. The transmission probability from the left to the right (or vice versa) can be written as The ideal transmission is achieved at Γ L = Γ R = Γ/2 and ε = E. Let us go for two dots and list possible parameters of the model. Those are: level energies (split in spin) Here, the partial decay rate read (Γ and similar for R. The spin-orbit interaction is represented by the vector Γ, and the coefficients RX, IY read We will explain the physical significance of each term in Eq. 41 in the next subsection. To treat the interaction self-consistently, we also need the average charge and spin in the dot, This is given by This can be rewritten in more detail as (b = B/B) We substitute filling factors at vanishing temperature f L,R = Θ(eV L,Rε) and integrate over ε to obtain n, n and full current. It is also advantageous at this stage to switch to dimensionless variables measuring energy in units of Γ and setting e = 1. We introduce convenient functions With this, The self-consistency equations then read: B 0 being the external magnetic field. This equation has to be solved at each V R,L . With this solution, we can evaluate the current the localized state is faster than the interference with the transmission in the channel. This results in a resonant reflection peak at B = 0 that splits into two upon increasing the magnetic field. A little Fano asymmetry can be noticed upon a close look. For Fig. For Fig. This choice is such that the competing processes of resonant transmission and reflection almost compensate each other so the resulting resonance peculiarity assumes almost antisymmetric Fano shape. The separation of the peculiarities upon the spin splitting is less pronounced than in the previous examples owing to long-range Fano tails mentioned. We illustrate the effect of strong spin-orbit interaction in Fig. and set the coefficient SO to 1.6, this is its maximal value that satisfies the positivity conditions imposed on the matrices of the rates. The peculiarity at B = 0 is a peak with a noticeable Fano addition. It splits at B = 2Γ changing its shape, that is different for B ∥ Γ and B ⊥ Γ as well as for positive and negative energies. Note that owing to Onsager symmetry G(B) = G(-B). We also provide an example with interaction implementing the self-consistent scheme described in the previous subsection (Fig. 1, 0.9. This choice corresponds to very low channel transmission (T 0 = 10 -3 ). The average number of electrons in the dot is presented in Fig. In this subsection, we elaborate on the description of superconducting transport in our model. Since supercurrent is a property of the ground state of the system, it is convenient to work with electron Green functions in imaginary time and introduce Nambu structure. Let us start, as we did previously, with an arbitrary number of dots and superconducting leads. If we neglect tunnel couplings, the inverse Green function H(ε) is a 8 × 8 matrix encompassing the spin index, Nambu index and that labelling the dots. It reads: The tunnel couplings to the leads labelled by a add the self-energy part where Γa are given by Eq. 18 and the matrix Qa is a matrix in Nambu space reflecting the properties of the superconducting lead a, To find supercurrents, we need to evaluate the total energy and take its derivatives with respect to the phase differences. Since the leads with different phases are connected by the dots, the phase-dependent energy is the energy of the dots. The latter can be expressed as To see how this works, let us check this formula neglecting tunnel couplings. With this, the energy is the sum over FIG. The integral formally diverges at ε → ∞. To regularize it, we subtract its value at E n = 0 to obtain To recover a familiar formula, we shift the constant by Tr( Ȟ)/2, so it becomes the energy of the filled states (those with E n < 0). This suggests that we need to handle the integral with care keeping eye on possible problems at big ε. Fortunately, no special care has to be taken for the phase-dependent energy since it is accumulated at superconducting gap scale ε ≃ ∆. We have to be careful when expressing the occupation of the dots in terms of derivatives of E with respect to dot energies (as we do for numerical calculations). For instance, the average occupation of the dot 1 reads the last term correcting for high-energy divergences. For our starting two-dot, two-lead model, the inverse Green function reads (c.f. with Eq. 29). , where and we turn back to the compact notations and made use of Q matrices corresponding to two leads Next goal is to reduce the number of parameters implementing the separation of scales mentioned and implemented for the normal transport. This is achieved by the following transformation of the determinant and implementing Let us first evaluate det( Ȟ22 ), which is that of a 4 × 4 matrix with spin structure taken into account. Since we may assume ε, B 2 ≪ Γ 2 , E 2 the spin structure is trivial and the answer reads where, as previously, we define ). The energies of Andreev levels are determined from zeros of this determinant. We recover the well-known expression for the energy of the spin-degenerate Andreev level in a contact with transparency T 0 , The integration of the log of the determinant over the energy gives the expected result for the energy of the ground state, Let us turn to evaluation of the rest of the expression. We note that where we have introduced a convenient compact notation The matrix in the first determinant thus contains a factor (1 -T 0 s) in the denominator. Multiplying with this factor cancels det( Ȟ22 ) so the whole expression can be reduced to the following relatively simple form The parameters Γ L,R , ∆E, Γ have been already defined in our consideration of normal transport. The compact description of superconducting transport brings three additional parameters Here, ∆E S is a part of the expression Let us outline the physical meaning of the overall structure of the expression (81). The first term is a product of the terms whose zeros give the Andreev level in the transport channel and energy level in an isolated localized state, the product indicate that these levels are independent. The rest of the terms thus describe the hybridization of these levels. Note that the terms with ∆E cannot be cancelled by a shift of E 1 , so in distinction from the normal case, are active in the presence of superconductivity. The terms with Γ(s) are similar to tunnel decay terms in Eq. 71, in distinction from normal case the presence of the second dot does not just renormalize Γ. The last term describes spin-orbit effect and is proportional to the same vector Γ as in the normal case. In distinction from all other terms, it is odd in the phase difference since it is proportional to the commutator of two Q. The combination of this term and that with magnetic field results in a shift of the minimum of the phase-dependent energy from 0 or π positions. In this subsection, we provide the overall strategy and details of our numerical calculations. We postpone the discussion of self-consistency assuming that we already know E 1 and B. To find the phasedependent energy, we have to integrate the log of the determinant over ε. We compute directly the determinant of 8 × 8 matrices implementing the difference of scales numerically. For quick computation at each energy, we represent the matrix Ȟ as a sum over various scalar functions of ε, where the matrices Ǎ -Ď do not depend on ε and only Ď depends on the superconducting phase. We define the function of ε as log(det( Ȟ(ε, φ = 0))log(det( Ȟ(ε, φ = 0)) and integrate using scipy.quad. Direct evaluation of the sum over discrete equidistant ε the interval of the order of 5∆ provides comparable numerical efficiency and accuracy. As mentioned, we treat interaction self-consistently, as the interaction-induced shift in E 1 and B. The selfconsistency equations read as ,where the average number of particles on the dot are given by derivatives of the total energy N = (∂ E1 E + 1) and n = ∂ B1 E. We compute these derivatives integrating the analytical derivatives of det( Ȟ(ε) over ε. These integrals may converge at ε ≫ ∆ provided E 1 , B ≫ ∆. An adaptive grid of discrete ε could be chosen to speed up the evaluation, yet using scipy.quad suffices for our purposes. To solve the self-consistency equations, we implement a root-finding minimization algorithm minimizing the function where f, f are defined as and checking if the minimum is achieved at F = 0. Alternatively, we can make use of the fact that the solutions of the self-consistency equations correspond to the extrema of the following energy functional Unfortunately, this energy function is not bounded, and the extrema required are rather saddle points than minima. However, they can be found, for instance, by maximization of the function in Ẽ1 and subsequent minimization in B. The Andreev bound states are given by the zeros of the determinant at imaginary ε (thus real energy E = iε) in the interval (0, ∆). We find these roots by minimizing det( Ȟ(ε)) 2 and checking if the minimum is achieved at zero. but because of the different scales in the problem and existence of a big scale, we first try to find an equivalent matrix, the determinant of which is more efficiently minimized numerically. Typically, there are multiple Andreev states, so we subdivide the interval (0, ∆) to find them all. continuous spectrum at φ ≈ 0.6, 2π -0.6. The lower one is close to zero, and exhibits two zero crossings at φ ≈ π ±0.65 corresponding to the discontinuities in corresponding curve in Fig. Example C. (Figs. S6, S7) In this example, we illustrate the effect of SO coupling on the superconducting transport. We choose Γ We consider first B ⊥ Γ. In this case, the time-reversibility provides the symmetry φ ↔ -φ that was present in all previous plots. Let us concentrate at the 0π energy difference (Fig. The phase dependence of superconducting current at B = 2 and various E 1 is presented in Fig. It is interesting to see 3 ABS in the plot presenting the phase dependence of ABS energies for E 1 = -1.5 and B = 2 (Fig. When we change from perpendicular to parallel field (Fig. The most prominent effect of SO coupling is the breaking of φ ↔ -φ symmetry in magnetic field, the effect ∝ |Γ|/Γ at B ≃ Γ. We see this in Fig. Non-symmetry of the phase dependence of ABS energies is clearly seen in Fig. To conclude, we have developed and presented a model that accurately describes normal and superconducting transport for a situation where a high transmission in a transport channel is accompanied by propagation via a resonant localized state. The motivation came from the experimental observation of a pair of 0π transitions separated by a small interval in the gate voltage, and the model explains the main features observed at semi-quantitative level. In addition, we gave several examples not immediately related to the experiment to illustrate the rich parameter space of the model. The accurate characterization of normal transport in the experimental setups to choose the model parameters and taking into account more resonant states should bring the agreement between experiment and theory to quantitative level. Here, we consider the case with finite charging energy U in the first dot. For U = 5∆, I c is calculated as a function of φ and E 1 for Zeeman terms B = 0 (Fig. Our experimental data provides the evidence of magnetic field-driven 0π transitions and π-shifted supercurrent inside narrow intervals of the electro-chemical potential of a hybrid nanowire JJ. The presented intervals of V G1 were identified in rough gate sweeps at high parallel fields B z = [600, 700] mT by detecting π-shifted oscillations of the SQUID switching current. These V G1 intervals were subsequently investigated in high resolution -both at high and low B z -fields. At B z = 0 mT, qualitatively different scenarios -with and without π shifts -were observed, as illustrated in Fig. The data, the code and the figures of theoretical calculations can be found at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo. 5879475. The raw data and analyzing code of experimental measurements can be found at https://doi.org/10. 5281/zenodo.8364886. 