We report magnetization and neutron diffraction studies on crystal and magnetic structures of Ir-and Rhsubstituted honeycomb lattice α-RuCl3. The iridium or rhodium atoms are distributed at the Ru site with little structural modification. Both systems undergo a room-temperature monoclinic C2/m to low-temperature trigonal R 3 phase transformation with a large recoverable hysteresis. At low temperature, a zigzag spin order is observed with the same characteristic wavevector (0, 0.5, 1) as in the parent α-RuCl3. Detailed magnetic structure refinement reveals an ordered moment of 0.32(5)μB/Ru and a upper boundary of canting angle of 15(4) • away from the basal plane at 5 K for the 10% Ir-substituted α-RuCl3, which is different from the 0.45-0.73 μB/Ru and 32 • -48 • canting angle reported in the parent compound α-RuCl3. The observation of unchanged RuCl6 local octahedral environment, reduced magnetic moment size and canting angle highlights the potential to study quantum spin liquid behavior through non-magnetic ion doping. The interplay between topology and electron correlation leads to a large variety of interesting topological phenomena in quantum materials. These include fractional quantum Hall effect where the quasi-particles carry a fraction of the electron charge Below T N = 7 K, α-RuCl 3 exhibits a zigzag spin structure The impact of chemical substitution on the crystal and magnetic structures of α-RuCl 3 has not been thoroughly studied before partially due to the availability of sizable single crystals. In this work, the growth, magnetic properties, nuclear and magnetic structures of Ru 1-x R x Cl 3 (R = Ir, Rh) single crystals are reported. With a moderate concentration of x = 0.1, the transition temperature T N is suppressed to around 6 K. A large hysteresis about 70 K is present between the room temperature (T ) monoclinic C2/m and the low-T trigonal R 3 crystal structures likely due to the presence of stacking disorder. As observed in α-RuCl 3 , both systems revert to the room temperature monoclinic structure after thermal cycling without sign of stacking disorder evident as diffuse scattering along the c * -axis. A significant reduced moment of 0.32(5) μ B /Ru is observed in the Ir-substituted α-RuCl 3 zigzag spin configuration. The spin moment is in the ac-plane with tilting angle 15(4) • away from the a-axis [the direction perpendicular to the Ru-Ru bond]. Both moment size and canting angle are smaller than previous reports in α-RuCl 3 with moment size of 0.45-0.73 μ B /Ru and canting angle of 35-48 • [17, 18]. Single crystals of Rh-and Ir-substituted α-RuCl 3 were prepared using self-selecting vapor growth method Neutron diffraction experiments of 10% substituted compositions were carried out using the single crystal diffractometer CORELLI A similar single crystal neutron diffraction experiment of 20% Rh-substituted samples were also performed on the TOPAZ diffractometer The temperature-dependent magnetization of 10% Ru-and Ir-substituted α-RuCl 3 crystals used for neutron diffraction study at CORELLI is shown in Fig. The presence of the structure transition is further confirmed by neutron diffraction study. Structural refinement indicates that the substituted α-RuCl 3 systems crystallize in a monoclinic C2/m space group at room temperature and transforms to trigonal R 3 space group at low temperature consistent with other reports in crystals without doping In parent α-RuCl 3 , the structure transition occurs around 170 K upon warming. In contrast, our observations in this study indicate a transition temperature roughly 20 K lower for 10% Rh or Ir substituted compositions. This reduction in the structure transition temperature appears to be a consequence of chemical substitution. Figure The difference between the room temperature monoclinic C2/m phase shown in Fig. Figures Both 10% substituted compositions enter a magnetic or- dered state at low temperature. The characteristic propagation vector (0, 0.5, 1) is the same as that reported in the parent α-RuCl 3 The magnetic space group compliant with the wavevector (0, 0.5, 1) and Ru-ion at the 6c site in the parent R 3 space group is P S -1 (#2.7 BNS setting). Although the magnetic cell doubles the unit cell along the b-axis, there is only one magnetic site with aand c-axis components to be determined for the zigzag spin structure. Given that magnetic intensity measurements probe the spin component perpendicular S ⊥ to the momentum transfer Q [S ⊥ = Q×(S× Q)], a comprehensive examination of out-of-plane l components in the surveyed magnetic reflections (0, 0.5, l = 1 + 3n) further constrains the spin canting angles. A sizable intensity at l = 4 implies the spin component is directed closer to the ab-plane. Together with magnetic reflections from other twinned magnetic domains, magnetic structure refinement of the Ir-substituted sample using Fullprof The spin direction is crucial to understand the strength of relative interactions and nature of the zigzag order. Since the discovery of α-RuCl 3 as one of the promising candidates realizing Kitaev quantum spin liquid, extensive efforts have focused on identifying a proper microscopic model that is capable of capturing the essential features of the inelastic neutron scattering and bulk property data Furthermore, our structure investigation reveals minimal alteration of the lattice parameters and average local RuCl 6 environment when compared to the parent compound α-RuCl 3 (see Appendix). The trigonal crystal electric field arising from compression of the RuCl 6 octahedra, plays a pivotal role in stabilizing the zigzag order evidenced from the strong anisotropic magnetization In summary, we use neutron single crystal diffraction to determine the crystal and magnetic structure of honeycomb lattice α-RuCl 3 with Ru partially substituted by nonmagnetic Rh 3+ and Ir 3+ ions. Similar to α-RuCl 3 , both 10% substituted samples exhibit a zigzag magnetic order with an identical characteristic magnetic wavevector below T N , undergo a first-order structural transition from room-temperature C2/m to low-temperature R 3 phase, fully revert to their original C2/m state after undergoing thermal cycling. An examination of the nuclear structure suggests that the substitution of Ir/Rh does not introduce any significant alterations in either the average structure or the local environment of the RuCl 6 octahedra. However, both the magnetic order and the structural transition upon warming are observed to occur at lower temperatures in these chemically substituted samples, indicating the nonmagnetic impurities affect both the in-plane magnetic interactions and the interlayer coupling. The magnetic structure refinement conducted in the Ir-substituted sample has revealed a reduction in both the magnetic moment size and canting angle when compared to the values reported earlier for α-RuCl 3 . These findings provide valuable constraints for future theoretical investigations into the magnetic Hamiltonian in substituted α-RuCl 3 . Chemical substitution with nonmagnetic ions of similar atomic radii presents an attractive approach for tailoring the magnetic properties of materials in close proximity to a quantum spin liquid state. Nuclear Bragg peaks of the sample are integrated in reciprocal space and corrected with Lorentz and spectrum corrections The zigzag magnetic structure corresponds to irreducible representation Γ 1 . The basis vectors from representation analysis are shown in Table ψ1 ψ2 ψ3 Ru (0, 0, z) (1, 0, 0) (0, 1, 0) (0, 0, 1) Ru (0, 0, z) ( 1, 0, 0) (0, 1, 0) (0, 0, 1) Bragg peaks. Six magnetic peaks from each structural domain are integrated. The primary domain with 77% contribution contains the magnetic reflections that are offset from indexed nuclear peaks in the rhombohedrally centered obverse setting. The secondary domain with 23% has peaks indexed from the reverse twin as discussed in the text. To determine the moment size, the magnetic peaks are refined with the Bragg reflections to obtain the scale factor. The observed magnetic intensities are compared to the expected values for the refined structure are shown in Fig. The order parameter of the Ir-substituted (0, 0.5, 1) magnetic satellite peak integrated intensity is compared to reference data for the parent compound As the Rh-doped sample has a similar reverse/obverse structural twinning with one major and minor domain, the appearance of magnetic peaks follows a similar trend with the Ir-doped sample. The (0, k, l) intensity slice from the Rhdoped sample at 5 K is displayed in Fig. FIG. 