This paper proposes a space-division multiplexed spatial-photonic Ising machine (SDM-SPIM) that physically calculates the weighted sum of the Ising Hamiltonians for individual components in a multi-component model. Space-division multiplexing enables tuning a set of weight coefficients as an optical parameter and obtaining the desired Ising Hamiltonian at a time. We solved knapsack problems to verify the system's validity, demonstrating that optical parameters impact the search property. We also investigated a new dynamic coefficient search algorithm to enhance search performance. The SDM-SPIM would physically calculate the Hamiltonian and a part of the optimization with an electronics process. Combinatorial optimization problems exist across diverse fields in science, industry, and society where σ j ∈ {-1, 1}( j = 1, 2, • • • , N) are spin variables and J j h ( j, h = 1, 2, • • • , N) are spin-spin interactions. N is the number of spins. Ising machines are developed using various physical systems, which can solve combinatorial optimization problems quickly. Because the ability to represent the problem in an Ising model depends on the flexibility of the spin-spin interaction J, using a suitable physical system is vital for the developing practical machines. An example of a phenomenon used in such systems is the quantum mechanical effect, associated with superconducting circuits A promising technique for controlling light on a large scale is spatial light modulation, (often used for computing), which exploits the parallel propagation characteristics of light However, the SPIM scheme has limited flexibility in expressing interaction J to solve combinatorial optimization problems; its primitive version can only solve problems with a rank-1 interaction matrix. This is a limitation for practical applications because only a few types of problems can be mapped. Several methods have been developed to remove this limitation, including (1) the quadrature photonic spatial Ising machine that introduces orthogonal phase modulation and external magnetic fields This paper presents a space-division multiplexed SPIM (SDM-SPIM), as an option of the system configurations to optically calculate a sum of multi-component Hamiltonian at a time while maintaining the high flexibility of the interaction matrix. In the space-division multiplexing scheme, the beams encoding each component are independently controlled to adjust the individual optical intensities, and thus the weight coefficients can be physically multiplied simultaneously. Then, the sum of the Ising Hamiltonian for each component can be obtained, by superimposing these beams. Furthermore, SDM-SPIM makes it possible to physically tune an optical parameter, a set of weight coefficients relating to constraint conditions of problems, and a part of the optimization process can be replaced by a physical process that dynamically tunes an optical parameter. This study aims to validate the method and its capability using physical parameter tuning, which is achieved by implementing an SPIM with spatial-division multiplexing. We constructed a proof-of-concept system and applied it to knapsack problems-combinatorial optimization problems with a constraint term. Furthermore, we analyzed the impact of physical parameters on the search characteristics of our method and investigated methods to enhance the search performance in the SDM-SPIM. In SPIMs, the Ising Hamiltonian is optically calculated by phase modulation of an amplitudedistributed light. The obtained Ising Hamiltonian is evaluated and used to update the next spin state. The spin σ j is encoded into phase modulation φ j ∈ {0, π} by an SLM, where σ j = exp(ıφ j ) = ±1. When the amplitude distribution of light is ξ j , the element J j h of the interaction matrix J is proportional to ξ j and ξ h . The Ising Hamiltonian in SPIMs can be expressed as follows The Ising model with such a Hamiltonian is known as the Mattis model where K is the total number of multiplexes, α (k ) are weight coefficients of k-th terms, and ξ (k ) are the amplitude distributions corresponding to the multiplexing number. An Ising model with an interaction matrix of rank K can be represented by this equation. In Eq. ( In the primitive SPIM, the Ising Hamiltonian is expressed as H ∝ ∥ I -I T ∥, where the target intensity I T is a delta function I (1) ( x )+I (2) . Then, the Ising Hamiltonian is obtained in the SDM-SPIM as follows. where I (k ) + (x) is the intensity of k-th term with positive sign. The value of the Ising Hamiltonian calculated from the optical intensity according to Eq. ( We used knapsack problems in experiments using the SDM-SPIM. The knapsack problems are combinatorial optimization problems to find the subset of items that maximizes the total value by satisfying each knapsack's weight limit. This problem cannot be transformed to the Ising model with a rank 1 interaction matrix. The 0-1 knapsack problem with integer weights is formulated as follows: subject to where v i and w i are the value and weight of the i-th item for i = 1, 2, • • • , n and W is the knapsack's weight limit. The corresponding Ising Hamiltonian H is formulated using a log trick where A and B are coefficients for the individual terms and y i ∈ {0, 1} are auxiliary variables. A conservative choice for the number m of auxiliary variables is m = ⌊log 2 W⌋ + 1, which can be reduced to m = ⌈log 2 (max w i )⌉ under the assumption of nontrivial problems where i w i > W. Consistent with the individual terms, Eqs. ( Equation At the SA process in the experiment, the Metropolis algorithm was used to update the spin states with an updating probability P(σ) = min 1, exp -ΔH ( σ) T depending on the temperature parameter T, where ΔH (σ) is the difference between the Ising Hamiltonian of the state σ and the reference. We constructed an SDM-SPIM system and applied it to knapsack problems. Figure as the amplitude with flipping the corresponding spin σ j in case that the amplitude modulation ξ (k ) j is negative. We investigated the system behavior using a knapsack problem with 13 items (Appendix A: Problem 1) to demonstrate the SDM-SPIM. In Problem 1, the weight constraint is W ≤ 80. The coefficient ratio was chosen to be β = 0.04 (ND filter transmittance was 1%) per the requirements of Eq. ( The coefficient ratio, β = A B , of the constraint term to the objective term should be set appropriately, to obtain the optimal solution of a knapsack problem. In the SDM-SPIM, this ratio can be controlled by the intensity of the light corresponding to each term. We solved a four-item knapsack problem (Problem 2) to investigate the impact on the property of the solution search when changing the transmittance of the ND filter in the optical path of the laser 2. The number of the auxiliary variable for Problem 2 was set to m = 4, and the total spin number was N = 8 to check that the constraint is still not violated by adding a sizable auxiliary spin. The temperature parameter in SA was set to decrease at a similar constant rate for all ND filters. Figure We solved each problem 50 times. The total iteration was 300. When the optical intensity representing the objective term is decreased, the search is more likely to be run while adhering to the constraint. In contrast, when the optical intensity is increased, the search is more likely to be run in violation of the constraint. In the result, when β = 0.01 (ND: 0.25%), no solution violated the weight constraint. In contrast, when β = 0.4 (ND: 10%), many solutions were obtained that violated the constraint. The experimental result illustrates that the distribution of the obtained solutions changed with the ND filter. This indicates that the solution-search space can be manipulated by tuning the optical parameter. An effective constraint condition should be β ≤ 1 13 = 0.077, because maxv i = 13 in Problem 2, according to Eq. ( In Fig. We compared the SA and the DCS by solving a knapsack problem (Problem 3) with a numerical simulation. The coefficient in SA was fixed at β = 0.05. The coefficient in the DCS was varied in the order β = 2, 1, 0.8, 0.5, 0.1, 0.05 at each step, and the annealing temperature was kept constant. Figure The SDM-SPIM increases the flexibility of the interactions by extending the interaction matrix with spatial resources by acquiring the Ising Hamiltonians in a single or double shot. In the demonstration, we applied three amplitude distributions that are spatially and temporally multiplexed to represent a rank-3 interaction matrix. At most two time-division processes for individual signs are sufficient. Thus, the time required for time-division processing is constant, regardless of the rank of the interaction. Increasing the degree of spatial multiplexing in the SDM-SPIM required increasing the number of pixels of the amplitude modulator that can be modulated and superimposing the encoded light for the multiplexing number. In this study, the optical system was constructed using an SLM, mirrors, and BSs in the multiplexing part. However, because of the limitation of the physical size of the elements, the beam illumination and combining part should be made more compact to increase the multiplexing number. The optical setup using highly integrated technology will enable the representation of a high-rank problem by relaxing the limitation of encodable spins because of the domain division of an amplitude-modulating SLM. In contrast, dividing the region of a phase-modulating SLM is unnecessary, so the number of its pixels is not a limiting factor of the multiplexing number. The DCS considered in this paper seems advantageous not only because of its potential to improve search efficiency but also because it can extend the physically implementable part of the system. Part of the DCS process can be physically achieved by adjusting the ratio of the coefficient of each term. The SDM-SPIM setup enables the coefficients to be adjusted simply by adjusting the ratio of the intensity of the encoded light. Hence, it can be introduced without modification into the optical system of SDM-SPIM using variable laser intensities. Simulated fluctuation in annealing can also be replaced using noise fluctuation during imaging We can also consider other types of problems for which applying the DCS is more effective. Although knapsack problems have only one constraint term, the DCS has the potential to select constraints preferentially to be kept in a problem with multiple constraints. This potential is expected to be valuable in obtaining approximate solutions sufficient for practical use. We presented a SPIM system with physically tunable space-division multiplexing as one of the implementing methods to physically calculate the weighted sum of the Ising Hamiltonian components at a time in a multi-component computing model. We experimentally demonstrated the validity of the SDM-SPIM by solving knapsack problems with a constraint term using the system. Another result demonstrates that the solution distribution obtained by the SDM-SPIM can be changed by controlling the intensity ratio of the encoded light using an ND filter placed in the optical path. Based on this property, we considered a new DCS algorithm as a solution-search method and compared it with the SA by simulation. The results suggest the ability to improve the performance of the SDM-SPIM by dynamically tuning optical parameters. Our method computes the Ising Hamiltonian in a single or double shot, saving computation time for high-rank problems. The SDM-SPIM that can handle a large number of spins will enable the solving of various combinatorial optimization problems at high speed by increasing the number of multiplexes.