The Quantum Materials group at Indian Institute of Technology Patna is working on a range of topics relating to nanoelectronics, spintronics, clean energy and memory design etc. The PI has past experiences of working extensively with superconducting systems like cuprates [1, 2], ruthanate The discovery of 2D materials has opened up various areas for nanoelectronic application. A single electron transistor (SET) is a source-quantum dot-drain structure where the quantised conduction through the dot can be controlled by a capacitively coupled gate. The quantised energy levels in the quantum dot (QD) give rise to well defined conductance plateaus, with their positions changing at specific source-drain bias leading to a coulomb blockade state. Due to the larger surface to volume ratio, 2D materials attracted significant attention for sensing applications, which is reflected in its drastic change of resistance on the adsorption of an alien molecule. In the close proximity of an external molecule, the charge carrier concentration on a 2D material changes significantly. This property has been exploited to use 2D layered materials like graphene Depending upon the sign of the charge transfer between the molecule and the 2D material, the molecule near the layered material can work as a donor or acceptor. Owing to the 2D nature of such materials, the effect of surface dopants is extremely perceptive which has been demonstrated in achieving extreme detection efficiency upto 1 ppb. In our recent work, we have developed various single electron transistor (SET) devices with 2D materials as island and studied their usefulness as nanosensor. DNA and RNA detection were studied for the case of graphene and hexagonal boron nitride based SET The discovery of atomically thin two dimensional materials has brought a paradigm shift in the development of 2D nanoelectronic and spintronic devices. Today, a wide variety of such materials ranging from graphene, which is a semi-metal, to semiconductors and insulators have emerged with unique electronic properties. Specifically, graphene and other 2D crystals have already shown their utility in spintronic applications However, the majority of the predicted materials exhibit ordering temperatures much below room temperature and a key challenge remains today is to find ways to increase the ordering temperature above room temperature and engineer phases locally. In particular, such control is necessary for device realisation and applicability of the magnetic phases in spintronic and magneto-electronic switches. The conventional strategy involves chemical doping and defect generation in 2D crystals for creating local magnetic moments In this direction, we have recently uncovered the family of 2D transition metal oxychlorides with the general formula MOCl (M = Ti, V, Fe, Cr). This type of magnetic material, while being a semiconductor, is promising for integration into electronic circuits. However, like other 2D semiconductor magnets, ferromagnetism in CrOCl only exists at low temperatures, much below 200 K. This makes it highly interesting to devise new ways of enhancing the interatomic exchange interaction for designing and tuning magnetic phases. While electric field control of the carrier concentration in graphene and other 2D crystals is one way to tune the interatomic exchange, the exceptional resilience of such crystals to strain also provides novel ways to engineer desired electronic structures and enable flexible 2D spintronic devices. For CrOCl, we probe the combined effect of two stimuli, through extensive ab-initio calculations and Monte-Carlo simulations of the 2D Ising Model, to uncover the magnetic response of CrOCl. First, we establish how the application of uniaxial and biaxial strain can lead to room temperature ferromagnetism and the occurrence of a well-defined phase transition. Next, we show how coupling strain with electric field leads to high temperature magnetic ordering, increasing the T c to almost three times the intrinsic T c of CrOCl The recent discovery of superconductivity in bilayer graphene has fuelled interest in understanding the role of an interlayer twist in controlling the material properties. When two neighbouring layers of a 2D system are rotated with respect to each others, it results in strong-electron correlation effect resulting in the demonstration of novel quantum effects. In this direction, we have studied several interesting systems to understand the role of interlayer twist on the electronic, magnetic and optical properties of various van der Waals heterostructures. Twist-assisted tunability and enhanced ferromagnetism in a 2D Van Der Waal's Heterostructure made up of CrI 3 and Graphene The effect of global warming is very prominent and the focus is towards green energy. In this direction, several technologies are in focus like photovoltaics, thermoelectrics, battery storage etc. The use of 2D materials and their heterostructures can have useful advantages due to their larger areal coverage in a smaller volume. We have studied MnO 2 /CoO 2 heterostructure as Promising cathode material for the Li and Na ion battery In the present era, the demand of Non-volatile memory (NVM) is continuously increasing because of its use in portable gadgets and consumer electronics like, laptops, digital cameras, USB storage devices, and smart phones etc. A variety of NVM candidates have emerged such as Flash memory, Phase change memory (PCM), Ferroelectric random access memory (FeRAM), Magnetic random access memory (MRAM), and Resistive random access memory (RRAM) etc. Among them, RRAM is the most promising candidate for the future memory design due to its simple structure, high endurance, good retention, low operating voltage, high power and multi-functionalities like complementary (CRS), unipolar (URS) and bipolar resistive switching (BRS). Choice of material in such structures is very crucial which determines the operational limitations in terms of durability, retention, reliability and switching power etc. Till now, a variety of materials like, binary transition metal oxides, organic materials, graphene derivative, chalcogenides, complex compositional materials and polymers have been used for the resistive switching (RS) purpose. Out of these, the transition metal oxide-based devices have attracted significant attention due to their easy fabrication technique and having a wide range of electrical properties. Among metal-oxides, ZnO has an advantage in terms of cost and stability, offering a wide and direct band gap, controllable electrical behaviour, having different morphologies and environmental friendly nature which we have studied in the presence of an oxide electrode 