Modeling non-planar coils in a full-scale stellarator M. Backmeyer, N. Riva, M. Lyly, A. Halbach, and V. Lahtinen Abstract-Design and modeling of a stellarator fusion reactor is a multidisciplinary effort that requires a tight integration between simulation of highly nonlinear multi-physics and representation of non-planar complex geometries. The critical current calculation and the design of the mechanical structures are among the most crucial aspects as they set size, cost, and time to build the stellarator. Because of the asymmetric and non-planar nature of its components the modeling of such figures of merit needs to be carried out at large scale, without the possibility of taking advantage of any particular symmetry. In this work we develop a three-dimensional model for the analysis of the magnetic field and forces, necessary for such considerations, for complex coil geometries, such as stellarators, where a twodimensional approach can not provide accurate analyses and verification of assumptions. Moreover, this method can quickly generate a large amount of critical modeling data (e.g. Lorentz load, displacement and stresses) that could be integrated into a workflow for coil design optimization based on machine learning or other recent optimization tools. Index Terms-fusion, stellarator, simulation, DDM, non-planar geometry T HE most advanced approach for nuclear fusion involves using toroidal magnetic confinement systems, specifically Tokamaks and Stellarators. Both systems use magnetic fields to confine the plasma. In both Tokamaks and Stellarators, particles can drift off course and hit the chamber walls due to the inhomogeneous magnetic field. In Tokamaks one set of coils generates a toroidal field, a central solenoid operated in pulsed mode induces a toroidal current in the plasma, and a third set of coils generates an outer poloidal field that shapes and positions the plasma. The combination of the field components result in a twisted magnetic field that confines the particles in the plasma. Stellarators confine the plasma by means of non-planar coils only, eliminating the need for the solenoid/transformer. This allows Stellarators to operate without plasma disruption (typically problematic for Tokamaks) and in a steady state for continuous energy production This work was supported by Quanscient and by CFS and PSFC-MIT via RPP27. We want to thank Jorrit Lion (jlion@proximafusion.com) for providing the geometry of the stellarator. electro-magneto-thermal and mechanical response of a hightemperature superconductor (HTS) non-planar coil Computational times of large and complex FEM scale models in the order of minutes could enable the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools to corroborate and perform generative design to optimize the mechanical structures. In section II we describe the procedure to obtain the coil orientations , briefly mention the formulation and describe the utilized custom DDM tool. In section III, we present our results, compared to results using COMSOL, and a mesh sensitivity study. Finally, in section III we draw conclusions. The stellarator geometry that will be analyzed is shown in Figure Specifically, in this work the stellarator is composed of a total of 30 non-planar coils: 29 coils are homogenized with rectangular cross-section and carry 13.27 MA; one of the coils only is modeled on a detailed level with 208 turns (see Figure The computational domain Ω consists of air Ω air and conducting coils Ω coil and is enclosed by the domain boundary ∂Ω. The well-known A-formulation is solved to find the distribution of the the magnetic vector potential A. The discretization of the magnetic vector potential A is carried out using Whitney edge elements To introduce the current density J oriented along the cable, the curvilinear coordinates of the cables/turns need to be Fig. ⃗ e 1 = ∇φ 1 , ⃗ e 2 = ∇φ 2 , ⃗ e 3 = ∇φ 3 . ( Exploiting the mutual orthogonality of the surfaces Γ 1 and Γ 2 , the scalar potential φ 1 is obtained solving a Laplace problem. It represents the solution to the boundary value problem, Repeating this procedure for φ 2 with interchanged boundary conditions we get with ∇φ 1 and ∇φ 2 two base unit vectors of the local curvilinear coordinate system at any point of the coil. The cross product of ∇φ 1 and ∇φ 2 defines the third basis vector of the coordinate system, which is orthogonal to the cross section and represents the direction of the current flow J ∥J∥ , so Figure The domain decomposition method (DDM) in the FEM context refers to the partitioning of the computational mesh into similarly sized pieces that can each be processed on different computing instances, allowing to distribute the computational burden. The DDM method is used to improve the speed of numerical simulations in solid mechanics, electromagnetism, flow in porous media, etc., on parallel machines from tens to hundreds of thousands of cores. This is well suited to take advantage of supercomputer or cloud architectures, which was (c) The resulting coil orientation J ∥J∥ as vector plot. already shown in The numerical study is conducted for different interpolation orders and mesh resolutions. First of all, the resulting fields for the coarser mesh and cubic elements are presented. In Figure Figure The solution was validated against another simulation software, namely the commerical software COMSOL Multiphysics As a next step, we study the dependency of the solution on the mesh resolution and the interpolation order. The same simulation was repeated for a finer mesh, obtained by splitting the elements, and for linear and cubic interpolation order. Results are presented in Figure A single coil was modeled in high detail, while homogenizing the others. This allowed us to capture the magnetic field and, consequently, Lorentz loads experienced by the chosen coil, considering both its self-field and contributions from the remaining coils. The results, when compared with those obtained from COMSOL, showcased a high degree of accuracy. Furthermore, a mesh sensitivity analysis showed the advantages of higher interpolation orders over finer mesh refinements. Ultimately, this method serves as a stepping stone to rapidly generate large amount of critical data such as Lorentz loads, displacement, and stresses. These data can be integrated into a workflow for coil design optimization, potentially leveraging machine learning or other contemporary tools.