Unconventional superconductivity in bulk materials under ambient pressure is extremely rare among the 3d transition-metal compounds outside the layered cuprates and iron-based family 1-2 . It is predominantly linked to highly anisotropic electronic properties and quasi-two-dimensional (2D) Fermi surfaces. To date, the only known example of the Co-based exotic superconductor was the hydrated layered cobaltate, NaxCoO2⋅yH2O, and its superconductivity is realized in the vicinity of a spin-1/2 Mott state Despite its relatively low TC, this material exhibits very high superconducting upper critical fields, μ0HC2(0), which far exceeds the Pauli paramagnetic limit by a factor of 3 -4. First-principles calculations show that Na2CoSe2O is a rare example of negative charge transfer superconductor. This cobalt oxychalcogenide with a geometrical frustration among Co spins, shows great potential as a highly appealing candidate for the realization of unconventional and/or high-TC superconductivity beyond the well-established Cu-and Fe-based superconductor families, and opened a new field in physics and chemistry of low-dimensional superconductors. After the discovery of superconductivity with high-TC in iron-based family However, the realization of high-quality samples of NaxCoO2⋅yH2O is still a big challenge to date, in which superconductivity occurs only in the low Na content region (x = 0.22 ~ 0.47), and when water is incorporated into its structure Accordingly, the nature of the superconductivity in this material is still under debate due to the lack of well-reproducible and reliable experimental results. Hence, exploring its possible analogs will deepen our understanding of the hydrated sodium cobaltate superconductor physics. In this work, we have successfully synthesized a new cobalt oxychalcogenide, i.e., Na2CoSe2O, in the Na-Co-Se-O system. This compound has a layered structure composed of alternate stacking of edge-sharing Na6O octahedra and CoSe6 octahedra, Crystal Growth. Single crystals of Na2CoSe2O were produced by a solid-state reaction of Na2O2 (95%, shot), NaSe, and CoSe. NaSe was synthesized in liquid ammonia from Na (2N5, lump) and Se (5N, shot) in stoichiometric quantities. CoSe were prepared from elemental Co (2N8, powder) and Se at 600 ̊C for 20 h. These reactants (in total 3g) were then mixed in stoichiometric ratios, pressed, and put into an alumina crucible, and finally sealed in a quartz tube filled with Ar under a pressure of 0.4 atmosphere. The quartz tube was heated to 650 °C within 20 h, held there for 20 h, and then cooled to 450 ̊C over 100 h. The as grown flaky single crystals are uniformly distributed throughout the reaction products with dimensions 0.3×0.5×0.02 mm Structure and Composition Determination. Structure analyses were done on a Single Crystal Diffractometer of BRUKER D8 VENTURE. A specimen of Na2CoSe2O, approximate dimensions 0.050 mm × 0.270 mm × 0.340 mm, was used for the X-ray crystallographic analysis and protected under Ar atmosphere during data collection. A total of 1094 frames were collected. The frames were integrated with the Bruker SAINT software package using a narrow-frame algorithm. The integration of the data using a trigonal unit cell yielded a total of 869 reflections to a maximum θ angle of 26.77° (0.79 Å resolution), of which 112 were independent (average redundancy 7.759, completeness = 96.6%, Rint = 5.53%, Rsig = 3.17%) and 110 (98.21%) were greater than 2σ(F 2 ). The final cell constants are based upon the refinement of the XYZ-centroids of 1108 reflections above 20 σ(I) with 8.507° < 2θ < 56.33°. The ratio of minimum to maximum apparent transmission was 0.456. The structure was solved and refined using the Bruker SHELXTL Software Package The chemical compositions were checked with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer equipped on a Phenom scanning electron microscope (SEM) operated at crystals. EDX analysis confirmed the existence of four elements Na, Co, Se and O, with Na : Co : Se close to stoichiometric proportions (more details in Supporting Information). were performed in a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS). Standard four-probe and Hall-bar method were adopted to obtain the resistivity and Hall coefficient, respectively. The magnetization was measured by a Quantum Design magnetic property measurement system (MPMS). All samples used for measurements were protected by N-Grease to avoid deteriorating in the air. Theoretical Methods. First-principles calculations were performed with the density functional theory (DFT), as implemented in the QUANTUM ESPRESSO package Na2CoSe2O crystallizes in trigonal space group R-3m (No. 166), as shown in Fig. The lattice parameters are determined to be a = 3.5161(9) Å, c = 28.745(11) Å, and V = 307.8(20) Å 3 , respectively The sufficiently large ratio, c/a ≈ 8.2,combining the significant spatial separation between [CoSe2] layers, 9.581(67) Å, are likely to produce 2D effects in its physical properties. In fact, the weak interlayer interaction allows it to form quasi-2D flaky crystals which are easily cleaved. To the best of our knowledge, this new crystal structure is different from the existing reported ones. In general, most of transition metal layered mixed-anion compounds crystalize in tetragonal space groups rather than hexagonal space group. Although the main features of Na2CoSe2O, namely [CoSe2] layers, have been described in a series of transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) Na2CoSe2O could thus represent a model system for studying the superconducting state in a geometrically frustrated system. It is well known that, the hydrated sodium cobaltate, NaxCoO2⋅yH2O, is also a layered we measured the electrical resistivity under several selected magnetic fields up to 9 T, as shown in Fig. Figure On the other hand, we noted also that a similar behavior observed in some multiband systems such as MgB2 Within this theoretical framework and taking the 99% criterion, the μ0HC2(0) along the c-axis and the ab-plane were calculated to be ∼23 T and 41 T, respectively. Both the estimated upper critical fields at zero temperature far exceeds the Pauli pair-breaking limit (given by μ0HP = 1.84 TC ≈ 11.6 T for TC = 6.3 K) in a BCS weak-coupling case The inset of Fig. To get more information about the conducting carriers, we measured the Hall coefficient in the normal state. From the ρxy(H) data (inset of Fig. Finally, we would like to point out that much attentions have been focused in recent years on the 3d transition-metal oxychalcogenides with square lattices, in which the possibility of high-TC superconductivity was theoretically predicted upon doping the Mott insulating state with electrons or holes In conclusion, we have discovered a new layered oxychalcogenide superconductor. Its Our studies expand the categories of unconventional superconductors in 3d transition-metal compounds, and open a door for finding new potential high-TC superconductors. It would be of interest in future studies to explore the similarities and differences between the layered cobalt oxychalcogenide and hydrated cobaltate from both theoretical and experimental perspectives, as well as infer something universal about unconventional superconductivity between these two-dimensional geometrically frustrated lattices and the well-defined square lattices of cuprates and iron-based family, which will help resolve their elusive superconducting mechanism.