Reticular materials, including metal-organic frameworks and covalent organic frameworks, combine relative ease of synthesis and an impressive range of applications in various fields, from gas storage to biomedicine. Diverse properties arise from the variation of building units-metal centers and organic linkers-in almost infinite chemical space. Such variation substantially complicates experimental design and promotes the use of computational methods. In particular, the most successful artificial intelligence algorithms for predicting properties of reticular materials are atomic-level graph neural networks, which optionally incorporate domain knowledge. Nonetheless, the data-driven inverse design involving these models suffers from incorporation of irrelevant and redundant features such as full atomistic graph and network topology. In this study, we propose a new way of representing materials, aiming to overcome the limitations of existing methods; the message passing is performed on a coarse-grained crystal graph that comprises molecular building units. To highlight the merits of our approach, we assessed predictive performance and energy efficiency of neural networks built on different materials representations, including composition-based and crystal-structure-aware models. Coarse-grained crystal graph neural networks showed decent accuracy at low computational costs, making them a valuable alternative to omnipresent atomic-level algorithms. Moreover, the presented models can be successfully integrated into an inverse materials design pipeline as estimators of the objective function. Overall, the coarse-grained crystal graph framework is aimed at challenging the prevailing atom-centric perspective on reticular materials design. Artificial intelligence (AI) is becoming the next game changer in materials science Atomic-level models are highly effective in representing materials if atoms are considered the most natural choice for the elementary structural unit. In the inorganic domain, chemical subspaces can be formed through element substitution in a prototype crystal structure; the resulting material sets have been processed with predictive models in a high-throughput manner By viewing experimental synthesis and characterization of in silico-generated frameworks as the ultimate goal of AI-assisted materials discovery, we can formulate the main challenge in the field as follows: there exists a fundamental disparity in how synthetic chemists and AI practitioners perceive reticular materials. As a result, atomic-level and topology-aware models leverage materials modalities that are not relevant or accessible in reticular design. To address this issue, we introduce a coarse-grained crystal graph framework; the performance of neural networks that utilize sets of molecular building units as input is analyzed in terms of accuracy, energy efficiency, and transferability. In our comparative analysis, we also include the widely used architectures that are the dominant paradigm in materials representation learning; composition-based and crystal-structure-aware models are examined. In addition to material-screening applications, the feasibility of incorporating coarse-grained crystal graph neural networks into an inverse reticular design pipeline is evaluated as well. The modern landscape of predictive models in materials informatics ) where φ, ρ, and ψ are (learnable) message, reduce, and update functions, respectively, and e t u→v is a vector representation of edge u → v at step t; the calculation of node features can optionally include edge features. Our approach involves applying the message-passing method to learn representations of materials that consist of molecular building units rather than distinct atoms. The proposed framework heavily relies on subgraph neural networks The next step is to define subgraph representations. Crystal graph neural networks appear to be the most relevant reference in this context; during training, learnable atomic embeddings are commonly generated in input layers of a model. In contrast, we rely on predefined vectors to characterize both the inorganic K subset and organic L subset. Specifically, the mol2vec model The considered sets of entities (K and L) form bipartite graph (K, L, E) by design; each edge in the graph connects species of different types, i.e., an organic linker to a metal center and vice versa. Unfortunately, reticular design does not provide prior knowledge of the specific bonds that will form in an experimental crystal structure. To eliminate arbitrariness from the selection of initial connectivity, we postulate every potential edge thereby forming complete bipartite graph (K, L, Ẽ) called the coarse-grained crystal graph. The term refers to the coarse-graining modeling approach, which involves simplification of complex atomic systems, e.g., reducing the number of degrees of freedom by representing groups of atoms as a single pseudoatom. Similar techniques have been applied to quantify MOF diversity Coarse-grained crystal graphs can be easily integrated into graph neural networks designed for heterogeneous graphs. To handle structure-property relationships in reticular materials, we implement a model with simple architecture (Figure Finally, the output of the CG 2 -NN is obtained by passing graph level embedding h g through a dense layer. In terms of message-passing scalability, the coarse-grained crystal graph framework is expected to outperform the full crystal graph. The Quantum MOF (QMOF) database To evaluate the predictive performance of CG Despite acknowledging the criticisms of using the coefficient of determination as a primary predictive performance measure The main focus of the materials informatics community has been on enhancing predictive performance of existing neural network architectures CG 2 -NNs are readily accessible as discriminative algorithms for in silico high-throughput screening of reticular materials. Nevertheless, the presented computational framework can be integrated into inverse design pipelines as well. As a proof-of-concept assessment, we investigate maximizing hydrogen storage capacity in MOFs; the optimization task is given by where X is design space represented within the coarse-grained crystal graph framework, f (x) is an objective function (hydrogen storage capacity) approximated by a CG 2 -NN, and x * is an optimal set of metal centers K and organic linkers L encoded as complete bipartite graph (K, L, Ẽ). Using IRMOF-20 As demonstrated in the Results section, CG 2 -NNs are able to compete in predictive performance with models incorporating information on atomic connectivity. This finding suggests that the underlying topology of a reticular material can be learned during model training. We intentionally examine datasets containing experimentally resolved MOFs and COFs; the relationship between a set of molecular building blocks and their self-assembled structure is usually straightforward. On the contrary, widely used databases of hypothetical structures expand the reticular materials genome by providing multiple structures of various topologies for a specific organic linker and secondary building unit. Obviously, CG 2 -NNs will fail to distinguish such structures, although most of in silico-generated MOFs are thermodynamically inaccessible and, as a result, are not of practical interest. The synthesized MOFs that exhibit polymorphism By eliminating topology from explicit consideration, we address the key shortcoming of current approaches to the creation of reticular materials. The entire design space is defined by the linkers-nodes-topology triad, but the optimization task is constrained by reticular chemistry principles: an experimentally observed topology is determined by molecular building units and is not an independent variable. The issue has been mostly ignored in previous studies The coarse-grained crystal graph framework is intended to make data-driven design of reticular materials more accessible for synthetic chemists. The efficiency of the presented approach is achieved via integration of relevant domain knowledge into the neural network architecture. Specifically, pretrained embeddings are used to represent organic linkers and metal centers, thereby demonstrating the impact of previous community efforts on AI tools for materials design. We hope that this research will not end here but rather bolster further enhancement of predictive models. The QMOF database The procedure outlined below was applied to construct the coarse-grained crystal graph and assign features to its nodes. Metals (in MOFs and COFs) and metalloids (in COFs) were completely removed from the initial crystal structure (the full list of atom types is provided in Figure CG 2 -NNs were built with PyTorch To evaluate an objective in the optimization task (hydrogen storage capacity), an ensemble of 20 CG 2 -SAGE models was trained by means of the Adam optimizer at a learning rate of 10 -3 and a batch size of 64. The holdout cross-validation technique with a training/validation/test ratio of 80:10:10 was applied. The mean and standard deviation of model ensemble outputs were used to estimate the target property and the corresponding uncertainty The linker optimization algorithm was heavily inspired by previously developed methods The SELFIES strings included in the last generations were transferred into 3D atomic coordinates. In particular, the Experimental-Torsion basic Knowledge Distance Geometry V.K. was supported by a Fellowship from Non-commercial Foundation for the Advancement of Science and Education INTELLECT. The PyTorch implementation of CG The next endpoint, thermal capacity, poses a different challenge for predictive models. Unexpected model rankings and ineffective training were caused by a shortage of data points (only 214) in the dataset. Compositionbased Roost and structure-aware ALIGNN showed comparable performance, with an average coefficient of determination of 0.68 for four temperature values. On the other hand, CGCNN and MEGNet, both incorporating crystal graph data, demonstrated nearly zero predictive performance. CG 2 -NNs manifested