3D printing technology offers the possibility of producing synthetic samples with accurately defined microstructures. As indicated by effective medium theory (EMT), the shapes, orientations, and sizes of voids significantly affect the overall elastic response of a solid body. By performing uniaxial compression tests on twenty types of 3D-printed samples containing voids of different geometries, we examine whether the measured effective elasticities are accurately predicted by EMT. To manufacture the sample, we selected printers that use different technologies; fused deposition modelling (FDM), and stereolithography (SLA). We show how printer settings (FDM case) or sample cure time (SLA case) affect the measured properties. We also examine the reproducibility of elasticity tests on identically designed samples. To obtain the range of theoretical predictions, we assume either uniform strain or uniform stress. Our study of over two hundred samples shows that measured effective elastic moduli can fit EMT predictions with an error of less than 5% using both FDM and SLA methods if certain printing specifications and sample design considerations are taken into account. Notably, we find that the pore volume fraction of the designed samples should be above ≈ 1% to induce a measurable softening effect, but below ≈ 5% to produce accurate EMT estimations that fit the measured elastic properties of the samples. Our results highlight both the strengths of EMT for predicting the effective properties of solids with low pore fraction volume microstructural configurations, and the limitations for high porosity microstructures. The elasticity of a material containing voids (empty pores) or inclusions (fluid-filled or solid pores) can be approximated using effective medium theory Probably the first steps in treating a material as effectively elastic were done by The EMT prediction for even the simple scenario of a single void embedded in a homogeneous matrix is not straightforward. The approximation is unequivocal only if 1) the background is isotropic or transversely isotropic, 2) the void is ellipsoidal, and 3) the void is very small. In the case that one of the first two conditions is not satisfied, an analytical solution cannot be obtained Early studies on ceramics with spherical pores have confirmed empirically the usefulness of EMT There have been attempts to examine EMT on synthetic materials, where the microstructure is much better constrained. One approach is to place polymeric inhomogeneities inside a previously prepared sandy matrix,with the polymeric materials being subsequently removed by chemical or thermal processes, leaving voids behind To our knowledge, researchers have used either manufacturing or 3D printing samples having small inhomogeneities only-such as highly concentrated small pores In turn, one cannot clearly distinguish the impact of interactions from the effect of pore concentration itself. Also, the small size of pores impedes fluid injection to measure the poroelastic response of such samples. All the aforementioned problems can be overcome if larger inhomogeneities are considered. A downside of such a solution, though, is that the acoustic measurements are heavily degraded due to the static assumption violation. Also, the theoretical prediction is not unequivocal due to the impact of the choice of boundary conditions. In this paper, we used fused deposition modelling (FDM) and stereolithography (SLA), two standard 3D printing technologies, to produce twenty different type of samples that contain relatively large voids with different geometries. Our samples are uniaxially compressed, and they behave elastically within a significant range of deformation. We obtain the elastic components of the stiffness matrix (Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio) from the experimental measurements, and attempt to validate EMT empirically. Pores are designed to be large enough to highlight the softening effect and ensure that the impact of void interactions is pronounced. Also, the sizes of voids might facilitate future fluid injection tests. 3D printing provides a very high accuracy of the desired microstructure that may overcome the above-mentioned manufacturing methodologies. Although 3D printing was developed in the 1980s, to our knowledge, only a few works have used this technology in the context of effective elasticity measurements Our research fills the gap in EMT validation studies for a variety of reasons. First, different geometries of voids are designed-instead of dense microcracks only-that are large enough to enhance the softening effect and overcome measurement errors. Also, we propose various interaction configurations that have not been previously examined experimentally. Further, we performed novel experiments where cylindrical samples containing twenty different void microstructures, printed with two different technologies, were deformed under uniaxial compression. Finally, we report results from over two hundred samples in total, which means that our experimental validation is less prone to random errors. In this paper, we discuss three main issues regarding uniaxial compression tests of 3D-printed samples with voids. First, we attempt to understand how the differences between 3D printing technologies and their specifications may affect the effective Young's modulus measurements. Second, we present the impact of Young's modulus measurement methodology. Third, and most importantly, we focus on whether EMT accurately predicts Young's modulus given the issues mentioned above. Two standard 3D printing technologies were used in this study: SLA and FDM. Stereolithography, patented in 1986, is the world's pioneering 3D printing technology. This method is a type of additive manufacturing process that employs a laser source to solidify liquid-state, light-reactive resin into solid polymers through a process called photopolymerization. A Computer-Aided Design (CAD) model is imported into the 3D printer which then constructs the object layer by layer (with 0.1 mm resolution). This is achieved by focusing the laser source, by which it selectively solidifies the liquid resin, precisely following the cross-sectional images of the 3D model. The resulting products usually require post-printing treatment. They are first immersed in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) to remove any residual, uncured resin. Subsequently, an additional curing step under heat may be needed to finalize the polymerization reaction, which brings the material to its optimal mechanical properties. The SLA method is known for producing highly detailed and accurate objects with seamless surface finishes. This makes it an optimal choice for a wide range of applications, including prototyping, jewelry craftsmanship, and dental modelling, among others. Once the resin is hardened, though, it cannot be recycled. Discarded parts need to be disposed as household waste. Fused Deposition Modelling is a widely used, cost-effective 3D printing technology. As in SLA printing, FDM also constructs CAD modelled objects by additive manufacture of the model cross-sections. A thermoplastic filament, in our case, biodegradable, polyactic acid (PLA), is fed into a heated nozzle that melts the material and then precisely extrudes it onto the build platform, constructing the object layer by layer. FDM printing is characterised by the lowest entry and material price of the 3D printing market, by very simple usage, and for having the lowest environmental impact with respect to other 3D printing technologies The latter is mainly due to its lower process energy consumption and the possibility of reusing or recycling its wasted products. These factors make FDM a highly popular choice for proof of concept purposes and prototyping. However, the level of accuracy and precision that FDM can offer is limited by the diameter of the circular orifice of the nozzle tip (in our case 0.4 mm). In addition, the layer-by-layer deposition (with 0.1 mm of resolution) limits the quality of curved surfaces, causing a grainy surface finishing. The ability of defining the exact shape, position, orientation, and density of the pore microstructure in a homogeneous matrix makes 3D printing highly attractive for evaluating the predictive capacity and limitations of EMT. In the context of 3D printing for EMT testing purposes, the starting material needs to be as isotropic, non-porous, and homogeneous as possible. Because both SLA and FDM printed objects are built layer by layer, some anisotropy is to be expected in the mechanical properties of printed materials. Mechanical anisotropy has been shown to be low (≈ 1%) for SLA printed objects By contrast, mechanical anisotropy can be significant for FDM printed samples Young's modulus is defined as the slope of the elastic (straight-line) portion of a stress-strain curve. If the slope is taken between two stress-strain points, the modulus is the change in stress divided by the change in strain. In general, brittle materials such as metals, certain plastics, and rocks will exhibit steeper slopes and higher moduli values than ductile materials such as rubber. Importantly, the values of Young's moduli may differ depending on the derivation methodology. slope of the curve. The second term describes a modulus measured from the selected start and end points of the curve. A line is drawn between these two points and the slope of that line is recorded as the modulus. Finally, the secant modulus is a particular type of chord modulus, where the start point is defined as the origin of the stress/strain curve. As reported by They specified these points based on: 1) the lower and upper elastic limits of the curve (if an elastic part is perfectly linear, this approach is equivalent to the ASTM-D695 tangent method), 2) 20% and 80% of the ultimate strength (cord modulus), and 3) 0% and 50% of the ultimate strength (secant modulus). Their analysis indicates a large discrepancy in results between the secant modulus and the two former methods (circa 23%) due to the inelastic crack compaction occurring in the initial part of the curve. In this paper, our primary goal is to consider the impacts of the voids on the elastic moduli of materials. These impacts might be different depending on the Young's moduli derivation methodology chosen. Therefore, similarly to In this section, we discuss the elastic moduli that we measure during uniaxial tests, the properties that are required to obtain the theoretical predictions, and we indicate how these predictions are calculated. In a uniaxial compression test, the components of the principal stress tensor can be written as σ 1 ̸ = 0, σ 2 = 0, and σ 3 = 0. In every test, we measure the axial strain in the direction of compression thatinvoking Hooke's law-is equal to ε 1 = S 1111 σ 1 , where S ijkl denotes the forth-order compliance tensor. Additionally, if a sample is isotropic or transversely isotropic (TI) with the symmetry axis aligned with the compression direction, we measure the radial strain that is equal to ε r = ε 2 = ε 3 = S 1122 σ 1 . The above elastic properties can be expressed as Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio, namely, E := σ 1 /ε 1 = 1/S 1111 and ν := -ε r /ε 1 = -S 1122 /S 1111 , respectively. In the case of a compression test of a plain sample, both Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio are background moduli used in the theoretical predictions, as explained later. In the case of a sample with a void (that usually induces anisotropy of lower symmetry than TI), we measure Young's modulus only, which is the effective parameter. Effective properties of a medium with a single inhomogeneity (e.g., void) can be predicted differently depending on the boundary conditions we choose. If stress is assumed to be uniform under the absence of the inhomogeneity, then according to e.g., where S 0 ijkl is the background compliance tensor, φ is the inhomogeneity volume fraction, H ijkl is the compliance increase due to void presence, and ∆H ijkl is the compliance correction factor due to the presence of fluid or solid in the void. If displacement, not stress, is assumed to be uniform, then where C 0 ijkl is the background stiffness tensor, N ijkl is the stiffness decrease due to the presence of the void, and ∆N ijkl is the stiffness correction factor due to the presence of fluid or solid in the void. In this paper, we do not consider fluid or solid filling of the void; hence, the last term in (1)-(2) equals zero. We use (1) and ( H ijkl and N ijkl can be derived analytically for ellipsoids embedded in an isotropic or TI background. They depend on a) void shape, b) void orientation, and c) background Poisson's ratio. The exact expressions for H ijkl and N ijkl are presented in e.g., In the case of multiple voids, if one assumes that the distance between inhomogeneities is great enough, then the stress at the boundary of each void region is nearly the same as at the boundary of the body. We can write the so-called non-interaction approximation (NIA) as where superscript m describes each void in the medium. If the displacement at the boundary of each void region is nearly the same as at the boundary of the body, we get a dual version of NIA, In the case where voids are relatively close to each other, the interaction between them may disturb the stress and displacement field. This is why several interaction schemes, such as the self-consistent, differential, Maxwell, or Mori-Tanaka schemes, were proposed Also, unless voids are parallel, these schemes are difficult to apply in the cases of anisotropy 3 Experiments 3D printed samples were subjected to uniaxial compression using a servo-controlled uniaxial load frame in the Rock and Ice Physics Laboratory of University College London (Figure The circumferential strain ε c is calculated from the differential LVDT output δl = l f -l i (see Figure We designed twenty types of cylindrical samples having different configurations of voids. These samples were 62.5 mm long with a diameter of 25 mm. This way, the 2.5 proportion between length and diameter suggested by ASTM-D695 and rock experimentalists e.g. The longitudinal and cross-sections of samples designed for the preliminary phase of experiments are depicted in Figure Theoretically, a void with a very low aspect ratio makes the softening more pronounced, an this effect should be even more significant if the volume of the pore increases. Therefore, samples 1.2 and 1.4 were designed to verify the influence of pore volume along with the possible effects of decreasing the distance between pore boundary and sample edge. Samples 1.3 and 1.5 contain one prolate ellipsoid and one sphere, respectively. The sizes of voids are designed in such a way as to overcome the limitation of printer resolution and make the softening significant enough for it to be easily measurable. The samples were printed using FDM (Prusa i3 MK3S+ printer) and SLA (Form3+ printer) technologies. In the case of FDM printing, we used PLA as the filament material. We set 100% rectilinear infill and select two different options for wall thicknesses (perimeters); our samples have either two or five perimeters. In Figure In the case of the SLA printing, we used standard grey resin. The manufacturer suggests putting freshly printed material in IPA (alcohol) and heating it to make the fabric stiffer. In this paper, we go beyond this suggestion and check two other procedures: a) IPA cleaning and cure for a month without heating, b) IPA cleaning and cure for a week without heating, and c) IPA cleaning, heating (60 • C), and fast cure (between 4 hours to 2 days). This way, we verify the influence of a cure time on the sample stiffness and compare it with the influence of the heating. In Figure keep a significant softening effect, c) keep it flat enough to be considered a crack, and d) allow fluid injection in the future. Samples 2.3 and 2.4 are designed to verify the influence of a crack-like void orientation. We designed other samples to verify the possible influence of interactions between two vertical cracks (samples 2.5 and 2.8), horizontal cracks (samples 2.6 and 2.9), and vertical and horizontal cracks (samples 2.7, 2.10, and 2.11). Further, samples 2.12-2.15 may allow us to measure the significant softening effect (as compared to plain sample 1.1) and interaction influence of a moderate crack concentration; the total volume fraction of voids in samples 2.12-2.13 is φ ≈ 5.6% and in samples 2.14-2.15 is φ ≈ 11.2%. Note that the overlapping of the samples is small enough to keep the crack-like shapes but perhaps sufficient to equilibrate pore pressure in future fluid injection experiments. In this phase of experiments, all samples are printed using FDM technology and have two perimeters. The interior of each void (either isolated, overlapping, or crossing) type is shown in Figure As mentioned in Section 2.3, we measure either Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio (plain samples) or Young's modulus only (samples with voids). We subjectively choose four pairs of start and end points on the strain-stress curve to define the limits for Young's moduli: • 15% and 30% of the yield strength, E 15-30 , • 25% and 50% of the yield strength, E 25-50 , • 25% and 75% of the yield strength, E 25-75 , • lower and upper elastic limits, E el . For instance, where σ y is the stress at yield, u is the displacement measured by LVDT, l is the sample's average length. In the case of FDM, the yield strength is determined based on the first peak of the stress-strain curve. In the case of SLA, yield is difficult to determine unequivocally due to the continuous growth of stress with displacement. Therefore, we arbitrarily choose a threshold of 6% strain to obtain the reference point (yield strength approximation) used to calculate the limits of Young's modulus. To define the Poisson's ratio, we first estimate two ranges of stresses that correspond to the elastic part of axial and radial curves. Second, we choose a common range of stress that-in a set theory sense-is the intersection of the two aforementioned ranges. This way, the parts of ε 1 and ε r needed for Poisson's ratio computation are unequivocally determined. Our compression experiments and modulus measurements are less prone to random errors due to the repetitions of 3D printing and testing of identically designed samples. This way, more reliable average values of moduli can be obtained. Table Results of axial strain as a function of stress are plotted for the five preliminary-phase microstructural configurations (samples 1.1-1.5) (Figure It can be seen that FDM printed samples are stiffer and stonger with respect to SLA samples, and that the printing pattern (numbers of delimiting perimeters) does not significantly affect their mechanical behavior, although samples printed with two perimeters (FDM t ) consistently display higher stiffness and higher yield strength with respect to those with five delimiting contours (FDM v ) for all preliminary-phase samples except for 1.4. SLA printed samples are relatively soft, elasto-plastic materials. Curing time and method have a significant influence on the mechanical properties of SLA printed samples. Two days of curing time within a heated chamber at 60 • C is shown to be the most effective method to drive the material to higher mechanical strength. In addition, samples cured for one month are consistently stiffer and stronger than samples cured for one week. The microstructural configuration of samples does not significantly affect the mechanical properties of preliminary-phase 3D printed samples, except for the 1.4 microstructural design, which notably alters the deformation mechanism of FDM printed samples. This design has the largest void fraction and smallest distance from void to sample edge. Predictably, this microstructural configuration induces a significant softening effect and causes a different deformation mechanism by which the pore boundaries collapse at lower stress due to stress concentrations at the thin walls surrounding the pore (Figure Poisson's ratio measurements for plain FDM samples printed with two and five perimeters (FDM t , FDM v ) and SLA samples with the previously described curing methods (SLA m , SLA w , SLA f ) are indicated in Table Figure The average Young's modulus calculated from the arithmetic mean of 12 and 6 repeated tests for plain FDM samples, and samples 1.2-1.5, respectively, are shown in Figure for the elasticity modulus of 3D printed samples. Young's modulus results vary depending on the portion of the elastic range chosen for modulus computation. The higher magnitudes are obtained using the 25 to 50% portion of the elastic range. FDM t samples display a consistently higher Young's modulus with respect to FDM v , although the difference is not significant (0.05GPa or less). Samples 1.1-1.5 were printed using the SLA method and treated with the curing procedures described in Section 4.1 (1 month at room temperature, 1 week at room temperature, 1 hour in 60 • C chamber). Three series of samples 1.1-1.5 were printed, treated, and tested for each curing method. Two additional series 1. of samples were tested immediately after heating (no curing time). This workflow was followed to evaluate the repeatability of results for printed samples following the same post-printing processing. Calculations of E 25-50 for the different series processed using the same method, for each curing procedure, are displayed in Figure The effect of the elapsed time between the curing of whole SLA samples and the execution of the uniaxial test to determine the mechanical properties of SLA samples is displayed in Figure Figure By contrast, SLA printed samples experience a consistent, albeit smaller, elastic range of 49.3%. The microstructural configuration of sample 1.4 does not produce deformation due to pore space collapse in SLA printed samples. However, it is important to note that the yield point for SLA printed samples is less well defined. To avoid arbitrary definitions, the yield point of SLA samples was assumed to correspond to 6% of axial strain, throughout. Figure Now that we have confidently determined the elastic properties of plain SLA and FDM printed samples (section 4.2), we can use these results to compute the predicted effective modulus for each sample with voids. However, predictions may not be unequivocal; as they depend on the boundary conditions chosen for theoretical calculations (uniform stress or uniform strain). As a result, for certain pore geometries, different boundary conditions can result in different predicted magnitudes for equal void configurations. In such cases, the prediction of effective Young's modulus from EMT is a range, and not a single magnitude. Herein, we describe the effect that pore space volume and shape have on the range of predictions by EMT. Theoretically, the larger the softening effect caused by a void, the larger the range of estimation is-meaning that the prediction becomes equivocal and, hence, less accurate. Both the softening effect and the prediction range are affected by the interplay of the void's orientation, shape, and size. For the sake of analysis, let us assume a single, horizontal, oblate void, such as those embedded in samples 1.2, 1.4 and 2.4, within a FDM printed sample with two perimeters (FDM t , E 0 = 2.69 GPa, and Poisson's ratio of ν 0 = 0.41). If we consider a fixed shape of the horizontal spheroidal void and we increase its radius (e.g., samples 1.2 and 1.4), then the increased volume of the void leads to higher inaccuracy of EMT prediction (Figure The measured effective elastic modulus of 3D printed samples, considering four different ranges for elasticity modulus computation (E 15-30 , E 25-50 , E 25-75 and the whole elastic portion of the curves), are plotted along with the predicted range for effective Young's modulus calculated from EMT for each microstructral configuration for a) FDM, preliminary phase printed samples (Figure where E measured is the average effective Young's modulus (averaged over a number of repetitions), and E predicted is the middle value within the EMT prediction range. The results of effective Young's modulus for FDM secondary phase samples correspond to the arithmetic mean of six tested samples per sample type, and are plotted normalised with respect to the measured Young's modulus of plain cores. The best fit to EMT predictions is achieved for effective moduli computed with E 15-30 , and for samples printed with two perimeters, which display very small errors of 0.94%, 0.23%, and 1.08% for samples 1.2, 1.3, and 1.5, respectively. The mismatch between measurements and predictions is highest for sample 1.4 (deformed due to pore space collapse) for any printing set-up and modulus calculation. Measured effective modulus for samples 1.4 are between 5.95% and 65.6% lower than EMT predictions. The details of computed effective Young's modulus and comparison with EMT predictions for SLA printed samples are displayed in Table Comparisons between EMT prediction with respect to measured effective moduli for secondary phase FDM printed samples (Figure with respect to measurements, by 4-9%. The effective modulus for two overlapping oblate pores (sample 9) is underestimated by EMT predictions by 7-9.5%. More complex pore arrangements such as those constituting the internal structure of samples 2.12-2.15 display the highest errors between measurements and predictions. The higher pore fraction volume of these samples causes a larger softening effect, which results in a wider prediction range from EMT. Effective modulus measurements for samples 2.12 and 2.13 (φ ≈ 5.6%) lie 6-11.4% above the upper limit of the effective modulus range predicted by EMT. By contrast, measured moduli for samples 2.14 and 2.15 (φ ≈ 11.2%) lie approximately 150% above the upper bound of the predicted range. Figure Figure Figure We have produced and subjected to uniaxial compression over two hundred 3D printed samples using two different printing technologies, considering distinct printing specifications and post-printing processing methods, and twenty different microstructural configurations. This thorough approach allows us to confidently state the strengths and limitations of 3D printing to emulate solids with voids and the capacity of effective medium theory to predict their effective elastic properties. We first discuss the methods and practices that we have seen to optimize the fit of measured elastic moduli with EMT predictions. We then examine the constraints on sample dimension and microstructural design that need to be considered for manufacturing representative porous media. The best fit between measured and predicted elasticity moduli for FDM printed samples (error less than 5%, Table SLA printed samples can also be used to produce controlled porous media. The best fit of measured effective elastic properties with respect to EMT predictions (error below 1%, Table Importantly, though, our results indicate that repeatability using SLA printed samples is more difficult to achieve. The mechanical properties of SLA samples appear to be affected by uncontrolled factors (e.g. ambient temperature) that cause slightly different results between printed batches, even if subjected to equal post-printing processing. In consequence, meaningful comparisons between elastic properties of SLA cores should always be done on samples printed in the same batch. We can conclude that both FDM and SLA methods can be used to emulate representative solids with a controlled void space whose effective elastic properties can be predicted by EMT. However, the need for long curing times of SLA samples, along with the difficulty of repeatability, added to the higher cost of this technology and the impossibility of recycling its wasted products, makes FDM a more convenient and equally effective method for this purpose. In order to produce 3D printed samples of an homogeneous medium with voids that can be significantly compared to predictions from EMT, some considerations need to be taken into account. First, the pore volume fraction needs to be sufficient to induce a measurable softening effect, but, at the same time, too large pore volume fraction results in an equivocal, wide range of estimation by EMT that fails to predict the measured effective moduli of samples. We observe that, for a pore fraction of φ ≈ 5.6%, such as that prescribed for samples 2.12 and 2.13, the range of effective moduli estimations from EMT becomes too wide, and lie below the measured effective properties of 3D printed samples. Results become extremely inaccurate for a pore volume fraction of φ ≈ 11.2% (samples 2.14, 2.15) with errors above 150% (Table More detailed comparisons can be made between samples with a single pore, equal shape and orientation, but different pore volume fractions. Samples 1.3 and 2.2 both contain a single, prolate, vertical pore, but with pore volume fractions of φ = 0.46% and φ = 5.12%. The misfit between measurements and EMT predictions were 0.23% and 9.34%, respectively. The effect of increased pore volume is smaller when pores are spherical. Sample 1.5 (φ = 0.87%) displayed a prediction error of 1% whereas sample 2.1 (φ = 7%) had a 2.4% error with respect to predictions. Samples 1.2, 1.4 and 2.4 all contain a single, horizontal, oblate pore but with volume fractions of φ = 0.02%, φ = 1.4%, φ = 1.4%, the latter with an aspect ratio of 0.2 as opposed to 0.1. The best fit to predictions was obtained for the smaller pore (error of 0.94%), while samples 1.4 and 2.4 displayed errors of 8% and 6%, respectively. From these results, it is tempting to conclude that smaller pore volume fractions allow EMT to better predict measured values. However, very small pores induce a negligible softening effect on samples. In these cases (e.g. sample 1.2, φ = 0.02%) the measured and predicted effective Young's modulus lie within the range of measurements of plain sample modulus, which makes this comparison meaningless. A pore volume fraction of above ≈ 1% induces a measurable softening effect, and is therefore interesting for EMT evaluation purposes. We obtained errors of less than 5% with respect to predictions for samples with either φ = 1.4% or φ = 2.8% Interestingly, a good fit between measurements and predictions was also obtained for overlapping pores (e.g. samples 2.8, 2.10, 2.11), in which the NIA is non-valid. Overall, experimental results show that closer interactions augment measured effective elasticity as compared to samples where voids are not overlapping, resulting in EMT predictions underestimating the effective properties of samples with interacting pores. It is also relevant to note that although the volume of the oblate, horizontal pores in samples 1.4 and 2.4 are the same, the increased aspect ratio of the pore in sample 2.4 (0.2) with respect to sample 1.4 (0.1) reduced the distance between void boundary and sample edge by 1 mm, which was enough to avoid the edge effect and a deformation mechanism dominated by pore space collapse. A distance of ≈ 4 mm from pore boundary to the sample edge is therefore recommended to avert pore collapse. Finally, the mean error between predicted and measured effective moduli considering samples 1-13 of the secondary printing phase lie between 2-5% (Table 5.3 Future perspectives: pore-fluid injection into 3D printed samples for undrained poroelasticity tests When porous, elastic materials saturated with fluids are subjected to stress changes that may reduce or increase the volume of pore space, the fluids within them experience a change in pore fluid pressure, which can significantly influence the strength and deformation of materials where ∆p u is the change in pore fluid pressure, ∆σ m the change in mean stress, and B is the Skempton's coefficient, a scalar for isotropic materials and a tensor for anisotropic solids and/or with an anisotropic pore space 3D printed samples with voids would enable the injection of pore fluids into their isolated pores and to conduct compression experiments while measuring in-situ pore fluid pressure change, using methods adapted from We have fabricated over two hundred 3D printed samples with voids of different sizes and geometries, using two printing technologies and various specifications, and compared their measured effective properties with predictions from EMT. From this large amount of data, we can conclude that both FDM and SLA printing technologies can emulate homogeneous solids with voids whose effective elastic properties can be predicted by EMT with an error of less than 5%, if certain specifications and considerations are taken into account: • Best results for FDM printed samples are obtained by specifying two contour printing perimeters, and when 15 to 30% of the stress/strain curve is considered for effective elastic modulus computation. • Best results for SLA printed samples are obtained by longer, post-printing, curing times (one month in our case). • Although the accuracy obtained for SLA and FDM samples can be similar, the lower cost of FDM, added to the necessity of long curing times plus identified issues with repeatability and recyclability for SLA printed samples, makes FDM overall more convenient for the manufacture of solids with voids. • The pore volume fraction of the designed porous samples needs to be above 1% to induce a measurable softening effect. However, a pore volume fraction above 5% results in equivocal, wide range of estimation by EMT that fails to predict the measured effective moduli of samples. • Better fits are obtained for spherical pores with respect to horizontally and vertically oriented pores. • Close interactions between voids leads to a diminished softening effect that is thus overestimated by EMT predictions. • A minimum distance of 16% of the sample diameter from the pore boundary to the sample edge should be prescribed for FDM printed samples to avoid an inelastic deformation mechanism through pore space collapse. 1. Selected curves are plotted for a) FDM printed samples with 2 perimeters (FDM t ), b) FDM printed samples with 5 perimeters (FDM v , c) SLA printed samples tested after f ).