Higher spectral and energy efficiencies are the envisioned defining characteristics of high data-rate sixth-generation (6G) wireless networks. One of the enabling technologies to meet these requirements is index modulation (IM), which transmits information through permutations of indices of spatial, frequency, or temporal media. In this paper, we propose novel electromagnetics-compliant designs of reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS) apertures for realizing IM in 6G transceivers. We consider RIS modeling and implementation of spatial and subcarrier IMs, including beam steering, spatial multiplexing, and phase modulation capabilities. Numerical experiments for our proposed implementations show that the bit error rates obtained via RIS-aided IM outperform traditional implementations. We further establish the programmability of these transceivers to vary the reflection phase and generate frequency harmonics for IM through full-wave electromagnetic analyses of a specific reflect-array metasurface implementation. network operators It is, therefore, imperative to employ reconfigurable antennas that have the ability to emit more than one radiation pattern at different frequencies and polarizations, efficiently use the constrained spectrum, beamform for multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) systems, and adaptively shape the beam at reduced cost and form factor In particular, systems that employ large arrays such as massive MIMO communications Another significant hindrance to future wireless systems arises from signaling strategies. Current modulation techniques like MIMO orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (MIMO-OFDM) are not sufficient to satisfy 5/6G data requirements RIS is made up of a metasurface (MTS), which is a two-dimensional (2-D) reconfigurable electromagnetic (EM) layer composed of a large periodic array of subwavelength scattering elements (meta-atoms) with specially designed spatial features Realistic and EM-compliant RIS implementations are imperative for the adoption of future RIS-based wireless communications. While many recent studies have proposed RISs Preliminary results of our work appeared in our conference publications 2) IM-based RIS across several domains. We present RIS-based designs for IM across all four major wireless media resources: spatial, spectral, temporal, and channel domains. Earlier works focused on RIS implementation in only one specific domain. 3) Full-wave physics and EM modeling. Our IM implementations are complemented by realistic, full-wave physical and EM modeling of RIS. We introduce the circuit design of a unit-cell that is later used for BER analyses. 4) BER analyses. We employ our novel EM-compliant design for BER analyses of R-MTS-based SM and OFDM-IM systems. Our comparison with traditional modulation techniques under Rayleigh and Rician channels shows the feasibility of our RIS implementation. Throughout this paper, we denote the vector and matrices in bold lowercase and uppercase letters, respectively. The i-th element of a vector x is x i . The (l, k)-th element of a matrix X is X l,k . The identity matrix of size N × N is I N . The notations (•) T and (•) H denote transpose and conjugate transpose operations, respectively. The notation R(•) denotes the real part of the signal. The notation CN (μ, σ 2 ) denotes complex normal distribution with mean μ and variance σ. The statistical expectation operator is E[•]. The operator mod(•) denotes the modulo operation. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we summarize the system models used for RIS-aided IM systems. We follow this by describing our RIS system implementations of various IM techniques in Section III. We present our EM-compliant circuit design for the RIS meta-atom to achieve these systems in Section IV. We validate our models and methods through numerical experiments in Section V and conclude in Section VI. In a conventional transmitter (Figure Consider a single-user MIMO system with N t transmit and N r receive sub-apertures. At each time index, a codeword x ∈ C Nt×1 is generated based on the input information bits. The codeword contains the complex-valued modulated symbols. The Tx source illuminates the R-MTS to perform modulation, multiplexing, and beamforming. The resulting codeword is transmitted through the R-MTS Tx array over a narrowband statistical channel, where the delay spread is much lower than the reciprocal of the bandwidth. The baseband, discrete-time N r × 1 complex received signal vector is where H ∈ C Nr×Nt is the channel matrix, ρ is average received power, and n ∈ C Nr×1 is the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with n ∼ CN (0, σ 2 n I Nr ). We analyze the communications system performance of the R-MTS transceiver using several different channel models to represent specific relevant propagation environments, i.e., direct line-of-sight (LoS) channel, Rayleigh fading, and Rician fading. Direct LoS path loss: The direct LoS component accounts for the signal path from the Tx antenna to the Rx antenna without any reflection. The direct link channel between Tx and Rx is noted as h T R,m (Figure where λ is the wavelength of the Tx signal, G T,LoS (G R,LoS ) is the gain of the transmitter (receiver) for the direct LoS component, and d LoS is the LoS distance between the Tx and Rx antennas. Rayleigh fading channel: When operating in a congested urban environment, the LoS path between the R-MTS transmitter and the intended receiver is often blocked or obstructed. The Rayleigh fading model is used for stochastic channel fading for non-LoS (nLoS) path For line-of-sight (LoS) communications, the standard statistical model for a multipath fading channel follows a Rician distribution where K is the Rician K-factor of the channel, H LoS ∈ C Nr×Nt is the LoS channel component, which remains unchanged within channel coherence time, and H nLoS ∈ C Nr×Nt is the nLoS fading component representing random multipath fading. The Rician K-factor is the ratio between the power in the direct path (LoS) and the power in the other, scattered, nLoS paths. This model has been used in literature to analyze SM Assuming that the additive noise terms at the N R receive antennas are statistically independent zero-mean Gaussian, the maximum likelihood detector (MLD) is optimal in the sense that it minimizes the probability of error P E . The MLD estimates the symbol vector x that minimizes the Euclidean distance metric In particular, the signal received at the l-th receive antenna from the RIS is Classical SM is the transmitted signal energy; H l,i = β l,i e -jψ l,i is the wireless fading channel between the l-th receive antenna and the i-th meta-atom reflector element; β l,i is the corresponding complex pathloss coefficient; and n l ∼ CN (0, N 0 ) is the AWGN sample at the l-th receiver. The reflection phase of each meta-atom {φ i } N i is adjusted by tuning the active embedded element to achieve the desired spatially-varying aperture phase distribution of the R-MTS. The R-MTS adjusts the reflection elements of each meta-atom to achieve beamforming, signal modulation, and spatial multiplexing. As shown in The SNR is maximized at the m-th receive antenna when the reflection phase of each meta-atom is adjusted such that ψ i = ψ m,i . This results in a maximum SNR at the selected receive antenna as As a performance metric, we consider the ergodic capacity of the R-MTS transceiver MIMO system. Assuming that the channel is unknown at the transmitter and known at the receiver, the instantaneous capacity of the MIMO system is where I Nr denotes the N r × N r identity matrix, and γ is the average signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) over all receiver array elements. The ergodic capacity is the expected value of the instantaneous capacity Table I lists various IM methods for which we now present RIS-aided designs. A simplified illustration of these modulations is shown in Figure The R-MTS has the ability to alter the reflection phase of each meta-atom that comprises the RIS in a programmable time-varying manner. This feature allows R-MTSs to perform M -ary PSK modulation without conventional RF transceiver and phase shifting circuitry. R-MTSs enable a new simplified wireless communications architecture where the R-MTS directly modulates the baseband digital signal onto the carrier wave The simplified architecture RIS-based approach to PSK eliminates the need for RF mixers, filters, and wideband power amplifiers (PAs), which increase the cost and complexity of systems. The time-varying reflection coefficient of each meta-atom in the R-MTS is expressed as where A(t), f (t), and φ(t) are the amplitude, frequency, and phase of the meta-atom's reflection coefficient. The signal constellation for M -ary PSK is The total number of bits being conveyed by the transmitter during each signaling interval in PSK is where M is the size of the considered PSK signal constellation. SM is a spatial domain form of index modulation that emerged as a low-complexity yet energy-efficient MIMO transmission technique where M is the size of the considered signal constellation, such as M -ary phase shift keying (M -PSK) or M -ary quadrature amplitude modulation (M -QAM). SM is particularly well suited for R-MTS/RIS implementation due to its simplified RF transceiver architecture and ability to use only a single RF source Other variations of SM implemented directly using a RIS (R-MTS) transceiver include spatial shift keying (SSK) We consider the following two forms of IM that employ frequency as an index. 1) Subcarrier-Index Modulation On-Off Keying (SIM-OOK): In addition to RIS/LIS-based spatial IM, a time-modulated RIS also functions as a low-complexity and low-cost frequency-domain IM (FD-IM) transceiver. Space-time (ST) modulation of the RIS reflection phase enables tunable frequency translation and programmable frequency harmonics where n SIM is the number of different discrete frequency possible harmonics that can be generated by the ST-modulated R-MTS. Section IV explains the EM theory and analysis of R-MTS frequency harmonic and subcarrier generation. 2) Subcarrier-Index Modulation OFDM (SIM-OFDM): A common type of digital modulation used in current wireless communications, such as IEEE 802.11a wireless local area networks (LAN), WiMAX, and 4G LTE, is OFDM Here, multiple closely spaced orthogonal frequency subcarrier signals with overlapping spectra are transmitted to carry data in parallel. A generic OFDM transmitter takes the form shown in Figure where X a are the information symbols and T sym is the temporal symbol duration. When the complex symbol is up-converted for wireless transmission, the transmitted signal is where f c is the carrier frequency of the transmitter. The currently employed modulation techniques based on MIMO-OFDM are not sufficient to satisfy the requirements for 5G and upcoming 6G networks To overcome physical layer challenges associated with MIMO-OFDM, SIM-OFDM, and MIMO-OFDM-IM, we propose the use of a space-time varying RIS (R-MTS) transceiver to implement these frequency domain (FD)-IM techniques. Through space-time coding of an R-MTS, frequency harmonics or subcarriers are generated and spatially steered in a controllable manner to produce SIM Time-domain (TD) IM schemes can be classified as either IM carried out on time slots or IM carried out on dispersion matrices 1) Single-Carrier-Based IM (SC-IM): SC-IM is a TD-IM scheme that performs IM on time slots of each transmit frame, where only part of the time slots are occupied for data transmission where N s is the number of symbols per frame, l s is the number of time slots in each sub-frame. L CP is the length of the cyclic prefix (CP), and M is the size of the M -ary symbol constellation. Using our software-defined R-MTS transceiver, SC-IM can be implemented by letting the digital controller map the data into index bits and M -ary constellation bits. Similar to the R-MTS implementation of SM, the index bits are mapped from the controller into transmission time frames and the R-MTS directly modulates the phase and/or amplitude of the carrier signal at the appropriate time slot to modulate the M -ary constellation bits. 2) Space-Time Shift Keying (STSK): The STSK is a modulation scheme for MIMO communication systems, where the concept of SM is extended to include both the space and time dimensions where N ns is the number of time slots per signaling interval and bpcu is bits per channel use, which is a measure of spectral efficiency. A low-cost ST-modulated R-MTS transceiver is well suited to be the transmitter of a STSK or GSTSK system. The digital controller of the R-MTS can map input data bits into dispersion matrix index bits and M -ary constellation bits. The digital controller of the R-MTS transceiver can also select the P dispersion matrices from the set of Q pre-designed dispersion matrices where A i ∈ C Nt×Nns are complex valued matrices. Through ST-modulation, the R-MTS is also able to perform the ST-mapper functionality of the GSTSK transmitter. Similar to our R-MTS-based implementation of SM, the R-MTS can also implement the more general SM by choosing the appropriate transmit sub-aperture or element during the specified time slot. Finally, the channel or paths may be employed for index modulation as follows. 1) RA-SSK: Reconfigurable antennas (RAs) have long been a subject of EM research to the wireless communications community Recently, RA-based IM modulation techniques have also become a focus of wireless communication research The challenge for RA-SSK systems is to minimize the spatial correlation between different radiation pattern states where N si is the number of uncorrelated radiation pattern states available at the i-th transmit antenna or R-MTS sub-array. Practically, the number of index bits that are signaled is limited by the number of distinct (uncorrelated) radiation patterns generated by the RA. As we show later, the degrees of freedom and a large number of tunable elements provided by an R-MTS/RIS have the potential to increase the number of available uncorrelated radiation pattern states and improve the BER performance of RA-SSK systems. Media-based modulation (MBM) is a form of channel-domain IM (CD-IM) that is implemented by intentionally altering the far-field radiation pattern of a reconfigurable antenna (RA) Very recently, an RA simulation model using a traditional 2-by-2 square patch array consisting of four microstrip patch antennas was presented to provide four different radiation pattern states for MBM 3) Space-Time Channel Modulation (STCM): As an alternative to MBM and RA-SSK, STCM has been proposed as a channel-based IM technique that combines RAs and space-time block coding (STBC) The behavior an electromagnetic medium can generally be expressed using Maxwell's equations as where ε 0 = 8.854 • 10 -12 As/Vm and μ 0 = 4π • 10 -7 are the free-space permittivity and permeability, E (V/m) and H (A/m) are the electric and magnetic fields, D (As/m 2 ) and B (Vs/m 2 ) are the electric and magnetic flux density fields, and P e (As/m 2 ) and P m (Vs/m 2 ) are the electric and magnetic polarization densities of the medium. We consider E as the field excitation for the surfaces and media that form the MTS. In particular, metasurfaces that exhibit magnetoelectric coupling are called bianisotropic metasurfaces where χ ee , χ em , χ me , and χ mm are 3 x 3 dyadic tensors representing the electric-to-electric, electric-to-magnetic, magnetic-to-electric, and magnetic-to-magnetic susceptibility terms and χ represents the dyadic 6 x 6 tensor that combines the previous four susceptibility coupling terms. To achieve communications modulation, multiplexing, and antenna beamforming, we consider space-time varying R-MTSs. The EM responses of each meta-atom in the R-MTS vary by time, spatial frequency k, and temporal frequency ω frequency such that χ(t, k, ω). To avoid unwanted fast-time dispersion effects, we only consider meta-atom time variations ∆t >> T = 2π ω Since our reflect-array MTS is fully reflective with no transmitted fields, our analysis only considers the incident and reflected EM fields above the MTS (z > 0). The total EM fields are a superposition of the incident and reflected fields as where E 0,i(r) are the incident and reflected complex electric field amplitudes, k i(r) are the wavenumbers, ω i(r) are the respective angular frequencies, and R[•] denotes the real-part of a complex quantity. At the surface of the R-MTS (z = 0), the incident and reflected electric fields are related by the time-varying complex reflection coefficient Γ(t): Knowing the incident E-field from our RF source, the reflection coefficient at each meta-atom in the R-MTS can be time-modulated to achieve a reflected wave with the desired frequency, amplitude, and phase at each time step. From The meta-atom unit cell is modeled using the equivalent circuit model shown in Figure where Y 0 = 1/120π is the free-space admittance. By electrically controlling the time-varying reflection phase of each meta-atom, any arbitrary phase profile can be formed across the R-MTS array. Assuming a full 360-degree range of meta-atom phase variation, each point along the R-MTS exhibits properties resembling a perfect-electric conductor (PEC), perfect magnetic conductor (PMC), or any reflection phase in between. The active MTS is in a reflectarray configuration Assume that the R-MTS is illuminated by a plane wave with time-harmonic dependence (e j2πfct ) at normal incidence (θ i = 0). The reflected far-field radiation pattern of the R-MTS is approximated as where θ and φ are the elevation and azimuth angles of an arbitrary direction, E pq (θ, φ) is the far-field pattern of the (p, q)-th meta-atom element computed at the carrier frequency f c , the time-varying reflection coefficient of the (p, q)-th meta-atom of the R-MTS is Γ pq (t) = a e (p, q, t) exp (jφ e (p, q, t)), d x and d y are the meta-atom unit cell grid spacing in the x and y dimensions, and the wavenumber is λ c = 1 fc . The directivity of the R-MTS antenna aperture in terms of the far-field radiation pattern Next, we synthesize a formulation to determine the phase coding of the R-MTS to steer the reflected radiation pattern to an arbitrary spatial direction of interest. Assume θ r and θ i are the reflected and incident wave directions, respectively. If dΦ dx is the gradient of phase discontinuity along the MTS, then the MTS beam scanning is modeled using the generalized law of reflection as Assuming θ i = 0 and taking MTS unit cell parameters into account, the beam scanning equation becomes where ∆φ e is the phase tuning range of the unit cell element, Q is the selected period of unit cells, and d is the element spacing of each unit cell. From this relation, we calculate the phase difference between each unit cell necessary to scan the beam in the desired direction. The FPGA-based MTS control module computes the values of ∆φ e and Q accordingly for beam scanning and calculates the phase of each unit cell column (φ steer (p)) using The unit cell grid spacing in each dimension is denoted by d x and d y and the wavenumber is k c = 2π λc . The far-field phase of each element due to the array factor of the MTS is φ f f (p, q) = kc sin θ((p -1)dx cos φ + (q -1)dy sin φ). From ( To analyze the response of the time-varying R-MTS, we take the Fourier transform (FT) of ( where ω represents the frequency spectrum and * denotes the convolution operation. It follows from where ω m is the meta-atom's angular modulation frequency and n represents each frequency harmonic. Taking FT of (37) results in The frequency spectrum of the EM field reflected from the time-modulated R-MTS is obtained from It follows that the signal reflected from the time-modulated R-MTS is the illuminating incident wave frequency plus and minus frequency harmonics of the meta-atom phase modulation frequency ω m . From ( The Fourier series coefficients a m pq of the periodic function Γ pq (t) are where L is the number of time-steps in steps in the coding sequence per modulation signaling period and m represents the m-th frequency harmonic of the carrier frequency f c . From this equation, we can see that the amplitude and phase of the m-th frequency harmonic reflected from the R-MTS is a function of its time-varying reflection coefficient Γ n pq . Key parameters for RIS-based frequency harmonic generation are modulation period (T 0 ), harmonic spacing (f 0 = 1/T 0 ), and harmonic frequency (f c + mf 0 ). We show that the desired frequency subcarriers for FD-IM wireless communication techniques can be generated by a R-MTS by phase (and/or amplitude) modulation of each meta-atom. The far-field radiation pattern of the space-time varying R-MTS at the m-th harmonic frequency This shows that we have the ability to generate and spatially steer frequency harmonics in a controllable manner for advanced RIS-based modulation, multiplexing, and beamforming. The R-MTS implementation of a multi-function RIS transceiver gives us many degrees of freedom and the flexibility to optimize our wireless communication techniques for the mission and the environment. We designed a reflective time-varying R-MTS (Figure The specific meta-atom design used in this work is adapted from The R-MTS aperture consists of an array of meta-atoms (Figure We now provide physics-and EM-compliant models of our proposed RIS design. A major limitation of current research on RISs in wireless networks is the lack of accurate and tractable models that describe the R-MTS as a function of their EM properties The simulated reflection phase and corresponding amplitude responses of the tunable meta-atom are shown in Figure To better understand the relationship between the reflection phase and the diode capacitance, we plot the phase response from Figure To examine the radiation performance of the macroscopic R-MTS aperture (shown in Figure To implement FD-IM techniques, such as SIM, we need the ability to generate frequency harmonic beams using our R-MTS transceiver. In addition to the EM simulation results, we use ( To modulate additional M -ary signal constellation bits using FD-IM, we also need the capability to independently modulate the phase of each GFH. We achieve phase tuning of GFHs by time-shifting the meta-atom phase coding sequence using a circular shift. Our numerical simulations showing the phase tuning of GFHs is shown in Figure where φ des is the desired phase shift of the GFH in degrees. Using this MTS-based time-varying phase coding technique, we are able to direct modulate the carrier wave to programmable generate reflected frequency harmonics of index m, with specified harmonic spacing, and a tailored phase of the frequency harmonic. These are the EM building blocks to perform SIM-OOK, SIM, OFDM-IM, and MIMO-OFDM-IM directly using the R-MTS transceiver as described in Section III. A conceptual illustration of the R-MTS transceiver implementation of OFDM-IM is shown in Figure The R-MTS transceiver can also generate multiple simultaneous harmonics using a proper phase coding. Three examples of multi-harmonic generation phase codings are shown in Figure To demonstrate the benefit of MTS-based IM systems, we performed bit error rate (BER) simulations and compared the IM-based results to traditional non-IM systems. The advantages for MTS-based IM systems is shown in Figures 