The design of electromagnetic coils may require evaluation of several quantities that are challenging to compute numerically. These quantities include Lorentz forces, which may be a limiting factor due to stresses; the internal magnetic field, which is relevant for determining stress as well as a superconducting coil's proximity to its quench limit; and the inductance, which determines stored magnetic energy and dynamics. When computing the effect on one coil due to the current in another, these quantities can often be approximated quickly by treating the coils as infinitesimally thin. When computing the effect on a coil due to its own current (e.g., self-force or self-inductance), evaluation is difficult due to the presence of a singularity; coils cannot be treated as infinitesimally thin as each quantity diverges at zero conductor width. Here, we present novel and well-behaved methods for evaluating these quantities using non-singular integral formulae of reduced dimensions. These formulae are determined rigorously by dividing the domain of integration of the magnetic vector potential into two regions, exploiting appropriate approximations in each region, and expanding in high aspect ratio. Our formulae show good agreement to full finite-thickness calculations even at low aspect ratio, both analytically for a torus and numerically for a non-planar coil of a stellarator fusion device, the Helically Symmetric eXperiment (HSX). Because the integrands of these formulae develop fine structure as the minor radius becomes infinitely thin, we also develop a method of evaluating the self-force and self-inductance with even greater efficiency by integrating this sharp feature analytically. We demonstrate with this method that the self-force can be accurately computed for the HSX coil with as few as 12 grid points. T HE self-field, self-force, and self-inductance are char- acteristic quantities of conducting coils that have both theoretical and practical importance. One approach to solve for these quantities is to use finite element techniques. For coils with complicated geometries, this approach can lead to high-dimensional numerical grids and a computationally intensive system of equations. Alternatively, one can use equations such as the Biot-Savart Law with a finite-thickness coil representation to solve for these quantities, though numerical evaluation is generally difficult due to the high dimensionality of the integrals and an integrable singularity. Notably, these finite-thickness equations can be reduced to one-and two-dimensional integrals when considering effects between separate coils (such as the mutual inductance) by treating each coil as an infinitely thin filament. These cases also do not suffer from singularities. However, one cannot perform a similar filamentary treatment for the self-force, internal magnetic field, and self-inductance as these quantities diverge when the conductor approaches zero thickness. Instead, one must consider the three-dimensional structure of the conductor and integrate over the singularity to obtain a correct result. To expedite these calculations, in the present paper we present novel well-behaved methods for evaluating these quantities using non-singular integral formulae of reduced dimensions. Some prior research has been done to simplify calculations of the self-force, self-inductance, and internal magnetic field. In In this paper, we rigorously derive filamentary integral models for the self-inductance Our proofs, discussed in Section III and completed in the Appendices, rely on partitioning the domain of the integral for the magnetic vector potential across the length of the coil into a "near region" and a "far region." The integral in the near region may be evaluated analytically, while the integral in the far region can be simplified to a 1D integral with no singularity. These results show remarkable numerical agreement with the standard finite thickness calculations, referred to throughout this paper as "exact" calculations. We show this correspondence analytically for a circular loop and numerically for a non-planar coil of a stellarator plasma confinement device, the Helically Symmetric eXperiment (HSX) at the University of Wisconsin A consequence of the incorporation of superconducting coils into fusion designs and subsequent use of high-strength magnetic fields is that quantities such as the self-force, selfinductance, and internal magnetic field become more critical to coil design. One emerging limiting factor in coil design is the mechanical stress, described by the self-force density and the internal magnetic fields, which the coils and their support structures experience due to Lorentz forces There exist a number of applications of our work to address these and other problems. The broadest is the fast evaluation of various magnet designs, which can be used for purposes both within and outside of fusion. For stellarators in particular, the simplified formulae can be used to optimize coil shapes to minimize magnetic stress and stored magnetic energy. They may also be used to optimize coil shapes with respect to the superconducting quench limit, though this practice may be less accurate as we assume in this paper that current density in a coil is uniform, an approximation of questionable accuracy for superconductors. Our results may also be relevant to other contexts in which coil optimization is important, such as for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) We describe a coil in terms of a minor radius, a, and a center-line, r c (φ), where φ ∈ [0, 2π) parameterizes r c . We consider the Frenet-Serret frame associated with r c , a righthanded set of orthonormal basis vectors, {e 1 (φ), e 2 (φ), e 3 (φ)} where primes indicate differentiation with respect to φ. The vectors satisfy the Frenet-Serret formulas, where the curvature and torsion, κ(φ) and τ (φ), are given by These vectors are demonstrated in Figure where φ behaves as a toroidal angle, θ ∈ [0, 2π) sweeps across the plane orthogonal to r c and behaves as a poloidal angle, and s is a radius in the same plane. Using (2) and ( In this Section, we discuss the simplified integral formulae for the self-inductance, self magnetic field, and self-force density of thin electromagnetic coils. These coils are chosen to carry a uniformly distributed current I, where the current density can be written as It can be shown that this expression satisfies ∇ • J = 0. We expand in the small parameter a/L, which behaves as an inverse aspect ratio, where L represents length scales associated with r c such as |r ′ c |, κ -1 , and τ -1 . To obtain a concrete measure of the scale length L, we introduce the quantity R, which is defined to be the coil length divided by 2π, and can be conceptualized as an approximate major radius. As mentioned in the Introduction, it is essential to consider the three-dimensional structure of a conductor when determining quantities like the self-inductance or self-force; attempts to let a/L → 0 and use the one-dimensional form of the Biot-Savart law or two-dimensional form of the self-inductance formula inherently fail. To demonstrate this, we consider the self-force on a circular conductor. When letting a/L → 0, one could write the self-force density as where the magnetic field is given by the one-dimensional Biot-Savart law, and ∆r c ≡ r c -rc . (Here and throughout the paper, tildes indicate quantities evaluated at the source location, e.g. rc ≡ r c ( φ)). The integrand of (8) notably contains a nonintegrable singularity at rc = r c . One may naively attempt to "cut it out," though this does not provide a solution. Consider the known formula for the self-force on a circular conductor, which is obtained from (5.40) of Fig. The formulae in our work are determined by rigorously simplifying the three-dimensional integral form of the magnetic vector potential (29) under the assumption a/L ≪ 1. The key idea in this method is to partition the domain of the integral over φ in (29) into a "near region" in which |φ -φ| ≪ 1, and a "far region" in which a/|∆r| ≪ 1, where ∆r ≡ rr. This partition occurs at some angle φ 0 such that a/L ≪ φ 0 ≪ 1. A detailed derivation for the vector potential is given in Appendix A. It is then possible to derive the selfinductance, self magnetic field, and self-force from the vector potential. These derivations are given in Appendices B-D. It is shown in Appendix B that the self-inductance of thin coils is given by For a circular conductor of major radius R, this becomes We may apply the integral identity where E(m = k 2 ) and K(m = k 2 ) are the complete elliptic integrals. Approximating the right-hand side for α ≪ 1, Applying ( The regularized self-inductance ( where L reg,f is given in (62). A similar logarithmic dependence on a can be shown to hold for the self-force. Exact Method 2D Integral Method Fig. It is shown in Appendix C that the magnetic field for thin coils in the region s ≲ a is given by where is a regularized Biot-Savart law, is the magnetic field of an infinite cylinder of radius a carrying a uniform current I, and Figure across contours of B on the HSX coil at different aspect ratios. As expected, the two formulae show good agreement, with closer agreement at higher aspect ratios. It is shown in Appendix D that the self-force for thin coils is given by In an identical fashion to the self-inductance of a circular coil An additional quantity of interest is max s,θ |B| within the coil as it determines the critical current and temperature for a superconductor. Although the current density in superconductors is nonuniform, the value of max s,θ |B| computed for a uniform current density may be a good enough approximation (particularly in multi-coil systems) to use for optimization. Unfortunately, even with the uniform current density approximation, ( B reg , a fact that can be demonstrated for a circular coil. Therefore, it is reasonable to approximate the location of max s,θ |B| as the point that instead maximizes the quantity B (0) ≡ B reg +B cyl . This point is found to be given by s max = a and θ max = -tan -1 (B reg,2 /B reg,3 ), where B reg,j ≡ B reg • e j . Substituting this solution into where Exact Method 1D Integral Method Fig. The accuracy of ( IV. EFFICIENT QUADRATURE A key advantage of the simplified formulae for the selfinductance singularity at rc = r c . Even so, quadrature is still challenging as the integrands have fine-scale structure near rc ≈ r c for a/L ≪ 1. Figure One method to circumvent this issue relies upon subtracting and adding back some analytically integrable function, Λ(φ, φ), that fits the integrand well near the reference point. For the regularized Biot-Savart law, we choose Λ based on the integrand of (17) as follows. First, we expand the numerator and denominator about φ = φ using the result of (37) and keep terms to second order in ∆φ. Comparing this expression to (3a), we find In order to recapture the 2π-periodic behavior of the integrand of ( Comparing to the formulae for self-force of a circular coil (9, 21), we see The advantage of ( where we applied (25). Although algebraically identical to Using the same methodology, a modified expression can be obtained for the self-inductance, Figure The self-inductance, self magnetic field, and self-force of electromagnetic coils are important properties yet they are difficult to evaluate numerically due to the high dimensionality of the integrals and the presence of a singularity in the integrands. In this paper, we rigorously derived novel integral formulae for these quantities using an expansion in large coil aspect ratio. The main results are summarized in Section III, with A key direction of future research would be to incorporate measures of stress and critical current, both of which may be computed from our simplified integral formulae, into coil shape optimization. For application to fusion energy, the design of stellarators in particular may benefit from this work as there is significant flexibility in coil shape. Prior to this work, it would have been infeasible to optimize for stress or critical current as the calculations would have been too costly. The modified forms of the self-inductance and regularized Biot-Savart law now allow for optimization as they can be evaluated rapidly. An additional direction for research would be to generalize these results for electromagnetic coils with different geometries. For example, a similar methodology can be applied to coils in which the cross-section is rectangular, as will be discussed in a separate paper The magnetic vector potential is given by a threedimensional integral, We consider a closed conductor with a circular cross-section of minor radius a, carrying a uniformly distributed current I in the e 1 direction, where ∆r ≡ rr. In this Appendix, we show that when s ≲ a and the minor radius is significantly smaller than the length scales L associated with r c (which includes |r ′ c |, κ -1 , and τ -1 ), there exists a reduced form of the magnetic vector potential, where φ 0 is defined ahead. This formula will be important in Appendices B, C, and D for finding simplified integral forms of the self-inductance, magnetic field, and self-force, respectively. To reduce (29) for a/L ≪ 1, different simplifying assumptions can be applied in different regions of the domain. In the "far region" where |φ -φ| ∼ 1 and a ≪ |∆r|, the threedimensional structure of the conductor is negligible and the coil can be approximated by a one-dimensional filament. By contrast, in the "near region" where |∆r| ∼ a and |φ-φ| ≪ 1, the three-dimensional structure is not negligible and must be considered. In order to take both domains into account, we introduce an intermediate angle φ 0 such that a/L ≪ φ 0 ≪ 1. Then, we split the integral over φ in (29) in two: the near region [φ -φ 0 , φ + φ 0 ] (in which |φ -φ| ≪ 1) and the far region [φ + φ 0 , 2π + φ -φ 0 ] (in which a/|∆r| ≪ 1). In other words, we write where A similar idea of identifying an intermediate scale for the self-inductance was used on page 123 of From the position vector ( where ∆r c ≡ r c -rc . Performing a Taylor expansion in a/L and keeping terms up to first order, Next, we substitute (34) into (32b), perform the integral over θ, and keep terms up to first order in a/L. Performing the next integral over s, (35) Comparing this expression to (34), we note that (35) may more simply be written as In the near region, we use the assumption that |∆φ| ≪ 1, where ∆φ ≡ φ -φ. To begin, we expand |∆r| for small ∆φ. First, we perform a Taylor expansion of r c to second order in ∆φ, where we determined r′′ c by evaluating the e ′ 1 term of ( where the derivatives of the basis vectors can be found from the Frenet-Serret formulas Squaring this result; expanding |r ′ c |, κ, and τ about φ = φ; and keeping all terms up to second order in ∆φ and first order in a/L, where ∆θ ≡ θ -θ. It is helpful to abbreviate this expression as Note that α, β ∼ a 2 while γ ∼ L 2 . By expanding r′ c and κ about φ = φ and applying (40), (32a) can be expressed in terms of integrals of the form where m is an integer ≥ 0. Let us seek to simplify the first few cases of (43). For m = 0, (44) As α and β ∼ a 2 while γ ∼ L 2 in (42), the m = 0 case simplifies under the assumption a/L ≪ φ Substituting in (42) and performing a Taylor expansion on √ γ, For the m = 1 and m = 2 cases, which, under the assumptions that a/L ≪ φ 0 ≪ 1, yield Notably, the m = 1 and m = 2 integrals (48) are smaller than (45) by factors of (a/L) 2 and φ 2 0 . We therefore use this observation to argue that only the m = 0 integral (45) contributes meaningfully to an evaluation of (32a). As a result, in (32a) we can expand r′ c and κ about φ = φ and only keep the zeroth order term of ∆φ, (49) Next, we apply to (49) our m = 0 integral formula (46), perform a Taylor expansion in a/L and keep terms up to first order, Here, we make use of the identities where b = (s 2 + s2 )/2ss and . Taking the integral of (50) with respect to θ then s, we find that where Adding the near and far terms gives the desired result, (30). The self-inductance of a conductor is given by Applying (28), the self-inductance can be written as Applying our choice of a uniform current density in the e 1 direction ( (56) As in Appendix A, it is helpful to separate the integrals into near and far regions of the domain, where We also introduce a regularized self-inductance, where k is some constant. It will be shown below that L ≈ L reg when a/L ≪ 1, for appropriate choice of k. As with the full self-inductance, we write the regularized self-inductance as a sum of near and far parts, where In the far region we may apply the assumption a/L ≪ 1 to the denominator of (61b), giving In the near region, we apply (40) and write the denominator of (61a) as where Note that α ∼ a 2 while γ ∼ L 2 . Just as in Appendix A, we may express (61a) as a sum of integrals of the form (43). As we noted previously, because α/γ ≪ φ 2 0 , only the m = 0 integral meaningfully contributes, as the m = 1 and m = 2 integrals are smaller by factors of (a/L) 2 and φ 2 0 . Therefore, we choose to keep terms only up to zeroth order in ∆φ in our expansion of rc . Performing this expansion, (61a) becomes Applying ( Applying the far form of the vector potential (35) and noting that |r ′ c |e 1 = r ′ c , the self-inductance in the far region (58b) becomes Keeping only leading-order terms in a/L and performing the integrals over θ and s, Applying the near form of the vector potential (53) and keeping terms up to first order in a/L, the self-inductance in the near region (58a) becomes Integrating over θ and s, D. The Total Self-Inductance As noted in (57), the total self-inductance is given by the sum of its near (70) and far (68) parts. Substituting in the expanded form of the regularized self-inductance which is given as a sum of its own near (66) and far (62) parts, We make the convenient choice that such that L = L reg . Thus, we obtain In this section, we find the simplified magnetic field ( We wish to find an expanded form of the regularized Biot-Savart law where The far region integral (74b) can be simplified for a ≪ |∆r|, As in Appendix A, the near region integral can be simplified by applying |∆φ| ≪ 1 to the numerator and denominator of (74a). Noting that r′ c = |r ′ c |ẽ 1 , we use (39) to write that where we Taylor expanded κ and |r ′ c | and kept terms up to second order in ∆φ. Applying this result (76) and We apply where we identify α = a 2 / √ e|r ′ c | 2 in (77). From our standard assumption that a/L ≪ φ 0 , we have that α ≪ φ 2 0 . Under this limit, (78) simplifies to ((∆φ) + α) Applying this result to (77), we have Here we wish to evaluate ∇×A f , where the vector potential in the far region is given by (36). The curl operator acts both on the integrand and the integration limits in accordance with the Leibniz rule, (81) We may use the formula for curl in non-orthogonal coordinate systems where the derivatives of the position vector can be obtained from (4). Applying (81), Let us denote the curl of (36) as where [∇ × A f ] int refers to the differentiation of the integrand as in the first line of (83) and [∇ × A f ] dom refers to the differentiation of the domain as in the last two lines of (83). Let us start with finding [∇ × A f ] int , which is given by Applying the product rule for a curl and taking the gradient in Cartesian coordinates, we find Using the definition of the position vector (4) and the far region assumption, a ≪ |∆r|, this simplifies to Next, let us consider [∇ × A f ] dom . Applying the formulas for the position vector (4) and the Jacobian (5), we can write with some algebra that Substituting this result into (88) and keeping terms up to first order in a/L, we find that At last, in accordance with (84), we sum the two contributions to the curl, (87) and (92), to find the total curl in the far region, Here we wish to evaluate ∇ × A n , where the vector potential in the near region is specified in (53). Applying (82), performing the expansion (1 -κs cos θ) -1 ≈ 1 + κs cos θ, and keeping terms up to first order in a/L, we find (94b) As stated in (31), the total magnetic vector potential is given by the sum of its near and far parts. As a result, the total magnetic field, taken as B = ∇ × A, is given as the sum of curls of the far part (93) and the near part (94), Comparing this expression to the expanded form of the regluarized Biot-Savart law, which is given as the sum (73) of its far (75) and near (80) parts, we write the magnetic field as The self-force per unit length (abbreviated here as selfforce) can be calculated in at least two ways. An elegant approach is to use the principle of virtual work, examined in a similar context in section 3 of 