Electrostatic charge dissipation is one of the major concerns for satellites operating in the earth's orbits. Under energetic plasma conditions, they may acquire very high negative potential (up to 10's of kV) due to the collection of energetic plasma constituents -resulting in temporary outages and permanent damages to onboard equipment. This study proposes and discusses a couple of physics-based schemes capable of mitigating/ minimizing the excessive charging effects over satellites under extreme plasma conditions in LEO/ GEO. An estimate of charge build-up on the space objects based on the charging dynamics as a function of ambient plasma parameters has been made. Our calculations illustrate that in the absence of a significant charge dissipation mechanism, a severe charging (~10's kV) in the dark/ shadowed at GEO and high latitude LEO regions. We propose that the installation of a suitable UV lamp and micro/nano-structuring of the surface fabric can induce efficient dissipation mechanism and effectively prevent the surface from the deleterious charging effects during satellite operation. We demonstrate that the UV illumination may maintain the satellite surface at quite a small positive potential (~ 2 V) while the surface nanofabrication sustains it at a sufficiently low negative potential (~ 10 V). Both concepts are shown to work efficiently in mitigating the potential threat of massive charging and safely performing the satellite operation. Satellites in orbit are exposed to harsh space environments such as space debris, neutral and charged fine particles, and plasmas The charging of the objects in space plasma in different scenarios, for Maxwellian and Non-Maxwellian plasmas, has been widely discussed in the literature In case the object is illuminated by sunlight, the photoelectron emission contributes significantly to the charging and effectively reduces the negative charge; the dominant photoemission flux (over electron collection) might lead to a positive potential on illuminated satellite surfaces To address this serious issue, we have adopted a physics-based approach to model satellite charging and demonstrate effective mitigation methods to tackle the deleterious effects of excessive satellite charging. Satellite charging is a complex process that not only depends on the ambient environment but also on the satellite surface material and the geometry of the satellite To overcome this concern, traditional approaches rely on strict design guidelines, e.g., shielding, material selection, and grounding components, to avoid differential charging To illustrate the conceptual basis, we first establish the analysis deriving the charge development over the surface of orbiting satellites. The surface charge at any location in orbit depends on solar radiation and the ambient plasma environment. Orbiting around the earth, the satellite encounters different plasma compositions and solar radiation. For instance, in the illuminated regime, the satellite faces typical solar wind (sw) plasma environment, while in eclipse (dark), the satellite generally interacts with diffused sw plasma. The temporal evolution of charge can be expressed in the form of the current balance equation dQ dt = I e + I i + I ph (1) where Q is the satellite charge at any instant, I e is the current due to electrons, I i is current due to ions, I ph represents the photoemission current. For simplicity in the analysis, we limit the study to spherical objects (satellite) and Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution of the sw plasma population. The constituent electron accretion flux (2) and ion accretion flux, in a plasma environment, can be expressed as, (3) where, q e is the charge of the electron, Z = Q/q e is the charge number, n e and n i represent the electron and ion density in the ambient plasma, T e and T i represent electron and ion temperature in the plasma, respectively, k B is Boltzmann constant, m e and m i represent the mass of electron and ions, respectively, and a represents the radius of satellite. The superscript (+, -) represents a positive or negatively charged surface. This notation is followed throughout the paper. Here, the constants α e and α i are given by, When the satellite passes through the illuminated region, the current resulting from photoelectric emission plays a vital role in the charging process. The photoemission flux (n ph ) from the spherical surfaces In the case of a positively charged surface, the photoemission flux can be expressed as where, ν is the frequency of the incident photon, χ(ν) is the photoelectric efficiency -it is the ratio of the number of photoelectrons emitted per incident photon, Λ is the incident photon flux, and (ν min , ν max ) is the frequency range of the solar spectrum, and ψ is given by, ψ(ξ, (Z + 1)α s ) = (Z + 1)α s ln[1 + exp(ξ -(Z + 1)α s ] + Φ(ξ -(Z + 1)α s ) The constant dκ is obtained by numerical integration, the upper limit depends on ξ, which is defined as ξ = (hν -φ)/k B T s , φ is the work function of the surface material, h represents the Planck's constant, and T s is the satellite surface temperature. For the photoemission, the energy of the incident photon should be greater than the work function(φ) of the surface material; therefore, the minimum frequency for photoemission can be expressed as, ν min = φ/ħ. Following Draine's formulation Eq.1 for satellite charging for the negatively (Eq.5) and positively (Eq.6) charged surface can be rewritten as The temporal evolution and steady-state characteristic of the surface charge or potential on the satellite at any given location in its orbit are determined by solving the current balance equation (Eq.1) with the appropriate sw plasma and solar irradiation parameters and charging currents. We have used in-built differential equation stiff and non-stiff ode solver MATLAB packages -ode15s, ode23s, and ode23t to solve the charging equation. We use uncharged surfaces, i.e., z = 0, at t = 0, as the initial condition. As discussed earlier, satellites encounter a variety of plasma environments depending on their altitude and latitude in orbit. The ambient plasma characteristics can be described in terms of electron number density (n e ), electron temperature (T e ), ion number density (n i ) and ion temperature (T i ) within the given plasma population. The computations are performed for most of the possible scenarios the satellites encounter in their orbits around the earth. In the GEO region, the plasma density is ~1 cm -3 and electron energy is of the order of tens of keV The solar spectrum data from ASTM E490-00, Extra-terrestrial Spectrum Reference (ASTM, 2000) is used to calculate the photoemission current from the satellite surface under sunlit conditions. The solar spectrum is shown in Fig. Commonly aluminium and its alloys are used for satellite design. Therefore, we have simulated satellite charging corresponding to aluminum (φ = 4.06 eV) for the illuminated conditions. We have performed calculations for the satellite temperature T s = 255K These discussed plasma parameters and solar spectra for various physical conditions are used to perform calculations for the satellites orbiting in LEO and GEO orbits -the charging results are discussed next. First, we discuss the charging in the dark region. Such a situation may correspond to the satellite in the night segment of orbit or the shaded region of the partially sunlit satellite. In this case, the satellite surface interacts only with the ambient plasma and acquires charge. Being lighter than the ions, electrons show higher mobility and larger flux towards the surface compared to the ions. Hence, the satellite surface generally acquires a negative charge in the dark regions. As the surface charging equation (Eq.1) suggests, the electron current and ion current become equal, i.e., I e = I i , in the steady state. The numerical simulation results for charging in the dark region under different plasma conditions are shown in Fig. The numerical results in the last section indicate that the satellite can acquire very high negative potential, particularly in the dark (eclipse) region, which might yield severe damage to its functioning. These damages may cause the temporary or permanent failure of the components of the satellite and, in the worst case, can even lead to mission termination We observe severe charging effects in the dark region, while nominal/ moderate charging is noticed over the sunlit locations. In fact, in the case of sunlit surfaces, the photoelectric emission naturally mitigates the excess negative charging created by ambient plasma sources. It suggests a novel notion that the excessive negative charge could be mitigated by shining the surface with an UV source (lamp) of suitable frequency and intensity. A schematic illustrating the conceptual basis is depicted in Fig. After implementing this mitigation scheme, this additional charging effect is manifested with the charging equation (Eq.1) for the dark region to evaluate the surface charge/ potential. For illustration, the case of satellite charging in the GEO region is calculated and illustrated in Fig. As the intensity of the UV lamp (viz., photon flux) is increased to 0.1 Wm -2 ,0.5 Wm -2 and 0.7 Wm -2 the negative surface potential reduces to 6 kV, 2 kV, and 0.5 kV, respectively. If the intensity is further increased to 1 Wm -2 , the surface acquires small positive potential of ~ 2V -it puts the satellite surface in a safe regime and avoids any detrimental effect from electrostatic charging. A further increase in the UV lamp intensity, for instance, 10 Wm -2 slightly raises the surface potential to ~ 4V. We note the increase in power does not alter positive potential much, but the steady state is reached at a shorter time scale. This could be understood in terms of increasing photons with increasing lamp intensity which effectively produces photoelectrons at a faster rate, and the plasma accretion current could be compensated at a shorter time scale. Other way around, a positive charge build-up on the surface increases the barrier height for electron emission. Hence, a small variation is observed in the steady state potential values. The effect of UV source intensity on the steady state surface potential for different χ 0 values are shown in Fig. From our calculations, it may be concluded that UV light illumination of the surface of sufficient intensity (1 Wm -2 ) neutralizes the disastrous electrostatic charging and acquires a small positive potential in ms (millisecond) time scale -the effect is attributed to the induced photoemission flux from the illuminated surface. During the operation, the intensity and spectrum of the UV source, if applicable, could be tuned to the desired extent depending on the ambient plasma characteristics and subsequent charging effects. For instance, higher-intensity illumination can be more effective in the case of highly energetic ambient plasma conditions (e.g., during substorms). Another scheme of charge mitigation is based on the phenomenon of electric field emission (F.E.) of the electrons. We propose that micro (nano) structuring of the surface of the satellite surface can efficiently support the charge dissipation and mitigate the massive charge deposition -a schematic of the concept is presented in Fig. w a e r =w a -ν s (8) where, A 0 = 4πq e mk B 2 /h 3 , w a = W a /k B T , e r , e t and e f are the radial and tangential electron energy (normalized with k B T), T is the temperature of the metal lattice, v s = V s /k B T is the potential energy of an emitting electron near the charged surface and f d = [1 + exp(e r + e t -e f )] -1 represents the Fermi-Dirac (FD) distribution where ρ = r/a 0 , r is the radial distance, β = a 0 √2m e k B T/ħ , m e is the mass of the electron, ρ 0 = ν s /(e r -w a + ν s ) and φ = W a -E f is the surface work function. To illustrate the concept, we consider the field emission points are spherical tips (grains) of radius a 0 and the satellite surface is nanofabricated as shown in Fig. Accounting for this effect, i.e., the inclusion of nano-structuring, the temporal evolution of the surface charge/ potential corresponding to the geomagnetic substorm is illustrated in Fig. It is noticed that the inclusion of the field emission sufficiently reduces the negative charging and brings the surface potential to a tolerable regime where the setup operates efficiently. The temporal evolution can be understood as follows: The charging begins with dominant sw plasma collection with a negligible FE contribution. As the surface acquires negative charge, a Coulomb potential builds up and leads to the FE current. This effect is pronounced for the spherical tips. The increase in surface potential increases the FE contribution. As soon as the tips acquire sufficient negative potential to generate sufficient neutralizing FE current, the surface reaches a steady state potential, as depicted in Fig. The dependence of steady state surface potential on the tip size corresponding to substorm and high latitude plasma conditions is illustrated in Fig. The excessive surface charging of satellites in the earth's orbit due to interaction with ambient plasma has been a serious concern and is considered responsible for several anomalies and failures in satellite functioning. With our calculations, we notice that the satellite operating in the eclipse zone is seen to gain high negative surface charge in GEO (few kV to ~40 kV) and high latitudes LEO (~1.2 kV) regions. The field originating due to this massive charging can interfere with the sensitive scientific measurement instruments and might overshoot the threshold, damaging electronic devices and setup. Moreover, severe differential charging can result in arcing, which can damage electronic devices, solar panels, and other onboard instruments. To tackle this problem, in this study, we suggest and conceptualize a couple of feasible solutions to mitigate/ minimize the deleterious charging effects of space plasma over orbiting satellites. One of the solutions is based on photoemission, and we propose the installation of an UV lamp over the operating object. In the eclipse zone, when the satellites face the highest risk of severe negative charging, the UV lamp tuning might cause the photoemission of electrons and consequently suppresses the magnitude of the negative charge. Through simulation, we demonstrated that under the influence of an UV lamp, the surface acquires a finite but small positive charge keeping the satellite out of any potential threat. For instance, an UV lamp with intensity ~1 Wm -2 maintains the operating surface at 2V under substorm conditions. The other physical mechanism we propose is a natural consequence of surface morphology. We suggest that micro (nano) structuring of the surface of the satellite fabric (surface) may act as the natural source of charge dissipation through field emission where these micro (nano) tips act like FE centres and maintain the surface at a significantly lower electric potential. This process has the advantage that being a natural process, it does not require any additional power. Our calculations suggest that the surface fabricated with 10 nm spherical tips can maintain the satellite surface at ~10 V negative potential in contrast to natural charging of ~10 kV (during geomagnetic substorms). We conclude that both the schemes have potential utility to efficiently dissipate the excess surface charge and maintain the charge of the operating surface at a safe level. However, the surface charging estimation and efficiency of mitigation methods is done using a simplistic model, but it captures the underlying physics of electric charge/potential development on space objects and subsequent mitigation schemes. This study could be a basis for a more rigorous analysis of satellite charging and mitigation methods including more realistic conditions like satellite geometry/ local plasma environment and effect of other physical mechanisms (like secondary electron emission, plasma wake, etc.) which can be a direction of further investigation. The proposed mitigation techniques can be tested in controlled realistic space plasma conditions to validate the efficiency and investigate the possible artifacts. Some possible challenges may involve surface damage due to erosion and sputtering due to bombardment of energetic particles, leading to reduced emission efficiency over time. In the case of UV lamp implementation, ensuring uniform illumination across satellite surface may impose extra certain design constraints. These issues need to be rigorously analyzed and optimized design with more particulars should be considered for real-world applications. - B T e is the normalized charge number (w.r.t electron temperature), the constant