Molecular ferroelectric materials have attracted widespread attention due to their abundant chemical diversity, structural tunability, low synthesis temperature, and high flexibility. Meanwhile, the integration of molecular ferroelectric materials and Si is still challenging, while the fundamental understanding of the ferroelectric switching process is still lacking. Herein, we have successfully synthesized the imidazole perchlorate (ImClO4) single crystals and a series of high-quality highly-oriented thin films on a Si substrate. A high inverse piezoelectric coefficient (55.7 pm/V) is demonstrated for the thin films. Two types of domain bands can be observed (in the size of a few microns): type-I band tilts ~60 ° with respect to the horizontal axis, while the type-II band is perpendicular to the horizontal axis. Most of the domain walls (DWs) are 180 ° DWs for the two bands, while some 109 ° DWs can also be observed. Interesting, the DWs in type-I band are curved, charged domain walls; while the 180 ° DWs in type-II band are straight, noncharged domain walls. After applying +20 V for 5 s through a PFM tip, the 180 ° DWs in type-I band shrinks first, then disconnecting from the band boundary, forming a needlelike domain with a size of ~100 nm. The needle-like domain will extend toward the band boundary after an inverse bias is applied (-20 V), and expand along the band boundary after touching the boundary. Whereas for the type-II domain band, the 180 ° DWs are more mobile than the 109 ° domain walls, which displaces ~500 nm after applying +20 V. While such displacement is much shorter after the application of a negative bias for the same duration, starting from the positively poled sample. We hope to spur further interest in the on-chip design of the molecular ferroelectrics based electronic devices. Molecular ferroelectrics are a class of ferroelectric materials composed of small organic molecules with weak intermolecular forces such as hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces These studies enlightened the potential applications of the ImClO4 based ferroelectric materials and devices. Meanwhile, there are still two obstacles towards industrial applications for this system. Firstly, the integration of the molecular thin films in Si-based devices (e.g., transistors, memories, and sensors) is difficult. Unlike the inorganic oxides that can be deposited layer-by-layer on a substrate, the growth of high quality molecular ferroelectric thin films on Si are challenging since the chemical and physical properties of ImClO4 and Si are vastly different. Second, the deterministic control of the ferroelectric domain switching, as well as the fundamental understanding of the domain switching kinetics are lacking, which requires integrated experimental and theoretical efforts. Herein, we have successfully synthesized high-quality, large-scale, and highly-oriented ImClO4 single crystals using a facile solution-evaporation method. Excellent ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties are obtained for the single crystals. Highly (-110)-oriented ImClO4 thin films are then grown directly on a Si substrate with the sol-gel spin-coating and annealing method, using sodium alginate (SA) as the nucleation additive. A high inverse piezoelectric coefficient (55.7 pm/V) is demonstrated for the thin films. PFM characterizations indicate the formation of two types of domain bands (in the size of a few microns): type-I band tilts ~60 ° with respect to the horizontal axis, while the type-II band is perpendicular to the horizontal axis. Most of the domain walls (DWs) are 180 ° DWs for the two bands, while some 109 ° DWs can also be observed. Interesting, the DWs in type-I band are curved, charged domain walls; while the 180 ° DWs in type-II band are straight, noncharged domain walls. The switching kinetics for the two bands are further investigated. After applying +20 V for 5 s through a PFM tip, the 180 ° DWs in type-I band shrinks first, then disconnecting from the band boundary, forming a needlelike domain with a size of ~100 nm. The needle-like domain will extend toward the band boundary after an inverse bias is applied (-20 V), and expand along the band boundary after touching the boundary. Whereas for the type-II domain band, the 180 ° DWs are more mobile than the 109 ° domain walls, which displaces ~500 nm after applying +20 V. While the domain wall displacement is much shorter after the application of a negative bias for the same duration, starting from the positively poled sample. The facile synthesis route for thin films on Si and indepth understanding of the switching kinetics could pave the way towards the on-chip design of the molecular ferroelectrics based electronic devices. The structure characteristics and electrical properties of the as-grown ImClO4 single crystal are given in Fig. The high-resolution transmission electron microscope was employed to investigate the morphology and crystal plane of a ImClO4 crystal, as shown in Fig. The electric properties of the single crystal are further measured. Fig. The domain structure is characterized by piezoelectric force microscope (PFM). Fig. Furthermore, the population for the 71 ° domain walls is higher for the second case as compared to the first case. (b)-(e) Initial VPFM amplitude, VPFM phase, LPFM amplitude, LPFM phase images, respectively. (f)-(i) VPFM amplitude, VPFM phase, LPFM amplitude, and LPFM phase images after applying a bias of +20 V for 5 s in the center of the area, respectively. (j)-(m) VPFM amplitude, VPFM phase, LPFM amplitude, and LPFM phase after applying a bias of -20 V for 5 s in the center of the area, respectively. The insitu switching study for type-I domain walls is performed by applying a local bias through a static PFM tip, as illustrated in Fig. In summary, we have developed a facile solution-evaporation method to grow large scale (~1 cm in size) high quality (100)-oriented ImClO4 single crystals. They exhibit good ferroelectricity (spontaneous polarization ~1.81 μC/cm 2 at 294 K), low coercive field (~8.5 kV/cm), high Curie temperature (~372 K), and high piezoelectric coefficient (15.2 pC/N for unpoled crystal). Then, highly (-110)-oriented ImClO4 thin films are grown on a Si substrate with the sol-gel spin-coating and annealing method, using sodium alginate as the nucleation additive. XRD, optical microscopy, and PFM characterizations are performed to unveil the crystal structure, morphology, piezoelectric, and ferroelectric properties of the thin films. A high inverse piezoelectric coefficient (55.7 pm/V) is obtained in this film. Two types of domain bands (in the size of a few microns) are observed: type-I band tilts ~60 ° with respect to the horizontal axis, while the type II band is perpendicular to the horizontal axis. Both domain bands are formed mainly by 180 ° domain walls, with minor 109 ° domain walls. Most of the domain walls in type-I band are curved, charged domain walls; while the 180 ° domain walls in type-II band are straight, noncharged domain walls. The switching kinetics for the two bands are investigated with PFM. After applying +20 V for 5 s, the 180 ° domain walls in type-I band shrinks first, then disconnecting from the band boundary, forming a needle-like domain with a size of ~100 nm. While the smaller domains (~100 nm) are completely switched. The needle-like domain will extend toward the band boundary after an inverse bias is applied (-20 V), starting from the needle tip point, and expand along the band boundary after touching the boundary. Whereas for the type-II domain band, the 180 ° domain walls are more mobile than the 109 ° domain walls, which displaces ~500 nm after applying +20 V. While the domain wall displacement is much shorter after application of a negative bias for the same time, starting from the positively poled sample. This study provides a facile synthesis route for the growth of highly-oriented, high quality, and large-scale molecular ferroelectric single crystals and thin films, as well as comprehensive, in-depth understanding of the domain and domain wall kinetics. The thin films are grown directly on a Si substrate, paving the way towards the on-chip design of the electronic devices.