We propose a model to describe the fluctuations in the internal magnetic field due to ion dynamics observed in muon spin relaxation (μSR) by an Edwards-Anderson-type autocorrelation function that separates the quasistatic and dynamic components of the correlation by the parameter Q (where 0 ≤ Q ≤ 1). Our Monte Carlo simulations for this model showed that the time evolution of muon spin polarization deviates significantly from the Kubo-Toyabe function. To further validate the model, the results of simulations were compared with the μSR spectra observed in a hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite FAPbI 3 [with FA referring to HC(NH 2 ) 2 ], where local field fluctuations associated with the rotational motion of FA molecules and quasi-static fields from the PbI 3 lattice are presumed to coexist. The least-squares curve fitting showed reasonable agreement with the model with Q = 0.947(3), and the fluctuation frequency of the dynamical component was obtained. This result opens the door to the possibility of experimentally distinguishing fluctuations due to the dynamics of ions around muons from those due to the self-diffusion of muons. On the other hand, it suggests the need to carefully consider the spin relaxation function when applying μSR to the issue of ion dynamics. Muon spin rotation (μSR) is an experimental method to probe magnetic fields in matter, where the spin-polarized muons (μ + ) stopped in the sample can directly provide information on the magnitude of the local field at the interstitial site(s) via the frequency of their Larmor precession Recently, attempts have been made to observe the diffusive motion of ions in battery materials and ionic conductors by μSR measurements under zero or longitudinal magnetic field (ZF/LF-μSR) The muon spin relaxation induced by H(t) under ZF/LF is considered well approximated by the Kubo-Toyabe (KT) function A similar situation has been observed in very recent μSR studies of hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites (HOIPs) In this paper, we propose a model in which the fluctuations of H(t) are described by an Edwards-Anderson-type autocorrelation function with the parameter Q used to divide the quasi-static and dynamical components in the correlation. Our Monte Carlo simulations on the time evolution of muon spin polarization for this model indicate that the relaxation lineshape could be significantly different from that of the KT function. This difference will open the door to the possibility of experimentally distinguishing between muon self-diffusion and cation dynamics based solely on μSR measurements. We show that the origin of H(t) fluctuations can indeed be inferred by comparing relaxation functions based on this model with high-precision μSR time spectra observed in formamidinium lead iodide [FAPbI 3 , where FA denotes HC(NH 2 ) 2 ] Since our goal is to investigate how different autocorrelations of H(t) can change in the spin relaxation function, we will introduce the KT function in a simple classical way in the following. When muons are initially polarized along the z-direction and subjected to a homogeneous magnetic field H = (H x , H y , H z ), the time evolution of muon polarization is described by where H = |H|. Such a single-frequency rotation is observed when muons are subjected to a uniform external magnetic field (not parallel to z). In the case of random local fields exerted from nuclear magnetic moments, H varies with the muon position r μ so that the μSR spectrum corresponds to a random sampling of H(r μ ) = (H x (r μ ), H y (r μ ), H z (r μ )), which is described by a density distribution: The time evolution of spin polarization projected to the z-axis is then given by ) where α = x, y, and z. Unless n(H) is a delta function, g z (t) accompanies relaxation due to the loss of phase coherence in the spin precession. Specifically, provided that the static distribution of H(r μ ) is approximated by an isotropic Gaussian distribution, the corresponding relaxation function is obtained analytically by executing the integral in Eq. ( where the term 1/3 originates from the spatial average of cos 2 θ in Eq. ( where is the dipole tensor for the ith nuclear magnetic moment γ I I i situated at r i from the muon site. Since the magnetic dipolar field decays proportionally to 1/r 3 i , the magnitude of ∆ is approximately determined by the nearest neighboring (nn) nuclear magnetic moments around a muon. The Gaussian distribution for n(H) works reasonably well when the number N of nn nuclear magnetic moments satisfies the condition N ≥ 4. On the other hand, it is a relatively poor approximation for N ≤ 3, and it is necessary to calculate g z (t) by treating the muon-nucleus cluster as a few-quantum spin system using the density matrix method In general, the effect of fluctuations in linear response theory is treated by a Gaussian-Markov process. In this model, the autocorrelation of fluctuations is given by where ... denotes the thermal average over the canonical ensemble. (For a more rigorous treatment, see, for example, Ref. This integral equation can be solved analytically by the Laplace transform of g z (t) and G z (t) On the other hand, fluctuations in H due to ion diffusion do not necessarily occur in its entire amplitude; let us consider the situation in Fig. where Q is the parameter that describes the fractional amplitude exhibiting fluctuations with the rate ν i , and ν μ is the fluctuation rate due to muon diffusion. The equation with ν μ = 0 corresponds to a model introduced to describe the slowing down of magnetic fluctuations (with the rate ν i ) in spin glasses, where 1 -Q is interpreted as an order parameter that describes "ordering in time" We performed numerical simulations of the spin relaxation function for Q > 0 and ν μ = 0, which we call G ID z (t; ∆, ν i , Q), where the ion dynamics is the sole origin of fluctuations with the amplitude Q∆ 2 and the frequency ν i : Figure As shown in Figs. The LF dependence of G ID z (t; ∆, ν i , Q) is indispensable in- formation for a more accurate determination of fluctuation frequency in μSR measurements. Let us compare the field dependence of the time spectrum for Q = 0.5 and ∆/ν i = 0.5 shown in Fig. When the ion dynamics is fast enough to satisfy ν i ≫ ∆, the spin relaxation for that part is Then, if the muon is quasi-static, the corresponding total relaxation function is indicating that the curve fitting using the conventional KT function will yield a reduced linewidth (1 -Q)∆. Conversely, in the limit of slow ion dynamics (ν i ≪ ∆), the change in relaxation function is independent of linewidth, and the exponential relaxation of the 1 3 component dominates: which is valid for Q ≈ 1. This suggests that it is difficult to distinguish the ion dynamics from muon diffusion in the slow exponential damping. As demonstrated in the case of FAPbI 3 below, the difference from the conventional KT function becomes notable in the intermediate region of ν i ∆, so the spectra in such a temperature region are important in data analysis to distinguish between ion dynamics and muon selfdiffusion. One of the fields of μSR application that would greatly benefit from the possible distinction between local ion dynamics and muon diffusion would be in the study of ion diffusion. From the viewpoint of the present model, however, we are still unable to find convincing examples of μSR data that exhibit the characteristic behavior of ion diffusion revealed in our simulations. For instance, an earlier μSR study on Li 0.73 CoO 2 reported that Li ions exhibit diffusive motion whereas μ + remains bound to an O atom and immobile at low temperatures From the value of ∆ KT extrapolated to T → 0 K and that to ∼400 K On the low Q side, our simulation indicates that the change in lineshape is strongly suppressed; as seen in Fig. least-squares curve fitting of the time-dependent asymmetry using the equation where A 0 is the initial asymmetry depending on the instrument and A b is the background signal from muons that missed the sample. In addition, a global fitting for multiple spectra was performed, where A 0 , ∆, and Q were common for the spectra at all temperatures. As shown in Fig. The theoretical evaluation of ∆ in the tetragonal phase of FAPbI 3 has a problem in that it is necessary to take into account the multiple orientations of FA molecules in the PbI 3 lattice, which makes the ab initio DFT calculations difficult in the Tetra-LT phase (< 140 K). Therefore, we discuss the results of DFT calculations for the Tet-HT phase (140-280 K), where the contribution of FA molecules to ∆ is quenched by the motional effect. More specifically, the hydrogen defect calculations (for mimicking muons) were conducted in two cases, one with the FA molecules fixed to one of the eight equivalent orientations and the other with all possible orientations taken into account using the virtual crystal approximation (VCA). More importantly, as shown in Fig. We have shown by Monte Carlo simulations that when the fluctuations of H(t) due to ion dynamics correspond to 0 < Q < 1 in Eq. ( Historically, the possibility of applying μSR to the study of ion dynamics was first discussed for the diffusion of Li + ions in Li x CoO 2 However, a very recent paper reporting the results of an "operando" μSR experiment in the charging and discharging of Li x CoO 2 incorporated in a half battery suggests an alternative interpretation that the fluctuation rate ν (derived from the analysis using the KT function) reflects the contributions of both Li + and muon jump diffusion, and that ν divided by the square root of the Li-muon mass ratio ( m Li /m μ ≃ 7.9) is the jump frequency of Li Another important factor in terms of identifying the origin of fluctuation is the temperature dependence of ∆ derived from the analysis using the KT function. Although the decrease in apparent ∆ with increasing temperature may indicate a contribution of ion dynamics to spin relaxation, muon diffusion is also expected in the temperature region of interest. Our simulation results show that when the muon diffusion is dominant (ν μ ≫ ν i ), the spin relaxation can be well repro- duced using the KT function. Therefore, when the spectra are well reproduced using the KT function even though ∆ ex-hibits a change (as seen in the case of Li x CoO 2 ), it is more likely that the cause of the change in ∆ is attributed to the issue of muon site(s) rather than that of ion dynamics; note that ∆ can vary with the muon position r μ in inhomogeneous materials. For example, muons may prefer to occupy atomic vacancies or voids to reduce zero-point energy, which has a significant impact on the behavior of light particles In examining previously reported μSR studies of Li ion diffusion, there are many cases in which ∆ decreases with increasing temperature, but thus far there has been little discussion on such behavior from the aforementioned viewpoint. If the observed spin relaxation is well reproduced by the KT function, it is incompatible with the ion diffusion for which the autocorrelation function is assumed to be given by Eq. ( Finally, as a more general possibility, note that Q may not necessarily be constant over the temperature range of interest. For example, there could be a situation where the diffusion motion of two kinds of ions (other than μ + ) occurs in stages as the temperature increases because of different activation energies. Developing a model that takes such a possibility into account is a future issue. We have performed Monte Carlo simulations to investigate how the residual correlations in the fluctuations described by the Edwards-Anderson type parameter Q affect the lineshape of the relaxation function observed in the μSR experiment. As a result, we found a significant deviation from the KT function for 0 < Q < 1. We then compared the simulated relaxation function, G ID z (t; ∆, ν i , Q), with the μSR spectra observed in FAPbI 3 in which internal field fluctuations associated with the rotational motion of FA molecules and the quasi-static internal field from the PbI 3 lattice are presumed to coexist. The curve fitting shows that the model can provide an appropriate description of the temperature-dependent lineshape with reasonable ∆, ν i and Q, which is in line with cation molecular motion. This result paves the way for the possibility of experimentally distinguishing fluctuations due to ion dynamics around muons from muon self-diffusion, which has been considered difficult. It also calls into question the attribution of internal field fluctuations entirely to ion diffusion for the μSR time spectra well reproduced by the KT function, suggesting the need for a major reexamination of the results of previous analyses. * 