The recent discovery of superconductivity in bilayer La3Ni2O7 (327-LNO) under pressure stimulated much interest in layered nickelates. However, superconductivity was not found in another bilayer nickelate system, La3Ni2O6 (326-LNO), even under pressure. To understand the similarities and differences between 326-LNO and 327-LNO, using density functional theory and the random phase approximation (RPA), we systematically investigate 326-LNO under pressure. The large crystal-field splitting between the eg orbitals caused by the missing apical oxygen moves the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital farther away from the Fermi level, implying that the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital plays a less important role in 326-LNO than in 327-LNO. This also results in a smaller bandwidth for the d x 2 -y 2 orbital and a reduced energy gap for the bonding-antibonding splitting of the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital in 326-LNO, as compared to 327-LNO. Moreover, the in-plane hybridization between the d x 2 -y 2 and d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals is found to be small in 326-LNO, while it is much stronger in 327-LNO. Furthermore, the low-spin ferromagnetic (FM) state is found to be the likely ground state in 326-LNO under high pressure. The weak inter-layer coupling suggests that s±-wave pairing is unlikely in 326-LNO. The robust in-plane ferromagnetic coupling also suggests that d-wave superconductivity, which is usually caused by antiferromagnetic fluctuations of the d x 2 -y 2 orbital, is also unlikely in 326-LNO. These conclusions are supported by our many-body RPA calculations of the pairing behavior. Contrasting with the cuprates, for the bilayer cuprate HgBa2CaCu2O6, we find a strong "self-doping effect" of the d x 2 -y 2 orbital under pressure, with the charge of Cu being reduced by approximately 0.13 electrons from 0 GPa to 25 GPa. In contrast, we do not observe such a change in the electronic density in 326-LNO under pressure, establishing another important difference between the nickelates and the cuprates. The recent experimental discovery of pressure-induced superconductivity in the Ruddlesden-Popper bilayer (RP-BL) perovskite La 3 Ni 2 O 7 (327-LNO) Under the influence of hydrostatic pressure, the structure of 327-LNO transforms from the Amam to the Fmmm symmetry followed by the stabilization of a superconducting phase for a broad range of pressures from 14 to 43.5 GPa By chemical reduction, namely removal of the apical oxygen from 327-LNO, the compound La 3 Ni 2 O 6 (326-LNO) was obtained experimentally. 326-LNO also has a stacking Ni bilayer structure [see Fig. At ambient pressure, no magnetic order was found down to 4 K for 326-LNO Considering these studies in bilayer systems, several interesting questions naturally arise: what are the similarities and differences between the bilayer 326-LNO and 327-LNO nickelates under pressure? What causes these differences? Does the missing apical oxygen in 326-LNO play a key role in the reported absence of superconductivity under pressure? What is the connection between 326-LNO and 12126-HBCCO? To address these questions, here we theoretically studied the 326-LNO compound under pressure, by using first-principles DFT as well as random phase approximation (RPA) calculations. Similarly to 327-LNO, pressure increases the bandwidth of the Ni's 3d states, leading to an enhanced itinerant behavior and thus effectively reduced electronic correlations. Furthermore, the Ni's 3d orbitals are mainly located near the Fermi level and most of the O's 2p states are far away from that Fermi level, indicating a robust charge-transfer energy (ε d -ε O ) in both 326-LNO and 327-LNO, establishing a common character among these nickelates. In addition, the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital displays a bonding-antibonding splitting character in both 326-LNO and 327-LNO, as well as in 12126-HBCCO. However, different from 327-LNO, the crystal-field splitting between the e g orbitals is much larger in 326-LNO and also the in-plane hybridization between the d x 2 -y 2 and d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals was found to be very small in the latter, leading to only two Fermi surface sheets, α and β, composed primarily of the single d x 2 -y 2 orbital. By introducing electronic correlations, the low-spin FM state was found to have the lowest energy among the five considered candidates under pressure, with a very weak magnetic coupling between the layers. This strongly suggests that s ± -wave pairing is unlikely in 326-LNO. Furthermore, the large in-plane FM coupling also indicates that d-wave superconductivity, usually caused by AFM fluctuations of the d x 2 -y 2 orbital, is also unlikely in 326-LNO. These qualitative conclusions are supported by our many-body RPA calculations. In addition, we do not observe any obvious changes of the electronic density in 326-LNO under pressure, while there is a strong "self-doping effect" of the d x 2 -y 2 orbital in 12126-HBCCO, establishing another difference between the nickelates and the cuprates. In the present study, the first-principles DFT calculations were performed by using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) code, within the projector augmented wave (PAW) method Both lattice constants and atomic positions were fully relaxed until the Hellman-Feynman force on each atom was smaller than 0.01 eV/ Å. The k-point mesh was appropriately modified for different crystal structures to make the k-point densities approximately the same in reciprocal space (e.g. 16 × 16 × 3 for the conventional structure of 326-LNO in the I4/mmm phase). In addition to the standard DFT calculation, we employed the maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) method to fit the Ni's e g bands to obtain the hoppings and crystal-field splittings for our subsequent model RPA calculations, as well as obtaining the FSs, using the WANNIER90 packages Furthermore, the calculated three-dimensional FSs obtained from MLWFs were visualization by XCRYSDEN package To discuss the magnetic tendencies in 327-LNO under pressure, a strong intra-atomic interaction was considered in a screened Hartree-Fock-like manner, as used in the local density approach (LDA) plus U method with Liechtenstein format within the double-counting item To investigate the superconducting pairing properties of the 326-LNO system, we first constructed a four-band e g orbital tight-binding model on a bilayer lattice The first term represents the hopping of an electron from orbital γ at site i to orbital γ ′ at the neighboring site i + ⃗ α. c † iσγ (c iσγ ) is the standard creation (annihilation) operator, γ and γ ′ represent the different orbitals, and σ is the z-axis spin projection. ∆ γ represents the crystal-field splitting of each orbital γ. The vectors ⃗ α are along the three bilayer-lattice directions [see Fig. This Hamiltonian is supplemented with an interaction term that contains on-site intra-orbital U and inter-orbital U ′ Coulomb repulsions as well as Hund's coupling J and pair-hopping J ′ terms. To assess this model for its pairing behavior, we performed many-body RPA calculations, which are based on a perturbative weak-coupling expansion in the Coulomb interaction Here, χ 0 (q) is an orbital-dependent susceptibility tensor and U is a tensor that contains the interaction parameters where the momenta k and k ′ are on the Fermi surface, and Γ(k -k ′ ) contains the irreducible particle-particle vertex. In the RPA approximation, the dominant term entering Γ(k -k ′ ) is the RPA spin susceptibility χ(k -k ′ ). In the pressure range that we studied, the electronic structures of 326-LNO remain very similar in shape, while pressure increases the bandwidth of the Ni's 3d states, leading to an enhanced itinerant behavior. This larger bandwith "effectively" reduces the electronic correlations (see Appendix). Here, unless otherwise specified, we will mainly focus on the results at 25 GPa to understand the similarities and differences between the bilayer 326-LNO and 327-LNO systems. At this pressure, 327-LNO is already superconducting but 326-LNO is not As shown in Figs. Furthermore, the Ni d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital shows a bonding-antibonding molecular-orbital splitting character in both cases, caused by the dimer structure in the bilayers, as discussed in 327-LNO Because there are no apical oxygens connecting two Ni sites between the two layers of bilayer 326-LNO, the crystal-field splitting ∆ between the orbitals d 3z 2 -r 2 and d x 2 -y 2 increases singificantly (∼ 1.96 eV) as compared with that in 327-LNO (∼ 0.51 eV) As a result of these differences, in 326-LNO, only the d x 2 -y 2 orbital contributes to the FS, leading to two strongly two-dimensional sheets (α and β), as shown in Fig. Considering the d 8.5 electronic configuration in 326-LNO and the square-planar crystal-field splitting, the Ni ions are expected to be in a low-spin state for 326-LNO. To confirm this, we calculated the total energy as a function of the magnetic moment of the Ni ions for 326-LNO at 25 GPa, using the fixed-spin-moment method. Figure The in-plane strong FM coupling is expected to disfavor d-wave superconductivity, which is induced by in-plane AFM fluctuations of the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. These considerations suggest that 326-LNO is far from a superconductiing instability. Furthermore, we also calculated the band structure of the FM state for 326-LNO at 25 GPa. As shown in Figs. As discussed in the previous section, based on calculations of magnetism, both the s ± -wave and d-wave pairing appear to be unlikely in 326-LNO. To better understand the superconducting pairing in 326-LNO, we performed multi-orbital RPA calculations for the four-band e g bilayer tight-binding model in Eq. ( As shown in Fig. Figure the two systems and shows that the 326-LNO system is far from a superconducting instability. As discussed before, one can understand the absence of an s ± instability in 326-LNO from the fact that, compared to 327-LNO, the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital is much farther from the Fermi level, and therefore does not contribute to the low-energy physics, resulting in a much weaker inter-layer coupling. In addition, the d x 2 -y 2 orbital is at 1/4 filling in 326-LNO. This electronic density is far from the typical density region for which a single-band system like the cuprates displays d-wave superconductivity. All the above discussions of 326-LNO suggest that the reduced 326 RP-BL system is very different from the 327 RP-BL system. The main reason for this difference is that the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital plays a different role in these two bilayer systems due to different crystal-field splittings ∆ of the e g orbitals with or without apical oxygen atoms. Next, let us briefly reexamine the typical reduced bilayer cuprate 12126-HBCCO to better understand the similarities and differences between the bilayer nickelates and cuprates. 12126-HBCCO forms a P 4/mmm tetragonal crystal structure with space group No. 123 As displayed in Fig. In summary, here we have systematically studied the similarities and differences of the two bilayer nickelates 326-LNO and 327-LNO. We presented our rationale for the absence of superconductivity in 326-LNO under pressure, by using DFT and RPA calculations. For both bilayer nickelates, the states near the Fermi level mainly arise from the Ni 3d orbitals, while most of the O 2p states are localized away from the Fermi energy. In addition, pressure increases the bandwidth of the Ni 3d states, leading to an enhanced itinerant behavior, which produces a reduced "effective" electronic correlation. In both 326-LNO and 327-LNO, the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital shows bonding-antibonding splitting states. The absence of the apical oxygen leads to a large crystal-field splitting between the e g orbitals in 326-LNO, resulting in the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital being far away from the Fermi level and thus reducing its importance. This also results in a smaller bandwidth for the d x 2 -y 2 orbital and a reduced bonding-antibonding energy splitting of the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital, as compared to 327-LNO. Moreover, the in-plane hybridization between d x 2 -y 2 and d 3z 2 -r 2 is found to be very small in 326-LNO, much smaller than in 327-LNO. In addition, using RPA calculations, we have found that superconducting pairing correlations are significantly weaker in 326-LNO relative to 327-LNO. Due to a much reduced inter-layer coupling, the leading s ± -wave state found for 327-LNO is suppressed for 326-LNO. Moreover, we have found that a low-spin FM state has the lowest energy among the five magnetic configurations studied, much lower than the C-AFM state, indicating a large in-plane FM coupling in 326-LNO. This, and the fact that the in-plane d x 2 -y 2 orbitals are quarter-filled, explains why AFM fluctuation driven d-wave pairing correlations are similarly suppressed in 326-LNO. Similar to 326-LNO, the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital also displays a bonding-antibonding state splitting character in the cuprate 12126-HBCCO, suggesting a common electronic structure in the bilayer lattice. However, as a fundamental difference between cuprates and nickelates, the Cu 3d orbitals in the cuprates are highly hybridized with the O 2p orbitals, leading to a much smaller charge-transfer gap. Moreover, we found a strong pressure induced "self-doping effect" of the d x 2 -y 2 orbital in 12126-HBCCO, where the charge of the Cu states is significantly reduced by about 0.13 electrons when changing pressure from 0 GPa to 25 GPa. However, we do not observe such a change of the electronic density in 326-LNO under pressure, indicating another important difference between the nickelate and the cuprate bilayer systems. This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. As shown in Fig. The FS are contributed by two sheets (α and β) made almost entirely of the single d x 2 -y 2 orbital. The pressure increases the bandwidth of Ni's 3d states, leading to an enhanced itinerant behavior, thus also leading to reduced "effective" electronic correlations U/W . Projected band structures and FSs of the non-magnetic phase of the I4/mmmm 326-LNO structures without any interaction at (a) 0 GPa, (b) 30 GPa, and (c) 50 GPa, respectively. The weight of each Ni orbital is given by the size of the circles. The Fermi level (zero energy) is marked by the horizontal dashed line. The coordinates of the high-symmetry points of the Brillouin zone are Γ = (0, 0, 0), X = (0, 0, 0.5), P = (0.25, 0.25, 0.25), N = (0, 0.5, 0), and R = (0.5, 0.5, -0.5).