Collective dynamics of many particle systems is tightly linked to their underlying symmetry and phase transitions. Higgs and Nambu-Goldstone modes are, respectively, collective amplitude and phase modes of the order parameter that are widely observed in various physical systems at different energy scales, ranging from magnets, superfluids, superconductors to our universe. The Higgs mode is a massive excitation, which is a condensed-matter analog of Higgs particle in high-energy physics, while the Nambu-Goldstone mode is a massless excitation that appears when a continuous symmetry is spontaneously broken. They provide important information on the fundamental aspects of many particle systems, such as symmetry, phases, dynamics, response to external fields, and so on. In this article, we review the physics of Higgs and Nambu-Goldstone modes in condensed matter physics. Especially, we focus on the development on the study of collective modes in superconductors and cold-atom systems. • Introduce collective modes of an order parameter in condensed matter physics, including Higgs and Nambu-Goldstone modes. • Describe basic theories for Higgs and Nambu-Goldstone modes in superconductors and coldatom systems (including fermionic and bosonic superfluids). • Review experimental observations of Higgs and Nambu-Goldstone modes in condensed matter systems. A phenomenon of phase transition is widely observed in various physical systems at different energy scales, ranging from condensed-matter to high-energy physics. For example, when temperature decreases, a paramagnet turns into a ferromagnet, and a metal turns into a superconductor. Those phenomena can be universally understood with the concept of spontaneous symmetry breaking: Physical laws are invariant under a certain symmetry transformation, while a physically realized state at low energy does not necessarily exhibit the same symmetry. In the case of magnets having spin rotation symmetry, individual spins are randomly oriented at high temperature, whereas at low temperature they are aligned to one particular direction which is spontaneously chosen. In the case of superconductors, a complex phase of a macroscopic wavefunction of electrons is aligned spontaneously. In the conventional Landau paradigm, phase transition is characterized by an order parameter, which grows in ordered phases, such as magnetization or condensate (su-perfluid) density. When a continuous symmetry is spontaneously broken, there typically appear two types of collective motions of the order parameter: One is a phase fluctuation of the order parameter, and the other is an amplitude fluctuation of the order parameter (Fig. Historically, on the other hand, the physics of Higgs particle and Higgs mechanism arose from the study Nambu-Goldstone mode < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " E u t K g J 5 1 Q q y O e y X P 3 f u u 0 a T O U J A = " > A o u l d c 7 m 1 j 1 x 8 r 2 l k a W 1 R v i y o 1 r + x f 4 N f 0 3 9 S Y R a t K K k S w / v 3 l P M 5 7 J K 8 6 M j e O r V r R 0 7 / 6 D 5 Z W H 7 U e P n z x 9 t r q 2 f m h U r S n 0 q O J K 9 3 N i g D M J P c s s h 3 6 l g Y i c w 1 F + s t v k j 0 5 B G 6 b k V z u u I B N k K F n J K L G B + u 5 S L f A + + P R V W h l 2 v N q J u / E k 8 G 2 Q z E A H z W L v e K 3 1 N y 0 U r Q V I S z k x Z p D E l c 0 c 0 Z Z R D r 6 d 1 g Y q Q k / I E A Y B S i L A Z G 7 S t s c v A l P g U u l w p M U T 9 q b D E W H M W O R B K Y g d m c V c Q 9 6 V G 9 S 2 f J c 5 J q v a g q T T Q m X N s V W 4 m Q E u m A Z q + T g A of superconductivity. The macroscopic phenomenological theory of superconductivity had been developed by Stimulated by the development of the BCS theory, Nambu had introduced the concept of spontaneous symmetry breaking in particle physics. Based on an analogy with the BCS theory In the application of symmetry breaking in particle physics, one has to avoid Goldstone's theorem, since no such massless particle had been observed in our universe. In 1964, Englert, Brout, Higgs, and others had noticed that there is a way to go around Goldstone's theorem when the system is coupled to gauge fields It should be emphasized that the Higgs mechanism had been discussed earlier by Anderson in the context signal arises from the third harmonic generation (THG). The THG intensity at 10 K normalized by that of the incident pump pulse reaches 8 × 10 -5 , which is high for a film with only 24-nm thickness and 3.5-kV/cm peak electric field (29). We could increase th 0.2 mm, the pen 0.6 THz ( While the physics of Higgs phenomena has originated from the study of superconductivity, the Higgs mode in superconductors In 2013, a coherent long-lived oscillation induced by a mono-cycle terahertz laser pulse was observed for a pure superconductor NbN ('pure' means the one without coexistence of any other long-range orders) If one is not limited to charged systems in which the order parameter is coupled with gauge fields, the phase and amplitude modes of order parameters have been widely observed in symmetry broken phases (see Table Throughout the article, we put ħ = 1. The emergence of collective modes in symmetry broken phases can be understood with a simple macroscopic phenomenological model. For example, the low-energy effective theory of superconductors corresponds to the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory, whose Lagrangian density is given, as a functional of a complex scalar field ψ(r) (a 'macroscopic wavefunction' of electrons), by Here a, b, c 1 and c 2 are constants, m * and e * are effective mass and charge of condensates, and φ and A are scalar and vector potentials for external electromagnetic fields, respectively. The time derivative terms are included phenomenologically. The amplitude of the scalar field ψ(r) serves as an order parameter, and its squared absolute value has a meaning of the superfluid density (|ψ(r)| 2 = n s ). The Lagrangian is invariant under the global phase rotation, ψ → e iθ ψ. The coefficient a is assumed to behave as a = a 0 (T -T c ) (a 0 > 0) near the critical point, where T is a temperature of the system, and T c is a critical temperature at which superconductivity emerges. At high temperature, the effective potential (the first two terms in the square bracket in Eq. ( One can consider fluctuations of the order parameter around the ground state by expanding as where H(r) and θ(r) represent amplitude and phase fluctuations, respectively. The Lagrangian is then expanded in the following way: The first term indicates that the Higgs mode represented by H has a finite mass, reflecting the fact that the effective potential has a finite curvature along the amplitude direction. The second term in Eq. ( The phase mode θ disappears from the expression, and a mass term of the gauge field (∝ A 2 ) appears in the third term. This is nothing but the Anderson-Higgs mechanism. One can count the number of degrees of freedom before and after the Anderson-Higgs mechanism: 2 (transverse components of A) + 2 (real and imaginary parts of ψ) → 3 (transverse and longitudinal components of A) + 1 (Higgs mode) The electromagnetic field, that mediates the longrange Coulomb interaction, screens phase fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter, pushing them up to high energy (in the scale of plasma frequency). As a result of the Anderson-Higgs mechanism, the electromagnetic field itself becomes short-ranged, and decays exponentially within the London penetration depth (Meissner-Ochsenfeld effect). The remaining low-energy excitation mode is the Higgs mode. In the vicinity of T c , however, the phase mode may have a possibility to revive without damping (known as the Carlson-Goldman mode If the system is electrically neutral (i.e., e * = 0), the order parameter is not coupled to gauge fields, and the Anderson-Higgs mechanism does not take place. In this case, the NG mode survives as a massless excitation, which dominates the low-energy behavior. In particular, the Higgs mode can hybridize with the NG mode if c 1 ̸ = 0, which causes a mixing between amplitude and phase modes. In order to decouple the amplitude and phase modes, one often requires an effective particle-hole symmetry, which suppresses the c 1 term and makes the Lagrangian relativistic with an emergent Lorentz symmetry. In superconductors, there is an approximate particlehole symmetry at low energy, so that one can practically neglect the c 1 term. From Eq. ( The Ginzburg-Landau theory does not predict the precise value of the mass of the Higgs mode. It only tells that the mass is proportional to (-a) . From a microscopic theory, the mass is found to coincide with the superconducting gap energy 2∆. That is, the minimum energy that is required to excite the Higgs mode is the same as the energy to break a single Cooper pair. This causes a problem of using the Ginzburg-Landau theory in the energy scale of the Higgs mode: In the GL theory, the order parameter is supposed to vary sufficiently slowly in space and time, whereas the order parameter oscillates with the frequency of 2∆ when the Higgs mode is excited. This already reaches the energy scale of pair breaking, and thus one cannot neglect the effect of quasiparticle excitations, invalidating the basic assumption of the GL description. The aforementioned issue motivates one to move to a microscopic description of superconductivity, i.e., the BCS theory. In the BCS theory, one adopts the Hamiltonian that includes the kinetic energy of electrons and the pairing interaction (usually mediated by phonons), where c kσ is the annihilation operator of electrons with momentum k and spin σ, ε k is the energy dispersion, V (> 0) is the pairing interaction strength, and N is the number of k points. In the mean-field approximation, the Hamiltonian (5) is replaced by is the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian. The offdiagonal element ∆ is defined by We assume that ∆ takes a real positive value. The eigenvalues of h(k) is found to be ±E k := ± ε 2 k + ∆ 2 , and thus the single-particle spectrum shows an energy gap of 2∆. At zero temperature, ∆ satisfies the gap equation, The dynamics of superconductors is determined by the time-dependent Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation, To analyze the equation, it is convenient to introduce Anderson's pseudospins, Here τ α denote the Pauli matrices. Physically, the x and y components of the pseudospins correspond, respectively, to the real and imaginary parts of Cooper pairs' amplitude ⟨c † k↑ c † -k↓ ⟩, and the z component represents the momentum-dependent occupation of electrons. From Eq. ( which resembles the Bloch equation that describes precession motion of spins in a magnetic field. Here b k = (-Re ∆, -Im ∆, ε k ) plays a role of a magnetic field for pseudospins. In general, the equation of motion (11) becomes a nonlinear equation, since it is supplemented by the selfconsistency condition (8). However, one can linearize the equation if the deviation from the initial ground state is sufficiently small. By writing σ k (t) = σ k (0)+δσ k (t) and ∆(t) = ∆ + δ∆(t), the linearized equation is expressed as By using the relation ∆δσ x k = ε k δσ z k , one can further simplify the equation into After Fourier transformation, one obtains Combining with the linearized gap equation, δ∆(ω) = V N k δσ x k (ω), one finds that a nontrivial solution exists if the following condition is satisfied: This is precisely the condition that has been derived by Subsequently, the equation of motion for a quench problem has been studied by with certain constants c and φ. This slight instability (power-law decay) of the Higgs mode is related to the fact that the energy of the Higgs mode lies right at the bottom edge of the quasiparticle excitation continuum. The decay into quasiparticles occurs without collisions, similar to the case of Landau damping for plasma waves. The energy dispersion of the Higgs mode at finite momentum, ω H (q), has the following form where v F is the Fermi velocity and q = |q|. The presence of the imaginary part indicates that the Higgs mode has a finite lifetime at finite q due to the decay into quasiparticles. Especially, the mode becomes overdamped when v F q/∆ ≳ 1. In multiband superconductors, the system may possess multiple order parameters (multi-gap superconductors) such as MgB 2 . In this case, there can arise a collective oscillation of the relative phase between two order parameters, known as the Leggett mode If there is a hidden competing order that stays close to the primary order, the so-called Bardasis-Schrieffer mode can emerge as a collective oscillation of the amplitude of the secondary order parameter In strongly correlated systems, one may need to go beyond the BCS theory and take into account quantum correction effects to treat Higgs modes, which can be defined by the peak of the superconducting amplitude-amplitude correlation function. It is expected that the lifetime (i.e., inverse of the peak width) of the Higgs mode would become shorter and shorter as one goes into strongly correlated regimes due to the decay to quasiparticles, and the amplitude oscillation of the order parameter would become overdamped at some point. Such kind of behavior has been observed in the ordered phase of the Hubbard model with an interaction quench The Higgs mode not only appears in superconductors but also in neutral fermionic superfluids. The only traditional condensed-matter system that falls into the latter category had been the system of superfluid 3 He. In the last few decades, a new system arose in the field of atomic physics: Superfluidity in a dilute gas of fermionic atoms has been realized in 2004 Atomic gases have several advantages over solid state systems. One of them is high controllability of system parameters. Using experimental techniques developed in atomic, molecular, and optical physics, various parameters can be tuned with unprecedented precision. In atomic Fermi gases, the interaction strength between fermions can be tuned by external fields via the Feshbach resonance. Employing this technique, one can observe a smooth crossover between the BCS-type state with large overlapping Cooper pairs and Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) of tightly bound molecules of two fermions, known as the "BEC-BCS crossover", which has been realized also in 2004 The interaction strength in this system is often described by the dimensionless parameter 1/(k F a), where k F and a are the Fermi wave number and the s-wave scattering length, respectively. The s-wave scattering length can be tuned by an external magnetic field due to the Feshbach resonance. The weak-coupling BCS regime and strong-coupling BEC regime correspond to 1/(k F a) < 0 and 1/(k F a) > 0, respectively. The crossover between the BCS and BEC physics occurs at the unitary limit 1/(k F a) = 0, at which a diverges. The Higgs mode in a superfluid Fermi gas of 6 Li atoms has been observed in 2018 The time-dependent Bogoliubov-de Gennes (tdBdG) formalism has been extensively used to study the dynamical properties of superfluid Fermi gases. In this formalism, the gap function ∆(r, t) obeys the tdBdG equation where ĥ = -∇ 2 /2m + U (r)μ, m is the atomic mass, μ is the chemical potential, U (r) is the trapping potential, ν is the index for the eigenstates, and u ν and v ν are the time-dependent quasi-particle amplitudes, respectively. The tdBdG equation needs to be solved self-consistently with the gap equation, and the equation for the total number of atoms N , In a uniform system (U (r) = 0), substituting the static solution of Eq. ( The self-consistent solution of (∆, μ) for the gap equation ( , where e is Napier's constant and ε F is the Fermi energy. Note that μ coincides with the binding energy of molecules in the BEC limit. The above tdBdG formalism thus correctly captures the dynamical properties of a superfluid Fermi gas including the Higgs mode throughout the entire BEC-BCS crossover. One can study small amplitude oscillations of the gap function The NG mode has also been investigated in atomic fermi superfluids. It manifest itself as the Anderson-Bogoliubov (AB) phonon (phase) mode as shown in TA-BLE I. Anderson predicted the sound velocity c = v F / √ 3 for the AB phonon mode in the BCS limit by the generalized random-phase approximation The NG and Higgs modes exist ubiquitously in quantum many-body systems that possess both a spontaneously broken continuous symmetry and an approximate particle-hole symmetry. In the previous sections, we have taken superconductors and superfluid states of ultracold two-component Fermi gases as specific examples that possess either or both of the NG and Higgs modes. In this section, we explain several other significant examples of the NG and Higgs modes in the contexts of condensed matter and ultracold-atom physics in order to illustrate broad applicability of the concepts. The gray shaded areas near the Mott insulator (MI) regions roughly mark the regions where the superfluid (SF) order parameter is small enough for the fourth-order GL approximation (i.e., the effective action can be written by the expansion up to fourth order in the order parameter) to be valid. On the dashed lines in the SF region, the effective particle-hole symmetry is present. n denotes the filling factor. (Adapted from We first consider a superfluid state of ultracold spinless Bose gases in optical lattices. An optical lattice means a periodic potential for atoms that is created by two counter-propagating laser beams. When the optical lattice potential is sufficiently deep, the system is well described by the Bose-Hubbard model, where bj , U , J, and μ denote, respectively, the annihilation operator of bosons at site j, the onsite interaction, the hopping, and the chemical potential. The external field potential ε j is present for trapped atoms in standard experiments. In Fig. In the superfluid region near the quantum phase transitions, which is the gray-shaded area in Fig. We next consider antiferromagnetic materials consisting of dimers of S = 1/2 spins, such as TlCuCl 3 Here, Ŝj,m = ( Ŝx j,m , Ŝy j,m , Ŝz j,m ) denotes the S = 1/2 spin operator at spin m(= L, R) of dimer j. J(> 0), J xx (> 0) and J j,l;m,m ′ are the intradimer isotropic interaction, the intradimer anisotropic interaction, and the interdimer isotropic interaction, respectively. In Fig. At atmospheric pressure, J is dominant over J 2 so that the low-temperature magnetic state is a dimerized type between octahedra, where the edge is from basal plane to apex. Again the possibility arises from the geometry that these weak bonds may be FM. Viewing the dimers as ladder rungs, the effective ladder-leg coupling is denoted by J 1 , and the asymmetrical cross coupling by J 1 Ј ͓Fig. 2͑a͔͒. Finally, the structure of the ladder legs is such that a next-neighbor Cu-Cl-Cl-Cu coupling, similar to that proposed in CuGeO 3 , may not be excluded, and this is denoted as J 1 Љ . A significant interchain coupling is expected only where the Cu-Cl-Cl-Cu pathway is rather direct, with bond angles not deviating state in that two spins on each dimer form a spin singlet and there is no magnetic order. When the hydrostatic pressure p is increased, J 2 /J increases and a continuous quantum phase transition to an antiferromagnetic ordered state occurs at p = p c ≃ 1.08 kbar. Associated with the transition, the spin-rotation symmetry is spontaneously broken. The quantum phase transition can be qualitatively captured by a mean-field approximation in which the many-body wave function is assumed to be a product state, where The local state at dimer j is spanned by the spin-singlet and triplet states, The coefficients satisfy the normalization condition 3 α=0 |a j,α | 2 = 1. In the limit of J j,l;m,m ′ → 0, the four states are the eigenstates of each local Hamiltonian, where |s⟩ is the ground state, |t 1 ⟩ and |t 2 ⟩ are the degenerate first excited states, and |t 3 ⟩ is the highest-energy state. When J 2 /J is finite but smaller than the critical value, the ground state remains to be |φ⟩ = |s⟩ for all the dimers and there is the energy gap to create triplet states. The energy cost for creating |t 1 ⟩ is equivalent to that for creating |t 2 ⟩ so that this symmetry can be regarded as a particle-hole symmetry. At the critical value of J 2 /J, the energy gap closes. When J 2 /J increases further, the coefficients a j,α for α = 1, 2, 3 become finite and the antiferromagnetic order emerges. The low-energy properties in the ordered phase can be effectively described by the GL theory of Eq. ( In 2008, Rüegg et al. have observed the excitation modes explained above by means of inelastic neutron scattering In the last place, we briefly mention another important example, namely, materials with incommensurate CDW of singlet and triplet states on each dimer bond: the QD state is described by the singlet component (jsi), and the properties of the RC phase by an additional triplet component. For the pressure-induced QPT, the wave function j i i of a dimer may be written as where increases monotonically with pressure from 0 at p p c to =4 for perfect antiferromagnetism, Q AF is the ordering wave vector, and r i the position of dimer i. The triplet mixing coefficient sin is the sole parameter determining all the physical properties of the ordered state (T N p, m s p g B sin= 2 p , L p), and is specified entirely by the pressure evolution of the superexchange parameters. The emergence of the longitudinal mode is contained naturally in this theoretical framework. The problem of modeling hydrostatic pressure effects in TlCuCl 3 is underconstrained. We have fitted the data by assuming both an increase of J 2 (an interdimer coupling in the a-c plane [4]) and a reduction of J. Either change in isolation acts to close the gap and to alter the dispersion, making this linear at the band minimum at the QPT, where a perfectly SU(2)-symmetric system would have three spin waves. The evolution of the mode gaps at p < p c , and the ordered moment and longitudinal mode gap at p > p c , are reproduced with the functional forms Jp J1 A 0 p B 0 p 2 , J 2 p J 2 1 A 2 p B 2 p 2 . The exponents of the transition are dictated by the linear terms, which were taken as A 2 ÿA 0 0:006 60 kbar ÿ1 , while the quadratic coefficients B 2 ÿB 0 0:001 09 kbar ÿ2 were also necessary to ensure an adequate fit. Similarly, the anisotropic interactions required to account for the experimental observations may reside on the dimer bonds, on the interdimer bonds, or on both. In a minimal model where only J is anisotropic, one may (ICDW) order where k F , ρ 0 , ρ 1 , and φ denote, respectively, the Fermi momentum, the average electron density, the amplitude, and the phase of ICDW. The oscillation of the amplitude ρ 1 , which is often called amplitudon, corresponds to the Higgs mode whereas that of the phase φ (phason) does to the NG mode. The Higgs mode has been observed in several ICDW materials via Raman spectroscopy. We have reviewed various order-parameter dynamics that appear in condensed matter systems. Especially, we have focused on Higgs and Nambu-Goldstone (NG) modes, corresponding to amplitude and phase oscillations of order parameters. They provide important information on the fundamental properties of underlying quantum many-body systems, including symmetries, phase transitions, dynamics, and response to external perturbations. Target systems range from superconductors to cold-atom systems (bosonic and fermionic superfluids), quantum magnets, charge density waves, and so on. Here one can see the universality of order-parameter dynamics, which may not depend so much on details of the system, partly because they are effectively described by a 'common language' based on quantum field theories at low energies. There are many open issues that remain to be addressed. In the case of superconductors, it is experimentally important to understand various aspects of Higgs modes in superconductors, especially for those beyond NbN and the coexisting phase of CDW and superconductivity in NbSe 2 . The difficulty lies in the fact that there are always competitions between the Higgs mode and quasiparticle excitations In the case of cold-atom systems, further investigations, both experimentally and theoretically, are needed to better understand the evolution of the Higgs modes across the BCS-BEC crossover in a superfluid fermi gas and the SF-MI phase transition in a bosonic superfluid in an optial lattice. In the lattice-boson systems, in particular, it is a long-standing problem whether or not the Higgs mode can be detected as a resonance peak in the response to temporal modulation of an external potential. Since recent experiments on optical-lattice systems have realized almost homogeneous samples of ultracold gases (e.g., 