This work presents a preliminary experimental study on the possibility to initiate growth of whiskers on the surfaces of some technologically important metals utilizing the enhanced electric field of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs). The results provide evidence that a relatively high concentration of what appear to be whisker nuclei form in the region where SPPs were excited, whereas no such changes are observed on the untreated surface. Metals that are extensively used in electronics manufacturing, such as tin (Sn), zinc (Zn), and related alloys, often show electrically conductive hair-like crystalline structures on their surfaces, referred to as whiskers. Whiskers can lead to current leakage and short circuits in sensitive electronic equipment causing significant losses and, in some cases, catastrophic failures in the automotive, airspace and other industries In this work, which is still in progress, we report on the possibility of initiating and controlling the growth of whiskers by taking advantage of the enhanced AC electric field at the metal surface on which SPPs are generated. The Otto and Kretschmann prism-based methods are well established and studied attenuated total reflection geometries for indirect optical excitation of SPPs on the surface of metals and metal films. Generating SPPs on low-loss metal films such as Ag and Au is generally straightforward. However, generating SPPs on the surfaces of metals with large damping losses, such as Sn and Zn, is challenging as the energy of the incident field is largely absorbed in the process of coupling to the SPPs Because of conservation laws requirements, direct coupling between the photon and SPPs is unattainable. Prism coupling techniques or near field probe based ones can be used to address this problem, i.e., providing momentum matching If the polarized laser beam with electric field in TM mode is incident on the metal film, which is mounted on the prism, and its angle of incidence (Θi) is slightly greater than the critical angle for total reflection, an evanescent wave is formed on the metal surface. The evanescent wave can excite the natural modes of oscillations of the electrons at the metal surfaces. These collective oscillations form SPPs that propagate parallel to the surface but decay very quickly in the direction normal to the surface. Their existence can be indirectly probed by recording reflectance as a function of the angle of incidence. The deep observed beyond the critical angle in the recorded reflectance curve authenticates their presence. Some literature suggests that the angle of incidence at which the reflectivity exhibits a deep minimum is not the same as the angle (Θp) of incidence at which SPPs have maximum intensity. The difference in Θi and Θp ranges in ±0.3̊ for noble metals (Ag, Au, etc.) due to their small damping losses;, unfortunately it may vary between 25̊ -35̊ for metals with large damping losses (Fe, Sn, Zn, etc.) The field enhancement between the prism and the metal surface can be calculated with the Fresnel reflection and transmission coefficients. The Fresnel reflection R123 and transmission T123 coefficient equations for our experimental setup are derived using equations 2 and 3 in Ref. The dielectric function of the metallic thin film is denoted by ε = ε1 + iε2. The imaginary part (ε2) of the dielectric function plays a crucial role in the optical absorption in the metal. At our laser wavelength (λ=662nm), the dielectric function of Ag is taken from this literature Having successfully generated SPPs on the low damping Ag films, we performed a similar experiment on the high damping Sn metal films. At λ=662nm, the dielectric function of Sn is taken from this literature Having identified the deep minimum experimentally, we left the laser at that incidence angle (68) for 5 hours at 100mW incident power. The figure This experimental observation has important implications: (1) it can experimentally verify some aspects of the electrostatic theory of metal whiskers using SPPs and (2) it paves a way to the controllable formation of whiskers. The latter would allow the development of accelerated failure testing methods of electronic components, which is currently not possible due to the random and unpredictable nature of whiskers formation. We also anticipate that these nuclei can be grown into a fully grown whisker with further applied electric field; this part of our work is still in progress.