We propose the "pair-breaking scattering interference" as a general source of coherence peak modulations in superconductors. Assuming this mechanism, we present a simple physical picture for the coherence peak modulations in overdoped cuprate Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O 10+δ (Bi-2223), ferromagnetic iron pnictide EuRbFe4As4 (Eu-1144), and kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs). Specifically, we explain the wavevectors, the particle-hole symmetry, and the dependence on the internal or external Zeeman-field of the coherence peak modulations. This work is intended as a cautious reminder to the scientific community when asserting the existence of a pair density wave phenomenon in the absence of tunneling conductance modulations in the normal state. I. The pair density wave (PDW), a superconducting (SC) state characterized by the condensation of Cooper pairs possessing a non-zero center-of-mass momentum This paper excludes the discussion of coherence peak modulations that could be attributed to a secondary order arising from the mere coexistence of a normal-state charge density wave (CDW) and a uniform SC order. The observed "PDW" in UTe 2 falls within this category. In contrast, the coherence peak modulations in Bi-2212, Bi-2223, Eu-1144, and AV 3 Sb 5 with A = K, Rb, and Cs belong to the category we shall discuss, where density wave orders are absent in the normal states of these materials. It is very important to note that the concept to be expounded below was initially introduced in Ref. We have coined this concept the "pair-breaking scattering interference" (PBSI), to differentiate it from the PDW phenomenon. This work serves as a cautious reminder to the scientific community when asserting the existence of a PDW under the situation that a similar modulation in the local density of states is absent in the normal state. We acknowledge that authentic PDW in many materials other than Bi-2212, Bi-2223, Eu-1144, and kagome metals can indeed exist The PBSI formalism relies on the existence of a uniform spin-singlet SC order. However, the microscopic origin of such uniform SC order is not in the scope of this work. Instead, we adopt a BdG-type Hamiltonian to describe it. Even in strongly correlated superconductors such as cuprates, BdG Hamiltonian remains an accurate description for the superconducting quasiparticle dynamics, which is verified by numerous experiments. Within this framework, we show that coherence peak modulations can emerge as a consequence of the PBSI. This serves as an alternative mechanism alongside PDW explaining the phenomena of coherence peak modulations. To begin, we briefly summarize the phenomenon of the coherence peak modulation arsing from the spatial modulation of the superconducting gap. As a function of spatial coordinate r, the positive and negative coherence peaks detected at the SC gap edges are situated at energies Here 2∆ 0 > 0 denotes the average energy distance between the coherence peaks, and ∆ 1 cos(Q • r) represents the modulation component with amplitude ∆ 1 > 0 (usually small compared with ∆ 0 ) at wavevector Q. The coefficient ρ = ±1 controls the particle-hole symmetry (asymmetry) nature of the modulation. In Eu-1144, the modulation is uni-directional and particle-hole symmetric, hence ρ = 1 The Fermi surfaces are composed of hole pockets and electron pockets at the Brillouin zone (BZ) center Γ and corner M , respectively The Fermi surfaces of the overdoped Bi-2212 and Bi-2223 are schematically shown in Fig. Consider the BdG-type Hamiltonian describing a uniform spin-singlet superconductor Spin-triplet superconductors such as UTe 2 are not included in our discussion. The Nambu spinor at momentum k is defined as Ψ k = (c k↑ , c k↓ , c † -k↑ , c † -k↓ ) T . I, X, Y , Z are the Pauli matrices. Two Pauli matrices standing next to each other, e.g., XY, represents the tensor product, with the first Pauli matrix acting in the particle-hole space and the second one acting in the spin space. The dispersion relation ε k is defined with respect to the Fermi level ε k F = E F = 0, where the Fermi momenta k F constitute the Fermi surface. Meanwhile, the gap function ∆ k = ∆ R k + i∆ I k = |∆ k |e iθ k is included to capture the Cooper pairing. A Zeeman term with h > 0 is also introduced in Eq.( with Ψ k↑ = (c k↑ , c † -k↓ ) T and Ψ k↓ = (c k↓ , c † -k↑ ) T . The eigenvalues of the BdG Hamiltonians H ↑,↓ are symmetrically centered about energies ε = ∓h. At the Fermi momenta k F , the QP operators are In the ideal superconducting state the quasiparticles exhibit particle-hole symmetric energy levels ±∆0 at the two hot spots k1,2. The Zeeman field h breaks the spin degeneracy. The two brown energy levels ±(-h + ∆0) are most important to the physics at the gap edge. In the presence of PBSI (the crossed dashed lines), the energy levels at the two hot spots get hybridized and split. The original two-fold degenerate black energy levels are split into green and orange levels, while brown levels are split into red and blue ones. (Fig. Now we study the effect of impurity scattering on the Bolgoiubov QP levels associated with the two hot spots k 1 and k 2 . In the following we define Q = k 1 -k 2 . The gap functions are ∆ k1 = s∆ k2 = ∆ 0 e iθ , where ∆ 0 > 0 and s = ±1 represents the relative sign of the gap function at the hot spots. At this juncture, it is important to note that we do not assume the impurity scattering can only impart momentum Q to the quasiparticles. The fact that we ignore all other momentum-transfer scatterings, except those between the tips of the equal energy contours in Eu-1144 [see Fig. Associated with χ k1,2↑↓ there are four QP levels above the Fermi energy E F , and associated with η k1,2↑↓ there are four QP levels below the Fermi level. In the following we shall ignore the impurity induced mixing between the χ levels and the η levels, while only focus on the mixing among the levels below or above E F . The reason for doing so is that such mixing has the effect of reducing the superconducting gap, hence is pair-breaking. Without affecting the nature of magnetic scattering we shall assume it preserves the z-component of the spin, under which the impurity-induced pair-breaking (PB) Hamiltonians for spin-up (↑) and spin-down (↓) read Here V s Q and V m Q denote the scalar and magnetic impurity potentials, respectively. See Supplemental Material (S. M.) [15] Section I for a detailed derivation of this Hamiltonian. Importantly, (i) if the signs of the gap function at the hot spots are the same (s = 1), the scalar impurity does not break pairs. This is consistent with Anderson's theorem. In contrast, the magnetic impurity breaks Cooper pairs. On the other hand, if (ii) the gap sign at the hot spots are opposite (s = -1), the roles of the scalar and magnetic impurities are switched. Eu-1144, and overdoped Bi-2212 and Bi-2223, precisely correspond to the two cases (i) and (ii) above, respectively. In the presence of the pair-breaking scattering, the QP states at the hot spots are mixed. This mixing induces the splitting of QP energy levels (Fig. Here S and L label the eigenstates with smaller and larger energy gaps from the Fermi level, respectively. The 1/ √ 2 factors are neglected for clarity. Among these eigenstates, the group of four corresponding to χ ↑,S,L and η ↓,S,L (see Fig. Since the eigenstates associated with the QP operators in Eq.( where ∆ L,S = ∆ 0 -h ± V . In Eq.( where ∆ ′ L,S = ∆ 0 + h ± V . Again, the proportionality constant is the tunneling matrix element. Assuming that D ± and D ′ ± contribute with equal weight, the total LDOS is given by the When the Zeeman field is absent h = 0, ∆ ′ S,L = ∆ S,L , yielding the total LDOS given by The modulations vanish in the case s = 1 (Eu-1144), due to the destructive interference between D ± and D ′ ± . This explains the absence of coherence peak modulations above the FM transition temperature in Eu-1144 So far, we have studied two extreme cases: (i) the highenergy QP eigenstates are completely ignored, and (ii) the high and the low energy QP eigenstates contribute with equal weight. In reality, the total LDOS under Zeeman field h ̸ = 0 should be somewhere in-between. In the s = 1 case (applicable to Eu-1144), the total LDOSs are (10) Here the weight function W (h) ∈ [0, 1] is a smooth monotonic function with W (0) = 0. Eq.( On the other hand, the LDOS in the case where s = -1 (applicable to Bi-2212 and Bi-2223) read Thus, the Zeeman field does not affect the particle-hole asymmetric coherence peak modulations, which can be checked experimentally by applying an in-plane field. In the experiments The coherence peak modulations at three inequivalent wavevectors are observed in the kagome metal CsV 3 Sb 5 Based on these properties, we derive the particle-hole symmetric coherence peak modulations at three inequivalent wavevectors in S. M. Section It should be noted that for CsV 3 Sb 5 , one CDW wavevector, which is 1/4 of a reciprocal lattice vector, occurs above SC T c We have proposed the pair-breaking scattering interference (PBSI) as an alternative explanation of coherence peak modulations in superconductors. This explanation involves (i) the momentum locations of the hot spots, which can be obtained experimentally from, say, angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES); (ii) the sign structure of the gap function at the hot spots, which requires phase-sensitive measurements such as phasesensitive quasiparticle interference STM spectroscopy; and (iii) the nature of impurities, which can be obtained through, say, NMR measurement and the phase-sensitive quasiparticle interference in STM. In particular, according to the PBSI mechanism, impurity scattering is essential. Hence one would expect coherence peak modulations to be detected around impurities. On the contrary, the signal should be absent in large impurity-free regions. The predictions of the pair-breaking scattering interference can be examined experimentally in STM measurements. This work serves as a cautious reminder to the scientific community when asserting the existence of a PDW phenomenon. Supplemental Material for "Pair-breaking scattering interference as a mechanism for superconducting gap modulation" In the solids, the electrons c r = (c r↑ , c r↓ ) T can scatter by the scalar and magnetic impurities (for simplicity we assume the magnetic scattering to be S z -conserving without losing generality) where V s,m (r) are local scalar and magnetic impurity-scattering potentials, respectively. A Fourier transform , where N is the number of sites, yields the momentum-space form Here V s,m q = (1/N ) r V s,m (r)e -iq•r are the Fourier-transformed impurity potentials, which are smooth in transfer momentum q due to their local structures. The expression in terms of the Nambu operator Since H imp commutes with ZZ, we can decompose it into the ↑ (ZZ = +1) and ↓ (ZZ = -1) sectors with where ψ k↑ = (c k↑ , c † -k↑ ) T and ψ k↓ = (c k↓ , c † -k↓ ) T . Now we derive the pair-breaking Hamiltonian. Here we focus on the hot spots k 1 and k 2 on the Fermi surface, where the quasiparticle operators χ k1,2↑↓ and η k1,2↑↓ are given by The impurity-scattering potential can be transformed into the quasiparticle eigenbasis The pair-breaking (PB) part of the Hamiltonian is obtained by omitting the crossing terms between χ k F ↑↓ and η k F ↑↓ , yielding This is the pair-breaking Hamiltonian we use in the main text. In the STM measurements, the LDOS at spatial position r and bias ω is determined by the local differential conductance where I and V are the local current and voltage, respectively. At positive and negative biases, the differential conductance corresponding to the electron and the hole tunnelings are Here |Ω⟩ is the SC ground state and |n⟩ are eigenstates with energies E n . After Fourier transform, the tunneling amplitudes read On the Fermi surface, we express the c k F σ in terms of the quasiparticle operators as Note that the ground state obeys the condition χ k F σ |Ω⟩ = η † k F σ |Ω⟩ = 0 (at zero temperature, the quasiparticle states above and below the Fermi level are fully filled and empty, respectively). The tunneling amplitudes then become Within the QP approximation, the relevant eigenstates |n⟩ are the one-quasiparticle and one-quasihole excitations According to the fact , the scattering amplitudes take the form Inserting this result back to the real-space tunneling amplitudes, we get Now we derive the LDOS associated with the hot spots k 1 and k 2 . The relevant tunneling amplitudes read where The LDOS then take the form The contributions from the four low-energy quasiparticle eigenstates χ ↑,S,L and η ↓,S,L are Similarly, we can do the calculation for the four high-energy quasiparticle eigenstates χ ↓,S,L and η ↑,S,L These are the LDOS formula we use in the main text. The formalism developed in this work can be also extended to systems with more than two hot spots, which as shown below yields commendable agreement with the experiments. In the kagome metals AV 3 Sb 5 , the 2 × 2 CDW order folds the BZ into the 1/2 × 1/2 one (the area enclosed by the dashed lines in Fig. Our analysis assumes the same-sign gap functions at all hot spots. According to the main text, the relevant pairbreaking impurity is the magnetic one. Similar to Eq.( Here χ ↑↓ = (χ M1↑↓ , χ M2↑↓ , χ M3↑↓ ) T and η ↑↓ = (η M1↑↓ , η M2↑↓ , η M3↑↓ ) T represent the 3-component quasiparticle operators at the hot spots M 1,2,3 , and Due to the involvement of three hot spots, the energy splitting is more complicated than the 2-hot-spot results. Here we consider a simplified case where the C 3 rotation symmetry is preserved. The pair-breaking Hamiltonian can be chosen, for example, as where n = 0, 1, 2 labels the eigenstates, ∆ 0 is the average superconducting gap, and h is the Zeeman field. Note that the three-fold degeneracy is lifted by the pair-breaking scattering. 