Relaxation dynamics, as a key to understand glass formation and glassy properties, remains an elusive and challenging issue in condensed matter physics. In this work, in situ high-pressure synchrotron high-energy x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy has been developed to probe the atomic-scale relaxation dynamics of a cerium-based metallic glass during compression. Although the sample density continuously increases, the collective atomic motion initially slows down as generally expected and then counter-intuitively accelerates with further compression (density increase), showing an unusual non-monotonic pressure-induced steady relaxation dynamics crossover at ~3 GPa. Furthermore, by combining in situ high-pressure synchrotron x-ray diffraction, the relaxation dynamics anomaly is evidenced to closely correlate with the dramatic changes in local atomic structures during compression, rather than monotonically scaling with either sample density or overall stress level. These findings could provide new insight into relaxation dynamics and their relationship with local atomic structures of glasses. Below glass transition temperatures, Tg, glasses fall out of equilibrium (breakdown of ergodicity) due to their slow dynamics with respect to the experimental timescales; hence, dynamic relaxation into equilibrium states naturally and inevitably occurs all the time, considerably affecting the properties of glasses Although lacking long-range translational symmetry, the local structure of seemingly disordered glasses still shows identifiable order, which may play a critical role in determining their structures and properties Previous experimental investigations on the relaxation dynamics of glasses mainly rely on the macro-relaxation behavior of a given physical property, such as the dielectric constant or loss modulus To overcome the challenges encountered in previous experiments for addressing the relationship between relaxation dynamics and glass structures, we deliberately introduced dramatic structural tuning of MGs by applying high pressure while simultaneously probing the atomic-scale relaxation behavior by developing in situ highpressure synchrotron high-energy XPCS Specifically, in this work, by combining synchrotron wide-angle high-energy XPCS with a diamond anvil cell (DAC), we developed the in situ high-pressure and high-energy XPCS technique and performed it on a cerium-based MG. We show that the microscopic structural relaxation process is not monotonically altered as typically expected with the pressure-induced density and stress increase. Instead, it shows an anomalous dynamics crossover at ~3 GPa. The dynamics below ~3 GPa follows a normal pressure-induced slowing down while it accelerates rapidly above ~3 GPa. The coincidence of the dramatic local structural change revealed at ~3 GPa by in situ highpressure synchrotron x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement indicates a coupling with the dynamics anomaly and dramatic structural changes. A polyamorphous cerium-based MG, Ce68Al10Cu20Co2, was chosen as the model system for the current study due to its well-known pressure-sensitive atomic structures and relatively low (near room temperature) glass transition temperature (Tg ~360 K) The in situ high-pressure XPCS experiments were performed using a symmetric DAC and a partially coherent x-ray beam with a high incident energy of 21.0 keV at beamline ID10 of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), Grenoble, France. During the high-pressure XPCS experiments, special attention was paid to the stability of the sample position and pressure (fluctuation < 0.01 GPa) since it is crucial for a reliable XPCS measurement Figures We average each TTCF plot over the entire measuring time window to get quantitative information on the relaxation process. The time average intensity autocorrelation functions, g2(q, t), are shown in Fig. In contrast, the negative pressure dependence of steady relaxation time above 3 GPa (Fig. Due to the close critical pressures, it is likely that the apparent dynamics crossover at ~3 GPa revealed by τ during compression might be associated with the structural polyamorphic transition from low-density amorphous (LDA) to high-density amorphous (HAD) states at a few GPa in many Ce-bearing MG Moreover, pronounced changes can be observed in the first peak of G(r) (R1, the first atomic shell) during compression. For quantitative analysis, the first peak of G(r), R1, can be deconvoluted into two subpeaks, denoted as r11 and r12 (see Fig. However, against this expectation, a sharp turn around to accelerated dynamics accompanies the polyamorphic transition. The non-monotonic evolution of the dynamics behavior with respect to monotonic density increase is unexpected and counter-intuitive. According to the prominent changes in SRO over the same pressure range, as shown in Fig. The LDA and HDA states of the Ce68Al10Cu20Co2 MG differ significantly in their SRO, which supports the important role of local atomic structure in affecting glass relaxation dynamics. It has to be noted that the pressure-induced polyamorphism is caused by the change of electronic structure in the Ce atoms In addition to the anomaly of relaxation time, the structure dependence of other fitting parameters is also interesting and inspiring. The shape parameter, β, reflects the nature of the relaxation mode. A compressed decay (β > 1) is common in MGs and usually suggests a collective ballistic motion of atoms due to internal stress In this work, the XPCS signals are only collected at the principal diffraction peak position, qp, in reciprocal space, which reflect collective atomic motion, but whether it corresponds to a well-defined length scale in real space is still controversial Further exploration with XPCS data collected over a wide wave vector range (qdependence of dynamics) could help to address this issue. It should be noted that the pressure-induced dynamics anomaly should not be limited to the specific composition (the Ce-based MG just facilitates the experiments with relatively low pressures to observe the dynamics anomaly) since pressure-induced structural rearrangement could be general in multicomponent MGs at high enough pressures In summary, by combining in situ high-energy high-pressure XPCS and XRD techniques, an anomalous relaxation behavior at the atomic scale was discovered in the Ce68Al10Cu20Co2 MG, which shows a steady relaxation dynamic crossover at ~3 GPa with opposite pressure dependence below and above the critical pressure. Pressureinduced monotonic crossover has been previously reported in ionic liquids with enhanced slowing down of relaxation dynamics, which suggests a liquid-to-liquid transition Instead, there is a strong correlation between the variation of relaxation dynamics and local atomic structure (potential energy landscape) details of MGs. The experimental methods successfully demonstrated in this work highlight the feasibility and effectivity of involving pressure as a powerful parameter to explore the structural relaxation dynamics at the atomic level and its relationship with atomic structures in MGs by employing in situ high-pressure high-energy XPCS. This technique could enable the atomic-level dynamics exploration with pressures up to hundreds of GPa without limitation in types of materials (different physical structures and chemical natures) Sample preparation. Ce68Al10Cu20Co2 (nominal composition) MG ribbons were prepared by arc-melting pure (>99.9 at.%) and melt-spinning master ingots under a high-purity argon atmosphere. Their glass nature was confirmed by x-ray diffraction (XRD) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) (SI Fig. Initialization was performed to eliminate the difference in thermal history among the as-prepared ribbon samples. Specifically, all the samples were heated up to 360 K with a heating rate of 20 K/min and then cooled down to room temperature with a ballistic cooling rate. In situ high-pressure XPCS. In situ high-pressure XPCS experiments were performed using a symmetric DAC at beamline ID10 of ESRF, Grenoble, France. We used a partially coherent x-ray beam with a high incident energy of 21.0 keV to effectively penetrate the two diamond anvils (~1. Where < ⋯ > p denotes an ensemble average over all the pixels of the detector, and < ⋯ > is the temporal average. The high-pressure samples were cut from the thermally initialized MG ribbons with an appropriate size (~90  90  20 μm 3 ) to fit the sample chamber in the DAC. Tiny ruby balls were used as pressure calibrants loaded along with the MG sample. The culet size of the diamond anvils is ~300 μm. The gasket is T301 stainless steel, which was pre-indented to ~20 GPa in the DAC. The sample chamber is a hole (~150 μm in diameter) drilled by laser in the indent center of the pre-indented gasket. The 4:1 methanol-ethanol (4:1 M-E) mixture was loaded into the DAC as the pressuretransmitting medium, which can provide a hydrostatic pressure condition with no firstorder phase transition below ~10 GPa As the development and demonstration of in situ high-pressure, high-energy XPCS technique, many experimental details were carefully evaluated to ensure the reliability of the XPCS data. Special attention was paid to the sample stability since it is critical for a reliable XPCS measurement. Firstly, the DAC was firmly fixed onto the sample stage, and its spatial stability was checked by sample position scanning before and after each XPCS measurement. The pressure was increased manually by minimal steps up to each target pressure. Before performing XPCS experiments, the pressure inside the DAC was continuously monitored by the ruby fluorescence peak position to ensure a constant pressure value with time-dependent pressure fluctuations less than 0.01 GPa. Approximately three hours of waiting time (between each pressure increase and final XPCS data collection) were taken to stabilize the sample chamber pressure to ensure a steady relaxation signal detection. After each XPCS experiment, the pressure inside the DAC was rechecked to evaluate its stability during the XPCS experiments, which always remained constant. In addition, before loaded into the DAC, the as-prepared ribbon sample was initialized by pre-heating into the supercooled liquid region (to eliminate additional stresses induced by fast quenching during sample synthesis). To avoid the influence of shear bands at the sample edges due to mechanical cutting, the x-ray beam was accurately located at the sample center by x-ray absorption scanning at each pressure, which also ensures probing the same sample volume (the sample center) for all the pressure points. The background XPCS signal from the high-pressure environment was carefully checked by shining an x-ray beam on the pressure medium away from the MG sample through the two diamond anvils. No apparent correlation signal was observed at those specific 2θ angles in the background signal (the constant background signal may differ from one specific DAC to another). The data at 0 GPa was collected on the same sample loaded in the DAC before adding the 4:1 M-E pressure medium. More experimental details can be found in the SI Appendix. In situ high-pressure XRD experiments. In situ high-pressure XRD experiments with an x-ray wavelength of 0.3344 Å (37.08 keV) and a beam size of ~3.5 μm × 4.0 μm focused by a Kirkpatrick-Baez mirror were performed at beamline 13-ID-D of Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), USA. The same sample loading protocol as described above for the XPCS experiment was used for the in situ high-pressure XRD experiment. During the experiments, the pressure difference measured before and after each exposure was found to be less than 0.2 GPa. The background patterns were collected at each pressure by shining the x-ray beam off the sample but through the pressure medium and diamond anvils inside the sample chamber. The data at 0 GPa was collected on a sample at ambient conditions outside of the DAC. Raw two-dimensional x-ray diffraction patterns were integrated to obtain the intensities I(q) using Dioptas software. The total scattering factor, S(q) (q = 4πsinθ/λ, λ is the x-ray wavelength, and 2θ is the angle between the incident and diffraction x-ray beam), and the reduced pair distribution functions, G(r), were derived from I(q) using the PDFgetX3 software package. S(q) is obtained from the coherently scattered intensity I coh (q), S(q) = 1 + I coh (q) -〈f 2 〉 〈f〉 2 (2) 