We present results of hard X-ray angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and photoemission diffraction measurements performed on high-quality single crystals of the valence transition compound EuPd2Si2 for temperatures 25 K ≤ T ≤ 300 K. At low temperatures we observe a Eu 4f valence v = 2.5, which decreases to v = 2.1 for temperatures above the valence transition around TV ≈ 160 K. The experimental valence numbers resulting from an evaluation of the Eu(III)/Eu(II) 3d core levels, are used for calculating band structures using density functional theory. The valence transition significantly changes the band structure as determined by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. In particular, the Eu 5d valence bands are shifted to lower binding energies with increasing Eu 4f occupancy. To a lesser extent, bands derived from the Si 3p and Pd 4d orbitals are also affected. This observation suggests a partial charge transfer between Eu and Pd/Si sites. Comparison with ab-initio theory shows a good agreement with experiment, in particular concerning the unequal band shift with increasing Eu 4f occupancy. A large variety of interesting phenomena, such as the Kondo effect and the appearance of heavy fermion features, quantum criticality, unconventional superconductivity, exotic magnetism, and non-trivial topological phases have been observed in metallic compounds containing rare earth elements Eu is particularly known to exhibit valence transitions due to the small energy difference between the divalent and trivalent states of the Eu ion, as has been observed in the tetragonal compounds EuPd 2 Si 2 10 , EuCu 2 Si 2 EuPd 2 Si 2 has attracted particular scientific attention because the Eu ions in this material exhibit a substantial valence transition from a non-integer value close to a magnetic Eu(II) state to a non-integer value close to a nonmagnetic Eu(III) state upon decreasing the temperature The lack of nearest neighbor atoms at the surface (100) surface allows expansion to counteract the valence transition at low temperatures. The high temperature divalent state remains partially at the surface even at lower temperatures, as has been found by photoemission spectroscopy in the vacuum ultraviolet and soft X-ray regions The Anderson model analysis ascribes the drastic valence change to the hybridization of the Eu 4f electrons with the conduction electrons. Density Functional Theory calculations Single crystals of the compound EuPd 2 Si 2 were synthesized using the Czochralski method from an Eu-rich levitating melt as described in Ref 29. The single crystals were bonded to the sample holder using epoxy resin with the (001) plane parallel to the sample holder plate. Before being transferred into the vacuum chamber, the crystals were cleaved using a wire cutter. The samples are inserted into a He-cooled (25 K) sample stage on a high-precision 6-axis hexapod manipulator of the timeof-flight momentum microscope. The experiments were performed at beamline P22 of the storage ring PETRA III at DESY in Hamburg (Germany) A major advantage of angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy in the hard X-ray range is the significant increase in the inelastic mean free path of the escaping photoelectrons. Therefore, the present results represent true bulk properties. This is essential, because the valency of Eu at the surface of valence fluctuating systems is divalent and the valence crossover cannot be studied To overcome the challenges of low cross-section and low signal-to-background ratio in the hard X-ray regime, we applied time-of-flight momentum microscopy Data were acquired at 25 K and 300 K for 8 hours in each case. Details of the data evaluation procedure are described in Refs. To quantify the valence number v of the Eu ions above and below the valence transition we measured the Eu Xray photoelectron spectra (XPS) at a photon energy of 3.4 keV as shown in Fig. Comparison of the high (300 K) and low (25 K) temperature spectra shows a significant change in the ratio between the Eu(II) and Eu(III) components. An evaluation of the peak area ratio results in values for the valence number v = 2.1 (occupation number n = 6.9) at high temperature, corresponding to an almost complete Eu(II) ionization state, and an increase to v = 2.5 (occupation number n = 6.5) at low temperature, indicating a mixed Eu(II)/Eu(III) valence state. Multiplet calculations 37 of the XPS spectra, taking into account interatomic correlation effects, show a very good agreement with the experimental spectra [Fig. The valence band photoemission intensity measurements [shown in Fig. X-ray photoelectron diffraction (XPD) patterns measured for a photon energy of 3.4 keV at the Eu(II) 3d 5/2 core level reveal changes in the lattice structure upon The XPD patterns are element-selective in the sense that the presented patterns reveal the lattice structure from the viewpoint of the Eu(II) ions in our case. For the case of EuIr 2 Si 2 , it has been shown that photoelectron diffraction for 4d -4f resonant photoelectron excitation probes the Eu valency The E B versus k x sections are dominated by two dispersion-free bands of very high intensity, representing the localized Eu 4f and Pd 4d states at binding energies of 0.5 eV and 3 eV [see Fig. All density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out based on the full-potential local-orbital minimum-basis as implemented in FPLO The number of valence electrons was set to n = 6.5 for the low temperature structure and to n = 6.9 for the high temperature structure. These values correspond to the change of the mixed Eu(II)/Eu(III) valence as determined by the XPD evaluation shown in Fig. Similarly, bands originating from Si orbitals (purple, band Si1) and Pd 4d orbitals (green, band Pd1) shift to lower binding energy with increasing valence number n. In contrast, at different momentum values the Pd 4d bands (green, band Pd b ) are only marginally changed by the different occupation number n. The band shifts are also seen in the density-of-states functions projected onto the Eu 5d, Pd 4d, and Si 3p bands as shown in Figs. We directly compare the calculated band structure with the experimentally obtained E B versus momentum k sections using the data overlay shown in Figs. At the Z-point, the photoemission data show a weak electron-like band with a minimum at E B = 0.8 eV. This band corresponds to the calculated band in the same energy range of hybridized Si 3p -Pd 4d character. Now, we turn to the high-temperature (300 K) data. The high-temperature data show a lower signalto-background ratio due to the significantly increased Debye-Waller scattering of photoemitted electrons, resulting in an increase of detected electrons after scattering events at the expense of electrons from direct photoemission processes. The intensity of scattered electrons is less dominant at the Fermi level. Here, we observe a shift of the E B = 0.6 eV minimum at the X-point (A) towards the Fermi level, combined with a decrease of the Fermi wave vector of this electron-like band (k F,1 and k F,2 ). In FIG. our calculations we observe a similar band shift. The calculated bands with at binding energies between E B = 2 and 3 eV fit to the experimental data. The theoretical and experimental bands show a shift to lower binding energies compared to the low-temperature data. This shift corresponds to the shift of the density-of-states maximum in the same binding energy range in Fig. For further comparison of experiment and theory, we show in Fig. We have experimentally studied the microscopic mechanism of the valence transition of Eu ions in EuPd 2 Si 2 . We determined the valence transition of the Eu ions using hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, resulting in an Eu ion charge of v = 2.1 at high temperature and v = 2.5 at low temperature, corresponding to an Eu 4f occupation number n = 6.9 and 6.5, respectively. By evaluating the hard X-ray photoemission diffraction patterns, we confirm the volume contraction at low tem-peratures in the probed sample volume. Using hard Xray angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, we studied the evolution of the valence transition in the bulk band structure. We observed a pronounced shrinkage of a Fermi surface sheet from low temperature to room temperature. This is due to the up-shift of a hybridized Si 3p-Pd 4d valence band that is hybridized with Eu 5d orbitals (see k F,1 in Fig. The combined experimental and theoretical effort allows to understand the changes of the momentumresolved electronic structure in this compound. The valence transition causes a charge transfer from localized Eu 4f states to conduction band states at low temperature. The most significant changes are observed for those bands that exhibit a partial Eu 5d orbital character.