We present a superconducting circuit device that provides active, on-demand, tunable dissipation on a target mode of the electromagnetic field. Our device is based on a tunable "dissipator" that can be made lossy when tuned into resonance with a broadband filter mode. When driven parametrically, this dissipator induces loss on any mode coupled to it with energy detuning equal to the drive frequency. We demonstrate the use of this device to reset a superconducting qubit's readout cavity after a measurement, removing photons with a characteristic rate above 50 μs -1 . We also demonstrate that the dissipation can be driven constantly to simultaneously damp and cool the cavity, effectively eliminating thermal photon fluctuations as a relevant decoherence channel. Our results demonstrate the utility of our device as a modular tool for environmental engineering and entropy removal in circuit QED. Superconducting qubits are a promising quantum computing technology, combining fast operation speed, longlived coherence, and scalability Almost all modern superconducting processors use the circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) architecture: a qubit circuit is coupled to a linear resonant circuit or cavity, which in turn is coupled to a microwave feedline where κ is the cavity photon loss rate set by its coupling to the environment and m = 1 for thermal states or m = 2 for coherent states The problem of ensuring that a cavity is in its ground state is essentially one of entropy removal. Entropy can be removed from a system either through active control (i.e., an information-based Maxwell's daemon approach) In this paper we present a modular dissipative element that can be used to induce tunable, on-demand loss in a target mode. Our "dissipator" consists of a tunable coupler, similar to a high-frequency tunable transmon, that links a target system to a lossy transmission line via a bandpass filter, similar to the geometry proposed in The operation of our device is based on a parametrically-driven exchange interaction (also sometimes referred to as a swapping or beamsplitter interaction We begin by considering the case of a lossy dissipator which is coupled to a lossless linear oscillator. For simplicity, we treat the dissipator as a tunable qubit with frequency ω diss . The dissipator is coupled to a cavity of frequency ω c with coupling strength g c . This gives the familiar Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian where σ + (σ -) is the raising (lowering) operator for the dissipator, and a (a † ) is the annihilation (creation) operator for the cavity. We next turn on a parametric drive which periodically modulates the dissipator frequency where ε p is the parametric drive amplitude and ω p is the parametric drive frequency. This parametric modulation of the dissipator transition frequency causes sidebands to appear, centered on ω diss and spaced by ω p . Parametric coupling can be turned on by tuning one of these sidebands into resonance with the cavity. Typically the first sideband is used, i.e., ω p = ω c -ω diss ≡ ∆. This resonance results in a parametrically-driven exchange interaction between the cavity mode and the lossy dissipator mode. In the dispersive regime where g c ≪ ∆, and when the drive amplitude is small ε p ≪ ∆ [41], the drive-induced parametric coupling rate is given by leading to Rabi oscillations between the states |g, n + 1⟩ ↔ |e, n⟩ with frequency We derive and generalize these equations in a closedsystem setting in Appendix A. The dissipator loss damps the Rabi swapping oscillations between cavity and dissipator. Depending on whether the parametric coupling g p is larger than, smaller than, or equal to the amplitude damping rate κ diss /4, the interaction will be underdamped, overdamped, or critically damped, respectively. In the underdamped case, excitations swap back and forth between dissipator and cavity, and decay at a rate κ diss /2. In the critically-damped case the decay is the same, but no oscillations occur. In the overdamped case the decay is rate-limited by g p , and the population decays with rate In the small-coupling limit (g p ≪ κ diss ) the decay rate is roughly κ eff ≈ 4g 2 p /κ diss . These rates are obtained in In this section we describe how the dissipator can be operated as a quantum refrigerator and give a brief derivation of the equilibrium behavior. The refrigeration performance of similar systems has been explored theoretically in When the dissipator is tuned near resonance with the filter, the exchange interaction between them allows heat to flow. Since loss via the filter dominates all other sources of loss on the dissipator, in the absence of other drives the dissipator comes to thermal equilibrium with the filter. The filter loss is likewise dominated by the coupling to the thermal bath formed by the continuous spectrum of the lossy feedline, and so the filter is in thermal equilibrium with this bath. Therefore T diss ≈ T bath . On the other hand, the target (cavity) mode is far off resonance from the dissipator and the two cannot easily exchange heat. Therefore the cavity and dissipator do not reach thermal equilibrium. Instead they can exchange excitations via the coherent swapping interaction induced by the parametric drive. In the absence of any drive, the cavity comes into equilibrium with its environment at temperature T 0 with a rate κ c . When the drive is turned on, excitations are exchanged between the cavity and dissipator. In the underdamped limit where these swaps happen very fast compared to the cavity and dissipator loss rates (g p ≫ κ c , κ diss ), the cavity and dissipator reach an equilibrium of excitation number : nc = ndiss . In the limit where the dissipator's loss dominates κ diss ≫ κ c , the dissipator comes to the temperature of its environment T bath . The mean photon number is given by n where T c is the cavity's effective temperature under driving and k B is the Boltzmann constant. This gives T c = ωc ω diss T bath . Thus if ωc ω diss T bath < T 0 the cavity is cooled by the dissipation drive. The opposite limit is also interesting: the overdamped regime where the cavity-dissipator swapping is slow compared to the dissipator loss rate (g p ≪ κ diss ). This is the regime in which we typically operate our device. Here, we can treat the target cavity as if it is exposed to two baths: the normal background bath with temperature T 0 and coupling rate κ c , set mainly by the cavity coupling to the measurement line; and the effective thermal bath formed by the frequency-converted excitations from the dissipator with driven coupling (loss) rate κ eff ≈ g 2 p /κ diss (from Sec. II A). This latter bath has effective temperature T eff = ωc ω diss T bath , which can be derived as above by counting excitations in the dissipator and inverting Eq. 7 to find T eff . This leads to an overall cavity temperature Once again we can lower the cavity temperature so long as ωc ω diss T bath < T 0 , which is easily achieved by setting ω diss > ω c if the baths are at similar temperatures. A circuit schematic and image of our device are given in Figure We tune up our device with spectroscopic measurements. We find the cavity modes by measuring the magnitude of the transmission from the measurement input port (port 1) to the output port (port 2) and looking for features in the transmission spectrum. We perform this measurement with a constant cavity drive. The transmitted signal is amplified, demodulated to 200.25 MHz in a standard heterodyne setup, and digitized. Ordinarily the transmission line that provides the lossy port (port 4) would be terminated; however, to better characterize our device, we instead connect it to a heavily-attenuated drive line. The microwave attenuators on the line produce a nearly identical load to a termination, so we expect the device behavior to be unaffected. See Fig. We note that it is possible to operate with the dissipator tuned to any frequency by parametric driving at the detuning between the cavity and filter modes, inducing an exchange interaction directly between the cavity and filter without populating the dissipator. Indeed, we measured increased cavity loss when driving the dissipator at the cavity-filter detuning at all static flux biases. However, we found the strongest parametrically-driven loss when the dissipator was resonant with the filter, and so we restrict our results and analysis to that regime. The filter resonance lineshape changes enough that we are unable to fit the linewidth (i.e., decay rate) when the dissipator is on resonance with the filter, and so the precise dissipator decay rate κ diss is unknown. We expect κ diss ≈ κ f /2, but we can only bound κ diss /2π ∈ [10, 100] MHz with measurements. We first characterize the cavity-dissipator interaction by measuring cavity ringdown with the parametric drive off. See Figure a rate γ cav = 3.000±0.036 μs -1 ≈ κ c when the dissipator is not driven. Note that we are characterizing ringdown of the cavity output power, which is linearly proportional to the photon number, not the output amplitude as is often done. The ringdown rate for amplitude decay is half the rate for power decay. The qubit is left idle during this measurement, and remains in its ground state. We next add a parametric drive at the cavity-dissipator detuning frequency during the ringdown, inducing driven dissipation. Again we leave the qubit in its ground state for the entire measurement. We measure the ringdown time as a function of the amplitude and frequency of this parametric drive. This "ringdown spectroscopy" shows a strongly enhanced ringdown rate when the parametric drive frequency ω p /2π ≈ (ω diss -ω c )/2π = 2.95 GHz, as expected. When driven with a moderate parametric drive amplitude of ≈ 0.005 Φ o (corresponding to a frequency modulation ε p /2π ≈ 130 MHz), we are able to increase the ringdown rate to γ cav = 57.4 ± 1.5 (μs) -1 . The parametric drive amplitude is approximate as we do not know the precise attenuation of the flux line at this frequency. If we assume κ diss ≈ κ f /2 when the dissipator is near resonance with the filter, we have a predicted decay rate from Eq. 6: γ cav = κ ef f ≈ 60 μs -1 , in good agreement with the measurement. The approximately linear relationship between γ cav and parametric drive power (i.e., g 2 p ) is also in agreement with Eq. 6. We note that the dissipator-induced loss rate simply adds to the bare cavity loss rate, and so even a very high-Q cavity could see a similar ringdown rate when the dissipator is driven. We see additional spurious features corresponding to transitions of the fixed-frequency transmon or combined transmon-cavity system. For instance, the features near ω p /2π ≈ 3.3 GHz are the transmon transitions ω ge and ω gf /2, broadened due to the strong drive. These features are due to classical crosstalk from the drive line to the transmon, as our parametric flux drive also induces a small charge drive on the transmon. This changes the transmon state and thus the cavity frequency, leading to a ringdown at a different frequency than the initial cavity drive. This signal is filtered by our measurement electronics and so appears as a faster ringdown. Only the true cavity-dissipator exchange feature leads to removal of photons from the cavity, as we show below. There is an additional sharper feature at 3.4 GHz which we do not know the origin of, but appears to cause no real photon removal and so is ignored in our analysis. The measured ringdown rate increases with parametric drive power up to the highest powers we are able to drive, as expected in the overdamped regime. At high enough drive power we would expect the ringdown rate to saturate at γ cav = κ diss /2. At drive powers roughly 20 dB above our maximum drive, the dissipator frequency would cross the cavity frequency during modulation, and ordinary resonant exchange would occur. This could lead to significant damping, but we choose not to analyze this regime as it would also lead to frequency collisions between the dissipator and any mode between its mean frequency and the cavity frequency. Avoiding such collisions is the main motivation for using parametric driving. We note that the dissipator has significant anharmonicity-we estimate α diss /2π ≈ -350 MHz from finite-element simulations of the dissipator capacitance. As such, when the dissipator is populated with a photon, the parametric drive is detuned from the frequency necessary to swap a cavity photon into the dissipator's higher levels. We would expect to see this photon blockade only if the anharmonicity was larger than both the photon swap rate (which grows with photon number) and the dissipator decay rate. Additionally, the blockade would only appear if the photon swap rate was itself larger than the dissipator decay rate; otherwise, the mean photon number in the dissipator would remain low. If photons were blockaded from leaving the cavity, we would expect to see a non- exponential ringdown. Our ringdown measurements are well fit by exponential curves (to within the accuracy of our measurements), and so we see no effect of dissipator anharmonicity in our device. We next demonstrate how the dissipator can be used to reset the readout cavity after a measurement. The pulse sequence is shown in Figure We also measure coherence with the cavity population pulse but without the parametric drive to characterize the bare cavity reset time. The background Γ E 2 we measure varies in a small range about 0.17 μs -1 , with the typical 1-standard-deviation range shown by the shaded bar in Fig. We can fit the qubit decoherence rate during cavity reset to a simple functional form: where the first term describes dephasing induced by a decaying coherent state and Γ 0 2 is the bare qubit decoherence rate in the absence of additional cavity population. We note that this is a simplified model that does not include the full open system dynamics of the qubitcavity-bath interaction. However, it still fits the data quite well in the driven case, and fits the undriven case well after approximately one cavity decay time, as shown in Fig. We then drive a parametric pulse on the dissipator for a variable time to induce cavity loss. We next perform an ordinary Hahn echo sequence on the qubit and then measure its state. (b) Measured echo decoherence rate Γ E 2 as a function of the wait time after an initial population pulse, with (blue, left) and without (green, right) the dissipator drive. Decoherence initially is fast, then drops to the background value (gray shaded region, indicating the variance in background Γ E 2 ). The dashed curves are fits to the simple model given in Eq. 9, with extracted cavity decay rates given in the legend. At short times without dissipator drive, the photon number changes significantly during the echo measurement, making Γ E 2 fits unreliable. This can be seen clearly in the inset curves, which show single echo measurements with (blue) and without (green) the dissipation drive: the measurement without dissipation drive gives a strongly non-exponential curve. cols for resonator reset, which typically speed reset by a factor of ∼ 2 In order to be used as a practical cavity reset, it is essential that the dissipator not compromise readout fidelity. We have performed single-shot readout fidelity with and without a cavity population pulse and reset pulse beforehand, and found no significant change in the average readout fidelity of 0.81. This fidelity is limited by the finite lifetime of our qubit and nonideal performance of our readout amplification chain, which has not been optimized for the cavity frequency. As described above in Sec. II B, it is possible to use the dissipator to cool a target system by pumping heat from the system into the dissipator's bath. Importantly, this pumping is frequency-selective, and thus can be used to cool one mode while leaving other modes unaffected. Thus, we can use the dissipator to remove thermal photons from the cavity, cooling it closer to its ground state, while leaving the qubit coherence unaffected. We measure this cavity refrigeration technique with a modified echo sequence. See Figure 2 to approximately 1 μs -1 for a population drive that creates a mean photon number n ≈ 1. Finally, we add the parametric drive during the entire sequence, damping and cooling the cavity. For all values of the cavity drive, adding the dissipator parametric drive reduces the Γ E 2 observed, enhancing coherence. For sufficiently high parametric drive amplitudes, we can decrease Γ E 2 even below its bare value, indicating that thermal photons were likely a source of dephasing even without the cavity drive. When we turn off the cavity drive and drive only the parametric cooling tone, we reach a minimum Γ E 2 = 0.114 μs -1 . All other qubits made with our inhouse fabrication process, which is limited by oxide contaminants in the qubit capacitor, show dephasing rates at or above this level, even when they are well-isolated from their measurement cavities. We therefore suspect the remaining dephasing is due to other processes and not thermal photon noise. This assumption is supported by the fact that the bare dephasing rate and the dephasing rate during refrigeration both drift in time, but the difference between them is relatively constant, indicating it is likely due to other time-varying processes as has been ubiquitously observed in superconducting qubits. Using the mean "cooled" value as the dephasing rate due to other processes Γ 0 2 = 0.124 μs -1 and comparing to the mean bare dephasing rate Γ 2 = 0.172 μs -1 , we can extract a photon-induced dephasing rate Γ p φ = 0.048 μs -1 . To convert this to a mean cavity photon number we can use Eq. 1 along with the measured device parameters κ c /2π = 477 kHz, χ/2π = 200 kHz. We find n ≈ 0.107, which gives an effective cavity temperature T c ≈ 115 mK before refrigeration. Assuming T diss ≈ T c and using the bare κ c = 3.00 μs -1 and dissipator-induced κ eff = γ cav -κ c = 54 μs -1 (both measured from cavity ringdown), we use Eq. 8 to calculate a final cavity temperature T c ≈ 77 mK during refrigeration. This gives an expected photon number n = 0.032 and an expected dephasing rate Γ p φ ≈ 0.9 ms -1 . The dephasing is suppressed both due to the reduction of n (cooling) and the enhancement of total cavity loss rate κ = κ c + κ eff such that κ ≫ χ, reducing the dephasing rate per photon. Therefore, with active refrigeration of the cavity mode, the limit on T 2 due to thermal photon dephasing is now above 1 ms, even with an external microwave environment temperature of 115 mK. Thus, the dissipator shows the capacity to support long-lived qubit coherence even in systems with elevated bath temperatures. We note that the bath temperature of 115 mK is far above the state of the art, which is typically around 60 mK In order to be used for continuous cavity refrigeration, it is essential that the dissipation we drive is frequencyselective, otherwise it would cause unwanted damping of the qubit. To test this, we perform measurements of the qubit lifetime T 1 with and without a cavity refrigeration drive. We have measured up to the strongest dissipation drives possible with our setup-i.e., the strongest drives shown in Fig. We have presented a simple modular dissipator element that can be used to induce tunable, on-demand dissipation in a target mode. The dissipator is based on a driven parametric coupling between the target and a lossy mode, with the loss coming from coupling to a terminated microwave feedline. We have demonstrated how our dissipator can be used with a standard circuit QED readout cavity as its target. We can rapidly reset the cavity after measurement and cool it below its equilibrium temperature, without detectably affecting readout fidelity (at the 81% level) and without reducing qubit The dissipator is parametrically driven to induce cavity loss while an ordinary Hahn echo sequence is performed on the qubit. During the free evolution of the echo, the cavity is driven with a variable-amplitude population drive to add a fluctuating photon population. (b) Measured echo decoherence rate Γ E 2 as a function of parametric drive power for 3 different cavity drive powers. The legend shows the mean cavity photon numbers n under the influence of the cavity drives when the parametric (dissipation) drive is off. The gray dashed line is the mean value of Γ E 2 = 0.17 μs -1 in the absence of all other drives. The rate fluctuates, and the gray shaded region shows the 1 standard deviation interval. When a cavity drive is present with no cooling drive, fluctuating photon populations of n = 0.14, 0.35, and 1.10 in the cavity lead to dephasing, giving the increased average decoherence rates of 0.274 μs -1 , 0.425 μs -1 , and 0.980 μs -1 shown by the blue, green, and red dashed lines, respectively. Shaded regions indicate 1 standard deviation intervals. When the dissipator is coupled to the cavity with a parametric drive, these excitations are rapidly removed from the cavity and the coherence is improved above its background value. With optimal dissipator driving and no added cavity drive, we read an average decoherence rate of 0.124 μs -1 , indicated by the yellow dashed line and shaded region. lifetime (at the 27 μs level) or coherence. In the case where qubit coherence is limited by background cavity photon population, our dissipator can be used to suppress dephasing and prolong qubit coherence. To add the dissipator to a standard cQED system, three components are required: (1) the dissipator itself (a tunable transmon coupler), (2) a high-frequency filter mode, and (3) a fast flux line. However, we note that parametric couplers similar to the dissipator are already present in many superconducting quantum processor ar-chitectures. The dissipator could therefore be integrated into these architectures with minimal extra complexity, as the coupler and flux line would be pre-existing; all that is required is to add an additional coupling to a highfrequency filter mode and to the target system (e.g., a readout cavity). In order to prevent unwanted loss on other modes (e.g., qubits that use this coupler for gates), the filter could be designed for strong frequency selectivity Future work could further optimize the dissipator for use in practical quantum processors. The filter frequency could be raised to further lower the cavity temperature, and its bandwidth could be reduced to allow similar dissipation strength with weaker driving. The off-chip termination could instead be implemented as a thin-film resistor either on chip or on the microwave launch, saving space. Driven dissipation is fully compatible with pulseshaping techniques for rapid ringdown, and the two could be combined for even faster cavity reset. Cavity cooling could be used to preserve coherence even with reduced base-temperature attenuation and reduced isolation from following amplifiers, removing bulk and heat load from cryogenic setups. We note that cavity cooling also allows dispersive shift, cavity linewdith, and cavity frequency to be optimized for readout fidelity, without having to make tradeoffs to avoid photon-induced dephasing. Future work can also use the dissipator as a source of loss for other applications, especially unconditional qubit reset. In a geometry like ours, this reset could be achieved by swapping qubit excitations into a lossy dissipator (which couples to the qubit via the cavity) or by driving a low-loss dissipator (i.e., a parametric coupler) with two tones to swap qubit excitations into a mode of the readout cavity. The latter approach would also work if the dissipator/coupler was instead coupled to the qubit, as in standard tunable coupler geometries. Such reset is useful in standard architectures, in bosonic encoding error suppression schemes where ndiss is the photon population of the dissipator. There is a similar equation for the dissipator: We can substitute Eq. B3 into Eq. B2 and solve for nc : We can then subtract the undriven photon number n0 from Eq. B2 to find When this is less than 0, driving removes photons from the cavity on average and thus cools it. This holds so long as γ - c γ + diss < γ + c γ - diss , i.e., as long as the undriven dissipator population γ + diss /γ - diss is less than the undriven cavity population γ + c /γ - c . In the case where the populations are thermal, this is simply the statement that ω diss /T bath > ω c /T 0 , the condition given in Section II B. Devices are fabricated on chips diced from a [100] intrinsic silicon wafer with a resistivity > 10, 000 kΩ • cm. The chip is first cleaned using a Piranha solution consisting of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide heated to 120 • C for 10 minutes to remove the organic contaminants, followed by a soak in a buffered oxide etch (BOE) solution with a 6:1 concentration (6 parts by volume 40% ammonium fluoride and 1 part by volume 49% HF) for 5 minutes to remove the native oxide layer on the wafer. The chip is then coated with a bi-layer stack of electronbeam resists (MMA EL13, PMMA A6). We utilize a 100 kV Raith electron-beam lithography tool to realize the junctions as well as the bulk structure of the device. Note that for the small structures (∼100 nm), we use a low beam current of 200 pA to achieve fine resolution. Immediately after finishing the lithography, the sample is developed in a MIBK/IPA 1:3 solution at 0 • C and then ashed in an oxygen plasma for 30 seconds at 60 W to remove all the remaining resist residue. To minimize the dielectric loss, the developed mask is again cleaned using the BOE solution for 30 seconds and pumped down inside an Angstrom Engineering electron-beam evaporator within 5 minutes of cleaning. Josephson junctions are deposited by employing the "Manhattan Style" evaporation scheme We take pulsed spectroscopy measurements of the qubit to find its frequency ω q and anharmonicity α q . We perform spectroscopy of the cavity resonance with and without a population-inverting π pulse on the qubit to measure the dispersive shift χ, and from it extract the qubit-cavity coupling g q . We measure mean qubit lifetime T1 = 27 μs and coherence T * 2 = 4 μs with ordinary decay and Ramsey experiments. Similar measurements on the dissipator yield no signal, which is expected as the dissipator lifetime should be Purcell-limited to below 50 ns at all dissipator frequencies. All device parameters are shown in Table We measure the qubit's excited state population by driving Rabi oscillations on the |e⟩ ↔ |f ⟩ transition frequency with and without a |g⟩ ↔ |e⟩ pi pulse beforehand. Taking the ratio of the amplitudes of these two signals gives us the ratio of the |g⟩ and |e⟩ state populations, and thus the qubit temperature To calibrate the flux drive through the dissipator SQUID, we first tune the dissipator through a full flux quantum using DC injected on the fast flux line. We thus obtain a current-to-flux transfer function. We then measure the microwave power in our parametric drive at the input to the fridge, and use the same transfer function to transform it to a flux drive amplitude. We include an extra 3 dB attenuation to account for the extra fixed attenuation in the microwave flux drive line (see Fig. [41] This is the regime in which we operate our device, based on the measured parameters. Note that if we were not in this regime, during modulation the dissipator frequency would come near resonance with the cavity, and the two would undergo a direct exchange operation. This may produce the desired loss, but such frequency collisions are exactly what we sought to avoid with parametric drives, as there may be other modes near the cavity that we do not wish to make lossy. [42] H. Okamoto, A. Gourgout, C.-Y. Chang, K. Onomitsu, I. Mahboob, E. Y. Chang, and H. Yamaguchi, Coherent phonon manipulation in coupled mechanical resonators,