Molecular magnetism aims to design materials with unique properties at the molecular level, focusing on the systematic synthesis of new chemical compounds. In this paper, we propose an alternative route to engineer molecular magnetic materials through plasma irradiation. Our research indicates that the long-range magnetic order temperature in the three-dimensional {[Mn II (H2O)2]2[Nb IV (CN)8]•4H2O}n molecular ferrimagnet increases by 20 K after plasma treatment. The core structure of the compound does not reveal significant changes after plasma processing, as confirmed by the X-ray powder diffraction analysis. The observed results are attributed to the release of crystallized water molecules. The described procedure can serve as a viable approach to altering the magnetic properties of the molecular systems. Molecular magnetic materials have emerged at the confluence of chemistry, physics, and materials science, holding promise for a wide range of applications from spintronics or qubits designs Plasma modification provides another way to manipulate magnetism through surface modification Here, we present the first case of combining plasma modification technique with molecular magnetism in the octacyanidometalate {[Mn II (H2O)2]2[Nb IV (CN)8]•4H2O}n ferrimagnet, representing the well-studied isostructural family of compounds The studied {[Mn II (H2O)2]2[Nb IV (CN)8]•4H2O}n coordination polymer (hereafter denoted as NbMn2) was synthesized using MnCl2•4H2O and K4[Nb(CN)8]•2H2O as per previously published procedures The samples were exposed to an air plasma generated by the Harrick Plasma Cleaner in high-power mode (18 W) for 2 (NbMn2-2), 10 (NbMn2-10), and 15 (NbMn2-15) minutes. The color of the NbMn2-10 and NbMn2-15 turned dark brown. Subsequently, an extra layer of Scotch tape was placed on the powder-taped samples, which were then folded and encapsulated inside a gelatin capsule with the high vacuum Apiezon M grease for protection against atmospheric air. The infrared thermometer recorded a temperature inside the plasma cleaner not exceeding 75 °C. X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) patterns were obtained by the PANalytical X'Pert Pro instrument with a copper X-ray tube source (Cu Kα1, 1.541 Å) in the θ-2θ geometry operating at 40 kV and 30 mA. Data were recorded at room temperature between 5° and 45°of 2θ. Background correction was applied, and the Scotch tape influence and the anode's characteristic X-ray Kα2 were removed. The magnetic properties were measured using the Quantum Design SQUID MPMS-XL magnetometer. The isothermal magnetization M(μ0H) was obtained with an applied magnetic field of μ0H = [0, 7 T]. Static magnetic susceptibility measurements were carried out while cooling in the temperature range of T = 2.0-300 K in the applied field of μ0Hdc = 500 G. The temperature-independent diamagnetic contribution to susceptibility from the sample and its protection was subtracted by fitting the experimental data to the hightemperature range of measured magnetic susceptibility. Detailed information on the NbMn2 crystallographic structure can be found in the reference article X-ray powder diffraction patterns acquired for the reference and NbMn2-15 reveal the presence of the same peaks in analog positions (Fig. The magnetic properties of NbMn2 have been investigated in previous studies The isothermal magnetization field dependence for studied samples measured at T = 2.0 K from μ0H = 0 to 7 T is shown in Fig. Our study presents the first example of applying plasma modification to molecular magnetic materials to tailor their selected properties. We investigated the impact of plasma treatment on the three-dimensional NbMn2 molecular ferrimagnet. A second magnetic phase emerges after plasma treatment with a critical temperature TC increased by 20.5 K from its initial value of TC = 49 K, reaching TC = 69.5 K. In contrast, the magnetization process T = 2.0 K undergoes only slight modification. The measurements of XRPD indicate only subtle modifications of the crystal structure. Additionally, the process of creating this new phase is gradual and can be regulated through plasma irradiation time. Further studies are needed to explore the nature of the modification in magnetic properties. High temperature and ultraviolet light generated in plasma, as well as desorption of crystallized and coordinated water, are potential factors contributing to the observed results.