Color centers in wide-bandgap semiconductors are a promising class of solid state quantum light source, many of which operate at room temperature. We examine a family of color centers in aluminum nitride which emit close to 620 nm. We present a technique to rapidly map an ensemble of these single photon emitters, identifying all emitters, not just those with absorption dipole parallel to the laser polarization. We demonstrate a fast technique to determine their absorption polarization orientation in the c-plane, finding they are uniformly distributed in orientation, in contrast to many other emitters in crystalline materials. Color centers (CCs) are emissive point structures in a crystal consisting of combinations of impurities, vacancies and lattice defects which at high-density can give a crystal color. When a single center is isolated, the photon statistics often demonstrate anti-bunching. CCs with internal energy levels embedded deep within the bandgap of their semiconductor host can emit at room-temperature. The most investigated example is the negatively charged nitrogen vacancy (NV -) complex in diamond Isolated CCs in the group III-nitrides have been less well investigated, with a small number of works reporting their presence in gallium nitride (GaN) In previous publications, density functional theory has been used to predict emission from several CCs in AlN, namely the anti-site nitrogen vacancy complex (N Al V N ) at 712 nm Here we report our studies on isolated CCs in a commercially-sourced AlN-on-sapphire sample that has a convenient density of CCs with zero-phonon lines clustered around to 620 nm. To learn more about the AlN CC's physical origin we investigate the ensemble distribution of absorption dipoles. We find that, despite the crystalline nature of the film, there is no preferred absorption dipole orientation direction for the CCs. Detailed study of the temporal, spectral and photo-physical properties of a small number of CCs provides an insight into their internal energy levels and physical structure. The sample measured in this work is a single crystal, 1 μm thick epi-layer of AlN grown via metal-organic chemical vapour deposition on a [0001] plane sapphire substrate. In confocal scan maps, CCs appeared as diffraction limited spots, Figure The density of CCs is sufficiently low that they can be individually addressed, as shown in Fig. with τ 1 and τ 2 representing the anti-bunching and bunching lifetimes respectively. At 44.3 μW excitation τ 1 = 8.3 ± 0.8 ns and τ 2 = 3.7 ± 1.1 μs. At 1.40 mW excitation τ 1 = 3.5 ± 0.2 ns and τ 2 = 198 ± 7 ns. Under stronger optical excitation, increasingly prominent bunching is observed in Fig. It is also possible to build a polarization map for every pixel using the three area maps in Fig. In our optical system, the birefringence of a dichroic beamsplitter results in a small reduction in the purity of the laser polarization at some angles. The maximum visibility achievable by the microscope is 99.8 %. When the effect of the birefringence was greatest, the visibility was 94.8 %, which has no impact on the conclusions of our study. With this information we can look at the statistics of CC absorption angles over the 2025 μm 2 area. A histogram of weighted pixel angle, shown in Fig. The lack of any preferred direction in the in-plane component of absorption dipoles in AlN CCs points to a more complex origin than the diamond NV -. In future, sampling the ensemble distribution of emission dipole orientations could yield further insight into the physical origin of these CCs, or could be applied to other material systems. Identification of all CCs in these samples, not just those aligned to the laser in a single scan, could be useful in correlative microscopy techniques where transmission electron microscopy and cathodoluminescence is compared to PL maps to investigate the link between threading dislocations in AlN and CCs.