We calculate the elongation or contraction force F on a point contact (length L) connecting two superconductors with a phase difference φ. When L is small compared to the superconducting coherence length ξ0 this force is given by F = -(∆0/πξ0) ln(ξ0/L) cos φ per spin-degenerate transverse mode. Quantum fluctuations in states from the continuous spectrum outside the superconducting gap ∆0 give the dominant contribution to this force, which may be understood as the superconducting counterpart of the electromagnetic Casimir force. We compare with earlier work that only included contributions from the discrete spectrum of Andreev levels. The free energy Ω of a Josephson junction, a weak link between two superconductors, depends on the superconducting phase difference φ across the junction as well as on the junction length L. The derivative of Ω with respect to φ gives the supercurrent I = (2e/ħ)dΩ/dφ, the derivative with respect to L gives the elongation or contraction force F = -dΩ/dL on the junction This force is the superconducting counterpart of the electromagnetic Casimir force with v F the Fermi velocity and g a factor that counts spin and other degeneracies. For φ = 0, g = 1, v F = c this is precisely the attractive Casimir force produced by vacuum fluctuations of a scalar one-dimensional wave between perfectly reflecting metallic mirrors The result One might surmise that the point contact length L should be replaced by an effective length L + ξ 0 , to estimate F ≃ ħv F /ξ 2 0 in the short-junction regime. The pioneering work by Krive et al. The insight that the continuous spectrum gives a nonanalytic contribution ∝ ln L to the Josephson free energy is not new FIG. The outline of this paper is as follows. In the next section we summarize the scattering matrix representation The free energy of a Josephson junction at temperature T is given by (We set ħ and Boltzmann's constant k B equal to unity.) The density of states ρ(ε) refers to the electron-hole sym-arXiv:2310.06672v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 2 Nov 2023 metric spectrum of the Bogoliubov-De Gennes Hamiltonian H BdG . We ignore φ-independent contributions to the free energy from the superconducting reservoirs The spectrum of H BdG consists of bound states (Andreev levels) for ε < ∆ 0 and a continuous spectrum for ε > ∆ 0 . Scattering theory in terms of the Andreev reflection matrix R A and the scattering matrix S N of the junction in the normal state. The key physical ingredient in this representation of the density of states is the separation of length scales between Andreev reflection The Andreev reflection matrix has the block structure The blocks r * A and r A describe Andreev reflection from electron to hole and from hole to electron, respectively. The diagonal elements of the submatrix r A refer to Andreev reflection from the left and right superconductor, at a phase ±φ/2. Andreev reflection happens with unit probability for ε < ∆ 0 , at larger energies α(ε) = ε/∆ 0 -ε 2 /∆ 2 0 -1 decays to zero. The normal scattering matrix S N is block-diagonal, with electron scattering matrix s 0 unitary at all energies. Substitution of Eqs. ( As a final step, the slowly converging integration over energies in Eq. ( For simplicity we consider an N -mode point contact which does not mix the transverse modes. For each mode the scattering matrix s 0 is a 2×2 matrix of reflection amplitudes (on the diagonal) and transmission amplitudes (off-diagonal). In this section we assume ballistic transport, so only the transmission amplitudes are nonzero, Here k(ε) is the momentum of the n-th electron mode in the point contact region between the superconductors. For ε ≪ E F we may linearize its energy dependence, k(ε) = k F + ε/v F , with k F and v F the momentum and velocity of the mode at the Fermi level. The contribution of each mode to the free energy (8) then takes the form We seek the force F = -dΩ/dL. For L ≫ ξ 0 we may set the function β(ω) to unity in Eq. ( In the opposite short-junction regime L ≪ ξ 0 the Ldependence of the integral A calculation to higher order in L/ξ 0 in the Appendix gives In Fig. at φ = ±π. The scaling with L is not significantly affected. The logarithmic L-dependence of the force is due to the contribution from the continuous spectrum, the energy range ε > ∆ 0 in the free energy integral (2). To see this, note that the discrete spectrum consists for L ≪ ξ 0 of a single excitation energy ε 0 > 0 per transverse mode, at (15) This contributes to the Casimir-Josephson force an Lindependent amount dε 0 /dL ≃ ∆ 0 /ξ 0 , without the ln(ξ 0 /L) factor. The integral over the continuous spectrum is cut off by the band width E F . This cut off is ineffective if L > λ F , but for smaller junction lengths the ln(ξ 0 /L) increase saturates at ln(ξ 0 /λ F ) ∝ ln(E F /∆ 0 ). A final remark for this section: As one can see by comparing Eqs. ( FIG. A tunnel barrier with transmission probability Γ ∈ (0, 1) at the center of the point contact modifies the scattering matrix So the expressions from the previous section can be used with the substitution For Γ ≪ 1 the φ-dependence of the force on the Josephson junction is reduced by a factor Γ. In particular, in the short-junction regime L ≪ ξ 0 one has, in view of Eq. ( (19) Notice that the same substitution In summary, we have calculated the Casimir-like force on a point contact Josephson junction, focusing on the regime that the length L of the junction is short compared to the superconducting coherence length ξ 0 . In the limit L/ξ 0 → 0 the supercurrent through the junction is fully determined by the discrete spectrum of Andreev levels, confined to the junction by the superconducting gap ∆ 0 . We have shown that the same does not apply to the elongation or contraction force on the junction: the continuous spectrum of states outside the gap qualitatively modifies the dependence of the force on both the junction length L and the superconducting phase difference φ: The L-dependence acquires a logarithmic factor ln(ξ 0 /L) and the φ-dependence becomes more sensitive to the presence of a tunnel barrier in the point contact (decreasing ∝ Γ rather than ∝ √ Γ with the tunnel probability Γ). In a ballistic point contact (Γ = 1) with N spindegenerate transverse modes (g = 2) the difference δF between the Casimir-Josephson force at φ = 0 and φ = π is given for L ≪ ξ 0 by The logarithmic enhancement factor saturates at ln(E F /∆ 0 ) for L ≲ λ F . This will be at best a factor of 10, and since ∆ 0 /ξ 0 ≲ 10 -15 N one needs a large number of modes, N ≳ 10 4 , to reach a measurable force in the 0.1 nN range. An additional complication, pointed out by Krive et al. In closing we remark that our result ( 