We present an algorithm for the determination of the local symmetry group for arbitrary k-points in 3D Brillouin zones. First, we test our implementation against tabulated results available for standard high-symmetry points (given by universal fractional coordinates). Then, to showcase the general applicability of our methodology, we produce the irreducible representations for the "non-universal high-symmetry" points, first reported by Setyawan and Curtarolo [Comput. Mater. Sci. 49, 299 (2010)]. The present method can be regarded as a first step for the determination of elementary band decompositions and symmetry-enforced constraints in crystalline topological materials. Topological materials have entered the centre stage of both theoretical Generalising the original approach by Dyson Further, to study topological semimetals, the concept of band crossing has been often used, which implies identifying a certain symmetry (that must be preserved along the energy band) and any obstruction of the band connectivity at high symmetry k-points in a way that preserves said symmetry Systematic approaches to the identification of symmetry indicators for topological materials have been developed recently The key ingredient for either the identification of symmetry indicators or the decomposition into elementary bands is the local symmetry group of the k-points considered, a. k. a. the little group of the wavevector. These groups have long been tabulated In a detailed study Setyawan and Curtarolo In all the above approaches the high symmetry points are identified through the action of space group operations that leave it invariant (up to the addition of a reciprocal lattice vector), i.e. via the k-point stabiliser G k . Yet, as we have already highlighted above, the key ingredient through which k-points enter the classification of electronic band structures is the irreducible representation of the little group of the wavevector, G * k . However, an evaluation of the latter poses a challenge for the usual method (see section II B for a summary) at "non-universal" k-points, since also the corresponding little group of the wavevector turns out to depend on structural details. On the Bilbao Crystallographic server this issue is avoided by reporting only the stabiliser group of the symmetry line, which implies that the irreducible representations will not contain the translational elements that act on the Brillouin zone boundary. The characters corresponding to these translations can be obtained easily in the case of a split extension, but they are less straightforward to evaluate for non-symmorphic space groups. While neglecting them might suffice for most practical applications, in this work we outline and implement a theory that treats universal and "nonuniversal" k-points on an equal footing by proposing an algorithm that can identify the little group for an arbitrary k-point. Specifically, we apply the method to the lattice parameter-dependent highsymmetry points and present the character tables defining their irreducible representations; the explicit matrix representations are also reported in the supplementary information. The paper is organized as follows: we summarise in section II B some background about the conventional method to construct G * k , and in section II C we instead devise a more general approach for identifying group extensions, without any dependence from the lattice parameters. Our algorithm allows to consider all high symmetry points for the 230 space groups in 3 dimensions. Details of our computational implementations are reported in section III and we finally list the groups G * k and their character tables in section IV. In this section we provide for completeness some background for the ensuing presentation in section II C, and we refer to Refs. exact. That means that ker{π} = M , hence we can find a transversal (i.e. a set of coset representatives) for G in G * , t : G → G * , such that t(e) = e, with e the identity element (of the appropriate group). The elements of G * can then be written as (t(x), m) for x ∈ G and m ∈ M . For any two elements x, y ∈ G one has π(t(xy)) = xy = π(t(x))π(t(y)) = π(t(x)t(y)), hence there is a unique element μ(x, y) ∈ M such that The elements μ of M are 2-cocycles, but also known as Schur's multipliers and represent the "obstructions" in G * that do not allow G to be a subgroup of G * . Since the little group of k (here: G * ) comprises of both point group operations and translations, its identification is equivalent to the construction of the correct group extension of M by G, where M can now be identified with the subgroup of lattice translations. We find it more convenient to stick to the multiplicative notation for elements of M , instead of using the common additive notation. A defining feature of the group G is to leave the lattice M invariant, and if we indicate the action of an element x ∈ G on m ∈ M by m x = m t(x) , we have a homomorphism from G to the group of transformations of M into itself α : G → Aut(M ), x → x α , which will be required in section II C. The method of choice in solid state physics for the construction of the little group of the wavevector is due to Herring The method produces an extension of the stabiliser of the k-point by introducing the map s : M → C, s := exp[2iπk • μ] that effectively identifies non-trivial translations; the value of s is then adjoined to each element of G to label the entries of the new group G * , whose multiplication table is generated following the point group multiplication rule for the first index and the product rule in Eq. ( The group's order can also be determined from knowledge of the k-point alone For the "non-universal" k-points such an approach is clearly not viable, since the order of the resulting group would depend on the crystallographic lattice constants, rather than be uniquely determined by the symmetries at play for that particular wavevector. In the following section we suggest an alternative construction for the identification of the little group of the wavevector, thus filling a conspicuous gap in the recent literature. To overcome the limitations stated above, we propose to leverage an idea due to Wells In particular, for transformations θ ∈ Aut(M ) and φ ∈ Aut(G), there might not be a transfor-mation γ ∈ Aut(G * ) that induces the pair (θ, φ). A pair (θ, φ) ∈ Aut(M ) × Aut(G) is compatible if it fulfils the condition θx α θ -1 = x φ α for all x ∈ G, in other words, (θ, φ) are compatible if they preserve the conjugation action of G on M . Compatible pairs form a group The sequence above connects the groups that we have just constructed with the second cohomology group H 2 and with the group of 1cocycles Z 1 . In particular, since the sequence is exact, one has that im{ψ} = ker{τ }, thus it sufficient to study the image and the kernel of τ to fully characterise the transformations of G * that we are interested in. Since the sequence above is exact, these transformations are all mapped into the identity element of H 2 α . More specifically, the following theorem allows to explicitly construct the 2-cocycles that specify our little group of the wavevector μ (φ(x), φ(y)) θ μ(x, y) -1 = χ(x) -1 φ(y) χ(y) -1 χ(xy). The proof can be found in Ref. In practice, χ(x) can either be chosen to be identically zero if the space group is symmorphic and the Bravais lattice is primitive, or it is a known function otherwise. Eq. ( When γ ∈ ker{τ }, Eq. ( On the other hand, when t ̸ = e, we are left with the task of determining the order of such a translation group, that is the integer p such that t p = e. While in the Herring's method such a choice is made (heuristically) as summarised in section II B, for the case of "non-universal" k-points we make the estimate for |G * | = p|G|, with p the smallest prime factor of the point group order |G|, thus removing the lattice parameters' dependence in the k-point coordinates: we denote this "abridged" wavevector k. In this way, we are separating out the effect of the non-trivial translations on the stabiliser of the k-point from the trivial translations that depend on the specifics of the lattice parameters. This choice is motivated by the fact that an upper bound on the order of G * is given by the order of the semidirect product M ⋊ G, which is just the product of the orders of the two groups M and G. The constraint on |M | in this case originates from the requirement that |M | and |G| ought not to be coprime: if that were the case the resulting second cohomology group H 2 (G, M ) would be trivial and the group extension G * would split. On the other hand, with our choice we ensure that a more complex structure of the extension group could be captured (since H 2 (G, M ) is not trivial) while keeping the order of the resulting group minimal. In section IV we will provide an example when the minimal choice for the group order is too restrictive and values of p n with n > 1 natural, have to be considered instead. Our reasoning is, perhaps, better explained with an example: let us consider the X-point for the Orthorhombic body-centred lattice, with coordinates [-ξ, ξ, ξ] (see Figure To give an overall summary of the approach we employ (which is discussed in refs. In our code, we tabulate the generators of the 230 space groups in the conventional unit cell settings in accordance with the International Tables for Crystallography (vol. A) In a limited number of instances, the local symmetry group generated can be bigger than our theoretical estimate outlined previously: this happens when the non-trivial translation μ (θ,φ) is collinear with the centering vectors in the non-primitive unit cell. For non-symmorphic space groups, the action of the centering translations can be non trivial and the resulting order of the extension exceeds the estimate by a factor proportional to the number of centering vectors present in the resulting group, typically by a factor two, thus leading to a local symmetry group of order p 2 |G|. In order to better investigate the group structure (see the discussion in section IV) the algorithm can list all subgroups of index n thanks to a one-to-one correspondence with (standardised and complete) coset tables with n rows and the subgroups of the given group; for a detailed exposition of the backtrack search strategy employed in the algorithm's implementation we refer to chapter 5 in Refs. Once that the little group of the wavevector has been constructed we determine its irreducible representations (over the complex numbers) by computing its character table. To this end we have implemented the Dixon algorithm We cross-check our implementation against the tabulated results for universal k-points in Ref. for each element h ∈ G * and for all irreducible representations r, s, overbar denotes complex conjugation in the expression above. Our algorithm automatically checks for Eq. ( Finally we touch on the computational methods to obtain the actual representation matrices starting from the character table. The algorithm that we are about to discuss is largely mutuated from the articles by Blokker algebra CG: where n is the number of conjugacy classes, d j = ζ j (e) is the representation degree and g i is a representative element for the i th class. The set of class functions is spanned by the centre of the group algebra Z[CG], hence our objective is to form a representation for Z[CG] by projecting the regular representation over the basis t i for the range of the operator p i : the matrices Γ Z i will in general be reducible representations of degree d 2 i containing the irreducible representation Γ i only d i times. The associated eigenvalues will then have multiplicity d i and the corresponding eigenvectors form an orthonormal basis B (i) g for the subspace of Z[CG] associated with the group element g ∈ G. Since the projection operators commute with the group elements, to obtain the other entries of the basis one can act with the remaining elements of G to span the whole centre of the group algebra. Finally, the irreducible representations matrices are obtained by a similarity transform: In order to induce the space group representations, a further constraint has to be imposed on the irreducible representations obtained in Eq. ( We identify the (non-trivial) little group of the wavevectors corresponding to those first obtained in Ref. These groups are listed in tables I to VI, for completeness we also report the corresponding Brillouin zones and wavevectors coordinates in Figs. 3 to 10, as we follow the standard crystallographic convention of the International Tables of Crystallography. In particular, for the orthorhombic lattice we consider only the so-called standard setting with a < b < c out of the six settings that are allowed by symmetry in orthorhombic systems For each of the space groups considered we report the generators of the Abelian little groups (tables XXXVIII-XLIII, the notation 0 therein indicates the null translation) and character tables for wavevectors that have a non-Abelian little group (tables VII-XXXVII, the notation ζ n therein indicates the n-th root of unity): we decided to individually tabulate the character table for each of these groups, even though two (or more) of them might be isomorphic. This is to make explicit the connection between the classes of the abstract group and the symmetry operation of the specific little group at hand. In the previous section we have mentioned the instance of our algorithm identifying a local symmetry group of order exceeding the simple estimate provided in section II, which occurs when the inclusion of centering vectors (that belong to the same coset as the identity element once the lattice translations have been factored out the space group) is necessary when non-symmorphic symmetry elements are present. As an example, consider the A wavevector for space group #63: if no restrictions are imposed on the local symmetry group order, the program identifies, starting from a point symmetry of order 4, a group of order 16, featuring two centering vectors t 1 = ( 1 2 , 1 2 , 0) and t 2 = ( 1 2 , 1 2 , 1). The translations t 1 and t 2 are nonequivalent, as it can be checked by evaluating the Herring phase factors, and there is no group operation that conjugates them, as such they must belong to singleton conjugacy classes; since the group does not contain any symmetry element of order 8, one can readily identify the group in question as the Pauli group Z 4 • D 8 . To further verify the correctness of the group structure presented above we compute the presentation for the group Z 4 • D 8 : this consists of the generating elements: 2 ), together with a set of relators (computed following ref. The quaternion group Q 8 can hence be constructed from the two elements c = (xyz| 1 2 1 2 1 2 ) and b = (xyz|00 1 2 ); in particular one can verify that c 4 = e, b 2 = c 2 = t H and that the action of one element on the other is non-trivial with bcb -1 = c -1 . Another subgroup that can be readily identified is D 8 , by choosing the elements a = (xyz|00 1 2 ) and b as above. By direct calculation one can observe that a 2 = b 4 = e and aba = b -1 , as long as the Herring translation is now taken to be t H = (xyz|001). The overall symmetry group Z 4 • D 8 contains both groups Q 8 and D 8 as normal subgroups of index two and only by considering this larger symmetry group one has a complete picture of the symmetries at play. For space group #63, these can thus be rationalised as arising from the presence of two equivalent translation vectors (along the z-direction and along the x + y-direction) unrelated by the space group operations. During the submission stage, we became aware of a recent publication In conclusion, we have proposed an algorithm for the evaluation of the local symmetry group for arbitrary k-points, including those whose coordinates explicitly depend on lattice parameters and that for that reason could not be dealt with using the consolidated approach by Herring. We think that our code, that we are planning to release to the general public, could be a useful development to be integrated in the induction of space group representations and can help strengthen the connection between symmetry indicators and their evaluation as Berry phases along closed loops in the Brillouin zone TABLE II: "non-universal" wavevectors' little groups for space groups with Orthorhombic base-centred and body-centred Bravais lattices. Plots of the corresponding Brillouin zones are reported in Fig. TABLE VI: "non-universal" wavevectors' little groups for space groups with Cubic face-centred Bravais lattice. Plot of the corresponding Brillouin zone is reported in Fig. {U, Fig. Fig. Fig. (e, 000) (e, 1 3 3 3 ) (e, 0 1 1 ) (xyz, 3 ) (e, 110) ) (e, 000) (e, 0 1 ) ) 2 ) 2 ) (xyz, 000) (xyz, 101) (e, 001) ) (e, 001) (xyz, 1 3 ) (yxz, 101) (e, 1 ) (yxz, 000) (yxz, 1 ) (xyz, 101) (yxz, 1 3 1) (xyz, 00 3 ) (yxz, 00 3 ) (e, 000) (e, 110) (yzx, 110) (yzx, 000) (zyx, 000) (zyx, 110) 2 ) (e, 000) (zyx, 0 1 2 0) (zyx, 1 1 2 0) (e, 1 2 1 1 2 ) (zyx, 00 1 2 ) (xyz, 0 1 2 1 2 ) (zyx, 1 2 00) (e, 1 2 0 1 2 ) (xyz, 1 2 1 2 0) (e, 001) TABLE XXXV: SG226U (e, 000) (xyz, 1 (e, 000) (xyz, 3