Nanoporous metals with a random, bicontinuous structure of both pores and ligaments exhibit many unique mechanical properties, but their technical applications are often limited by their intrinsic brittleness under tensile strain triggered by fracture of the weakest ligaments. Here, we use molecular dynamics simulations to study the mechanical behavior and thermal stability of two different bicontinuous nanoporous high entropy alloys, Al 0.1 CoCrFeNi and NbMoTaW. To isolate the properties related to the nanoporous nature of our samples, we also studied the corresponding bulk and nanocrystalline systems. The results demonstrate that the specific modulus of nanoporous HEAs are 2 to 3 times greater than that of single element nanoporous materials with specific strength reaching values 5 to 10 times higher, comparable to bulk metals with the highest specific strength. Bicontinuous HEAs also displayed excellent resistance to thermal degradation as evidenced by the absence of coarsening ligaments up to temperatures of 1273 K which ensures the durability and reliability in high-temperature applications. The findings uncover unprecedented mechanical and thermal properties of bicontinuous nanoporous high entropy alloys, paving the way for their promising utilization in advanced engineering and structural applications. Nanoporous metals with a random, bicontinuous structure exhibit a unique combination of mechanical properties such as high stiffness, low specific density, high compression strengths, and excellent energy absorption capabilities This paper focuses on utilizing Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations of nanoporous HEAs and studying the mechanical response under uniaxial compression and tensile testing which are then compared to the corresponding mechanical properties of bulk and polycrystalline HEAs. Al 0.1 CoCrFeNi and NbMoTaW HEAs were selected due to their single disordered face-centered cubic (fcc) phase and body-centered cubic (bcc) phase, respectively, as opposed to other HEAs that may have multiple or ordered phases MD simulations were used to perform mechanical compression and tensile tests at 298/600/1273 K. A Nose/Hoover thermostat and barostat (NPT) ensemble with damping parameters of 0.1 picoseconds for temperature and pressure control was first used for 100.0 ps for thermalization at the studied temperature and atmospheric pressure until the lattice parameter and energy of the system reached a steady state. After thermalization, the NPT ensemble is maintained and a strain rate of 10 9 s -1 is imposed to deform the simulation box along the [100] direction from 0-75% strain for compression tests and 0-50% strain for tensile tests. The large strain rate is a limitation of the small-time scales of MD simulations where realistic strain rates would take an unrealistically long time to simulate. The types of systems that were examined are shown in Fig. The results of the mechanical tests at 600 and 1273 K of the Al 0.1 CoCrFeNi and NbMoTaW systems demonstrate the exceptional mechanical properties of nanoporous High-Entropy Alloys (Fig. The NbMoTaW systems (Fig. Fracture analysis was only performed on tensile test specimens as fracturing was not observed in compression tests that are dominated by ligament bending as the primary deformation mode In contrast to the prevalence of dislocations, stacking faults, and twin boundaries in the nanoporous Al 0.1 CoCrFeNi, NbMoTaW is lacking many of the same defects in the ligaments during the fracturing process (Fig Fig. In general, the dislocation density seems to be less sensitive than the stacking fault density towards changes in temperatures or test geometry. For both test geometries, the dislocation density of nanoporous Al 0.1 CoCrFeNi (Fig. By contrast, no stacking fault defects were observed for any of the NbMoTaW nanoporous systems. While metastable stacking faults in bcc crystal structures are crucial for dissociation of partial dislocations, the absence of stacking faults can be attributed to the high stacking fault energy of bcc crystal structures An additional investigation into Al 0.1 CoCrFeNi nanopillars was conducted to investigate the dislocation/stacking fault interaction during compression and tensile tests. The simulations use a 7 nm size nanopillar under compression and tensile tests in the long directions following the same parameters of relaxation and compression as the bicontinuous structures (Fig. The surface energy (table The surface energy also appears to change depending on the mechanical test that is conducted. Fig. To highlight the remarkable mechanical properties of the nanoporous HEAs, the systems are compared to other nanoporous materials (Fig. There appears to be an additional mechanism for the outstanding mechanical properties that come from the sluggish diffusion of dislocations in HEAs The MD results discussed in this work demonstrates the exceptional mechanical properties of nanoporous High-Entropy Alloys (HEAs). The materials offer a remarkable combination of high strength, low Young's modulus, and low density, occupying a previously unoccupied region of the specific modulus-strength phase space. The molecular dynamics simulations suggest that the high strength of nanoporous HEAs is due to the dual mechanism of dislocation starvation and sluggish diffusion. The reduced dislocation motion impacts the defect evolution differently depending on whether the HEA is an fcc or bcc structure. For the fcc structure, the perfect edge dislocation is reduced due to the sluggish diffusion mechanism, making it more likely for stacking faults to form in the ligaments due to the low stacking fault energy. Stacking faults in the ligaments are then trapped due to the bounding of the stacking fault with the surface and are additionally limited due to the orientation of ligaments that hinders partial dislocation motion bounding stacking faults. For the bcc structure, the sluggish diffusion contributes to the dislocation pileup in the nodes of nanoporous structure, causing dislocation forest hardening. The similar mobility of screw and edge dislocations leads to the interaction of a large number of dislocations in the center of the nodes thus creating large pile ups and reducing the number of dislocations that would travel into ligaments to cause deformation. The lack of dislocation nucleation in the ligaments comes from the preferential (111) direction of the surfaces of the nanoporous structure, but is common in the nodes. Furthermore, the study observed that tailoring the ligament size and relative density of the material yields varying responses in defect density concentrations and surface energy. Lower relative densities were found to be associated with reduced defect densities and higher initial surface surfaces energies. Further analysis of these structures will provide valuable insights into the unique mechanisms at play in nanoporous HEAs. B. J.: Writing-review and editing H. C.: Supervision, Writing-review and editing W. J.: Formal Analysis, Investigation, Software, Visualization, Writing-original draft, writing-review and editing. Properties: Supplementary Materials The MD simulations were carried out using the open-source code LAMMPS using a three-dimensional cell with periodic boundary conditions with lengths of 44.625 nm x 44.625 nm x 44.625 nm In order to understand the impact of these materials on wider industries, nanoporous HEA is compared with Steel DP600, a primary component in car manufacturing The yield stress and Young's modulus for the Al 0.1 CoCrFeNi systems at 298 K and 1273 K are displayed in tables 1 and 2 of the main text, respectively. The Young's modulus of Al 0.1 CoCrFeNi from the tensile mechanical tests compares well with the experimental value of 203 GPa and other molecular dynamic simulation values A critical consideration when comparing MD results with experimental results is the high strain rate associated with MD simulations that produces higher yield strengths. The discrepancy is particularly evident when comparing bulk gold stress strain calculations in experiments and simulations where MD results show yield strengths around 8.21 GPa whereas experimental values put the yield strength at 205 MPa 