Materials with low thermal conductivity usually have complex crystal structures. Herein we experimentally find that a simple crystal structure material AgTlI 2 (I4/mcm) owns an extremely low thermal conductivity of 0.25 W/mK at room temperature. To understand this anomaly, we perform in-depth theoretical studies based on ab initio molecular dynamics simulations and anharmonic lattice dynamics. We find that the unique atomic arrangement and weak chemical bonding provide a permissive environment for strong oscillations of Ag atoms, leading to a considerable rattling behavior and giant lattice anharmonicity. This feature is also verified by the experimental probability density function refinement of single-crystal diffraction. The particularly strong anharmonicity breaks down the conventional phonon gas model, giving rise to non-negligible wavelike phonon behaviors in AgTlI 2 at 300 K. Intriguingly, unlike many strongly anharmonic materials where a small propagative thermal conductivity is often accompanied by a large diffusive thermal conductivity, we find an unusual coexistence of ultralow propagative and diffusive thermal conductivities in AgTlI 2 based on the thermal transport unified theory. This study underscores the potential of simple crystal structures in achieving low thermal conductivity and encourages further experimental research to enrich the family of materials with ultralow thermal conductivity. Pushing the lattice thermal conductivity (κ) of materials to a lower limit There are two main mechanisms to scatter phonons in semiconductors and insulators: intrinsic phonon-phonon interactions and extrinsic phonon scatterings from phononimpurity or phonon-boundary interactions. Significant intrinsic phonon-phonon scatterings usually exist in materials with complex crystal structure Extrinsic phonon scatterings from lattice defects, boundaries and distortions provide additional ways to scatter phonons efficiently. Superlattice Bi 4 O 4 SeCl 2 These aforementioned limitations greatly hinder the development of new materials with ultralow κ. In this case, exploring simple crystal structure compounds (low non-diagonal κ) with intrinsically ultralow (no artificial modification) κ can be an alternative solution. It has been reported that PbTe (2 W/mK) Herein, we synthesized a simple crystal structure phase AgTlI 2 (space group I4/mcm; eight atoms in the primitive cell (PC)) and find that it exhibits an exceedingly low κ of 0.25 W/mK at room temperature. AgTlI 2 was synthesized AgTlI 2 and AgTl 2 I 3 both belong to AgI-TlI quasi-binary silver-thallium iodides system, and they constitute an adjacent regime of the Ag-Tl-I equilibrium phase diagram The maximum ADP (U max ) at 300 K in experiments for rattling Cu/Ag atoms in AgTlI 2 and typical thermoelectric materials The crystal structure of AgTlI 2 was established by Flahaut et al. In order to experimentally determine the thermal conductivity, the as-synthesized powder was densified by Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS, see Methods section for details). Rietveld refinement of the PXRD pattern of the SPS-ed powder (see Fig. Bearing in mind from previous studies of low κ compounds, such as TlSe In Fig. Knoop et al. proposed a parameter (σ A ) where i, α and T are respectively the atomic index, Cartesian direction and temperature. F A and F represent the anharmonic and total atomic forces, respectively. Note that σ A is time dependent in AIMD simulations, and we can derive its time average readily. For most materials with modest anharmonicity, it will converge rapidly with the increase of simulation time It is found that AgTlI 2 owns the largest time-average σ A among these materials and significantly deviates from the power-law model at 300 K, which are the intrinsic imprints of its large atomic displacement parameters and strong lattice anharmonicity, further implying its ultralow κ. We note that the calculated U max for Ag in AgTlI 2 at 300 K (0.097 Å 2 ) based on AIMD trajectories is larger than that of our experiments (0.061 Å 2 ), which may be used to rationalize the significant deviation of σ A from the power-law model. Moreover, the time evolution (Fig. Atomic vibrations can be directly observed in MD simulation, while it is nontrivial to obtain more insights into the microscopic phonon transport mechanisms. Thus, we further study the anharmonic lattice dynamics within the perturbation theory (PT) on the basis of first-principles calculations. According to the unified theory where T, ħ, k B , V and N q are respectively the temperature, reduced Plank constant, the Boltzmann constant, the volume of the unit cell, and the total number of wave vectors. v j, j ′ q , Γ j q and ω j q are respectively group velocity, linewidth and frequency of a specific phonon with wave vector q and branches j and j ′ . When j = j ′ , Eq. 2 computes the conventional propagative thermal conductivity (κ pg ), and if j ≠ j ′ , it calculates the diffusive thermal conductivity (κ diff ). Eq. 2 indicates that phonon frequency ω and linewidth Γ are two crucial factors that determine κ. Therefore, a sophisticated treatment to these parameters is necessary for strongly anharmonic system. We consider a combination of factors including: lattice thermal expansion, temperature-dependent phonon frequency renormalization In Figs. Comparing the spectral-κ with respect to the phonon frequency as shown in Figs. For phonon linewidths (lw), three- frequency phonons (0∼1 THz) have significant contributions to the propagative thermal transport. From the phonon density of states at 300 K (see Fig. The discovery of ultralow-κ materials at room temperature in simple and fully dense crystal structure has proven extremely challenging. In Fig. Ag 8 GeS 6 (60 atoms in PC) Recent studies have focused on finding high thermoelectric zT values from complex materials We synthesized polycrystalline AgTlI 2 with a simple crystal structure, and report its ultralow κ at room temperature via both state-of-the-art experiments and calculations. This unusually low value of κ is close to the known lowest limit The nominal AgTlI 2 sample was prepared starting from the high-purity precursors AgI (powder, 99.999%) and TlI (ball, 99.999%). Stoichiometric amount of 3g precursors was mixed and loaded into a carbon-coated silica tube inside of the glove-box, followed by sealing and evacuating (∼ 10 -3 Pa) under vacuum. The mixture of precursors was melted at 873 K for 24 hours, and then slowly dropped to 373 K over 24 hours, followed by annealing at this temperature for 240 hours. The obtained ingot was hand ground into fine powders. Finally, they were densified by SPS at 373 K under a pressure of 200 MPa for 10 minutes using a 10 mm diameter WC die. The resulting SPS-ed sample has a geometrical density of 6.85 g/cm 3 , i.e, around 99% of the theoretical density. X-ray diffraction. PXRD of the synthesized powder, SPSed powder, and consolidated bulk sample were recorded on a PANalytical XPert2 system with Cu K α1 / K α2 radiation (λ 1 =1.541 Å, λ 2 =1.544 Å). Rietveld refinements of PXRD patterns were performed using GSAS (General Structure Analysis System) packages The batch synthesis was composed of grains of matter a few tens of micrometers in size. These grains of matter were not single-crystals, and were broken up with a scalpel and selected using a stereomicroscope. They were mounted on microloops and their diffraction quality was tested. After numerous trials and errors, we finally succeeded in isolating a single crystal of the targeted phase of sufficient quality; the dimensions of this crystal were 0.011 × 0.008 × 0.008 mm 3 . X-ray diffraction measurement on a single crystal was then performed on Rigaku Synergy S diffractometer, equipped with a micro-focus sealed X-ray Mo tube and an Eiger 1M Dectris photon counting detector. Due to the very small size of the sample, an extremely long exposure time was chosen (360 s/0.5°); the utilization of the measurement strategy enabled us to obtain 97% completeness at a theta angle of 36.9°. Data reduction was performed with CrysAlisPro. The structure determination was then performed using SHELXS3 The Gram-Charlier formalism is recommended by the IUCr Commission on Crystallographic Nomenclature. Note that the anharmonic approach has been successfully used in the past to solve numerous structures, both of nonconducting materials Thermal transport measurements. Thermal conductivities of AgTlI 2 bulk sample were measured from 4 to 325 K using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design, Dynacool 9 T). In order to cross-check κ of AgTlI 2 obtained from PPMS, we also measured thermal diffusivity and thermal conductivity (see Fig. AIMD simulations. A 2 × 2 × 2 supercell with experimental lattice constants at 300 K was used to perform the AIMD simulations with NVT ensemble and obtain the atomic trajectories. An energy cutoff value of 400 eV and a Γ-centered 1 × 1 × 1 k-point mesh were used for AIMD simulations with the PBEsol Interatomic force constants. Temperature-dependent second-order interatomic force constants (IFCs) were extracted at 300 K using the TDEP For AgTlI 2 , we used the converged neighbor cutoff distances 7.5, 6.0 and 4.2 Å to extract the IFCs of second, third and fourth-order terms, respectively. For Ag 8 GeS 6 , a 2 × 2 × 1 supercell (240 atoms) was used to perform AIMD simulations at 300 K. We then used the same method to extract the second-, third-and fourth-order IFCs at 300 K with cutoff distances of 7.0, 4.0 and 3.0 Å, respectively. Lattice thermal conductivity. Three-phonon linewidths were calculated using the ShengBTE 