In this preview, we discuss how to combine concepts of Weyl fermions, amazing electronic properties of bulk Weyl semimetals, and advances in molecular beam epitaxy with the needs of semiconductor industry, through the fabrication of TaAs thin films. Since the inception of molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), arsenides such as GaAs and AlAs have been at the forefront of interest for material scientists testing basic concepts of epitaxy. The development of high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) based on MBE-grown GaAs/AlAs interface has amplified this interest, and arsenide HEMTs have become a prominent industrial application of MBE, serving as an integral part of our everyday life by powering various devices, including mobile phones. For a long time, the primary tool to improve the performance of such electronic devices was enhancing electron mobility through better ultra-high vacuum conditions and avoiding unnecessary dopants in MBE chambers. However, there is limited room for further improvements using this approach, prompting theoretical and experimental physicists to explore various other concepts to enhance electric performance (Fig. The general strategy involves shaping the electronic band structure of materials to lower the effective mass and eventually making electrons behave like massless fermions. Moreover, leveraging symmetry and topology helps to avoid electron scattering by blocking unnecessary channels and taking advantage of surface states. While such properties are difficult to find among insulators, metals, or traditional semiconductors, they are not so rare among semimetalsmaterials with separated bands for electrons and holes but with zero or almost zero energy gap between them. Unfortunately, most of these fascinating semimetals, known as topological semimetals, are quite exotic materials, not very compatible with the present semiconductor industry. They are first identified theoretically and then confirmed experimentally using bulk samples. Present challenge lies in growing thin films of high quality with electron transport properties similar to theoretical predictions or properties already obtained in bulk samples. Various difficulties arise when trying to grow such semimetals. Interesting topological semimetals usually have very different structures and chemical compositions compared to the accessible large-size, high-quality substrates used in epitaxy. Additionally, many topological semimetals require heavy metal elements, such as Cd or Hg, which are volatile and generally avoided in common technologies due to health risks. Moreover, introducing such volatile group-II elements into pure arsenide chambers poses the risk of unintentional electrical doping. Therefore, the semiconductor industry would benefit from the development of a topological semimetal system that is compatible with already existing, acceptable, and tested solutions. This almost perfect compatibility with the present semiconductor industry is the central point of the recently published paper in Matter titled "Thin film TaAs: developing a platform for Weyl semimetal devices" by Jocienne N. Nelson et al. For Weyl semimetals physics intensively developed last 8 years, TaAs epitaxy is a great chance to demonstrate large-scale solutions, to gain inspiration for the calculation of novel structures combining various layers, which were not accessible in bulk version. Moreover, epitaxy will also introduce several interesting challenges, such as the presence of strain, defects, proximity of surfaces, various positions of the Fermi level, and interfaces between not perfectly oriented grains. It is worth noting that plotting a rich phase diagram illustrating the growth conditions of TaAs and demonstrating TaAs properties as a function of epitaxial layer thickness The author acknowledges financial support from the National Science Centre (Poland) grant number 2021/41/B/ST3/04183. The author declares no competing interests. During the preparation of this work the author used Grammarly and ChatGPT in order to correct grammar and spelling. After using these tools, the author