Reinforcement learning (RL) over text representations can be effective for finding high-value policies that can search over graphs. However, RL requires careful structuring of the search space and algorithm design to be effective in this challenge. Through extensive experiments, we explore how different design choices for text grammar and algorithmic choices for training can affect an RL policy's ability to generate molecules with desired properties. We arrive at a new RL-based molecular design algorithm (ChemRLformer) and perform a thorough analysis using 25 molecule design tasks, including computationally complex protein docking simulations. From this analysis, we discover unique insights in this problem space and show that ChemRLformer achieves state-of-the-art performance while being more straightforward than prior work by demystifying which design choices are actually helpful for text-based molecule design. Molecular discovery can have a significant impact on our society, however, the vast search space makes it challenging to find high-value molecules. The potential of reinforcement learning (RL) methods to discover new, high-value molecules has resulted in a series of research work performed by RL researchers focusing on learning policies as graph neural networks (GNNs) In order to take advantage of the richness of text-based representations for molecules, one can formulate the molecular search problem as the construction of tokens in a sequence that become a molecular text. The molecular texts formulated by common text-based representations, such as SMILES In this paper, we perform a detailed empirical study of molecular discovery using text-based RL across more than 25 molecular properties relevant for drug-discovery, including docking simulation for molecular ligands Via our detailed ablation study, we construct ChemRLformer and find that pretraining on aligned datasets can significantly improve performance across all molecular design tasks, even exceeding the performance of agents pretrained on 100 times larger datasets. We also show that targeted algorithmic design, such as hill-climbing in the replay buffer and regularization, further increases the performance of ChemRLformer. To the best of our knowledge, ChemRLformer is the largest analysis of text-based RL methods for molecule discovery. Molecular Discovery Using Sequence-Based Methods: Sequence-based methods treat molecular design as a sequence of tokens that get concatenated in order. Generative models for sequence-based methods span a diverse range, including variational autoencoders (VAEs) Molecular Discovery Using Search-Based Methods: Although sequence-based molecule generation methods often provide a more structured way of learning molecular distributions, searchbased methods generally have the advantage of being able to directly find molecules based on a desired property. Although a wide range of graph-based RL methods The algorithms detailed in this paper are built on top of a foundation of reinforcement learning, text-based molecule representations, and language modeling. Reinforcement Learning: Reinforcement learning can be used to learn policies for sequential decision-making problems. Policies are optimized based on an environment that is described as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). A discrete MDP is defined by the tuple ⟨S, A, T , r, γ⟩ where S is the state space, A is the action space, T : S × A × S ′ → [0, 1] is the transition function, r : S × A → R is the reward function and γ is the discount rate. For actions a t ∈ A and states s t ∈ S, the goal of reinforcement learning is to learn a policy π θ (a t |s t ) which maps states to actions, such that: where p(τ |θ) is the distribution over trajectories induced by π θ and the transition function T . Text representations for molecules: Molecules are most naturally described using a graph structure of atoms and bonds. However, graph-based deep learning models can be difficult to train, especially at large scale In this study, we focus on the two most commonly used representations: SMILES Language modeling: Language modeling often relies on the self-supervised task of next-token prediction for model pretraining. The general framework for next-token prediction is to train a model to predict the next token in a sequence autoregressively, i.e. given the previous tokens in the sequence (left context). Many architectures to handle sequential data have been proposed: Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) The molecular design space is complex but the benefit from finding improved options is great. In this section, we describe ChemRLformer and how combining language models and tools from RL produces a sota algorithm. MDP for molecule generation: The vocabulary and grammar for text representations of molecules can be interpreted as an MDP as described in Section 3, where the states s t correspond to a variable length text of accumulating tokens, and the actions a t correspond to vocabulary defined by the text-representation. The transition function is a deterministic function where the action a t taken by the agent is appended to the end of the state s t resulting in s t+1 using the dynamics s t+1 = [s t , a t ] ← T (s t , a t ). However, the corresponding transition function induced in the graph representation of molecules is more complex as it is determined by the encoding/decoding rules of the chosen text representation. For example, in the SMILES grammar, a random concatenation of tokens may not correspond to a valid molecule, while the SELFIES grammar is constructed such that any ordering of its tokens is encoded as a valid molecule. Finally, the reward function R scores molecules according to their alignment with desired chemical properties, which can involve complex material simulations. The underlying property computation of the reward function further informs the dynamics of the MDP imposed by text representation. For example, docking scores are used to estimate the binding affinity between ligands and protein targets. We discuss reward functions for molecules in more detail in section Section 5. Pretraining policies for molecule discovery. To advance effectively within this vast search space, we make use of datasets containing a large number of drug-like molecules in text format In practice a minibatch of sequences {A 1 , • • • , A m } are sampled from the prior dataset D to evaluate the loss function in Equation To generate a molecule, a ChemRLformer policy π θ (a t | s t ) is allowed to autoregressively sample tokens for a fixed number of timesteps H. The start state s 0 is always a beginning-of-sequence token [BOS], and the agent can terminate early by taking the end-of-sequence action [EOS]. Figure (3) , is sampled autoregressively from the policy. Our experiments use the policy gradient algorithm The pretrained model can directly be used to sample novel drug-like molecules. These molecules, however, are not optimized for any particular property. Note that given our definition of the state s t as the concatenated history of all previous actions, this pretrained network is exactly analogous to the policy network in Equation Our proposed algorithm ChemRLformer uses the best combinations of choices resulting from assessing the performance across three dimensions: (1) what pretraining factors are important to improve RL for molecular discovery (Section 5.2), (2) how the use of recent text-based molecule grammars facilitates downstream RL exploration (Section 5.3); and, lastly, (3) which specific algorithmic changes are necessary to improve RL performance (Section 5.4). Tasks. We evaluate ChemRLformer against five different docking targets Evaluation metrics. We design our evaluation procedure with the final goal of identifying the best candidates to test in a wet lab. To discover such high-value candidate molecules, we use sota simulators that assign rewards to molecules by performing complex docking simulations Pretraining. We study how the quality and size of prior data affect the downstream RL performance of ChemRLformer by pretraining a GPT The quality of ChemRLformer's pretrained model is evaluated using the top-100 molecules sampled by the pretrained model under the same evaluation setup in Appendix A.2. By default, these open-sourced datasets contain a large number of drug-like molecules in SMILES format. For our experiments, we also convert all datasets to the SELFIES format. Lastly, three different architectures are compared: fully-connected (FC), recurrent (RNN) -a GRU and transformer -GPT style autoregressive model, and compare them on downstream RL tasks. Table 2: Description of molecular datasets used for pretraining: Datasets are ranked according to procedure described in Section 5.1. Two datasets have the same rank if their average performance lies inside one standard error of the other. The datasets are drawn from a subset of the Zinc Size Docking Rank Pytdc Rank Description Manually curated database of bioactive molecules with drug-like properties 1 M 3 3 Random molecules from ≈ 1.5 billion ZINC 10M 10 M 3 4 molecules from the ZINC database All of our experiments on pytdc tasks are run across 5 random seeds. Since docking simulations are expensive and time consuming, we run all docking experiments across 3 random seeds. Experiments with different seeds use the same pretrained model which is only pretrained once for every dataset. Additional details about the task rewards, evaluation metrics, and the pretraining datasets and models are discussed in Appendix A.1, A.2, and A.3 respectively. In this section, we pretrain the REINFORCE policy on datasets of varying size and quality from Table Results may seem surprising from an NLP perspective, but they make sense when viewed from an RL perspective. Pretraining using next token prediction Equation (2), is analogous to behavior Figure cloning in this context, where the performance depends largely on the quality of the offline dataset Starting with a REINFORCE agent, we isolate the effect of various text representations for molecules and policy network architectures on performance. All experiments in this section use ZINC-250k dataset for pretraining. Similar results obtained for other datasets are shared in the following sections. Whenever we show normalized results across different experiments, we add the individual plots in Appendix C.1. Text representations. In Figure Architectures. The results in Figure Nitrogen atoms together. To evade the reward hacking of docking scores, we constructed an augmented docking score function with commonly used oracles (QED and SA scores) based on previous work Standard replay buffers throw away the oldest trajectories as newer ones arrive. But many text-based RL algorithms propose to use hillclimb replay buffers, that randomly sample a batch of molecules from the highest scoring molecules seen so far and add them to the current mini batch. In Figure To combat this issue, entropy regularisation, which adds a log π(s) term to the RL loss, has been proposed We present ChemRLformer that resulted from our empirical study of multiple algorithmic components of text-based molecular design. For future practitioners, our method suggests the following philosophy: (1) Using SMILES is a better choice than SELFIES. (2) When collecting data for pretraining, the quality of molecules matter much more than the number of molecules. (3) Both transformer and RNN architectures achieve similar performance across all tasks using current datasets. (4) Incorporating components such as a hill-climb buffer and Log P regularization yields substantial performance improvements. Conversely, introducing KL regularization or opting for more intricate actor-critic algorithms may result in diminished performance, at the cost of more hyperparameters and memory resources. While our analysis addresses many questions, it also shows that RL agents were able to hack the reward functions suggesting that there is space to improve on the metrics used for molecule quality. In Appendix A we provide details about the experimental setup. In Appendix B we describe our hyperparameter tuning strategy. In Appendix C we include additional results from our experiments. In this section, we provide additional details about the tasks, evaluation metrics and pretraining models and data used in our work. A.1 Tasks Pydtc tasks. These tasks are a set of 21 pharmaceutically-relevant oracle functions, which have been commonly used in prior work • QED: A quantitative estimate of drug-likeness calculated using a set of rules. • DRD2, GSK3β, and JNK3: Classical machine learning models (SVMs and random forests) that provide an estimate of properties like target affinity or susceptibility towards a disorder. • Celecoxib, Troglitazone, and Thiothixene rediscovery: An estimate of smiles text similarity, based on tanimoto metric, towards a target molecule. • Albuterol and Mestranol similarity: Generate molecules similar to a target molecule. • Isomers c7h8n2o2 and isomers c9h10n2o2pf2cl: Generate molecules corresponding to a target molecular formula. • Median1 and Median2: Generate molecules that are maximally similar to several target molecules. • Osimertinib mpo, fexofenadine mpo, ranolazine mpo, perindopril mpo, amlodipine mpo, sitagliptin mpo, zaleplon mpo: Generate molecules that maximize multiple properties of a targeted drug. • valsartan smarts: Generate molecules that contain a certain SMARTS pattern and certain physicochemical properties. Most of these tasks are from the GuacaMol benchmark Docking tasks. We used QuickVina 2 Where DS is the docking score, QED and SA are quantitative estimates of drug likeness and synthesizablity respectively. Most of the metrics we use are described in detail in Section 5.1. Here, we provide additional details about the diversity metric. We calculate the diversity of the top 100 molecules sampled by the algorithm, where higher diversity is considered better given that it increases the chances for success in further wet lab experiments. In our experiments, we use the diversity evaluator from TDC In this section, we provide more details about the pretraining datasets and models used in our experiments. Pretraining datasets. The ZINC 250k dataset contains approximately 250k molecules from the ZINC database Removing outliers and unusual non drug-like compounds helps to keep the vocabulary small and improves the quality of the generative model Apart from the experiments shown in the main paper, Appendix C.2 contains additional experiments comparing text-based RL agents across different pretraining datasets. Pretraining models. In Table We select network sizes that have been commonly used in RL Since the fully connected model can only take fixed length inputs, we always input a molecular text padded to a certain maximum length (we used length 100 in our experiments). This padding is done using a special token Pretraining experimental details. We pretrain FC, RNN and transformer architectures on the ZINC 250K dataset and pretrain a transformer on all other datasets. All models are pretrained using the PyTorch The pretrained model is further trained using the policy gradient algorithm, REINFORCE where A t is the token sampled by the agent at time-step t. We conduct a common hyperparameter tuning strategy for all experiments. Specifically, we conduct hyperparameter tuning for • Learning rate for different architectures Figure • Coefficients for different likelihood regularizations Figure • Coefficients for KL regularization loss term Figure We select three tasks from the pytdc tasks, i.e., troglitazone rediscovery, sitagliptin mpo, and median2 for hyperparameter tuning. For each hyperparameter, we select a set of 5 evenly spaced realistic values and run 5 random seeds of RL experiments per hyperparameter value. We select the hyperparameter value that achieves the best average score of the top-100 molecules as the final value for running all the experiments. We report the hyperparamters used for the policy gradient training in table 5. Here, we present additional results from subsection 5.3. Figure Figure Top 1 Top 10 Top 100 Div. Red. Figure C.4 Additional results for the importance of algorithmic choices for text-based RL. Section 5.4 compares various algorithmic components like replay buffers, hill climbing, KL regularisation towards the pretrained policy, and likelihood penalties and show results for PYTDC tasks. In this section, we repeat all the experiments from Section 5.4 on augmented docking tasks as well and reach the same conclusions. In Figure C.5 Instability of transformers for online RL. Many works RL for Design and Discovery: Many methods in diverse fields leverage RL to help augment a prior design method to improve performance Preprint. Under review.