Suggestive, but indirect evidence of the existence of pair-density wave (PDW) order in several high-T c cuprates has been reported that a novel form of superconducting order -PDW order -appears in some range of doping and temperature in certain high-T c cuprates . The 2007 experimental observation in La 1.875 Ba 0.125 CuO 4 (LBCO) by Li et al. The 2019 observation in scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) by Edkins et al Nevertheless, several distinct aspects in Bi2212 compared with other cuprates pose challenges to fully understanding the broader implications of the PDW evidence. These aspects include the relatively short correlation length of CDW order, at best marginally longer than the CDW period Here, we report the first bulk evidence of subharmonic order (i.e., a 1Q peak) in two La-based near 1/8 doped cuprates, Sr-doped LBCO and Fe-doped LSCO. (For details see the Methods section.) We employed resonant soft x-ray scattering (RSXS) in conjunction with neutron scattering and transport measurements for a comprehensive study of the PDW state. We found that the long-sought 1Q peak appears as a new peak seen with RSXS for temperatures roughly midway between T c and T pdw , where T pdw is, respectively, taken to be the T at which there is a sudden superconducting-like drop of the in-plane resistivity, ρ ab , with no accompanying decrease in the interplane resistivity, ρ c (i.e., there is still no SC-LRO). The new ordering vector ⃗ K/2 is half that of the dominant CDW order. These results effectively address the challenges of PDW experiments (discussed below) and provide a foundation for further investigation into PDW and its implications in high-T c cuprates. Considerations of Intertwined orders: Several well-known are related to each other by a C 4 rotation of the crystal axes. Each of these is, in principle, an independent order parameter with their own preferred ordering vector. In the present La-214 family of cuprates, the CDW and SDW orders are always commensurately locked to each other, i.e., ⃗ K ≡ 2 ⃗ K sdw appears able to coexist with density wave order more easily -a point we revisit below. As was known from previous studies, the phase diagrams of the La-cuprates studied here, including crossovers associated with the onset of density wave (DW) orders, have the same structure, shown schematically in Fig. Theoretical considerations concerning a 1Q peak: Because the evidence of PDW order has been somewhat hodge-podge, many discussions of cuprate physics do not include any reference to such order at all. Among the theoretical approaches that include it, there are two extremes in terms of perspective: (i ) The "subdominant order" view, in which the uniform SC, CDW and SDW orders are the principle orders while PDW order appearsif at all -where the other orders are not too strong. (ii ) The "mother of all orders" view To better frame the issue, let us consider the case in which all the density waves are assumed to be mutually commensurate, i.e., ⃗ K ≡ 2 ⃗ Q ≡ 2 ⃗ K sdw , and imagine that all the different order parameters can be considered as independent dynamical variables where α sc and α sdw are coupling constants that depend on microscopic details. What is apparent here is that there could be multiple contributions to the scattering intensity at ⃗ K: It could primarily reflect CDW order if the fundamental CDW order is strong, or conversely if there were no intrinsic CDW ordering tendency, it could be an indirect signature of either PDW or SDW order. On the other hand, a 1 ⃗ Q peak clearly signifies an interference effect between the PDW and the uniform SC orders. Motivated by the theoretical framework outlined above, we devised an experimental strat-egy to identify a putative 1Q peak within our crystals (see details in the Method section). Specifically, we have chosen materials that exhibit layer-decoupling, indicative of the presence of significant PDW order, and have focused on two such materials that have relatively higher values of T c 's, suggestive of a somewhat stronger tendency to develop uniform SC order. We have used the fact that there is little evidence of any density wave or SC order with significant correlation lengths at temperatures above T cdw to identify high temperature scattering data as the uninteresting background signal (Extended data Fig. Experimental search for a 1Q signature in Fe-doped LSCO: The first set of new results reported here (see Fig. Direct interpretation of the measured scattering intensity is complicated by the presence of a large background signal arising from fluorescence and specular reflection from the sample surface (Extended Data Fig. emerges below T pdw (with a peak width corresponding to a correlation length, and below T pdw . Moreover, by examining the x-ray photon energy dependence (Fig. 1Q signature in other La-based cuprates: To rule out the possibility that the (relatively weak) 1Q peak we have seen in Fe-doped LSCO is a peculiarity of one particular material, we conducted additional scattering experiments on another high-T c cuprate, Sr-doped LBCO. This choice was intentional as LBCO is the archetypal system in PDW research. Furthermore, based on the previous work In our initial assessment of this material's suitability for our study, we examined DWs and superconducting properties to verify that the basic structure of the phase diagram is as in Fig. Figure Adopting the same method of analysis we used for Fe-doped LSCO, we exhibit the difference between the RSXS maps measured at T = 26.5 K and 42.5 K in Fig. Figures ≈ (h = 1/8, k = 0), in Fig. But because it is weak, it is only in the second cut where conditions are optimized that the 1Q peak is evident. In addition to providing information pertinent to avoiding a possible failure route in future studies of this order, this observations demonstrates that the 1Q peak shares the same interlayer structure as the principle stripe-order peak. Discussion: In this work, we have observed subharmonic (1Q) CDW order with a structure that links it with the fundamental quasi-2D CDW order. The fundamental (2Q) is always much stronger, and is seen over a wide range of T , while the subharmonic is only observable below T pdw , where observed layer-decoupling phenomena already provided strong indirect evidence of the existence of PDW order. Together, these results provide compelling evidence of the theoretically conjectured state consisting of mutually commensurate CDW, SDW, and PDW orders. An intuitive real-space image for such a state can be visualized starting with the familiar "stripe" image (suggestive Extended data Fig. Turning to the cuprates, the present results extend the evidence that a central feature of the physics Somewhat more speculatively, the present results support the conclusion that PDW order is typically subdominant relative to competing uniform SC order, and occurs only where the dominant order is in some way significantly weakened. For instance, investigations into a 1Q peak in YBCO have been carried out over a range of magnetic fields and strain where global SC order coexists with pronounced signals of charge-density wave (CDW) order (at If CDW order were primarily a harmonic of PDW order, a prominent 1Q peak would have been anticipated alongside the CDW signal Finally, it is worth highlighting the future experimental opportunities that arise from our current findings. Since our present experimental results lack phase-sensitive information, they do not directly corroborate certain aspects of the "stripe" image or conclusively address questions like whether the intertwined order is commensurate (i.e., precisely period 8), and if so, whether it is "site-centered" or "bond-centered." Therefore, further investigations that explore the polarization and azimuthal dependence of this 1Q peak are warranted. In addition, conducting experiments in the presence of an external magnetic field holds the promise of yielding valuable insights into the characteristic behavior of the observed peak and its correlation with the 2D and 3D superconducting states. Furthermore, expanding the scope of x-ray measurements to encompass other cuprate materials, based on the criteria established in this study, would offer an enriching avenue for research. These efforts will undoubtedly contribute to a deeper understanding of the complex interplay between various orders in the high-T c cuprates. we prepared all the samples with a typical dimension of 1.5 mm × 1.5 mm × 2.5 mm (a × b × c axis). To achieve a fresh c-axis normal surface, each sample was ex-situ cleaved, before transported into the ultra-high vacuum chamber (base pressure = 8 × 10 -10 Torr). The zero-magnetic field x-ray experiments were conducted at beamline 13-3 of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL). The sample was positioned on an in-vacuum 4-circle diffractometer and maintained at a controlled temperature using an open-circle helium cryostat (base T ≈ 25 K). To avoid distortions of the cryostat and mechanical components of the diffractometer typically occurred during initial cool down or large temperature changes, we ensured that the setup had sufficient time to stabilize at each measurement temperature and the temperature did not exceed 100K during the whole data collection. Incident photon polarization was consistently set as vertical linear (σ) polarization. The precise (h, 0, l) scattering plane alignment was achieved using the measured (0, 0, 2), (-1, 0, 1), and (1, 0, 1) structural Bragg reflections at a photon energy of approximately 1770 eV. Detecting the RSXS signals used a 256 × 1024 pixel area detector. To ensure the maximized scattering intensity, we set the detector at a fixed position of 2θ = 106 • in which the scattering from ⃗ Q is at l ≈ 1.5. We rotated the sample in small steps (θ-scan) to gather information about the h-dependence. Throughout the θ-scan, each CCD image included scattering information from the well-aligned (h, 0, l) scattering plane near the center of the detector and from off-scattering planes (h, ±k, l) at the top and bottom parts of the CCD The resulting three-dimensional scattering intensity data were then projected onto different planes/directions for further analysis. It is worth noting that the single scattering data collection at each temperature point involved a total of 8 hours of measurements. Due to the critical role of background information in shaping our data analysis strategy, meticulous signal-to-noise ratio reduction and x-ray footprint control were paramount considerations (see the section below -Strategy for detecting a 1Q peak). Furthermore, it is important that the incident polarization for the experiment was chosen to be vertical because using linear polarization parallel to the scattering plane poses additional challenges. Specifically, when the 1Q's l-vector is around half-integer l, the 2θ angle approaches Brewster's angle. In other words, the charge scattering signal (i.e., π ′ •π) is reduced by approximately 1 -cos(2θ) without considering details of the scattering tensors' matrix elements based on the Cu orbital state in the CuO 2 plane. In this scenario, the expected 1Q signal in π-polarization could be even less, approximately 70% lower than that in σ-polarization. Although other backgrounds, such as specular and CDW tails, would also be reduced, but it becomes more challenging when attempting to detect an intrinsically smaller 1Q signal in this type of experiment. Neutron measurement: In order to investigate the SDW order, we performed the elastic neutron scattering measurements on the cold triple-axis spectrometer HER and the thermal neutron triple-axis spectrometer TOPAN located at the research reactor JRR-3. The most of measurements were performed at HER with the incident and scattered neutron energies of 5 meV. Additional elastic scattering measurements were carried out using the thermal neutron triple-axis spectrometer TOPAN at JRR-3. The horizontal collimations sequences at HER and TOPAN were 32'-100'-Be-S-80'-80 and 30'-Sap-30'-PG-S-PG-30'-100', respectively. Here Be, Sap and PG represent the beryllium, sapphire and pyrolytic graphite filters, respectively, to reduce contamination from the higher-order wavelength neutron in the beam. S denotes the sample. The single crystal was sealed in an aluminum can with Helium gas for thermal exchange. The aluminum can was attached to the closed-cycle cryostat to control the temperature. Strategy for detecting a 1Q peak: To optimize conditions for observing a 1Q peak, we begin by focusing on members of the 214 family in which clear signatures of layer-decoupling provide strongly suggestive evidence of significant PDW order. In the poster-child material for layer-decoupling, 1/8 doped LBCO, the CDW and SDW order are particularly strong, while T c is 4 K or less, suggestive that the uniform SC order is all but absent in the range of temperatures that are accessible to us in RSXS. We therefore have looked at two closely related materials -Fe-doped LSCO and partially Sr substituted LBCO -both of which show a clear range of T in which layer-decoupling is apparent, but which have relatively higher values of T c and somewhat weaker scattering at ⃗ K. In resonant x-ray scattering, there are three purely technical challenges to observing a weak 1Q peak. The first is that the strength of the scattering off the principle CDW order implies technical challenges in observing a putative 1Q peak on the background coming from the tail of the ⃗ K peak (hereafter, CDW-tail). Given that this tail signal typically persists even at significantly off-q positions (e.g., ⃗ Q), it would also be advantageous if the material exhibits a somewhat weaker scattering signal at ⃗ K, as discussed above. This further supports the rationale for our choice of these cuprates from a scattering perspective. The second is that there is always a strong elastic background that has nothing to do with the desired diffraction signal that comes from a combination of specular scattering from the sample surface (i.e., reflection and its tail), and florescence (including the geometrical effect of a detector position). Fortunately, these two background sources are expected to be approximately temperature independent. Thus, we can remove it by subtracting the signal taken at relatively high temperatures, T = 60 K (Fe-LSCO case), from the lower temperature signals as shown in Figs. The last arises from the expected dependence of the scattering intensity on the c-axis component of the scattering vector, l. It is known that the CDW scattering produces quasi-2D rods of scattering, so that one generally treats ⃗ K as a 2D vector. In this context, the CDW intensity is greatest at l = 1/2 in reciprocal lattice units (r.l.u.), where is a doubled c-axis unit cell corresponding to a 4-Cu-O plane period. Assuming that the same is true of the PDW order, then it would be expected that the 1Q scattering intensity would also be strongest at half-integer l. However, as shown in the extended data Fig. Finally, to properly implement the aforementioned strategy, it is imperative to maintain high-quality data throughout prolonged acquisition times. The following steps were taken to ensure that the scattering signal was consistently originated from the same spot on the sample. First, two optical cameras continuously tracked both the x-ray beam and sample positions with micron-level resolution. Second, before and after each angle scan, we verified the positions of structural Bragg reflections (0, 0, 2), (-1, 0, 1), and (1, 0, 1). This ensured that the X-rays consistently probed the same domain structure and sample volume. Third, during the acquisition of photon signals (i.e., angular scan), we simultaneously recorded the secondary electron signal, known as total electron yield (TEY). The intensity of TEY is highly sensitive to incident x-ray beam angle with respect to the sample and beam footprint on the sample. We utilized the angular dependence of the TEY signal as a real-time indicator to ensure reproducibility. * jslee@slac.stanford.edu Due to the resonant nature, the scattered x-rays include not only the elastic component (e.g., DWs and specular) but also the inelastic component (e.g., fluorescence). hoku University. For elastic neutron scattering measurements, a crystal of Sr-doped LBCO (Fe-doped LSCO) with the length of 25mm (35mm) was used. For the RSXS measurements,