The Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) theory is the pillar of magnetic quantum oscillations, which have been extensively applied to characterize a wide range of metallic states. In this study, we focus on the Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) effect observed in SmSb, a rare-earth monopnictide. We observed a significant departure from the expected LK theory near TN = 2.4 K: both a peak-like anomaly and an enhancement in the temperature dependence of quantum oscillation amplitude are seen in SmSb. Moreover, we discovered a remarkable sensitivity of the SdH amplitudes to sample purity. By adjusting the sample purity, we were able to tune the temperature dependence of the α band's SdH amplitudes from a peak-like anomalous behavior to an enhancement. Therefore, SdH oscillations from the α band connect the two well-known non-LK behaviours, controllable through varying the sample purity, paving the way for developing further understanding of the mechanism leading to the anomalous quantum oscillations. Magnetic quantum oscillations such as the de Haas-van Alphen effect (dHvA) and the Shubnikov-de Haas effect (SdH) are important tools to study metallic states. These oscillations, displaying the characteristic periodicity in the inversed magnetic field, enable the determination of the Fermi surface size and shape, the scattering rates, the quasiparticle effective masses (m * ) and the Berry phase Quantum oscillation signals can be weakened by various factors such as high temperatures and sample disorders. In the Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) theory, the suppression of quantum oscillation amplitudes is described by a product of damping factors. The thermal damping factor, commonly denoted as R T , describes the weakening of the quantum oscillation amplitude as temperature increases. This damping factor is a direct consequence of the smearing of the Fermi-Dirac distribution function near the Fermi energy when thermal energy is injected, and R T = X/ sinh X where X = 2π 2 k B m * T /eħB, k B , e and ħ are the Boltzmann constant, elementary charge and reduced Planck constant, respectively. T is the temperature and B is the applied magnetic field In a majority of cases, the temperature dependence of quantum oscillation amplitudes can be very well described by R T , which is a smooth and monotonically decreasing function of T for a fixed B and m * . However, several important cases that show spectacular deviation from the expected R T have been reported, giving rise to the so-called non-LK behaviour Recently, intriguing non-LK behaviour has been reported in SmSb In this work, we report our measurements on the SdH and the dHvA effects for 7 SmSb crystals, spanning a range of crystal qualities. We discover a surprising interplay between crystal quality and LK violation. Our data show that, with a decreasing crystal quality, the temperature dependence of the SdH amplitudes associated with the α bands evolve from the peak anomaly observed in Ref. Single crystals of SmSb were grown using Sn flux method. The starting materials of Sm, Sb, and Sn with the molar ratio of 1 : 1 : 20 were put into an alumina crucible and sealed in a silica tube under high vacuum. The reagents were heated to 1323 K, kept at this temperature for 10 h, and slowly cooled to 1073 K over 100 h. The remaining Sn flux was separated by centrifugation and several cubic-shaped crystals with a typical size of 1 × 1 × 1 mm 3 were mechanically removed from crucible. The phase purity and the orientation of crystals were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (Bruker D2 phaser). The electrical resistivity was measured by a standard four-terminal configuration in a Physical Property Measurement System by Quantum Design (down to 2 K) or a dilution refrigerator by Bluefors (down to 30 mK). The dHvA measurement was performed by a standard modulation field method with a 800-turn drive coil and a 10-turn pick-up coil. Band structure calculations were performed using the WIEN2k package Figure To gain more insight into the non-LK behaviour in SmSb, we measure SdH oscillations at different temperatures. As displayed in Figs. With higher order harmonics detected, we next investigate if the non-LK behaviour can also be seen for the harmonics. From the FFT spectrum in Fig. We now present the central finding of our work. SdH oscillation amplitudes for six samples, spanning RRR values from 18 to 43, are displayed against temperature in Figs. ,-./01%2( 1%3( 456! 71 7 7 8 1 91 : ;3/!11 <3-=1 8> +11 <3-=1 $> * 11111111 <3-=1 ?> ) @A@B1%@#8(118"1AC )" *" +" " " ,-./01%2( %B( @A@B1%@#8(1181C %D( this RRR range (Fig. Given the observed RRR dependence, one would naturally query if the reported difference between the temperature dependence of the SdH and dHvA amplitudes From our measurements, the deviation from the LK theory in SdH oscillations happens near the AFM transition. We examine if a Fermi surface reconstruction occurs at T N . First, we note that there is no resolvable shift in the SdH frequency across the AFM transition for both α and β: the numerical upper bound on the change of α and β frequencies across T N are 0.9 T and 2.8 T, respectively, with details presented in Supplementary Note 6. Then, to explore the possible shape change through the AFM transition, we measure the angular dependence of SdH oscillation frequencies F at 30 mK (deep inside the AFM phase) and 3 K (in the PM phase). The experimental data are displayed as symbols in Figs. While we are not in a position to conclusively settle the issue of the non-LK behaviour in SmSb, we discuss some possibilities. In SmB 6 , a two-channel model has been adopted to describe the non-LK behaviour of the dHvA results , in which C 1 and C 2 are the weights for different channels, and A (T ) is the measured amplitudes. We apply the two-channel model to α band of our SdH results (Supplementary Note 3), which successfully captures both the peak-like and enhancement non-LK features for different samples with different RRR. The analysis gives m * 1 ∼ 0.2 m e , which is consistent with the effective mass obtained from the high temperature fit, and a larger m * 2 (from 0.6(1) m e to 1.6(3) m e ). Importantly, in this two-channel model C 1 and C 2 must have different (same) signs to describe the peak-like (enhancement) behaviour. This suggests that the phase relationship between the quantum oscillations in the two channels might be influenced by the change in the crystal quality, and this could serve as a phenomenological explanation on the observed disorder tuning be-tween the two types of LK violation. Besides, from the two-channel analysis, channel 2 appears to be more sensitive to disorder. This could provide a path towards the eventual understanding of the non-LK behavior in SmSb, if one could identify a mechanism to manipulate channel 2 effectively. We further comment that the emergence of two different effective masses in the two-channel model could be a consequence of the hybridization between the itinerant electrons and the well-localized Sm f -band. Such a hybridization has been shown by some authors However, it remains a challenge to explain the differences between SdH and dHvA results. Such difference could be reconciled if surface states emerge in the lowtemperature AFM phase for which LK violation is observed, as the surface states would have a diminishing contribution to the dHvA signals (via the magnetic susceptibility) compared with the SdH signals (via the electrical conductivity). Indeed, AFM-induced surface states have recently been discovered in the isostructural compound NdBi In summary, we have measured the SdH and dHvA effect in SmSb. Our experiments confirmed the existence of non-Lifshitz-Kosevich temperature dependence of SdH amplitudes in α band and β band, as well as in harmonics 2α and 3α. Importantly, we unravel a striking sensitivity of the non-LK behaviour to the sample purity: for α, the peak-like behaviour progressively changes to an enhancement as RRR decreases and such a sensitivity to the crystal quality is absent in the dHvA study. Therefore, SmSb is an unique compound which displays two well-known types of non-LK behaviours, each has been separately seen in the heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn 5 and the topological Kondo insulator SmB 6 . The fact that the two non-LK behaviours can be controlled by a tunable parameter, namely the sample quality, offers the prospect of developing further understanding of the mechanism leading to the anomalous quantum oscillations in exotic metals.