We propose an effective field theory for branes with higher-form symmetry as a generalization of ordinary Landau theory, which is an extension of the previous work by Iqbal and McGreevy for one-dimensional objects to an effective theory for pdimensional objects. In the case of a p-form symmetry, the fundamental field ψ[C p ] is a functional of p-dimensional closed brane C p embedded in a spacetime. As a natural generalization of ordinary field theory, we call this theory the brane field theory. In order to construct an action that is invariant under higher-form transformation, we generalize the idea of area derivative for one-dimensional objects to higher-dimensional ones. Following this, we discuss various fundamental properties of the brane field based on the higher-form invariant action. It is shown that the classical solution exhibits the area law in the unbroken phase of U(1) p-form symmetry, while it indicates a constant behavior in the broken phase for the large volume limit of C p . In the latter case, the low-energy effective theory is described by the p-form Maxwell theory. We also discuss brane-field theories with a discrete higherform symmetry and show that the low-energy effective theory becomes a BF-type topological field theory, resulting in topological order. Finally, we present a concrete brane-field model that describes a superconductor from the point of view of higher-form symmetry. Symmetry is one of the most important and fundamental concepts in modern physics, and it plays an essential role in classifying phases of vacuum and matter. For instance, various phase transitions can be comprehended through the presence of symmetries and their spontaneous breaking. The Landau theory provides a comprehensive and effective framework for this description The concept of symmetry has been recently extended in various directions, called "generalized global symmetries" Considering the great success of the Landau theory, a natural question arises: Is it possible to construct effective field theories with extended objects for higher-form symmetries? The purpose of this paper is to explore this possibility, and demonstrate that this framework provides an effective approach to understanding the physics of higher-form symmetry, much as the conventional Landau theory does for 0-form symmetries. The advantage of this approach is that, within the mean-field approximation, it naturally describes the phase transition to topological order by using extended order parameters, which cannot be explained in conventional Landau theory. It should be mentioned that our approach is inspired by Ref. To construct the brane field theory, we should clarify which type of p-dimensional branes C p should be considered. In this paper, we focus on p-dimensional closed branes C p that extend spatially in a d-dimensional Lorentzian spacetime Σ d Not only the concept of the field but also the concept of derivative must be generalized in order to construct a brane-field action invariant under higher-form transformations. In general, the variation of the brane field with respect to a small change of the subspace is described by the functional derivative δψ[C p ]/δX μ (ξ). On a p-dimensional object C p , we can generally consider variations of subspaces of lower dimensions, and the functional derivative contains all such contributions. In this paper, however, we focus on a p-dimensional variation δC p such that the corresponding functional derivative is described by the area derivative, which was originally introduced for one-dimensional objects Following our discussion on the construction of the brane-field theory, we perform a mean-field analysis. First, we show that the classical solution ⟨ψ[C p ]⟩ exhibits the area-law behavior in the unbroken phase of U(1) p-form symmetry, while it is constant in the broken phase in the large volume limit of C p . These behaviors can be naturally interpreted as a generalization of the off-diagonal-long-range order of the two-point correlation function ⟨φ † (x)φ(y)⟩ for the 0-form symmetries. Second, by considering phase fluctuations of the order parameter, we show that the low-energy effective theory in the broken phase of U(1) p-form symmetry is given by the p-form Maxwell theory, which is a p-form version of the Nambu-Goldstone theorem for 0-form symmetries The organization of this paper is as follows. In Sec. 2, we introduce the p-brane field and the field theory with U(1) p-form symmetry, and discuss several technical aspects, including the generalization of the area derivatives and the construction of the Noether current. In Sec. 3, we focus on the spontaneous breaking of higher-form symmetry. Using the expectation value of the brane field as the order parameter, we discuss the spontaneous breaking of p-form symmetry within the mean-field approximation, the low-energy effective theory, and emergent symmetries in the broken phase. We show that the effective theories for the spontaneous breaking of continuous and discrete higher-form symmetries are the pform Maxwell theory and the BF-type topological field theory, respectively. We also discuss the brane field model for a superconductor and its effective theory. Section 4 is devoted to summary and discussion. The Appendices provide additional details on differential forms, truncated action, and other related calculations. We explain how to construct field theory for higher-dimensional branes C p . We first introduce the brane field ψ[C p ] by imposing two physically natural conditions: spacetime diffeomorphism invariance and reparametrization invariance. Then, we discuss the relation between the functional derivative and the "area derivative" We discuss how to construct the brane field ψ[C p ]. We consider a d-dimensional spacetime manifold Σ d with the metric g μν . We employ the Minkowski metric signature for d-spacetime dimensions as (-, +, +, • • • ). C p is a subspace in Σ d , which can be expressed by an embedding function S p → Σ d , i.e., {X μ (ξ)} d-1 μ=0 , where S p is a p-dimensional space. Therefore, as mentioned in Introduction, ψ[C p ] can be thought of a functional of {X μ (ξ)} d-1 μ=0 . Since we are interested in a brane as a p-dimensional object at a given time of some specific time choice, we will restrict C p to spacelike objects. C p may have a boundary; however, we mainly focus our discussion on the case where C p has no boundary. In general, ψ[C p ] can take any functionals of {X μ (ξ)} d-1 μ=0 , but we restrict it by imposing the following conditions as in the ordinary field theory: Reparametrization invariance : ψ[C p ] is invariant under the reparametrization on C p : We note that we imposed a scalar condition (1) on the spacetime diffeomorphism to simplify the argument; more generally, it could take a covariant form. Typical examples that satisfy the above conditions are the functionals of various differential forms: where A (a) (X) is a spacetime scalar, and h = det(h ij ) is the determinant of the induced metric, Besides, the index a represents various types of volume integrals. Note that for a given scalar A (a) (X) we can always rewrite the volume integral in Eq. ( where Here, η j ) can be explicitly written as where By introducing a p-form, we can also check and where Vol[C p ] is the volume of C p . In general, a variation of the brane field ψ[C p ] for an arbitrary change of the manifold δC p = {δX μ (ξ)} d-1 μ=0 is given by the functional derivative as In particular, when δC p has a small support around some point ξ and is given by the boundary of a (p + 1)-dimensional subspace, i.e., ∃ δD p+1 , ∂δD p+1 = δC p (see Fig. where Here, we have used the Stokes theorem in the third line of Eq. ( where S p is the symmetric group of degree p, and sgn(σ) is the sign of permutations. We call δψ[C p ]/δσ μ 1 •••μ p+1 (ξ) the p-th order area derivative, which is the generalization of the area derivative for one-dimensional objects which leads to the following expression of δψ[C p ]: This coincides with Eq. ( Note that for more general variation δC p , the above relation does not necessarily hold, and additional terms can appear on the right-hand side p can be calculated in the following way. Under the infinitesimal change C p + δC p , the variation of Eq. ( where The above equation implies Thus, as long as we consider the brane field whose functional form is given by Eq. ( It is also convenient to introduce the (p + 1)-form of the area derivative: Let us see a few important examples below. A first important but trivial example is the Wilson surface defined by where A p is a p-form field. As already seen before, the area derivative is given by where F p+1 = dA p is the field strength. The next important example is the world volume, This case corresponds to A (a) (X(ξ)) = 1 in Eq. (3). Thus, by using Eq. ( Another example is the (minimal) volume Vol[M p+1 ] of a (p+1)-dimensional subspace M p+1 enclosed by C p , i.e., ∂M p+1 = C p . See Fig. which corresponds to the expression Figure Now, we define the brane field action with global U(1) p-form symmetry. At the leading order of the functional-derivative expansion, the action takes the following form, where Vol[C p ] is the world volume where δ(C p ) is defined as Besides, the (path-)integral measure is defined by where T p is the p-brane tension, and DX is the induced measure by the diffeomorphism invariant norm The weight in the (path-)integral measure (33) that we choose is nothing but the p-brane action The brane action Note that if C p is a boundary, i.e., C p = ∂C p+1 , the contribution of Λ p to the phase vanishes from the Stokes theorem. Even when the topology of space-time is trivial, this transformation is useful as a symmetry, e.g., it leads to Ward-Takahashi identities as in ordinary p = 0 symmetry. We can also promote the global symmetry to the gauge symmetry by introducing a (p + 1)-form gauge field, and replacing the derivative with the covariant derivative, The gauge transformation is given by where we have used Eq. We should comment on the interactions of the brane field. The potential which represents the splitting or merging of branes As with ordinary symmetry, when p-form global symmetry is continuous, we have a current (p + 1)-form J p+1 , which is conserved as The corresponding conserved charge is given as where We can calculate J p+1 in the brane field theory as follows. Instead of the global p-form transformation, we consider an infinitesimal local p-form transformation Then, the variation of the action in the linear order of Λ p should have the form since the action needs to vanish if dΛ p = 0. J p+1 is nothing but the Noether current. From the integrating by part, we obtain If ψ satisfies the equation of motion, the action is stationary, so the divergence of the current vanishes d ⋆ J p+1 = 0. Let us derive the explicit form of J p+1 for the action where we have used η ∧ ⋆ω = ω ∧ ⋆η. Comparing Eqs. ( This expression shows that the (p + 1)-form current is given by the integral over all the brane configurations. Note that X dependence of the current J p+1 (X) comes from δ(C p ) in Eq. Consider the expectation value of ψ[C p ], where ". . . " represents other arbitrary operators. We choose Λ p in the field transformation of Eq. ( with ∂D d-p = Σ d-p-1 , and an infinitesimal parameter ε. Here, δ p (D d-p ) is the Poincarédual form of D d-p such that for an arbitrary (dp)-form, f d-p . δ p (D d-p ) can be thought of as a generalization of the delta function. In this parametrization, the variance of the action ( while ψ[C p ] transforms as Here, we have defined the linking number as See the left figure in Fig. u / 6 4 p g J R p F X Z g l 8 + / J e W g s v S q a b 4 p T C 6 8 L p Z l 0 q r I 0 T s / p J S b n L Z V o j u a p g u w e 7 d A + H R h n x h f j q / G t 4 2 p k U s 4 Y 3 V v G j 1 t 1 s 7 g H < / l a t e x i t > C d p 1 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " B x P a 6 / D e c h t u o r R P w m G A q P + 0 R I f l U j o Y L S o p + 3 0 l A i w 6 r O I a B l q B G l q t P r p 9 E 6 6 5 b X t u a T 5 + y K f Y K e l + y O 3 U J R v / H F e V v i W + c 6 u g / O i V b f 0 x X 4 q D 4 B H i F q W 1 s / 6 4 p g J R p F X Z g l 8 + / J e W h s v y y Y y 4 W l 0 m J + f S O d q m G a o T l 6 g c l Z o X V 6 R U W q I H u L L q h D 1 8 Y 7 the field transformation ( This implies This is the relation in the path integral. To derive the relation in the operator formalism, consider the Cauchy surface labeled by time t. Let C d-p-1 (t 0 ) be (dp -1)-dimensional subspace on the Cauchy surface at t = t 0 . We choose that Σ d-p-1 = C d-p-1 (t 0 + η) ∪ C d-p-1 (t 0 -η) with an infinitesimal parameter η. Here, C d-p-1 is the (d-p-1)-dimensional subspace with the opposite orientation of C d-p-1 . We also choose that C p is a p-dimensional subspace on the Cauchy surface at t = t 0 . See the right figure in Fig. In operator formalism, the ordering of the operator product corresponds to the time ordering, so ; thus, we find that the Noether charge Q p generates the symmetry transformation, Here, I[C d-p-1 , C p ] represents the intersection number between C d-p-1 and C p on the Cauchy surface, which can be obtained by evaluating the right-hand side in Eq. ( 3 Spontaneous breaking of Higher-form symmetry In this section, we discuss the spontaneous breaking of the higher-form symmetry in the brane field theory. As in the case of 0-form symmetry, gapless modes appear when the continuous p-form symmetry is spontaneously broken as the order parameter. Since the two points (x, y) can be written as the boundary of segment M 1 and the distance between x and y can be expressed as the minimal volume |x -y| = Vol(M 1 ), the order parameter can be written in the form: This expression can be naturally extended to accommodate the case of p-form symmetry. In this context, we can define the order parameter as where ∂M p+1 = C p . We will use Eq. ( This corresponds to the truncated treatment in Ref. which leads to Here, we used Eq. where is the density of p-brane configurations for a given minimal volume z. The equation of motion for f (z) is By introducing the WKB form f (z) = exp(S(z)), Eq. ( As in the usual Landau theory, the vacuum state is determined by the potential V (f 2 ). As a simplest example, let us consider the following potential: In the following, we always assume λ > 0 to guarantee the stability of the system. When m > 0, the minimum of the potential is located at f = 0. Therefore, we can neglect the quartic potential in the equation of motion as Let us find the asymptotic solution for the large volume. For z → ∞, we have g ′ (z)/g(z) ∼ z -1 from dimensional analysis which corresponds to the area law of the brane field where c is a constant that in principle can be determined if we specify the boundary condition for z → 0 (small brane limit). The exponential behavior also justifies neglecting the quartic potential term in the equation of motion. This implies that the order parameter vanishes, indicating the unbroken phase of p-form symmetry. Equation ( In the p-form case, Eq. ( within the mean-field approximation. Let us next consider the case for m < 0. Within the truncated approximation, the equation of motion is given by Eq. ( As in the unbroken case, we focus on the large z behavior. In this case, we can neglect the derivative terms for z → ∞ by dimensional analysis, and the solution is given by 2 is nonvanishing at z → ∞, the p-form symmetry is spontaneously broken. In ordinary quantum field theory, the non-renormalized order parameter exhibits a perimeter law in the broken phase. However, the order parameter is completely independent of C p in the present model. As already mentioned in Ref. What are the low-energy fluctuation modes in the broken phase? As in the case of 0-form symmetry, the phase fields are candidates for low-energy degrees of freedom (d.o.f): Let us see how this d.o.f describes a gapless mode in the effective action. Note that the effective theory has the gauge symmetry because Eq. ( In other words, A p is the U(1) p-form gauge field. Now let us calculate the effective action for A p . By putting Eq. ( In the following, we consider the flat spacetime g μν = η μν for simplicity. By introducing the Fourier modes, Eq. ( where There are zero-mode integrations in the above path-integral, and it is convenient to separate them: where X μ NZ (ξ) denotes the nonzero mode. In this expression, it is easy to see that K(k) is proportional to δ (d) (k). Thus, we can choose the normalization N as which leads to which is nothing but the p-form Maxwell theory, and thus, A p is gapless for d > p + 2 What about the other fluctuation modes? In general, they are given by expanding the phase with respect to the derivatives of X μ (ξ): where φ(X) is a scalar field and H μν (X) is a symmetric tensor field. These fluctuation modes are typically gapped because they are not protected by spontaneous symmetry breaking. Here, we actually show that φ(X) is gapped as an example. The area derivative is calculated as Then, we have Now, the effective action is written as where The first term in Eq. ( where n μ is the normal vector on C p , and we have used g μν = n μ n ν + h ij e μ i e ν j in the last line. Now let us focus on the flat spacetime g μν = η μν for simplicity. Equation (92) gives the kinetic term where which has to be proportional to η μν as long as the Lorentz symmetry is unbroken. 7 As a result, Eq. ( For the evaluation of the other terms in Eq. ( 7 A rigorous proof needs more dedicated studies. Instead, we here give an intuitive argument. For a given C p and μ ̸ = ν, there always exists another brane C ′ p such that n ′μ = -n μ and n ′ν = n ν for ν ̸ = μ. These contributions cancel each other in the path-integral (94), and it should vanish for μ ̸ = ν. We can show this more explicitly based on the gauge-fixed brane action for p = 0, 1 where Λ 2 is defined by which can be interpreted as a bare mass of φ(x). As for the third term, it contains the following average: This term should vanish as long as the spacetime symmetry is not spontaneously broken. Now, one can see that the scalar mode is gapped. Other fluctuation modes also become gapped as long as they are not protected by some additional symmetry of the original brane-field theory. In the case of ordinary 0-form symmetries, there exists a vortex solution in the broken phase, which carries the topological charge given by where φ is a complex scalar field, and S 1 is a closed curve. This symmetry is not exact but rather emergent, as this charge is not strictly conserved, If we parametrize φ = he iφ / √ 2, where h and φ are the radial and phase degrees of freedom, respectively, the current is expressed as J 1 = h 2 dφ, leading to dJ 1 = 2hdh ∧ dφ. Away from the vortex core, h approaches the vacuum expectation value (VEV) h = v, and the fluctuation of h can be neglected at low energy because it is gapped. Consequently, J 1 can be approximated as J 1 ≈ v 2 dφ, and the topological charge reduces to which is conserved due to ddφ = 0. U (θ) = e iθQ d-2 is the corresponding symmetry operator, which acts on (d -2)-dimensional object, i.e., U(1) (d -2)-form symmetry. For example, for d = 4, this is 2-form symmetry, and the 2-dimensional object is the worldsurface of a vortex. In the case of p-form symmetry, a natural generalization of topological charge is given by where S p+1 is a closed (p + 1)-dimensional subspace and J p+1 is given in Eq. The corresponding symmetry operator is U (θ) = e iθQ d-p-2 and the charged object is a (dp -2)-dimensional object. For example, when d = 4 and p = 1, the charged object is a worldline of a magnetic particle. Since A p is the U(1) p-form gauge field, it satisfies the Dirac quantization condition, which also leads to Up to this point, we have discussed the case with a continuous higher-form symmetry. In general, we can consider a model with a discrete higher-form symmetry and its spontaneous breaking. For example, we can construct a model with Z N p-form symmetry, by adding the following term which explicitly breaks the U(1) p-form symmetry down to Z N , into Eq. ( in a broken phase of Z N p-form symmetry. In this case, the phase degrees of freedom, will no longer be gapless. The effective theory must be invariant under Z N p-form symmetry corresponding to the shift, with C p Λ p ∈ 2πZ, where n ∈ Z. For example, when p = 0, C p=0 A p=0 = φ(x) is the periodic scalar field, and it has the periodic potential V (φ) = V (φ + 2π/N ). The effective theory must also be invariant under gauge transformation of A p , with C p dΛ p-1 ∈ 2πZ, which is a redundancy in the degrees of freedom of Eq. (107). When the discrete higher-form symmetry is spontaneously broken, it exhibits topological order. The degeneracy of the ground state depends on the topology of the space. We assume that the space manifold has a nontrivial topology such as where C p+1 is a (p + 1)-dimensional subspace with boundaries at infinity C ′ ∞ p and C ∞ p , and D d-p-2 is a (d-p-2)-dimensional subspace. See Fig. More explicitly, dA W p can be represented as in the thin wall limit, where δ p+1 (D W d-p-1 ) is the Poincaré-dual form defined in Eq. ( In the last line, we approximated the cosine by using the Villain formula for large β, and dropped the constant term. Equation ( By performing the same calculations as in Sec. 3.3, we have the following effective action of A p : where λN is a coupling constant which includes λ N . See Appendix C for the derivation of the mass term. Here, f p is the U(1) p-form gauge field, and the flatness condition is imposed by the last term by using the Lagrange multiplier B d-p-1 . which leads to For the domain wall configuration (111), the last term becomes which implies that the worldvolume D W d-p-1 couples with the gauge field B d-p-1 . In the low-energy limit, we can neglect higher derivative terms, and we obtain the topological field theory with the action, This effective theory has the following emergent global Z N (dp -1)-form symmetry: with in addition to the original Z N p-form symmetry (108), where C d-p-1 is a (dp -1)dimensional closed subspace. The charged objects for p-and (dp -1)-form symmetries are the Wilson surfaces: respectively. We can also show that V [C d-p-1 ] and W [C p ] correspond to the symmetry operators of the above p and (dp -1)-form symmetries. They satisfy where Link[C p , C d-p-1 ] is the linking number defined in Eq. ( As mentioned above, this theory (118) exhibits the grand state degeneracy depending on the topology of the spatial manifold Σ d-1 . Let us look at this in detail using the same argument in Sec. 2.4. When Σ d-1 = S p × S d-p-1 , we can choose C p = S p and in the operator formalism at time t. The ordering of the operator product corresponds to the time ordering. That is, the pair of symmetry operators V [C d-p-1 ] and V -1 [C d-p-1 ], corresponds to the operator on C d-p-1 (t + η) ∪ C d-p-1 (tη) in the path integral formalism. Here η is an infinitesimal parameter and C d-p-1 is the subspace with the opposite orientation of C d-p-1 (t). In this case, C p (t) and C d-p-1 (t + η) ∪ C d-p-1 (tη) can be linked in space-time. This means that holds as an operator relation. Since both operators are symmetry operators, we can choose a groundstate |Ω⟩ as an eigenstate of one of the symmetry operators. Here, we take the , where e iθ is the eigevalue. Since W [C p ] is also a symmetry operator, has the same energy as |Ω⟩. But it has a different eigenvalue of Since |Ω⟩ and |Ω ′ ⟩ have different eigenvalues, they are orthogonal, ⟨Ω ′ |Ω⟩ = 0; that is, the ground state is degenerate. We here discuss a superconducting phase (Higgs phase) in a brane-field model by coupling (p + 1)-form gauge field. We mostly focus on the low-energy degrees of freedom, and leave more detailed studies including the massive degrees of freedom for future investigations. We consider a gauged p-form brane-field model: where g 2 is a gauge coupling whose mass dimension is 2(p + 2)d and Here, B p+1 is the U(1) (p + 1)-form gauge field. Note that we consider a general charge q ∈ Z compared to Eq. ( where Λ p is p-form normalized as C p+1 dΛ p ∈ 2πZ. In addition to the p-form gauge symmetry, when q > 1, this theory has a global electric Z q (p + 1)-form symmetry: where C p+1 is a (p+1)-dimensional closed subspace. The corresponding symmetry operator and charged objects are 9 One may think that the charge can always be absorbed into the gauge coupling by the field redefinition qB p+1 → B p+1 . However, this is not true since such a redefinition changes the Dirac quantization condition where D d-p-1 is a (dp -1)-dimensional subspace with boundary. Using the Stokes theorem and the Maxwell equation, (-1) p d ⋆ H p+2 /g 2 = q ⋆ J p+1 , we obtain Here, q ⋆ J p+1 is the gauge current defined by the variation of B p+1 in the matter part of the action as δS matter = -Σ d δB p+1 ∧ q ⋆ J p+1 . Since the charge is quantized to integer, In addition, the theory has the magnetic U In the following, we consider the Higgs phase, i.e., we assume that there exists a nontrivial minimum ψ[C p ] = v/ √ 2 in the potential V (ψ † ψ). In order to study the low-energy effective theory in a Higgs phase, we focus on the phase modulation in the brane field: Then, by repeating the same calculations as before, Eq. ( where λ is a parameter whose mass dimension is d -2(p + 1), and F p+1 = dA p . In addition to the original p-form gauge symmetry (128), this effective theory has a (p -1)-form gauge symmetry given by Equation ( where C p+1 is a (p + 1)-dimensional closed subspace. The charged object is the (dp -2)dimensional 't Hooft operator, which is a defect operator formally obtained by excising a codimension (p + 2) dimensional locus from Σ d and imposing a boundary condition on A p around it. Instead, one can express the 't Hooft operator by using a field in the dualized theory. By introducing the dual field of A p as Ãd-p-2 , Eq. ( where Fd-p-1 = d Ãd-p-2 (See Appendix D for the derivation). In the dualized theory, the (dp -2)-form symmetry is given by a transformation of Ãd-p-2 as where C d-p-2 is a (dp -2)-dimensional closed subspace. The corresponding charge and charged object for the (dp -2)-form symmetry are respectively. Note that there is a correspondence between the dual theory and original theory, ⋆ Fd-p-1 /Λ = dF p+1 . For example, for d = 4 and p = 0, the brane field theory (126) is nothing but the usual Abelian Higgs model, and W [C 1 ] is the Wilson loop while V [C 2 ] is a 2-dimensional surface operator which corresponds to the world surface of the vortex. On the other hand, we can also derive the same effective theory from the brane-field theory with d = 4, p = 1, where the roles of B and Ã are reversed. In this theory, the dual gauge field B1 of the original Abelian-Higgs model appears as a phase d.o.f ψ[C 1 ] ∼ exp i C 1 B1 which corresponds to the 't Hooft operator for the Abelian-Higgs model. More generally, one can see that the gauged (dp -3)-form brane field theory gives the same-low-energy effective theory as Eq. ( We have proposed an effective brane field theory with higher-form symmetry by generalizing the previous work for a mean string field theory There are several issues to be addressed. First, while we have focused on closed subspaces in this paper, we can generalize to branes with boundaries. In this case, the area derivatives need to be treated carefully since we have contributions from both the bulk and the boundary. Compared to the closed-manifold case, one of the crucial differences is that low-energy effective theory typically contains other higher-form fields originating from the boundary d.o.f as well as the bulk ones. Such an effective theory might have emergent gauge symmetry as well as emergent higher-form global symmetry. Second, we have considered an effective theory for a single type of extended object, but it would be interesting to consider a theory in which objects of different dimensions interact. Additionally, a theory that includes objects constrained on an extended object or on the intersection of extended objects can also be considered. Symmetries of such a theory could be described by higher groups or, more generally, non-invertible symmetries. It is possible that a theory exhibits anomalies where symmetries are broken by quantum corrections. It would be interesting to consider whether an anomaly specific to brane field theory could exist. Finally, it is interesting to study a brane field theory without Lorentz invariance. In the case of 0-form symmetry without Lorentz invariance, there exist two types of Nambu-Goldstone modes, and unlike in Lorentz-invariant systems, there is no one-to-one correspondence between the generators of the broken symmetry and the Nambu-Goldstone modes We would like to investigate these problems in our future work. We summarize the basics of differential forms. We consider a d-dimensional spacetime Σ d . The totally anti-symmetric tensor is represented by ε μ 1 •••μ d . In particular, we have We also define On a p-dimensional subspace C p , we have Let be a general p-form. Then, the Hodge dual is defined by For a Lorentzian spacetime Σ d , we have ⋆ ⋆ ω p = (-1) 1+p(d-p) ω p . As usual, we can construct the integral over Σ d by However, what we want is an integration over C p . To construct it, we define which leads to When the brane field ψ[C p ] is given by a functional as Eq. ( The truncated action in Eq. ( The effective action for broken Z q p-form symmetry discussed in Sec. where δA p = N A pf p . Following the same procedures as Sec. 3.3, this can be estimated as where Assuming the spacetime symmetry is not broken, we have where c 0 (k 2 ) and c 1 (k 2 ) are functions of k 2 in general. In the low-energy limit, however, we can neglect the k dependence, and the first term gives which corresponds to the mass term in Eq. (114). D Equivalence between Eqs. (135) and (138) Here, we show the equivalence between Eqs. (135) and (138). We begin with the following "parent" action that generates both Eqs. (135) and (138), Inserting Eq. (164) into Eq. ( which coincides with Eq. (135) except the kinetic term of B p . One can see that 2πλ := e 2 corresponds to the gauge coupling and reproduces the same normalization as in Ref. In general, we can also consider p-dimensional objects that extend the time direction in Σ d . The construction of the brane field theory is completely parallel to the spatially extended case, but with different signatures. In this paper, we focus on the spatially extended objects for simplicity. When p = 0, σ μ 1 •••μ p+1 (δC p ) is just δX μ . For example, for p = 1, there is also another term called the path derivative which corresponds to the variation δC 1 such that an infinitesimal path δΓ is added to a point {X μ (ξ 0 )} of the original loop. In this case, the functional derivative becomes This interaction still preserves the U(1) p-form symmetry due to the delta function. It may seem strange to have U(1) symmetry while the number of branes is changing; however, U(1) p-form symmetry does not represent the conservation of the number of branes itself, but rather the conservation of the winding number on a space with nontrivial topology. Actually, this dimensional analysis is not fully correct because there also exists another dimensionful quantity, i.e., the brane tension T p . Roughly speaking, the large z limit would behave asg(z) ∼ exp -T p z p p+1, which means g ′ /g ∼ z -1 p+1 . In any case, the large z behavior of f (z) does not change. For d ≤ p + 2, U(1) p-form symmetry cannot be broken by the higher-form version of the Mermin-Wagner theorem[3, Note also that when one considers a topological defect A W p as a background solution, f p is replaced by f p -N A W p in the last term in Eq. (114) As mentioned before, the system generally contains many other fluctuations. However, they typically become massive unless they are protected by other symmetries that forbid their mass terms.