Specific heat can explore low-energy quasiparticle excitations of superconductors, so it is a powerful tool for bulk measurement on the superconducting gap structure and pairing symmetry. Here, we report an in-depth investigation on the specific heat of the multiband superconductors KCa2(Fe1-xNix)4As4F2 (x = 0, 0.05, 0.13) single crystals and the overdoped non-superconducting one with x = 0.17. Clear specific heat anomalies can be observed at the superconducting transition temperature of 33.6 K and 28.8 K for the samples with x = 0 and x = 0.05, respectively. For the two samples, the magnetic field induced specific heat coefficient ∆γ(H) in the low-temperature limit increases rapidly below 2 T, then it rises slowly above 2 T. Using the non-superconducting sample with x = 0.17 as a reference, the specific heat of phonon background for various superconducting samples can be obtained and subtracted, which allows us to extract the electronic specific heat of the superconducting samples. Through comparative analyses, it is found that the energy gap structure including two s-wave gaps and an extended s-wave gap with large anisotropy can reasonably describe the electronic specific heat data. According to these results, we suggest that at least one anisotropic superconducting gap with a deep gap minimum should exist in this multiband system. With the doping of Ni, the superconducting transition temperature of the sample decreases along with the decrease of the large s-wave gap, but the extended s-wave gap increases due to the enlarged electron pockets via adding more electrons. Despite these changes, the general properties of the gap structure remain unchanged versus doping Ni. In addition, the calculation of condensation energy of the parent and doped samples shows the rough consistency with the correlation of U0 ∝ Tc n with n = 3-4, which is beyond the understanding of the BCS theory. Since the discovery of superconductivity in LaFeAsO 1-x F x Concerning the gap structures in IBSs, there is a consensus that, in general, IBSs have nodeless s-wave pairing symmetry, except for a few systems such as LaFePO, BaFe 2 (As 0.7 P 0.3 ) 2 and KFe 2 As 2 , which may have nodes In this work, electrical transport and thermodynamic studies have been carried out on KCa 2 (Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 F 2 (x = 0, 0.05, 0.13, 0.17) single crystals. In the 12442 system, Ni acts as an electron dopant. It has been proved by Yi et al. Single-crystalline KCa 2 (Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 F 2 (x = 0, 0.05, 0.13, 0.17) were synthesized by the self-flux method. The details about the growth method can be found in Ref. Figure In order to obtain more information about their electric transport properties, we can study the resistivity in the normal state. Remarkably, the resistivity data for the three superconducting samples exhibit a good linear relationship with temperature at low temperatures, indicating a non-Fermi liquid behavior. To analyze this behavior, we adopt a linear fitting approach to the resistivity data of the three superconducting samples below 70 K, using Equation (1): Here, ρ ab represents the in-plane resistivity, ρ 0 is the residual resistivity which accounts for defect and impurity scattering, and AT represents the resistivity contributed by non-Fermi liquid scattering mechanism. In this low-temperature range, the resistivity contribution from electron-phonon scattering, which is typically a power-law function with a high-order exponent of temperature, is negligible and can be ignored. The fitted curves, represented by solid lines, are illustrated in the inset of Fig. There is an assumption that the entropy of samples with varying levels of doping conforms to a universal form: S(lattice) = ǫΦ(T /θ) with θ and ǫ representing characteristic parameters specific to each sample, and Φ being a function common to all samples. According to the thermodynamic formula, the phonon specific heat can be expressed as C ph (T ) = T ∂S(lattice)/∂T = (ǫ/θ)T Φ ′ (T /θ). Therefore, for different superconducting samples, they are related to the non-superconducting sample by the equation Here, C ph-s (T ) and C ph-n (T ) denote the phonon contribution of specific heat from the superconducting and nonsuperconducting samples, respectively; a and b are fitting parameters. By subtracting a constant, representing the electronic contribution, from the total specific heat coefficient C total /T of the non-superconducting sample, we can obtain its phonon contribution. Then, by fine-tuning parameters a and b, while ensuring entropy conservation, we can accurately determine the phonon contributions of the superconducting samples. The results are a and b to be 0.99 and 1 for the sample with x = 0; 0.985 and 0.99 for the sample with x = 0.05; and 0.99 and 0.98 for the sample with x = 0.13. By subtracting the phonon contributions from the experimental data, we ultimately obtain the electronic specific heat for superconducting samples, as depicted in Fig. Here, γ ′ e = γ e -γ 0 , which defines the electronic specific heat coefficient after subtracting the residual component at zero temperature. ξ = ǫ 2 + ∆ 2 (T, θ). The kinetic energy ǫ = h2 k 2 /2m -E F . ∆(T, θ) is the gap function, and it has different forms based on dif-gap structures. We list it as (i) a single swave gap ∆(T, θ) = ∆ 0 (T ), (ii) a single d-wave gap ∆(T, θ) = ∆ 0 (T ) cos 2θ, (iii) a single extended s-wave gap ∆(T, θ) = ∆ 0 (T )(1 + α cos 2θ). Here, α denotes the anisotropy. If α = 1, the gap function will be zero at some points, indicating that there exist accidental nodes. When α is close to 0, it means the anisotropy is very small and the extended s-wave gap will degenerate into an isotropic s-wave gap. We first consider the one-gap model to fit the electronic specific heat data, and find that for both KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 and KCa 2 (Fe 0.95 Ni 0.05 ) 4 As 4 F 2 , a single gap cannot fit the data well (see Fig. Then we would like to discuss the fit of an isotropic s-wave gap plus a d-wave gap. Although this model can also roughly satisfy the data, it cannot be regarded as possible evidence that it has a d-wave component. Firstly, the total residual specific heat γ 0 plays an important role in determining the fitting results. In the fitting process, γ 0 is added to the BCS fitting curves to match the electronic specific heat data. This process results in a fitted γ 0 . Additionally, in Fig. Although the two-gap scenario has already satisfied the data, there remains a problem. We calculate the proportion of each gap and find that the large gap accounts for 43.9% and the small gap accounts for 56.1% in relative weight for KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 , and the large gap accounts for 32.2% and the small gap accounts for 67.8% in relative weight for KCa 2 (Fe 0.95 Ni 0.05 ) 4 As 4 F 2 . Since we attribute the contribution of the small gap to the electron pockets, the proportion seems too large in the 12442 system. There may be some small gaps existing in the hole-like pockets near Γ point. According to ARPES experiment in KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 KCa2(Fe0.95Ni0.05)4As4F2 From Fig. In all, the fittings to the electronic specific heat again support the multigap features in the multiband 12442 system. We finally adopt a three-gap model, while a two-gap model can also fit the data well. The common point of the two treatments is that an extended s-wave gap with large anisotropy must be included, which we believe appears in the electron pockets. Based on the obtained fitting results, we observe the presence of non-zero residual specific heat coefficients γ 0 in our system. Next, we are going to discuss the possible origin of this residual specific heat coefficient. Firstly, one plausible explanation for γ 0 could be associated with a non-superconducting fraction in the superconductors. However, our high-quality single crystals demonstrate nearly full magnetic shielding volumes at low temperatures, suggesting minimal nonsuperconducting fractions, which effectively rules out this possibility. Consequently, a more viable explanation arises, suggesting that γ 0 originates from deep gap minima within a highly anisotropic extended s-wave gap. In real materials, the existence of defects, disorders, and impurities is unavoidable. The impurity scattering effect can significantly influence the quasiparticle excitations in superconductors, particularly for superconductors with gaps that have nodes or deep minima points. Even in the low-temperature limit, the small gap amplitude near nodes or deep gap minima can be suppressed, resulting in a residual γ 0 value Therefore, we can obtain entropy by integrating the specific heat coefficient, and then obtain the condensation energy by integrating entropy to T c . We calculate the condensation energy for KCa 2 (Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 F 2 with x = 0, 0.5, 0.13. In order to understand the superconducting mechanism in present samples, we try to study the correlations between the condensation energy and T c . In several IBSs, it is found that the specific heat jump exhibits a power law relation with the transition temperature T c observed by Bud'ko, Ni, and Canfield (BNC) In summary, we investigate the specific heat of the multiband superconductors KCa 2 (Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 F 2 (x = 0, 0.05, 0.13) single crystals and the overdoped nonsuperconducting single crystal with x = 0.17. We observe the obvious specific heat anomalies at T c of 33.6 K and 28.8 K for the samples with x = 0 and x = 0.05, respectively. For the low-energy excitations, the magnetic field induced specific heat coefficient of the two superconducting samples increases quickly with the increasing field below 2 T, but shows a slow down and rough linear behavior above 2 T. Using the phonon contribution of specific heat of the non-superconducting sample as a reference, we successfully extract the electronic contributions of specific heat for the superconducting samples. By carefully identifying different fits of various pairing wave functions, we prefer the model with two s-wave gaps and an extended s-wave gap with large anisotropy. All the information above suggests that least one anisotropic superconducting gap with deep gap minima exists in this multiband system. By Ni doping, T c decreases due to the impurity scattering effect, resulting in a decrease in the large s-wave gap, while the extended s-wave gap increases due to the enlargement of electron pockets. The general properties of the gap structure do not have a clear change with doping. Moreover, we calculate the condensation energy of the three superconducting samples, and find that it satisfies an empirical relation of U 0 ∝ T c n (n = 3-4) proposed earlier, which is inconsistent with the traditional BCS framework. 