Spontaneous parametric down-conversion is a vital method for generating correlated photon pairs in the visible and near-infrared spectral regions; however, its extension to X-ray frequencies has faced substantial barriers. Here, we present an advancement in correlated X-ray pair generation and detection by employing a two-dimensional pixelated detector to obtain the first direct image of the pair distribution. Our study explores and directly visualizes the down-conversion process, revealing the characteristic ring structure of coincident photon pairs and demonstrating robust spatial correlations. A significant finding is the observation of energy anti-correlation, achieved at an unprecedented rate of approximately 4,100 pairs/hour, far exceeding previous reports in the literature. We believe these results represent a significant leap in X-ray quantum imaging, unlocking the potential The ability to generate, manipulate, and detect single photons has paved the way for many advances in quantum information science and technology. In particular, one of the most commonly used techniques to generate correlated single photon pairs is spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC) X-ray SPDC was initially demonstrated in the early 1970s using an X-ray tube source In this work, we achieve an important milestone in X-ray SPDC, presenting record rates of down-converted pairs, an order of magnitude higher than the next best report in the literature A conceptual schematic (Fig. Fig. When employing Bragg diffraction using a diamond single crystal, the reflection's Bragg angle is detuned slightly to set the phase matching condition between pump photons, the reciprocal lattice vector, and the two down-converted single photons (often called the "signal" and "idler" photons in the quantum optics community). This guarantees momentum conservation between the down converted photons and the pump We use three independent observables, enabled by the new Lynx T3 detector ToT selections (Fig. The theoretical treatments of this phenomenon from Freund and Levine where η SPDC is the probability of generating a photon of energy E from a pump photon energy of E pump in the pair production process (see Supplemental Information for derivation from equation ( and momentum conservation: where the suffixes i and s refer to idler and signal photons, respectively. The conservation of momentum requires that the two photons in the pair produced in the SPDC process will be colinear with and on opposite sides of the Bragg peak, with distances from the peak position determined by their energies. The relationship between a single photon's energy E and its emission angle α from the diffracted pump beam at 2θ is given by the following equation (see Supplemental Information for derivation from equation where 2θ is the angle of the diffracted pump from the (111) diamond plane and ∆θ is the detuning angle from the Bragg scattering θ angle. The factor 2∆θ sin 2θ is determined by the phase matching condition. The relationship between α, the photon distance r from the 2θ position on the detector plane, and the distance L between the diamond and the detector is given by tan(α) = r L (Extended Data Fig. The calculation of the center point (Fig. Non-degenerate photon pairs cause a deviation from the degenerate center point. In those cases, the calculated center point is shifted towards the location of a lower energy X-ray, which has a larger emission angle α than its higher energy counterpart. The strong agreement between the calculated positions and the measured diffracted Bragg peak provides strong evidence that the selected pairs emerge from the SPDC process. Calculating the closest position on the line segment connecting photons in a found pair with the Bragg location at (260, 259) provides a measure of the collinearity of the pairs with the pump (Fig. We can demonstrate the energy anti-correlation of the photons in the measured pairs by converting each photon's distance r from the Bragg peak location into energy using equation ( Applying the conservation of energy and conservation of momentum restrictions to the data reveals a final total signal (SPDC) pair count of 4,145 ± 39 pairs/hour or ∼1.15 Hz; this value is what we take to be our measured SPDC rate. This rate is over an order of magnitude larger than the next highest rate reported in the literature (317 pairs/hour) The emission angles of the down-converted photons are determined by the detuning angle ∆θ. The results presented thus far are for a detuning angle of ∆θ ≈ 0.022 • . To further validate the phase matching condition, we systematically varied this angle and accumulated corresponding datasets. The dependence of the measured degenerate photon pair distance on ∆θ matches very well with theoretical predictions A comprehensive model that aligns well with our observed experimental data (Fig. Our experimental setup incorporated a 12.7 mm x 12.7 mm square beamstop, positioned close to the detector's center, and the detector's active region measures 28.3 mm x 28.3 mm. The distance from the diamond to the detector was 69.7 cm. This geometry inherently restricts the energy acceptance of our measurements. The effect of this phenomenon can be quantified by calculating the proportions of the circumferences of concentric circles, centered at the Bragg peak location, that are obscured by the beam stop or fall outside the detection plane. This geometry establishes the acceptance of our apparatus as a function of photon energy. High-energy SPDC photons exceeding ∼12 keV are partially obstructed by the beamstop, with complete suppression occurring at ∼14 keV. Conversely, X-rays with energies below ∼6 keV begin to not be accepted by the detector plane and fully disappear at ∼4 keV. If one of the two down-converted photons is not detected, the pair will not be found. This restriction shapes the observed spatial structure, causing the circular ring structure to appear more square-like in appearance. The other influential variable that shapes our observed photon energy distribution pertains to our ToT selection procedure. The ToT spectra of monochromatic photons generally follow a normal distribution, displaying a bandwidth on the order of approximately 125 ns, increasing with energy. The average value of the ToTs recorded from such an experiment can be used to coarsely map energy to a mean ToT (Extended Data Fig. where η ToT represents the efficiency of the ToT filtering, E is the photon energy, and ToT cutoff is the chosen threshold. Both of these models provide detection efficiencies as a function of energy. Combining these curves with the conversion cross-section of SPDC X-rays in equation ( The work presented here marks significant milestones in X-ray quantum optics, reporting the highest detection coincidence count rates to date, the first imaging of the SPDC ring, and a detailed characterization of properties for the down-converted X-rays, including their spatial and energy correlations. These advancements in count rates and the improved detection system have enabled us to investigate the spatial correlations of paired X-rays in an unprecedented way. Further potential improvements are possible with the use of more advanced detectors with capabilities beyond Timepix3-based systems. In our case of hard X-rays, simultaneous direct measurements of time, energy, and position are achievable. Although the energy resolution of the Timepix3 detector through the ToT measurement is not optimal, a clear correlation of the measured ToT and the SPDC photon position is evident (Extended Data Fig. Exploring other anticipated lines of investigation, such as the use of different diamond reflections or alternative materials for the down-conversion process, holds promise. The potential applications of X-ray quantum optics extend to biological and medical imaging techniques, aiming for superior image quality with reduced radiation doses. Our work could also offer an alternative to existing quantum microscopes Our investigations were conducted at the 11-ID Coherent Hard X-ray Scattering (CHX) beamline of the National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS-II) facility at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL). The beamline was configured to produce a monochromatic X-ray beam set at 15 keV. The average input flux of the pump beam generated at the BNL's NSLS-II beamline was approximately 10 11 photons/second, with a polarization of 99% in the horizontal direction and ∆E E ≈ 10 -4 . The dimensions of the 15 keV input beam were set to 50 μm (horizontal) x 50 μm (vertical). The incident X-ray beam was directed onto a (111) diamond single crystal with dimensions of 3 mm x 3 mm x 0.33 mm, grown by chemical vapor deposition from Element Six After standard height alignment procedures, the diamond crystal was oriented to the (111) Bragg reflection at a Bragg (θ) angle of 11.576 • . Multiple positions along the surface of the diamond were probed to find the area with the highest quality, using rocking curves (θ scans) to minimize dual peaks and full-width-at-half-max (FWHM). These measurements were performed using CHX's Eiger X 500K detector A tantalum beamstop was strategically positioned to obscure the direct Bragg reflection and nearby scattering. The Bragg alignment was then finetuned by a deviation of +0.022 • to a θ angle of 11.598 • to meet the phase matching condition, a requirement for the SPDC process. This adjustment instantiated the production of correlated X-ray pairs at a peak output angle of 0.995 • , an angle chosen to maximize the SPDC signal between the edge of the detector and the tantalum beamstop. The experimental schematic (Extended Data Fig. To isolate the correlated X-ray photon pairs, we employed a Lynx T3 detector by Amsterdam Scientific Instruments, equipped with four Timepix3 readout application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) A minor fraction of hot pixels (≈0.1%) were masked to avoid recording substantial amounts of noise hits. This system allows for multihit functionality for each pixel, independent of others, along with a rapid readout bandwidth of 80 MPix/sec. Occasionally, photons excite charge in multiple adjacent pixels; to correct for this, a k-d tree algorithm was employed to cluster and ultimately centroid such events together. The 512x512 pixel array has two columns and two rows along the center (x and y = 255 and 256) of large, double-length (110 x 55 μm) pixels. This is corrected by inserting rows and columns of two dummy pixels between chips to preserve the correct distance between pixels. We calibrated the ToT dependence on X-ray energy by allowing the detection of beams of scattered X-rays, varying their energy from 6 to 15 keV in 0.5 keV steps (Extended Data Fig. All data processing and analysis were conducted using custom Python code, developed in-house and computed on CHX's local resources. This tailored approach facilitated the meticulous processing of the raw Lynx T3 detector output, including corrections, thresholding, filtering, time coincidence searches, photon pair determinations, and analysis of spatial and energy correlations. The raw data recorded by the detector, prior to any selections, resemble a generic X-ray scattering pattern with no obvious SPDC signature (Extended Data Fig. The collinearity selection tolerance is the largest handle in background suppression (Extended Data Fig. Another essential aspect of our selection process is the possibility of precisely setting of the ToT selection thresholds using the method described. It should be noted that higher SPDC photon counts could be inferred with less conservative ToT filtering. We adjusted these thresholds in increments of 25 ns and observed that raising the thresholds led to a greater number of pairs identified through Gaussian distribution fits, albeit at the expense of lower SNRs. The thresholds utilized in the results presented were carefully chosen by calibrating the ToT distributions per chip, using 7.5 keV and 15 keV monochromatic photon scattering. The selected values represent an optimal balance between the high signal rate and SNR, as they allow for enhanced pair detection without a significant loss in signal quality. Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. The function parameters (i.e. A, x 0 , σ, d) were fit to the data using nonlinear least squares. Equation (3), which gives the relationship between an SPDC photon's energy E x and its emission angle R(x) (which we simply call E and α in the manuscript), is derived from equation where x and y are the fractions of the pump energy for the two downconverted photons, i.e. E x = xħω pump and E y = yħω pump , or alternatively x = Ex Epump and y = Ey Epump . Noting that energy conservation requires y = 1 -x, and thus y x = 1-x x = Epump Ex -1, by substitution and solving for E x one arrives at: 2∆θ sin 2θ + 1 2∆θ sin 2θ + 1 arctan 2 (r/L) 2∆θ sin 2θ + 1 The work of Eisenberger and McCall writes the cross-section of the process in their equation By substituting in the expressions for R(x) and R(y) as a function of a down-converted photon's energy fraction x, one obtains: where a is the factor 2∆θ sin 2θ (not a function of x). Simplifying reveals: which indeed has the form of an inverted parabola with a maximum at x = 0.5 and zeros at x = 0 and 1.