Expanding the pool of stable halide perovskites with attractive optoelectronic properties is crucial to addressing current limitations in their performance as photovoltaic (PV) absorbers. In this article, we demonstrate how a high-throughput density functional theory (DFT) dataset of halide perovskite alloys can be used to train accurate surrogate models for property prediction and subsequently perform inverse design using genetic algorithm (GA). Our dataset consists of decomposition energies, band gaps, and photovoltaic efficiencies of nearly 800 pure and mixed composition ABX 3 compounds from both the GGA-PBE and HSE06 functionals, and are combined with ∼ 100 experimental data points collected from the literature. Multi-fidelity random forest regression models are trained on the DFT + experimental dataset for each property using descriptors that one-hot encode composition, phase, and fidelity, and additionally include well-known elemental or molecular properties of species at the A, B, and X sites. Rigorously optimized models are deployed for experiment-level prediction over > 150,000 hypothetical compounds, leading to thousands of promising materials with low decomposition energy, band gap between 1 and 2 eV, and efficiency > 15%. Surrogate models are further combined with GA using an objective function to maintain chemical feasibility, minimize decomposition energy, maximize PV efficiency, and keep band gap between 1 and 2 eV; hundreds more optimal compositions and phases are thus discovered. We present an analysis of the screened and inverse-designed materials, visualize ternary phase diagrams generated for many systems of interest using ML predictions, and suggest strategies for further improvement and expansion in the future. The importance of engineering and optimizing halide perovskites (HaPs) for use as absorbers in next-generation solar cells cannot be overstated. There is a deluge of experimental and computational work on this topic emerging every single day Our research group has made several contributions to the HaP literature over the last few years, reporting updates on discovering promising new materials using density functional theory (DFT)-based computational screening and machine learning (ML) In the present contribution, we build upon our prior work and present multi-fidelity ML regression models The remainder of this manuscript presents details of the ML approaches and subsequent screening and inverse design, followed by a systematic discussion of the results. The overall methodology is shown in Figure The entire HaP dataset is pictured in Figure The E gap vs ∆H plot in Figure 1. 14-dimensional composition vector: This encodes the HaP composition in terms of the fraction (between 0 and 1) of every A/B/X species in the compound. 2. 36-dimensional elemental properties vector: This uses 12 distinct well-known properties (the full list is provided in Table 3. 4-dimensional phase vector: This one-hot encodes whether the perovskite phase is cubic, tetragonal, orthorhombic, or hexagonal. 4. 0-dim, 2-dim, or 3-dim fidelity vector: This one-hot encodes the source of the data (PBE, HSE, or Expt) Three different types of RFR models are trained: 1. PBE, HSE, and Expt. single-fidelity (SF) models: The source of the data is not an input here, so a total of 54 dimensions are used as X and separate models are trained to predict ∆H, E gap and SLME each from PBE and HSE, as well as E gap and PCE just from experiments. These models are subsequently referred to as PBE-sf, HSE-sf, and Expt-sf, respectively. 2. PBE+HSE multi-fidelity (MF) models: A 2-dim data source vector is included to yield a 56-dimensional X, used as input to predict the three properties simultaneously from both functionals based on the dataset of 917 DFT points. The advantage here is that the reach and prediction accuracy of the smaller and more expensive HSE dataset can be enhanced by utilizing its correlations with the supposedly inferior but larger PBE dataset. These predictions will be referred to as PBE-mf1 and HSE-mf1, respectively. 3. PBE+HSE+Expt MF models: A 3-dim data source vector is included to yield a 57-dimensional X, which is used as input to predict E gap and SLME or PCE simultaneously from PBE, HSE, and Expt based on the combined DFT-Expt dataset of 1014 points. A clear advantage is that the applicability of the much smaller experimental dataset can be enhanced by utilizing its correlations with the PBE and HSE data. These predictions will be referred to as PBE-mf2, HSE-mf2, and Expt-mf2, respectively. RFR results after training and optimization are visualized in terms of parity plots between ground truth values (actual PBE, HSE, or Expt) on the x-axis and ML predictions on the y-axis, separately for each property and each source of data. It should be noted that the ultimate test of the model's predictive power is its performance on unseen data points, and ideally, one must look at the quality of prediction for every data point when it is considered as part of the test set. To achieve this, we adopt the following ensemble-based strategy: every SF and MF RFR model is trained 5000 times across each dataset, with an 80-20 split, such that every single data point is considered in the test set approximately 1000 times. Effective test set predictions are then achieved for all points as a mean over their ∼ 1000 test predictions (also yielding the standard deviation, which serves as a rough uncertainty in prediction for any point). Thus, final parity plots, which will be presented and discussed later, show only test predictions for all PBE, HSE, and Expt points. Since only a small subset of possible ABX 3 compositions is used for the DFT+ Expt dataset, we generate a much larger dataset of "hypothetical" HaP compositions by populating the 14-dim composition vector with fractions of n/8, such that the A components sum up to 1, B components sum up to 1, and X components sum up to 3. A similar approach was applied in other works as well Inverse Design using GA Finally, we move beyond the constraints of the restricted chemical space considered for enumeration, to perform a more efficient design of HaP compositions in any phase that satisfy conditions of DFT stability and experiment-level optoelectronic properties. A constrained or clamped Genetic Algorithm (GA) is used for this purpose 1. Chemical feasibility: Constituent fractions at A, B, and X sites should respectively sum up to 1, 1, and 3. 2. Suitability of modeling via DFT: Mixing fractions are restricted to be n/8, n/27, or n/64 (where is a positive integer), such that any composition could be simulated using a 2×2×2, 3×3×3, or 4×4×4 supercell. 3. Stability: ∆H should be minimized to maintain maximum likelihood of perovskite formability. The HSE-level ∆H prediction is used here. 4. Optoelectronic properties: E gap should be in between 1 and 2 eV and PV efficiency should be as high as possible, with both predictions at experiment-fidelity. During any GA run, new HaP compositions are generated using concepts such as crossover, elitism, and mutation, so as to minimize the objective function, yielding a plot between GA generation and objective function, eventually resulting in the best material that satisfies all criteria. Running this several hundred times leads to a massive list of attractive materials that further improve on the compounds derived from enumeration → prediction → screening. Here, we run GA multiple times with different types of inputs, such as restricting the phase to be cubic or tetragonal, restricting the B-site to consider only Pb, Sn, and Ge, or to not consider Pb at all in a bid to achieve Pb-free perovskites, etc. Final results can be visualized for different families of HaPs in terms of PV efficiency vs band gap plots for hundreds of stable compounds. The "geneticalgorithm2" package is used for running the GA models Figure Finally, multiple approaches are used for making predictions on the experimental data points, and to eventually achieve accurate and general experiment-fidelity predictions. An important shortcoming of the dataset had to be overcome here: while we could collect experimental data on nearly 100 points from the literature which included their chemical composition, band gap, and PV efficiency (and some other solar cell-relevant quantities 1. The PBE-sf ∆H is predicted for all 100 compounds considered in all 4 phases. 2. Predictions are made over an ensemble of 5000 models as described earlier, and the most stable phase (which of the four phases has the lowest predicted PBE ∆H?) is noted each time. 3. A score between 0 and 1 is assigned to each of the 4 dimensions of the phase vector based on the relative frequency of occurrence of any phase as the most stable. For instance, for the compound FASnI 3 , the cubic phase fraction is found to be 0.57 and the hexagonal phase fraction is 0.41. 4. With all 54 dimensions (including composition, phase, and elemental property vectors) now available for all experimental data points, single-fidelity models could be trained, and this data can be added to the DFT data along with a 3-dimensional fidelity vector to train the new MF models. In the absence of any experimental data, one might wonder how the DFT-predicted E gap and SLME compare with measured values. A comparison of DFT vs experiments has been performed for a small set of compounds in past work, and the general understanding is that PBE and HSE errors are quite large for a lot of compounds Next, SF models were trained for the experimental E gap and PCE, and effective test predictions for all 97 points based on an ensemble of 5000 models are presented in Figure Figure To understand the contributions of various features better, we plotted the feature importance values for all descriptor dimensions as obtained from the best RFR models, in Figure Next, predictions are made for the expanded set of 151,140 compounds populated across the same HaP chemical space. It should be noted that for any given compound, PBE or HSE computations would at least require at least 12 to 24 hours of CPU time (on approximately 128 cores) for estimating the three properties, which would correspond to over 200 years of computing time for > 150,000 compounds. Experimental investigation of all these materials would take even longer. The ML predictions, on the other hand, require only seconds for several compounds, and can be made for hundreds of thousands of compounds in mere minutes. It can immediately be seen that (i) general shape and distribution of the plots is the same as the DFT-Expt dataset pictured in Figure Discovery at Experiment-Fidelity using GA The GA results are presented in Figure Objectives / constraints: Since many different constraints are applied in the objective function, the best compounds obtained from a GA run may not be completely stoichiometrically accurate or meet every property target. As can be seen in Figure An examination of the frequencies of occurrence in the GA-screened list of 1703 compounds is presented for the chemical spaces D1, D2, D3, and D4 in Figure Using ML predictions made across the set of 151,140 HaP compounds in different phases, it is now possible to visualize how the phase stability and computed properties vary in specific families of compounds, such as with increasing Sn concentration in Pb-Sn mixed compounds. Here, we pick a few interesting and important chemical spaces and visualize their property variations using ternary diagrams. Figure Figures S7 to S12 further show ternary plots for the phase stability (cubic vs tetra vs ortho vs hex), the HSE-mf1 ∆H, and the Expt-mf2 E gap and PV efficiency, across the chemical spaces Cs(Ge-Sn-Pb)I 3 , MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I 3 , FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I 3 , Cs(Ge-Sn-Pb)Br 3 , MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)Br 3 , and FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)Br 3 . Such diagrams could be trivially plotted for any binary, ternary, or even higher-dimensional chemical spaces of interest, and can be navigated to determine the likely phase and bulk stability of any composition as well as their optoelectronic properties. It can be seen that the Cs-iodides generally prefer the tetragonal phase while the Cs-bromides prefer the orthorhombic phase. Nearly all compositions are stable w.r.t. decomposition in either series, and the highest PV efficiencies ∼ 13% for the bromides are achieved with Sn-dominance at the B-site. The MA-based iodides and bromides are nearly always tetragonal and show good bulk stability. Maximum efficiencies are obtained from mixed compounds with intermediate Pb fractions. Finally, the FA-based compounds are almost always stable in the hexagonal phase, except for a small area of cubic stability in the iodides. Sn-dominant FA-bromides provide a peak PV efficiency around 10%, but the real pay-off comes from Pb-dominant iodides. The entire FA HaP space is highly stable against decomposition with ∆H values < -1 eV p.f.u. In summary, several single-fidelity and multi-fidelity random forest regression models were trained for predicting the decomposition energy, band gap, and photovoltaic efficiency of halide perovskites at both DFT and experiment fidelity, resulting in the discovery of hundreds of promising new candidates via high-throughput screening and genetic algorithm. This work is based on an innovative approach of fusing experimental data from the literature with multiple types of DFT computed properties, and the unique representation of every material in terms of its composition and phase, well-known elemental or molecular properties of species at the cation and anion sites, and one-hot encoding fidelity information. All DFT data, optimized RFR models, and predictions made on hundreds of thousands of hypothetical compounds, are openly available to the community. GA enabled the efficient design of compositions beyond the limits of brute-force enumeration in certain mixing fractions, and provides an avenue for continuous discovery and improvement with infusion of more data and expanding the chemical space. Composition-property distributions are visualized in terms of ternary diagrams generated using ML predictions, revealing the most promising regions of B-site mixed (with Pb, Sn, and Ge) Cs/MA/FA iodides and bromides, and such exercises could easily be repeated for any chemical sub-spaces of interest. Limitations of the current work arise in terms of the experimental data only covering a small range of band gaps, any compound only represented as a single data point although it may posses dozens of polymorphs with varying properties, known issues with the DFT functionals, and the lack of consideration of other essential properties such as defect behavior and electron/hole mobilities. Each of these factors will be explored in future work; some of our ongoing work includes additional benchmarking of functionals for HaPs and the use of crystal graph-based neural networks for property prediction based on entire crystal structures as input. We anticipate that our datasets will serve many data mining and ML efforts, both within our group and from the community in general, and significant improvements will further be made in terms of data and ML approaches. . Root mean square error (RMSE) in test set prediction for the three properties from multiple single-and multi-fidelity models. Jiaqi Yang, 1 , Panayotis Manganaris,