The Edelstein effect is the origin of the spin-orbit torque: a current-induced torque that is used for the electrical control of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic materials. This effect originates from the relativistic spin-orbit coupling, which necessitates utilizing materials with heavy elements. Here we show that in magnetic materials with non-collinear magnetic order, the Edelstein effect and consequently also a current-induced torque can exist even in the absence of the spin-orbit coupling. Using group symmetry analysis, model calculations, and realistic simulations on selected compounds, we identify large classes of non-collinear magnet candidates and demonstrate that the current-driven torque is of similar magnitude as the celebrated spin-orbit torque in conventional transition metal structures. We also show that this torque can exist in an insulating material, which could allow for highly efficient electrical control of magnetic order. In materials and heterostructures with spin-orbit coupling, the interconnection between the spin and momentum degrees of freedom of the electronic Bloch states underscores a rich landscape of microscopic "spinorbitronics" phenomena, such as anomalous Hall effect Contrary to a common conception though, spin-orbit coupling is not a mandatory ingredient to obtain spinmomentum locking. In fact, as noticed by Pekar and Rashba in the mid-sixties The Edelstein effect refers to the generation of non-equilibrium spin density by an applied electric field in non-centrosymmetric semiconducting or metallic materials and heterostructures with spin-orbit coupling. The magnitude of the nonequilibrium spin density is governed by the competition between the spin-orbit coupling energy and the crystal field energy associated with inversion symmetry breaking. In magnetic materials, the spinmomentum locking is governed by the magnetic exchange between local and itinerant electrons, rather than by the atomic spin-orbit coupling, suggesting that a large Edelstein effect can be obtained in non-centrosymmetric magnetic materials. A possible advantage of such a mechanism is that it does not require the presence of heavy elements and it could exist even in materials with negligible spin-orbit coupling such as organic magnetic materials. In addition, since the magnitude of the Edelstein effect is directly related to the magnetic configuration of the material, it should be highly tunable using an external magnetic field. A first step towards the realization of this nonrelativistic Edelstein effect was established recently in a model non-collinear coplanar kagomé antiferromagnet with in-plane broken inversion symmetry We demonstrate that wide classes of antiferromagnets lacking a center of inversion can support the currentdriven Edelstein effect in the absence of spin-orbit coupling, and therefore also current-driven spin torques. We establish general symmetry principles to discover new materials, propose selected promising candidates, demonstrate and quantify the effect in specific materials, and extend the idea to the case of magnetic multilayers. We also show the existence of non-relativistic antisymmetric spin-textures in reciprocal space, which are in some cases directly related to the Edelstein effect, and discuss their general symmetry properties. We implemented an algorithm for determining the symmetry of the non-relativistic Edelstein effect as well as other non-relativistic phenomena and we released it within an open source code. Remarkably, we show that the nonrelativistic Edelstein effect can also be present in insulating materials. This could allow for controlling the magnetic order by a voltage in the absence of any Ohmic conduction, resulting in a much higher efficiency than the conventional current-induced torques. In non-magnetic materials lacking inversion symmetry, the relativistic Edelstein effect is associated with an antisymmetric spin texture in the reciprocal space In the absence of relativistic spin-orbit coupling, the spin and orbital degrees of freedom are decoupled, which also means that the spin is not coupled to the lattice. In such a case the symmetry of magnetic systems is described by the so-called spin space groups In a 3D periodic system, the rules for the existence of spin-splitting are simple to determine. For an arbitrary k-point (that is, a k-point lying away from any high-symmetry lines or planes), the only symmetry operations that can keep the spin invariant are the combined space-inversion and time-reversal (the so-called P T symmetry), a pure spin rotation, translation, or any combination of these symmetry operations. In a P T symmetric system, the bands with opposite spin must be degenerate, which is known as Kramers degeneracy and holds even in the presence of spin-orbit coupling. If a pure spin rotation is present, the spin of all states must lie along the spin-rotation axis. If more than one spin rotation with different spin axes is present, this cannot be satisfied without a spin degeneracy. This can also be seen from the fact that spin rotations along different axes do not commute. Since translation does not change spin, the same conclusions apply to symmetry operations that contain translation. Thus spin-splitting exists in all systems, except those that have a P T symmetry or two spin rotation axes. In ferromagnetic systems, spin splitting can exist anywhere in the Brillouin zone since no symmetry operations connecting states with opposite spin exist. In antiferromagnetic materials, there are specific lines or planes where the bands with opposite spin must be degenerate, see Ref. In a collinear magnetic system, any spin rotation along the magnetic axis is a symmetry. Thus if there exists another spin-rotation around a perpendicular axis, the bands must be degenerate. Such a spin rotation must contain translation (otherwise the system could not be magnetic) and can only be a 180 • rotation, which in a collinear system has the same effect on the magnetic order as the time-reversal. The existence of such a symmetry thus implies that the system is invariant under a T τ (a combined time-reversal and translation) symmetry. Collinear antiferromagnetic systems can thus be separated into three types. In systems with P T symmetry, bands are spin degenerate even with spin-orbit coupling. In systems with T τ but broken P T symmetry, spin-splitting occurs only when the spin-orbit coupling is present. Finally, in systems with broken P T and T τ symmetries, a non-relativistic spin-splitting can be present. In non-collinear magnets, this does not hold since time reversal does not have the same effect as a 180 • spin rotation, and spin rotations with different angles can also occur. The existence of antisymmetric spin textures is governed by symmetries that transform k → -k. This involves in particular the inversion symmetry, which implies S nk = S n-k . In systems with inversion symmetry, any spin texture thus must be symmetric. In a coplanar system a combined spin-rotation and time-reversal operation {R s (n ⊥ , 180 • )||E||E} ′ is a symmetry. Here R s (n ⊥ , 180 • ) denotes a spin rotation by 180 • around the direction perpendicular to the magnetic plane n⊥ . As a consequence, it must hold that , where S || and S ⊥ denote the components of spin parallel and perpendicular to the plane, respectively. In a coplanar system, the only antisymmetric component is thus perpendicular to the magnetic plane, as in the case studied by Hayami et al. Let us now turn our attention towards the nonrelativistic Edelstein effect. The nonequilibrium properties of materials obtained via the Kubo formula are often parsed into so-called Fermi surface and Fermi sea contributions The symmetry of the non-relativistic global and local Edelstein effects and the resulting torque can be determined in a similar fashion as for the relativistic one, just replacing the magnetic space groups with spin groups. The key symmetry that needs to be broken for the existence of the Edelstein effect is the inversion symmetry. This holds regardless of the presence of spin-orbit coupling. For the global Edelstein effect, the global inversion symmetry must be broken, whereas for the local Edelstein effect, it has to be broken locally (see, e.g., As already mentioned, in magnets the Edelstein effect can be nonzero even without spin-orbit coupling, similar to the spin-Hall effect, for example, To determine the full symmetry of the non-relativistic Edelstein effect, it is necessary to consider all the symmetry operations of the spin group. We have implemented an algorithm for determining all spin group symmetry operations of a given magnetic system within the freely available open-source Symmetr code Among the noticeable materials whose crystal structure admits both a global and local (sublattice) torque, we identified ferroelectric antiferromagnets such as orthorhombic DyFeO 3 , hexagonal HoMnO 3 , YbMnO 3 , and LuFeO 3 , as well as metallic antiferromagnets such as α-Mn, Tb 3 Ge 5 and Tb 5 Ge 4 . Interestingly, the centrosymmetric metallic antiferromagnets Mn 5 Si 3 , Mn 3 (Sn, Ge, As), and Mn 3 CuN do not display a global torque but do admit a local torque on the individual magnetic sublattices. These torques are expected to induce magnetic excitations and potentially magnetic order reversal. In the following, we explicitly compute the global and local Edelstein effects in both LuFeO 3 and Mn 3 Sn as an illustration of both cases. To calculate the Edelstein effect and torque we use the Kubo formula within the constant relaxation time approximation. We only consider an Edelstein effect linear in an electric field: δS i = χ ij E j , where δS i is the induced spin, E j is the electric field, and χ ij is a response tensor. The T -even and T -odd components are computed using the Kubo formula derived in Refs. ( Here ψ kn is the Bloch function of band n, k is the Bloch wave vector, ε kn is the band energy, ε F is the Fermi energy, vj is the velocity operator, e > 0 is the elementary charge, Ŝi is the spin operator, and Γ is a parameter that describes the strength of disorder, which is related to the relaxation time τ = ħ/2Γ. To calculate the local Edelstein effect on a given sublattice, a local spin operator is used instead. In the limit Γ → 0, Eq. ( A non-coplanar 3Q antiferromagnet An example of a non-relativistic Edelstein effect in a non-collinear coplanar antiferromagnet was recently given by Hayami et al. Here, c † and c denote the creation and annihilation operators respectively; a, b denote the site index and α, β the spin index. The first term is the nearest neighbor hopping term, with t ab representing the hopping magnitude. The second term represents the coupling of the conduction electrons to the on-site magnetic moments. Here m i is the magnetic moment direction, J is the exchange parameter and σ is the vector of Pauli matrices. We only consider nearest-neighbor hopping. To break the inversion symmetry we use two different hopping magnitudes as shown in Fig. Taking Γ = 0.1 eV, m 0 being the free electron mass, α R = 10 -9 eV•m as the typical Rashba strength expected in transition metal heterostructures In antiferromagnets, and in general in more complex magnetic systems, the magnetic dynamics is not determined by the global Edelstein effect, but rather by the local Edelstein effect on each magnetic sublattice. Consequently, in antiferromagnets, it is the local rather than the global inversion symmetry breaking that is necessary for the existence of the Edelstein effect and the currentinduced torque The crystal and magnetic structure of Mn 3 Sn is given in Fig. We evaluate the Edelstein effect in Mn 3 Sn using abinitio calculations with and without spin-orbit coupling (see the Methods section for details of the calculation setup). The result of the calculation for Γ = 0.01 eV is shown in Fig. We note that current-induced switching of Mn 3 Sn has been experimentally observed in Mn 3 Sn/non-magnetic metal heterostructures metal layer and to spin-transfer torque and inter-grain spin-transfer torque, however, it is possible that the nonrelativistic Edelstein effect also contributes. A non-centrosymmetric antiferromagnet: LuFeO3 As an example of a real non-collinear antiferromagnet that can exhibit a global non-relativistic Edelstein effect and torques, we consider the hexagonal LuFeO 3 , a multiferroic with antiferromagnetic order. In bulk, LuFeO 3 is typically orthorhombic. However, the hexagonal phase has been stabilized in thin layers The non-relativistic electronic structure is shown in Fig. For the calculation of the Edelstein effect, we move the Fermi level into the valence band to simulate doping. Our symmetry analysis shown in the Supplementary Materials shows that the Edelstein effect is allowed in LuFeO 3 even with no spin-orbit coupling. Results of the calculation for Γ = 0.01 eV with and without spin-orbit coupling are given in Fig. Our calculations reveal a large non-relativistic global and local Edelstein effect in good agreement with the symmetry analysis. Without spin-orbit coupling for the global effect only the T -odd component is allowed [Fig. An important remark is in order. The T -even component has to vanish within the gap since it is a Fermi surface property [see Eq. ( We note that in metals the torques induced by an elec- tric field are accompanied by an electric current and thus often referred to as "current-induced" torques. However, even in metals, the torques are in fact due to the electric field, rather than to the current flow, although the torque cannot exist without Ohmic conduction. In noncentrosymmetric insulating magnets though, Ohmic conduction is suppressed while the electrically-driven torque remains sizable as demonstrated in LuFeO 3 . This opens promising perspectives for the dissipation-free electrical control of magnetization. The examples we have discussed so far all have inversion symmetry (globally or locally) broken in the bulk of their crystal structure. Such a constraint however severely restricts the Edelstein effect to the materials listed in the Supplemental Materials. For this reason, we propose to exploit the broken inversion symmetry taking place at the interface between the non-collinear antiferromagnet and an adjacent metal. Such heterostructures are commonly utilized for spin-orbit torque, where the ferro-or antiferromagnet is typically interfaced with a heavy element metal such as platinum The same concept can be applied to the non-relativistic Edelstein effect. When a non-collinear magnetic material with inversion symmetry is interfaced with a different material, the broken inversion symmetry can result in a non-relativistic Edelstein effect, which in turn generates a torque on the magnetic order. We illustrate this concept using the example of the well-known non-collinear antiferromagnet Mn 3 Ir whose crystal and magnetic structures are displayed in Fig. The calculated Edelstein effect is shown in Fig. In Figure The torque induced by the non-relativistic Edelstein effect shares important similarities with the conventional spin-orbit torque. Both torques are electrically driven self-induced torques that necessitate inversion symmetry breaking. The key difference though is that the torque due to the non-relativistic Edelstein effect does not orig-inate from spin-orbit coupling, but rather from the noncollinear magnetic order. As a consequence, the microscopic origin of these two torques is quite distinct. In the non-relativistic limit, spin is conserved and the torque is directly associated with a spin current: the torque corresponds to spin sources In the present work, we have computed the nonrelativistic Edelstein effect in four different systems, all displaying inversion symmetry breaking, either in the magnetic unit cell or locally. It is quite remarkable that all the examples discussed here display a sizable electrically induced spin density, in spite of the absence of spin-orbit coupling. For the sake of comparison, in our previous calculations of the relativistic Edelstein effect in a collinear antiferromagnet Mn 2 Au, we found a magnitude of χ S ∼ 4.3 × 10 -11 ħm/V for Γ = 0.01 eV A central feature of the non-relativistic nature of the torque is its dependence on the magnetic order. In most magnetic systems, the magnetic exchange is much larger than any other magnetic interactions or torques acting on the system. Hence, during the dynamics of the magnetic order, the angles between the individual magnetic moments stay approximately unchanged. Therefore, the dynamics of the magnetic order are described by an overall rotation of all magnetic moments and a small canting. In the non-relativistic limit (ignoring the small canting) the rotated states are connected by a spin rotation and, consequently, the corresponding torques must also be transformed by this spin rotation. Specifically, any torque acting on magnetic moment M i can be written as T i = M i × B i , where B i is an effective magnetic field. When the magnetic moments are rotated by rotation R then the torque reads T i = RM i × RB i . This is quite distinct from the conventional spin-orbit torque for which the two most important terms are the field-like torque, in which B i is independent of M, and the anti-damping torque, in which B i ∼ M i × p, p being some constant direction Because of the dependence of the non-relativistic torque on the magnetic order, it may be difficult to realize reversible switching since there can be no magnetic configuration for which the effective field B i vanishes. This might not be such a limitation in practice, however, since some spin-orbit coupling is always present, which may enable deterministic switching even in cases where the non-relativistic torque is dominant. Furthermore, deterministic switching could be achieved by using field-assisted switching or precise pulse timing. In the presence of antiferromagnetic domain walls, the non- relativistic torque could provide an additional source of spin current and therefore enhance or quench the domain wall mobility, depending on the wall configuration. In fact, the very dependence of the torque on the magnetic ordering makes the interplay between the flowing electrons and the magnetic order particularly rich and, as such, the non-relativistic torque is well adapted to excite magnetic modes and self-oscillations which, in antiferromagnets, are particularly appealing for THz applications. We acknowledge the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic Grant No. 22-21974S. A. M. acknowledges support from the Excellence Initiative of Aix-Marseille Université -A*Midex, a French "Investissements d'Avenir" program. The DFT calculations use the VASP code For the linear response calculations we use the Linres code 