Two-dimensional (2D) systems, such as high-temperature superconductors, surface states of topological insulators, and layered materials, have been intensively studied using vacuum-ultraviolet (VUV) angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). In semiconductor films (heterostructures), quantum well (QW) states arise due to electron/hole accumulations at the surface (interface). The quantized states due to quantum confinement can be observed by VUV-ARPES, while the periodic intensity modulations along the surface normal (kz) direction of these quantized states are also observable by varying incident photon energy, resembling three-dimensional (3D) band dispersion. We have conducted soft X-ray (SX) ARPES measurements on thick and ultrathin III-V semiconductor InSb(001) films to investigate the electronic dimensionality reduction in semiconductor QWs. In addition to the dissipation of the kz dispersion, the SX-ARPES observations demonstrate the changes of the symmetry and periodicity of the Brillouin zone in the ultrathin film as 2D QW compared with these of the 3D bulk one, indicating the electronic dimensionality reduction of the 3D bulk band dispersion caused by the quantum confinement. The results provide a critical diagnosis using SX-ARPES for the dimensionality reduction in semiconductor QW structures. Quantum size effects have been widely used in practical semiconductor devices such as solar cells The band structures of the low-dimensional systems have been studied by angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) to unveil the electronic structures Concerning semiconductor-based QW structures, while there have been few reports studying QW structures with ultrathin films by ARPES In general, the 2D electronic band dispersion has a characteristic feature of dissipation of the kz dispersion compared with the 3D bulk dispersion. In addition to the nondispersive kz band structure, the quantized band dispersion and the alternation of the symmetry from the 3D band dispersion due to the dimensional reduction are also characteristic 2D features for semiconductor QW structures. While the inherent 2D materials with layered structures are crystallized 2D, the quantum confinement in semiconductor QW makes the wave function 2D although the crystal structure is 3D (even with the ultrathin thicknesses). As shown in Fig. To verify the dimensionality reduction in semiconductor QWs, we have performed soft X-ray (SX) ARPES on III-V semiconductor InSb thin films with different thicknesses, where one of the films is designed to form a QW structure due to the quantum confinement. SX-ARPES has been used to measure 3D crystals and interface states in heterostructures InSb films with 10 nm and 300 nm thickness were grown on p-GaAs(001) substrates by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). To avoid surface contamination, the surfaces of the films were covered with amorphous Sb capping layers. Figure The SX-ARPES experiments were performed at the SX-ARPES end station 33 of the ADRESS beamline 34 at the Swiss Light Source. The Fermi-level positions of the ARPES spectra have been determined by measuring the Fermi cutoff of an Au foil in electrical contact with the samples. To expose the clean surface of the samples where the red markers represent the peak positions of the momentum distribution curves. Unlike the thick InSb film, the band dispersion of the ultrathin InSb film is independent of hν. Since the surface states are not observed in the present SX-ARPES measurements on the thick InSb film, it is probable that any surface states hardly contribute to the observed band structure of the ultrathin InSb film. Since no Al core-level spectra have been observed with hν up to 1100 eV in both the thick and ultrathin InSb films (not shown), the ARPES spectra of the ultrathin InSb film do not originate from the AlSb buffer layer. The top of the observed band of the ultrathin InSb film is located at EB = 0.24 ± 0.05 eV. To identify the observed band, the simple Schrödinger equation of QW is used: where m* and V represent the effective mass and potential barrier from the edge of VB (conduction band (CB)) of InSb, respectively. V is set to ∞ in vacuum, 0.98 eV for electrons in AlSb, and 0.45 eV for holes in AlSb, and m* of electrons, LHs, and HHs are set to 0.015m0, 0.021 m0, and 0.39 m0 39 , respectively. Here, m0 represents the free-electron mass. Figure Since the kz dispersion in the ultrathin film is disappeared as shown in Figs. 3 we have chosen hν = 642 eV for the following ARPES measurements due to the large intensity of photoelectrons. Figure Compared with the bulk band dispersion (Fig. Because only the dimensionality of the electron wave function is reduced by the quantum confinement while maintaining its crystal structure, this result provides the experimental evidence for the electronic dimensionality reduction in semiconductor QW structures. Since the in-plane 2D electronic states have not been observed in the triangle-potential QWs To verify the dimensionality reduction in semiconductor QW, we have conducted SX-ARPES measurements on thick and ultrathin III-V semiconductor InSb films, the latter 