Lightweight refractory high-entropy alloy coatings (RHEAcs) of NbxMo0.5Ti1.5Ta0.2Cr (where x=1, 1.3, 1.5, After annealing, an increase in microhardness is observed at all Nb concentrations, up to 31.2% at Nb2. Before annealing, the wear resistance of RHEAcs was slightly better than that of 316L stainless steel at different Nb contents. However, after annealing, the coefficient of friction (COF) and wear rate of the coatings are lower than those of annealed 316L stainless steel, highlighting their excellent wear resistance. It is 316L stainless steel is known for its excellent high-temperature properties and remarkable plasticity for easy hot and cold machining Laser cladding technology has become the preferred method to enhance the surface properties of 316L. Compared with traditional thermal spray coatings and physical vapor deposition techniques, laser cladding technology has the advantage of rapid cooling, which usually results in ultra-fine grain structure and unique phase formation, thus significantly enhancing its mechanical properties, high-temperature resistance and corrosion resistance Yeh et al proposed TiZrHfNbTa RHEAs In this study, the elemental composition and molar ratios in RHEAS were optimized using first-principles calculations, and a series of coatings of NbxMo0.5Ti1.5Ta0.2Cr (with x-values of 0.5, 1, 1.3, 1.5, and 2) lightweight RHEAs were designed and fabricated using laser cladding. In view of the significant thermal efficiency ratio (Tm/ρ) and intrinsic toughness of Nb In this work, first-principle calculations were used to determine various alloy properties (1)-( represents the enthalpy of mixing between the two elements, ( ) i VEC denotes the valence electron concentration of the ith element, and (Tm)i corresponds to the melting point of the i th element. ) The thermophysical parameters of RHEA with different Nb contents are shown in Table The 316L high-temperature stainless steel was cut into 50 mm × 50 mm × 10 mm blocks, polished with 200-and 400-grade sandpaper, and cleaned with anhydrous ethanol. NbxMo0.5Ti1.5Ta0.2Cr (x = 1, 1.3, 1.5, 2) RHEAS powders with purity greater than 99.95% and particle size of 15-53μm were weighed and mixed, and then subjected to 10 h of vacuum ball milling. The powders (shown in Fig. After etching with Keller's reagent (HF: HCl: HNO : H32 O = 2: 3: 5: 100), 10 mm × 10 mm samples were prepared and analyzed using a SmartLab X-ray diffractometer and a JSM-7800F field emission scanning electron microscope. Elemental composition was evaluated using an equipped X-ray spectrometer. The surface microhardness was evaluated using a hmv-g21 Vickers hardness tester with a load of 1.961 N for 20 seconds, averaged over five measurements, each 100 μm apart.The coefficient of friction was measured using GCr15 tungsten carbide balls with a diameter of 4 mm, loaded with 5 N and rotated at 600 r-min for 25 min. The samples were oxidatively annealed at 900°C for 10 hours and then repeatedly tested for hardness and friction properties to investigate high-temperature softening, strengthening mechanisms and oxidation conditions. Figure During this transformation process, a small amount of airborne O elements penetrate into the coating, forming clusters of TiO2 . Figure ) The variation of NbxMo0.5Ti1.5Ta0.2Cr coating hardness with height is shown in Fig. According to classical wear theory The coefficient of friction of NbxMo0.5Ti1.5Ta0.2Crafter annealing is shown in Fig. Observation of the wear trajectories reveals that the oxide layer at Nb1.3 and Nb1.5 is very heterogeneous. This oxide layer is formed by debris that builds up and compresses during the friction process. Once these buildups are formed, they are prone to internal cracking and show undesirable wear resistance. In contrast, at Nb1 and Nb2, the oxides generated in situ in the sliding direction are point-like and densely and uniformly distributed, which greatly improves the wear resistance. Upon annealing, the substrate surface precipitates large amounts of iron, Cr and nickel carbides in the austenite, leading to a drastic reduction in wear performance. On the contrary, the oxide film on the RHEAS surface is mainly composed of various oxides such as Nb2O5 , TiO2 and Ta2O5 . According to the X-ray diffraction pattern of the oxide layer shown in Fig. In addition, the dense TiO2 oxide film also acts as a lubricant and effectively reduces the coefficient of friction (COF). The synergistic effect of the Ta and Ti oxides significantly improves the wear resistance of the alloy. However, one of the reasons for the increase in friction coefficient of the Nb2 coating, which had the lowest COF before annealing, is the significant increase in hardness after annealing (31.2%), which leads to the formation of cracks in the surface layer of the coating. In addition, too high Nb content leads to the formation of complex intermetallic oxides of Ti4 Cr3 Nb O32 type, which is detrimental to the wear resistance. Utilizing Laser Cladding (LC) technology, refractory high-entropy alloy coatings (RHEAcs) of NbxMo0.5Ti1.5Ta0.2Cr were successfully fabricated on the surface of 316L stainless steel. Through systematic studies, the phase compositions, structural characteristics, and the impact of Nb content on hardness and wear resistance were elucidated. This coating boasts exceptional mechanical properties, lower density, and production costs, heralding a promising application prospect. The principal conclusions are as follows: (1) The composition of RHEAcs primarily consists of a body-centered cubic (BCC) solid solution, C15-Laves phase, and a minor quantity of hexagonal close-packed (HCP) solid solution containing Ti. As the Nb content increases, the crystal grains exhibit a progressively refined trend. (2) In comparison to the base material, the RHEAcs coating demonstrates a significant enhancement in hardness. When Nb1.3 , influenced by lattice dislocations, the coating's hardness ascends to 1066.5HV, which is 7.11 times that of the base material. However, at Nb2 , despite the hardness being the lowest at 709.31HV, it still reaches 4.72 times that of the base material. After annealing, the hardness across different Nb contents all exhibited improvement, particularly at Nb2, where the hardness increased by 31.2%. (3) Before annealing, the wear performance of the RHEAcs coating is generally slightly superior to that of 316L stainless steel. However, post-annealing, the coating's coefficient of friction (COF) and wear rate are significantly lower than that of annealed 316L stainless steel, reflecting its superior wear resistance. Specifically, the coating at Nb1 , post-annealing, displays optimal wear resistance with minimal difference compared to before annealing. Furthermore, at Nb1 , the theoretical density of the coating is the lowest, standing at 7.3g/cm3. The outstanding wear resistance after annealing can be attributed to the ultra-fine grain oxidation friction layer formed, such as TiO2 and Ta2O5. The primary wear mechanism involves oxidative wear, accompanied by a minor amount of abrasive wear.