We demonstrate a silicon photonic dual-polarization phase retrieval receiver. The receiver recovers phase from intensity-only measurements without a local oscillator or transmitted carrier. We design silicon waveguides providing long delays and microring resonators with large dispersion to enable symbol-to-symbol interference and dispersive projection in the phase retrieval algorithm. We retrieve the full field of a polarization-division multiplexed 30-GBd QPSK and 20-GBd 8QAM signals over 80 km of SSMF. Short-reach optical communication continues to push to higher capacities while also demanding low-cost devices Similarly, single-sideband detection systems also require co-transmitting a carrier The recently proposed phase retrieval receiver upends many of these difficult trade-offs Silicon photonics is an ideal platform on which to implement these receiver technologies in massively manufacturable, low-cost devices We recently reported a carrier-less silicon photonic phase retrieval receiver for a single polarization Here we report the first fully integrated, carrier-less silicon photonic phase retrieval receiver using polarization-division multiplexing (PDM). The chip includes silicon microring resonators, waveguide delay lines, and integrated high-speed photodiodes. We show transmission of dual polarization (DP) quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) signals and DP-8QAM (quadrature amplitude modulation) signals over 80 km of standard single mode fiber (SSMF) using the integrated receiver. In order to retrieve the full fields of signals using direct detection without a carrier, we employ a space-time diversity phase retrieval approach We implement the phase retrieval receiver in silicon by designing a photonic circuit with the three key components of the approach: polarization management, large dispersion, and long delay lines. The input to the chip is an edge-coupled inverse taper waveguide which provides low-loss coupling for both polarizations (Fig. We achieve a large on-chip dispersion by designing microring resonators to introduce spectrally varying group delay The delay lines must incorporate long waveguide lengths with very low loss in a small area on-chip. To accomplish this, we use wide multimode waveguides to minimize propagation loss from the sidewalls. Additionally, to avoid exciting higher-order modes, we use Euler bends rather than circular arcs. By spiraling the waveguides into a compact shape, we fit delay lengths of L2 = 1.3 cm and L3 = 2.2 cm, or ~120 ps and ~200 ps, respectively (Fig. The remainder of the receiver in Fig. The phase retrieval receiver is fabricated at a foundry on 300 mm silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers with 220 nm device layer thickness. We assemble the fabricated device (3.3 mm × 1.4 mm) into a packaged module (Fig. We first investigate the performance of the ring resonators. The waveguide after the rings includes a tap off to measure the spectral response of the rings and infer that they provide the proper dispersion performance. From here, we observe the resonances of each ring on an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) and use the integrated heaters to tune them (Fig. Next, we demonstrate recovery of dual-polarization, complex-valued signals using the integrated receiver. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. The measured QPSK constellations for both polarizations are shown in Fig. We have presented the first demonstration of a silicon photonic phase retrieval receiver which recovers the full field without a carrier or LO. The dispersion and delay lines needed for the space-time diversity phase retrieval algorithm are implemented by carefully designing the silicon waveguide components. We show transmission of high-speed DP-QPSK and DP-8QAM signals over 80 km of fiber with low BERs. Because it does not require a carrier, our approach is compatible with conventional coherent transmitters. Compared to coherent systems, direct detection-based phase retrieval could allow for a colorless transmitter and therefore an uncooled laser, reducing power consumption 