λ-RhO 2 , a prototype 4d transition metal oxide, has been prepared by oxidative delithiation of spinel LiRh 2 O 4 using ceric ammonium nitrate. Average-structure studies of this RhO 2 polytype, including synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction and electron diffraction, indicate the room temperature structure to be tetragonal, in the space group I4 1 /amd, with a first-order structural transition to cubic F d 3m at T = 345 K on warming. Synchrotron X-ray pair distribution function analysis and 7 Li solid state nuclear magnetic resonance measurements suggest that the room temperature structure displays local Rh-Rh bonding. The formation of these local dimers appears to be associated with a metal-to-insulator transition with a non-magnetic ground state, as also supported by density functional theory-based electronic structure calculations. This contribution demonstrates the power of soft chemistry to kinetically stabilize a surprisingly simple binary oxide compound. In the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling, as expected in 4d and 5d transition metals, a d 5 electronic configuration can give rise to an effective j = 1/2 ground state with enhanced correlations, paving the way for exotic long-range macroscopic quantum states such as in α-RuCl 3 , 1-5 Sr 2 IrO 4 , A search of the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) yields a total of around 266 oxide compounds containing Rh 3+ , versus 30 unique oxides containing Rh 4+ . The difficulty in synthesizing oxide compounds with Rh 4+ originates from the high oxidative potential required to oxidize Rh 3+ to Rh 4+ , as well as the predilection for RhO 2 to vaporize. Of the few reported Rh 4+ oxide compounds in the literature, only a small number have been demonstrated to possess phenomena similar to other aforementioned d 5 materials, such as in the correlated electron metal Sr 2 RhO 4 , The Rh cations in LiRh 2 O 4 form a three-dimensional pyrochlore network, and thus interactions between them can be destabilized by geometric frustration. A total topotactic delithiation of LiRh 2 O 4 to Rh 2 O 4 would result in a pyrochlore network of exclusively Rh 4+ , which would be a potential j = 1/2 Rh analog of the RE 2 Ir 2 O 7 (RE = Y, Pr-Lu) pyrochlore iridates. Some of these pyrochlore iridates display metal-to-insulator transitions In this work, we report the topotactic, oxidative delithiation of LiRh 2 O 4 to form a new rhodium (IV) oxide, λ-RhO 2 . Fashioned after λ-MnO 2 , which was also obtained via soft, chemical delithiation of LiMn 2 O 4 spinel in acid, Oxidative delithiation of LiRh 2 O 4 was performed using ceric ammonium nitrate (CAN), a reagent commonly used in other fields of synthetic and industrial chemistry, Rietveld refinements were performed on X-ray diffraction data sets collected on λ-RhO 2 obtained via chemical delithiation at the 11-BM beamline at Argonne National Laboratory between T = 100 and 400 K. Data and fits for these two temperatures are shown in Figure Fit parameters can be found in the supplementary information (Tables A consequence of the cubic-to-tetragonal structural phase transition is the formation of rhodium xy-chains along either a or b. In the cubic phase, the nearest-neighbor Rh-Rh distance is 3.002(1) Å, whereas in the tetragonal phase, Rh-Rh intrachain distances be- As demonstrated later with complementary solid-state NMR results, this remnant cubic phase could be related to a fraction of the sample that is not delithiated. Long-range structural phase transitions have been observed in other spinel systems with electronic degrees of freedom on cations on the B-site, such as CuIr 2 S 4 65,66 and MgTi 2 O 4 . Those results are consistent with our observations in TEM measurements, where the bulk of the crystallites appeared homogeneous and with minimal disorder, as opposed to the crystallite edges which appeared greatly disordered and likely containing admixtures of both cubic Li 1-x Rh 2 O 4 and tetragonal λ-RhO 2 . In summary, the presence of short Rh-Rh bonds is evidenced in both PDF and NMR, despite the predicted average I4 1 /amd structure for λ-RhO 2 that does not accommodate these bonds. Given this disparity between the average and local structures, these dimers are either static and disordered, or dynamically fluctuating on a timescale comparable to the diffraction measurement. In LiRh 2 O 4 , this has been suggested in the temperature range of T CO < T < T JT , where a dimerization peak appears in the PDF despite an average tetragonal I4 1 /amd structure. Physical Properties Measurements. or variable range hopping model. Given the fact that λ-RhO 2 is a metastable compound, annealing or sintering pellets for measurements at high temperatures is not a possibility. As such, measurements were performed solely on cold-pressed pellets, which likely affects the measurements through poor conductivity across grain boundaries. Nevertheless, as can be seen in the inset, the resistivity increases with increasing temperature above the transition, suggesting a metallic state. A metal-to-insulator transition occurs in LiRh 2 O 4 , 36 as well as in the spinels CuIr 2 S 4 , Calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) were performed on LiRh 2 O 4 and λ-RhO 2 using experimentally-derived structural parameters. λ-RhO 2 was treated as having no lithium on the A-site. Calculations were done on both the cubic Fd 3m and tetragonal I4 1 /amd cells with and without structural relaxation using the the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange functional. A gap in the calculated band structure for the low-temperature tetragonal phase can be observed for U ef f ≥ 3 eV, as demonstrated in the supplementary information (Figure We conclude our discussion of the structure and properties of λ-RhO were loaded into 1.3 mm diameter ZrO 2 magic angle spinning (MAS) rotors. Conclusion