Metalenses are composed of nanostructures for focusing light and have been widely explored in many exciting applications. However, their expanding dimensions pose simulation challenges. We propose a method to simulate metalenses in a timely manner using vectorial wave and ray tracing models. We sample the metalens' radial phase gradient and locally approximate it by a linear phase response. Each sampling point is modeled as a binary blazed grating, employing the chosen nanostructure, to build a transfer function set. The metalens transmission or reflection is then obtained by applying the corresponding transfer function to the incoming field on the regions surrounding each sampling point. Fourier optics is used to calculate the scattered fields under arbitrary illumination for the vectorial wave method and a Monte Carlo algorithm is used in the ray tracing formalism. We validated our method against finite difference time domain simulations at 632 nm and we were able to simulate metalenses larger than 3000λ 0 in diameter on a personal computer. Metalenses consist of subwavelength nanostructures that locally modify the phase profile of an incoming beam to focus it Recently, mass-manufacturable metalenses with diameters on the order of a few centimeters have been demonstrated Here, we propose a method to accurately simulate large area metalenses in a timely manner. Our strategy is based on sampling the metalens phase gradient profile and modelling each point as a binary blazed grating using the nanopost or metagrating design of choice. We then build a transfer function library for each blazed grating under plane wave incidence for different incident angles and polarizations. A similar approach has been recently demonstrated to simulate quantum emitters' response near periodic patterned hyperbolic metamaterials We propose a model based on a transfer-function approach that considers coupling among different posts. The metasurface phase gradient is sampled on N positions, as illustrated in Fig. where G (ì r i1 ) ≡ G i1 = ∂φ(r)/∂r is the radial phase gradient value calculated at the i t h sampling point. Any radial phase profile can be sampled using our phase gradient library, as shown in Fig. The metalens is modeled as a spatially patched transfer function that modulates an arbitrary field distribution and relies on the angular spectrum formalism for the propagation in free space where ì E i, j (ì r) is the electric field distribution calculated on sector j of region i and W i j (ì r) is a window function, as shown in Fig. where is the transfer function defined as a tensor given by Eq. (S4). Eq. ( where ì e i jg ( ì k ∥ ) is the spectrum of the output field produced by the g-th diffraction order and is given by Eq. (S10). The reciprocal vectors are defined according to the versors ρi j and φi j , shown in Fig. As seen in Eq. 5, the total field on the (i, j) region is given by the linear superposition of the diffracted fields modulated by the linear phase of the order. Furthermore, the phase term r ∥ controls the central position of the diffracted field spectrum and creates a local linear phase profile distribution, which is a consequence from the linear patching approach. This effect induces aberrations on the wavefront and can be detrimental to the properties of the metalens. To eliminate this problem, we correct this phase term by substituting it to the original phase profile, φ(ì r ∥ ), as discussed in the SI. Although more precise and faster in describing the behavior of large-area metasurfaces, the computational burden of the vectorial approach can be further reduced by applying the proposed method on the ray tracing method. The metalens is now treated as a phase discontinuity on the ray path We define a cumulative probability distribution f as where, , A] and we omitted the region indices for clarity. Therefore, we can use f to define intervals where a given outcome might happen. The diffraction order can then be found by generating a random number and analysing in which interval it has fallen. Given the uniformly distributed random variable χ ∈ [0, 1], we can obtain i, and consequently the outcome of the event from the sequence V, by solving the following equation where g is the resulting diffraction index and index of the sequence V, which is used to map a given event. With the scattering event determined, the resulting ray can either be scattered or absorbed. If it is absorbed, then no other ray is produced. On the contrary, if the ray is reflected or transmitted, then a new ray is generated with momentum given by where n is the normal vector to the metasurface, ì G i is the reciprocal vector of the g-th order, and k n is the resulting ray wave-vector along the normal direction, which can be found from the dispersion equation in the medium. Note that the reciprocal vector radial component is corrected locally according to the local phase gradient instead of using the blazed binary grating momentum. As shown in the SI, we can also obtain the diffracted polarization by the metalens. Each ray can be labelled according to the corresponding diffraction order it originated from, allowing a better understanding of the metalens behavior, without the need to perform separate simulations, see Figs. (S1) and (S2) in the SI for more detail. Such discrimination is also possible on the vectorial wave method, but it would require storing a field distribution of each order, which is impractical. We compare the focusing profile of a metalens operating at 632 nm against FDTD simulations. The ray tracing map distribution is obtained by calculating the ray density crossing the plane y = 0 and the field distributions were normalized with respect to their peak values on the focal plane to highlight the field distribution. The simulation parameters are discussed in section 3.3. We use 1200 nm tall glass-based nanoposts in our design Finally, the ray tracing model allows us to easily tag each ray according to the diffraction order it originated. Fig. After qualitatively showing that our models can calculate the focusing field profile of a metalens, we assess the efficiency prediction of our model against numerical simulations performed using FDTD. We used a glass-based nanopost design described in The simulation results at normal, 10 • and 20 • of incidence are shown in (Figs. 5(a)-5(c)), Figs. 5(d)-5(f) and Figs. 5(g)-5(i), respectively. The calculated diffraction efficiencies of orders m=-2,-1,0 and m=2 and n=0 correspond to each column of Fig. In particular, the efficiency of the m = -1 order is the highest at normal incidence, and it is almost constant throughout the whole scan, remaining higher than 60%, which is an good indication that the proposed design focuses light efficiently. These results highlight how accurately our model can simulate the metalens even at oblique incidence when coupling among adjacent posts takes over. These results have also been compared against experimental data with a good match, see In this section, we compare each method's simulation time and memory requirements against FDTD simulations. Note that this estimation does not account for the computational resources used in calculating the transfer functions. We simulate fused silica glass-based metalenses, operating at 632 nm Our approach's low computational time and minimal memory usage enable the simulation of large-area metasurfaces. Here, we simulate the focusing profile of hyperbolic and quadratic metalenses Both models display similar focused field distributions, but the ray tracing model only accounts for the power flow without any interference effects. At normal incidence, the mirror-symmetric focusing profile of the hyperbolic profile is obtained in both models, and both feature a weak second-order focusing around z=500 μm, as shown in Figs. We propose a strategy to simulate large area metalenses by patching it into smaller parts that can be simulated faster using Maxwell's equations. The patching process is similar to the phase sampling used to design a metasurface profile. However, we sample the phase gradient instead, and a corresponding blazed binary grating models each sampling point. Maxwell's equations are then rigorously solved for each linear piece using a single supercell of the blazed binary grating to obtain a transfer function that is a function of the angle of incidence and polarization. The same transfer function can be reused to model different metalenses or metasurfaces with radial phase profiles for a given metasurface post design. Thus, after the transfer function is obtained, the metalens transmitted or reflected fields can be simulated either using a ray tracing approach or a vectorial wave model, depending on the desired application. We found very good agreement between our model, FDTD simulations, and experiment. This approach reduces the time and memory requirements by orders of magnitude, allowing the simulation of metalenses with diameters larger than 3755λ 0 on a personal computer. Funding. Content in the funding section will be generated entirely from details submitted to Prism. Authors may add placeholder text in the manuscript to assess length, but any text added to this section in the manuscript will be replaced during production and will display official funder names along with any grant numbers provided. If additional details about a funder are required, they may be added to the Acknowledgments, even if this duplicates information in the funding section. See the example below in Acknowledgements. For preprint submissions, please include funder names and grant numbers in the manuscript.