Linear colour conversion is a process where an emitter absorbs a photon and then emits another photon with either higher or lower energy, corresponding to up-or down conversion, respectively. In this regard, the presence of a volumetric cavity plays a crucial role in enhancing absorption and photoluminescence (PL), as it allows for large volumes of interaction between the exciting photons and the emissive materials, maximising the colour conversion efficiency. Here, we present a dual resonance nanostructure made of a titanium dioxide (TiO2) subwavelength grating to enhance the colour down-conversion efficiency of green light at ~530 nm emitted by gradient alloyed CdxZn1-xSeyS1-y colloidal quantum dots (QDs) when excited with a blue light at ~460 nm. A large mode volume can be created within the QD layer by the hybridisation of the grating resonances and waveguide modes. This allows increasing mode overlap between the resonances and the QDs, resulting in large absorption and tailored emission enhancements. Particularly, we achieved polarized light emission with maximum photoluminescence enhancement of ~140 times at a specific angular direction, and a total enhancement of ~34 times within 0.55 numerical aperture (NA) of the collecting objective. The enhancement encompasses absorption enhancement, Purcell enhancement and directionality enhancement (i.e., outcoupling). We achieved total absorption of 35% for green QDs with a remarkably thin colour conversion layer of ~ 400 nm (inclusive of the TiO2 layer). This work provides a guideline for designing large-volume cavities for practical application in absorption/fluorescence enhancement, such as down colour conversion in microLED displays, detectors or photovoltaics. Augmented reality (AR) devices such as smart glasses are called to be the "next revolution" in consumer electronics. Tech giants such as META, Apple, Google, and Xiaomi have heavily invested in their versions of these devices with the hope of completely changing the way people interact with the virtual world and bringing a true metaverse experience to the users. Compared to more matured display technologies such as liquid crystal display (LCD) and organic light emitting diode (OLED), microLED based on III-V semiconductors are the emerging technology believed to be the best solution in this arena, thanks to its superior performance in brightness, stability, contrast, and colour gamut. The simplest way to integrate green or red QDs onto a microLED display is to place them directly on top of a blue microLED pixel made of gallium nitride (GaN), where a green or red pixel is supposed to be. The principle is that the QDs will absorb the blue light from the microLED and then emit either green or red colour. However, there are challenges associated with the colour conversion approach, such as the leaking of blue light when it is not fully absorbed in the QD layer, affecting the colour purity, the cross-talk between colour pixels, and the patterning of the QD layer to large aspect ratios. In this work, we propose a resonant nanostructure based on the hybridisation of a waveguide mode within the QDs layer and a resonant "Bloch mode" originating from the high-index contrast grating made of TiO2 stripes, as shown in Figure However, this design concept can be applied to the red QDs as well and is suitable for fullcolour display applications. Design principle, fabrication and integration of QDs into the resonant nanostructure The inset shows a "zoomed in" view of an edge of the nanostructure to highlight the quality of the side walls. We chose TiO2 as the grating stripe material because of its relatively high refractive index and negligible optical loss in the visible. We designed the TiO2 grating to match two grating resonances (for normal incidence) with the blue (λ = 460 nm) and green (λ = 530 nm) light wavelengths, which those of interest for absorption and emission, respectively. To do so, the resulting grating has a period Λ = 270 nm, and the stripes have a height H = 200 nm and a width W = 190 nm. The total thickness of the QD layer is designed to be T = 400 nm (i.e., 200 nm additional layer on top of the stripes) to support the first-order transverse electric (TE) slab mode,TE1, around 460 nm. For more details regarding the design, see Supp. Info. Section 1, Figure For completeness, the simulated angle-resolved transmission spectra of the system when excited with incident light polarized perpendicular to the stripe (i.e., y axis) are shown in the Supp. Info. Section 3, Figure Info. Section 3, Figure We then characterise the absorption spectrum of QDs inside the grating structure, as shown in The measured angle-resolved reflection and transmission spectra used to calculate the absorption can be found in Supp. Info. Section 3, Figure Further understanding can be gained by looking at the mode profiles (norm of the electric field) at different points in the resonance bands, as shown in Figure shown in the Supp. Info. Section 4, Figure Regarding the band at λ ~530 nm, exploited to enhance the emission by the QDs, we also show the corresponding mode profile in Figure We characterise the colour conversion performance of the fabricated structures by first using a wide-field fluorescence imaging technique. The whole sample was is illuminated by a mercury lamp equipped with a 470 nm short-pass filter through a 10× objective (0.3 NA). The signal is then passed through a 500 nm long-pass filter to collect only the fluorescence from the QDs. Figure By comparing the total PL enhancement when pumping at resonance wavelength (i.e., 460 nm) and non-resonance wavelength (i.e., 470 nm), we can estimate the absorption enhancement of ~3.5 times. The rest of the enhancement is attributed to the Purcell effect and outcoupling enhancement of the emission at the second resonance (i.e., 530 nm), which will be further demonstrated below. Similar experiments are done for different pixel sizes with adjusted laser spot sizes for smaller pixels, and the results are shown in Figure Regarding the emission, Figures shown in Figure In conclusion, we present a concept of dual resonance nanostructure with a large mode volume to enhance both the absorption and the light polarized emission of quantum emitters applicable for colour down conversion in display technology. The hybridisation of a grating resonance in the high index contrast grating and a waveguide mode within the QD layer is responsible for better spatial mode overlapping and an angularly "flat-band" resonance at the excitation wavelength over an angular range of 15. Thus, we report experimentally an absorption of 35% at 460 nm for green QDs for an excitation at normal incidence, which is remarkably high for such a thin colour conversion film of ~400 nm (inclusive of the TiO2 grating layer), while in simulations the total absorption ranges from 36% (at normal incidence) to up to 67% within the angular range of 15. Moreover, we obtain a highly linear polarized light emission (along the stripes) without the need of filtering, with a total PL enhancement of 34.3 times within the field of view of ± 33 and a maximum enhancement of 141 times at 525 nm wavelength and viewing angle of 17 (i.e., k y k 0 ⁄ =0.29) in comparison to a bare QD film. Our work suggests that high-index dielectric nanoantennas can be used to create efficient resonant structures suitable for colour conversion in practical applications such as microLED displays and sensitiser-assisted detectors. Chemicals: Cadmium oxide (CdO) (99.9%), zinc acetate [Zn(Ac)2] (99.99%), 1-octadecene (ODE), selenium (Se) (99.99% trace metals basis), sulfur (S) (99.98% trace metals basis), oleic acid (OA) (90%), trioctylphosphine (TOP)(90%), octane (98%), hexane, and ethanol (EtOH) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. The green QDs were synthesised according to a method reported in the literature with some modifications. The substrates with TiO2 nanoantenna structures were cleaned by isopropanol, dried, and treated with oxygen plasma for 1 minutes. Before deposition, the as-prepared QD dispersion was firstly centrifugated at 6,000 rpm for 1 min to remove the large aggregates. Then, the patterned substrate was spin-coated with ~50 μl of the above QDs at 2,000 rpm for 1 min. After that, the as-made QD film was dried under vacuum for 15 min. The samples were finally stored in a dry box before characterisations. Film deposition: 2×2 cm 2 quartz substrates were first cleaned by deionised (DI) water, acetone, and isopropanol in an ultra-sonication bath. Then amorphos TiO2 film with a thickness of ~200 nm was deposited by ion-assisted sputtering (Oxford Optofab3000). Subsequently, a 30 nmthick film of chromium (Cr) was deposited by electron-beam (e-beam) evaporation (Angstrom EvoVac). For nanostructure patterning, a negative electron-beam resist, hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ, Dow Corning XR-1541-006) was spin cast on the quartz/TiO2/Cr substrate at 5000 rpm for 60 seconds, followed by baking at 120 °C for 2 minutes and subsequently at 180 °C for another 2 minutes. This results in a HSQ film thickness of ~150 nm. The sample then underwent e-beam lithography (Elionix ELS-7000) with a voltage of 100 keV and a current of 500 pA. Finally, exposed HSQ patterns was developed in a homemade salty developer (1 wt.% NaOH and 4 wt.% NaCl in DI water) for 4 minutes, followed by a generous rinse in DI water. Oxford PlasmaPro 100 Cobra) was used to transfer the EBL patterns to Cr layer using a mixture of Cl2 and O2 gases (Cl2: 20 sccm, O2: 2 sccm, 14 mTorr). Subsequently, using Cr as a hard mask, the pattern was transferred to the TiO2 layer using CHF3 gas (25 sccm, 25 mTorr). Finally, Cr together with any residual HSQ were removed by immersing the sample in liquid chromium etchant (Sigma Aldrich) for 4 minutes. The sample was rinsed in water and IPA and blown dry with nitrogen gas. All the numerical simulations were performed using COMSOL Multiphysics. We built a 2D model in the yz plane (because of the invariance of the stripes along the x direction), and simulated only a unit-cell containing one stripe, with the use of periodic boundary conditions in the y direction and of ports in the z direction. For these simulations (Figs. The total reflection R was recorded by the lower port (in glass n s = 1.46) and the total transmission T by the upper port (in air n air = 1). In order to compare with the experimental measurements where the angle of incidence was defined in air (i.e., before entering the glass substrate), we converted the angles of incidence in our simulations to: arcsin [ n s n air sin(θ)] ≃ 1.46θ (approximation valid for small angles). The total absorption A was obtained by energy conservation as A = 1 -T -R. To calculate the different absorption contributions coming from TiO2 or QDs (i.e., the only materials with non-zero extinction coefficient κ), we integrated the absorption within the TiO2 or QD regions S TiO 2 and S QD , respectively, according to the formula: with S i = S TiO 2 or S i = S QD using the normalization constant C such that A = Q TiO2 + Q QD . The BFP emission simulations (Fig. Supporting Information (Design principles, additional sample and optical characterisations, and absorption calculations) is available free of charge. following simulations in this Section 1, the period is set to Λ = 270 nm, and a linearly polarized light coming from the below substrate is considered, with wavevector k and electric field E along x-axis. The angle θ is defined as the angle of incidence with respect to the plane of incidence (e.g. the yz plane in this schematics). The grating parameters such as the period Λ and filling factor F = W/Λ, (W being the width of the high-index stripes), are chosen to be Λ = 270 nm and W = 190 nm (F ∼ 0.7) in order to be in the resonant regime for the wavelengths of interest (i.e. for the blue light wavelength λ ∼ 460 nm and green light wavelength λ ∼ 530 nm). This corresponds to the case where lateral Bloch modes are being excited by the evanescent first diffraction order. Indeed, the firstorder cutoff wavelength λ c 1 beyond which one enters the deep subwavelength (non-resonant) regime is λ c 1 ∼ 586.7 nm for transverse electric (TE) modes can be excited by incident light with electric field along the x-axis, as depicted in Figure shows the corresponding angle-resolved reflection (transmission) spectrum for a grating structure with H = 200 nm, also simulated for x-polarized incident light as in Figure We next interfaced the high-index contrast grating with a slab waveguide made of the low index material, as depicted in Figure One can use the equation above to have an approximate idea of the minimum slab thickness In Figure In Figure To appreciate what the absorption value of 67% means, obtained in our design near the pumping wavelength λ ∼ 460 nm and at incident angle θ = 7.3°, we can calculate the propagation distance z p necessary for the light to be attenuated (i.e. absorbed) by the same amount when propagating through a bare film of QDs. For an incident light intensity I 0 , the intensity in a homogeneous medium decays exponentially with the propagation distance z as: 5 I(z) = I 0 e -μz where the attenuation (or absorption) coefficient μ reads μ = 