The distortion of corner-sharing octahedra in isovalent perovskite transition-metal oxide interfaces is proven to be an excellent way to tailor the electronic and magnetic properties of their heterostructures. Combining depth-dependent magnetic characterization technique; (polarized neutron reflectivity, PNR); and theoretical calculation (density functional theory), we report interface-driven magnetic exchange interactions due to a modification in the octahedral rotations at the interfaces in an isovalent La0.67Ca0.33MnO3 (LCMO)/La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 (LSMO) heterostructures. PNR results determined a length scale of ~ 8 unit cells at the interface, which demonstrated a modification in magnetic properties. The results also predicted a low-temperature exchange bias for these ferromagnetic heterostructures with a maximum exchange bias for the heterostructure, which showed an enhanced antiferromagnetic coupling at the interfaces. The emergent interfacial phenomena in transition metal perovskite oxide (ABO3) heterostructures are induced by the strong coupling between spin, orbital, charge and lattice degrees of freedom These structural modifications lead to a decrease in the electronic bandwidth (W) as W ∝ cos[0.5 (π -< β >)] d 3.5 ⁄ In the case of ABO3 heterostructures, which offer additional means to tune the lattice structure, the oxygen octahedral rotation can be regulated either by interfacial strain or by interfacial oxygen octahedral coupling (OOC) The purely structural proximity at interfaces has been known as a -doping strategy, which controls the OOC and provides enhanced magnetization at the interfaces in manganite heterostructures Chemical depth profiles obtained for different heterostructures from XRR data were subsequently used to fit the PNR data by varying the parameters within a constrained range. Further, the atomic-scale structure of the heterostructure was investigated by atomic resolution electron microscopic studies using aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope (JEOL-ARM) to acquire high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) images. A representative cross-section HAADF image of heterostructure S3 (a multilayer) is shown in Fig. Therefore, combining scattering techniques (x-ray and neutron) with a direct imaging technique (STEM) for the structural characterization of LSMO/LCMO heterostructures clearly suggested high-quality interfaces. heterostructures (Fig. The difference between spin-dependent PNR data (i.e., R + -R -) provides the detailed magnetization depth profile of the heterostructure. As expected, PNR data at 300 K show the negligible difference between R + and R -and are used to obtain the detailed NSLD depth profiles for the heterostructures S1 and S2, shown in Figs. Remarkably, we find the emergence of a finite magnetization (FM order) for an interfacial LCMO layer of thickness ~ 32 Å (~ 8 u.c.) in S1 at a temperature of 200 K (shaded region in interfaces in these heterostructures. This rules out the possibility of asymmetric chemical structure at the interfaces as a plausible reason for the observed effect and thus it indicates the asymmetric magnetic nature is an intrinsic behaviour. To confirm such magnetic asymmetric behaviour in these isovalent manganite heterostructures, which depend on the sequential growth of layers, we have studied the depth-dependent magnetic properties in a multilayer (heterostructure S3) providing two different interfaces in a single heterostructure (Fig. In ABO3 perovskite manganite oxides, the local magnetic exchange interactions are enhanced within the spatially confined regions of the suppressed octahedral rotations (increase in B-O-B bond angles) PNR results from three different heterostructures (S1, S2 and S3) of LSMO-LCMO based system confirmed the evolution of asymmetric interfacial ferromagnetism in the LCMO layer at the interfaces well above the Tc (~ 140 K). Depth-dependent structure of the heterostructures studied by reflectivity (both PNR and XRR) and EDS suggested intermixing at the interfaces, which can influence the magnetization at the interfaces. However, the length scale involved in interfacial magnetic modulation is found to be ~ 32 Å, which is about ~ 600% of the interface roughness (intermixing) observed for these heterostructures. Further, the DFT calculations suggested different octahedral rotations at interfaces, which modify the AFM and FM exchange interactions at different interfaces and thus exhibiting different and asymmetric magnetization as well as exchange bias in these systems. In summary, we demonstrate the interface-driven coupling which controls the magnetic properties of isovalent correlated manganite heterostructures and exhibits exchange bias at low temperatures. The spin-dependent PNR technique enables us to determine a length scale of ~ 8 u.c. for the interfacial LCMO region, which exhibits either enhanced or reduced moment depending on the stacking-dependent interface coupling. The PNR results also suggest an FM behaviour of the interfacial LCMO region at the LSMO/LCMO interface above the transition temperature of LCMO. Furthermore, the DFT calculations reveal that the difference in magnetization at two interfaces (LCMO/LSMO and LSMO/LCMO) in these isovalent manganite heterostructures is due to the different magnitude of nearest-neighbour exchange interactions as a result of interface-driven deformation of oxygen octahedral at the interfaces. CSR, Indore for sample preparation using pulsed laser deposition and x-ray reflectivity measurements, respectively. We acknowledge the use of facilities within the Eyring Material Center at Arizona State University. (f), respectively. We obtained nice Keissig oscillations corresponding to the thickneses of the layers even with a poor ESLD contrast at interfaces for these heterostructures. We also obtained a small Bragg peak due to 5 bilayers repeat for heterostructure S3 (multilayer) in Fig. The absence of 2 nd order Bragg peak for XRR data reconfirms the bilayer thickness of ~ 150 Å for heterostructure S3 and a well-defined multilayer structure. (LCMO) region in La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 (LSMO)/LCMO heterostructures with different stacking sequence using polarized neutron reflectivity (PNR) experiments. PNR results suggest a finite magnetic moment for an interfacial LCMO layer of thickness ~ 8 u.c. at the LCMO/LSMO interface above and S2 (LCMO/LSMO/MgO), as well as multilayer S3 ([LSMO/LCMO]5/MgO), are given in Table 1 and the schematic of these heterostructures is shown in the inset of Fig 1(a). A KrF excimer laser (wavelength = 248 nm, pulse width = 20 ns) was used to ablate the high-purity LCMO for in-plane and LSMO > LCMO > interface for out-of-plane bond angle. As a result, θout governs the experimentally determined magnetization ordering in LCMO/LSMO system.