Materials able to rapidly switch between thermally conductive states by external stimuli such as electric or magnetic fields can be used as all-solid-state thermal switches and open a myriad of applications in heat management, power generation and cooling. Here, we show that the large magnetoresistance that occurs in the highly conducting semimetal ⍺-WSi2 single crystals leads to dramatically large changes in thermal conductivity at temperatures <100 K. At temperatures <20 K, where electron-phonon scattering is minimized, the thermal conductivity switching ratio between zero field and a 9T applied field can be >7. We extract the electronic and lattice components of the from the thermal conductivity measurements and show that the Lorenz number for this material approximates the theoretical value of L0. From the heat capacity and thermal diffusivity, the speed of thermal conductivity switching is estimated to range from 1 x 10 -4 seconds at 5 K to 0.2 seconds at 100 K for a 5-mm long sample. This work shows that WSi2, a highly conducting multi-carrier semimetal, is a promising thermal switch component for low-temperature applications such cyclical adiabatic demagnetization cooling, a technique that would enable replacing 3 He-based refrigerators. Compared to the extensive research focused on transistor materials in which the electronic conductance can be actively switched between various states, there has been considerably less effort focused on designing materials, systems, and concepts whose thermal conductance can be actively switched to enable the control of heat flow through a device. Here, we focus on materials whose thermal conductivity changes under applied magnetic fields at temperatures below 10K. This temperature and field range matches that needed for continuously operating cyclical adiabatic demagnetization refrigerators (ADR's) that operate below 2K, using the same magnetic field for the magnetocaloric material (a paramagnet like gadolinium gallium garnet Gd3Ga5O12) as for the switch. ADR's enable electronic loads to reach sub-Kelvin temperatures without the use of One possible mechanism to actively change the thermal conductivity of a material is by exploiting the electrical magnetoresistance of a material whose primary carriers of thermal conductivity are electrons. In a nonmagnetic metal the total thermal conductivity (κ $!$%& ) comes from the electronic component (κ ' ), while the remainder comes from the phonon contribution to thermal conductivity, in which lattice vibrations conduct heat through the material (κ & ): Each electron that travels through the material carries a charge e and an amount of heat kBT, so that if the scattering mechanisms that limit the mean free path for momentum and energy transport are the same, the Wiedemann-Franz 10 relationship holds between electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity: Here T is the temperature, σ is the electrical conductivity, and L is the Lorenz ratio, which for free electrons is L0 = 2.44 10 -8 V 2 m -2 . To maximize the switching ratio between the "on" and the "off" state of the switch (SR ≡ κ !" /κ !## = κ $!$%& (0)/κ $!$%& (B) ) of a magnetoresistive switch, one must have a very metallic material, where ke >kl ; this is because the lowest value achievable for κ $!$%& (B) is kl. Because the range of κ & in most materials lies between ~0.1 to 1000 W m -1 K -1 from 1 to 300 K, the Wiedemann Franz law predicts that the electronic resistivity would have to range from 10 -5 to 10 -9 Ω m to meet the condition κ ' = κ & in the high conductance state. At the same time the material must have a large magnetoresistance, MR = [ρ(B) -ρ(0)]/ρ(0). These two requirements are mutually counter-indicated in most materials, since a high MR comes from a high mobility, and good metals in which ke >kl have much lower mobilities than semiconductors because their large Fermi surfaces result in intensive electron-phonon scattering. Three classes of solutions have been proposed to circumvent this dilemma. The first is to use the giant magnetoresistance in magnetic multilayers such as Co/Cr, in which a cross-plane SR value of ~1.8 gas been observed. Superconductors, such as Nb 12 , subject to a magnetic field greater than their critical field, become normal metals leading to an appreciable reduction in thermal κ ' . Superconducting Sn wires, In switches and Zn-foil switches have been made and studied 13 but except at temperatures below 100 millikelvin, their SR's are relatively modest; in all cases, switching can only occur at temperatures below the superconducting transition temperature. The third solution is to use topological Weyl and Dirac semimetals including PtSn4, 14 BixSb1-x Non-magnetic, non-superconducting, non-topological semimetallic materials, like Bi, Here we explore the magnetothermal conductivity switching in the compensated semimetal WSi2, a material recently established to exhibit axis-dependent conduction polarity. Recent studies have found that at 2 K, certain crystals of WSi2 exhibit a high transverse electronic MR of 4,000-8,000% at 14 T, where %MR = 100%*[r(B)-r(0)]/r(0). The thermal conductivity switching ratio is larger in the crystal with fewer defects, on account of its lower baseline electronic resistivity and larger corresponding magnetoresistance. Negligible differences in the thermal switching ratio or temperature dependence are observed along the [100] or [001] directions. Both MR and SR decrease with increasing temperature, although both crystals retain an SR close to 1.1 at room temperature. We show that the Lorenz number for this material closely matches the free electron value, thereby indicating minimal ambipolar effects that contribute to thermal conductivity. We also calculate the thermal response time from the specific heat and thermal diffusivity, and show that for a 5 mm 3 sample, switching can occur in less than a second at room temperature and much faster at lower temperatures. Overall, this work shows that ultraclean, compensated semimetallic compounds such as WSi2 show great promise as heat switches. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES WSi2 crystals were grown using a Xenon Optical Floating Zone Furnace using a previously described procedure. [001] directions using a diamond wire saw to maximize sample resistance, and these samples were polished using 3 mm diamond grit in oil and 0.05 mm alumina slurry on a precision lapping and polishing machine to minimize contact resistance. Contacts to the surface of the crystal were made using Transene GE-40 gold-epoxy paste. Transverse magnetoresistance measurements were performed using a 4-probe geometry in a Quantum Design 14T PPMS from 2-300K and from 0-9T using the DC resistivity option. Thermal conductivity measurements were performed from 2-300K and from 0-9T using the thermal transport option (TTO) in a Quantum Design 9T PPMS. ⍺-WSi2 crystallizes into a body-centered tetragonal I4/mmm crystal structure (Figure This material has a metallic band structure with unique band curvatures that give rise to simultaneous electron and hole conduction along different crystallographic axes (Figure ) for crystal 1 were 37.6 for the [100] direction (Figure [100] direction. Above 21K, the magnetoresistance effect starts to fall as electron-phonon scattering decreases the mobility of the carriers in the material at higher temperatures, as occurs in nearly all metallic materials. 25 direction (red). The magnetic field-induced reduction in both thermal and electrical conductivities occur across similar temperature ranges (2-100K), with the effects being most pronounced at low temperature. Importantly, although the magnetoelectrical resistance in the material increases quadratically with magnetic field and does not saturate, the thermal conductivity decreases asymptotically as magnetic field is increased. This is because κ ' is nearly eliminated, leaving only κ & , which remains unchanged in the presence of a magnetic field (Figure A large 9000-10000% magnetoresistance in WSi2 at low temperatures of 2-21K and fields of 0-9T can be attributed to the electron-hole compensation in this two-carrier material and gives rise to an accompanying 7-fold decrease in the material's thermal conductivity, which closely follows the Wiedemann-Franz Law. Furthermore, a WSi2 crystal with a larger relative resistivity ratio has a larger SR, indicating that minimization of defects during crystal growth will provide an opportunity to enhance the magnitude of thermal switching. The appreciable change in the thermal conductivity in the presence of a magnetic field, along with the material's ability to rapidly switch between thermally conductive and less conductive states, makes WSi2 a promising material system for thermal switching applications at low temperatures.