We observe significant, 6.5% -12%, differences between skyrmion and antiskyrmion Hall angles in existing experimental data. To account for them, the Thiele equation is generalized with the transverse velocity component in the collective coordinate of magnetization vector. The corresponding generalized Hall angle is formulated, and its consequences are compared to the data. A plausible physical origin is provided for explaining the Hall angle differences. S KYRMIONS are particle-like extended spin textures that have attracted much attention due to small size, topological protection and low operational costs. One of their signature properties is the skyrmion Hall effect, that pushes skyrmion and antiskyrmion toward opposite transverse directions. This Hall effect can be conveniently described by the Hall angle tan θ H = v ⊥ /v ∥ where v ⊥ and v ∥ are transverse and longitudinal velocities with respect to an applied current. There exist small number of systematic experimental Hall angle data that contain both skyrmion and antiskyrmion Attentive observations reveal unexpected disparity between the skyrmion Hall angle and the antiskyrmion Hall angle with the same experimental environments. A clean data set is provided in with their % difference as This is a strikingly large difference with the naive expectation that the two Hall angles are supposed to be the same. Also, in one of the earliest measurements for the skyrmion Hall effect Thus we see that skyrmion Hall angles are consistently much larger (by 6.5% -12%) than those of the antiskyrmion. In a seminal paper where The repeated indices are summed over. The resulting Thiele equation is here we consider 2 dimensions (i, j, k = x, y). G ij = ε ij Q is related to the Magnus force with the skyrmion charge that is symmetric and has the same values for diagonal components for the fundamental Néel or Bloch skyrmions. F i = -γ 0 d 2 x(∂ i n j )H j is external force that can include forces due to various spin torques. The integrals are over the unit Skyrmion volume. Internal forces due to anisotropy and exchange energies, internal demagnetizing fields, magnetostriction do not contribute. For ⃗ F = F x without loss of generality, we get the Hall angle from (4) (for i = y) as Note that this Hall angle cannot explain the disparity described above as it gives the same value for skyrmion and antiskyrmion with opposite signs. To accommodate the disparity between skyrmion and antiskyrmion Hall angles, we generalize the collective skyrmion coordinate X i as Without altering the constraints, M i ∂ t M i = 0, and M i ∂ j M i = 0, the Thiele equation ( where the new terms come from There are two new terms. (1) G ij Rε jk v k = -QRv i is parallel to the applied force F i . It is proportional to the skyrmion charge and thus either an accelerating or decelerating force. (2) D ij Rε jk v k = DRε ik v k is an additional transverse contribution added to Q. This turns out to be quadratic to the magnetization vector ⃗ n. Thus it is independent of the skyrmion charge and universal transverse force pushing both skyrmion and antiskyrmion toward the same transverse direction. The generalized Hall angle is One can check it reduces to (5) for R = 0. This include the new universal transverse contribution αDR and the longitudinal one -QR as well. We estimate R in It is a surprisingly large contribution. Similar analysis with the data mentioned above After seeing the significant contributions of αDR, we explorer consequences of the existence of the transverse velocity component R near the angular momentum compensation point T A of ferrimagnet GdFeCo/Pt considered again in Fig. [2] modeled the Magnus force as ⃗ F g = s n Q(ẑ × ⃗ v) and the viscose force as ⃗ F d = s t αD⃗ v. Thus, the spin (and temperature) dependence can be incorporated by Q → s n Q and αD → s t αD. Thus, the Hall angle (8) turns into Repeating analysis, R = -0.035 and (s t /s n )αD = -9.68. The Hall angles are plotted in Fig. We observe the skyrmion Hall angle vanishes when s n /s t > 0, while that of antiskyrmion does when s n /s t < 0. Thus skyrmion Hall angle vanishes at a smaller temperature than the antiskyrmion. The compensation temperature s n (T A ) = 0 lies in between them, and the Hall angles are the same tan θ H = R < 0. Thus there is a triangle structure formed by the Hall angles near T A , illustrated in Fig. IV. CONCLUSION By introducing the transverse velocity component, we account for the surprising disparity between the skyrmion and antiskyrmion Hall angles. The corresponding universal transverse force estimates to be 2.9% -5.4% of skyrmion Hall effect. This can play crucial roles for fast moving skyrmions in, say, the next generation skyrmion racetrack devices. Is there a candidate responsible for this universal transverse force? Yes! The so-called Hall viscosity was introduced in skyrmion physics in We advertise to perform systematic precision experiments for skyrmion and antiskyrmion together to verify the universal transverse force and Hall viscosity.