Donor-acceptor (D-A) structured molecules are essential components in organic electronics. The respective molecular structure of these molecules and their synthesis are primarily determined by the intended area of application. Typically, D-A molecules promote charge separation and transport in organic photovoltaics (OPV) or organic field-effect transistors (OFET). D-A molecules showing a larger twist angle between D and A units are, e.g., extremely important for the development of high internal quantum efficiency in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). A prototypical molecule of this D-A type is DCzDCN (5-(4,6diphenyl-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)benzene-1,3-dinitrile). In most cases, these molecules are only investigated regarding their electronic and structural interaction in bulk aggregates but not in ultra-thin films supported by a metallic substrate. Here, we present growth and electronic structure studies of DCzDCN on a Cu(100) surface. In a complementary approach, through the use of Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Spectroscopy (STM and STS), we were able to view both the adsorption geometry and the local electronic states of the adsorbed molecules in direct comparison with the integral electronic structure of the DCzDCN/CU(100) interface using Ultraviolet and Inverse Photoemission Spectroscopy (UPS and IPS). The orientation of the molecules with the donor part towards the substrate results in a chiral resolution at the interface due to the molecular as well as the substrate symmetry and additional strong molecular electrostatic forces. Thus, the formation of various bulk-unlike homochiral structures and the appearance of hybrid interface states (HIS) modifies the molecular electronic properties of the DCzDCN/Cu(100) system significantly compared to that of a single DCzDCN molecule. This may be not only useful for optoelectronic applications but also in organic spintronics. Donor/acceptor (D-A) systems and molecules are among the most important building blocks in the field of molecular electronics. The choice of D-A-molecules and interfaces is very diverse, depending on the application. Especially for D-A systems used in optoelectronic devices, research ranges from nanostructured molecular heterojunctions Fig. At the early stage of growth (Fig. In the selected energy range, units localized on the phthalonitrile biphenyl moiety are, in particular, dominant for the unoccupied states. Therefore, we attributed the brighter parts of the molecular structures to the phthalonitrile unit. This means the preferred adsorption geometry of the DCzDCN molecules is upright in a face-on position with respect to the carbazole units on the Cu(100) surface. Furthermore, in Fig. The high-resolution STM images of the cluster units identified in Fig. The clear resolution of the respective double-ring structure of the carbazole units in direct contact with the substrate is evident. The angled (see Fig. The evaluation of the individual ensembles in Fig. The formation of molecule clusters on flat terraces in the sub-ML range indicates interaction between the DCzDCN molecules and the Cu(100) surface. To identify any kind of interaction between adsorbed molecules and metal substrates, the coverage dependence of the electronic structure upon adsorption is measured. Therefore, UPS and IPS spectra were subsequently acquired with increasing coverage to determine the molecular orbitals and possible hybrid interface states (HIS), as well as changes in the surface dipole .  will change by any kind of charge transfer between substrate and molecule and/or charge redistribution at the organic/metal interface, and is, in addition, often a first indication of the orientation of polar molecules like DCzDCN on the surface. The coverage dependence of UPS spectra is shown in Therefore, within the framework of this assessment, the direction of a CT will be from the DCzDCN to the Cu-substrate. Such a CT would decrease  Because we see an overall decrease of  (Fig. Looking at the development of the valence band structure in Fig. Since the determination of electronic densities of states by UPS always represents only an integral snapshot over a larger surface area, the region up to 3 eV below the Fermi level was investigated by means of tunneling spectroscopy (STS). As a single molecule spectroscopy, STS allows direct access to electronic states with submolecular resolution. Thus, the role of individual molecular regions in the framework of the total DOS can be better identified. In Fig. We are aware that the validity of dI/dV measurements is critical at higher bias voltages. The validity of the commonly used Tersoff-Hamann model 27 may already be exceeded at the voltages used. However, the PES/IPES measurements provide independent information about the surface/molecular states. In this combination, assignments of states clearly beyond 1 eV above or below EF are possible This effect can be attributed to a polarization effect by the surrounding molecules, i.e., the influence of the transient local electrostatic environment (screening) induced as a response to instantaneous localized charge added or removed during tunneling spectroscopy. This effect is well known in PES experiments and has recently also been observed by STS performed on molecular adsorbates This can be compared with the energy levels found for the multilayer system (Multi-L) (see bulk-unlike structures with modified electronic properties were formed because of chiral resolution at the interface. The question of effects on the excited molecular states as well as the directly related optical properties of the system DCzDCN/Cu(100) are therefore exciting questions to be answered in case of using such a system for further, maybe new (opto-) electronics applications. In further studies, this system will, in addition, be studied in the context of a possible chemically induced spin-polarization. Experiments were performed by using an ultrahigh vacuum multi-chamber system (PREVAC, Rogów, Poland), allowing sample transport among preparation and analysis chambers under a base pressure below 2•10 -10 mbar. Single crystal Cu(100) (MaTecK, Jülich, 99.999% purity, <0.1° orientation accuracy, <0.03 μm surface roughness) was cleaned by repeated cycles of Ar+ ion bombardment at 1 kV and subsequent annealing to 500°C. The quality of the crystal surface was examined by using photoelectron spectroscopy and scanning tunneling microscopy. DCzDCN molecules (Luminescence Technology Corp. New Taipei City, Taiwan, sublimated 99%) were thermally evaporated at 240°C and deposited under UHV conditions onto the clean Cu(100) single crystal surface kept at room temperature. The deposition rate was controlled by a using quartz microbalance and by a comparison of STM/UPS measurements. Photoemission studies were performed with a hemispherical energy analyzer PHOIBOS 150. (SPECS Surface Nano Analysis GmbH, Berlin) For ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, a conventional gas discharge lamp was used with an excitation energy of 21.22 eV for the He I line. During photoelectron collection, the chamber pressure was kept at 10 -10 mbar, and on samples -6 V bias was applied to ensure accurate determination of the low kinetic energy cutoff. Work function has been determined from secondary electron cut-off in normal emission. Inverse photoelectron spectroscopy measurements were performed using a homemade setup equipped with an EGPS-2B electron source (Kimball Physics, Wilton, USA) with a barium oxide cathode. The sample was moved after each scan to avoid film damage. Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy in situ measurements were performed by The optimized single molecular geometry calculations for the DCzDCN were carried out using DFT with a Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional and the def2-TZVPP basis set, as implemented under GAUSSIAN03 