ScaleLat (Scale Lattice) is a computer program written in C for performing the atomic structure analysis of multi-phase system or high entropy alloys (HEAs). The program implements an atomic cluster extraction algorithm to obtain all independent and symmetry-reduced characteristic chemical structures for the complex atomic configurations which are usually obtained from molecular dynamics or kinetic Monte-Carlo simulations for supercell containing more than 10 4 atoms. ScaleLat employes an efficient and unique chemical structure matching algorithm to map all extracted atomic clusters from a large supercell (>10 4 atoms) to a representative small one (~ 10 3 or less), providing the possibility to directly use the highly accurate quantum mechanical methods to study the electronic, magnetic, and mechanical properties of multicomponent alloys with complex microstructures. We demonstrate the capability of ScaleLat code by conducting both the atomic structure analysis and chemical structure matching procedure for Fe-12.8 at.% Cr binary alloy and equiatomic CrFeCoNiCu high entropy alloy, and by successfully obtaining the representatively supercells containing 10 2 ~10 3 atoms of the two alloys. Overall, ScaleLat program provides a universal platform to efficiently project all essential chemical structures of large complex atomic structures to a relatively easy-handling small supercell for quantum mechanical calculations of various user interested properties. Metallic alloys consisting of two or more principal components are widely used as both structural and functional materials due their outstanding mechanical, chemical and physical properties Thermodynamically, the formation of MEA or HEA is mainly attributed to the high configurational entropy in the fully disordered multicomponent solid solution structure. So far, experimentally investigated and verified HEAs are highly limited to quite few systems including VNbMoTaW Investigating the atomic structures of multi-component alloys is essential to reveal the complexity in their interatomic chemical interactions, and which is also critical to establish possible quantitative relationships between their properties and compositions or microstructure. Computer simulations based on first-principles calculations or classic molecular dynamics simulations play the vital role together with experimental study in understanding those aspects. The first-principles calculations, which are usually based on density functional theory, are considered as non-empirical method. Applying the first-principles method directly to multi-component alloys with a multiphase microstructure or fully disordered lattice structure faces great challenges, because both the time and spatial scales handled in typical quantum mechanical calculation are highly limited due the high computational costs and complexity in algorithm For example, to properly simulate the atomic structure evolution in Fe-Cr binary alloy at the typical phase separation composition (> 10.0 at.% Cr) and annealing temperature (600-800 K), it requires a supercell model containing at least 10 5 atoms Otherwise, addressing the microstructure of HEAs has been done on a simulation cell containing more than 10 4 atoms In this paper, we proposed a novel chemical structural mapping and matching methodology to efficiently and accurately describe the atomic structure of multicomponent or multi-phase alloys by directly projecting the microstructure obtained from the molecular dynamics simulations or Monte-Carlo method in long time and large spatial scales to small supercell model within less than 1000 atoms. Notably, for such a small supercell, the first-principles methods may be used to calculate the mechanical, physical, and chemical properties. Our methodology partly resembles that of cluster expansion in terms of characteristic atomic cluster extraction algorithm. However, the proposed method deviates from that of cluster expansion in the sense that the additional atomic structure matching algorithm is also integrated with the atomic cluster mapping process, enabling the user to physically rescale the dimensions of the initial large supercell to a specified size containing only few hundred atoms. Besides the aforementioned rescaling algorithm for supercell dimensions, the algorithm also provides additional atomic structural analysis abilities including the Warren-Cowley short-range order parameters and atomic structure files for all symmetry-reduced chemical clusters. Here, we implemented the algorithm in a self-contained software package named ScaleLat. ScaleLat is considered as a very useful tool to further boost our ability to use quantum mechanical methods for investigating the physical and chemical properties of HEAs and multi-phase structures in different fields. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the workflow of ScaleLat and the implementation of structural mapping and matching algorithm are discussed. The use of ScaleLat is illustrated in Section 3, employing Fe-Cr binary alloys and CrFeCoNiCu alloy as examples. The conclusion is presented in Section 4. The workflow of ScaleLat software is illustrated in Figure The functionality of ScaleLat software relies on two major computational modules including cluster extraction module and cluster mapping module, as shown in Figure Cluster extraction module picks up an atomic cluster centered at a randomly selected lattice site in the supercell model. The size of the atomic cluster is defined by a cutoff radius (rcut). Users are allowed to use different rcut values for the task. It is worth mentioning that the computational costs are expected to increase rapidly with the increase of rcut value. For each extracted atomic cluster, the atomic percentages of all constituting elements are evaluated. A principal element is assigned to the atomic cluster, allowing each atomic cluster to be allocated to a specific atomic cluster set. For any multi-component atomic cluster, it could be assigned to different atomic cluster sets simultaneously, depending on possible options for principal element. Then, the point symmetry operations are employed to atomic registries of all clusters, removing all symmetrically equivalent atomic clusters in the atomic cluster set. The symmetry reduction of the cluster set is realized using Eq. ( Regarding the symmetry reduction step, the current algorithm only considers the point symmetry operations of simple cubic and orthorhombic point groups. Specifically, for simple cubic symmetry, the point group includes C2 and C4 rotational axes in x, y, and z directions. Meanwhile, the simple orthorhombic point group contains C2 axes in x, y, and z directions. Other symmetry elements such as mirror planes, inversion center and rotation-inversion operation are not considered, because those point operations are not expected to be seen very often in HEAs or multi-phase microstructures. Otherwise, the employed point operations in the current algorithm are sufficient to perform the symmetry analysis for all extracted atomic clusters in multi-component alloys. In the final step, the cluster extraction module outputs all symmetrically non-equivalent atomic clusters obtained from the input supercell model by the order of the atomic concentration of principal constituting elements. For a typical multi-component alloy, the atomic cluster set may usually consist of 10 2 ~10 3 cluster configurations (chemical structure types). The cluster mapping module performs a chemical structure matching algorithm by mapping the symmetry reduced cluster set to a user defined small supercell usually containing no more than 10 3 atoms. This trial supercell is defined with respect to a unit cell by N1 × N2 × N3, where Ni represents an integer. The starting chemical composition of the smaller trail supercell is built as close to that of benchmark supercell as possible. The chemical structure matching algorithm realized in the ScaleLat software ensures that all symmetry independent atomic clusters obtained from large supercell model are properly mapped onto the user defined small supercell. This goal is achieved by implementing a self-consistent chemical structure matching algorithm that uses a direct atomic swapping technique to update the atomic configuration of small supercell in each iteration according to the benchmark atomic cluster set. During each structural iteration, the atomic cluster set is obtained for the updated atomic configuration of small supercell using cluster extraction module. Then, the standard deviation (STD) and mean absolute error (MAE) are calculated, as given by Eq. ( ( ) A successful atomic structure update is implied by the reduction of both STD and MAE for small supercells. Otherwise, the updated atomic configuration is rejected in the iteration, and the direct swapping of a randomly selected atomic pair in the structure is Finally, it is also worth noting that the atomic configuration updating algorithm employed here for the chemical structure matching step in ScaleLat code partly resembles the well-known kinetic Monte-Carlo simulation based on Metropolis method in the sense that the new atomic structure is generated by directly swapping atomic pair in the previous iteration Here, we would like to demonstrate both the usage and capability of ScaleLat code for analyzing the chemical structures of multi-phase system and high entropy alloys. For the multi-phase system, the binary Fe-12.8 at.% Cr alloy is used, because it shows a interestingly two-phase separation mechanism between Fe-rich ferrite (α) and Cr-rich precipitates (α ′ ) by annealing Therefore, applying first-principles methods to investigate the lattice structures, electronic density of states and mechanical properties of the resulting supercells for Fe-Cr binary alloy or CrFeNiCoCu HEA remains a formidable task even on the modern high-performance computing facility. The Cr content in Fe-12.8 at.% Cr binary alloy is slightly above that of the solubility limit of Cr in ferrite-Fe matrix. Here, we use an in-house code to perform the kinetic Monte-Carlo simulations for Fe-12.8 at.% Cr alloy at 673 K by applying the direct atom swapping mechanism and embedded atom method (EAM) potentials for Cr and Fe atoms To generate the benchmark atomic structure of an equiatomic CrFeCoNiCu highentropy alloy, we first build a large supercell consisting of 108000 atoms with a facecentered cubic like lattice structure. Then, the kinetic Monte-Carlo simulation is carried out at 200 K using EAM potentials for all relevant elements Nevertheless, most chemical structures of benchmark supercell are indeed reproduced using the small trial supercells containing less than 1000 atoms for CrFeCoNiCu HEA. Beginning with a very large supercell, the ScaleLat code provides a reliable and efficient tool to fold all essential chemical structures of high entropy alloys into an easy handling small supercell by quantum mechanical methods. ScaleLat is a useful computational tool and universal platform to conduct the chemical structure analysis for multi-phase alloys or multi-component solid solutions based on the fast, efficient, and user-friendly atomic cluster extraction procedure and chemical structure matching algorithms. The most unique feature of ScaleLat is that it allows the user to mapping all characteristic chemical structures of very large supercell containing more than 10 4 atoms to a small supercell consisting of less than 10 3 atoms. Employing such a chemical structure matching method, we may use a small supercell to confidently represent the very complex atomic configurations of multi-phase or high entropy alloys obtained usually from molecular dynamics or kinetic Monte-Carlo simulations. More importantly, the reduction of supercell size for complex systems also offers the key advantage that the first-principles methods are appliable to understand the electronic structure, magnetic and mechanical properties for multi-phase structure or high entropy alloys (HEAs). For all user defined small trail supercells, only the prototype unit cell is required here to execute ScaleLat code. The unit cell is given by the standard 'CONTCAR" format. In the case of CrFeCoNiCu HEA, an FCC unit cell is adopted. POSCAR file written by OVITO ## title Finally, the job controlling parameters are all provided in the file 'Input', and the contents of 'Input' are attached below using CrFeCoNiCu HEA as the example. 