The progress in materials science has always been associated with the development of functional materials systems, which enables us to design proof-of-concept devices. To advance further, theoretical predictions of new novel materials and their experimental realization is very important. This chapter reviews the intriguing properties of rare earth-based materials and their applications in spintronics. Spintronics is an emerging technology, which exploits spin degree of freedom of an electron along with its charge property. Discovery of various physical phenomena and their industrial applications in the field of magnetic sensors, magnetic recording and non-volatile memories such as magnetic random access memory (MRAM) and spin-transfer torque (STT) MRAM opens several new directions in this field. Materials with large spin polarization, strong spin-orbit coupling, and tunable electronic and magnetic properties offer an excellent platform for the spintronics technology. Combination of rare earths with other elements such as transition metals show broad range of structural, electronic, and magnetic properties which make them excellent candidates for various spintronic applications. This chapter discusses many such materials ranging from Heusler alloys, topological insulators to two-dimensional ferromagnets and their potential applications. The review gives an insight of how rare-earth materials can play a key role in emerging future technology and have great potential in many new spintronic related applications. Rare earths (REs) consist of elements from lanthanide series (La-Lu, Ln) and including Sc and Y. Despite their name they are relatively in ample amount in earth's crust. REs in combination with other elements have been studied for many years and are still topic of great interest to many researchers because of their intriguing physical properties and application potentials Spintronics is a rapidly growing multidisciplinary field, which utilizes spin degree of freedom (DoF) of an electron instead of its charge DoF. Exploitation of spin DoF of an electron or in other words spin polarized-transport leads to many advantages over conventional electronics such as faster data operation, low energy consumption, non-volatility of data storage, high storage density The change in the electrical resistance of a material on application of a magnetic field is referred to as magnetoresistance (MR) and is of great technological importance. The larger the magnitude of MR is, the better for technological applications as it increases the device stability. Therefore, the search of material systems with larger MR is very important for technological applications. Grünberg et al., Figure In this way, one can have high and low electrical resistance, which can be read as '0' and When the non-magnetic conductive layer between two FM layers is replaced by a thin insulating layer (usually Al2O3, MgO) the structure behaves as a tunnelling junction. In this type of multilayer system, electrons tunnel through thin insulating barriers and therefore the resultant magnetoresistance is called tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR). It is worth to note here that the physics of TMR is different from the GMR effect since tunnelling is involved in the TMR effect. The breakthrough in this field took place in 1995 when Moodera et al. The spin polarization P of a system is then described as Where N ↑ and N ↓ are the density of majority and minority electrons at the Fermi level, respectively. Ferromagnetic transition metals (in the form of alloys or compounds) are commonly used as magnetic electrodes in GMR/TMR devices. Due to their intrinsic magnetism and variation in the coercive fields, rare earth materials have also been tested in such devices. Recently, Warring et al. Exploitation of the spintronic technology depends on the development of new functional materials. Theoretical predictions and experimental realization of new materials help in engineering future spintronic devices. In this section, material aspects and basic physical principles, which play an important role in the progress of spintronics, are presented and discussed. Moreover, the discussion on materials highlights how rare earth-based materials can be an integral part of emerging spintronic technology. Half-metallic (HM) ferromagnetic materials have drawn hefty attention for spintronic applications due to their exceptional electronic structures manganites (e.g. La0.7Sr0.3MnO3) GaAs) Heusler alloys (HAs) are known as multifunctional materials as these materials show diverse magnetic and electronic properties due to their tunable electronic structures and therefore are useful in various applications In 1983, de Groot et al. There are several rare earths based Heusler alloys (half, full and quaternary), which have been predicted theoretically and some of them are experimentally realized The main ingredients for a material to be a topological insulator are (i) bulk band gap, (ii) appropriate magnitude of spin orbit interactions (to invert bands), (iii) time reversal symmetry. However, in some cases, it has been observed that the introduction of strain can also tune the electronic band structures of a material and result in band inversion Non-trivial TSS were reported experimentally in some of these materials using ARPES technique and other indirect measurements such as Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillations and nuclear magnetic resonance studies ARPES is a technique which can directly probe the allowed energy and momenta along with the spin of an electron in a given material. By mapping these properties, the technique can provide detailed information about the electronic band structure and Fermi surface of this material. Liu The electronic band structures of topological materials can be directly measured by ARPES; however, for these measurements, materials should be cleaved in the desired direction, which sometimes is difficult. Also, ARPES is a sophisticated technique and not a common laboratory technique. The indirect ways to establish the topological behavior of materials is to perform transport measurements and map Fermi surface determination by measuring Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillations. For more details about SdH, one can refer to Ref. Various RE half Heusler alloys such LnPtBi (Ln= Y, Tb, Gd, Er, Lu) show paramagnetic (PM), antiferromagnetic (AFM), and ferromagnetic (FM) nature, when doped into intrinsic TIs. Paramagnetic to antiferromagnetic transition was observed in Gd doped MTI, the possible reason for the magnetic order being Gd-Gd coupling through chalcogen ions Though the magnetic proximity effect can induce magnetism in topological insulators, it is effective up to few nm down the interface only and therefore it cannot guarantee the involvement of topological surface state carriers in mediating the coupling between local moments There are various non-trivial topological materials in addition to the topological insulators. Dirac and Weyl semimetals are also examples of non-trivial topological matters, however instead of insulators, these materials are topological semimetals Topological Weyl semimetals represent another, novel quantum state, which exhibits a pressure-induced anomalous Hall effect and its quantum version when confined in a quantum well structure. A number of rare earth materials such as GdPtBi and REFeAsO shows large negative longitudinal magnetoresistance with field steering properties suggesting the presence of chiral anomaly. It has also been observed that the chiral anomaly strongly suppresses thermopower in this material. Figure Ferrimagnets consist of inequivalent magnetic sublattices with antiferromagnetic coupling between them and therefore can benefit from the properties of both ferromagnets and antiferromagnets Recently fully compensated ferrimagnet (FCF) research has drawn significant attention. Antiferromagnetic coupling of magnetic sublattices in carefully selected ferrimagnets cancels moments from different sublattices, resulting in vanishing magnetic moments These materials with vanishing moments and antiferromagnetic coupling have many advantages Therefore, magnetization in FCFs can be easily controlled by external magnetic field. Furthermore, spin polarization in these materials opens up many directions for spin based research RE-TM ferrimagnets, for example GdFeCo, TbFeCo, TbCo, GdCo, (Sm,Nd)ScGe, feature remarkable spintronic properties Experimental observation of all optical magnetization switching in GdFeCo was one of novel discoveries in ferrimagnets. The authors A spin orbit torque (SOT) assisted DW movement near TA (~260 K) has been reported in another RE-TM ferrimagnet, GdCo Perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) materials and interfaces triggered a huge interest after their experimental observation in multilayer thin films Large magnetic anisotropy is usually observed in materials with strong spin-orbit coupling such as heavy elements (rare earths, Bi, Ta, W, Pd, Pt etc.) as the strength of SOC is proportional to  2 Z 4 , where  is fine structure constant ( 0.007297) and Z is the atomic number The effective anisotropy per unit volume for a magnetic thin film sandwiched between two interfaces can be described as Rare earth iron garnets (REIGs) are promising candidates for spin torque, spin waves, data storage and logic devices as these materials show tunable saturation magnetization, Gilbert damping constant, magnetocrystalline anisotropy, and magnetostriction along with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy properties Bauer et al. shows the high-resolution X-ray diffraction (HRXRD) pattern of DyIG containing the (444) reflection of single crystalline DyIG along with the (111) reflection from GGG, SGGG and GSGG substrates, labelled as F and S, respectively. Figure Magnetic skyrmions are topologically stable swirling magnetic textures, which are a hot research topic nowadays as they present novel characteristics for use in data storage and other spintronic applications. Some rare earth materials such as DyCo3 CoGd films [151] reported a vanishing skyrmion Hall effect (Figure After the successful exfoliation of graphene in 2004, researchers have very actively started looking for two dimensional (2D) materials Therefore, these materials are in very high demand for next generation slim and flexible technological devices. For this reason, a variety of 2D materials have been investigated and engineered for specific properties during the past few years. A two-dimensional magnet (2DM) was experimentally obtained recently. The first intrinsic magnetic order in monolayer/fewlayer materials was experimentally observed in Cr2Ge2Te6 The authors studied structural, transport and magnetic properties of bulk (multilayer) and few layer GdSi2 and EuSi2. The magnetic and transport properties of GdSi2 are summarized in It can be noted that a large variation in the Curie temperature, TC, is observed upon changing the applied magnetic field, indicating 2D ferromagnetism Based on the above discussion, it is obvious that despite of extensive studies on rare earths, the materials described in this review hold promises and need to be further explored. They feature a wealth of properties, ranging from superconductivity to topological magnetism, enabling them as potential candidates for many existing and new technological applications. Strong spin orbit coupling in these compounds results in a variety of novel physical phenomena for spintronics applications. Many rare earths based Heusler alloys, which show semiconducting behavior with very small band gaps, can be investigated theoretically and experimentally for their non-trivial topological states obtained by tuning their electronic structures. The coupling between 4f electrons of rare earths and 3d/4d electrons of transition metals make them prime candidates for investigating antiferromagnetic dynamics by tuning angular momenta and magnetization of the magnetic sublattices. The large magnetic moments of rare earths single them out for magnetic topological phase and two-dimensional magnets. It is noteworthy that rare earth materials are presently used to study several new aspects of physics, and that they open new perspectives for novel technologies. Indeed, combining different properties of rare earths and integrating them with other materials leads to intriguing new phenomena. theoretically calculated total spin moment (mt), spin moment of individual atoms (mR, mX, mV and mZ for R, X, V, and Z atoms, respectively), magnetization energy and total magnetic moment (Mt) calculated from Slater-Pauling rule. Here FM: ferromagnetic, FiM: ferrimagnetic, HM: half metal, AHM: antiferromagnetic half metal, and MSC: magnetic semiconductor. The table is adapted from Ref.