Electrical control of the non-trivial topology in Weyl antiferromagnet is of great interests to develop next-generation spintronic devices. Recent works suggest that spin Hall effect can switch the topological antiferromagnetic order. However, the switching efficiency remains relatively low. Here, we demonstrate effective manipulation of antiferromagnetic order in Weyl semimetal Mn3Sn by orbital Hall effect originated from metal Mn or oxide CuOx. While Mn3Sn is proven to be able to convert orbit current to spin current by itself, we find that inserting a heavy metal layer like Pt with proper thickness can effectively reduce the critical switching current density by one order of magnitude. In addition, we show that the memristor-like switching behavior of Mn3Sn can mimic the potentiation and depression processes of a synapse with high linearity, which is beneficial for constructing artificial neural network with high accuracy. Our work paves an alternative way to manipulate topological antiferromagnetic order and may inspire more high-performance antiferromagnetic functional devices. Topological materials have attracted intensive attentions due to their robust topologically protected states, many exotic properties and promising applications for quantum computing and spintronics To date, researchers have demonstrated that spin-orbit torque can manipulate the Weyl nodes in Mn3Sn or Co2MnGa manifested with the change in anormolous Hall effect (AHE) In this work, we propose to utilize orbital Hall effect (OHE) to manipulate the magnetic order in topological AFM. The basic schematic is shown in Fig. We deposited 40-nm-thick Mn3Sn film on thermally oxidized silicon substrates by magnetron sputtering (see details in Methods). By energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) mapping, the atomic percentage of MnSn alloy is determined to be around Mn(3.05-3.1)Sn. The x-ray diffraction (XRD) θ-2θ scans results of the deposited Mn3Sn is shown Supplementary Note S1. Compared with pure Si substrate, a clear Mn3Sn (0002) crystal peak is observed in the film sample. SQUID measurement indicates that our film exhibits a tiny out-of-plane magnetization (see Supplementary Note S1). This tiny out-of-plane hysteresis loop suggests there exist crystalline grains with its Kagome plane in the film normal since the spin canting is in the (0001) Kagome plane. We further carried out magneto-transport and anormolous Nerst effect (ANE) measurements to confirm the Weyl semimetal of our deposited Mn3Sn films. Planar Hall effect (PHE) and in-plane angular magnetoresistance (AMR) are shown in Fig. It has been widely demonstrated that OHE can be observed in the naturally oxidized Cu We then carry out current-induced switching experiments (Fig. Note that, for practical use, it is important to quantitatively control the orbital Hall angle in the device. In such case, metallic OHE sources have an application edge over naturally oxidized Cu. We thus employ an heterostructure composed of Mn3Sn (40 nm)/Pt(tPt)/Mn(tMn) trilayer (Fig. An important difference between switching in FM and switching in Mn3Sn is the impact of applied current pulse width. In FM system, a thermally activated switching model, in which Jc decreases exponentially with the increasing pulse width, is widely accepted To further verify that the observed switching behaviors are dominant by OHE in Mn3Sn/Pt/Mn and to optimize the switching performance, we implemented current-induced switching experiments in samples with different Pt and Mn thicknesses. We first investigate the impact of tPt by fixing tMn to 10 nm and varying tPt from 0.5 nm to 6 nm. In all the samples, deterministic switching is observed, while the switching polarity remains the same (see Supplementary Note S3). Fig. The minimum Jc appears at around tPt = 1 nm, revealing that the L-S conversion efficiency in Mn3Sn/Pt/Mn system maximizes at this point. To better quantify the switching efficiency, we measured the effective SHA in Co/Pt(tPt)/Mn(10 nm) heterostructure by spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance (ST-FMR) technique (see details in Supplementary Note S5). As shown in Fig. We then investigate the impact of tMn by fixing tPt to 2 nm and varying tMn from 3 to 20 nm. As shown in Fig. Artificial synapses are considered as an ideal hardware to implement neuromorphic computing In Fig. for n = 1 to 120, where GP(n) and GD(n) are the normalized RAHE values after the n th potentiation pulse and n th depression pulse. Gmax and Gmin represent the maximum GP(n) after 120 potentiation pulses and minimum GD(n) at initial state. Here, a very small NL value (0.166) is determined, indicating that our Mn3Sn-based artificial synapse possesses a similar LTD (LTP) process to an ideal device (see Supplementary Note S6). To better evaluate the performance of the proposed synapse, an ANN with a 100 × 100 Mn3Sn-based memory array was then constructed to implement pattern recognition task (see Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated that OHE can serve as an effective electrical method to manipulate the topological magnetization of antiferromagnets. We prove that Mn3Sn can directly convert the orbital current from the OHE sources, e.g., metals (Mn) and oxides (CuOx), to spin current. We also show that an inserted Pt layer between Mn3Sn and OHE source can enhance the L-S conversion efficiency. By adjusting the thickness of Pt and Mn, the critical switching current density can be reduced to as low as ~1×10 10 A/m 2 . In addition, we show that the OHE-driven switching process in Mn3Sn can mimic the LTD and LTP process with high linearity in an artificial synapse, which can be further utilized to construct ANN system with high image recognition accuracy. Finally, given TMR has been reported in AFM-MTJ, it is possible to incorporate the presented OHE-driven Mn3Sn switching scheme in an OHE-based AFM MTJ devices. Our finding goes beyond the conventional paradigm of using spin current to manipulate AFM's order, and offers an alternative to integrate topological AFM in future diverse spintronic devices.