Hybrid quantum systems based on magnons in magnetic materials have made significant progress in the past decade. They are built based on the couplings of magnons with microwave photons, optical photons, vibration phonons, and superconducting qubits. In particular, the interactions among magnons, microwave cavity photons, and vibration phonons form the system of cavity magnomechanics (CMM), which lies in the interdisciplinary field of cavity QED, magnonics, quantum optics, and quantum information. Here, we review the experimental and theoretical progress of this emerging field. We first introduce the underlying theories of the magnomechanical coupling, and then some representative classical phenomena that have been experimentally observed, including magnomechanically induced transparency, magnomechanical dynamical backaction, magnon-phonon cross-Kerr nonlinearity, etc. We also discuss a number of theoretical proposals, which show the potential of the CMM system for preparing different kinds of quantum states of magnons, phonons, and photons, and hybrid systems combining magnomechanics and optomechanics and relevant quantum protocols based on them. Finally, we summarize this review and provide an outlook for the future research directions in this field. Quantum information science and technology, exploiting the principles of quantum mechanics, have great potential to cause revolutionary advances in fields of science and engineering in the twenty-first century. The manipulation and processing of quantum information and the realization of multifunctional quantum technologies require hybrid quantum systems (HQSs) as the implementation platform, which combines different physical components with individual strengths and complementary functionalities Among all HQSs, the HQS based on collective spin excitations (magnons) in magnetic materials, e.g., yttrium iron garnet (YIG), has attracted great attention and made significant progress over the past decade; see relevant reviews Up to now, although there have been exhaustive reviews on the interactions between magnons and microwave cavity photons, optical cavity photons, and superconducting qubits The review is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the fundamental theory of the magnomechanical coupling and its fully quantized interaction Hamiltonian, which lays the theoretical foundation for various applications using the magnomechanical systems. Section 3 introduces a series of representative classical phenomena in the field of CMM, of which most have been experimentally demonstrated at room temperature. Section 4 discusses a number of theoretical proposals for preparing different kinds of quantum states in the system, e.g., entangled states, squeezed states and quantum steering of magnons, phonons and photons, fully exhibiting its potential as a HQS. Section 5 introduces hybrid systems combining both magnomechanics and optomechanics and relevant quantum protocols based on them. Finally, Section 6 summarizes this review, outlines important future research directions in the field of CMM by applying the concepts of non-Hermiticity, PT symmetry, and exceptional points to the CMM system, and briefly introduces other magnomechanical platforms beyond the frameworks set by Refs. The magnomechanical coupling describes the interaction between magnetization and elastic strain of a magnetic material. Depending on the distance between magnetic atoms (or ions), there are three kinds of interactions: the spin-orbital interaction, the exchange interaction, and the magnetic dipole-dipole interaction where B 1 and B 2 are the magnetoelastic coupling coefficients, M S is the saturation magnetization and M x,y,z are the magnetization components. ε i j = 1 2 ∂u i /∂l j + ∂u j /∂l i is the strain tensor of the magnetic crystal, with coordinate indices i, j ∈ {x, y, z}, and u x,y,z are the components of the displacement vector ⃗ u. A magnon is viewed as a quantized spin wave. According to the Holstein-Primakoff approximation and where m (m † ) is the annihilation (creation) operator of the magnon mode, V is the volume of the magnetic crystal, and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. Note that equation ( and The magnetoelastic Hamiltonian, H me = H 1 + H 2 , implies different types of magnon-phonon interactions depending on the relation of their frequencies. For specific magnon and phonon frequencies, a certain type of coupling can be dominant in the magnetoelastic coupling, while other coupling mechanisms are negligible. This can be more clearly seen in the fullyquantized interaction Hamiltonian by further quantizing the strain displacement The magnetoelastic displacement can be decomposed and expressed as the superposition form of ⃗ u(x, y, z) = n,m,k d (n,m,k) ⃗ χ (n,m,k) (x, y, z), where d (n,m,k) zpm denotes the amplitude of the zero-point motion, and b n,m,k and b † n,m,k are the annihilation and creation operators of the corresponding phonon mode. The fully-quantized magnetoelastic Hamiltonian can be derived by quantizing the strain displacement in the semiclassical Hamiltonians of equations ( where the dispersive coupling strength Note that the above Hamiltonian is derived under the condition of low-lying magnon excitations, where the second-order term of the magnon excitation m † m is neglected For the case where the phonon mode is nearly resonant with the magnon mode, ω (n,m,k) b ≃ ω m , after neglecting the nonresonant fast-oscillating terms, one gets the following dominant linear interaction where the coupling rate Similarly, the higher-order term has been neglected under the low-lying excitations. This magnon-phonon linear coupling is typically the case for high-frequency phonons, e.g., in the gigahertz range. In this regime, the magnon-phonon strong coupling can be achieved forming magnon-phonon polarons Apart from the aforementioned dispersive and linear interactions, a magnon parametric amplification (PA) interaction becomes dominant when the phonon frequency is about twice of the magnon frequency, ω (n,m,k) b ≃ 2ω m . This leads to the following interaction with the coupling rate Such magnon PA can be used to generate entangled pairs of magnons, in analogy to the generation of entangled photon pairs by optical parametric down-conversion. To sum up, by fully quantizing the magnetoelastic Hamiltonian, different effective magnomechanical Hamiltonians are derived for different relations between the magnon and phonon frequencies: specifically, i) the dispersive interaction for the phonon frequency being much lower than the magnon frequency, ω (n,m,k) b ≪ ω m ; ii) the linear (beam-splitter) interaction for nearly resonant magnons and phonons, ω (n,m,k) b ≃ ω m ; and iii) the magnon PA interaction when ω (n,m,k) b ≃ 2ω m . Note that all the effective interactions are obtained by neglecting nonresonant fast-oscillating terms, which are good approximations when the magnon frequency and (or) the phonon frequency are (is) much larger than their coupling strength and dissipation rates Figure The exploration of the CMM has started from the experimental studies on classical phenomena, and so far, all the CMM experiments have been operated at room temperature. The typical CMM experimental device is shown in Figure The Hamiltonian of the CMM system reads where a (a † ) and m (m † ) ([ j, j † ] = 1, j = a, m) are the annihilation (creation) operators of the cavity and magnon modes, respectively, q = (b √ 2 are the dimensionless position and momentum of the vibration mode (modeled as a mechanical oscillator and [q, p] = i), and ω k (k = a, m, b) are their resonance frequencies. In typical CMM experiments, ω a and ω m are nearly resonant and around ∼10 GHz In what follows, we introduce a series of classical phenomena that have been either experimentally demonstrated or theoretically studied, including magnomechanically induced transparency and absorption, magnomechanical dynamical backaction, magnon-phonon cross-Kerr nonlinearity and mechanical bistability, etc. The radiation-pressure-like dispersive magnomechanical interaction predicts the magnomechanically induced transparency (MMIT) and absorption (MMIA) where κ e is the external decay rate of the cavity, and γ b is the mechanical damping rate. Note that the noise terms are removed and the operators are replaced with their expectation values. Equivalently, the position and momentum (q, p) are replaced with (b, b * ) to describe the mechanical mode. The Heisenberg equations By omitting high-order perturbation terms, one obtains the linearized equations for the perturbations (δa, δm, δb), which, in the frame rotating at the drive frequency, are The above equations can be conveniently solved in the frequency domain by taking the Fourier transform of each equation. Having achieved the solution of δa(ω), one then obtains the cavity output field δa out (ω) using the input-output relation δa out (ω) = ε s + i √ 2κ e δa(ω) The strong coupling between the cavity and magnon modes leads to two hybridized polariton modes A ± , formed via A + = a cos θ + m sin θ and A -= -a sin θ + m cos θ, with θ = 1 2 arctan 2g ma ω a -ω m . It indicates that the weight of the cavity (magnon) component in each polariton can be varied by altering θ, realized by changing the coupling g ma and/or the detuning ω a -ω m . Since the cavity component has no coupling with the mechanical mode, the interaction between each polariton and the mechanics is fully determined by the interaction between the magnon component and the mechanics, i.e., the polariton-mechanics coupling is also dispersive The dispersive magnomechanical interaction also promises dynamical backaction effects on the mechanical mode (similar as those in optomechanics To enhance the magnomechanical coupling, the system is operated to satisfy the triple- resonance condition where G mb is the effective magnomechanical coupling strength and , with χ m (ω) (χ a (ω)) being the natural susceptibility of the magnon (cavity) mode. The above mechanism works optimally in the resolved sideband limit κ ± ≪ ω b Figure The mechanical motion can be cooled into its quantum ground state when the cooperativity is significantly improved and the system is at a low bath temperature Another magnomechanical backaction effect is called the "magnonic spring" effect, in analogy to the "optical spring" in optomechanics The "magnonic spring" effect is revealed in Figure As introduced above, the "magnonic spring" effect causes a frequency shift of the mechanical mode. This frequency shift is typically small, at the level of 0.1 kHz as observed in the experiment This nonlinear coupling is termed as the magnon-phonon cross-Kerr nonlinearity where u i are the components of the displacement vector, and l i = i (i = x, y, z). The first-order terms lead to the conventional dispersive (radiation-pressure-like) interaction Hamiltonian, For a not strong drive field, the second-order terms are negligible The dispersive magnomechanical coupling gives rise to an effective susceptibility of the mechanical mode where χ b (ω) is the natural susceptibility of the mechanical mode, but depends on the modified mechanical frequency ωb = ω b + K cross |M| 2 (|M| 2 is the magnon excitation number), which includes the cross-Kerr-induced frequency shift. The effective coupling G mb = g mb M, and as defined in equation ( The effective mechanical susceptibility yields a mechanical frequency shift (i.e., the "magnonic spring" effect) where we write together the frequency shift induced by the cross-Kerr nonlinearity (last term). In addition, it causes a mechanical linewidth change Note that the above equation is different from equation The mechanical linewidth change δγ b versus the drive power for a red (blue)-detuned drive is shown in Figure In Figure Due to the large frequency mismatch between the magnon and mechanical modes, their coupling is typically weak, leaving the CMM experiments The natural way of achieving the strong coupling is to improve the effective coupling strength G mb or G +/-,b , e.g., using a strong drive field. However, there are restrictions on such improvement: a strong drive field may cause instability An effective approach is offered Because of the significantly reduced polariton decay rate and the intrinsically small mechanical damping rate, the polariton-mechanics strong coupling G +,b > κ + , κ b is achieved. Note that the system is actually in the triple cavity-magnon-phonon strong coupling regime, since the polaritons are formed by strongly-coupled cavity photons and magnons. This leads to the NMS at the mechanical sideband in the spectrum being resonant with the higher- frequency polariton The remarkably improved cooperativity can significantly boost the mechanical cooling efficiency and lower the threshold for achieving phonon lasers The MMIT and MMIA can be well described by the linearized magnomechanical interaction. Taking into account the nonlinearity of the magnetostriction, it can be used to generate magnonic high-order sidebands (similar to optical high-order sidebands created in optomechanical systems The concept of the MFC can be regarded as a magnonic counterpart to the optical frequency comb (OFC), which contains a set of discrete modes that are equally spaced in frequency (Figure The sideband generation can be enhanced via phonon lasing (or giant mechanical oscillation). Along this line, the generation of MFCs based on resonantly enhanced magnetostrictive interaction has been proposed Experimental generation of the MFCs based on the magnetostrictive interaction has been recently realized The efficiency of sideband generation can also be enhanced by adopting a two-tone microwave drive Many quantum information tasks and quantum technologies require low-temperature environments. In cryogenic environments, accurate thermometry can be difficult to implement and often requires calibration to an external reference. To solve this problem, Ref. Such CMM-based thermometry shows some advantages compared with that employing optomechanical systems. The heating due to optical absorption limits the effective lower temperature range of optical quantum-correlation thermometry to ∼10 K The nonlinear magnetostrictive interaction provides necessary nonlinearity for preparing various quantum states, e.g., entangled and squeezed states, in the CMM system. By further exploiting, e.g., external quantum fields, the reservoir engineering technique, and measurements on the microwave field, quantum states of the system can be created or enhanced. In general, the preparation of quantum states requires the system to be at a low bath temperature to reduce the detrimental thermal noises. Otherwise, a cooling mechanism for the mechanical motion should be present. Many proposals indicate that the CMM system holds the potential to prepare entangled states of magnons and phonons of macroscopic YIG crystals. These macroscopic entangled states are relevant to the fundamental studies of macroscopic quantum mechanics The Hamiltonian ( where ∆ a = ω a -ω 0 , and ∆ m = ω m -ω 0 . a in and m in are input noise operators for the cavity and magnon modes, respectively, which are zero-mean and obey the following correlation functions: ξ is the Langevin force operator, accounting for the Brownian motion of the mechanical oscillator, which is autocorrelated as Here the Markovian approximation has been taken, which is valid for a large mechanical quality factor The magnon mode is strongly driven to enhance the dispersive magnomechanical coupling strength, leading to a large amplitude of the magnon mode |⟨m⟩| ≫ 1. This allows one to linearize the system dynamics around the large average values. Consequently, the linearized QLEs for the quantum fluctuations can be obtained Here the quantum fluctuations are written in the quadrature form, i.e., δX O = (δO ), and the noise operators are defined in the same way. The drift matrix A is given by where ∆m = ∆ m + g mb ⟨q⟩ is the effective detuning including the frequency shift due to the magnomechanical interaction, and G mb = i √ 2g mb ⟨m⟩ is the effective magnomechanical coupling strength, with ⟨q⟩ = -(g mb /ω b )|⟨m⟩| 2 and ⟨m⟩ = Ω(i∆ a +κ a ) Because of the linearized dynamics and the Gaussian nature of the quantum noises, the steady state of the quadrature fluctuations is a three-mode Gaussian state, which can be completely characterized by a 6 × 6 covariance matrix (CM) V, with its entries defined as ). The steady-state CM V can be obtained straightforwardly by solving the Lyapunov equation A more fundamental reason lies in the fact that the two mechanical sidebands, i.e., the Stokes and anti-Stokes sidebands, are entangled via the mediation of the mechanical oscillator, which is involved in both the Stokes and anti-Stokes scattering processes. In the Stokes scattering, the mechanics and the Stokes sideband get entangled due to the PDC, whereas in the anti-Stokes scattering, the mechanics and the anti-Stokes sideband realize an effective state-swap interaction. Therefore, the two sidebands become entangled due to the mechanical mediation. Since the cavity and magnon modes are, respectively, resonant with the two sidebands, the cavity and magnon modes thus get entangled. Apart from the simultaneous presence of all bipartite entanglements, the system also shares a genuine tripartite entanglement, as witnessed by a nonzero R min τ in Figure Two magnon modes of two YIG spheres can get nonlocally entangled by exploiting the nonlinear magnetostriction in one YIG sphere and their linear coupling to a common microwave cavity where m 2 and m † 2 ([m 2 , m † 2 ] = 1) are the annihilation and creation operators of the second magnon mode, and g m 2 a is the associated cavity-magnon coupling strength. The mechanism of entangling two magnon modes can be explained by using the partial result of Ref. 4.1.3. Entanglement between two microwave fields Continuous-variable entanglement of microwave fields can be generated by exploiting the nonlinear magnetostrictive interaction where a 2 and a † 2 are the annihilation and creation operators of the second cavity mode, satisfying [a 2 , a † 2 ] = 1, and g ma 2 denotes the coupling rate between the magnon mode with the second cavity mode. Figure The first step is to entangle the vibration mode b 1 and the magnon mode m 2 . From the result of Ref. As another form of quantum correlation that lies in between entanglement and Bell nonlocality Distinct from Bell nonlocality and entanglement, EPR steering is essentially asymmetric with respect to two observers. Such an asymmetric and even one-way steering between the cavity mode and the mechanical (magnon) mode in the CMM system can be achieved by the injection of a squeezed (nonclassical) field into the cavity Squeezed states represent a kind of nonclassical states with the noise at certain phases below the vacuum fluctuation. Squeezed states of light or microwave fields find a wide range of applications in continuous-variable quantum information Once the magnon mode is squeezed, by further driving it with a strong reddetuned microwave field with frequency ω 0 (Figure The dispersive (radiation-pressure-like) magnomechanical interaction can be exploited to generate magnon squeezing The optimal condition for squeezing requires a strong red-detuned magnon drive field with a small detuning 0 < ∆ m ≡ ω m -ω d < ω b , and a remarkable stationary squeezing appears at the mechanical frequency ω ≃ ω b (in the frame rotating at the drive frequency ω d , Figure The reservoir engineering technique has been successfully applied to the field of optomechanics to prepare squeezed states of mechanical motion The two-tone drive can be described by the driving Hamiltonian H dri /ħ = Ω + e -iω + t + Ω -e -iω -t m † + H.c., where Ω + and Ω -are the Rabi frequencies associated with the two drive fields at frequencies ω ± = ω m ± ω b , respectively. The two-tone drive leads to the steady-state mean value of the magnon mode being approximated as ⟨m⟩ ≈ ⟨m + ⟩e -iω + t + ⟨m -⟩e -iω -t , where ⟨m ± ⟩ = Ω ± / ω ± -ω m + iκ m -g 2 ma ω ± -ω a +iκ a . The linearized QLEs of the quantum fluctuations, in the interaction picture with respect to ħω m (a † a+m † m)+ħω b b † b, are given by where the resonant case ω a = ω m is considered and G ± = g mb ⟨m ± ⟩ are the effective magnomechanical couplings associated with the two drive fields. The squeezing or noise properties can be investigated by solving the dynamical covariance matrix of the system The system dynamics can be conveniently solved by taking the RW approximation under the condition of κ a(m) , g ma , G ± ≪ ω b , which allows us to neglect the time-dependent coupling terms in equation + , and δB = cosh r δb + sinh r δb † being the Bogoliubov mode, where r = 1 2 ln G -+G + G --G + is the squeezing parameter. It describes a beam-splitter interaction between the magnon mode and the Bogoliubov mode, and can thus be used to cool the Bogoliubov mode. Since the ground state of the Bogoliubov mode corresponds to the squeezed vacuum state of the mechanical mode, mechanical squeezing can be achieved by cooling the Bogoliubov mode. For the stability reason, G + < G -is required. It is worth noting that for a fixed G -, by increasing G + (via increasing the blue-detuned drive field) the squeezing parameter r grows, but this simultaneously reduces the cooling rate G of the Bogoliubov mode. Consequently, an optimal ratio of G + /G -exists for the mechanical squeezing as a result of the trade-off between the above two effects, cf. Figure Despite the above analysis for the mechanical squeezing, the two-tone drive also induces the magnon squeezing and consequently the intracavity field squeezing, but the degrees of squeezing of both the magnon and intracavity field are very small Due to their low damping rates, the mechanical modes of the CMM system can serve as quantum memory for microwave or magnonic quantum states. Further, by exploiting the unique advantages of the CMM system, e.g., tunable magnon frequency and linearized magnomechanical coupling, strong photon-magnon coupling, etc, the CMM system provides a promising platform to efficiently realize the photon-magnon-phonon state transfer. In Ref. Differently, Ref. In addition, shortcut-to-adiabatic (STA) protocols are provided in Ref. It is quite natural to couple the magnetostriction-induced mechanical displacement with an optical cavity via the radiation pressure where c (c † ) is the annihilation (creation) operator of the optical cavity mode with frequency ω c . The bare optomechanical coupling strength g cb is in the range of 10 2 -10 3 Hz for a micronsize mirror c ω b N m The OMM system also enables many quantum protocols, which may find wide applications in quantum information science and technology. For example, by driving the magnon (cavity) mode with a red-detuned microwave (laser) field to activate the magnomechanical (optomechanical) state-swap interaction, the magnon-phonon-photon quantum state transfer can be realized. Consequently, the magnonic state can be read out in the output field of the cavity via the mechanical transduction The above protocols consider the mechanical frequency to be much lower than the magnon frequency. When the size of the magnomechanical system is significantly reduced (considering, e.g., thin YIG films), the mechanical frequency becomes high and close to the magnon frequency Another approach to combining magno-and optomechanics is via the direct mechanicsmechanics coupling, implemented by placing the two systems in direct physical contact (Figure where k = c, m, b 1 , b 2 (k † ) are the annihilation (creation) operators of the optical cavity, magnon, and two mechanical modes, respectively, ω k are the corresponding mode frequencies, and g b denotes the linear coupling between the two mechanical modes of close frequencies. In such a system, when the magnon (optical cavity) mode is driven by a red-detuned microwave (laser) field, the magnomechanical (optomechanical) beam-splitter interaction is activated, which enables the microwave-to-optics conversion via the mechanical mediation. Moreover, the interference effect between the two mechanical motions is also observed by applying a red-(blue-)detuned drive field to the magnon (cavity) mode In conclusion, we have reviewed both experimental and theoretical developments in the emerging field of CMM. The experimental observations of the MMIT (MMIA), magnomechanical dynamical backaction, magnon-phonon cross-Kerr nonlinearity, and magnetostrictively induced MFCs are the typical characteristics of the CMM system possessing a nonlinear magnetostrictive interaction. The system has also recently reached the strong-coupling regime and the polariton-mechanics NMS has been observed. As for the theoretical investigations, the progress is much ahead of the experimental studies and many proposals for preparing various quantum states of magnons, phonons, and microwave photons have been offered. These theoretical findings provide beneficial guidance for future experimental development. Despite the above achievements, there is still enormous potential for the development in this field. The quantum-state protocols indicate that the magnomechanical effective coupling and cooperativity should be significantly improved in order to prepare any quantum states of the system, which is likely the most important direction for future experiments. A landmark achievement would be the generation of real macroscopic quantum states in the laboratory. Besides, the CMM system also offers an ideal platform for nonlinear researches by exploiting rich nonlinearities from the magnon-phonon coupling and the YIG. Below, we provide an outlook for future research directions in this field, including non-Hermitian, PT -and anti-PT -symmetry, and exceptional-point-engineered CMM, as well as self-sustaining dynamics and synchronization phenomena by fully exploiting the nonlinearity of the magnetostriction. At last, we introduce some other magnomechanical platforms beyond the frameworks set by Refs. Non-Hermitian physics and parity-time (PT ) symmetry have attracted considerable attention over the past decade [164, 6.1.1. PT -symmetric CMM The PT -symmetric CMM system can be constructed by realizing an effective gain of the microwave cavity mode with the gain rate κ ′ a , e.g., by exploiting the CPA It is worth noting that for the PT -symmetric CMM system, the stability analysis of the system needs to be given sufficient attention, because the introduction of the gain will strongly modify the stability conditions, making the system more easily tend to be unstable. This becomes particularly important when studying some quantum effects, such as mechanical ground-state cooling and entanglement. As the counterpart of PT symmetry, anti-PT symmetry related phenomena have been demonstrated or predicted in cavity magnonic systems, such as anti-PT -symmetry phase transition 6.1.2. Exceptional-point-engineered CMM Apart from the introduction of the gain into the system as discussed above, the EP can also be achieved in a non-Hermitian CMM system with a dissipative magnon-photon coupling H int /ħ = g ma (a † m + e iΦ am † ) + g mb m † m(b + b † ). Most of the studies in the field of CMM are based on an approximate linearized magnomechanical interaction under a strong pump. However, the magnomechanical interaction is intrinsically nonlinear. Including full nonlinearity of the interaction gives rise to rich nonlinear dynamics of the system, such as high-order sidebands (Section 3.5), selfsustaining dynamics The preceding sections focus on the CMM system with a dispersive magnetostrictive interaction, typically of a macroscopic ferromagnet (e.g., a sub-mm sized YIG sphere). However, the magnomechanical system can refer to any system that achieves an effective coupling between magnons and phonons, which can be realized in a variety of configurations Of particular interest is the coupling between the magnonic mode and the center-of-mass (CoM) motion of a spherical micromagnet, e.g., a YIG sphere The magnon and mechanical modes can also establish a long-range coupling by the aid of optical pulses The phonons can also be the acoustic phonons of the surface acoustic wave (SAW) interacting with ferromagnetic magnons 