Laser-driven electron transport across a sample has garnered enormous attentions over several decades, because it potentially allows one to control spin transports in spintronics. But light is a transverse electromagnetic wave, how an electron acquires a longitudinal velocity has been very puzzling. In this paper, we show a general mechanism is working. It is the magnetic field B that steers the electron moving along the light propagation direction, while its strong transverse motion leads to local excitation. We employ the formalism put forth by Varga and Török to show that if we only include E, the electron only moves transversely with a large velocity. Including both B and E and using real experimental laser parameters, we are able to demonstrate that a laser pulse can drive the electron along the axial direction by 20 to 262 Å, consistent with the experiments. The key insight is that B changes the direction of the electron and allows the electron to move along the Poynting vector of light. Our finding has an important consequence. Because a nonzero B means a spatially dependent vector potential A(r, t), B = ∇ × A(r, t), this points out that the Coulomb gauge, that is, replacing A(r, t) by a spatial independent A(t), is unable to describe electron and spin transport under laser excitation. Our finding is expected to have a potential impact on the ongoing investigation of laser-driven spin transport. Laser-induced electron and spin transport has attracted a broad attention over several decades Aeschlimann et al. The goal of this paper is to investigate how a single laser pulse could drive the electron in a thin film down the axial direction so fast and so long. We employ Varga and Török's method, which is based on the Hertz vector and satisfies the Maxwell equation, to carry out a series of simulations. We find a general conclusion. While the electron oscillates strongly along the transversal direction and moves very little, its axial velocity does not oscillate and is unidirectional along the light propagation direction. Using an IR pulse of 1.6 eV moves the electron along the axial direction by z = 20 Å. z quadratically depends on the laser field amplitude and linearly depends on the pulse duration. When we reduce the photon energy ω to 0.1 eV, z can reach over 120 Å, Reducing ω to 0.06 eV, z reaches 262 Å even with a weak pulse of 0.05V/ Å, which is now closer to the experimental observations Assuming two different masses and two spin wavepacket spatial widths for majority and minority spins, our model can describe the spin moment change observed in experiments Our finding will have an important impact on future ultrafast electron and spin transport A fundamental difference between the electric-field-induced transport and laser-induced transport is that the latter does not have a voltage bias along the carrier moving direction. A light wave propagating toward a sample along the z axis has its electric-field E along the x axis and the magnetic field B along the y axis. Figure The Hamiltonian of the electron inside an electromagnetic field is where A(r, t) is the vector potential, φ is the scalar potential, q is the charge of the electron, and p is the electron momentum. The equation of motion is given in terms of the generalized Lorentz force as If we set B(r, t) to zero, then every term, except the first term, on the right side, is zero, so the electron only moves along E(r, t). This demonstrates that it is indispensable to include B(r, t). In the limit that B, not A(r, t), is independent of space, one recovers the usual Lorentz force, where the velocity v is defined through the mechanical momentum v ≡ p-qA(r,t) m . We follow Varga and Török and the magnetic field is where , and F is given by V (x, y, 0)e -i(kxx+kyy) dxdy. Here V (x, y, 0) = A 0 e -(x 2 +y 2 ) w 2 0 has the dimension of the electric field, where A 0 is the field amplitude and w 0 is the pulse spatial width chosen as 10λ. λ is the wavelength of the pulse. Within the paraxial approximation, we integrate the above equations analytically to get the reduced Ẽ and B, The final electric field and magnetic fields are When the light enters a sample, both fields are reduced by e -z/(2λpen) , where λ pen is the penetration depth and 2 comes from the fact that penetration depth is defined at 1/e the incident fluence and the fluence is proportional to the square of the electric field. λ pen is chosen to be 14 or 28 nm, typically values in fcc Ni. In our study, we choose a linearly x-polarized pulse that is propagating along the z axis. The pulse is a Gaussian of duration τ , amplitude A 0 and photon energy ω. A 0 e -iωt in E and B in Eq. 7 is replaced by A 0 e -t 2 /τ 2 cos(ωt), so our electric and magnetic fields are These analytic forms of E and B, which contain both the spatial and temporal dependences, greatly ease our calculation. As a first step toward a complete transport theory, we treat the electron classically, and solve the Newtonian equation of motion numerically, where m and q are the electron mass and charge respectively, v is its velocity, and Γ is a small damping to mimick the resistance due to collision with other electrons and nuclei. Although our method is classical, it fully embraces the real space approach that is more suitable for transport, a key feature that none of prior first-principles and model simulations is able to achieve. This will answer the most critical question whether the electron can move along the axial direction. We choose a pulse of ω = 1.6 eV, τ = 180 fs, A 0 = 0.15 V/ Å, often used in experiments , and Hagenbuch Figure In our simple classical model, these features cannot be included. But our study confirms the local heating must occur. Besides the direct demagnetization due to heating, it may stimulate magnon generation to destroy the magnetic long-range ordering We can move one step further. Keeping the rest of laser parameters unchanged, we change the laser field amplitude A 0 from 0.01 to 0.20 V/ Å and then compute z for each amplitude. Figure We compute z with our photon energy going from 0.02 up to 1.6 eV, while keeping both the duration τ = 180 fs and amplitude A 0 = 0.05V/ Å fixed. Figure Our result uncovers an important picture. When the pulse oscillates more slowly, the electron gains more grounds. Of course, a DC current can move electrons even further, but then it does not have enough field intensity. This result can be tested experimentally. We would like to see what happens to the electron under a THz pulse excitation. We choose a pulse of ω = 0.06 eV, τ = 180 fs and A 0 = 0.05V/ Å. Figure This opens the door to investigate the spin transport by using two different effective masses of the electron. Since the effective mass of the majority spin is always smaller than that of the minority spin, we assume m ↑ = m e and m ↓ = 2m e . Naturally, this huge difference is somewhat exaggerated, but our intention is to see whether this difference could produce something that can be related to experiments. With these different masses, we compute the z ↑ and z ↓ separately. We employ the same laser parameters as above: A 0 = 0.05V/ Å, ω = 0.06 eV, and τ = 180 fs. For the same force, the acceleration a ↑ is larger than a ↓ , since a = F/m. Figure The next question is how we can relate z to the spin. We recall that the classical position is always a good measure for the center of the wavepacket of the electron in quantum mechanics. In our mind, we envision that a wavepacket of some size is centered around z(t). As time goes by, the center moves. Henn et al. where both z ↑ and z ↓ are referenced to z = 0 and w ↑(↓) is the width of spin majority For w ↑ = 100 Å, w ↓ = 24.5 Å, Fig. Our finding reminds us the earlier study by von Korff Schmising et al. Our approach is in sharp contrast to the prior studies, where the axial motion is empirically included where μ s = μ ↑ -μ ↓ is the spin chemical potential and D is the spin diffusion constant, and τ s is the spin relaxation time. This approach follows the electric-field induced transport, where a voltage bias is applied across a device and the chemical potential difference maintained between the drain and source drives the charge carrier across the device Our finding has several important implications. First, although the magnetic field is much weaker than the electric field, if we ignore it, the electron only moves along the x axis. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to include the magnetic field, because it is the magnetic field that changes the direction of the electron motion Although ignoring the magnetic field greatly eases numerical calculation, it cannot describe the laser-induced electron transport. Second, because B = ∇ × A, where A is the vector potential, not to be confused with the laser field amplitude A 0 . A nonzero B means that A must contain r as its variable. The regular dipole approximation, A(r, t) → A(t), is not appropriate, if one wishes to describe the electron transport along the axial direction, but nearly all prior theoretical studies employ this approximation In conclusion, we have shown that the electron transport under an ultrafast laser pulse -1000-500 0 500 1000 t (fs) 