In this paper, considering the variation of the viscous dissipative heat in the transfer direction, a new theoretical formula for thermal conductivity measurement was proposed based on the energy equation of the rotational Couette flow field. This theoretical formula shows that thermal conductivity and rheology have a synergistic effect. Based on this theoretical formula, the rheological synergistic thermal conductivity of CMC-based Fe 3 O 4 nanofluids and Al 2 O 3 nanofluids was experimentally investigated. The experimental results show that the thermal conductivity rises with the increase of shear rate and volume fraction, moreover, volume fraction and shear rate have mutually reinforcing effects on thermal conductivity enhancement. Non-Newtonian effects of rheology and heat transfer reduce with shear rate and increase with volume fraction, with consistent synergistic effects. According to the experimental data, the expressions of the thermal conductivity and dynamic viscosity of these two nanofluids as functions of shear rate and volume fraction were presented. Energy transportation is a key issue for most industries, such as: petroleum, chemical reactors, nuclear, solar, power plants, microelectronics, etc Based on the rotational Couette flow field established in reference The shear rate in cylindrical coordinate system is represented by where r represents the radius, m; k is the thermal conductivity, W/(m•K); T is the temperature of the fluid, K; u θ is the tangential velocity, m/s; and τ rθ is the shear stress, Pa. Ignoring the variation of shear rate γ in the radial direction within the annular gap, the shear rate can be approximated as where R o is the inner radius of the outer cylinder, m; R i is the outer radius of the inner cylinder, m; n is the rotational speed of the outer cylinder, r/min. The first term on the left side of energy equation ( where h is the effective heating length of the inner cylinder, m; ∆V 1 = πr 2 h -πR 2 i h is the volume of the annular gap from the outer wall of the inner cylinder to the radius r. Assuming that the heat generated by heating the inner cylinder per unit time, i.e., the heating power of the inner cylinder is Q 1 . When reaching thermal equilibrium, the heat flow rate Q through the cylindrical side at the radius r position in the annular gap is the heat generated by heating the inner cylinder per unit time, plus the viscous dissipative heat generated from the outer wall of the inner cylinder to the radius r position, that is: Eq. ( By integrating Eq. ( Where From the Eqs. ( Integrating Eq. ( where T o is the temperature of the inner wall of the outer cylinder, K; T i is the temperature of the outer wall of the inner cylinder, K. By solving Eq. ( It can be clearly seen from formula (11) that the thermal conductivity and rheological properties are synergistically coupled, and the thermal conductivity is related to the rheological constitutive equation, i.e. the expression of shear stress. This synergistic correlation is more significant for non-Newtonian fluids whose molecular structure and intermolecular interaction forces change with the shear rate. The traditional formula of linear Fourier heat conduction law is no longer applicable to the heat transfer calculation of non-Newtonian fluids in shear flow state. The rheological properties of non-Newtonian fluids are affected by shear rate, temperature and volume fraction, etc. If the rheological constitutive relationship τ rθ = η ( γ, T, φ...) γ of fluid is known, that is, the function expression of dynamic viscosity η with respect to shear rate γ, temperature T , volume fraction φ and other variables is obtained, the theoretical formula Formula ( A laboratory-made coaxial cylinder thermal conductivity measuring device was used to measure the thermal conductivity, and this measurement equipment was described in detail in reference (i) Inject the liquid to be tested into the annular gap between the inner and outer cylinders of the thermal conductivity measurement equipment, with the liquid height consistent with the inner cylinder height. (ii) Set the temperature of the circulating water bath, and then wait for the temperature to reach the set value, and the temperature of the outer walls of the inner and outer cylinders to be consistent. (iii) Set the rotation speed of the outer cylinder n and turn on the motor switch. The shear rate γ corresponding to n can be calculated by Eq. ( (iv) Set the heating power of the inner cylinder and turn on the DC power supply (the heating power should not be too large, and ensure that the temperature difference between the outer walls of the inner and outer cylinders does not exceed 10 • C when the temperatures reach stable values). (v) When the system reaches thermal equilibrium, record the values of several thermal resistance thermometers, and calculate the average value to obtain the temperature T i of the outer wall of the inner cylinder and the temperature of the outer wall of the outer cylinder. The temperature T o of the inner wall of the outer cylinder is approximated by the temperature of the outer wall of the outer cylinder. (vi) The average values of T i and T o are used to approximate the fluid temperature. The shear stress at this temperature and shear rate γ is measured by Anton Paar MCR 302 rheometer. (vii) substitute the experimental data obtained in the first six steps into Eq. ( (viii) Repeat from (iii) if you need to measure thermal conductivity at different shear rates, and repeat from (i) if you need to measure thermal conductivity of different liquids. Before conducting error analysis, we first made an improvement to the laboratorymade coaxial cylinder thermal conductivity measurement equipment. Wrap an insulation layer on the outer side and top of the circulating water bath barrel of the coaxial cylinder thermal conductivity measurement equipment to reduce the interference of room temperature on the temperature of the circulating water bath. Therefore, in all the measurement results in this paper, the temperature difference between the measured outer cylinder temperature and the set circulating water bath temperature didn't exceed 0.2 • C. If there is free convection in the annular gap, it will cause measurement error. For low Rayleigh number (Ra<1000), free convection does not affect heat transfer The expression of Rayleigh number is as follows: where g is the acceleration of gravity, m/s 2 ; β is the coefficient of volume expansion, 1/K; ∆T is the temperature difference between the outer wall of the inner cylinder and the inner wall of the outer cylinder, K; α is the thermal diffusion coefficient, calculate the maximum Rayleigh number and get Ra=14.3819 (≪1000). Therefore, there was no free convection effect in our experiment. In reference From Fig. For thermal conductivity measurements, the heating power was set at 13 W and the temperature of the circulating water bath was 20 And the significance of the change in thermal conductivity with volume fraction/shear rate increases with increasing shear rate/volume fraction, which means that there is a mutual promotion effect between shear rate and volume fraction on the enhancement of thermal conductivity. (iv) The non-Newtonian effects of rheology and heat transfer decrease with increasing shear rate and increase with increasing volume fraction, implying that there is a consistent synergy between the non-Newtonian effects of rheology and heat transfer (v) By analyzing experimental data, the expressions of thermal conductivity and dynamic viscosity as functions of shear rate and volume fraction were presented. 