Directed atomic fabrication using an aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) opens new pathways for atomic engineering of functional materials. In this approach, the electron beam is used to actively alter the atomic structure through electron beam induced irradiation processes. One of the impediments that has limited widespread use thus far has been the ability to understand the fundamental mechanisms of atomic transformation pathways at high spatiotemporal resolution. Here, we develop a workflow for obtaining and analyzing high-speed spiral scan STEM data, up to 100 fps, to track the atomic fabrication process during nanopore milling in monolayer MoS2. An automated feedbackcontrolled electron beam positioning system combined with deep convolution neural network (DCNN) was used to decipher fast but low signal-to-noise datasets and classify time-resolved atom positions and nature of their evolving atomic defect configurations. Through this automated decoding, the initial atomic disordering and reordering processes leading to nanopore formation was able to be studied across various timescales. Using these experimental workflows a greater degree of speed and information can be extracted from small datasets without compromising spatial resolution. This approach can be adapted to other 2D materials systems to gain further insights into the defect formation necessary to inform future automated fabrication techniques utilizing the STEM electron beam. The rapidly evolving landscape of science and technology demands unprecedented precision in materials fabrication, pushing the boundaries of traditional manufacturing techniques. Atomically precise fabrication has emerged as a transformative approach that promises unparalleled control over the structure and properties of materials at the atomic scale. This precision is essential for unlocking breakthroughs in diverse fields, including quantum sensing and communications While traditional synthesis methods, such as top-down or bottom-up synthesis have been used extensively for 2D materials Here we used the transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) MoS2, as the model system to explore the structural changes associated with defect and nanopore formation. As a model system, defect engineering within TMDs have been of interest in recent years as different atomic defects To acquire the atomically resolved images required for these experiments, an aberrationcorrected STEM was used in conjunction with an external beam control system that allows for simultaneous imaging and atomic fabrication. A custom-built beam control system was used for these studies due to the difficulties introduced from traditional STEM raster scanning In this study, a workflow incorporating deep learning (DL) networks was employed to decode individual frames captured during this rapid image acquisition. Distinguishing features in atomically resolved experiments, such as scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), differ from classifying objects commonly found in publicly available datasets like CIFAR and ImageNet The experimental workflow from data acquisition to processing and decoding can be seen in Figure The experimental data was acquired using an aberration corrected Nion UltraSTEM100 operating at 60kV with a spatial resolution of ~1Å. The custom-built scanning feedback and electron beam control system was controlled using LabView software to acquire atomically resolved image datasets with the high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector. A schematic of this system's operation can be seen in Figure Figure With the image datasets fully decoded into the possible atomic sites, information can be obtained as to the stoichiometry, structure and atomic movement that takes place prior to the nanopore formation. By retaining the classifier information, the exact number of Mo and S atoms within the field of view being irradiated can be tracked and recorded along with the associated dose. Using these decoded frames the average dosage (assuming an average beam current of around 50 pA for the day) required to cause initial atomic disordering as well as form sulfur single vacancy line (SVL) defects and point defects (9.0 ± 4.5 × 10 8 e -nm 2 ⁄ ) that act as the nucleation site for expanding nanopores can be tracked for each experimental milling process. On average, we find that initial disordering takes a dose of 3.3 ± 2.3 × 10 8 e -nm 2 ⁄ to begin. After initial deformation, an additional 1.3 × 10 8 e -nm 2 ⁄ is needed to form SVLs, when they did form ~75% of the time. From disordering to formation of a vacancy point defect, or hole, an additional dose of 5.7 × 10 8 e -nm 2 ⁄ is applied to the MoS2 field of view. The dosage required to induce atomic transformations was found to generally be dependent on the speed of the scanning parameters with the slower scans with longer dwell times inducing atomic transformations more rapidly. However, the dosage required for each respective transformation was found to be irregular even within similar settings indicating other parameters outside of only dosage influencing the formation of these defects. Additionally, trends in the location of the initial disordering and defect can be studied in each milling dataset. As expected, the nucleation of the nanopore is entirely dependent on the location of the atomic disordering with the center of the frame requiring on average, lower dosage to begin forming in the center of the frame. When the initial defects begin forming at the edge of the frame, they take much longer to grow due to lower local dosage. It was also found that smaller fields of view result in the disordering further from the center of the field of the view. Outside of general dosage trend, atomic tracking can be conducted between frames. Tracking is done by finding the closest identified atom between frames within a set distance threshold, if this distance is overcome, the atom has either been ejected or completely displaced. However, this threshold is large enough to observe the atomic shift both Mo and S species exhibit during disordering. Several examples of the spatiotemporal trajectories of single atomic sites at different acquisition rates were gathered in a brush diagram in Figure In Figure In summary, this study demonstrates the successful enhancement of temporal resolution in STEM imaging without direct modifications to the electron microscope optics. By employing custom scan control with image processing techniques and implementing the ELIT workflow to develop a DCNN, a significant increase in the speed of determination of atomic position and species information at high speeds in STEM imaging was achieved. This approach facilitated a more comprehensive investigation of the kinetics involved in the defect formation process. The application of DCNN-enabled decoding of low-quality, hightemporal-resolution data provided valuable insights into the atomic disordering and reordering process. Specifically, the experiments focused on the MoS2 materials system, utilizing a beam control system capable of data acquisition at scanning rates of up to 100 fps, resulting in small datasets with resolutions as low as 64x64 pixels. Through image processing, atomic resolution was attained, and the ELIT workflow successfully decoded the data into Mo, S2, and S1 classes, enabling accurate tracking of these elements throughout the milling process. This workflow enables the extraction of more useful information from small datasets without compromising temporal or spatial resolution. The integration of machine learning and beam control techniques in this manner holds the potential for the development of different electron beam control methodologies and a deeper understanding of early defect formation and hole nucleation and growth and edge state formation in 2D materials. These findings have implications for advancing atomic fabrication processes and fostering autonomous atomic-level control. Chemical vapor deposition was used to synthesize the MoS2 monolayers at a growth temperature of 750 °C using a hinged tube furnace (Lindberg/Blue) equipped with a 2 in. diameter quartz tube. SiO2 (300 nm)/Si was used as a growth substrate. These substrates were first cleaned with isopropanol and then spin-coated with perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid tetrapotassium salt before being dried and placed face-down above an alumina crucible containing MoO3 powder (∼5 mg) (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich). This crucible was then inserted into the center of the quartz tube. Another crucible was filled with S powder (∼0.7 g) (99.998%, Sigma-Aldrich) and inserted at a region located 20 cm upstream from the other crucible in the quartz tube. When the center of the tube reaches 750 °C center of the tube, the temperature at the S powder crucible was around 180 °C. The tube was then evacuated to ∼5 mTorr. At this point a 70 sccm (standard cubic centimeters per minute) flow of Ar at atmospheric pressure was established. The furnace was heated to 750 °C with a ramping rate of 30 °C/min and held at this temperature for 4-6 min. The furnace is allowed to naturally cool down to room temperature. These MoS2 monolayers are then transferred from the SiO2/Si substrate onto gold mesh holey carbon Quantifoil TEM grids using a wet transfer process for STEM imaging. PMMA (Poly(methyl methacrylate)) was spun coated onto the SiO2/Si substrate with monolayer MoS2 crystals on the surface at 500 rpm for 15 s followed by 3000 rpm for 50 s. The PMMA-coated sample was then placed into a 1 M KOH solution to remove the SiO2 substrate. This leaves the PMMA film with the MoS2 monolayer on the solution surface. The KOH residue was then rinsed from the sample film with DI water. A TEM grid was then placed into a funnel filled with DI water. Using a glass slide the washed PMMA/MoS2 film was then transferred to float on the DI water. As the water drains the film is then placed onto the TEM grid. The samples are then baked to dry at 80 °C before being placed into acetone to soak for 12 hours to remove remaining PMMA before a final rinse in IPA, leaving a clean monolayer surface. Prior to STEM experiments, the specimens were baked at 160°C in vacuum overnight to reduce surface contamination. An aberration corrected Nion UltraSTEM100 electron microscope were used for all the STEM imaging experiments while operating at 60kV. The custom-built scanning feedback control system described in this study was based on a National Instruments DAQ (PXIe-6124) and field-programmable gate array (FPGA) system (PXIe-7856R) in a PXIe-1073 chassis that was interfaced with the beam control system of the Nion UltraSTEM100 for spiral scans. Input coordinates from customizable MatLab code were then put into a LabView program that was used to control the STEM scan coils to position the focused STEM probe along well-defined scanning pathway shapes. The custom scan control system has a maximum IO rate of 2M Samples/s.