Group IV vacancy color centers in diamond are promising spin-photon interfaces with strong potential for applications in photonic quantum technologies. Reliable methods for controlling and stabilizing their charge state are urgently needed for scaling to multi-qubit devices. Here, we manipulate the charge state of silicon vacancy (SiV) ensembles by combining luminescence and photo-current spectroscopy. We controllably convert the charge state between the optically active SiV -and dark SiV 2-with MHz rates and > 90 % contrast by judiciously choosing the local potential applied to in-plane surface electrodes and the laser excitation wavelength. We observe intense SiV - photoluminescence under hole-capture, measure the intrinsic conversion time from the dark SiV 2-to the bright SiV -to be 36.4(67) ms and demonstrate 1 Color centers in diamond are a promising platform for quantum sensing and quantum network applications For SnV, the consensus has converged more towards interaction with the valence band under illumination in the visible In this paper, we present investigations of the opto-electronic interconversion between the optically dark SiV 2-and bright SiV -charge state. For this, we define interdigitated metallic contacts on the diamond surface to facilitate the application of local electric fields and combine with quasi-resonant optical illumination to efficiently and reversibly control the SiV charge state. Our results show that the charge state can be converted at fast (MHz) rates under optical illumination by controlling the electrical bias and can be applied to a specific center located within a device, opening the way toward fully integrated geometries. We examine the conversion for synthetic, undoped, commercially implanted electronic grade single-crystal diamonds typically used by the quantum photonics community. Specifically, we find that the excitation wavelength providing the maximum (> 90 %) conversion contrast for the lowest charge conversion voltage to be 2.4 eV, readily accessible using diode-pumped solid state lasers and, moreover, show that this is related to a deeper resonance of the SiV -from the lower-lying a 2u level As described in detail in the materials and methods section, the sample investigated is a highpurity, CVD grown single-crystal diamond that was implanted with 28 Si to produce SiV centers at a depth from 100 to 150 nm below the surface. After annealing using a three step high temperature process under high vacuum Figure We begin by discussing photocurrent (PC) measurements. Hereby, we focus the excitation laser over several electrodes (28 μm 1/e 2 beam waist, centered between two electrodes) to generate a PC signal that dominates over the dark current even at moderate excitation laser power P ex of several hundred μW. Figure where S is the junction area, A * is the Richardson constant, T is the temperature, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and hν is the photon energy of the laser. In this expression φ is the effective modified Schottky barrier height, where φ 0 is the ideal Schottky barrier at zero bias, V is the voltage drop at each of the diamondmetal junctions, and n j is the ideality factor for each contact forming the double Schottky barrier. Figure with a fit provided by equation 1. Very good agreement is obtained between experiment and this phenomenological model. From the linear dependence of the PC on P ex at the gold-diamond interface under green excitation presented in figure According to DFT calculations, photons with an energy ≥3 eV are required to excite an SiV -electron into the conduction band In contrast, we identify the linear response as arising from free holes generated in the diamond VB by exciting electrons from the VB into defect levels via single photon absorption. Up to photon energies of E g /2 = 2.75 eV, it is not possible to excite a defect both from the VB and to the CB with a single photon process for each step. A cascade of a one-photon process and a two-photon process could exhibit a linear laser-power dependence, but that would require the one-photon process to be significantly slower, which is very unlikely. In summary, all the data suggests that the photocurrent does not stem from optically created electron-hole pairs, neither mediated by the SiV nor other crystal defect states. The arguments against optical electronhole-pair creation also hold for the PC in between the electrodes. Instead, we propose that the PC stems from free holes created by optical excitation of a VB electron into a defect level which is in accord with recent findings on SnV charge state stabilization We continue by investigating the dependence of photocurrent and photoluminescence on the position of the excitation laser relative to the electrodes, which reveals central characteristics of the SiV charge state conversion. All following measurements are performed with a 0.5 NA objective that focuses the laser on the sample surface with a 1/e 2 beam waist of 2.2 μm. In figure In other words, charges are most efficiently created and captured in the direct vicinity of the positive electrode. Electrons from the VB are energetically photo-excited above the Fermi level of the positive electrode, leaving holes in the VB, which drift towards the negative electrode. This process can be mediated by interface states the bright SiV -to either the dark SiV 2-or bright SiV 0 , which emits at 1.31 eV (20) and hence does not contribute to PL SiV -, the integrated zero-phonon line of the SiV -. Due to the absence of the SiV 0 signature at 1.31 eV, we conclude that SiV -is converted to SiV 2-at the negative electrode, while SiV -is preserved at the positive contact. We note that we do not observe any indication of linear Stark shifts as shown in the inset of figure To characterize the low-temperature excitation spectrum, we performed spectrally-resolved PL-excitation measurements by tuning the excitation photon energy from 1.77 to 2.75 eV and detecting the SiV -emission. Figure Figure We now determine the conversion voltage from the bias-dependent photoluminescence for different excitation wavelengths at constant P ex = 10 mW (see figure We continue to study the temporal dynamics of the charge state interconversion between SiV - and SiV 2-. For this, as depicted schematically in figure To study purely electrical charge state interconversion, we additionally gate the CW Laser and vary the relative delay to the voltage pulses. Figure The SiV -→ SiV 2-conversion at the -50 V→0 V transition results in a PL overshoot. The rightmost panel of figure To investigate the role of the excitation laser in the PL overshoot, we performed experiments in which we turn the laser off before switching the voltage back from -50 V to 0 V. Typical results of these investigations are presented in figure 4C. We do not observe the PL overshoot during this voltage switch-off. Instead, after a variable delay, we turn the laser back on and again observe the PL overshoot. These observations show that the PL overshoot is optically triggered, which also means that laser illumination is required for the SiV 2-to SiV -conversion. Nevertheless, the voltage switch-off perturbs the relative equilibrium populations of SiV As discussed in the main text this arises from hole capture of SiV 2-resulting in an SiV -excited state. The PL overshoot becomes temporally narrower with increasing P ex since the optically created hole flux increases, thereby, more rapidly driving the conversion. B The area of the PL overshoot is divided by the SiV -PL count rate at zero bias to normalize it. The result scales inversely with P ex . The SiV -PL intensity is linearly proportional to P ex indicating that the number of photons in the PL overshoot is independent of P ex . This is the expected behavior as we expect a single photon from each SiV 2-to SiV -conversion. C After to the SiV 2-state by applying -50 V a 2.4 eV laser, the laser is turned off. When the voltage is switched off subsequently, we do not observe a PL overshoot. The delay between voltage turnoff and laser turn-on in the plots is 1.06 ms and 29.06 ms. We see that the intensity of the PL overshoot slowly decreases with the delay, which indicates a relaxation of the non-equilibrium SiV 2-population to SiV -. D The PL overshoot intensity decreases with a time constant of 36.4(67) ms in the dark (weighted average of the two exponential decay constants). This can be interpreted as the lifetime of the SiV 2-charge state in the dark. SiV 2-and it is expected that some SiV 2-slowly relax back to SiV -after applying the voltage pulse. By varying the delay between voltage turn-off and laser turn-on, we measured the time scale over which this process occurs, namely the lifetime of the non-equilibrium SiV 2-charge state under dark conditions. The results of these experiments are presented in figure To explain the SiV charge state interconversion, we propose the mechanism depicted schematically in figure context of figure Similar as in the purely optically driven charge state conversion cycle of tin vacancies (13), also SiV 2-could directly recapture the created VB hole and restore the SiV -charge state. However, this is no longer possible when the hole is attracted by the negative electrode and thus separated from SiV -immediately. For future applications and experiments with SiV -, we therefore propose an electrically assisted charge state conversion and stabilization instead of the standardly used purely optical method. SiV -luminescence overshoot by hole capture We continue to discuss the underlying physical mechanism driving the SiV 2-to SiV -conversion, depicted in figure 5B. To convert the SiV back to the SiV -state, a VB hole needs to be recaptured by an SiV 2-center. The hole could either be captured by e u , which lies close to the VB edge Regardless of whether the hole is captured into a 2u or e u , this automatically results in an excited state of the SiV -and hence PL at 1.68 eV in full accord with our experimental observations. As shown in figure Thereby, the PL overshoot stems from optically created holes and should therefore change with the laser illumination. The total PL overshoot intensity depends primarily on the number of non-equilibrium SiV 2-that we created opto-electronically. With a higher flux of VB holes, we expect this population to reconvert faster. We indeed find that the PL overshoot becomes temporally narrower for higher P ex , see figure This charge state conversion process is much more efficient at the positive electrode that promotes the generation of free holes in the VB and now we discuss how this can be used to stabilize the SiV -charge state. Figure Our experimental results provide a better understanding of the photophysics of SiV color centers charge exchange with the diamond host and provide the basis for changing and stabilizing their charge states using local electric fields. Due to the similarity in the energy level structure and position in the band gap Last, we discuss the limitations of this study and our view on the next steps towards fully charge-stabilized SiV. For charge state stabilization protocols, the current density needs to be small in the vicinity of the SiV spin qubits, as the electric fields of moving charges can cause decoherence. We measured very low dark currents smaller than 1 nA for the whole interdigitated electrodes and hence, in combination with the inversion symmetry of the SiV, do not expect them to be an issue. However, this should be experimentally verified and strong local photocurrents could have an influence on coherence, such that we recommend a pulsed stabilization scheme without illumination during the qubit operation. In such a protocol, the charge state has to be conserved for longer than the relevant T 2 time of the system. We measured the charge state relaxation time to be 36.4(67) ms at 8 K, which is longer than the 10 ms electron spin coherence time T 2 with dynamical decoupling. However, nuclear spin coherence times can reach the timescale of seconds, causing stronger requirements. We expect the charge state relaxation time to increase towards millikelvin temperatures, which should be verified. Furthermore, the Schottky contacts need to be integrated into cavities to get efficient spin-photon interfaces, for example by using an evanescently coupled cavity and waveguide system with in-plane surface electrodes on the diamond To create silicon vacancy centers, we implanted high-purity, single-crystal diamond produced by Element Six. The diamond was grown using Chemical-Vapor-Deposition (CVD) with a size of 3 mm × 3 mm × 0.5 mm. This type of diamond typically contains nitrogen and boron impurity levels < 5 ppb and < 0.5 ppb, respectively (46). 28 Si was implanted with 132 keV by CuttingEdge Ions (expected implantation depth of 100 to 150 nm) with a dose of 3 × 10 11 ions/cm -2 . After implantation, we annealed in several steps (4 h ramp to 400 • C, 8 h at 400 • C, 12 h ramp up to 800 • C, 8 h at 800 • C, 12 h ramp to 1100 • C, 10 h at 1100 • C) under high vacuum (< 1 × 10 -7 mbar) We cleaned the sample in aqua regia (1 h at 90 • C) and concentrated sulphuric acid (1h at 225 • C), followed by exposure to oxygen plasma which produces oxygen termination. Electrodes of 8 μm distance were created by optical lithography and evaporation of Ti(5 nm)/Au(80 nm). The interdigitated electrodes are each connected to a 200 μmx200 μm bond pad. The sample is glued to a copper plate and wire-bonded to a printed circuit board chip carrier (see figure The optical measurements in this work are performed with a custom-built confocal microscope photoluminescence setup. The excitation Laser (Toptica iBeam smart, 517 nm with digital intensity modulation function) is focused with a 100x magnification, 0.5 NA, broadband objective. Wavelength-scans were performed with a Spectra physics tunable HF100 optical parametric oscillator (OPO) system which emits ultrashort pulses with a duration of 80 fs to 200 fs and a repition rate of 80 MHz. Pulse patterns were created with a Pulse Streamer 8/2 from Swabian instruments. We used a spectrometer with 500 mm focal length for continuous measurements or a fiber coupled single photon avalanche photodiode (SPAD) for detection in time-resolved experiments. The excitation laser was separated from the signal by using a spectral 732 to 742 nm bandpass filter combined with 532 nm, 600 nm or 700 nm longpass filters, depending on the excitation wavelength. For time-resolved measurements we also used a tunable longpass and a tunable shortpass filter to filter the SiV -emission tightly around the zero-phonon line. Temporal correlations were taken with the time-tagger QuTag from qutools.