Comprehending the interaction between geometry and magnetism in three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures is of importance to understand the fundamental physics of domain wall (DW) formation and pinning. Here, we use focused electron beam-induced deposition to fabricate magnetic nanohelices with increasing helical curvature with height. Using electron tomography and Lorentz transmission electron microscopy, we reconstruct the 3D structure and magnetization of the nanohelices. The surface curvature, helical curvature and torsion of the nanohelices are then quantified from the tomographic reconstructions. Furthermore, by using the experimental 3D reconstructions as inputs for micromagnetic simulations we can reveal the influence of surface and helical curvature on the magnetic reversal mechanism. Hence, we can directly correlate the magnetic behavior of a 3D nanohelix to its experimental structure. These results demonstrate how control of geometry in nanohelices can be utilized in the stabilization of DWs and control of the response of the nanostructure to applied magnetic fields. With advancing nanofabrication methods, it is now possible to fabricate complex, three-dimensional (3D) magnetic nanostructures respectively, where r is the helical radius and 2πc is the helical pitch Micromagnetic simulations are a powerful tool to represent and explain experimental results [4, 5]. However, computational structures often represent idealized version of the experimental structures and can miss real geometrical variations and features, thereby not fully representing the complexity of the system. These geometrical features can be of importance as nucleation site for magnetization reversal, for domain wall pinning or cause local variations in spin textures. Therefore, to accurately predict and understand the magnetic behavior of a nanostructure we require a method to take these features into account. In this work, we will present complementary experimental reconstructions and micromagnetic simulations of the magnetization in two nanohelices of nonuniform curvature and torsion. The helices were fabricated by FEBID and subsequently characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Through electron tomography, we reconstruct the 3D geometry of the helices. This enables us to quantify parameters that describe the nanohelix such as the Gaussian surface curvature, the helical curvature and torsion. Lorentz TEM (LTEM) was used to determine the magnetic phase shift and reconstruct projected magnetic induction maps. The reconstructed geometric structure is then directly used in micromagnetic simulations to verify the asgrown experimental states and subsequently to correlate the magnetic reversal behavior to the experimentally observed nanohelix geometry. Two left-handed cobalt nanohelices were fabricated by FEBID on SiOx TEM membranes. The FEBID process is shown in Figure After analyzing the structure of the nanohelices, we now look to determine their magnetization through both LTEM and micromagnetic simulations, which we carried out using MuMax3 [28]. Both helices were imaged in their as-grown state, without exposure to an external magnetic field. The magnetic induction of the nanohelices was reconstructed by collecting through-focus series of images and using the transport of intensity equation method The tomographic reconstructions, shown in Fig. In addition to verifying the as-grown magnetic states, the 3D reconstructions can allow us to further explore the magnetic behavior of the nanohelices, giving insights into the effect of varying helical curvature and torsion on the magnetization reversal behavior. In Figure In Fig. Here, we observe two left-handed vortices where the central region with negative Mz region grows with applied field. At an applied field of -26 mT, the field fully reverses the magnetization relative to the initial state except at the base of the helix where the vortex remains until higher fields. The increased curvature and curvature gradient of helix 2, with respect to that of helix 1, allows the stabilization of complex non-linear spin textures during reversal. This is largely due to the wire becoming more transverse to the applied field with increased helical curvature. Most of the magnetization in helix 1 is reversed over a range of 1.5 mT, with a further 11.5 mT required to expel the vortex domain wall pinned at the top. The reversal process for helix 2, however, is a more gradual process over a range of 16 mT. However, for both helices we observe that regions of higher curvature and lower torsion promote the formation and stability of nonlinear spin textures such as vortices and domain walls. The experimentally fabricated nanohelices discussed above display a welldefined trend of increasing curvature with height. Through micromagnetic simulations, we can correlate the magnetic behavior with the geometric curvature. However, the trend of torsion as a function of height is less clear. Therefore, we now discuss the behavior of three simulated helices (shown in Figure where X, Y and Z are the coordinates of the helical wire (see Fig. In summary, we have utilized FEBID to create nanohelices with curvature and torsion that vary with height. We have demonstrated the ability to controllably create nanostructures of complex geometry, and by using electron tomographic reconstruction of the nanohelices in 3D, we can obtain quantitative information about the surface curvature, helical curvature and torsion as a function of height. We then used the 3D reconstructions as inputs for the shape of the nanohelices in micromagnetic simulations, whereby we were able to verify the single domain states observed in the asgrown magnetic phase reconstructions of the nanohelices. Our simulations also enabled us to explore the magnetization reversal behavior of the two nanohelices, and to link the spin textures that form directly to the experimentally fabricated geometry. Variations in surface curvature can provide pinning sites for domain walls, while areas of higher helical curvature allow the formation of more non-linear spin textures during the reversal process. Further simulations on computationally defined structures revealed that intermediate values of torsion (of comparable magnitude to the helical curvature) are required for initialization of domain walls, which was also reflected in the experimental structures. The results presented here aid in understanding how 3D geometric effects could be integrated into domain wall-based devices. Further experiments could include the fabrication of nanohelices of controlled varying curvature and torsion in order to precisely create and move domain walls. We would then look to initialize and experimentally reconstruct non-linear 3D magnetic textures through vector field tomography Nanofabrication. The two cobalt nanohelices were fabricated using focused electron beam-induced deposition in an FEI Nova dual beam FIB/SEM. The precursor gas used was Co2(CO)8 with a working pressure of 3 × 10 %& Torr, accelerating voltage of 10 kV and a beam current of 33 pA. The structures were grown using stream files that contained a series of x and y pixel coordinates and dwell times for each point. The nanohelices were grown directly onto SiOx TEM grids before being transferred to the TEM with minimal exposure to air and external magnetic fields. Transmission electron microscopy. The electron tomography and magnetic phase reconstruction were performed in a JEOL 2100F LTEM instrument operating at 200 kV with an imaging CS corrector. The samples sit in a low field environment to avoid affecting their as-grown magnetic state. Tomographic data were collected by imaging the sample at tilt angles from -70° to +70° in steps of 2° between ±70° and ±60° and in steps of 5° between -60° and +60°, at a magnification of 8000x. The images were then aligned using crosscorrelation using the TomoJ plugin in ImageJ. This aligned tilt series was used to create the 3D reconstructions using TomoViz. The surface Gaussian curvature was calculated using the curvature filter in Paraview. The data was smoothed to remove high curvature artefacts, but not overly smoothed such that the structure was altered. The 3D reconstruction meshes were discretized using the Voxelize function in PyVista. A model with voxels of size 3x3x3 nm was created and inputted in to MuMax3 to simulate the magnetization of the nanohelices. The reconstruction of the magnetic phase of the nanohelices was performed by taking a series through-focus bright field images from -640 to +640 μm (in 15 steps). A second through-focus series was recorded with the samples flipped 180° to be able to separate the magnetic and electrostatic phase shift. The retrieval of the magnetic phase was performed using the transport of intensity equation method using the open source PyLorentz code developed in our group. PyLorentz was also used for simulating the magnetic phase from the output of the MuMax3 simulations of the nanohelices.