It has been recently shown how computing operations such as high-speed switching, routing, and solving partial differential equations can be performed by exploiting perfect splitting of electromagnetic waves in networks of waveguides from microwaves to the optical regime. Here, we propose a technique to achieve perfect splitting of electromagnetic waves using junctions of rectangular waveguides. The structure consists of N air-filled rectangular waveguides interconnected at a junction. They are designed to have their cut-off frequency above the cut-off frequency of further N waveguides used as inputs. The proposed structure is studied theoretically using transmission line models demonstrating that perfect splitting can occur at frequencies below the cut-off frequency of the interconnected waveguides (evanescent coupling). Numerical results are implemented to validate the designs demonstrating a good agreement between them. As examples of computing operations, it is shown how the proposed structure can be used to compare the amplitude of two incident signals (comparison operation) and also for routing of information to different output ports by exploiting linear superposition of scattered waves excited at the junction of rectangular waveguides, opening new opportunities and possibilities for future exploration and exploitation of electromagnetic waves for high-speed computing. The increasing need of powerful and faster computing systems has pushed the field of computing to evolve at an unprecedented speed. However, challenges in the performance and manufacturing of integrated circuit chips (e.g. chips are approaching physical size limits Within the realm of photonic computing, recent examples in this field include methods for solving quadratic optimization problems Inspired by the importance of photonic computing and the need for perfect splitting in arrays of interconnected waveguides, here we present our efforts to achieve perfect splitting of incident EM signals within a 4-port network of rectangular waveguides operating below their fundamental TE10 mode. The structure consists of four vacuum-filled rectangular waveguides designed to have their cut-off frequency at f c w (called outer waveguides). These waveguides are interconnected via a cross-junction comprised of four vacuum-filled rectangular waveguides having a higher cut-off frequency, f c x > f c w (called junction waveguides). In so doing, it will be shown how perfect splitting of EM waves can be achieved at frequencies that fall above the cut-off frequency of the outer waveguides but below the cut-off frequency of the junction waveguides (i.e. evanescent coupling). The mechanisms enabling such perfect splitting is presented and studied via numerical simulations using CST Studio Suite®. To understand this performance, in-depth analytical studies using TL theory are presented. It is shown how, the reactive field at the junction can be modelled via a reactive element demonstrating how there are frequencies where perfect splitting is achieved even below the cut-off frequency of the junction waveguides, in agreement with numerical simulations. For completeness, we show how the proposed configuration using rectangular waveguides can be exploited for N-port perfect splitting. Finally, we implement the proposed structure to perform some computing operations including elementary signal routing and amplitude comparison operations. A. Definition of perfect splitting. As mentioned in the introduction, perfect splitting of EM signals has recently been exploited for fundamental computing operations such as routing of information if the TLs are interconnected in series or parallel configuration, respectively. In so doing, transmitted and reflected signals will be traveling towards the output and input ports, respectively with a transmission and reflection coefficient (for each port) defined as γ = -2N -1 and ρ = (N -2)N -1 , respectively, if the TLs are interconnected in series, or γ = 2N -1 and ρ = (2 -N)N -1 , respectively, if they are connected in parallel (the latter case is depicted in Fig. Note that the signs of γ and ρ have been written to directly account for the change of phase of the transmitted and reflected signals with T as the transpose operator. To implement the perfect splitting theory described above and to exploit it for computing operations, one can make use of waveguides as TLs The cut-off wavelength (and hence frequency) of the first TE10 mode, λ c , is defined by the width, a, of the waveguide (dimension transversal to the direction of the electric E-field), as λ c = 2a B. Perfect splitting: interconnected rectangular waveguides. The proposed structure to enable perfect splitting of EM signals using interconnected rectangular waveguides is shown in Fig. With this configuration, the proposed structure in Fig. The numerical results of the scattering parameters for the proposed 4-port structure are presented in Fig. In the previous section, it has been shown how perfect splitting of EM signals can be achieved using interconnected rectangular waveguides as proposed in Fig. first, in subsection A, an equivalent 2-port TL model for the structure shown in Fig. Finally, in this manuscript the time convention e -iωt is used. As mentioned in the previous section, l w can have an arbitrary value as the outer waveguides are finished with absorbing ports in the numerical analysis, hence, in the TL model they are simple impedances connected to the circuit To analyze the equivalent circuit from Fig. where Z in is the input impedance seen from the center of the junction towards an output port. From TL theory, Z in can be expressed as with . With these simplifications, the resulting circuit model is reduced to (see bottom panel from Fig. 2c can be defined by the following 2 × 2 matrices: respectively and S 21 , for the 2-port equivalent circuit from Fig. where Z w denotes the complex conjugate operator, A eq , B eq , C eq and D eq are the components of the ABCD eq matrix, and Re{ } denotes the real component With a TL model in good agreement with numerical calculations at the frequency of the first resonance, we can now address the challenge of calculating a frequency dependent function for the admittance, Y J (f/f c x ), to match the full transmission spectra with the numerical results. In this section, and in the rest of the calculations, we consider Ψ I = 0 as it has been shown above that the modelling of the perfect splitting performance can be achieved by simply using Ψ J ≠ 0, i.e., Y J = -iΨ J . With this in mind, Eq. 5a for S 11 [of the circuit model from Fig. As observed, Y J is now dependent on S 11 and frequency, as required in this study. Now, as the input impedance Z in is complex valued, the resulting Y J is also complex. However, since the admittance represents a reactive element, the solution must be purely imaginary (i.e., a real Ψ J ). To better study the implications of Eq. 6, the value of Y J was extracted using the S 11 from the numerical simulations at the frequency where perfect splitting occurs (i.e., f/f c = 0.7967). The resulting complex value is plotted in Fig. where a, b, c, d, and e are constants to be found and x and y are the real and imaginary values of Y J , respectively. To calculate these constants, five points from the generated admittances can be taken, [(x 1 , y 1 ), ... , (x 5 , y 5 )], to form the following matrix equation: where M is used to represent the matrix on the left-hand-side of this equation. To find the constants, the inverse of M must be calculated, and then multiplied on the left to both sides of the equation, giving: [ x Using the equation of the ellipse (Eq. 7) and the constants from Eq. 9, the intersection of the imaginary, y, axis can be found by setting x = 0, and solving the resulting quadratic equation cy 2 + ey + 1 = 0 , leading to two solutions for a purely imaginary Y J that satisfies the numerically calculated |S 11 | at a given frequency. Based on this, the theoretically calculated values of Ψ J (f/f c x ), obtained from Y J using the method described above are shown in Fig. However, due to the unequal splitting nature of the second resonance (where ~1 straight through transmission is obtained, as discussed in Fig. The previous sections have been focused on the study of the structure from Fig. Next, we can consider the length of the junction waveguides as a key parameter to be able to physically fit an increased number of arms connected to the junction. As the frequency at which perfect splitting occurs will be < f c x , it is the evanescent field inside the junction waveguides (working below their cut-off frequency f c x ) that enables perfect splitting. Extending the length l x will reduce the evanescent field that reach the center of the junction waveguides, meaning that this length should be carefully chosen such that evanescent coupling to the junction still exist. A detailed numerical study of the influence of the length and height of the crosssection of the hollow for the junction waveguides (dimensions l x and b x = a x Δh, respectively) is presented in the supplementary materials. From those results, increasing l x cause the response of the structure to be more narrowband, a response that can be overcome by, for instance, increasing Δh. Interestingly, this means that narrow hollow waveguides are not required in our case to enable perfect splitting of EM signals. From now on, to evaluate perfect splitting response using N port structures and to apply them for computing processes in the next section, the dimensions l x = 3λ c x and Δh = 0.5 are used. The numerical results of the out-of-plane E yfield distribution using the proposed interconnected rectangular waveguides for N = 3, 5 and 6 arms, are shown in the first column of The proposed structure for perfect splitting of EM signals is exploited in the next section for fundamental computing processes including routing of information. In the previous sections, perfect splitting of EM signals was achieved using interconnected rectangular waveguides. Here, it is shown how this performance can be used in fundamental computing operations such as routing of information and linear comparators. We have recently shown how such operations can be performed using arrays of parallel plate waveguides as ideal TLs For this scenario, a 4-port (N = 4) configuration of interconnected rectangular waveguides is used (as discussed in Fig. An interesting application of perfect splitting is that it can be used to perform the comparison between the amplitudes of two inputs Note that now the phase (polarity) of the signal at port 3 is the same as the phase of the input signal from port 2 which is the opposite that happened in the example from Fig. The corresponding numerical results for the Eyfield distribution at the resonant frequency along with the F-parameter are shown in Fig. In this manuscript, a structure to achieve perfect splitting of EM waves has been proposed and evaluated both theoretically and numerically. The proposed structure consisted of N interconnected rectangular waveguides. It was demonstrated that perfect splitting cannot occur when considering just the junction of waveguides given that their width (in the direction perpendicular to the E-field) is in the order of the operational wavelength. To tackle this, additional outer waveguides, with a cut-off frequency below that of the junction waveguides, were considered. Thus, it was shown that it is possible to achieve perfect splitting of EM waves when working below the cut-off frequency of the junction waveguides, i.e. there is an evanescent field coupled to the junction waveguides, exciting a junction resonance. The proposed structure was then evaluated theoretically using TL models, demonstrating how the evanescent coupling and junction resonant frequency can be approximately modelled using parallel admittances in the equivalent circuit. Different scenarios of perfect splitting were demonstrated, including N = 3, 4, 5 and 6 interconnected waveguides, showing excellent agreement with the theory of perfect splitters. Finally, the proposed structure was implemented to perform fundamental computing operations such as routing of information and comparison operations. We envision that the proposed mechanism for perfect splitting of EM waves could be implemented in large networks to perform, for instance, the solution of partial differential equations of derivatives both in the time and frequency domain, opening up further opportunities for computing with waves.