Stochasticity plays a significant role in the low-power operation of a biological neural network. In an artificial neural network (ANN), stochasticity also contributes to critical functions such as the uncertainty quantification (UQ) for estimating the probability for the correctness of prediction. This UQ is vital for cutting-edge applications, including medical diagnostics, autopilots, and large language models. Thanks to high computing velocity and low dissipation, a spin-orbit-torque (SOT) device exhibits significant potential for implementing the UQ. However, up until now, the application of UQ for stochastic SOT devices remains unexplored. In this study, based on SOTinduced stochastic magnetic domain wall (DW) motion with varying velocity, we fabricated an SOT synapse that could emulate stochastic weight update following the Spike-Timing-Dependent-Plasticity (STDP) rule. Furthermore, we set up a stochastic Spiking-Neural-Network (SNN), which, when compared to its deterministic counterpart, demonstrates a clear advantage in quantifying uncertainty for diagnosing the type of breast tumor (benign or malignant). Stochasticity plays a significantly crucial role in the low-power operation of a biological neural network (BNN). Beyond the stochastic firing of neurons, synapses responsible for modulating the strength of connections between pre-neurons and post-neurons also manifest non-deterministic behaviors. The random events associated with a biological synapse stem from the spontaneous opening of intracellular Ca 2+ stores, synaptic Ca 2+ channel noise, and the random positioning of vesicles with a broad size distribution Among various types of ANNs, the Spiking Neural Network (SNN) holds unique potential for implementing UQ because the presence or absence of spikes in an SNN correlated with the sampling from a binary random variable Different electronic devices, such as memresistors, ferroelectrics, and spintronics devices, can be exploited to emulate an artificial synapse in an ANN. In the Spin-Orbit-Torque (SOT) device, current pulses can induce a continuous variation of anomalous Hall resistance (R AHE ) characterized by ultra-low dissipation (fJ/bit) and rapid processing (ps) [Fig. From a microscopic perspective, the modulation of R AHE in an SOT device is based on currentdriven domain wall (DW) motion [Fig. In this paper, leveraging SOT-induced DW motion with varying velocities, we designed and fabricated a stochastic synapse to emulate nonlinear weight updates in an SNN. Employing this SOT synapse, we established a stochastic SNN for the classification of breast tumors, assessing the uncertainty of the prediction. In contrast to a deterministic neural network, the SNN equipped with the stochastic SOT synapse adeptly gauges the uncertainty for the prediction outcomes. To determine the optimal structure of an SOT device suitable for nonlinear weight update, we Building upon the simulation results, we fabricated an SOT Hall-bar made of the Ta(3.0)/Pt(5.0)/Co(1.15)/SiN(7.0) multilayer (The numbers in parentheses denoted layer thickness in nanometers) deposited on a Si/SiO 2 substrate via the magnetron-sputtering (Fig. We conducted additional measurements on ΔR AHE under a series of current pulses to characterize the stochasticity (Figs. Notably, σ significantly increases in the first few pulses for both LTP and LTD stages, stabilizing as ΔR AHE approaches saturation (Fig. However, the σ in this case appears smaller than that under a fixed pulse amplitude (Figs. In an SNN, the weigh update follows the Spike-Timing-Dependent-Plasticity (STDP) rule, involving exponential weigh variation by modifying the time difference of spike arrival between the pre-synaptic and post-synaptic neurons (Δt). Typically, spiking pulses for both pre-and postsynaptic neurons can manifest as triangle waves, resulting in an effective square-wave pulse with variation in both pulse width and amplitude (Figs. 4c) To evaluate the efficiency of UQ for the SOT synapse, we designed a stochastic SNN composed using deterministic neurons and a stochastic SOT synapse to classify the breast tumors (benign or malignant) via Python3.10 software (Fig. We initially reduced the original 9-dimensional data to 2 dimensions using the principal component analysis (PCA) After completing the full training of the SNN, we utilized the stochastic SNN to predict the type of breast tumors for each test datum by 100 times. The prediction probabilities in each region were then averaged. The probability of classifying a tumor as benign (B) or malignant (M) can be estimated using the formula: This implies that the network provides identical results across the 100 predictions, irrespective of their correctness (the bottom figure in Fig. (the upper figure in Fig. In summary, we designed and fabricated a SOT synapse, enabling nonlinear weight updates following the STDP rule through DW motion with varying velocities. The R AHE of the device followed a Gaussian distribution, facilitating its modeling as a stochastic synapse to introduce a noisy environment for deterministic neurons. Leveraging these stochastic synapses, we constructed a stochastic SNN and applied it to the classification of breast tumors. The network exhibited high prediction accuracy and demonstrated proficiency in quantifying the uncertainty associated with predictions.