In graphene on transition metal dichalcogenides, two types of spin-orbit coupling (SOC)-Rashba and spin-valley Zeeman SOCs-can coexist that modify graphene's electronic band differently. Here, we show that the Landau levels (LLs) are also affected by these SOCs distinctively enough to estimate their relative strengths from the Landau fan diagram. Using a simple theoretical model, we calculated the LL spectrums of graphene for different SOC strengths, and found that when the total SOC is strong enough (i.e., when it is comparable to the half of the energy gap between the LLs of an intrinsic graphene), the corresponding LLs will split and cross with others depending sensitively on the relative strengths of the SOC terms. To demonstrate how one can use it to estimate the relative SOC strengths, we first identified the four key features that are well separated from the complex background and can be compared with experiment directly, and used them to show that in our sample, the Rashba SOC is stronger than the spin-valley Zeeman SOC that is consistent with other spectroscopic measurements. Our study therefore provides a simple and practical strategy to analyze the LL spectrum in graphene with SOC before carrying out more in-depth measurements. Interfacial interactions between the layers in van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures have been shown to be highly efficient in inducing new electronic properties that are originally absent in the individual layers. Examples include, but not limited to, strongly correlated states in magicangle twisted bilayer graphene, Many efforts have been made to estimate the SOC strengths of the system, which can be grouped into two: one that measures the spin relaxation time (τ s ) of the charge carriers and uses a model to estimate the SOC strength from the measured τ iii) The QH signal at v = ±4 becomes stronger than the signal at v = ±6, i.e., it appears at lower B, only when λ R ≈ 0; iv) As λ R increases, the QH signals at v = ±4 and ±6 will disappear and appear again at a larger and smaller B, respectively. After identifying these key features, we examined a Landau fan diagram measured in one of the graphene-WSe2 heterostructures used in our previous study To show that the Rashba and spin-valley Zeeman SOCs can affect the graphene band differently, we first calculate the band structure of graphene on TMDC at zero B for different values of λ vz and λ R using the effective Hamiltonian, . Moreover, only when both SOC terms coexist, the gap at the charge neutrality point opens (Figure and down (↓) bands (so, it keeps the linear dispersion), whereas the Rashba term H R mixes the in-plane spin (i.e., the superposition of ↑ and ↓ spins) and sublattice degrees of freedom (A and B). Thus, without the broken sublattice symmetry term (∆σ z ) and the intrinsic Kane-Mele SOC (H KM ), the gap can be opened only when both terms exist. This is consistent with previous calculations, To investigate how these SOC terms affect the LL spectrum in the system, we followed the existing studies Having identified the four key features, we turn our attention to the Landau fan diagram, R xx (v, B), measured in one of our graphene-WSe2 heterostructures at 1.5 K (see supplementary material for experimental details). In conclusion, by carefully analyzing the LL spectrum of graphene-TMDC heterostructures, we demonstrate a practical way to compare the experimental data with calculations for the LL spectroscopy of spin-orbit-coupled bands in graphene. From the theoretical analysis, we determined four robust features, i) the resistance at zero density, the QH signals at ii) v = ±3 (and ±5), iii) v = ±4, and iv) v = ±6, that can be used to identify the relative strengths of the Rashba and spin-valley Zeeman SOC terms in the system (Figures To calculate the Landau levels, we follow the existing studies Interestingly, after carefully examining the Equation (S1-3) at low energy (n ≤ 0), we find that there are non-trivial solutions with interesting properties. The graphene-WSe2 device was fabricated using conventional nanofabrication technique. For electrical measurement, we put the device in a 1.5 K cryogen-free variable temperature insert (VTI) with a 14-T superconducting magnet. The longitudinal resistance R xx = V xx /I xx was measured by applying a small low-frequency (17.777 Hz) AC voltage of 500 μV between the source and drain contacts while simultaneously measuring the current I xx in the circuit where m is a subset of solutions for orbital index n, one can derive effective low-energy Hamiltonians in the quantum Hall regime for both K and K′ valleys as follows