Optical absorption in rhombohedral BiFeO 3 starts at photon energies below the photoemission band gap of ≈3 eV calculated from first principles. A shoulder at the absorption onset has so far been attributed to low-lying electronic transitions or to oxygen vacancies. In this work optical spectra are calculated ab initio to determine the nature of the optical transitions near the absorption onset of pristine BiFeO 3 , the effect of electron-hole interaction, and the spectroscopic signatures of typical defects, i.e. doping (excess electrons or holes), intrinsic defects (oxygen and bismuth vacancies), and low-energy structural defects (ferroelectric domain walls). BiFeO 3 is a well-studied ferroelectric material with a very stable and large ferroelectric polarization close to 100 μC/cm 2 BiFeO 3 exhibits a bulk photovoltaic effect due to its noncentrosymmetric R3c crystal structure Because of its advantageous ferroelectric and optical properties, BiFeO 3 may be considered a starting point for combining ferroelectric and optoelectronic functionality, even though its band gap is still too large to efficiently harvest visible light. In spite of a large number of publications on the subject, the optical properties of BiFeO 3 and the role of defects are still not completely understood. A fundamental or photoemission band gap between 3.0 and 3.4 eV First principles studies of BiFeO 3 with oxygen vacancies revealed electronic states below the conduction band minimum Not only atomic, but also electronic defects such as excess electrons or electron holes may create extra peaks in optical absorption spectra. Both structurally and electronically, BiFeO 3 is similar to hematite, Fe 2 O 3 . Both materials contain Fe atoms in the formal charge state Fe 3+ inside oxygen octahedra; for both materials the electronic structure near the band edges is mainly composed of O-p and Fe-d states. In the case of hematite, there is evidence indicating that excess electrons, introduced via doping, tend to localize and form polarons with an electronic state inside the band gap wellseparated from the conduction-band bottom Besides electronic and atomic defects, also structural defects, such as ferroelectric domain walls, are often present and should be considered when discussing material properties. In fact, ferroelectric domain walls may even be desirable, as they can bring additional functionality, such as enhanced electrical conductivity compared to the domain interior The purpose of the present work is to determine the origin of the shoulder at the optical absorption onset and the effect of electron-hole interaction on the optical absorption spectrum of BiFeO 3 , and to identify the signatures of defects. To this end the optical absorption spectrum of BiFeO 3 was modeled ab initio including electron-hole effects by means of density-functional theory (DFT) with GW corrections of the electronic energies and by subsequently solving the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE). The resulting optical spectra are compared to published ellipsometry data, the electronic transitions responsible for the peaks near the absorption onset are identified, and the excitonic binding energy is determined. A computationally less demanding approach, the independent particle approximation on DFT+U level, is validated for defect-free BiFeO 3 and subsequently used to determine the optical spectra of BiFeO 3 with defects, namely, electron and hole polarons, oxygen and Bi vacancies, and ferroelectric domain walls, for which the GW+BSE approach would be computationally too demanding. The calculations were performed with the program vasp 1. BiFeO 3 with defects BiFeO 3 with defects was modeled using supercells with 120 atoms employing periodic boundary conditions. These supercells were identical to those used in Ref. Atomic defects. Several initial positions were considered and the structures optimized, then the lowest-energy configuration was selected for further investigation. For modeling the hole at the Bi vacancy, an additional Hubbard U of 8 eV Electronic defects. Throughout this paper, similar to Ref. Ferroelectric domain walls. The atomic structures and formation energies of low-energy ferroelectric domain walls in BiFeO 3 are well-known Optical properties of pristine, perfect BiFeO 3 were determined using many-body perturbation theory. First, a oneshot GW (G 0 W 0 ) calculation was performed for the lowest ≥110 bands to obtain electronic energy eigenvalues that include electron-electron interaction beyond the mean-field approach of DFT+U, starting from LSDA+U (U=6 eV) with a k-mesh of 6 × 6 × 6 points, using 150 frequencies, an energy cutoff of 300 eV for the dielectric permittivity, and ≈ 2000 bands in total. Pseudopotentials were chosen for which core electrons are well separated in energy from valence electrons (see Fig. BiFeO3 with defects was modeled using the computational setup summarized in TableII. Since modeling the systems with defects is computationally expensive already at the DFT level, many-body perturbation theory was not employed to calculate their optical properties. Instead the independent-particle approximation (IPA) on the LSDA+U level was used to calculate the frequency-dependent imaginary part of the highfrequency relative dielectric permittivity, ε 2 (ω), thereby neglecting excitonic effects and local-field effects. The justification for this approach lies in its being computationally lightweight enough to be applied to supercells. In the energy region within 2 eV above the absorption onset, the local-field effects mainly reduce ε 2 by ≈ 10% without modifying the shape, see Fig. where α and β are Cartesian directions, v and c are valenceand conduction-band indices at k-point k, the ε nk are energy eigenvalues, u is the lattice-periodic part of the Bloch function, e is a Cartesian unit vector, Ω is the unit-cell volume, and w k is the k-point weight. The real part of the dielectric permittivity ε 1 , needed to calculate the absorption coefficient, was obtained from a Kramers-Kronig transformation To model photoluminescence (PL), spontaneous emission from electron-hole pairs is assumed that are in thermal quasiequilibrium in the excited state, but not in thermal equilibrium with the photon field. Only the zero-phonon line is considered here. The intensity of the photoluminescence as a function of frequency is here approximated by where f ck and f vk are the Fermi distributions in the excited state, f v/ck = 1/(e (ε v/ck -μ h/e )/k B T + 1); μ h , μ e are the quasi-Fermi levels of holes and electrons; and T is the temperature. μ h and μ e were determined based on the electronic density of states and chosen such that there is one excess electron and one hole in the 120-atom supercell. Equation ( Both recombination from an electron polaron with an instantaneous hole and from a small exciton polaron were considered; the latter was modeled using excitonic Delta self-consistent field (∆SCF), i.e. by enforcing simultaneously a hole in the valence bands and an electron in the conduction bands in a DFT calculation during geometry optimization. References and details regarding the implementation are given in Ref. Method Gap (eV) A. Optical spectra of pristine BiFeO 3 The bandgaps of BiFeO 3 calculated with different levels of theory as reported in the literature and from this work are compiled in Table Figure Figure and analogously for the hole, where A (λ) is the coupling coefficient for the BSE eigenvalue E (λ) , so vck The lowest transition from hybridized O-p and Fe-d states to Fe-d states (Fig. B. Optical spectra of BiFeO 3 with defects Optical spectra of BiFeO 3 with defects were calculated using the independent-particle approximation on the LSDA+U level (U=5.3 eV) validated in the previous section. Polarons. Previous first-principles calculations indicate that excess electrons spontaneously form small polarons Figure laron peaks also the differential spectra (∆ε 2 = ε 2 -ε 2,bulk ) are shown in the bottom panels of Fig. The spectra of the 109°and 180°domain walls are similar to that of the 71°wall. The most pronounced effects of the domain walls are the additional absorption peaks stemming from the defects located there. The oscillator strength of transitions involving defects is already small at the high doping level of the order of 10 20 -10 21 /cm 3 considered here, and should decrease linearly for lower doping levels. Therefore, these defect signatures will be difficult to detect in absorption spectroscopy, but should be easier to find using photoluminescence spectroscopy (Kasha's rule). The bottom panels show differential spectra with respect to those of the bulk (∆ε 2 = ε 2 -ε 2,bulk ). Red circles mark peaks from small electron polarons. Figure Pristine BiFeO 3 . The optical absorption spectrum of BiFeO 3 calculated on the BSE@G 0 W 0 level, using pseudopotentials and starting from LSDA+U, is in close agreement with experiment, but different choices of pseudopotentials and different numbers of frequencies in the GW part can change the calculated gap by several tenths of an eV. A quasiparticle band gap of ≥3.1 eV and an optical band gap of ≥2.9 eV are obtained (excitonic binding energy ≈0.2 eV). Due to partial cancellation of errors, the independentparticle approximation on LSDA+U level has a similar accuracy. The agreement with experiment is best for U ≈ 6 eV. Assuming that the methodology adopted here is valid, the shoulder at the absorption onset cannot be explained by defect states, such as those at oxygen vacancies, because the defect states lie too deep in the gap so they form separate peaks rather than a shoulder. Moreover, the defect concentration would need to be quite large (of the order of 10 20 /cm 3 ) to give rise to a sizable signal in the absorption spectrum. The shoulder is already present in calculated absorption spectra of defectfree BiFeO 3 . It seems, therefore, more likely that the shoulder is composed of transitions between hybridized O-p/Fe-d valence states and Fe-d conduction states of pristine BiFeO 3 . Such transitions that are partially dipole-and spin-forbidden are likely underestimated by the methodology adopted here. To validate the adopted methodology and to clarify the origin of the shoulder unambigously, self-consistency in GW and a dense k-point mesh using e.g. interpolation should be employed, taking into account spin-orbit coupling, ideally also avoiding the use of pseudopotentials, a formidable task. BiFeO 3 with defects. Different point defects, namely, electron polarons, electrons at oxygen vacancies, and possibly holes near bismuth vacancies apparently introduce defect states deep within the gap. These defect states seem to be at similar energies and may be difficult to distinguish. In the case of hole doping (p-type conditions), a Drude peak should appear due to the metal-like density of states of the large hole polaron. The spectroscopic signatures of the point defects should only be visible in absorption spectra at high defect concentrations of the order of 10 20 /cm 3 , whereas they should be visible in photoluminescence at lower concentrations, such as 10 11 /cm 3 , provided the excited carriers are near thermal equilibrium and their concentration is of the order of the defect concentration or lower, otherwise bulk transitions should dominate. The ferroelectric domain walls seem to accumulate these point defects rather than to affect the spectra directly. This section contains convergence tests for the 10-atom unit cell of perfect rhombohedral BiFeO 3 . Details of the pseudopotentials (PSP) used and calculation results are given in Table Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure Fig. 12. G 0 W 0 & BSE@G 0 W 0 gaps, and the exciton binding energy E B (X) as a function of N ω using PSP1 (left) and PSP2 (right). Fig. For the full BSE N ω = 150 and E cut (ε) = 300 eV were used. Both the model and the full BSE were solved for 16 valence and 16 conduction bands. Figure Figure Figure Figure FIG. picted density of states of BiFeO 3 because in the pseudopotential they are part of the core electrons. Two pseudopotentials with energetically well-separated core and valence states were finally chosen for the G 0 W 0 calculations, namely the "Bi-d Fe O" (15, 8, and 6 valence electrons) and the "Bi-sv-GW, Fe-sv-GW, O-GW" Figure Figure Figure Approximately converged exciton binding energies can be obtained with the calculation parameters in Table The (BSE@)G 0 W 0 gaps in the main text were corrected for spin-orbit coupling and extrapolated to an infinite cutoff energy of the dielectric matrix, and to an infinitely dense k-point mesh (only BSE). This section contains convergence tests for the 120-atom cell of BiFeO 3 with 71°domain walls. FIG. While the absorption spectra of domain walls were calculated in the independent-particle approximation, in the photoluminescence spectrum excitons were introduced afterwards by weighting the absorption spectrum with a Bose-Einstein distribution. Figure oscillator strength (arb. u.) Energy (eV) oscillator strength (arb. u.) FIG. Bi 5 f 0 6s 2 6p 3 6d 0 Bi 5d 10 5 f 0 6s 2 6p 3 Bi 5s 2 5p 6 5d 10 5 f 0 6s 2 6p 3 Fe 3s 2 3p 6 3d 7 4s 1 4 f 0 Fe 3d 7 4s 1 4p 0 4 f 0 Fe 3s Imaginary part of the dielectric permittivity ε 2 with and without considering Bi semicore (5d) electrons as valence electrons, for light polarizations along the extraordinary ("c") and ordinary ("a") axis of rhombohedral BiFeO 3 . Vertical lines mark G 0 W 0 (green) and BSE gaps (black). Imaginary part of the dielectric permittivity ε 2 on LSDA+U level for two methods of calculating dipole matrix elements, perturbatively and using finite differences. 