Prediction and discovery of new materials with desired properties are at the forefront of quantum science and technology research. A major bottleneck in this field is the computational resources and time complexity related to finding new materials from ab initio calculations. In this work, an effective and robust deep learning-based model is proposed by incorporating persistent homology and graph neural network which offers an accuracy of 91.4% and an F1 score of 88.5% in classifying topological vs. non-topological materials, outperforming the other state-of-the-art classifier models. The incorporation of the graph neural network encodes the underlying relation between the atoms into the model based on their own crystalline structures and thus proved to be an effective method to represent and process non-euclidean data like molecules with a relatively shallow network. The persistent homology pipeline in the suggested neural network is capable of integrating the atom-specific topological information into the deep learning model, increasing robustness, and gain in performance. It is believed that the presented work will be an efficacious tool for predicting the topological class and therefore enable the high-throughput search for novel materials in this field. Recent years have witnessed the rise of machine learning, enabling a multitude of new applications, ranging from accelerated drug discovery to personalized advertising The key requirement to apply deep learning-based methods is the availability of a large-scale data set. Thankfully, density functional theory Data-driven intelligent models learn certain features or descriptors of the materials from the provided data and can make certain decisions based on those in an automated system Deep learning-based automatic prediction of the topological materials requires an efficient representation of the material and a scheme to extract the useful features for the network. Persistent homology, which explores the qualitative features based on the geometry and topology Our graph neural network -persistent homology ensemble model architecture encodes the structural, chemical, and topological information of the material. The graph representation of the crystals acts as a structural descriptor whereas the persistent homological feature vector acts as a topological descriptor. Therefore, the model can be divided into two separate but operating in parallel models: one network works with the graph representation learning and the other part performs the algebraic homological operation on the material crystal structures to produce a topological feature vector. These two representations in two different spaces are finally combined to produce the complete representation of the whole crystal system. This conjoined feature vector is then fed into a deep neural network to produce the final prediction result. The entire mechanism of merging homological and graph features to reach the final result is presented in Fig. Figure The graph representation of data can bear more vigorous information on the basic structure thanks to its ability to represent the relation between the entities. The basic components of a graph are nodes and edges-here the edges create connections between the nodes. When considering a molecule as a graph, each atom is represented as a node in the graph while the interactions among the atoms are represented as edges. Thus atoms and their bonding information can be encoded into a graph structure. However, the graphs are non-structured and non-euclidean in nature, so accessing and working with the information is challenging and requires scaling down to a lower dimension. A key advantage of a graph convolutional neural network is that it can work with varying and non-ordered node connections. It is, therefore, significantly advantageous over the traditional convolutional neural network which only works with the regular structured Euclidean data. As illustrated in Fig. ( Here ⊙ and σ denote element-wise multiplication and sigmoid function, respectively. z j ⊕ u(i, j) k incorporates the neighbouring vectors through concatenation. W t is the weight vector and b t represents the bias on t th convolution stage. A detailed description of CGCNN can be found in Ref. In order to build a functional neural network for predicting topological classes of materials, we need to extract the necessary features related to the complex crystal geometry as well as the interactions between atoms. However, features provided by the traditional topological descriptors are not sufficient to depict the complete crystal structure because they are over-simplified and lack the required geometrical information to train a neural network. It necessitates a more accurate crystalline representation and feature extraction approach capable of portraying the overall crystal domain interactions. We find persistent homology to be an effective tool for this purpose. Persistent homology can successfully encode the multi-scale crystalline geometric information as well as the topological invariant. Besides crystal geometry, it is necessary to consider the atomic diversity and crystal periodicity information to distinguish one crystal from the others of a similar kind. Here we choose atom-specific persistent homology (ASPH) because it can provide element-level chemical information and adaptations to periodicity necessary to capture the discrepancies of crystal structures Figure To better understand how ASPH combines atom-wise geometric and chemical information with the topological invariant to generate an individual topological fingerprint, first, we analyze the Betti number generation based on the simplicial homology group rank Next, to extract element-specific interaction features, all the possible element pairs of the crystal composition are considered. Each element-specific pair collection of atoms inside a crystal is symbolized as P β α,i , where α and β are the two types of elements of that crystal composition, and the i th central atom of type-α is surrounded by atoms of type-β . Then, the unit cell is enlarged to the extent that the distance between any atom in the original unit cell and the boundary atom is smaller than a cutoff radius r co . In this enlarged unit cell, a point cloud of atoms within r co is selected as the region of interest to generate the homology groups and persistence barcodes based on the Betti numbers. The point cloud region R α,β i is defined as 7 : In our atom-specific persistent homology pipeline shown in Fig. The structural features obtained from the graph convolutional network and topological descriptors from atom-specific persistent homology are integrated and processed through a deep neural network to perform the final prediction. A detailed illustration of the ensemble model is depicted in Figure the three individual classes, which is evident from the topological insulators (represented by red dots) spread all over the feature space. Examples of some materials from the two classes and the respective confidence scores are presented in Table In summary, our proposed model contributes to the exploration of novel topologically reactive materials by exploiting persistent homological features and integrating them with the graph convolutional neural network. The novelty of this work encompasses robust prediction of the topological nature of crystals along with efficient incorporation of graph features with persistent homological information. In spite of the fact that graph neural networks have been rigorously used in material property prediction, the impact of graph representation and graph convolutional features in encoding topological information of material has been an untrodden realm. It is observed in this work that, structural information and neighborhood connectivity information encoded in the graphs of the materials can be employed to predict the topological nature of materials. Furthermore, manipulating the graph information with atom-specific persistent homological features of individual materials can stimulate the prediction. Crystals, being unstructured non-euclidean data, are difficult to assimilate in the deep learning pipeline. Graph feature along with persistent homological feature is an effective method to do this, reflecting upon the fact that these features are rotation and translation invariant. The proposed model has been tested against state-of-the-art graph neural network prediction models and showed promising results with an accuracy of over 91% and an F1 score of over 89%. Additionally, the model's performance has been examined on both notable and newly discovered topological materials, thus bearing testimony to the robustness of our model. Considering recent advancements in topological material physics and its anticipated application in the field of spintronics, optics, and electronics, our model presents a novel approach to studying topological materials bypassing time and resource-intensive density functional theory calculations and is expected to be a pioneer in the search for new topologically exquisite materials. The dataset for this study has been collected from the Topological Quantum Chemistry database . The final dataset consists of 33800 material entries: around 15000 topologically trivial materials, 5600 topological insulators, and 13250 topological semimetals. The topological material database is collected through web scrapping from the topological quantum chemistry website. Crystallographic Information File (CIF) files The graph convolutional neural network and atom-specific persistent homology-based ensemble model is implemented in PyTorch In the persistent homological feature generation process, given cells are enlarged to a cutoff radius of 8Å and the betti number for each structure is calculated accordingly. Persistent barcodes of the dataset are generated using Ripser package The model has been instructed to minimize the Negative Log-Likelihood loss function The deep learning models of this work have been implemented on computers of the Robert Noyce Simulation Laboratory at Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology. The proposed model along with the reference models are trained on 8 core Intel Core i7 CPU and Nvidia GTX 1650 for 50 epochs with batch size 256. The dataset is split into 80-10-10 ratios for training, testing, and validation purposes, respectively, and therefore experienced a total of 26000 training samples. Dataset validation has also been applied to ensure stability and robustness of results, whereas dropout layers are introduced in order to avoid overfitting. https://www.topologicalquantumchemistry.org/, https://www.cryst.ehu.es/