We present a detailed study of the local atomic and magnetic structure of the type-I multiferroic perovskite system (Sr,Ba)(Mn,Ti)O3 using x-ray and neutron pair distribution function (PDF) analysis, polarized neutron scattering, and muon spin relaxation (μSR) techniques. The atomic PDF analysis reveals widespread nanoscale tetragonal distortions of the crystal structure even in the paraelectric phase with average cubic symmetry, corresponding to incipient ferroelectricity in the local structure. Magnetic PDF analysis, polarized neutron scattering, and μSR likewise confirm the presence of short-range antiferromagnetic correlations in the paramagnetic state, which grow in magnitude as the temperature approaches the magnetic transition. We show that these shortrange magnetic correlations coincide with a reduction of the tetragonal (i.e. ferroelectric) distortion in the average structure, suggesting that short-range magnetism can play an important role in magnetoelectric and/or magnetostructural phenomena even without genuine long-range magnetic order. The reduction of the tetragonal distortion scales linearly with the local magnetic order parameter, pointing to spontaneous linear magnetoelectric coupling in this system. These findings provide greater insight into the multiferroic properties of (Sr,Ba)(Mn,Ti)O3 and demonstrate the importance of investigating the local atomic and magnetic structure to gain a deeper understanding of the intertwined degrees of freedom in multiferroics. In magnetoelectric multiferroic materials, ordered magnetic moments exist simultaneously with ordered electric dipoles Multiferroics are typically classified as type I or type II In this context, the perovskite material (Sr,Ba)MnO 3 has recently attracted interest as a promising multiferroic system In the paraelectric state, (Sr,Ba)MnO 3 adopts the typical cubic perovskite structure. The FE transition, which occurs between 330 and 430 K depending on the composition, is associated with an off-centering displacement of the Mn 4+ ion relative to the surrounding O 2-ions and a tetragonal distortion, in which c becomes slightly greater than a. The resulting space group is P 4mm The FE and AFM ordering temperatures can be tuned systematically by varying the Ba content in Sr 1-x Ba x MnO 3 . Ferroelectricity first appears for x = 0.43 with a Curie temperature of T C = 330 K, which rises rapidly to about 400 K for x = 0.5. Compositions with x ≥ 0.5 can be stabilized by co-substitution with small amounts of Ti on the Mn site Features of the local structure such as short-range structural correlations that differ from the long-range crystallographic structure have long been recognized as crucial for understanding ferroelectric materials. For example, short-range tetragonal distortions resulting in local polar displacements within an average centrosymmetric crystal structure have been observed in numerous perovskite-based ferroelectrics ranging from classic systems such as BaTiO 3 to complex relaxor ferroelectrics Studies of local atomic structure are likewise expected to be valuable for investigations of multiferroics, especially when combined with probes of the local magnetic structure. Detailed understanding of short-range atomic and magnetic correlations could potentially provide a direct view into the microscopic mechanisms of magnetoelectric coupling in multiferroics. Several fruitful atomic PDF studies have been conducted on multiferroic systems Here, we report a thorough x-ray and neutron total scattering study of Sr 1-x Ba x Mn 1-y Ti y O 3 for 0.45 ≤ x ≤ 0.7 and 0.00 ≤ y ≤ 0.12 featuring combined atomic and magnetic PDF analyses of the local atomic and magnetic structure. We also performed complementary muon spin relaxation (μSR) and polarized neutron diffraction experiments to further probe the local magnetism. We show that short-range ferroelectric distortions with a typical length scale of ∼2 nm are present in the instantaneous local structure above T C in all measured compounds. Short-range antiferromagnetic correlations likewise appear in the ferroelectric state about 100 K above the magnetic ordering temperature and grow in magnitude as the temperature approaches T N . The growth of the local magnetic order parameter scales linearly with a reduction of the tetragonal distortion in the crystal structure above T N , indicating that the magnetoelectric coupling mechanism can have effect even in the absence of genuine long-range magnetic order when robust short-range magnetic correlations are present. High-purity powder samples of Sr 1-x Ba x Mn 1-y Ti y O 3 were synthesized according to previously published recipes Magnetic susceptibility measurements (M/H) were performed using a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS-3). The data were collected in a field of 1 T upon warming after the samples were cooled to base temperature in zero magnetic field (ZFC-W). We show in Fig. Neutron total scattering experiments were performed on the NOMAD beamline Polarized neutron scattering measurements were performed on the HYSPEC instrument at SNS Muon spin relaxation (μSR) experiments were conducted at the TRIUMF Laboratory in Vancouver, Canada using the LAMPF spectrometer on the M20D beamline. In a μSR experiment, spin-polarized positive muons are implanted in the sample, where they undergo Larmor precession in the local magnetic field (i.e. the vector sum of any internal and externally applied fields) at their stopping sites. After a mean lifetime of 2.2 μs, the muons undergo asymmetric decay into positrons, which are emitted preferentially along the direction of the muon spin at the moment of decay We first present results relating to the local atomic structure of (Sr,Ba)(Mn,Ti)O 3 determined from atomic PDF analysis of the neutron and x-ray total scattering data. The focus is on the specific compositions Sr 0.55 Ba 0.45 MnO 3 and Sr 0.4 Ba 0.6 Mn 0.95 Ti 0.05 O 3 . We begin with model-independent analysis of the data, which we then support through quantitative refinements of structural models. To illustrate the temperature dependence of the structure on a qualitative basis, we display in Fig. To investigate this further, we computed the Pearson correlation coefficient between each PDF pattern and the patterns collected at every other temperature for a given sample. This quantity, given by can be used as a measure of the similarity between two data sets G 1 and G 2 , with angular brackets denoting the mean and the subscript i indexing each discrete data point. The Pearson coefficient ranges from 1 to -1, with 1 indicating perfect linear correlation, 0 indicating no correlation, and -1 indicating anti-correlation between the two data sets. We computed the coefficient for the data ranges 1.5 -21.5 Å and 41.5 -61.5 Å to allow a comparison of the local and longer-range structure once again. The resulting Pearson correlation maps are shown for Sr 0.55 Ba 0.45 MnO 3 in Fig. The temperature dependence of the corrected Pearson correlation coefficient with respect to the 250 K x-ray PDF data for Sr 0.55 Ba 0.45 MnO 3 is displayed for three different data ranges in Fig. Complementing the model-independent analysis presented in the previous section, we now present structural refinements of the tetragonal model against the PDF data. We used a boxcar fitting approach, in which the structural model was refined against a sliding window through the PDF data. In our case, we performed fits over a 20 Å range beginning with 1.5 -21.5 Å and ending with 41.5 -61.5 Å in increments of 2 Å, resulting in 21 distinct fitting ranges for each temperature and hundreds of fits for each sample studied. This enables a detailed study of the evolution of the local structure (as determined from the shorter range fits) to the intermediate or average structure (as determined from the longer range fits). We used the tetragonal model at all temperatures, including those in the nominally cubic phase, to avoid imposing the symmetry of the average structure on the local structure. In the case that the structure really is cubic, the tetragonal lattice parameters will simply converge to equal values in the fit. The structural parameters refined in PDFgui included a scale factor, the lattice parameters, the coordinates of the atoms with symmetry-allowed positional degrees of freedom, the ADPs, and the linear correlated motion sharpening parameter for the fits that included data below 5 Å. The z coordinates of the atoms on the Mn site were fixed so that the positions of the other atoms could shift relative to the Mn sites. The goodness-of-fit metric R w typically lay between 0.05 to 0.10, indicating good quality fits. A representative fit is shown in Fig. The refined lattice parameters were extracted from each fit conducted for a given sample. This allows us to quantify the temperature-and length-dependent behavior of the tetragonal (i.e. ferroelectric) distortion by calculating c/a for every fit. The results for Sr 0.55 Ba 0.45 MnO 3 based on neutron PDF fits are shown in Fig. Representative neutron PDF fit for Sr0.55Ba0.45MnO3 at 180 K. The blue symbols show the experimental data, the red curve the best fit, and the green curve the fit residual, offset vertically for clarity. analysis that the instantaneous local structure is already symmetry-broken above the ferroelectric Curie temperature. Interestingly, a local enhancement of the tetragonal distortion also seems to be present in the multiferroic state at low temperature. Boxcar fits conducted for the other compositions showed qualitatively similar results. As a final note on the structural characterization of (Sr,Ba)MnO 3 , we also comment on x-ray PDF measurements that we performed with variable temperature in an in situ magnetic field up to 5 T. No clear field dependence of any structural parameters at any temperature could be determined from the fits, indicating that if such effects are present, they are smaller than the sensitivity of our x-ray PDF measurements. This is not a surprising result, considering that antiferromagnets do not typ- ically show a large response to an applied magnetic field. We now present data relating to the local magnetic structure of (Sr,Ba)(Mn,Ti)O 3 , with particular emphasis on short-range magnetic correlations above T N . We begin with magnetic PDF analysis, followed by polarized neutron scattering, and finally μSR. Magnetic PDF data are typically extracted from the total PDF (i.e. the sum of the nuclear and magnetic PDF signals) by subtracting the best-fit nuclear PDF from the total PDF data. The resulting fit residual contains the mPDF signal in addition to the usual components of the fit residual, i.e. noise and errors from the nuclear PDF fit. In (Sr,Ba)(Mn,Ti)O 3 , the mPDF is quite small in magnitude, comparable to the noise and errors. Therefore, we took the additional step of subtracting the nuclear PDF fit residual obtained at a high temperature (≳ 350 K, high enough that no short-range magnetic correlations survive) from the fit residuals at all lower temperatures. This removes any temperatureindependent contributions to the fit residual such as systematic errors that might otherwise swamp the mPDF signal. In Fig. strates the small signal weight of the mPDF relative to the total PDF. We show a close-up view of the mPDF data and fit in Fig. We performed mPDF fits to the neutron PDF data for Sr 0.55 Ba 0.45 MnO 3 and Sr 0.4 Ba 0.6 Mn 0.95 Ti 0.05 O 3 for all temperatures below 350 K, from which we extracted the local magnetic order parameter (LMOP) as a function of temperature. This should be interpreted as the magnitude of the instantaneous locally ordered moment among near-neighbor Mn 4+ spins, which will remain nonzero even above T N when short-range magnetic correlations are present. We plot the LMOP for Sr 0.4 Ba 0.6 Mn 0.95 Ti 0.05 O 3 in Fig. Considering the small magnitude of the mPDF signal relative to the total PDF, it is useful to confirm the presence of short-range magnetic correlations above T N using polarized neutron scattering, which provides excellent sensitivity to diffuse magnetic scattering. In Locally ordered magnetic moment in Sr0.4Ba0.6Mn0.95Ti0.05O3 obtained from mPDF analysis. The persistent ordered moment above TN arises from short-range AFM correlations. The anomalous drop in the ordered moment at 90 K is expected to be an artifact of imperfect thermal equilibrium. with the data. The magnetic peaks at 100 K are indexed by the propagation vector k = (1/2, 1/2, 1/2) and were modeled using the magnetic space group I c 4cm in BNS notation and I4cm.1 ′ c [rP 4mm] in the new unified (UNI) notation As an independent verification of the local magnetic properties of (Sr,Ba)MnO 3 revealed by neutron scattering, we performed μSR measurements on Sr 0.55 0.45 MnO 3 and Sr 0.4 Ba 0.6 Mn 0.95 Ti 0.05 O 3 . Asymmetry spectra collected at various temperatures across the antiferromagnetic transition are shown for Sr 0.4 Ba 0.6 Mn 0.95 Ti 0.05 O 3 in Fig. We analyzed the μSR data more quantitatively by performing fits to the asymmetry spectra using the program BEAMS Based on the total scattering, polarized neutron scattering, and μSR data presented here, the local electronic environment in (Sr,Ba)(Mn,Ti)O 3 is characterized by widespread local symmetry breaking. This includes not only short-range tetragonal distortions resulting in local electric dipole formation deep into the high-temperature paraelectric phase, but also short-range AFM correlations that survive well above T N . The occurrence of local symmetry breaking above ferroelectric or magnetic transitions is by no means unique or even particularly uncommon, but these observations nevertheless confirm the relevance of such behavior for (Sr,Ba)(Mn,Ti)O 3 and possibly other multiferroic systems, where local symmetry breaking has received mostly limited attention in the past. Considering the behavior of the local atomic and magnetic structure together allows us to interrogate the coupling between the electric and magnetic degrees of freedom, a central issue for multiferroics. To facilitate this, we plot in Fig. An issue not fully resolved in previous studies is the reason for the reduction of the tetragonal distortion upon approaching the AFM transition from above, beginning around 250 K in Sr 0.4 Ba 0.6 Mn 0.95 Ti 0.05 O 3 . Here, it is clear that this reduction coincides precisely with the onset of short-range AFM correlations above T N , providing direct evidence that the magnetic fluctuations are responsible for the reduced tetragonal distortion. To illustrate this further, we plot the tetragonal distortion against the local magnetic order parameter in Fig. We note that the phenomenon of short-range magnetism driving long-range changes in the average structure, such as that seen in (Sr,Ba)(Mn,Ti)O 3 , has also been observed in a diversity of other systems, such as a geometrically frustrated magnet 