The search for evidence of Majorana states on the edges of topological superconductors (TSCs) is challenging due to the difficulty of detecting such charge-neutral electronic quasiparticles. Local microwave spectroscopy has been shown to be a possible method to detect propagating Majorana modes, where a spatially focused light beam must be used. Here, we show that helical Majorana modes in TSCs allow inter-band transitions and thus contribute to optical conductivity under a spatially uniform light. The existence of such a signal requires the system to break certain symmetries so that the projection of the charge current operator onto helical Majorana edge states leads to inter-band hybridization terms. The general form of this contribution under a tunable time-reversal breaking field is derived, which is valid in the sub-gap low-frequency regime where the edge energy spectrum is linear, and numerical results are obtained in three TSC models, showing remarkable consistency with the analytical prediction. In comparison, the current operator for normal helical edge states, such as in quantum spin Hall insulators, does not cause inter-band transitions and the related optical conductivity vanishes unless the time-reversal symmetry is broken. Our results may help guide feasible experiments to provide evidence of Majorana edge modes in TSCs. The search for Majorana modes in condensed matter physics Various systems have been predicted to host propagating helical Strictly speaking, however, the neutrality is true only on average since Majorana modes alone do not preserve the U(1) gauge symmetry. This makes it possible for them to couple with external electromagnetic field, leading to particular optical responses that may serve as evidence of chiral Majorana modes Here, we show that, without breaking the transnational symmetry along the edge, the microwave absorp-tion of helical Majorana modes (HMMs) in time-reversal invariant TSCs is nonzero and may be used as an effective detection method. We begin with a generic discussion with an effective theory containing only the edge states. The current operator, assumed to be determined by the current operator of the bulk TSC system projected onto the edge, is directly written down by physical arguments at this stage. A general form of the optical absorption is obtained. Then we investigate this phenomenon in several models of time-reversal invariant TSCs including p ± ip-wave superconductors, topological insulator (TI) thin films in proximity to superconductivity, and doped quantum spin Hall (QSH) insulators. We show that they all share the same features in the sub-gap low-energy region where the optical transitions happen among the Majorana edge states. A minimum theory of the helical Majorana edge states of a time-reversal invariant TSC may be described by the following Hamiltonian, where Γ k = [γ 1k , γ 2k ] denotes the edge HMMs, σ 1,2,3 are the Pauli matrices, k 0 is the momentum cutoff, and M is a time-reversal breaking term that opens a gap in the 1D spectrum. When M = 0, one readily find that the time-reversal symmetry T = iσ 2 K and the particle-hole symmetry P = K are both preserved. When M ̸ = 0, the energy eigenvalues are ±ξ k with ξ k = (vk) 2 + M 2 , which has a gap of M , as shown in Fig. where a and b are real. The current operator in the momentum space is given by Fourier transformation j q = j(x)e -iqx dx and the optical conductivity is given by the Kubo formula, where R (I) denote the real (imaginary) part. For a uniform detecting light we only need to consider the q = 0 component. Eq. ( When the temperature T → 0 and M = 0, the R[σ(ω, 0)] curve decreases as 1/ω. For the time-reversal breaking case, the optical response is zero inside the edge gap, i.e. when ω < 2M which is the lowest energy to break a Cooper pair into two Majorana states with the same energy and opposite momenta. R[σ(ω, 0)] reaches the maximum value at ω = 2 √ 2M and decreases with further increasing ω, as shown in Fig. Note that the right-hand side of Eq. ( As the simplest case, let us first consider a p ± ip-wave TSC described by the following Hamiltonian with the basis Here τ and σ i are Pauli matrices (σ 0 being the identity matrix) acting on the particle-hole and spin degrees of freedom respectively. A pair of gapless helical Majorana states appear at the boundary of the 2D system and are protected by the time-reversal symmetry T , which can be broken by a small Zeeman term H z = B p τ 3 σ 1 . The spin orbit coupling (SOC) term proportional to A p is necessary in order to induce optical response to a uniform light, because the Hamiltonian (6) with A p = 0 commutes with the spin operator σ 3 and there is no mixing between ↑ and ↓, indicating b = 0 in Eq. ( The current operator along the x direction is given by where j n (k) = eħk x /mσ 0 + eA p σ 1 is the k-derivative of the normal state Hamiltonian H n = (ħ 2 k 2 /2m -μ)σ 0 + B p σ 1 + A p k • σ multiplied by the electron charge e. The Kubo formula calculated in the energy eigenstate basis leads to where Ω stands for the area of the shining light and f (ε) represents the Fermi distribution function. Note that, in the absence of SOC effect, j x is proportional to the identical matrix and no inter-band transition occurs due to the orthogonality of the eigenstates, |nk⟩ and |mk⟩. Adding SOC terms breaks the inversion symmetry and produces spin-mixing terms in the current operator. Then, we expect nontrivial inter-band transition described by the effective 1D theory in the previous section. verges at as ω → 0. This is in agreement with the prediction of the effective theory in which R[σ(ω)] ∼ 1/ω. For nonzero but small B p , the edge states acquire a gap, denoted by E g . Thus, there is no absorption for ω < 2E g unless thermal excitation due to finite temperature is considered. R[σ] rapidly increases near ω > 2E g and reaches a maximum at ω nu(th) . It decreases as ω further goes up until it reaches the bulk gap, where the contribution of the bulk states dominates. Figure The optical conductivity of the p ± ip-wave superconductor in response to a locally distributed detecting light is also studied by transforming Eq.( The size of detecting area is determined by the limits 1 ≤ x ≤ l x and 1 ≤ y ≤ l y , where l y is chosen to cover the spread of the edge state wave functions. The current operator to calculate the optical response in the detecting area is given by Figure For small l x we get similar shape of the R[σ l (ω)] curve compared to the chiral case The surface states of TIs can be used to design a timereversal invariant TSC by proximity to conventional superconductors. If the SC order parameters induced on the two surfaces of a TI thin film are different by a phase π, a pair of HMMs appear on the edges where ± denotes the two surfaces. The vector d = [k x , k y , 0] and the function m k = m 0 -t f (k 2 x + k 2 y ). The first term of Eq. ( two surfaces and the second term represents the intersurface coupling. An inversion-symmetry-breaking term (originating from the substrate, for example) is needed to induce vertical optical transition Equations ( Adding time-reversal breaking terms will open small gaps at these points. As shown in Fig. Quantum spin Hall insulators are proposed to be a TSC through correlation effects Consider the following Hamiltonian describing a QSH insulator where the Pauli matrices σ i and τ i (i = 1, 2, 3) act on the spin and orbital spaces, respectively. y ) and m 0 t > 0 is required to guarantee the non-trivil topology of the normal state. It has been predicted that a The real-part conductivity of the doped QSH system in the QSH phase and in the TSC phase. For the TSC state the parameters are: A = 2, ∆ = 0.5, t = 2, m0 = 0.1, A1 = 2, Z = 0 (for the red line) and Z = 0.2 (for the blue line). For the QSH state: A = 2, ∆ = 0, t = 2, m0 = 0.7, A1 = 2 and Z = 0 (for the black line). (b) and (c) are the energy spectrum of the TSC phase and the QSH phase, respectively, where the time-reversal invariant (broken) edge states are in red (blue). μν (k) = ∆c 1,kμ c 2,-kν δ μν is favored at certain doped region with an inversion-breaking Rashba SOC Here the subscript μ(ν) labels the electron spins and the superscript 1(2) represents different orbitals. The TSC phase has a pair of helical Majorana states propagating along the boundary, which is replaced by normal-fermion edge states when the pairing term vanishes and the system transforms into a QSH phase. In presence of a time-reversal breaking term H Z = Zσ 3 τ 0 , the edge states develop new features including a small gap, as shown in Fig. The real-part conductivity of the TSC phase and the QSH phase under uniform detecting light are shown in Fig. The vanishing optical absorption by the QSH edge states forms a major difference from the HMMs. It originates from the different mechanisms through which the edge states couple with electromagnetic waves. While the light-coupling of the HMMs relies on the bulk system and the corresponding current operator must be obtained by projecting the bulk version to the edges, the current operator of the QSH edge states may be directly derived within the effective edge theory which preserves the U(1) gauge symmetry. By introducing a gauge field to the edge theory, the current operator, , can be readily obtained without referring to the bulk. It is simply the k-derivative of the edge Hamiltonian h edge (k) = vk(ψ † 1 ψ 1 -ψ † 2 ψ 2 ). Following the same procedures in the previous effective 1D theory of Majorana edges states, we get the optical absorption for the QSH edge states at zero temperature, , where M is the edge gap open by time-reversal symmetry breaking. Note that, besides the above major difference, the optical responses of the QSH edge states and the HMMs may happen in different ranges of the wavelength since a QSH insulator may have a much larger topological gap. We have demonstrated that helical Majorana modes induce microwave absorption. It originates from interband optical transition processes that are made possible by the broken U(1) gauge and spatial-inversion symmetries. Analytical form of the resulting optical conductivity is obtained with an effective edge theory, which are qualitatively confirmed by numerical calculations with several models of topological superconductors. The zerotemperature real-part optical conductivity R[σ(ω)] induced by the helical Majorana modes under uniform light is proportional to ω -1 . When the time-reversal symmetry is broken and an energy gap of M is opened on the edge, R[σ(ω)] has a maximum value at ω = 2 √ 2M . In comparison, vertical optical transitions in helical normal edge states in quantum spin Hall insulators are forbidden unless the time-reversal symmetry is broken after which the functional form of R[σ(ω)] becomes similar to that of Majorana modes. This difference originates from the different mechanisms of coupling with the U(1) gauge field. Our results show that optical measurements may provide evidence of Majorana edge states in time-reversal invariant topological superconductors. Different from reference in the new basis. To maintain the Majornana algebra of the new quasi-particle states {γ ik , γjk ′ } = δ ij δ k,-k ′ the parameters ξ k , and φ u -φ v = π 2 . The akσ 0 term from Eq. (A9) does not contribute to the correlation function because it only involves terms like ⟨T τ γ † i (τ )γ i (τ )γ † i γi ⟩ (i = 1, 2). Such terms vanish under Wick's theorem since the involved Green's functions belong to the same Majorana operator. However the second term of Eq. (A9) will cause connected diagrams 