Chiral Majorana one-dimensional modes have been proposed as they key component for topological quantum computing. In this study, we explore their potential realization as hinge modes in higher-order topological superconductors. To create such phases, we engineer a sign-changing, time-reversal symmetry-breaking mass term through an ensemble of magnetic impurities on the surface of a sphere. The magnetization of this ensemble arises from the competition between the external magnetic field and the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction among the impurities, mediated by the surface Majorana modes. We determine the magnetic phase diagram and identify the optimal magnetic field to minimize orbital effects and induce a sign changing mass term. This term opens a gap in the surface spectrum, resulting in a gapless one-dimensional chiral Majorana mode along the nodal line of the mass term, thereby implementing a second-order topological superconductor. Introduction.-Chiral Majorana one-dimensional (1D) modes are much sought after for their potential application in topological quantum computing In this letter, we present a method for creating higherorder TSCs by introducing symmetry-breaking perturbations to gap out the one-dimensional lower boundary modes of first-order topological phases. For instsance, applying a Zeeman field in a two-dimensional (2D) timereversal invariant (TRI) TSC results in Majorana corner states To address this, we propose decorating the surface of a 3D TRI TSC with magnetic impurities. The net Zeeman field is given by the sum of the external field and the magnetic moments of the impurities. Aligning the magnetic impurities with the direction of the field locally enhances the Zeeman term without affecting the orbital supercurrent, thus increasing the strength of the nodal time-reversal symmetry-breaking mass term. However, a potential obstacle to this proposal is the self-ordering of the magnetic impurities through the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction. Similar to the case of a topological insulator (TI) We generalize the Ising properties of Majorana surface fermions and the resulting RKKY interaction, demonstrating its role in promoting a ferromagnetic radial order that competes with the external magnetic field. In the absence of an applied field, impurities form a hedgehog configuration resembling a magnetic monopole. With a sufficiently strong field, the ground state undergoes a phase transition to a domain wall state. We illustrate that the critical field for the onset of the domain wall state decreases as the number of impurities increases. Consequently, in systems with dense enough magnetic impurity ensembles, the resulting mass term opens a gap in the surface spectrum, leaving a gapless chiral Majorana mode along the nodal line at the equator. Second-order TSC with Zeeman field.-We illustrate the realization of a chiral Majorana mode along the inversion-symmetric line, which is protected by intrinsic higher-order bulk topology Chiral Majorana hinge modes on sphere.-We introduce gamma matrices γ i ≡ (γ 0 , γ 1 , γ 2 ) = (-iσ z , σ x , σ y ) in flat 2+1-dimensional Minkowski space with {γ i , γ j } = 2η ij and η ij = diag(-1, 1, 1). In curved space-time, the η ij is now replaced the metric tensor g μν , giving new gamma matrices γ μ satisfying {γ μ , γ ν } = 2g μν . The resulting Dirac equation in curved space-time takes the form ħv ∆ γ 0 [-iγ μ (x)D μ ]ψ = 0 On the surface of a sphere with radius R, the metric is given by Consequently, the Dirac Hamiltonian on the surface of the sphere is given by The eigenstates of Eq. ( We now introduce a Zeeman term into the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The mass term vanishes along the equator at θ = π/2, where the Zeeman field is tangential to the surface. The Zeeman term has two consequences. First, it generates finite matrix elements between positive and negative energy states of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Additionally, the perturbation results in non-trivial diagonal matrix elements These matrix elements induce non-trivial results. They cause an upward energy shift in all states with positive m, which is particularly pronounced in low-energy states with small l. Conversely, they induce a downward energy shift in all states with negative m. For states with l = |m|, the energy shift undoes the gapping, resulting in a single chiral mode crossing the gap, as shown in Fig. RKKY interaction among magnetic impurities on a sphere.-As largely discussed in interact with the surface Majorana modes. For simplicity, we use semiclassical descriptions of magnetic impurities and focus exclusively on the on-site exchange interaction between these impurities and the surface Majorana modes. Due to the locality, the exchange term on a curved surface involves only the radial component of the magnetic moment S r i at its location, taking the form as with the interaction strength λ. Here, g represents the determinant of the metric g μν , and it can be eliminated through an appropriate rescaling of the wavefunction, Ψ → χ = |g| 1/4 Ψ. The magnetic impurities experience RKKY interactions mediated by propagating surface Majorana modes. We can evaluate the RKKY interaction on the curved surface by integrating out the Majorana modes and expanding with their Green's function up to second order in λ. The resulting expression is where 0)⟩ represents the out-of-plane spin susceptibility of the surface modes, with τ denoting imaginary time. Its one loop approximation is given by χ Here, β = 1/T (k B ≡ 1) and w n = 2π/β • (n + 1/2) represents the Matsubara frequency where involving transitions between negative and positive energy states with E l = (l + 1/2)∆/k F R, mediated by the exchange interaction. The sum over |m| ≤ l < l max ≃ k F R is bounded below the gap of the bulk energy spectrum, that is an order of ∆. We compute the dimensionless static susceptibility χ 1,2 •∆ as a function of the dimensionless distance k F •d = k F •Rθ, where θ is the angle between neighboring impurities. Using the azimuthal symmetry, we simplify the calculation by fixing one impurity at the north pole and placing the other at a latitude θ of radius R. As shown in Fig. To characterize the asymptotic behavior of the susceptibility, we calculate it as a function of azimuthal angle φ while fixing two impurities along the equator line, allowing us to derive a valid asymptotic form for large values of l max and φ ≪ π where F l,l ′ (φ) = [J 0 (lφ)J 0 (l ′ φ) + J 1 (lφ)J 1 (l ′ φ)]. Our comparison with the exact case in Fig. Magnetic phase diagram.-With the form and the range of RKKY interaction now established, our focus turns to the magnetic phase diagram. The magnetic moment of the i-th impurity, denoted as S i , can be parameterized using polar and azimuthal angles, Θ i and Φ i . These angles define the orientation of S i relative to local coordinates z i and x i in a tangential plane centered at its position R i = (θ i , φ i ). The free energy of the system is given as a sum of the RKKY interaction and the Zeeman term. Its dependence on Φ i is solely due to the RKKY interaction, and we can set Φ i = φ i as a solution of the Euler-Lagrange equations with respect to Φ i , which minimizes the energy functional. Consequently, we are left with where the J R ij = λ 2 χ ij . In a simplified representation of the RKKY interaction, illustrated in Fig. The magnetization of a system with N magnetic impurities on the circular geometry, influenced by the RKKY interaction and the external Zeeman field along the axial direction, is computed using the transfer matrix method for the given energy functional H in Eq. ( by setting χ ij = χ for such pairs (i, j). The ferromagnetic Ising RKKY interaction compels the magnetic impurities to arrange themselves radially, forming a hedgehog configuration, with Θ i taking on values of either 0 or π. In contrast, the Zeeman term dictates that impurities align with the external field, adopting an axial configuration with Θ i = -θ i . The ground state is determined by the interplay between these two competing terms. It is instructive to begin by examining the onedimensional (1D) problem on a circle as a geodesic curve along the sphere. Assuming a uniform distribution of N impurities with positions set at θ i = 2πi/N , we can express the RKKY interaction as χ N = χ[cos(2π/N )]. The energy for both hedgehog and axial configurations can be written as follows In the hedgehog configuration, the Zeeman term contributions cancel out due to the exact cancellation of impurities placed at antipodal points. In contrast, the energy in the axial configuration results from both Zeeman term and RKKY interactions. The critical field obtained by equating the energies of the hedgehog and axial configurations, is given by B c /J = 1cos(2π/N )/2, and it saturates at 1/2 for large N . When considering the energy in a domain wall kink located near the equator, at the intersection of two hemicycles with opposite signs of the local magnetic moment in the radial component, it can be expressed as For the domain wall configuration to become the ground state, the Zeeman term must dominate over the RKKY interaction along the domain wall, that is for cot(π/2N ) > 4λ 2 χ N /B. By neglecting the N dependence of χ N for large N and defining the RKKY interaction strength as J = λ 2 χ, the critical field for the phase transition from zero total magnetization to finite magnetization along the axial direction scales as B c /J = 4/ cot(π/2N ), revealing an inverse relationship between increasing N and decreasing critical field. To validate the results obtained from the approximate analytic estimate, we calculate the magnetization and study its behavior with an increasing number of magnetic impurities N . The partition function at temperature T is given by Z where F represents the free energy. We discretize the magnetic configurations of i-th impurity as Θ i = 2πn i /M for a sufficiently large M , and employ the transfer matrix methodto compute the partition function. The magnetization along the axial direction is determined as m ax = -1 N ∂F ∂B . In Fig. The analysis on the 2D surface can be approached similarly. Assuming a uniform distribution of impurities on the sphere, we can do a triangulation of the sphere with N impurities occupying N v = N equally distanced vertices. Here, our aim is not to provide an exact account of each impurity position, but rather to offer a qualitative estimate of the phase diagram and an approximate understanding of how it depends on the number of impurities. For every triangulation, the number of edges N e and triangles N t are related through N e = 3(N -2), N t = 2(N -2). On the surface with a radius of R, each triangle has an area of 4πR when N is large, the energy in a hedgehog configuration is expressed as with J = λ 2 χ N . In the axial configuration, the RKKY contribution to the energy can be estimated by integrating over the Northern hemisphere, given as E RKKY ax = -(3N J/2) π/2 0 dθ sin θ cos 2 θ, which considers the projection along the radial direction. This leads to the energy of the axial configuration as In the domain wall configuration, the RKKY contribution is determined by the energy of hedgehog configuration minus twice the energy of the domain wall near the equator. The Zeeman term in the continuum limit The energy density of a system of N = 2000 impurities on the surface of a sphere subjected to RKKY interaction and an external magnetic field along the axial direction, as described by Eq. ( where √ 10N represents the number of edges cutting the equator at the intersection of two hemispheres with opposite signs of local magnetic moment in a radial order. As previously discussed in the 1D geodesic case, the ground state can exhibit a domain wall configuration when the Zeeman term surpasses the RKKY interaction along the equator, which occurs for B > 4J 10/N whereas the critical field scales as 1/N for large N in the 1D case. Conclusion.-We realize a second-order chiral Majorana hinge mode along the inversion-symmetric equator by modifying a 3D TRI odd-parity TSC. This involves introducing a uniform external Zeeman field to break timereversal symmetry while preserving inversion symmetry. As the magnetic field increases, the orbital tilting effect on the surface energy spectrum takes precedence over the Zeeman term. To counteract this, we introduce surface magnetic impurities, proposing that the chiral mode emerges in a domain wall configuration with a reduced magnetic field strength. We analyze the ferromagnetic Ising RKKY interaction among the radial components of these impurities, deriving its asymptotic form converging to the interaction form on a flat surface as the radius of sphere increases. We examine scenarios with 1D and 2D impurities, determining the critical field for the transition to a domain wall configuration hosting a chiral Maajorana mode. Detailed investigations of how these obtained chiral hinge modes can be utilized for interferometers 