We demonstrate multiple flat bands and compact localized states (CLSs) in a photonic super-Kagome lattice (SKL) that exhibits coexistence of singular and nonsingular flat bands within its unique band structure. Specifically, we find that the upper two flat bands of an SKL are singular-characterized by singularities due to band touching with their neighboring dispersive bands at the Brillouin zone center. Conversely, the lower three degenerate flat bands are nonsingular, and remain spectrally isolated from other dispersive bands. The existence of such two distinct types of flat bands is experimentally demonstrated by observing stable evolution of the CLSs with various geometrical shapes in a laser-written SKL. We also discuss the classification of the flat bands in momentum space, using band-touching singularities of the Bloch wave functions. Furthermore, we validate this classification in real space based on unit cell occupancy of the CLSs in a single SKL plaquette. These results may provide insights for the study of flatband transport, dynamics, and nontrivial topological phenomena in other relevant systems. Flatband lattices are characterized by an energy band structure in which at least one band is completely dispersionless in the whole Brillouin zone Flatband lattices can support a large number of entirely degenerate eigenstates, namely, the compact localized states (CLSs) In this Letter, we present theoretical and experimental studies on multiple flat bands and relevant CLSs in super-Kagome lattices (SKLs), unveiling their flatband features in both real and momentum spaces. Specifically, we classify flat bands based on their supporting CLSs in real space and corresponding momentum-space BWFs. In momentum space, a flat band can either be singular or nonsingular, depending on the presence or absence of a BWF singularity Inspired by the general method to construct superlattices where tt is the uniform nearest-neighbor coupling strength, By solving the Bloch eigenvalue problem HH|vv nn (kk)⟩ = EE nn |vv nn (kk)⟩, where nn = 1,2, ⋯ ,9 counts the energy bands, one can obtain the band structure EE nn (or the propagation constant) of the lattice, as shown in Fig. In order to reveal whether these flat bands have singular properties, let us first consider the triply degenerate flat bands at EE 1,2,3 = -2. The normalized flatband BWFs can be obtained as where , and αα 3 = (18 -2 cos kk 3 ) 1 2 ⁄ are the normalization factors. For the BWF |vv 1 ⟩, the zero components indicate the flatband states never populate SS 7 and SS 9 sublattices, and the amplitudes at SS 1 and SS 8 sublattices are 1, and those at SS 2,3,5,6 are -1, and at SS 4 is 2. The real-space profile of one localized state (CLS-1), corresponding to |vv 1 ⟩, is shown in Fig. Next, we discuss the other two flat bands EE 4 and EE 7 touching the dispersive bands. The normalized BWF for EE 4 = -1 reads (5) and that for EE 7 = 1 reads The immovable discontinuity at the Γ point, i.e., kk = (0,0), of the BZ reveals that they belong to the classification of singular flat bands To demonstrate the flatband CLSs experimentally, we employ a laser-written photonic SKL (Fig. For the initial equal-phase excitations (no phase difference between sites), the relevant results are shown in Figs. 