For epitaxial Sr3Ru2O7 films grown by pulsed laser deposition, we report a combined structural and magnetotransport study of thin films and Hall bar devices patterned side-by-side on the same film. Structural properties of these films are investigated using X-ray diffraction and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, and confirm that these films are epitaxially oriented and nearly phase pure. For magnetic fields applied along the c-axis, a positive magnetoresistance of 10% is measured for unpatterned Sr3Ru2O7 films, whereas for patterned Hall bar devices of channel widths of 10 and 5 μm, magnetoresistance values of 40% and 140% are found, respectively. These films show switching behaviors from positive to negative magnetoresistance that are controlled by the direction of the applied magnetic field. The present results provide a promising route for achieving stable epitaxial synthesis of intermediate members of correlated layered strontium ruthenates, and for the exploration of device physics in thin films of these compounds. Layered ruthenates are peculiar strongly correlated materials in which several comparable interactions compete to give rise to a variety of novel electronic and magnetic phenomena. Intricate phenomena observed in layered ruthenates range from superconductivity Beyond fundamental interests, the potential of Sr n+1 Ru n O 3n+1 for applied physics has driven interests in thin films, particularly in Sr 2 RuO 4 (n = 1) films due to its unconventional superconductivity and Shubnikov-de Haas effect We focus on epitaxial films of the bilayer strontium ruthenate Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 . The material Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 is an enhanced Pauli paramagnet in its ground state that undergoes an anisotropic metamagnetic transition (i.e., a sudden increase in the magnetization within a small change of applied magnetic field) Although magnetransport properties of Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 have been characterized both in bulk single crystals In this work, we report on the epitaxy of Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 thin films, as well as on the magnetotransport trends of epitaxial films and Hall bar devices of Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 . The synthesis of near phase-pure Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films was previously reported, but only for epitaxial films grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) The surface quality of epitaxial Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films was characterized by reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The deposition of Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 was in situ monitored by RHEED [Fig. The crystalline quality and phase purity of Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films were characterized by XRD. Figure 2 ), only the substrate peaks and phase-pure 00l family of the film diffraction peaks are resolved, which indicates a high crystallinity and verifies that the Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films were aligned along the caxis. The 002, 004, 008, 0010, 0012, 0014, 0020, and 0022 Bragg diffraction peaks are well resolved, while the 006, 0016, and 0018 peaks are not present due to the small film thickness and the low structure factors of these peaks To provide a complementary real-space microstructural characterization of these films, cross-sectional TEM imaging was performed. With these studies, we investigated the defect populations of these films including possible inter-growths of n ̸ = 2 members of the Sr n+1 Ru n O 3n+1 series. Figure 2 ), the defects detected are infrequently regions of n = 3 inter-growth within n = 2 layers (indicated by black arrows in Figs. Magnetization as a function of temperature, M (T), of Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films were studied using a physical property measurements systems (PPMS) vibrating sample mag-netometer (VSM). The film was first pre-cooled to 5 K while in a 0.1 T, and then warmed to 300 K in the presence of 0.01 T, the M (T) data were collected. Figure Figure The MR increases with decreasing temperature and it evolves into quasi-linear behavior in the high field limit. For the unpatterned Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 film, a maximum MR (T = 5 K, B = 9 T) of 10% is obtained [Fig. The differences revealed by the transport measurement results [Fig. For the same film characterized in Figure In summary, we have explored an approach to stabilize the epitaxy of Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films by varying the substrate temperature and laser fluence in the PLD process, and investigated the magnetotransport trends in these epitaxial films. Structural characterizations of Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films prepared at optimal growth conditions confirm that these films are epitaxially oriented and nearly phase pure. Resistivity measurements of Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films and Hall bar devices exhibit characteristic metallic behavior. The magnetization characteristics of the films show no intrinsic ferromagnetic transition over the entire measured temperature range. These films exhibit a qualitatively similar MR behavior as previously reported for bulk single crystals and strained epitaxial films, specifically positive MR for the magnetic field applied along the c-axis. However, we achieve unprecedented large magnetoresistance values up to 140% in Hall bar devices patterned on Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 epitaxial films. Briefly, this work is not only the first reported effort for the epitaxial growth of nearly phase-pure Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films by PLD, but also, it is the first endeavor for the exploration of magnetotransport characteristics of a series of Hall bar devices patterned side-by-side on the same film, which help define a pathway towards understanding the synthesis science and device physics of epitaxial Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films. This provides an opportunity to explore more the physics of Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7based devices for the realization and modulation of novel emergent phenomena at low temperatures in phase pure films. Based on these results, future directions are expected to focus on improving further the films quality and the investigation of magnetotransport properties of quantum structures (e.g., nonowires and quantum dots) patterned on epitaxial Sr n+1 Ru n O 3n+1 films, as well as on nanoscale devices fabricated side-by-side on the same film in which magnetotransport properties can be modulated through quantum size effects and applied electric fields. T (K) R (T)/R (5 K) In general we observe a trend that for lower growth temperatures, the n ≥ 2 RP phases predominate in the parasitic phases, whereby this fraction decreases with increasing temperature until finally at higher substrate temperatures (800°C), the films are dominantly n = 1 RP phase and in the scanned areas they exhibit defects running across the film from the interface between substrate and the film. For device fabrication and electronic transport characteristics of epitaxial Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 films prepared at the optimal growth conditions, we fabricated side-by-side on the same film a series of Hall bar devices of various channel widths (from 10 μm to 500 nm) [Fig. 