We study the origin of bimodal emission in AlGaN/AlN QD superlattices displaying high internal quantum efficiency (around 50%) in the 230-300 nm spectral range. The secondary emission at longer wavelengths is linked to the presence of cone-like defects starting at the first AlN buffer/superlattice interface and propagating vertically. These defects are associated with a dislocation that produces strong shear strain, which favors the formation of 30° faceted pits. The cone-like structures present Ga enrichment at the boundary facets and larger QDs within the defect. The bimodality is attributed to the differing dot size/composition within the defects and at the defect boundaries, which is confirmed by the correlation of microscopy results and Schrödinger-Poisson calculations. There is a strong interest in the development of efficient solid-state UV-C sources in the 220-270 nm range due to their powerful germicidal properties. In this work, we investigate the origin of the bimodal emission in AlxGa1-xN/AlN QDs superlattices designed for electron beam pumped UV emitters. With this purpose, we perform a comprehensive analysis combining scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), atom probe tomography (APT), electron tomography, cathodoluminescence (CL) spectroscopy and 3D simulations of the electronic structure. The bimodal emission is attributed to the presence of a secondary population of quantum dots located within cone-like structural defects. These defects emerge at the initial interface between the AlN buffer layer and the QD superlattice and propagate vertically. They are associated to a dislocation featuring a strong strain field, thereby facilitating the generation of a pit characterized by 30° faceted boundaries. The samples under study consist of 100 periods of AlxGax-1N/AlN self-assembled QDs deposited on commercial 1-μm-thick (0001)-oriented AlN-on-sapphire templates by PAMBE. During the growth, the substrate temperature was fixed at 720°C, and the active nitrogen flux was adjusted to provide a growth rate of 0.6 monolayers per second (ML/s) under metal-rich conditions. For the generation of AlxGax-1N QDs, the metal/N flux ratio was kept below the stoichiometric value. This resulted in the Stranski-Krastanov (SK) growth mode due to the lattice mismatch and the energetically favorable {10-13} facets over the (0001) plane, under N-rich conditions. A TEM lamella and a needle-shaped specimen for atom probe and electron tomography were prepared using a scanning electron microscope/focused ion beam (SEM/FIB) Helios Nanolab 450S operated at 16 kV. Low energy (2 keV) ion beam was used during the final APT annular milling in order to reduce irradiation damages on the sidewalls of the specimen. The structural properties of the samples were studied by bright field (BF) and high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM imaging using a probe-corrected Titan Themis (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating at 200 kV. The 3D morphology of the extended defect was investigated by electron tomography on a needle-shaped specimen mounted on a Fischione on-axis tomography holder (model 2050). The HAADF-STEM tilt series was acquired over a tilt range of 180 degrees, in 2-degree steps. The tilt series was then aligned by cross-correlation and the common-line method Cathodoluminescence measurements were carried out using an Attolight CL-dedicated SEM microscope. The acceleration voltage was 10 kV and the beam current was  5 nA. The luminescence was collected through an integrated microscope objective (numerical aperture = 0.7). By scanning the sample, the optical spectra of each pixel are recorded on a CCD camera through a dispersive spectrometer with 400 mm focal length (grating: 150 grooves/mm blazed at 500 nm). The electronic structure of the QDs was modelled using the Nextnano3 8-band k•p Schrödinger-Poisson equation solver This study investigates bimodal emission in AlGaN/AlN QD superlattices, primarily focusing on sample S1, with QDs containg 14% of Al and emitting at 294 nm at room temperature. The findings and discussion are organized in three sections. We start by presenting the structural analysis and morphology of AlGaN QDs in S1. Then, the cathodoluminescence of this sample is discussed and correlated with the defect structure, including experiments and calculations. Finally, in the third section, the study expands its purview to shorter wavelengths emitters by incorporating sample S2, with QDs containing 46% of Al and emitting at 233 nm. A BF-STEM image of the full structure of S1 is presented in figure The surface of the S1 sample unveils a high density of pits, as showcased in the SEM image presented in figure The peak emission is observed at 291 nm for 5 K and at 294 nm for room temperature. By integrating the full CL spectra intensities at room temperature and 5 K and comparing their values, the IQE is estimated to be 46% To analyse the spatial distribution of the two spectral contributions, we have carried out CL mapping experiments. Upon comparing the morphology of the sample with the associated λ-filtered CL map in figure In order to gain a deeper understanding of the structural and optical effects associated with the pits observed at the surface, a TEM lamella was prepared and analyzed using STEM and CL. Figure Further insights were obtained from a BF-STEM image of one of the longer-wavelength emitting region, which is presented in figure Figure The presence of steps can be attributed to the strong strain field in the vicinity of the dislocation, which promotes the emergence of facets with low surface energy. Indeed, Figure To gain further insight into the 3D structure of the defects, HAADF-STEM tomography was performed on a needle-shaped specimen, obtained from sample S1, containing an extended defect. A slice through the tomographic reconstruction is presented in figure APT was performed in order to gain combined 3D structural and quantitative compositional information within the 3D extended defects. Figure Figure to the five QD layers in figure To investigate whether the chemical and morphological changes of the QD population within the extended defects are responsible for the emission bimodality, we conducted 3D calculations of the electronic structure of AlGaN/AlN QDs by solving the Poisson and Schrödinger equations using Nextnano3, as described in the Experimental Methods. a) The primary emission in the samples originates from QDs in defect-free regions. To simulate these QDs, we considered a QD superlattice oriented along the [0001] axis, with QDs containing 14% Al and the geometrical dimensions presented in figure According to our simulations, this structure produces an emission at 286 nm, which reproduces closely the experimental emission at 290 nm. Figure Then, in the defective region, we need to consider two different scenarios based on the experimental results obtained. Larger QDs were observed within the extended defects, and a Ga enrichment was found at the 30°-faceted boundaries. Therefore, two different simulations were performed: b) QDs on the (0 0 0 1) plane containing 14% of Al and with a diameter of 7.2 nm, and a height of 6 ML. This simulation, with increased QD size, accounts for the QD population inside the extended defect. Figure The study presented above refers to sample S1 emitting at 294 nm, which was selected for this analysis for its compatibility with characterization using a Nd-YAG laser (266 nm). However, it is important to extend the study to the highly-demanded 230-270 nm range. LEDs emitting around 270 nm are starting to replace conventional mercury lamps, An SEM image of the S2 sample surface is displayed in figure A combined structural and optical analysis was performed using TEM and CL on the same lamella specimen fabricated on the S2 sample. Figure Figure However, the dislocation associated with the boundary of the extended defect nucleates a second extended defect several QD periods above the interface with the buffer layer. This is also observed at the top-left part of the image, where an extended defect arises from directly from a dislocation in the superlattice. The intermixing of these structures could explain the large FWHM of the secondary emission in S2. Regarding the larger red shift of the emission in S2 with respect to S1, it might be due to higher Ga enrichment in the defective areas of S2, as Ga represents a lower overall percentage of the QD chemical composition. This Ga enrichment could additionally contribute to the formation of larger QDs, offering further explanation for the observed increased redshift. In fact, the HAADF-STEM image presented in the figure We have investigated the cause of the bimodal emission of AlxGax-1N/AlN QDs superlattices taylored for electron-beam pumped emitters, displaying high IQE in the 230-300 nm range. Our analysis has revealed that this bimodality is linked to the presence of cone-shaped extended defects originating at the first interface between the AlN buffer layer and the superlattice and propagating vertically. These defects are associated with a dislocation with a strong shear strain field, which motivates the generation of a pit with 30° faceted boundaries. We observe a Ga enrichment at the facets, which is attributed to the Ehrlich-Schwoebel effect, and an increased QD size within the defect domain. The different size and chemistry of the dots within the defect and at the defect boundary was identified as the source of the bimodality through the use of correlated microscopy techniques and 3D Schrödinger-Poisson calculations. Further investigations aimed at mitigating or reducing the occurrence of these structures will pave the way for the implementation of this efficient technology within disinfection applications. The use of bulk AlN substrates, with a significantly lower dislocation density, is a potential solution. However, finding cost-effective approaches might require creative thinking and alternative strategies. Video showcasing the electron tomography study performed on a FIB-fabricated tip of the S1 sample. This project received funding from the French National Research Agency (ANR) via the ASCESE-3D and FUSSL projects (ANR-21-CE50-0016 and ANR-22-CE09-0024). A CC-BY public copyright license has been applied by the authors to the present document and will be 