The Toffoli gate is the essential ingredient for reversible computing, an energy efficient classical computational paradigm that evades the energy dissipation resulting from Landauer's principle. In this paper we analyze different setups to realize a magnetic implementation of the Toffoli gate using three interacting classical spins, each one embodying one of the three bits needed for the Toffoli gate. In our scheme, different control-spins configurations produce an effective field capable of conditionally flipping the target spin. We study what are the experimental requirements for the realization of our scheme, focusing on the degree of local control, the ability to dynamically switch the spin-spin interactions, and the required single-spin anisotropies to make the classical spin stable, showing that these are compatible with current technology. Reversible computing is a computational paradigm inspired by physical aspects, where the elementary logic operations and logic circuits are ideally invertible In this paper we aim at the possibility of realising a classical Toffoli gate exploiting the continuous-time dynamics of interacting classical spins. A classical spin corresponds to the limit of a quantum spin for large spin quantum number S and is represented as a fixed-modulus vector in a threedimensional space. The building blocks of classical computing with interacting large-S spins have recently been explored in experiments with magnetic adatoms The dynamics of classical spins is ruled by Hamiltonians and Poisson brackets that follow from the spin commutation rules in the large-S limit, so they can be imagined as objects carrying a fixed angular momentum and realized as magnetic dipoles. In the following, we present two different models, whose common feature is the presence of three interacting classical spins, each one embodying one of the three bits needed for the Toffoli gate. In other words, the two logical states of the bits are encoded in the alignment (1-state) or anti-alignment (0-state) of the corresponding spin along a locally preferred direction. The basic idea behind our schemes is that different configurations of the two control-spins give rise to different effective magnetic fields acting on the target spin, thus producing different dynamics. The two models differ for the choice of the local easy-axis direction: in the first one, introduced in Section II, all spins, being they either control or target, are supposed to be collinear when in their stable steady states, while in the second model they are taken to form mutual well defined angles, as detailed in Section III. In each Section we discuss the role played by single-ion anisotropy and dissipation. Finally, to better frame the problem in view of a concrete realization, a quantitative estimate of the relevant parameters is given in the final Section. A quantum spin corresponds to an angular momentum operator Ŝ having a fixed modulus, Ŝ2 = (ħS) 2 , S being the (semi-integer) spin quantum number. Its three components obey the commutation relations where Greek letters correspond to the components x, y, and z, and ε αβγ is the completely antisymmetric Levi-Civita symbol. The classical limit ħ → 0 entails that the spin quantum number S → ∞ in such a way that the modulus ħS → S is kept constant: Ŝ becomes a classical vector S, i.e., with three commuting components. Being its modulus |S| = S a constant (with the dimensions of an action), it is more convenient to deal with the unit vector s = S/S , whose components obey the Poisson brackets that follow from Eq. ( Our aim is to define a spin system and its dynamics in such a way that it can implement classical logical operations. To accomplish this goal we first specify how a classical spin can be exploited to encode a classical bit. If the spin is subjected to an easy-axis anisotropy that favors its alignment along, say, the z-direction, it can have two stable directions, s z = ±1. The natural mapping is to encode the classical bit into two stable orientations, bit states {0, 1} ⇐⇒ s = { (0, 0, -1), (0, 0, 1) } , (3) that may be dubbed South-and North pole. As our purpose is to single out a dynamics that could implement a three-bits Control-Control-Operation, here we consider a three classical spins system: s 1 and s 2 are control spins while s ≡ (x, y, z) is the target spin. Besides the easy-axis anisotropy, we consider an exchange interaction between control and target spin, while adjustable magnetic fields are introduced as tunable parameters for driving the dynamics in a controlled way. The Hamiltonian of the system is where the exchange interaction between the control spins and the target spin is ferromagnetic, J > 0, and of the Ising type. Hereafter JS 2 is used as the energy unit and (JS ) -1 as the time unit. The single-site easy-axis anisotropy a > 0 defines the zdirection and the stable up/down configurations. Finally, an overall Zeeman field h ∥ along the z-direction is applied, while a local tunable field h ⊥ (one can assume it to be non-negative, without loss of generality) along the x direction is assumed to act locally on the target spin. The equations of motion (EoM) are obtained from the Poisson brackets (2) through d(•)/dt = (•), H and the specific form of the Hamiltonian (4) implies that ṡz 1 = ṡz 2 = 0, namely, the z-component of the control spins is conserved. This implies that, if initially in s z i = ±1, the control spins do not evolve in time. This is a desirable feature to implement a Control-Control-Operation, such as the Toffoli gate, which is defined by the following rule: if and only if both control spins are in the 1 configuration (with the encoding (3)) the target spin is flipped (from 0 to 1 or vice-versa), otherwise it is unchanged. For the dynamics of the target spin, the Hamiltonian (4) yields the following EoM, with effective field If h is constant throughout the target spin motion (namely, if a = 0), then the above equations describe the precession of s around the direction identified by h, which depends on the constant control-spin components s z 1 and s z 2 . Thus, it is necessary to analyze the dynamical behavior of s starting from the four different initial configurations of the control spins/bits, [s 1 s 2 ], according to the encoding of Eq. ( The case of vanishing anisotropy elucidates the mechanism for the realization of the Toffoli gate via the spin dynamics. For a = 0 the EoM (5) describe a precession of Larmor frequency |h| around the fixed axis h. According to Eq. ( so that fixing the values of h ∥ and h ⊥ , different trajectories are obtained depending on the initial configuration of the control spins. A Toffoli gate requires that the dynamical evolution, at time t G , defined as the gate time, produces the transformation on the target spin The first action on s can be achieved only if the precession axis h 11 lies in the xy-plane. From the first of Eqs. while h ⊥ remains the only free parameter that sets the angular frequencies in the different cases. Here it is important to note that the direction of the precession axis, when the control spins are different from the configuration In order to obtain the actions described in ( for three integer numbers n, m, l. Comparing the third and the fourth term with the second one, it must be and the elimination of h ⊥ leads to a constraint for the three integers The latter condition cannot be satisfied, as the left and right terms are even and odd, respectively. Hence, there is no choice of the parameters that allows to exactly achieve the desired transformation, Eq. ( In this section we analyse the dynamics of the target spin s for a finite value of the anisotropy parameter (i.e., for a 0). In this case, the motion described by Eqs. ( As there are no simple analytical solutions in this case, we integrate numerically the EoM. Specifically, we analyze the dynamics of the target s to find a single gate time t G which accomplishes the transformation The general expressions are derived in Appendix A, and assume a simpler form for h = 0, namely when the controls are in the state and setting z = cos θ, it further simplifies to As the condition a| sin θ | ≤ h ⊥ must be satisfied, it follows that for an anisotropy value larger than the field strength (a > h ⊥ ) the target spin cannot cross the equator (sin θ = 1) and its motion is confined to a cone of aperture sin -1 (h ⊥ /a) around the pole where its dynamics started, θ(0) = 0 or θ(0) = π. Therefore, the condition a < h ⊥ must be fulfilled for achieving a target spin to flip between the poles. Under this condition, the implicit kinematic equation reads The resulting trajectories are closed and connect the two poles in a time corresponding to half-period of the motion, where is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind. Therefore, the effect of anisotropy is to increase the precession period T 11 = 2π/h ⊥ in Eqs. On the other hand, in Section III we will show that the use of non-collinear control spins simplifies Eq. ( Without an external environment, the dynamics described in the previous sections continues indefinitely so the driving field h ⊥ needs to be switched off externally to stop the dynamics and achieve the gate. As this scheme requires a careful timing of the switch control, its practical realization may be difficult. In the following we show that this limitation can be overcome by exploiting the interaction of the system with an external environment which provides a mechanism to stabilize the dynamics and help the realization of the Toffoli gate. The key point is that in a bistable configuration there are two stable minimum-energy spin orientations (North and South poles). The effect of the dissipation is then to drive the system to the "closest" equilibrium position, so that even if the Toffoli gate is implemented with some errors, as long as the imperfect dynamics brings the target spin close to the desired configuration, then relaxation processes transform such a dynamics into a perfect gate. In the following we show how this condition can be achieved. A damping term, -η s × ṡ, that accounts for the energy loss of the magnetic moment caused by its interaction with the surroundings, is introduced following the scheme of the Laundau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) model. The equation ( We note that both the North and the South poles, z = ±1, are equilibrium configurations for the LLG equation, when h ⊥ = 0. To check for the stability of these configurations we first linearize Eq. ( Both poles are stable if the real part of the above eigenvalues is negative, i.e., 2a-| h| > 0. Therefore, taking into account the condition Figure The effect of the damping factor for the dynamics of the target spin is plotted in Fig. We now consider a different scenario where the stable positions of the control spins may be along different axes e 1 and e 2 , while the target bit is defined in the z direction. The values 1 and 0 of a control bit correspond to the spin being aligned or antialigned with the direction e i , i.e., s i = e i ⇔ 1 and s i = -e i ⇔ 0. To simplify the analysis, the control spins are assumed to be frozen in their state, while the effect of the anisotropy is taken into account in the next subsection. Unlike the Ising interaction considered in Eq. ( Since the control spins s 1 and s 2 are frozen, the resulting dynamics is a precession around the effective field s 1 + s 2 + h with frequency |s 1 + s 2 + h|. It is easy to see that the choice of h = e 1 + e 2 freezes the dynamics for the [00] configuration, for which H 00 = 0 or, equivalently, the precession frequency is ω 00 = 0. On the other hand, respectively for the configurations where 2φ is the angle between e 1 and e 2 . Many solutions are possible (provided that the condition 2n + 1 < 4m is satisfied). This amounts to require cos φ = 2n+1 4m , so that the simplest one is for n = 1 and m = 1, namely A. Easy-axis anisotropy We consider the effect of a non-zero anisotropy a for the target spin s along the z-axis, H = (s 1 + s 2 + h) • s + a(s z ) 2 . The equation of motion for the target spin s reads We assume that now e 1 and e 2 lie in the xy-plane and we study the dynamics of the target spin, for all the control configurations, setting the x-axis in the direction of the in-plane field s 1 + s 2 + h ≡ ( h, 0, 0), with h00 = 0, h10 = 2, h01 = 2, and h11 = 2|e 1 + e 2 | = 4 cos φ. In this case the EoM can be cast in a form equivalent to Eq. ( Similarly to what happened in the collinear case, from Eq. ( so, choosing m = n = 1 as above, one finds an implicit condition that determines φ, IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS In this paper we have analysed several setups that realize a magnetic implementation of a Toffoli gate, under some suitable assumptions about the building elements of the device. Specifically, the control spins must be kept fixed during the target spin evolution. This requires that at least one of the following conditions to be satisfied: i) an external magnetic field can be applied to the target spin only [this is implicitly assumed by writing the Hamiltonian as in Eqs.( Moreover, while the Hamiltonian model ( On the other hand, in the collinear model, a single ion anisotropy on the target spin is not only required to properly set the quantization axis, but it has also to be strong enough, i.e. a > 2, to stabilize the spin configurations representing the logical states. As the proper spin-flip operation can be achieved only if h ⊥ > a, measuring spin values in ħ units and writing the control-target coupling as J (S z 1 +S z 2 )S z , the anisotropy term as -AS 2 z , and the Zeeman term as -g s μ B ⃗ S • ⃗ H, we may go back to physical units, to get a quantitative estimate of the relevant parameters. For the system presented in Ref. 10 we can gauge J ≃ 0.3 meV ≃ 3.5 K, an order of magnitude similar to that observed also in molecular magnets The necessary requirements on the field strength and on the timing can be made less strict due to the effect of a weak dissipative environment. We have shown in Sec.II C that, although the small price that has to be paid in terms of gateoperation time and thermal energy loss, the environment is beneficial for implementing the device. Indeed we have shown that if the non-dissipative dynamics, while being not perfect, brings the target not too far from the wanted logical state configuration, the effect of dissipation is to eventually stabilize the target spin.