Two-dimensional (2D) materials combine many fascinating properties that make them more interesting than their three-dimensional counterparts for a variety of applications. For example, 2D materials exhibit stronger electron-phonon and electron-hole interactions, and their energy gaps and effective carrier masses can be easily tuned. Surprisingly, published band gaps of several 2D materials obtained with the GW approach, the state-of-the-art in electronic-structure calculations, are quite scattered. The details of these calculations, such as the underlying geometry, the starting point, the inclusion of spin-orbit coupling, and the treatment of the Coulomb potential can critically determine how accurate the results are. Taking monolayer MoS 2 as a representative material, we employ the linearized augmented planewave + local orbital method to systematically investigate how all these aspects affect the quality of G 0 W 0 calculations, and also provide a summary of literature data. We conclude that the best overall agreement with experiments and coupled-cluster calculations is found for G 0 W 0 results with HSE06 as a starting point including spin-orbit coupling, a truncated Coulomb potential, and an analytical treatment of the singularity at q = 0. The isolation of graphene in 2004 can be regarded as a milestone in materials science that triggered a novel field of research, namely atomically thin 2D materials For a deep understanding of 2D materials, an accurate description of their band structure is a must. Many-body perturbation theory within the GW approach has become the stateof-the-art for ab initio electronic-structure calculations of materials. In this sense, many studies have employed GW to investigate the electronic properties of 2D materials . Surprisingly, as illustrated in Fig. Many factors contribute to this confusing and unsatisfactory situation: • In various works, different geometries have been adopted. In this context, it must be said that the properties of 2D materials are highly sensitive to structural parameters • A second reason can be attributed to the various ways of performing G 0 W 0 calculations. First, there is the well-known starting problem • Last but not least, also spin-orbit coupling (SOC) plays an important role in many cases. Besides decreasing the size of the fundamental gap mainly through a splitting of the valence band In this manuscript, we address all these issues and provide a benchmark data set of DFT and G 0 W 0 calculations, taking monolayer MoS 2 as a representative 2D material. Due to its unique properties, it can be considered the most important 2D material after graphene. MoS 2 exhibits high electron mobility We employ the linearized augmented planewave + local orbital (in short LAPW+LO) method as implemented in the exciting code. LAPW+LO is known to achieve ultimate precision for solving the Kohn-Sham (KS) equations of density functional theory (DFT) The full-potential all-electron code exciting |φ G+k ⟩ are constructed by augmenting each planewave with reciprocal lattice vector G, living in the interstitial region, by a linear combination of atomic-like functions inside the MT spheres. In contrast, the LOs |φ γ ⟩ are non-zero only inside a specific MT sphere. They are used for reducing the linearization error In the G 0 W 0 approximation, one takes a set of KS eigenvalues {ε nk } and eigenfunctions {Ψ nk } as a reference, and evaluates first-order quasi-particle (QP) corrections to the KS eigenvalues in first-order perturbation theory as where Z nk is the renormalization factor, V xc is the exchange-correlation (xc) potential, and Σ is the self-energy. The latter is given as the convolution with G being the single-particle Green function and W the screened Coulomb potential. In this non-selfconsistent method, the quality of the QP eigenvalues may depend critically on the starting point. In many cases, LDA and PBE have been proven to be good starting points for G 0 W 0 , leading to QP energies that agree well with experiments However, e.g., for materials containing d electrons, such as Mo, hybrid functionals, like HSE, usually provide an improved reference for QP corrections compared to semilocal functionals In calculations with periodic boundary conditions, for treating 2D systems, a sufficient amount of vacuum is required to avoid spurious interaction between the replica along the outof-plane direction. Local and semilocal density functionals have a (nonphysical) asymptotic decay much faster than 1/r, facilitating convergence of unoccupied states -and thus KS gaps-with respect to the vacuum size. In G 0 W 0 , the 1/r decay of the self-energy complicates this task. Specifically for MoS 2 , even a vacuum layer with 60 Å thickness turned out not being sufficient to obtain a fully converged band gap Here, we truncate the Coulomb potential with a step function along z. Setting the cutoff length to L/2, where L is the size of the supercell along z (Fig. where Q = q + G, and q is a vector in the first Brillouin zone (BZ). D. Treatment of the q = 0 singularity On the down-side, truncating the Coulomb interaction slows down the convergence in terms of k-points because of the non-smooth behavior of the dielectric function around the singularity at q = 0 [23, where εnk = ε nk + i η sign(E F -ε nk ) and E F the Fermi energy. M i nm (k, q) are the expansion coefficients of the mixed-product basis, an auxiliary basis to represent products of KS wavefunctions. Like LAPWs and LOs, they have distinct characteristics in the MT spheres and interstitial region where Ω 0 is a small region around q = 0. Analytical expressions for W c ij (q, ω ′ ) in the limit q → 0 In this study, SOC is treated via the second-variational (SV) scheme A ground-state calculation with HSE is performed via a nested loop G 0 W 0 calculations with SOC are performed in two steps on top of ground-state calculations that include SOC. First, the QP energies are computed as explained in Sec. II B, using the scalar-relativistic KS eigenvalues and eigenvectors. In the second step, the obtained QP energies are used, together with the SV KS eigenvectors, to evaluate SOC through the diagonalization of the SV Hamiltonian. This approach is sufficient in the case of MoS 2 since SOC does not cause band inversion In our calculations, we employ the all-electron full-potential code exciting In all calculations, the unit-cell size L along the out-of-plane direction (Fig. In the latter, we use the typical parameters For these geometries, the electronic structure is calculated with all three functionals, with and without SOC, giving rise to a set of 18 calculations. These calculations are followed by G 0 W 0 calculations, taking the respective DFT solutions as starting points. The dimensionless parameter rgkmax that controls the exciting basis-set size is set to 8. In the LDA and PBE calculations, we use a 30×30×1 k-grid. In HSE and G 0 W 0 calculations, we employ 400 empty states and an 18 × 18 × 1 k-grid. In G 0 W 0 , the correlation part of the self-energy is evaluated with 32 frequency points along the imaginary axis, and then analytic continuation to the real axis is carried out by means of Pade's approximant. For the bare Coulomb potential, we use a 2D cutoff The geometry of MoS 2 , depicted in Fig. Table The fundamental gap obtained with LDA, PBE, and HSE, is always direct at K. In G 0 W 0 , the fundamental gap is E g (KT) for the structures with smaller lattice parameter andE g (KK) for larger lattice constants. As to be expected and also observed in Ref. Experimental results for bulk MoS 2 are also provided (c In contrast, HSEgives a direct gap, regardless of whether SOC is considered. Also G 0 W 0 @LDA and G 0 W 0 @PBE are very close to each other, the largest difference being 0.04 eV. This can be attributed to the similarity between LDA and PBE when the same geometry is adopted. However, the similarity between G 0 W 0 @LDA and G 0 W 0 @PBE results is material dependent, as observed in other works For a given geometry, the locations of the VBM and the CBm are independent of the starting point, with the only exception being the HSE geometry when SOC is included. When comparing the three geometries, we encounter three different scenarios. First, for the LDA geometry, the fundamental gap changes from a direct KS gap at K to an indirect QP gap (between K and T), independent of the starting point. Second, for the PBE and HSE geometries, when SOC is disregarded, the indirect gap ΓK obtained with LDA and PBE becomes direct and located at K upon applying G 0 W 0 . Third, for the HSE geometry, and SOC being included we observe an indirect band gap for G 0 W 0 @LDA while it is direct for PBE and HSE as starting points. This can be understood in terms of the small differences or not (N). The experimental gap is 2.6 eV (direct at K) Figure The impact of the self-energy correction on the energy gaps, shown in Fig. The dependence is even weaker for G 0 W 0 @HSE with values of 0.64-0.66, 0.74-0.78, and 0.39-0.40 eV, respectively. Very similar results are observed when SOC is disregarded. In Table masses m e (m h ) calculated at the K point along different directions are shown as well. We observe that neither the spin-orbit splittings nor the effective masses are very sensitive to the geometry (see Table XV for more details). ∆ val exhibits a very narrow spread among all the methods employed here (DFT and effective hole (m h ) and electron (m e ) masses, in units of the free electron mass m 0 , at the K point along different directions, obtained for the HSE geometry. Experimental results are taken from Refs. (a The effective hole mass, m h , exhibits minor variations, not larger than 0.04m 0 , when going from KΓ to KM. This is in line with other calculations The experimental band gap for free-standing MoS 2 , determined by photocurrent spectroscopy, is 2.5 eV which is 0.02 eV smaller than E g (KK). G 0 W 0 @PBE shows the best agreement with experiment and also predicts the gap to be direct. Interestingly, considering the PBE geometry, as done in several works On the other hand, HSE satisfies ∆ ΓK best with a value of 0.12 eV (0.02 eV smaller than in experiment), while the values obtained with the other methods differ from experiment by 0.09 eV (G 0 W 0 @HSE), -0.09 eV (LDA and PBE), 0.10 eV (G 0 W 0 @PBE), and 0.11 eV (G 0 W 0 @LDA), respectively. At the PBE geometry, G 0 W 0 @HSE and G 0 W 0 @PBE give the same value for ∆ ΓK . With an overestimation of 0.07 eV, it is closer to experiment than the value at the HSE geometry. Again, HSE is the only starting point for which G 0 W 0 predicts ∆ KT in agreement with experiment. In summary, considering the band gap as well as the energy differences ∆ KT and ∆ ΓK , we conclude that at the PBE geometry, G 0 W 0 @HSE including SOC shows the best overall agreement with experimental data. Also for the HSE structure, HSE is the best starting point, with results that are overall only slightly worse. Overall, G 0 W 0 @HSE at the HSE geometry can be considered more appropriate, since only one xc functional is needed for providing decent results for both, the geometry and the electronic properties and thus the most consistent picture. Also for other materials, HSE has been found to be a superior G 0 W 0 starting point By employing coupled-cluster calculations including singles and doubles (CCSD) For our PBE geometry and also omitting SOC, the G 0 W 0 @HSE results are the ones closest to these values, with E g (ΓK) differing by 0.04 eV and E g (KK) by 0.24 eV. For a fair comparison with other published G 0 W 0 values with LDA and PBE as starting points, we restrict ourselves here to results obtained by using a Coulomb truncation in combination with either a special treatment of the q = 0 singularity or a nonuniform k-grid sampling, since these methods ensure well converged gaps. In Ref. For a lattice parameter of 3.15 Å, Rasmussen et al. calculated a G 0 W 0 @PBE band gap of 2.64 eV without SOC we obtain E g (KK) = 2.52 eV with G 0 W 0 @LDA, although at this geometry, we obtain an indirect gap that is 18 meV smaller than E g (KK). This is in good agreement with Ref. with a difference of 0.07 meV only. For the experimental geometry and neglecting SOC, Hüser et al. When it comes to G 0 W 0 @HSE, there are only a few results for MoS 2 in the literature, neither obtained with Coulomb truncation nor by any special treatment of the q = 0 singularity. For MoS 2 , these two aspects lead to opposite effects, competing with each other when converging band gaps with respect to the vacuum size and the number of k-points We have employed the LAPW+LO method to provide a set of benchmark G 0 W 0 calculations of the electronic structure of two-dimensional MoS 2 . We have addressed the impact of geometry, SOC, and DFT starting point on the energy gaps, spin-orbit splittings, and effective masses. We find that the self-energy corrections to the band gaps hardly depend on the adopted geometry. As could be expected, employing LDA and PBE as starting points does not make a significant difference when the same structure is used. The best agreement with experimental results is achieved by G 0 W 0 @HSE at either the HSE or PBE geometry, considering SOC. The spin-splittings obtained with all methods agree well with experimental results. This also holds true for the effective hole mass, using either HSE or G 0 W 0 on top of any of the considered starting points (LDA, PBE, and HSE). In line with other theoretical works, we highlight the importance of a Coulomb truncation and an adequate treatment of the Coulomb singularity around q = 0 as being fundamental for high-quality calculations. Our findings are expected to be valid for other two-dimensional materials as well. is provided in the respective reference, only the functional used for relaxation is shown. SP stands for the G 0 W 0 starting point, KS refers to the specific pseudopotential method (NC means norm-conserving, PAW stands for the projector augmented wave method). FI indicates the method for frequency integration, where AC stands for imaginary frequencies and analytic continuation; CD for the contour-deformation approach; PP for plasmon-pole model; RA for full-frequency integration along the real axis. The symbols * , ⋄ , and g [eV] Ref. a × b [ Å2 ] d [ Å] θ [°] L [ Å] SP KS SOC FI k-grid Misc. ΓΓ