Atom arrangement plays a critical role in determining material properties. It is, therefore, essential for materials science and engineering to identify and characterize distinct atom configurations. Currently, crystal structures can be determined either by its static properties or by quantifying its structural evolution. Here we show how to classify an atom into phase solely by its speed dynamics. We model silicon crystals at different phase transition points and use a single atom speed trajectory to demonstrate that crystal-structure-independent Maxwell distribution of speed is generated by crystal-structure-dependent atom dynamics. As the classification accuracy of the method increases with trajectory length, we show that subtle difference in local atomic structures can be identified using sufficiently long trajectories. Thanks to symbolization of atom dynamics, the method is computationally efficient and suitable for an analysis of large datasets on the fly. An accurate discrimination of local atomic structures of materials is necessary to understand structure-function relationship. Contemporary experimental methods have enabled impressively precise structural material characterization at real time The aim of this research is to investigate the extent to which a single atom dynamics encodes its local neighborhood in crystalline materials at equilibrium. As an example, we analyze silicon atom trajectories, as its phases are broadly used [GMC16; Won+19], bc8 and r8 structures thereof are difficult to distinguish The reminder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we calculate phase transition points, describe the protocol of generating atom trajectories from molecular dynamics simulations and shortly introduce permutation entropy method. Subsequently, in Section 3, an entropy-based crystal structure discrimination scheme is presented and followed by the demonstration of how the accuracy of the method increases with trajectory length enabling identification of subtle differences in local atom neighborhood. Finally, in Section 4, we discuss applications of the method, its current limitations and outline further development. All the data, input scripts and codes for replicating figures presented here can be found on github: https://github.com/rmabram/ crystal-structure-classification. In this work we used two computational models of bulk silicon developed by Kumagai et al. A symbolic speed trajectory that is used throughout this work is defined as a sequence of unique permutation patterns (or ordinal patterns), each of which constructed as follows: given a set of four consecutive values of speed, s t = {v t , v t+1 , v t+2 , v t+3 }, sort it and replace every value of speed with its position in the initial set, s t . (As there are only four positions, the maximum number of permutation patterns equals to 4! = 24.) Then, the symbolic trajectory is generated by building a sequence of the ordinal patterns of every four consecutive speed values from the trajectory. It is performed using an ordinal sequence method from ordpy Python package developed by Pessa et al. Crystal structure discrimination scheme is presented in Figure A clear separation of the permutation entropy distributions presented in Figure The above results clearly indicate that a temporal structure of single atom speed trajectory can be effectively utilized to identify distinct local atom arrangements in defect-free crystals at equilibrium. Relaxing constrains on simulated samples to test the method against defected or disordered multi-element materials at different physical conditions (temperature, pressure, shear strain, etc.) is out of the scope of this work as well as using different simulation settings (eg. models or dynamics). As the method is based on single atom attributes, it would enable an efficient and precise identification of atom that initiates a structural change within a material, enhancing our understanding of structure-function relationship. Further development of the method should be aimed at shortening trajectory length in order to efficiently study both materials phenomena out of equilibrium and non-ergodic systems. To this end one would use various symbolization techniques that quantify additional information (eg. amplitudeaware permutation patterns 