As a promising remedy for overcoming the limited ductility and work softening of bulk metallic glasses (BMGs), BMG composites incorporating a B2 crystalline phase have attracted considerable attention. Here, we explore the formation of Zr-Co-Al BMG composites by quenching alloys Zr55Co31Al14, Zr54.5Co33.5Al12, Zr53.5Co36.5Al10, Zr52.5Co37.5Al10, and Zr43Co43Al14. We found the first alloy fully amorphous whereas the fifth was fully crystallized upon quenching. The other three were quenched to generate composite structures, with a higher fraction of B2 ZrCo phase with increasing Co/Zr ratio and decreasing Al content. For comparison, the formation of B2 ZrCo in annealed Zr55Co31Al14 was also studied. For both approaches the influence of crystalline phases on hardness was examined. Bulk Metallic Glasses (BMGs) are promising structural materials with high strength, hardness and elastic limit. However, their low tensile ductility at failure and strain-softening associated with autocatalytic shear-banding at room temperature significantly hamper their applications. These problems have been tackled by designing BMG composites containing ductile crystalline phases dispersed throughout the glassy matrix Recently, a few studies have shown that ZrCo in the B2 phase, due to its large number of slip systems, is inherently ductile In this work, by exploring the ternary composition space we identify certain compositions of significant potential for the formation of BMG composites containing B2 ZrCo. For comparison, we also study the formation of B2 ZrCo in devitrified Zr 55 Co 31 Al 14 . To date a number of Zr-Co-Al compositions have already been explored, as indicated by the solid blue squares (for high GFA) or the open blue squares (for poor GFA) in Fig. Alloys were fabricated by mini arc melting the mixture of pure Zr (99.95%), Co (99.95%) and Al (99.99%) metals in a Ti-gettered high-purity argon atmosphere. The alloys were remelted a minimum of six times before being suction-cast into cylinders of 3 mm in diameter and 40 mm in length. Thermal analysis was performed using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, NETZSCH 404) at a heating rate of 20 K/min. Structural characterizations were performed using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8, Philips X'Pert, Operating Voltage of 45 kV and Cu-K α radiation), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, Hitachi 3400X) attached with an Energy dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS). Micro-Hardness was measured using a Struers Durascan micro-hardness tester at 1 kg with dwell time of 15 seconds. To examine the effect of devitrification on the formation of the B2 phase, Zr 55 Co 31 Al 14 was annealed using DSC near the onsets of the first and second crystallization, respectively, for various times before cooling the samples by switching off the DSC. The heating rate for annealing was 20 K/min. The DSC curves of as-cast alloys A1-A5 are shown in Fig. Based on the proposal of Nagel and Tauc It is interesting to compare the GFA of (ZrCo) 100-x Al x and its counterpart (ZrCu) 100-x Al x for low x since both Zr 50 Co 50 and Zr 50 Cu 50 can exhibit B2 crystal phase, which, according to the binary phase diagrams, precipi-TABLE I. Thermal and electronic properties of alloys A1-A5 and similar reported alloys. The glass transition temperature (Tg), the onset temperature of crystallization (Tx), the width of the supercooled liquid region (∆Tx), and the latent heat of crystallization (∆H) were measured at a heating rate of 20 K/min, same as those in reference As GFA decreases, the alloys (partially) crystallize during quenching. As shown in Fig. The DSC and XRD results discussed earlier clearly indicate that in-situ Zr-Co-Al BMG composites can be fabricated by tuning the compositions. For comparison we also explored the formation of BMG composites by annealing alloy A1 for various dwell times at 753 and 843 K, respectively. These two temperatures are slightly below the crystallization onsets (Fig. Fig. To understand the effect of BMG composite formation on mechanical properties we carried out uniaxial compression testing on the as-cast alloys A1 to A4. It can be seen from Fig. For amorphous Zr 56 Co 44-x Al x (x from 12 to 18) We also performed Vickers hardness tests, as a complimentary approach for understanding mechanical behaviour. As shown in Fig. Annealing of alloy A1 also results in an increase in hardness (Fig. Microscopically, the fraction of five-fold symmetry, instead of the volume, of an atomic cluster was found to positively correlate with the resistance to shearing As can be seen from Fig. For some final comments, we compare the formation of B2 phase in Zr-Co-based and Zr-Cu-based BMG composites. Due to their high GFA of Zr 50 Cu 50 , Zr-Cu-based BMG composites are often made with compositions close to Zr 50 Cu 50 In this work we have explored the possibility of fabricating Zr-Co-Al bulk metallic glass composites with B2 ZrCo phase via 1) rapidly quenching alloys of various compositions and 2) annealing the as-cast amorphous alloys. In the first approach, it was found that, as composition changes from Zr 55 Co 31 Al 14 towards Zr 52.5 Co 37.5 Al 10 (with increasing Co/Zr ratio and decreasing Al fraction), glass forming ability decreases and B2 ZrCo phase forms, along with Zr 2 Co, Zr 2 Al, and Zr 6 CoAl 2 phases. In particular, the B2 ZrCo phase was dominant in Zr 52.5 Co 37.5 Al 10 . Alloy Zr 43 Co 43 Al 14 with equimolar Zr and Co was found to fully crystallize into B2 ZrCo and minor Zr 5 Co 7 Al 3 upon quenching. In the second approach, annealing amorphous Zr 55 Co 31 Al 14 close to the onset T g temperature results in structural relaxation with minimal crystallization of B2 ZrCo, ZrCoAl, and Zr 6 CoAl 2 . A large volume fraction of these crystals was found upon annealing at 843 K, above the first DSC exothermic peak, and the alloy was almost fully crystallized after annealing for 30 min. For both approaches, the formation of crystalline phases increases hardness of the alloys, but full crystallization upon annealing results in embrittlement and a decrease in hardness. To study the effect of non-parallel sample surfaces on the measured (nominal) Young's modulus, we consider a model sample as shown in Fig. where x 1 /(N -1) represents the length difference between two neighbouring slabs. The compressive force in slab i is where E 0 is the true modulus of the sample and y 0 z is the cross-sectional area of the sample. The total force F in the sample is the summation of f i . With nominal strain ε=dx/x 0 and nominal modulus E=F/(y 0 zε) for the sample, one can obtain the normalized modulus E n =E/E 0 as where n (up to N ) is the number of slabs deformed. Several observations can be made from equation A3. First, geometrically, the measured modulus only depends on the dimensions (x 0 and x 1 ) along the loading axis, not the cross-sectional dimensions y 0 and z. Second, when the nominal strain ε increases while the sloped end is only partially deformed (n<N ) , not only ε i but also n increase, resulting in a relatively rapid increase in the nominal E. Third, even when all the sloped surface is deformed (n=N ), the nominal modulus E is still smaller than the true modulus E 0 since ε i <ε for i>1. By assuming a large N (N=100, so that the sloped surface is 'smooth'), we examined the effects of strain and geometry on the normalized modulus E n . As can be seen from Fig. A previous experiment shows that a slanted contact due to a tilted platen can also cause the reduced measured modulus 