The quantum dynamics of electron-nuclear systems is analyzed from the perspective of the exact factorization of the wavefunction, with the aim of defining gauge invariant equations of motion for both the nuclei and the electrons. For pure states this is accomplished with a quantum hydrodynamical description of the nuclear dynamics and electronic density operators tied to the fluid elements. For statistical mixtures of states the exact factorization approach is extended to two limiting situations that we call "type-n" and "type-e" mixtures, depending on whether the nuclei or the electrons are, respectively, in an intrinsically mixed state. In both cases a fully gauge invariant formulation of the dynamics is obtained again in hydrodynamic form with the help of mechanical momentum moments (MMMs). Nuclear MMMs extend in a gauge invariant way the ordinary momentum moments of the Wigner distribution associated with a density matrix of positional variables, electron MMMs are operator-valued and represent a generalization of the (conditional) density operators used for pure states. The theory presented here bridges exact quantum dynamics with several mixed quantum-classical approaches currently in use to tackle non-adiabatic molecular problems, offering a foundation for systematic improvements. It further connects to non-adiabatic theories in condensed-phase systems. As an example, we re-derive the finite-temperature theory of electronic friction of Dou, Miao & Subotnik (Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 046001 (2017)) from the dynamics of "type-e" mixtures and discuss possible improvements. . Introduction 1 II. QHD with gauge fields 3 A. Momentum and velocity fields 4 B. QHD for a particle in 3D space with gauge fields 5 C. Many-particle QHD with gauge fields 7 D. Statistical mixtures 8 III. Quantum Hydrodynamics of exactly factorized electrons-nuclei 10 A. Pure states 10 B. Type-n statistical mixtures 13 C. Type-e statistical mixtures 14 D. Remark on mechanical momentum moments 17 IV. Applications 17 A. Mixed quantum-classical dynamics 17 B. Electronic friction at finite temperature 21 V. Summary and Conclusions 24 A. Circulation theorem 25 B. Wigner function and momentum moments 26 C. Gauge invariant formulation of the pure-state electron dynamics 30 * rocco.martinazzo Describing the correlated behavior of electrons and nuclei beyond the Born-Oppenheimer (BO) or adiabatic approximations poses a formidable challenge with significant implications in various fields, ranging from the photochemistry and photophysics of molecular systems, aggregates, and functional materials This classical treatment of the nuclear dynamics is suitable for single-surface dynamics, especially when investigating 'global' observables for which self-averaging occurs and quantum features are washed out. However, it remains questionable for non-adiabatic dynamics, even for nuclei that would behave as classical particles in a singlesurface dynamics under similar conditions. The challenge lies in determining the appropriate forces acting on the nuclei and understanding the correct nuclear influence on the quantum dynamics of the electrons. These challenges become increasingly more intricate when a larger number of electronic states are involved in the coupled dynamics. To make progress, it is essential to depart from the BO framework and consider the electronic problem in the time domain rather than the energy domain. However, defining the appropriate equations of motion is not straightforward, and different approaches emerge depending on when the classical limit for the nuclei is introduced In this context, the exact factorization (EF) of the total electron-nuclear wavefunction, as introduced by Abedi et al. The proposed approach is ideally suited for introducing a classical description for the nuclei while maintaining a quantum treatment of the electronic motion. It can be viewed as an extension of De Broglie-Bohm-Madelung hydrodynamics to multi-state dynamics, which is exact for any number of electronic states. Additionally, this approach allows extensions of the EF method to investigate dynamical processes involving statistical mixtures of states, thereby enabling the study of more realistic scenarios like those appearing at finite temperatures. The EF is an "intermediate" representation that consists in projecting the total wavefunction of a molecu-lar system |Ψ in the position basis of nuclear variables, henceforth denoted as {|x }. This defines a local (i.e., position dependent) electronic state |u(x) and a nuclear wavefunction ψ(x), upon requiring that |u(x) remains normalized at any time, namely where the subscript X reminds that integration is performed over nuclear variables only. In other words, in EF the total wavefunction is exactly expanded as This form closely resembles the adiabatic ansatz -where the |u t 's of Eq. 1 are replaced by eigenstates of the local electronic Hamiltonians -and it is thus an ideal starting point for addressing a non-adiabatic dynamics. The equations of motion for ψ(x) and |u(x) can be obtained from the total Hamiltonian in coordinate representation for the nuclear variables which, in rather general terms, can be taken of the form where T is the nuclear kinetic energy operator ξ ij is an inverse mass tensor for the nuclei and H el (x) is the electronic operator with the nuclei clamped at a configuration x. In this way, one obtains an effective Schrödinger equation for the nuclear wavefunction and an equation of motion for the electronic wavefunction In the above equations the effective Hamiltonian H eff for the nuclear dynamics closely resembles the adiabatic Hamiltonian and is specified below (Eq. 6), E = u|H el |u is the average electronic energy and A 0 = i u|∂ t u is an arbitrary (but real) term that guarantees norm conservation to the electronic wavefunction. The detailed derivation of the equations of motion along these lines can be found in Ref. where Q = 1 -|u u|, V j = (v j ψ)/ψ is a complex-valued nuclear velocity field (to be discussed below, in Sec. II A), R |u = 2 ij ξ ij D ij |u , and One key feature of the exact factorization approach is, as mentioned above, some freedom in defining the electron and the nuclear wavefunctions appearing in Eq. 1, namely in the choice of their phase. This gauge freedom introduces spurious terms in the corresponding equations of motion and hampers the physical interpretation of the dynamics, for which only gauge invariant quantities can be relevant. The equations above, Eqs. 3 and 4, are "microscopically" gauge covariant, meaning that they have separate, gauge covariant contributions, as discussed at length in Refs. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we review the configuration-space hydrodynamical formulation of quantum mechanics developed by De Broglie, Bohm and Madelung As mentioned above, in the exact-factorization approach a key ingredient is represented by the (gauge invariant) velocity fields of the nuclei appearing in the functional of Eq. 5. They subsume the effect that the nuclear dynamics has on the evolution of the (local) electronic states, beyond the ordinary potential coupling term built in the electronic Hamiltonian H el (see Eq. 2). Here, these fields are described in their natural setting, which is that of the hydrodynamical view of quantum mechanics. We refer in particular to the configuration space hydrodynamical picture set by the (closely related) De Broglie -Bohm and Madelung views In this Section we shall consider a generic pseudoelectromagnetic Hamiltonian in Schrödinger representation for a number D of degrees of freedom x = (x 1 , x 2 , ..x D ) t subjected to gauge fields. At a later stage it will play the role of effective Hamiltonian for the marginal probability amplitude describing the nuclei in the exact factorization approach (Eq. 3). This Hamiltonian takes the form where ξ ij is a (coordinate-independent) inverse mass tensor, πj = -i ∂ j -A j and A j , V are local operators depending on x and eventually on time t. Here, V is taken to be gauge invariant, while the gauge potentials A k and A 0 are required to transform according to under the U (1) gauge transformation ψ → ψ ′ = e iφ ψ appropriate for a spinless wavefunction (here k = 0 denotes the time coordinate, ∂ 0 ≡ ∂ t ). In the exact factorization approach V = u|H el |u + φ FS , where the first term is the instantaneous Born-Oppenheimer potential and φ FS is its "diagonal correction" where g ij is the Fubini-Study metric tensor The latter is a key object since it subsumes the gauge fields introduced by the electronic wavefunction, in a gauge invariant way. The Hamiltonian of Eq. 6 is gauge invariant in form, meaning that the transformed Hamiltonian H → H ′ ≡ -∂ t φ + e iφ He -iφ is the generator of the dynamics in the new gauge, as can be easily verified with a direct calculation i ∂ t e iφ ψ = -(∂ t φ)ψ ′ + e iφ Hψ ≡ H ′ ψ ′ In practice, the A k 's can have different physical meaning. They can represent the coupling to a true electromagnetic field, and in this case the replacement (q k being the particle charge) connects to the standard, non-relativistic, semiclassical theory of the dynamics of a spinless charge in an electromagnetic field. However, the A k 's can also represent the coupling to a pseudoelectromagnetic field, for instance that arising from the electronic subsystem in the exact factorization approach. In this case, they read explicitly as and are known collectively as Berry connection (for k = 1, 2, ..). Here, the |u ≡ |u(x) 's are local electronic states and the transformation properties of the connection reflect the (conjugate) U (1) action on these states that is needed to preserve the invariance of the total wavefunction, i.e., |u → |u ′ = e -iφ |u . In either case, it is expedient to introduce the differential 1-form to which we can add -dV if desired, without altering its gauge invariance. The magnetic and electric fields (either real or pseudo) are then described by the components of the above forms in the canonical basis {dx k }, i.e., and represent the "physical" (i.e., gauge invariant) effects that the gauge fields have on the particle dynamics. They satisfy two differential identities that are, respectively, the magnetic Gauss and the Maxwell-Faraday induction law. They hold for both the real and the pseudo-electromagnetic fields and, in terms of components, read as In the following, we first introduce the key momentum and velocity fields, using their most general setting established by the above Hamiltonian. Then, we follow the historical route to quantum hydrodynamics by considering the problem of a single particle in three dimensional space, here subjected to a real or pseudo-electromagnetic field. The general result, which follows next, is a straightforward extension that could be directly derived from the Schrödinger equation, but the single particle problem is pivotal to identify its key physical ingredients. The established setting is instrumental to the analysis of the combined electron-nuclear dynamics in the exact factorization picture that is performed in Section III. The operator πk = -i ∂ k -A k entering Eq. 6 represents the k th component of the mechanical momentum, which connects to the velocity components vk via the mass tensor, namely through πk = j ξ kj vj where ξ kj is the mass tensor, j ξ kj ξ ji = δ i k , and vk = i [H, x k ] is the k th component of the velocity. Both πk and vk are gauge covariant, meaning that hence the expressions define two kinds of complex-valued, gauge-invariant fields in any point of configuration space but the ones where the wavefunction vanishes. They are, respectively, the momentum and the velocity fields and comprise qualitatively different contributions in their real and imaginary parts, henceforth denoted as π k , w k for the first and v k , u k for the second. By definition we have, for instance, and, using the polar representation of the wavefunction, ) where θ = argψ and n = |ψ| 2 is the particle density in configuration space. Note the both π k and w k are illdefined (singular) when ψ = 0 for any path joining the point x a with x b . This can be better expressed as where W is an exact 1-form W = k w k dx k = -/2d ln n and the path is arbitrary, subjected only to the constraint that it does not go through the wavefunction nodes or excluded region (if any). The velocity counterpart of this relation is similar but employs a different "metric". For a single particle in 3D we can write nu = -2m ∇n which can be viewed as a sort of Fick's law relating the density gradient to a kind of (number) density current on the left, with D = /2m playing the role of diffusion coefficient. For this reason u is termed osmotic velocity, a term that we shall adopt for u k , irrespective of the system dimensions (and nature of the mass tensor). The real part of the momentum fields, π k , are trickier for at least two reasons. First of all, the definition of the fields includes the potentials A k which are essential for the gauge invariance and are usually non-longitudinal, thereby providing a "diamagnetic" contribution to the current. Secondly, but equally important, even when ) is only apparently longitudinal: the wavefunction phase θ is defined modulo 2π only, meaning that θ = argψ is not a smooth function on the whole complex plane, rather it presents a branch cut (typically placed on the real negative axis, in such a way that arg(C) = (-π, π]). That is, when selecting smoothly the phase θ along a loop there is no guarantee that it gets back to its original value, it may well change by an integer multiple of 2π. Accounting for this aspect we must have a quantization condition on the "circulation", namely for any closed path γ in configuration space. Here, n is the topological value that describes the way a loop winds around a singularity (or an excluded volume). In fact, n can be nonzero only in a multiply connected domain, since otherwise we could exploit Stokes' theorem to write where S is any open surface having γ as its frontier, dΠ = d( k π k dx k ) is the vorticity of the (mechanical) momentum field and the second integral is the B-flux through S (i.e., the Berry flux or the flux of the magnetic field, depending on the context). Stokes' theorem guarantees that the surface integral (hence, the circulation of Eq. 12) changes smoothly down to zero value when contracting the loop to a single point, thereby implying that n = 0 must hold for the finite loop as well. We thus see that in the typical situation where there is no excluded volume the mechanical momentum field π k has a non-trivial vorticity only for a non-vanishing magnetic field, except at the singularities, i.e. at the wavefunction nodes. Thus, a third issue worth mentioning here is the behavior of the momentum field around the wavefunction nodes Cleary, at t = 0 and x = x 0 the phase θ is completely undefined and the partial derivatives ∂ t (π k + A k ) are singular. Note that, in general, the wavefunction nodes are objects of codimension 2 as they are found at the intersection of two surfaces, i.e. those defined by the conditions Rψ(x) = Iψ(x) = 0. B. QHD for a particle in 3D space with gauge fields We start with the simple example of a particle of mass m in 3D space, namely with the Hamiltonian that may represent a charge of mass m subjected to a true electromagnetic field, provided the gauge potentials are correctly scaled for the particle charge. As mentioned above, there is no real difficulty in dealing directly with the general case of Eq. 6, but this single-particle example allows us to single out the key physical ingredients that are otherwise hard to identify in the general setting. We only sketch the derivations and present the main (textbook) results In this problem, the momentum and velocity fields are simply related to each other, and we choose to work with the velocity field (which is valid everywhere in configuration space but the wavefunction nodes) one obtains the set of coupled (real) equations for the pair of variables (n, θ) that represent the wavefunction in polar form. These equations require a complex-valued "energy density" that, for H above, reads as They are, respectively, the celebrated continuity equation for the particle density [35] and a kind of Hamilton-Jacobi equation for the "action" [36] S = θ ≡ S(x, t) which involves the quantum potential Eq. 15 represents the key dynamical equation of the De Broglie -Bohm approach, corresponding [37] to the particle equation of motion is the electric field and B = ∇ × ( A) is the pseudo-vector describing the magnetic field. Solution of this equation for any initial position x 0 (and corresponding v 0 , as determined by the initial wavefunction) provides in principle a solution of the quantum dynamical problem -i.e. the wavefunction at later times. However, note that on comparing with the classical Hamilton-Jacobi equation, the added term ) is a potential that depends on the particle density, and this is the crucial factor that makes the system quantum. The trajectory equation does determine (as in classical mechanics) the evolution of a classical-like system but now the trajectories are quantum trajectories whose (changing) density affects the equation of motion itself. This implies that it is not possible to solve for a single or a handful of trajectories, unless we know in advance the evolving density n(x, t). Were it not for the classical analogy, the phase equation of the De Broglie -Bohm approach, Eq. 15, would be an ordinary partial differential equation, not easier to solve than the Schrödinger equation we started from. Importantly, this equation involves yet the potentials, that are gauge dependent, and thus it is not in a gauge invariant form. In fact, θ(x, t) = S(x, t)/ itself is gauge dependent. In order to fix this problem and to find the (gauge invariant) particle equations of motion one can take the spatial derivative of the Schrödinger equation, to write where the r.h.s. can be obtained from the energy density of Eq. 13. The result is the "Lagrangian-frame" expression where is the material derivative (here written in Lagrangian form, too) and, together, the two represent Madelung's hydrodynamical equations of motion. The solutions of these equations solve the original quantum dynamical problem if one enforces the quantization condition on the circulation, namely Eq. 12. This is necessary to guarantee the existence of a scalar function S ≡ θ that is independent of the path (modulo 2π ). This quantization condition (a boundary condition for the velocity field) is required at initial time only, since Kelvin's circulation theorem Eqs. 18 and 20 can be further presented as a set of coupled equations for the real (v) and imaginary (u) velocity fields, namely where F = E+v × B -∇V represents the total (classical ) force acting on the particle. This set of equations describes a particle dynamics subjected to the classical force F and "an internal force" (second and third term on the r.h.s. of the last equation) that depends on the auxiliary field u. The latter evolves along the flow as dictated by the first equation, and replaces the quantum potential appearing in the De Broglie -Bohm formulation where now F = E+V × B -∇V is a complex-valued classical force and is the complex-valued material derivative, both involving the complex-valued velocity field V in place of the real one. This result follows more easily by introducing the complex-valued action F (x) according to (i.e., setting F (x) = S(x) -i 2 ln n(x)) and writing a complex-valued Hamiltonian-Jacobi equation for it. However, in practice, the first (vectorial) equation of Eq. 21 is conveniently replaced by the continuity equation for the scalar n, at the expense of breaking the symmetry between velocity fields, hence Eq. 22 becomes just a compact way of presenting the QHD equations of motion. Finally, we notice that the key equation of motion, Eq. 18, can be recast as a momentum balance equationi.e. as a quantum Navier-Stokes equation - where the bulk force F b is classical (F b ≡ F) and the surface force is quantum. The latter reads componentwise as (∇σ) k = j ∂ j σ jk , and is determined by the quantum stress tensor where P q = -2 4m ∇ 2 n is the (positive definite) quantum pressure. The analogy with the classical Navier-Stokes, though, can only be formal. The fluid of quantum probability addressed here does not experience any frictional effect since this would require an interaction between fluid molecules, one that can transfer momentum when the molecules travel at different speeds. Here the interaction is a manifestation of the non-locality of quantum mechanics, it depends on the density gradient and it is same irrespective of whether or not the "particles" travel at the same velocity. We are now ready to undertake the more complicated task of developing the hydrodynamic picture for the many-body Hamiltonian of Eq. 6. We shall use the complex valued momentum fields introduced in Sec. II A, Eq. 9, and the result Eq. 26 defines the potential of the complex Eulerian force that shows that non-longitudinal contributions to the momentum field can only come from the timedependence of the vector potential A k , consistently with the generalized Maxwell-Faraday induction law of Eq. 8. There remains to calculate the spatial derivative of Eq. 26. A simple calculation gives for the non-trivial kinetic contribution that can be further rearranged as where we have used Adding the potential contribution and rearranging, we finally find where we have introduced the complex material derivative and the complex-valued total classical force, Eq. 31 generalizes Eq. 22 for the single particle in 3D space, here re-written in terms of the momentum field, where in 3D the pseudo-vector field B is related to the tensor B kj by B i = 1 2 kj ǫ ikj B kj (here ǫ ijk is the Levi-Civita symbol that stands for the fully antisymmetric unit tensor, ǫ 123 = 1). Eq. 31 is the complex-valued form of Madelung's hydrodynamic equations. It can be easily split into a pair of real-valued equations by taking its real and imaginary parts. Upon using and which generalize Eqs. 21, here re-written in terms of momentum fields, Eq. 35 is, of course, continuity equation in disguise. Hence, at the expense of breaking the symmetry between real and imaginary momentum fields, it is conveniently replaced by or, equivalently, by its Lagrangian form Eqs. 37 and 34 form the basis for the trajectory approach to quantum dynamics underlying the Madelung hydrodynamic picture. Eq. 34 shows that, in analogy with the single particle case, the dynamics is governed by the classical force (here comprising both "external" and gauge fields) and by a quantum force depending only on the density. The latter can be rearranged to identify the quantum potential an expression that closely parallels that found above for the single particle in 3D space, Eq. 16. The analogy can be tightened if we introduce a mass-weighted Laplacian according to and rewrite Eqs. 39 and 16 in the suggestive form The mass-weighted Laplacian is further in accordance with other analogies provided above in the equations of motion, e.g. it can be used to write the momentum equation as in close analogy with Eq. 21, or that for the complexvalued field (cf. with Eq. 22). The resulting quantum potential can also be used to obtain the density of quantum force which enters the momentum balance equation (i.e. the Navier-Stokes equation for the momentum) in the form of divergence of a stress tensor with the quantum stress tensor given by and the quantum pressure P q = -2 4 ∆ M n. Eq. 46 parallels (generalizes) Eq. 25 found for the particle in 3D space. Notice that u j is the j th imaginary component of the velocity, while w k is the k th imaginary component of the mechanical momentum. The theory presented so far has only addressed the case of a pure state, for which a set of two hydrodynamic equations suffices. These can be formulated as the momentum particle equation augmented with the continuity equation or as two Euler equations, one for the density (continuity equation) and one for the momentum density. For (proper) mixtures of states an analogous and yet very elegant description is possible in terms of momentum moments of the underlying phase-space (pseudo) distribution The standard construction of momentum moments and of the related hierarchy of equations of motion is well known. It is however of limited help here since the presence of gauge potentials in our Hamiltonian, Eq. 6, makes the ordinary momentum moments gauge dependent, hence unsuited for a gauge invariant hydrodynamic description of the quantum dynamics. Thus, we introduce here a new type of gauge invariant momentswhich we call mechanical momentum moments (MMMs) because of their relationship with the mechanical momentum operator -and show that their equations of motion take a simple, physically sound form. In the following we provide the main results of these developments, the details of the calculations can be found in Appendix B. The ordinary momentum moments are the moments of the partial "distributions" that are obtained when fixing q in the Wigner function ρ W (q, p), namely is the number of degrees of freedom and ρ W (q, p) is the Wigner function , q + r 2 e i pr associated to the system density matrix σ(x, x ′ ). For instance, in this notation, S (0) 00..0 (q) is just the density in configuration space, S (1) 01..0 (q) is the second component of the first order moment, etc. There exist several equivalent ways to express these moments, the one that is most useful for our purposes is by means of where [A, B] + = AB + BA is the anti-commutator and now the hat denotes abstract operators, e.g, pk and σ for the k th momentum and for the density operator, respectively. In the last expression, the subscript labels the coordinates and specifies the order of the products -the momentum operators appearing in the nested products are labeled with indexes from right to left, starting from the innermost product. However, since the pk 's commute with each other, the P (n) ijk.. (q) 's so defined are fully symmetric in their indexes and coincide with the moments above. That is, where count([ijk..], m) counts the occurrences of m in the list of indexes ijk... This representation of the moments is redundant but it is very useful if we intend to generalize the moment construction to gauge covariant, noncommuting operators. Specifically, in connection with the dynamics provided by our Hamiltonian, Eq. 6, we define mechanical momentum moments according to This definition can be equivalently expressed in a form that is rather useful for calculations, namely where now ) (see Appendix B for details). Note that here the symbol π k , differently from the previous Sections, is used to mean a differential operator. The moments defined in this way are, by construction, gauge invariant and they thus fulfill our requirement. The price to be paid is that they are no longer symmetric in their indexes since where again we have primed (unprimed) quantities for functions of x ′ (x). For instance, a direct calculation shows that The exception is the symmetry in the two leftmost indexes which holds for any moment of order n ≥ 2. Note that we could define moments which are yet gauge invariant and symmetric in their indexes, for instance However, only for the M (n) ijk.. 's defined above the equations of motion take a simple form. The moment equations of motion follow indeed from the Liouville -von Neumann (LvN) equation and for the first three moments take the form (see Appendix B) In general, for the n th moment we have an "upward" coupling to the (n + 1) th layer of moments that occurs through a surface term containing the spatial derivatives of the (n+1) th moments, and both "downward" and "horizontal" couplings that occur through "classical" forces. The rank-1 pseudo-electric field E k and the intrinsic force -∂ k V link the n th layer of moments to the layer below it. The rank-2 pseudo-magnetic field B kj increases the order by one and thus describes "horizontal" coupling to moments of the same order n (starting from n = 1). In the above hydrodynamic set of equations the first, Eq. 49, is continuity equation, with j (q) playing the role of density current. The second equation, Eq. 50, extends the quantum Navier-Stokes equation for a pure state, Eq. 45, here written in the form where use has been made of the identity ∂ t (nπ k ) + j ∂ j (nv j π k ) ≡ n dπ k /dt. The comparison with the pure state is insightful, since it suggests to single out the "uncorrelated" term from the second moment by defining the second cumulant as For a pure state we have and the cumulant is seen to be the source of the density of surface forces, F S k (the only ones having a quantum origin). In general, i.e. for an arbitrary mixed state, we can always introduce the rank-2 tensor C (2) kl (q) according to Eq. 52 and re-write Eq. 50 in terms of it. The result is where k /M (0) and v j = i ξ ji π i are the usual momentum and velocity fields. We thus see that, in the form of Eq. 53, the first moment equation describes the Lagrangian-frame evolution of momentum in terms of classical, bulk forces and a surface term which is responsible for quantum effects. We are now ready to address the main issue of this paper, that is replacing the EF equations with gauge invariant equations of motion for both electrons and nuclei. We shall start with the pure state case where this program can be accomplished in an exact way, and later we shall explore extensions of the theory to special statistical mixtures that require some assumptions. We recall that the generic Hamiltonian of Eq. 6, is also the Hamiltonian governing the time evolution of the marginal probability amplitude describing the nuclei in the exact factorization approach to the electron-nuclear problem. Hence, as shown in the previous Section this immediately leads to a gauge invariant formulation of the nuclear dynamics in hydrodynamical form, for instance that provided in Lagrangian frame by the complex momentum equation presented in Eq. 44, with the complex momentum fields Π k given by Eq. 32. In that case, the dynamical problem needs to be augmented by the coupled equation of motion for the local electronic states, Eq. 4, here written for the only relevant component of ∂ t |uthe gauge covariant projection Q∂ t |u which is "free" of the gauge choice -and rearranged to make explicit on the l.h.s. the complex material derivative of Eq. 23. This equation can be presented in complex hydrodynamical form the closely parallels that momentum equation for the nuclei (Eq. 44), i.e., in the form where ∆M := ij ξ ij D i D j is a mass-weighted gauge covariant Laplacian (cf. with Eq. 40), defined with the help of the gauge covariant derivative D j = ∂ j + iA j . Alternatively, one can work with real-valued nuclear fields and consider in parallel to the real-valued momentum equation for the nuclei, Eq. 43, and jointly with the continuity equation (Eq. 37). Upon making explicit the role of the density gradients, one can present the dynamical equations in a suggestive form, namely ) for the electrons and for the nuclei, where now |φ = |u and |Φ = H el |u / . For k = 1, 2, ..D Eq. 57 represents trajectory equations similar to those of the De Broglie -Bohm -Madelung theory, and defines the evolution of the elementary volumes of the quantum probability fluid in nuclear configuration space (noting that the second and third terms in Eq. 57 are just the quantum force, see Eq. 38). However, they are now augmented by an equation for the electronic state, Eq. 56, that follows each fluid element similarly to the quantum hydrodynamical description of a particle with a spin In the above equations the effect of the electron dynamics on the nuclear motion is condensed in the "classical" force F k (the real part of Eq. 33), containing both the averaged electronic forces and the gauge fields, Here, three distinct contributions are evident. The first term is the scalar potential known from the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, though now involving a time dependent electronic state. It explicitly reads as where E el = E el (x) is the average (local) electronic energy, g ij = Rq kj is the Fubini-Study metric tensor and q ij = ∂ i u|Q|∂ j u the instantaneous quantum geometric tensor. This is the term that was dubbed "gaugeinvariant part of the time-dependent potential energy surface" in the seminal work by Gross and coworkers on exact factorization This last contribution precisely corresponds to the pseudo-electric field E k , as defined in Eq. 7. However, in the context of the exact factorization of the wavefunction, it would be misleading to label it as "electric" due to the presence of a velocitydependent (magnetic) contribution. Indeed, upon making apparent the material derivative of the electronic state, we find ) where G ED k -defined by this equation -is the "Lagrangian-frame" electron-dynamical force. G ED k is free of velocity contributions, as a simple inspection of Eq. 55 reveals. Hence, the total classical force of Eq. 58 does not explicitly depend on the nuclear velocity, Furthermore, upon using Eq. 55, G ED k can be split as where, δF BO is the corresponding correction to the pseudo-electric force -∂ k φ FS appearing already in the adiabatic approximation. Since the dynamically corrected BO and electric forces read as, respectively, and [49] we arrive at This is the same result as obtained in our previous work [50]. The reason is that we are now dealing with the classical force (as needed in the hydrodynamic picture) and not with the quantum one used in Refs. A few comments are in order at this point. First of all, F el k (Eq. 63) is manifestly zero-averaged when interpreted as (local) operator acting on the nuclear wavefunction but it is generally non-zero as a classical force, i.e. as required by the trajectory equation, Eq. 57. Furthermore, as already observed in Refs. The Liouville-von Neumann-like equation of motion governing the evolution of ρ el reads as (see Appendix C) where the dot stands for the material derivative and δH en is the electron-nuclear correction to the electronic Hamiltonian defining the Liouvillian Eq. 66 is both trace-and purity-conserving, i.e., Tr el ρel = 0 Tr el (ρ el ρel ) = 0 see Appendix C for a proof it forms a full set of gauge invariant equations for both the electrons and the nuclei. Here, in re-writing Eq. 57 we have made explicit the role of the electronic Hamiltonian and that of the gauge fields, and we have combined the quantum contributions in a single term. Eqs. 66 and 68 represent the first main finding of this work: they provide an exact, gauge invariant description of the electronic and nuclear dynamics, in the Lagrangian frame defined by the nuclear quantum fluid. Alternatively, the nuclear hydrodynamical equations of motion can be given in the Eulerian frame. Using the moment notation and the results of Section II D, they read as for the zero-th and the first moment, respectively, and replace Eqs. 68 and 37 formulated in Lagrangian frame. Here, the net force F k is (see Eq. 64) and the second moment is subjected to the pure-state closure Before closing this Section we emphasize that one main advantage of a gauge invariant formulation of the dynamics is that it removes the need of obtaining the electronic wavefunctions with a smooth phase factor, when the latter is computed on-the-fly along the nuclear trajectories. This issue can pose significant difficulties, especially in systems with broken time-reversal invariance-e.g. in the presence of a magnetic field. In such cases, the overlap between adjacent electronic states, u(x t )|u(x t+∆t ) , takes arbitrary phases and it becomes challenging to make it smooth by selecting an appropriate phase from Table the random values generated by the electronic solver. In the above formulation, on the other hand, the only information required consists of the gauge invariant fields, and these can be directly obtained from ρ el and its spatial derivatives. For instance, provides the instantaneous quantum geometric tensor, hence the Fubini-Study metric (which is needed for the dynamics, see the force of Eq. 71) and the Berry curvature. Furthermore, we notice that upon multiplying Eq. 66 by n(x) and integrating over all nuclear configuration space one obtains which gives the evolution of the "true" density operator of the electronic subsystem -that is, γ el of Eq. 65in terms of local (i.e., conditional) contributions. This equation is an exact identity for globally pure states that can be generalized to the statistical mixtures discussed below. It shows that out of the two terms on the r.h.s. of Eq. 66 only the first one (the Liouvillian associated to H el ) contributes directly to the change of the global electronic properties, the second one (i.e. the electronnuclear coupling δH en ) affects the local properties (the ρ el 's) that in turn determine a change in γ el . In a sense, Eq. 74 proves that H el plays a primary role in the evolution of the electronic properties. We should emphasize, though, that this result is of limited help in general since most often the observables of interest are electron-nuclear rather than purely electronic, and thus require more detailed information than those contained in γ el . A notable example consists in the adiabatic populations p ad n (apparently, pure electronic observables) which are defined as where P n (x) is the eigenprojector on the n th eigenstate of H el . These are, in fact, expectation values of the following electron-nuclear operator and always require n(x) and the conditional density operators ρ el , unless the relevant eigenspace is trivial and P n (x) does not depend on x. In Section III A we have provided an exact, gaugeinvariant description of the dynamics using the exact factorization of the wavefunction describing the globally pure state of the combined electronic-nuclear system. We now consider extensions to this picture, starting from the situation where the electron-nuclear system is in a simple, proper statistical mixture of states where electrons can be yet described by a local pure electronic state. By this we mean that the nuclear-coordinate representation of the total density operator changes according to [53] where σ(x, x ′ ) -the apparent nuclear density matrix -is no longer constrained to have a pure state form. We call this special mixture of states a type-n statistical mixture. In this case, the equations of motion for the nuclei and for the electrons follow easily as a simple generalization of the equations given in the Section II D and III A. Specifically, electrons are governed by the same equations we have seen above, namely Eq. 66 for the Lagrangianframe dynamics of the conditional electronic density operators. We only need to perform an ensemble average of the complex-valued nuclear velocity or momentum fields appearing there, specifically in the definition of the material derivative on the l.h.s. of Eq. 66 and in the e-n correction term on its r.h.s. (Eq. 67). With nuclei described by the mixed-state apparent density matrix σ(x, x ′ ) the real component of the momentum field takes the form of a ratio of mechanical momentum moments j (q) is the correct expression for the nuclear current density. As for the imaginary component we need a similar construction, that translates into a logarithmic average n eff of the nuclear density entering the electronic equation, namely where ω α are statistical weights and n α (q) = ψ * α (q)ψ α (q) is the density of the α th representative of the ensemble. Here, we can replace n eff with M (0) , which is logarithmically correct up to second order in the (relative) density fluctuations in the ensemble to write the electron-nuclear correction term as in the pure state case, with the ensemble average nuclear density M (0) in place of ψ * ψ and ρ el the usual conditional density operator for the electrons. As for the nuclei, the dynamical behavior of any realization of the ensemble is governed by one and the same Hamiltonian H eff , with the gauge fields coming from the evolution of the (local) pure electronic state. As a result, the nuclear dynamics can be described by a Liouvillevon Neumann equation for the density matrix σ(x, x ′ ) of the kind already mentioned in Sec. II D, meaning that it can be given as a hierarchy of momentum moment equations ... where again (in the approximation n eff ≈ M (0) ) the net force F k is given by Eq. 71 and C (2) kj (q) was defined in Eq. 52. Hence, in a type-n statistical mixture the electronic equation of motion takes precisely the same form of the pure state case, Eq. 66, and the hierarchy of equations for the nuclear moments generalizes the pure state result of Eqs. 69 and 70, following the general scheme presented in Section II D. We notice that in the latter set of equations cancellation of the gauge fields is incomplete beyond the first moment: coupling to the magnetic field occurs through the first-moment correlations, which are generally non-vanishing beyond the first moment. We now consider the opposite limit of a statistical mixture where the nuclei can be yet represented by a wavefunction ψ(x) and the electrons are in an mixed state, meaning that even locally in nuclear coordinates they are not constrained to have a pure state form. In other words, in this case the total density operator takes the form where Ŵ(x, x ′ ) is the ensemble average of the pure-state dyad Ŵα (x, with ω α statistical weights, α = 1, 2, ..n α . We call the special kind of mixture of Eq. 75 a type-e statistical mixture, to emphasize that now the electrons are in a intrinsically mixed state. In this situation the fact that a unique nuclear wavefunction can be singled out from the ensemble means that the electronic states |u α (x) 's have only an overall gauge degree of freedom, i.e. their phases cannot be changed independently of each other. Rather, a single set of gauge potentials exist, A k for k = 0, 1, 2, .. (in keeping with the previous notation we use k = 0 for the time coordinate) and this defines completely the dynamical problem for the nuclei and makes the theory yet relatively simple. We notice that this does not imply that the |u α 's define the same Berry connection, only that the gauge potentials are just the ensemble average in such a way that the same gauge transformation applied to the |u α 's, i.e. |u α → e -iφ |u α , gives rise to the desired transformation law for the gauge potentials In turn, this also implies that both the pseudo-magnetic and pseudo-electric fields are ensemble averages of the pure-state expressions (see Eq. 7) However, in order to completely define the nuclear problem, we shall also need an ensemble average for the metric tensor, g av ij . This requires separate considerations (see below, Eq. 84) since for mixed states the tensor cannot be represented in terms of derivatives of the conditional electronic density operator. Once this issue is settled, the nuclear dynamics follows straightforwardly from the pure-state case, and can be subsumed in the gauge-invariant quantum hydrodynamical equations, e.g. continuity equation for the nuclear density (Eq. 37) and the momentum equation of Eq. 57, with the quantum force (F q ) k , as usual, given by Eq. 38. Thus, we are left with the problem of seeking a gauge invariant formulation of the electron dynamics that can account for the mixed state character of the local electronic states. Formally, given a total density operator ρ(x, x ′ ) and a nuclear wavefunction ψ(x) (hence, the pure-state apparent nuclear density matrix σ(x, x ′ ) = ψ(x)ψ * (x ′ )) we can define a "doubly conditional electronic operator" according to for any x and x ′ where the wavefunction does not vanish. This operator determines the conditional density operator for electrons through its diagonal elements and, in general, determines the true nuclear density matrix through its off diagonal elements These "doubly conditional" electronic operators Ŵ(x, x ′ ) are the key elements of the theory of type-e statistical mixtures. In the following we shall describe them by means of a set of moments, which we call mechanical electronic moments, in full analogy with the mechanical momentum moments of Sections II D and III B. We report only the main findings of these developments and leave the details of the calculations in Appendix D. We start defining the "mechanical" electronic moments M(0) (q) = Ŵ(q, q) ≡ ρ el (q) M( iA k is the gauge covariant derivative. By definition, these moments are gauge invariant with respect to the gauge transformations mentioned above (note that sign change in the gauge potentials when compared to the mechanical momenta of the nuclei, i.e., μ k ≡ -π * k ). For a pure state, for instance, we find M( M( The equations of motion for these moments can be derived from an analysis of the pure-state case, provided the results are cast in a form that survives the ensemble average (see Appendix D). The appropriate form of the electronic equation for the state vectors involves only the gauge covariant derivatives D k 's, since these are fixed in our setting by the presence of a single set of gauge potentials A k . This is Eq. 54 in the form where we have set D 0 ≡ ∂ t + iA 0 and removed the projector Q = 1 -P , P = |u u|, which is annoying for the ensemble average. This could be done at the price of adding the following term in the space projected by P ("P -space") which is precisely the potential energy for the nuclear motion (noting that D i u|D j u ≡ ∂ i u|Q|∂ j u ), and which guarantees u|D 0 u ≡ 0. Indeed, we have When extending the above equation to a statistical mixture of the type considered here, i.e. with the replacement |u → |u α for α = 1, 2, ..n α in Eq. 82, orthogonality no longer holds for each representative (83) since this implies Here, we have used the overbar to denote the ensemble average and exploited the definition of the ensemble connection, Eq. 76. It is worth stressing at this point that the electronic equation of motion for the ensemble realizations (Eq. 82 with |u α in place of |u ) remains gauge covariant, even if the A k 's are not defined by any Berry connection. Indeed, for that property to hold one only needs that the potentials transform as A k → A k + ∂ k φ under the gauge transformation |u α → e -iφ |u α . This is the essence of the gauge covariant derivative and it is the key for Eq. 82 to work properly for the members of our ensemble Incidentally, the above arguments also show that the metric tensor entering the nuclear potential V (Eq. 83) is g av ij ≡ Rq av ij where is the appropriate expression for the averaged quantum geometric tensor. This is consistent with the expression for the average gauge fields given in Eq. 77 and formally settles any issue concerning the nuclear dynamics. Now, as shown in Appendix D, when using Eq. 82 as effective electronic equation for our type-e ensemble, the zero-th moment equation takes the form where d/dt denotes the material derivative and n(q) = |ψ(x)| 2 is the usual nuclear density. This is actually one of the several possible ways of presenting the equation of motion for the conditional density of a pure state (see Appendix C), the one appropriate for the kind of ensemble averages we are interested here. The key difference between a type-e mixed state and a pure state is that only for the latter the first order moment appearing on the r.h.s. can be expressed in terms of the zero-th order one and its spatial derivative, Eq. 85 is a Liouville-von Neumann-like equation with a surface term (second term on the r.h.s.) that resembles the flux term of the continuity equation. Upon multiplying by n(q) and integrating over all nuclear configuration space we obtain where γ el is the "true" density operator of the electronic subsystem, appropriate to the present statistical mixture (see Eq. 65), This equation generalizes Eq. 74 found for pure states, and is subjected to the same caveats: most often one needs the electronic moment M(0) (q) (and the nuclear density n(q)) for computing the observables of interest, hence the global electronic density operator γ el is of little help. Now, the main difference between the type-e statistical mixture addressed here and the pure-state case of Sec. III A is that the evolution of the zero-th electronic moment requires the first moment (last term on the r.h.s. of Eq. 85), which in turn involves higher order moments. In other words, the Liouville von Neumann like equation of Eq. 85 no longer suffices to describe the electron dynamics, and an infinite hierarchy of equations is necessary. For instance, the dynamical equation of the first order moments reads as j The evolution of these moments requires the second-order moments in a flux-like term (fourth line), even if the e-n coupling term (third line) is neglected. This is the general way the couplings to higher order moments occurs. In fact, higher order moment equations become increasingly complicated, but they appear unlikely to play a key role in practical applications. Before closing this Section we notice that the electronic moments have well defined traces, as can be checked with a direct calculation on the purestate expressions (Eqs. 79, 80 and 81), followed by an ensemble average. The zero-th moment equation, Eq. 85, is clearly trace-conserving since both the commutator and the first moment on the r.h.s. are traceless. As for the first moment equation, on the other hand, the trace of the r.h.s. of Eq. 88 reduces to thereby proving that this equation is trace-conserving too. As a final remark we notice that the type-e statistical mixture considered in this Section requires the instantaneous pseudo-magnetic field B kj = -2 Iq av kj , as is evident from the moment equation of first order given in Eq. 88. This cannot be obtained from Eq. 73 since the latter only holds for pure states, and cannot be generalized to statistical mixtures. The situation differs from that of the metric g av kj , which is directly provided by the second moments through their trace (Eq. 89). The required equation of motion for B kj can be obtained from Maxwell-Faraday induction law (Eq. 8) and is conveniently re-expressed in terms of the forces acting on the nuclei since these are in any case needed for the particle dynamics. It reads as ) where F k can either be the classical force or the total force of Eq. 78 (the quantum component is longitudinal and does not contribute to the curl appearing in Eq. 90) . Eq. 90 follows from Eq. 58 upon singling out the electric field components and performing the ensemble average. It plays the role of a vortex equation for the dynamics of the quantum probability fluid. The momentum moments introduced in the previous Sections replace in a sense the ordinary moments and, as seen above, provide a gauge invariant description of the dynamics. However, they are not (separately) fully equivalent to the ordinary moments: the latter allow, at least in principle, to retrieve a density matrix, while this is not obviously the case for the mechanical moments which, by definition, require the gauge potentials. The point, however, is that, after all, we are always interested in the full density matrix The issue of the gauge invariance only arises when looking separately at the electronic and the nuclear problems, the total density matrix above is in fact globally gauge invariant by construction. The mechanical moments allow one to split the problem into gauge invariant sub-problems. This becomes clear when focusing on the ordinary moments of this matrix, for instance Here, where k (q) M(0) (q) + M (0) (q) M( The "weakness" of the mechanical moments is only apparent, it is actually a necessity: the marginal density matrix for the nuclei and the conditional density matrix for the electrons -as inspired by the exact factorization of the total wavefunction -are gauge dependent, hence require that a gauge choice is made. In this Section we make a connection between the exact electron-nuclear quantum dynamics formulated for a pure state in Section III A and commonly adopted mixed quantum-classical schemes in which nuclei are treated as classical particles and electrons evolve quantum dynamically. The purpose of this Section is to bridge the exact quantum theory to practical approaches to the problem and, eventually, to identify the key corrections to the latter that can bring results in better agreement with the exact one. We start discussing a little point that concerns the dynamical interpretation behind Eq. 55 and the original equation arising from the exact factorization of the electron-nuclear wavefunction, namely Eq. 4 or the equivalent Eq. 91 is formulated in the Eulerian frame: for each x in the configuration space of the system there exists an equation of motion of the kind of Eq. 91, and the local electronic state fixed at x is seen to evolve under the action of one and the same electronic Hamiltonian H el (x) at any time, besides its coupling to the nuclear motion Albeit equivalent in an exact framework, the two equations, Eqs. 91 and 92, represent distinct starting points when introducing approximations. In the Lagrangian picture the coupling to the nuclear motion appears reduced, since the effect of the (real) velocity fields has been absorbed in the total time derivative, with clear advantages in the diabatic (fast moving nuclei) limit where the electronic state has hardly time to adjust to the "evolving" Hamiltonian. On the other hand, the advection term becomes a complicating factor in the adiabatic limit where the electrons respond rapidly to the changing Hamiltonian, on the time scale appropriate for a (slow) nuclear motion. This latter, adiabatic limit deserves some considerations since it is rather instructive. It is easily formulated in the Eulerian frame, where the adiabatic condition is a stationary condition for the local electronic states that, we remind, are fixed in space in this picture. In the Lagrangian frame, on the other hand, it reads as and it is a bit less intuitive. It becomes clear when the adiabatic dynamics is driven by classical parameters x k , with velocity ẋk ≡ v k , since in that case the appropriate (variational) equation of motion would be (see Eq. 4 in Ref. where P is the eigenprojector of interest, E the corresponding eigenvalue and Ṗ its directional derivative Ṗ = j v j ∂ j P . Indeed, Eq. 94 follows from Eq. 95 upon projecting on Q space and noticing that the dynamics in the P -space is just a gauge choice. Clearly, if the dynamics is close to be adiabatic the Euler form is preferred and the stationary condition is conveniently turned into a standard eigenvalue problem -i.e., QH el |u = 0 -in the limit where v k → 0 and the e-n coupling terms on the r.h.s of Eq. 91 can be neglected. Far from this dynamical limit, on the other hand, the Lagrangian form has distinct advantages and represents the preferred choice for describing the electron dynamics. As a matter of fact, the gauge invariant form of the electronic equation appears natural in the Lagrangian frame (Eq 66), in the Eulerian frame it would contain an "odd" advection term. Next, we introduce a classical approximation for the nuclei by naively setting ∂ i n ≈ 0 in the equations of motions. This turns the momentum equation (Eq. 57) into and amounts to neglect the quantum force of Eq. 38 and to simplify the dynamically corrected electric force, Eq. 63, by neglecting a term at the expense of breaking a global property of the corrected electric force, i.e. the vanishing of its average over the nuclear quantum state. Eq. 96 immediately leads to classical Born-Oppenheimer dynamics if the geometric term is neglected, since u|∂ k H el |u = ∂ k u|H el |u when |u is a (normalized) eigenstate of H el . However, in order to recover the full adiabatic limit once needs to eliminate the electronic response from the above expression and enforce the adiabatic condition with the vanishing of the dynamical response F ED k (third term in Eq. 58) before setting |u to be an eigenstate of H el . This gives the well known result where V = u|H el |u + φ FS is the Born-Oppenheimer potential energy surface with the diagonal correction, and the second term is the Berry force. This can be directly checked with a calculation that starts from Eq. 96, upon noticing that hold in the classical, adiabatic limit, along with the geometric identity These considerations will turn out to be useful in the next Section where we address a quasi-adiabatic regime. Beyond this adiabatic limit, the electron dynamics needs to be explicitly taken into account and, in the classical approximation considered here, it follows the equation here given in the traditional wavefunction picture. This equation results from the condition ∂ i n ≈ 0 and the second term on its r.h.s. is consistent with the geometric contribution appearing in Eq. 96, meaning that the second term on the r.h.s. of Eq. 96 is precisely the dynamically corrected electric force of Eq. 63 at this level of approximation, where we have exploited once again the geometric identity of Eq. 98. These geometrical contributions have nothing to do with the quantum nature of the nuclear dynamics and thus survive the classical limit. These are neglected in the popular Ehrenfest method, whose equations of motion result from Eqs. 96 and 99, upon disregarding the geometric terms. Eqs. 100 and 101 are precisely the equations of motion of the "semiclassical Ehrenfest method", here obtained from first-principles without any meanfield approximation and ad-hoc correction for energy conservation. The widely used form of the Ehrenfest equations of motion is indeed easily recovered from Eqs. 100 and 101 by fixing the gauge of the electronic equation according to A 0 = E el and presenting the equations in an adiabatic (time-independent) basis of eigenstates of the electronic Hamiltonian, {|u n }. They read as where the d nm 's are non-adiabatic coupling vectors, are, respectively, the gradient and nuclear velocity vectors in the nuclear configuration space, and the ρ nm 's are defined by ρ nm = u n |ρ el |u m and are known as (adiabatic) populations for n = m and coherences for n = m (cf.. Eqs. 73, 74 and 78 in Ref. and we exploited the identity which follows from | un ≡ v∇ |u n and d nk = -d * kn . Clearly, a first correction to the Ehrenfest dynamics would be the inclusion of the geometric effects in both the nuclear and electron dynamics, what we can call "geometric Ehrenfest" approximation. Note that we refer here to effects that are of pseudo-electric (rather than pseudo-magnetic) nature: Berrry-like forces are absent when the electron dynamics is taken into account. However, it turns out that a main weakness of the quantum-classical approach is not in the classical approximation to the nuclear dynamics but rather in the classical way the electron-nuclear coupling is handled. By this we mean that one can perform a classical limit for the nuclear dynamics by setting to zero the quantum force while keeping the density dependence (which occurs through the imaginary part of the nuclear momentum fields, w k = -/2∂ k ln n) in the rest. At this stage, if we neglect the geometric contributions (∂ k g ij ≈ 0) we obtain a pseudo-classical dynamics governed by where u j = i ξ ij w j is the imaginary part of the j component of the velocity field, and the rightmost terms of the two equations are again consistent with each other, This is pseudo-classical because the nuclear trajectories are not independent of each other, and essentially amounts to what is known in the literature as coupledtrajectory mixed quantum-classical dynamics in the geometric limit described by Eq. 99, and as δH en ≈ j u j ∂ j ρ el in the pseudo-classical limit addressed by the coupledtrajectory mixed quantum-classical method of Eqs. 106, 107. Finally, in the "geometric Ehrenfest with quantum coupling" scheme the term takes its exact form, Eq. 67, and the only approximation is the neglect of the quantum force in the nuclear equation of motion. Table We have intentionally left trajectory surface hopping (TSH) and the first term vanishes in Ehrenfest dynamics, we have that (if positive) represents the correct transition probability from n to m, depending on the nuclear velocity, on the derivative couplings and on the coherences ρ nm . Because of its stochastic nature, deriving TSH from deterministic equations requires additional assumptions, a topic that warrants more extensive exploration in a separate publication. Here we just notice that TSH has been almost derived In closing this Section we notice that one main problem of mixed quantum-classical methods relying on Ehrenfest evolution of the electron dynamics is the absence of any feedback from the actual distribution of the nuclei in configuration space. In the Lagrangian frame where the nuclei are at rest the electrons experience only a strictly local, potential-like coupling with the nuclei, through the electronic Hamiltonian H el (x). In the exact dynamical equation, on the other hand, the electron-nuclear coupling δH el of Eq. 67, provides a coupling which depends on (the gradient of) n(x) and which is active when ρ el happens to change in the neighborhoods of x (since it depends on ∂ j ρ el ). In terms of hopping probabilities, adding this e-n coupling contribution introduces a correction to the transition probability. Indeed, differently from Ehrenfest dynamics, we now have hence the hopping probabilities get modified into Electron dynamics ( ρel ) Classical forces ( πk ) Table where Here, the first term is geometric, while the second is dynamical and depends on the nuclear density gradient through the imaginary component of the velocity field, u j . Neglecting the first term one obtains a corrected transition probability in the form where u n |∂ j u m =u n |∂ j P n |u m has been used for m = n. This correction turns TSH into a coupled trajectory surface hopping method (where coupling occurs through the hopping probabilities only) and might be important when ρ el deviates from a pure adiabatic state (otherwise u n | ρel |u n ≡ 0, as in the ordinary TSH, and the correction vanishes). Of course, if the electron-nuclear term δH en were also considered for the electron dynamics (even at an approximate level) it would provide a further source of coupling for the trajectories and it would directly affect the evolution of populations and coherences. The specific form of electronic decoherence introduced by this electronnuclear quantum coupling will be addressed in a separate publication. Here, we just notice that, as observed in Sec. III A, the exact electronic equation, Eq. 74, is purity conserving, as it must be since it is just the electronic equation for the pure-state, local electronic wavefunction defined by the exact factorization approach (i.e., Eq. 4), recast in a density form. Hence, if decoherence happens to occur in the energy basis between regions of strong non-adiabatic coupling it must be accompanied by population decay to a single adiabatic state, i.e., it must be of the "decay of mixing" type, according to the classification of Ref. Quoting Dou et al. The T = 0 K electronic frictional regime was derived by the present authors This issue actually poses a fundamental interpretative problem when extending classical approaches to memory (as opposed to memoryless or Markov) friction: how can the system found at x at time t experience a memory, in the electronic response, that depends only on H el (x), if it never visited x at earlier times? The memory, if any, should involve the past dynamics, hence H el (x) along the visited trajectory. The reason why we do get a coordinate-local memory (in spite of the oddities it implies for the nuclear dynamics in the classical limit) is, we believe, a manifestation of non-locality of quantum mechanics, here arising in an apparently "innocent" setting: depending on the time-scale of the electron dynamics, the representative point found at x at time t may experience the effect of a perturbation in the electronic state |u(x, t) which was induced by different representatives that visited x in the past. Having elaborated on these interpretative issues -and made clear that a re-derivation of the electronic friction picture in the Lagrangian frame is a challenging task when memory effects are non-negligible -let us first recast the results of our previous work k is the ground-state, dynamically corrected force of Eq. 64 and δF k = 2R ∂ k u 0 |QH el |∆u to linear order in |∆u = |u -|u 0 (upon neglecting terms that depend on the spatial derivatives of |∆u and that arise from the geometric contribution g ij ). The electronic fluctuation |∆u can be obtained from linear response theory using Eq. 54 and it leads to where the first term is a pseudo-friction contribution with the kernel and the second is a geometric contribution Here, H ′ el is the ground-state referenced, local Hamiltonian, i.e., H ′ el = H el (x) -E 0 (x), and Q 0 = |u 0 u 0 |. In the memoryless (Markov) limit only the integrated kernel matters and this can be recast as where q 0 kj is the ground-state geometric tensor and is the Markovian friction kernel. Hence, upon neglecting the second term in Eq. 109 (which is non-zero only when time-reversal invariance is broken), the correction force in the Markov limit reads as is the electronic friction contribution, F mag k = j v j B kj and δF el k is the dynamical correction to the pseudoelectric force defined in Eq. 61. In other words, the Markov-limit quantum hydrodynamical equation of motion governing the nuclear dynamics is where F ad k is the ground-state adiabatic force of Eq. 97 and (F q ) k is the quantum force of Eq. 38. Next, we consider electronic friction at finite temperature, using the theory developed in Section III C for typee statistical mixtures. This is the useful framework in the mixed quantum-classical limit where the electronic friction regime is most often considered, henceforth we shall start with re-deriving the results recently obtained by Duo, Miao & Subotnik (DMS) where we have set ρ el ≡ M(0) for clarity. This is clearly the mixed-state generalization of the simple Ehrenfest method discussed in the previous Section. Next, we apply linear response theory to the electron dynamics in the Eulerian frame, treating the advection term as a perturbation. The result is (113) where ρ 0 el is the density operator that characterizes the electronic system at steady-state. Eq. 113 can then be used to evaluate the force governing the nuclear dynamics where is the average microscopic force acting on the nuclei at steady state and the kernel reads as Here, we have introduced the (Heisenberg evolved) microscopic force operator and its fluctuation upon exploiting Tr el (∂ j ρ 0 el ) ≡ 0. In the Markov limit only the integrated kernel matters and we have These are the results obtained by DMS in their mixed quantum-classical theory of electronic friction In our previous work Here, only the second term represents a true frictional force, the last one is a pseudo-magnetic force. The above results hold for a general steady-state. If the electronic system is in (local) canonical equilibrium additional, interesting properties hold. First of all, the force F 0 k becomes an equilibrium force which is manifestly conservative, where n labels the eigenstates of H el , Z el = n e -βEn is the (local) partition function of the electronic system and Φ el = -k B T ln Z β -the corresponding (coordinatedependent) Helmholtz free-energy -is the appropriate "thermal" potential that generates the force. Secondly, the kernel W kj can be recast as a Kubo correlation function where, in general, is the Kubo transform of the operator A at the inverse temperature β (H ≡ H el in our problem). This follows directly from the definition of the kernel upon noticing the identity (see Appendix E) Eq. 117 is a form of the fluctuation-dissipation theorem of the second kind relating the (time-symmetrized) memory kernel and the correlation function of the "random force" δf k , and gives the Markovian kernel in Green-Kubo form where for A = δf k and B = δf j . All this connects electronic friction theory with linear-response irreversible thermodynamics, a rather interesting issue that deserves consideration in a separate manuscript. Here, we just notice that in thermal equilibrium the pseudo-magnetic field appearing in the Markov-limit expression of Eq. 116 is given by B DMS kj = -2 Iq av kj , where q av kj is the quantum geometric tensor defined in Eq. 84, averaged over the canonical ensemble (see Appendix F). Likewise, the "corrected" Markovian friction kernel reads, in thermal equilibrium, as where as shown in detail in Appendix F. Here, the p n 's are Boltzmann populations, n labels again energy eigenstates, Clearly, the difference with the T = 0 K case is due to the electronic de-excitation processes that can occur in the electronic bath at finite temperature and that work by pumping energy into the nuclear system. Detailed balance guarantees that the kernel Rγ β kj (ω) remains positive definite for ω > 0, hence it correctly describes friction. Finally, Appendix G shows that for independent electrons Eq. 118 becomes where D k ab = φ a |∂ k h|φ b , |φ a (ǫ a ) are single-particle states (energies), h is the single-particle Hamiltonian, ∆ǫ ba = ǫ bǫ a and f (ǫ) is the Fermi occupation function at the given temperature. Eq. 121 is the finitetemperature extension of the original Head-Gordon and Tully expression to which it reduces in the limit T → 0 K (see Appendix G). So far we have considered electronic friction theory in the context of the simple Ehrenfest theory for mixedstates. Improvements are possible (in a yet mixed quantum-classical framework) along the lines of arguments used in Section IV B, by either introducing geometric contributions or describing the e-n couplings quantally or both. The main difference with Section IV B is that now the hierarchy of electronic moment equations does not terminate at the zero-th order (that of the conditional density operators), rather requires the first moment equation to introduce corrections (Eq. 88). The latter can be simplified to its free-evolution and handled in linear response theory, consistently with zero-th moment equation, giving rise to correction terms that account for the quantum couplings. We discuss these improvements in a forthcoming paper. This study has delved into the quantum dynamics of electron-nuclear systems by leveraging the concept of exact factorization of the wavefunction. Our primary objective was to reformulate the equations of motion for both electrons and nuclei in a manner that eliminates the dependence on the arbitrary phase of the electronic (and nuclear) wavefunction, leaving only physical contributions. In the case of pure states, we achieved this in an exact way by adopting a quantum hydrodynamical description for the nuclei, coupled with the dynamics of specific density operators for electrons. These density operators are conditional, meaning that they depend on the nuclei being in a particular configuration, and therefore move in tandem with the fluid elements that describe the nuclear dynamics. This is a setup often invoked in modern quantum approaches to the problem where the dynamics is "direct" and the electronic problem is solved "on-the-fly" alongside the propagation of the nuclear wavefunction. The advantage of the proposed approach is that it removes completely the need of selecting smooth phases for the wavefunctions. Importantly, the proposed approach establishes a natural connection between exact quantum dynamics and various mixed quantum-classical methodologies, laying the groundwork for their systematic enhancement. This is where direct dynamical approaches are mostly employed and where a protocol for systematic corrections is yet missing. The present theory further enables the extension of the exact factorization approach to encompass statistical mixtures of states, where either the nuclei or the electrons are in a inherently mixed state. The primary adjustment in this scenario involves a hierarchical construction that incorporates moments associated with the variables (either electrons or nuclei) existing in a mixed state. These advancements establish a formal connection to approximate non-adiabatic theories in condensed phases, where nuclei are often classical and electrons are in a mixed state. As an illustrative example, we explored the concept of electronic friction at finite temperatures, in the quantum-classical limit where it is commonly invoked. In concluding, we emphasize the role played by the exact factorization of the wavefunction in the developments presented in this work. It emerges as a key tool for investigating electron-nuclear systems, forming the basis for unifying many different themes and views in molecular dynamics. The quantization condition on the circulation of the (Hamiltonian) momentum field given in Eq. 12, i.e., is necessary to single out from the many solutions of the hydrodynamical equations of motion (Eqs. 34 and 37) those that are compatible with the Schrödinger equation we started from. It guarantees the existence of a smooth scalar function S(x), that can be used to synthesize the wavefunction ψ(x) = n(x) exp(iS(x)/ ), once the solutions {n(x), π k (x)} of the hydrodynamical problem have been obtained. This is the open-path line integral along the curve γ(x 0 , x) joining x to a reference point x 0 that is in fact path-independent (modulo 2π ) under the quantization condition of Eq. 12. However, for consistency with the dynamical evolution one has to check that this condition is preserved during the dynamics, i.e. dΓ γ /dt = 0. We first consider the simple case where the loop γ is fixed in space and This is easily seen to vanish since, upon taking the real part of Eq. 27, i.e., one sees that the integrand is in fact purely longitudinal and therefore gives a vanishing contribution to the closedpath line integral. The only (implicit) assumption here is that in the flow of the probability fluid no wavefunction node crosses the loop γ, otherwise p k would change abruptly and ∂p k /∂t would be singular at the crossing point (see Section II A). If this condition is satisfied we thus have for arbitrary times t and t ′ . Let then be γ ′ the loop γ that has been transported by the flow v k from t to t ′ . We also have since Eq. 12 holds for arbitrary loops and γ and γ ′ are connected by a continuous transformation that cannot change the value of n. Hence, Γ γ is preserved along closed paths that are in motion with the fluid elements. This is Kelvin's circulation theorem for the many-body quantum hydrodynamical fluid investigated in Sec. II C, i.e., that describing the nuclear dynamics in the exact factorization approach of Sec. III. The final result can also be obtained with a direct calculation that bypasses the need of a non-crossing condition. Indeed, when the curve follows the fluid, the rate of change of circulation involves the material derivative of the fields and contains contributions from the moving path Here, the second term on the r.h.s. can be rearranged as upon noticing that the first integral on the second line vanishes identically. In second step we have introduced the magnetic field (Eq. 7) and singled out an advective term that precisely cancels that coming from Hence, we are left with On the other hand, Eq. 34 and Eq. 7 give which is again Kelvin circulation theorem: circulation is conserved along any dynamically evolved path -hence continuous in time -and no problem arises from the possible presence of singularities which, too, evolve during the dynamics. Note, however, that this results does not conflict with the formation of vortexes. Vortexes can emerge in pairs with opposite chirality, or they can manifest as closed vortex lines originating from a single point In closing this Appendix we notice that the particle trajectories define useful paths to synthesize the wavefunction where the divergence is evaluated along the trajectory x t started from x 0 at t = t 0 . Likewise, we have where L is a pseudo-electromagnetic Lagrangian in which V -A 0 +Q plays the role of potential (see the Hamilton-Jacobi equation of Eq. 15). Hence, builds the wavefunction amplitude along the trajectory x t that solves the QHD equations of motion. Noteworthy, the "propagator" appearing here is determined by a single trajectory, in striking contrast with a Feymann's path integral where the propagator is the sum of contributions from infinitely many paths. This might be useful for interpretative purposes but it is of limited help in practice since, as emphasized in the main text, it is not possible to solve the QHD equations for a single quantum trajectory, unless the evolving density is known in advance. Momentum moments represent an essential ingredient for the development of a hydrodynamical picture of quantum dynamics beyond the pure state case. With their help one can recast the evolution of a quantum system in terms of a hierarchical set of equations for the momentum moments, where each moment is seen to couple to the next (higher order) one. For pure states the hierarchy can be truncated at the first moment equation -second and higher moments of a pure state can be expressed in terms of the zero-th and the first moment alone -but in general the whole structure of the hierarchy is needed and often a closure is pragmatically introduced to make the problem manageable. The purpose of this Appendix is to extend such construction to the case where the quantum system is subjected to gauge fields (in addition to the usual scalar potential typically considered) which make the standard construction of limited help (since it is gauge dependent). Hence, we define here a new type of gauge invariant moments -which we call mechanical moment moments (MMMs) because of their relation with the mechanical momentum operator -and show that their equation of motion take a simple, physically sound form. We start with some general remarks about the momentum moments and recast them in a form that suit better to the presence of gauge fields. Henceforth, we shall use the hat on operators to denote the abstract operators and and not their Schrödinger representation. We recall that for a D dimensional quantum system described by a continuous position variable x ∈ R D the Wigner function ρ W is defined as a Fourier transform of the function , q + r 2 with respect to r, at fixed q. Here, ρ is the system density operator and ρ(x, x ′ ) = x|ρ|x ′ is the density matrix (hence, r ≡ x ′x the "difference variable" or "relative position"). That is, ρ W (q, p) = ˆdD r (2π ) D W (q, r)e i pr in such a way that ρ W (q, p) is a kind of distribution function in phase space, (q, p) ∈ R 2D . Then, the momentum moments are the moments of this "distribution" at fixed q (irrespective of the fact that ρ W is a true distribution or not) and can be obtained from the s-derivatives at s = 0 of the characteristic function where .. denotes the average w.r.t. to the Wigner "distribution". Specifically, where and [n] stands for the constraint In other words we have By definition, the characteristic function is the Fourier transform (w.r.t. to p) of the function ρ W (q, p), which is itself the Fourier transform of W (q, r). Hence, and the moments are seen to characterize the behavior of the density matrix along the second diagonal of the (x, x ′ ) "plane", for a fixed position q along the first (main) diagonal. The characteristic function can be conveniently given in terms of translational operators, namely where T a = exp(-iap/ ) is the translation operator by a, T a |x = |x + a (or equivalently, x|T a ψ = ψ(xa)). The usefulness of the representation in the rightmost side of the last equation becomes evident when expanding the exponentials and remembering that where we have introduced the notation ψ ≡ ψ(x) and ψ ′ ≡ ψ(x ′ ) for the wavefunction and, correspondingly, 0..1 k ..0 (q) 0..1j ..1 k ..0 (q) .... where [.., ..] + is the anti-commutator. Here, we have introduced new moments P (n) ijk.. in which the subscripts denote explicitly the order of the products, i.e. the momentum operators appearing in the nested products are labeled with an index from right to left, starting from the innermost product. This is useless in this case since the pk 's commute with each other -meaning that the newly defined moments are fully symmetric w.r.t. their indexes -but it will become important soon when we generalize this construction to non-commuting operator. This representation of moments in terms of symmetrized product turns out to be useful in view of the following property which holds for arbitrary operators Ô. Here k are the Schrödinger-representation momentum operators and O(x, x ′ ) = x| Ô|x ′ . Indeed, it allows us to re-write the above moments in the form which makes evident the symmetry of the moments (the p k 's commute with each other and with the p ′ j 's). Furthermore, the last equation provides a useful expression for the moments or, equivalently, which is the same as Eq. B1. As mentioned above, these moments are dynamically coupled to each other. The (infinite) set of equation of motion can be obtained in rather general form if the system Hamiltonian takes the standard form where V is a scalar potential, see Refs. with [76] πk = pk -A k . Furthermore, to distinguish this case from the previous one we shall use σ in place of ρ for the density operator and, correspondingly, σ(x, x ′ ) in place of ρ(x, x ′ ) for the density matrices. Clearly, under such circumstances, the above momentum moments P (n) ijk.. (q) are of limited help since they are gauge dependent and cannot provide a gauge invariant formulation of the dynamics. Progress can be made by generalizing the anticommutator-based definition, Eq. B2, namely Equivalently, upon noticing we can write (cf. Eq. B3) where now ). Since the π k 's are gauge covariant, these moments are, by construction, gauge invariant and they thus fulfill our requirement. The price to be paid is that they are no longer symmetric in their indexes since where again we have primed (unprimed) quantities for functions of x ′ (x). For instance, a direct calculation shows that The exception is the symmetry in the two leftmost indexes jik.. (q) which holds for any moment since the second term disappears in the limit x = x ′ = q. We note that we could define moments which are yet gauge invariant and symmetric in their indexes, for instance However, as it will become soon evident, only for the M (n) ijk.. 's defined above the equations of motion take a simple form. To obtain the dynamical equations for the moments we need the Liouville -von Neumann (LvN) equation (which hold for any operator Ô and an arbitrary local operator φ), the commutation properties and In the above, the kinetic energy contribution of the LvN has been re-written in the convenient form that can be easily checked with a direct calculation. The equation of motion for the 0 th moment can be obtained readily upon taking the q| ..|q matrix element of LvN and noticing that It takes the form [78] The equation of motion for the first order moments follows similarly. For, on the one hand, we have and, on the other hand, Here the first term reads as where we have used , while for the second term we find Hence, summing up we arrive at where is the density of classical forces, being the pseudo-electric field. The equation for the third moment can be derived straightforwardly along steps similar to those followed above. It is only considerably longer and thus here we only quote the final result k (q) which shows the "typical" classical contribution, comprising the intrinsic force and the gauge forces, and the coupling to the higher order moment. Please notice that this equation is symmetric w.r.t. the indexes k and m, as it should be since the moment is yet of second order. However, the third moment M (3) kmj appearing in the first line of the r.h.s. of this equation cannot be replaced by its symmetric counterpart N (3) kmj , hence the latter cannot be used to build up a hierarchy of equations of motion. To summarize, the equations of motion for the first few moments are ... In general, for the n th moment we have an "upward" coupling to the (n + 1) th layer of moments that occurs through a surface term containing the spatial derivatives of the (n+1) th moments, and both "downward" and "horizontal" couplings that occur through "classical" forces. The rank-1 pseudo-electric field E k and the intrinsic force -∂ k V link the n th layer of moments to the layer below it. The rank-2 pseudo-magnetic field B kj increases the order by one and thus describes "horizontal" coupling to moments of the same order n (starting from n = 1). In the above hydrodynamic set of equations the first is continuity equation, with J i (q) = j ξ ij M (1) j (q) playing the role of density current. The second equation extends the quantum Navier-Stokes equation given in the main text for a pure state, namely where F k = nF k is the density of classical forces. Indeed, with the notation of the main text, and the term between brackets on the r.h.s. is the moment M ki (q) for a pure state. This can be checked with a simple calculation: setting σ = |ψ ψ| we recognize the complex-valued momentum fields of the main text (evaluated at both x and x ′ ) Thus, with the help of the commutation properties where now π k = RΠ k in the notation of the main text, and we remember -/2∂ k ln n ≡ w k . This analysis is insightful, since in the last expression the first term is a "uncorrelated" term, while the term between brackets is right the one responsible for the surface forces. Specifically, upon setting (in current notation), C we have for a pure state where σ i k is the quantum stress tensor. This suggests to rewrite the general first moment equation (i.e. that for arbitrary mixed states) introducing the rank-2 tensor C (2) kl (q) defined as in the above equation. The result is where π k = M k /M (0) and v j = i ξ ji π i are the usual momentum and velocity fields, and d/dt is the material derivative. Written in this way the first moment equation describes the Lagrangian-frame evolution of momentum in terms of classical "bulk" forces and a surface force. Whether the system is in a pure or in a mixed state it is the latter responsible for quantum effects. More generally, we argue that a similar decomposition is possible for higher order moments. That is, we expect them to contain all quantum effects in a surface term that can be singled out by subtracting the uncorrelated contributions from their definition. One can then envisage different "classical closures" to the hydrodynamic hierarchy, depending on the momentum order n at which the surface term is forced to be null. Classical mechanics would result upon setting C (2) = 0 whereas C (n) = 0 for n > 2 would describe a classical world with quantum corrections of the (n -2) th order. where the effective Liouville super-operator is the sum of three gauge invariant contributions. Here, the third term can be shown to be the derivative of contributions that appear in the second term, namely and these (gauge invariant) contributions (i.e. the terms between brackets in the last equation) turn out to be To prove these identities we first notice that where Q |D j u = |D j u . Then, we move the derivatives in the first term out of the kets and the bras since u|D j u ≡ 0. On the other hand, we also have hence, summing up, we obtain where the last two terms cancel each other once multiplied by the (symmetric) inverse mass tensor ξ ij and summed over i and j. This proves the first identity. As for the second identity a direct calculation gives since ∂ j u|u = u|∂ j u * = iA j and u|∂ j u = -iA j . Noteworthy, since in fact we have ∂ j ρ el ≡ |D j u u| + |u D j u| we find that the gauge invariant dyad |D j u u| can be written solely in terms of ρ el and its derivatives and similarly for its adjoint. As a second step we prove that the equation of motion is trace and purity conserving since, as mentioned in the main text, this suffices to show its equivalence to the original equation, Eq. 92, for the state vector. The trace conserving property is immediate since on the r.h.s. there appear only commutators, and these are traceless by virtue of the trace properties. As for purity, we need to prove that Tr (ρ el ρel ) = 0 Left multiplication by ρ el gives three terms, the first two of which are easily seen to vanish by cycling under the trace operation. As for the third contribution, we notice that and then upon tracing since the first contribution vanishes as above. The remaining term gives the contributions as is evident upon expanding the commutator, cycling under the trace and remembering that ξ ij = ξ ji . This shows that if ρ el represents a pure state at initial time, it will remain a pure state at any later time when evolving according to Eq. 66. Finally, in closing this Appendix we show that the second and the third term on the r.h.s. of the equation of motion can be compound into a single term and, interestingly, the latter can be recast as an electronnuclear correction to the Hamiltonian that defines the Liouvillian, namely where The first step is simple, and requires just to recognize As for the second result, we notice that since the terms in the last line of the second step give no contributions to the sum. In the exact factorization of the electron-nuclear wavefunction describing a pure state, the doubly parametrized electronic dyad plays a key role, in that it determines through its diagonal elements the conditional electronic density operator of the system and, in general, through its trace, the true nuclear density matrix where σ(x, x ′ ) = ψ(x)ψ * (x ′ ) is the apparent nuclear density matrix. The purpose of this Appendix is to generalize this concept to the case where a single nuclear wavefunction can be yet singled out from an ensemble, whereas the electronic state is in an intrinsically mixed state. That is, the total density operator of the system is taken of the form (in the Schrödinger representation for the nuclei) where Ŵ is the ensemble average of the operator defined above. In other words, given a total density operator ρ(x, x ′ ) and a nuclear wavefunction ψ(x) (hence, the "pure-state" σ(x, x ′ ) = ψ(x)ψ * (x ′ )) we introduce a "conditional electronic operator" according to for any x and x ′ where the wavefunction does not vanish. Note that our assumption about the existence of a single nuclear wavefunction implies that the electronic states involved in the ensemble (call them |u α (x) , with α = 1, 2, ..) have only an overall gauge degree of freedom, i.e. their phases cannot be changed independently of each other. Rather, a single set of gauge fields exist, A k , irrespective of α. Next, we define moments of these conditional electronic operators (which we call electronic moments) by analogy with the momentum moments introduced in Appendix C, that is, is the gauge covariant derivative, using the gauge potential common to the ensemble elements. By definition, these moments are gauge invariant with respect to the gauge transformations mentioned above (notice the sign change of the gauge field when compared to the mechanical momenta π k 's, i.e., μ k ≡ -π * k ). For a pure state, for instance, we find in the same notation used in the main text. Then, we proceed in deriving the equations of motion for these moments. We start from the Lagrangian-frame pure-state result and re-interpret it in terms of moments, j This equation survives to the kind of ensemble average we are interested in (being linear in the M's ), hence it represents the equation of motion of our zero-th order electronic moment (the conditional density operator for electrons generalized to arbitrary mixed states). The key difference with a pure state is that only for the latter the first order moment appearing on the right hand side can be expressed in terms of the zero-th order one and its spatial derivative, namely Henceforth, we shall proceed by looking at the pure state case and seeking a form of the equations of motion that suits ("survives") to the kind of ensemble average mentioned above. The dynamical equation of the first order moments follows from the observation that , where now primed and unprimed quantities refer to (x ′ , t ′ ) and (x, t), respectively. On the other hand, where E k is the pseudo-electric field. We then use the electronic equation of the exact factorization in gauge covariant form (as explained in the main text, see Eq. 82) and consider first the simplified situation where we neglect the term which is of second order in the spatial derivatives of the electronic state (third term on the r.h.s.). With the replacement V j = v j + iu j and |D 0 u ≈ -i (H el -V) |uj v j |D j ui j u j |D j u the r.h.s. of Eq. D1 is seen to contain three terms. The first is the Halmitonian driving where and, in the limit x ′ = x, and can be manipulated in the form j upon remembering the second moment expression 81. Summing up the contributions we find k ] - j thereby identifying the total derivative of the Lagrangianframe dynamics. If we considered the neglected term (second order in the spatial derivatives) we would have the additional contribution i 2 where now The latter can be re-arranged as follows with the usual limit implicit, and the sum of derivatives can be moved to the leftmost position -upon introducing the appropriate commutators -while the moments can be easily identified, since they only involve differences of derivatives. The result is k ] - This concludes our derivation of the first two moment equations. We stress once again that these equations of motion are most naturally formulated in the Lagrangian frame, which is in motion on the nuclear trajectories. Appendix E: Lie-Trotter identity The Lie-Trotter identity is d dλ e A(λ) = ˆ1 0 dt e tA(λ) dA dλ e (1-t)A(λ) (E1) and can be proved using the operator identity d dt e tA(λ ′ ) e (1-t)A(λ) = e tA(λ ′ ) (A(λ ′ ) -A(λ)) e (1-t)A(λ) upon integrating over t ∈ [0, 1] to write e A(λ ′ )e A(λ) = ˆ1 0 dt e tA(λ ′ ) (A(λ ′ ) -A(λ)) e (1-t)A(λ) Indeed, setting λ ′ = λ + ∆λ and taking the limit of the incremental ratio where δf j = f j -F 0 j and F 0 j = β -1 ∂ j ln Z is the ensemble-average of the microscopic force f j . Here, G + (E) is the retarded Green operator of the (many-body) electronic Hamiltonian, G + (E) = lim ǫ→0 + (E + iǫ -H el ) -1 = 1 i lim ǫ→0 + ˆ∞ 0 e -ǫt e -i (H el -E)t dt and the second equality follows upon splitting it into real (or principal) part and imaginary one, namely with the help of The kernels thus introduced are the ensemble averaged generalization of the kernel introduced in Ref. and the true, frequency-dependent friction tensor where for the second equality we have used δ(E n + ω -H el )Q n |∂ j u n = -1 ω δ(E n + ω -H el )Q n (∂ j H el ) |u n , and for the third one we have expanded Q n in the energy basis and introduced the matrix elements of the force (f k ) nm = u n |(-∂ k H el )|u m . In the Markov limit we have which amounts to the averaged quantum geometric tensor of Eq. 84, to within a minor correction in its symmetric part, q β kj = q av kj + n p n δA n k δA n j where δA n k = A n k -A k . Hence, Iq β kj = Iq av kj and the pseudo-magnetic field contribution is precisely that described by the ensemble averaged geometric tensor. As for the Markovian friction, the physical friction kernel η kj is given by the real part of γ kj = lim ω→0 2γ β kj (ω) + 2γ β kj (-ω) 2 as extensively discussed in Ref. In this Appendix we focus on independent electrons, and address the issue of obtaining the finite-temperature Markovian friction kernel η kj for them. We start from the results of Section F in the form η kj = lim ω→0 Rη kj (ω) where η kj (ω) = γ β kj (ω)(1e -β ω ) and Here, n labels energy eigenstates, p n are Boltzmann populations, Q n = 1 -|u n u n | and H n el = E n -H el . For N independent electrons the many-body states are Hartree-Fock "determinants" built with the single-particle states |φ a of the monoelectronic Hamiltonian h, and the sum over states can be recast as where I is a collection of N -1 particle labels, ǫ a are single-particle energies and ∆ǫ ba = ǫ bǫ a . In obtaining the above expression we have exploited Slater rules and included only single-particle excitations, i.e., Ia → Ib. This automatically accounts for the projector Q n without further constraining the single-particle labels [a = b in unnecessary in the above expression unless ω ≡ 0]. In the thermodynamic limit we have The latter kernel satisfies η kj (ω) * = η kj (-ω) = η jk (ω), which makes its real part symmetric in its indexes, and even in ω. The Markovian friction kernel follows unambiguously as a zero frequency limit, The latter form is particularly useful for taking the T = 0 K limit, where and μ → ǫ F , the Fermi energy. Hence, since the sum becomes real in this limit. This is the Head-Gordon Tully result where only the first two terms are gauge invariant. The last term must be combined with the Berry connection to form the electron-dynamical force F ED k . [49] To obtain this equation we exploited the geometrical identity R ∂ k u|QDiDj u = 1 2 (∂jg ik + ∂ig kj -∂ k gij ),see Ref. [50] In our previous work, we called δF BO k a "genuine non-Born-Oppenheimer force" and used the symbol F NBO k for it. [51] In other words, this magnetic force only appears in the Euler frame where x is fixed and the fluid elements move with speed v i (x, t). In the Lagrangian frame xt is at rest with the moving fluid, and cannot couple to the magnetic field. [52] These properties guarantee that ρ el represents a purestate density at any time, provided it does at initial time. As a corollary, the instantaneous electronic ket |ut(x) can be retrieved from ρ el (x) by projection, using an (almost) arbitrary |ψ ∈ H el . In this picture, it is the (quasi) arbitraness of |ψ that provides the gauge freedom. [53] Please notice that the hat is used here to identify operators in the electronic variables, the density is a matrix in nuclear coordinates and an operator in the electronic ones. [54] What is specific of the Berry connection is that it guarantees the orthogonality condition mentioned above. i }