Based on statistical mechanics, a macroscopically homogeneous system, i.e., a single phase in the present context, is composed of many independent configurations that the system embraces. The macroscopical properties of the system are determined by the properties and statistical probabilities of those configurations with respect to external conditions. The volume of a single phase is thus the weighted sum of the volumes of all configurations. Consequently, the derivative of the volume to temperature of a single phase depends on both the derivatives of the volumes of every configuration to temperature and the derivatives of their statistical probabilities to temperature with the latter introducing non-linear emergent behaviors. It is shown that the derivative of the volume to temperature of the single phase can be negative, i.e., negative thermal expansion (NTE), due to the symmetry-breaking non-ground-state configurations with smaller volumes than that of the ground-state configuration and the rapid increase of the statistical probabilities of the former, and NTE can be predicted without fitting parameters from the zentropy theory that combines quantum mechanics and statistical mechanics with the free energy of each configuration predicted from quantum mechanics and the partition function of each configuration calculated from its free energy. The stability criteria of a macroscopically homogeneous system require that the derivatives between conjugate variables in the combined law of thermodynamics must be positive except at the limit of stability where they become zero. However, there is no such requirement for derivatives between non-conjugate variables. The derivative of volume (V) to temperature (T) under constant pressure, i.e., thermal expansion, is thus not required to be positive in a stable system because V and T are not conjugate variables. Though the derivative of volume to temperature of a macroscopically homogeneous material, i.e., a single phase, is commonly thought to be positive, i.e., positive thermal expansion (PTE), it is known that the volume of water does decrease with the increase of temperature at temperature below 4°C, i.e., negative thermal expansion (NTE). The first manmade NTE material was an Fe65Ni35 alloy in 1897 by Guillaume While there have been many theories that aim to describe NTE mechanisms in various materials, they are mostly phenomenological aiming for interpretation of experimental observations Based on statistical mechanics, a single phase at finite temperature is composed of various independent configurations that are in statistical equilibrium with each other and its surroundings under given external constraints. The probability of each configuration is related to its and the system's partition functions as follows where p ! and Z ! are the probability and partition function of configuration k, and is the partition function of the system or the phase with m being the number of independent configurations. The configurational entropy among the configuration is obtained as where k % is the Boltzmann constant. For a closed system under hydrostatic pressure (P), the combined law of thermodynamics in terms of internal/total energy, E, is written as For a canonical ensemble, the combined law is written in terms of Helmholtz energy as follows dF = -SdT -PdV Eq. 4 The partition functions of the system and its configurations are written as where E ! is the total energy of the configuration k. The Helmholtz energy of the phase can be obtained from above equation as follows When there is only one configuration in the system, Eq. 6 becomes F = E ! Eq. 7 Since F = E ! -TS ! by definition, Eq. 7 gives S ! = 0 at finite temperature, indicating that the configurations are all pure quantum states without any unspecified internal degrees of freedom as implicitly implied by Gibbs as the quantum mechanics was not invented yet at that time and envisioned by Landau and Lifshitz resulting in a non-zero entropy for each configuration at finite temperature and thus the necessity to modify the formula of entropy and partition function in terms of the zentropy theory as discussed below. For configurations with non-zero entropy, it is necessary to add their contributions to the total entropy of the system. Our zentropy theory is schematically shown in Figure The first summation in Eq. 8 reflects the bottom-up view of the system by considering the contribution from individual configurations, and the second summation represents the top-down view of the system, seeing the statistical fluctuations of configurations as discussed in Section 2 above. This nested formula of the zentropy theory can be extended to consider more complex systems such as forest, planet, and black holes with more degrees of freedom, with Eq. 8 representing one of the subsystems of the system All with the same NVT Nested formula è Down to quantum scale Figure Reproduced with the permission of Ref. The Helmholtz energy of the system can thus be obtained as Eq. 9 where F ! = E ! -TS ! is the Helmholtz energy of configuration k. Re-arranging Eq. 9 in the form of partition function, one obtains Eq. 10 Eq. 11 Eq. 8 to Eq. 11 reduce to standard statistical mechanics when S ! = 0, i.e., pure quantum configurations with F ! = E ! as discussed in Section 2. Formulated as an exact theory of many-body systems, DFT S ! = S !,,-+ S !,./0 Eq. 14 where F !,,-, E !,,-, and S !,,-are the contributions of thermal electron to Helmholtz energy, total energy, and entropy of configuration k based on the Fermi-Dirac statistics for electrons, and F !,./0 , E !,./0 , and S !,./0 are the vibrational contributions to Helmholtz energy, total energy, and entropy of configuration k based on the Bose-Einstein statistics for phonons, respectively. As the electron and phonon degrees of freedom are included in each configuration from the DFT-based calculations, all configurations are ergodic and symmetry-breaking in terms of magnetic spin, electric polarization, atomic short-rang ordering, and defects such as vacancy, dislocation, and stacking faults. For their F ! to be predicted from DFT as a function of external stimuli, the non-ground-state configurations must be metastable. With their p ! calculated from partition functions using F ! , the zentropy theory enables the integration of the quantum and statistical mechanics through Eq. 8 to Eq. 14 and is capable to predicting how a system responds macroscopically to external stimuli. The pressure of a system can be calculated from the derivative of Helmholtz energy to volume as where P ! is the pressure of configuration k evaluated at the system volume. In our previous publications as reviewed in refs. As mentioned in our previous publications From the Maxwell relation, one has ∂V ∂T = -∂S ∂P Eq. 17 The statistical mechanics in terms of Gibbs ensemble is shown below Eq. 18 where G ! is the Gibbs energy of configuration K. The volume and the derivative of volume to temperature is obtained as follows Eq. 20 where V 2 is the volume of the ground-state configuration. From Eq. 20, it can be seen that if With increase of temperature, the probability of the groundstate configuration decreases, i.e., 34 # 3( < 0, while the probabilities of non-ground-state configurations increases, i.e., The first term Eq. 21 is a linear combination of contributions from each configuration, and the second term gives nonlinear behavior. The condition for 35 3( = 0, i.e., ZTE, can be obtained as follows As all variables in Eq. 22 are positive, and no contributions from Eq. 23 Both cases are shown in Figure Anharmonicity is usually represented by the deviation of entropy or heat capacity away from quasiharmonic behavior From Eq. 8, it can be seen that the first summation is the linear combination of entropies of individual configurations, and the emergent behaviors, i.e., the behaviors that none of the individual configurations possess, originate from the second summation in the equation. This is the same for the derivative of volume to temperature shown by Eq. 21 where the emergent behavior of NTE is due to the rapid increase of the symmetry-breaking non-ground-state configurations and their volumes smaller than that of the ground-state configuration, and none of the individual configurations possess NTE. For a stable system, the derivatives between a potential and its conjugate molar quantity in the combined law are positive, i.e., ∂T ∂S > 0 Eq. 24 ∂(-P) ∂V > 0 Eq. 25 When these derivatives become zero, the macroscopic system reaches its limit of stability and the extreme of anharmonicity, and the inverses of these derivatives diverge positively, i.e., ∂S ∂T = ∂V ∂(-P) = +∞ Eq. 26 Eq. 26 represents the heat capacity under constant pressure and can be derived from Eq. 8 as follows Again, the first summation is the linear combination of heat capacity of each configuration, and the nonlinear emergent behavior comes from the second summation. However, derivatives between non-conjugate variables are not required to be positive, such as the derivative between volume and temperature. As they will also diverge at the limit of stability, they could be either positive or negative, i.e., The zentropy theory postulates that the entropy of a system contains contributions from entropies of the ground-state and symmetry-breaking non-ground-state configurations of a system and the statistical configurational entropy among these configurations. With the free energies of individual configurations predicted from DFT, the zentropy theory integrates quantum and statistical thermodynamics with the partition function of each configuration calculated from its free energy instead of total energy commonly used in the literature. With accurate free energy landscape of the system predicted by the zentropy theory, the properties of the system can be predicted by the first and higher-order derivatives of free energy with respect to its natural variables such as volume as the first derivative and thermal expansion as the second derivative. While the derivatives between conjugate variables are always positive for a stable system, the derivatives between non-conjugate variables such as thermal expansion can be either positive or negative with the latter due to the larger volume of the ground-state configuration than those of non-ground-state configurations in the system. It is articulated that the emergent behaviors and anharmonicity originate from the competition among the configurations, and their accurate predictions can be realized by the zentropy theory. & ' " &' ! ! (