Parallel wireless digital communication with ultralow power consumption is critical for emerging edge technologies such as 5G and Internet of Things. However, the physical separation between digital computing units and analogue transmission units in traditional wireless technology leads to high power consumption. Here we report a parallel in-memory wireless computing scheme. The approach combines in-memory computing with wireless communication using memristive crossbar arrays. We show that the system can be used for the radio transmission of a binary stream of 480 bits with a bit error rate of 0/480. The in-memory wireless computing uses two orders of magnitude less power than conventional technology (based on digital-to-analogue and analogue-to-digital converters). We also show that the approach can be applied to acoustic and optical wireless communications. In traditional wireless digital communication technology, the digital signal processor implements signal processing algorithms and the analogue unit transmits or receives time-varying waves carrying the digital data (such as radio waves, light waves and acoustic waves) Edge device applications, thus, require alternative wireless communication technologies In this article, we report a parallel in-memory wireless computing scheme. The approach is based on one-transistor-one-memristor (1T1R) crossbar arrays, which can store, transfer and modulate time-varying analogue signals and parallelly process data without digital-to-analogue converters (DACs) and analogue-to-digital converters (ADCs). We transmit 480-bit ASCII code using a transmitter and a receiver based on memristive crossbar arrays, customized peripheral circuits and radio-frequency (RF) modules. We also show that the parallel in-memory wireless computing scheme can be used for multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) wireless communication. The approach uses two orders of magnitude less energy than wireless digital communication based on traditional technology and can be adapted to ultrasonic and optical wireless communications. Figure Figure The programmable states of the memristive crossbar array can be used to implement a variety of complex signal processing discussion on the effect of state variability). Our 1T1R cell also shows linear current-voltage characteristics (Fig. Figure We used QAM and experimentally mapped 480-bit ASCII codes corresponding to the character string 'Here is a demo of memristor-based communication system @ NJU' into the conductance states of a 30 × 32 memristive crossbar array (Fig. In-memory wireless computing can also be used to extract digital data from transmitted wireless analogue signals with a bit error rate of 0. Figure Other signal processing algorithms in conjunction with the demodulation algorithm, such as windowing and channel equalization, can also be implemented using the same memristive crossbar array, without consuming more energy and hardware resources (Methods). Our proposed in-memory wireless computing can be readily extended to high-order modulation (Supplementary Fig. Combining in-memory wireless computing with MIMO technology has the potential for the parallel processing of wireless signals through multipath propagation, which can enhance the capacity of simultaneous data streams where , k represents the number of subfrequency channels and L is the length of DFT. By adopting the zero-forcing precoding approach, the weight matrix W(k) used for implementing the MIMO decoupling algorithm is determined by either We verify the parallel in-memory wireless computing scheme with a 2 × 2 MIMO system using 7-OFDM and 4-QAM (Fig. Our parallel in-memory wireless computing technology is not limited to radio waves and can be applied to other transmission media. We evaluate the state variation dependence of the bit error rate by simulating the data transmission process (Fig. We have reported a parallel in-memory wireless computing scheme based on memristive crossbar arrays. We showed that the approach can be used for the wireless radio transmission of 480-bit binary data with a bit error rate of 0 and can be applied to other transmission media (ultrasonic waves and light waves). We also showed that our parallel wireless digital communication technology uses around two orders of magnitude less energy than conventional technology. i, Energy efficiency of signal processing based on in-memory wireless computing and traditional digital processing https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-023-00965-5 We fabricated the 1T1R crossbar array chip by integrating the Pd/Ta/ HfO 2 /Pd memristive devices onto a custom complementary metaloxide-semiconductor chip. On-chip multiplexers, decoders, transistor arrays and metal interconnections were fabricated in a standard complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor foundry based on the 180 nm technology node. The memristive devices were fabricated in the laboratory. The memristive devices were integrated onto the chip by using standard photolithography, etching and deposition processes. The bottom electrode layer of Pd (50 nm thick) was deposited by using electron-beam deposition; the switching layer of HfO 2 (6 nm thick), by atomic layer deposition; the capping layer of Ta (100 nm thick), through a standard RF sputtering process in Ar; and the top electrode layer of Pd (50 nm thick), using electron-beam deposition. All the above layers were patterned by standard photolithography and were lifted off in acetone. The architecture of the 1T1R chip is shown in Supplementary Fig. To implement OFDM-QAM modulation, orthogonal signals (cos(1,000 × 2π × t), -sin(1,000 × 2π × t), cos(2,000 × 2π × t), -sin(2,000 × 2π × t)...cos(15,000 × 2π × t), -sin(15,000 × 2π × t)) were fed into the memristive crossbar array, weighted by the conductance of the memristive devices and then accumulated. Since the positive and negative conductance values are mapped into adjacent columns of the memristive crossbar array, the current output from the even-numbered columns was subtracted from that of the odd-numbered columns by a differential current-to-voltage amplifier. The transmitted symbol can be sequentially changed by switching the transistors on two adjacent columns on and off, and the transmitted data in each symbol period are identified by the selected memristive devices. As a result, current outputs generated from the array represent the baseband signal of an OFDM symbol. The output signal from the memristive crossbar array was upconverted to a high frequency (118.3 MHz) and then transmitted by an antenna. The waveforms at different stages were measured by an oscilloscope. The local oscillating signal was generated by a Keysight 81150A generator. The wireless signal was received by an antenna and amplified by a low-noise amplifier, which was eventually downconverted to a low frequency by a mixer and low-pass filter (LPF). Considering that the magnitude of the wireless signal is reduced by various environmental factors, a variable-gain amplifier (VGA) has been used to adjust the signal amplitude to an appropriate range, which was sequentially sampled by a sample-and-hold amplifier (SHA) with a sampling rate f sam (32 kHz) determined by the switching frequency of the multiplexer. In a symbol period (1 ms), the 32 sampled signals were sequentially applied on 32 rows of the memristive crossbar array with a multiplexer. Experimentally, we realized the negative weight using a resistor that generates an offset current through R offset at each column. For a memristive crossbar array to implement DFT, the conductance value of the memristive device at the ith row and jth column is determined by A × cos(2π × j × (i - 1)/32) + G offset or A × sin(-2π × j × (i - 1)/32) + G offset according to j = 2k - 1 or 2k, where k = 1, 2...15. The output current was accumulated by an integrator in a symbol period, and the resulting voltages from the integrators represent the in-phase components and quadrature components of the received symbol, which are finally binarized by using comparators. Note that the proposed scheme is fully compatible with a higher-dimensional OFDM system due to the excellent scalability of the memristive crossbar array. The radio, optical and acoustic transmitting and receiving in the experiments designed and assembled by using customized printed circuit boards. The schematic of the transmitting and receiving modules in radio wireless communication is shown in Fig. We experimentally demonstrated 17 different conductance levels in our fabricated 1T1R cells and used them for the proof-of-concept demonstration of the in-memory wireless computing (Fig. Using the memristive crossbar array to process wireless signals can significantly reduce the energy consumption associated with the ADCs in a traditional receiver, because simple comparators can be used for replacing ADCs to digitalize the analogue signals in our work. To illustrate the advantage of in-memory wireless computing in energy efficiency, the power consumption of the ADCs and comparators was calculated for an OFDM-4-QAM wireless communication system. For the ADC design, there is a general trade-off between the resolution and power efficiency. To identify the trends and limits, we collected the data of the ADC designs published in ISSCC and VLSI Circuit Symposium from 1999 to 2021 (ref. 41) (Supplementary Fig. where ADC_Energy_per_sample_per_bit Comparator_Energy_per_sample_per_bit can be calculated to be 20.9 by using the fitted equation y = 10 0.2315x-0.7068 ; the minimum value of ADC_number×f sam Comparator_number×f sym can be calculated to be 1 according to Nyquist's theorem. Based on these parameters, 140 is the value obtained for the reduction in energy consumption for digitalizing analogue signals in wireless communication. In our proposed architecture, the signal processing was realized by an end-to-end analogue in-memory wireless computing scheme. For the architecture presented in Fig. 