The application of topology, a branch of mathematics, to the study of electronic states in crystalline materials has had a revolutionary impact on the field of condensed matter physics. For example, the development of topological band theory has delivered new approaches and tools to characterize the electronic structure of materials, resulting in the discovery of new phases of matter with exotic properties. In the framework of topological band theory, the crossings between energy levels of electrons are characterized by topological invariants, which predict the presence of topological boundary states. Given the frequency of energy level crossings on the potential energy surface in molecules, the applicability of these concepts to molecular systems could be of great interest for our understanding of reaction dynamics. However, challenges arise due to differing quantum mechanical descriptions of solids and molecules. Out work aims to bridge the gap between topological band theory and molecular chemistry. We propose that the Euler Class, a topological invariant, can be used to categorize and analyse the distribution of nonadiabatic couplings on the potential energy surface. To exemplify this connection, we introduce a model system with two distinct regimes that are characterized by different values of the Euler Class, yet identical potential energy surfaces. Contrary to expectations set by the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, we propose that these two regimes don't exhibit identical dynamics, due to a qualitatively distinct distribution of nonadiabatic couplings. Chemical reactions are rare dynamical events in which reactants are transformed into products through the rearrangement of electrons and atoms. From the quantum chemical perspective, these processes are ration and characterization of the PES. For example, it remains a major challenge to a priori identify regions of the PES in which the aforementioned features are expected to have a strong influence on reaction dynamics. In this vein, we propose that recent theoretical developments in the field of topological condensed matter physics can be used to characterize the presence and influence of features such as CIs on reaction outcomes. More concretely, we will explore how the concept of topological invariants can connect the structure of the PES with the appearance of nonadiabatic dynamics, and showcase this connection in a model system. The paper is structured as follows: We begin by revisiting the BOA approximation and the appearance of nonadiabatic couplings as geometric objects. Through this perspective, we connect the theory of nonadiabatic couplings with topological invariants encountered in characterizations of condensed matter systems. Lastly, we demonstrate our findings using a model system and show how topological invariants constrain the distribution of nonadiabatic couplings along reaction paths. The PES itself is defined through the eigenvalues of electronic Schrödinger Equation (SE): where R(t) represents the nuclear coordinates, and ε i is the instantaneous energy of the i th electronic state |φ i (R (t))⟩. The nuclear coordinates are explicitly dependent on time t, while the electronic wavefunctions and energies are parametrically dependent upon nuclear coordinates. Chemical reactions can then be interpreted as the dynamics of the nuclei on this PES. Their dynamics are determined by the solution of the time where H is the full Hamiltonian describing electrons and nuclei in atomic units. Going forward, t dependence will be suppressed for brevity. As the electronic eigenfunctions form a complete basis, one can expand the exact solution to Eq. 2 in this basis as where χ i (R, t) is the i-th nuclear wavefunction. Inserting this Ansatz into Eq. 2 and applying some algebra, we obtain the matrix differential equation where χ is the vector of nuclear wavefunctions, ε is the diagonal matrix of the electronic energies ε i , and A is the matrix of nonadiabatic coupling vectors whose importance will be discussed in details below. The term is sometimes referred to as the dressed kinetic energy operator, which allows us to interpret the nuclear SE as a non-abelian gauge theory. The BOA is central to modern quantum chemistry because it admits the assumption that over the course of a reaction a chemical system remains in a single electronic state, the evolution of which is described by The BOA holds for a expansive number of systems due to the large difference between the electron mass and the masses of the nuclei. It fundamentally relies on a substantial difference in energy between the electronic state under consideration and the remaining electronic states. When this prerequisite is violated and the energy separation between the state of interest and the remaining states dwindles, the BOA may not furnish accurate predictions. To achieve this simple single state model, certain terms are omitted from the Schrodinger equation, among which are the first derivative nonadiabatic couplings (NACs) defined in Eq. 5. Physically, we can interpret these terms as an interaction between distinct electronic states induced by nuclear motion on the PES This representations allows us to consider three distinct regimes in terms of the applicability of the BOA, identifiable by the magnitude of ∆E = ε j -ε i . In the first regime ∆E ≫ ⟨φ 1 (R)|∇ R H|φ 2 (R)⟩, in which case the NACs are negligible and the BO approximation may be invoked. In contrast, the next regime features two adjacent electronic states which cross one another at what is commonly known as a conical intersection (CI). In this section we wish to connect NACs with geometric and topological concepts derived from the electronic wavefunctions, as commonly encountered in condensed matter physics. The NACs are generally organised in a matrix, in which the diagonal components are purely imaginary, while off-diagonal components are not constrained. It is well known, that the diagonal components are connected to a geometric phase factor e iγn , where γ n is known as the geometric phase in chemistry, and as the Berry phase in condensed matter physics. The phase is expressed as: where the integral is taken along a path C on the PES. This phase is a geometric quantity, because its value only depends on the choice of path. Additionally, the integral itself is not gauge invariant, which complicates its interpretation and numerical computation. Its relevance stems from the fact that this phase can give rise to interference effects between paths with different values of γ n , which in some cases radically alters the dynamics. where the integral is taken along a path ∂S on the PES, S is the surface bounded by the path. The above definition can be applied to both an open region with a boundary and a closed region with no boundary. In condensed matter physics, the diagonal component A nn is called the U(1) Berry Connection and its curl Ω n = ∇ × A nn is the gauge independent Berry Curvature. For the Chern Number and geometric phase factor to be non-zero, time-reversal symmetry (TRS) needs to be broken. This stems from the fact TRS allows the choice of a real gauge, which enforces the diagonal NACs to vanish as they are purely imaginary. On a Hamiltonian level, this is represented by a reality condition As many chemical reactions do not break TRS, the Chern Number has attracted little attention in the context of chemical reaction dynamics. In contrast, the off-diagonal components A ij with i ̸ = j are not constrained by TRS, and generally take on non-zero values. It is therefore desirable to explore generalizations of the Chern Number, that are defined in terms of the off-diagonal NACs, which are of direct relevance to the discussion of nonadiabatic dynamics in chemical reactions. The Euler Class is such a generalization. One often defines the Euler Form The Euler Connection, Euler Form and Euler Class are in analogy to the Berry Connection, Berry Curvature and Chern Number, but the former are only well-defined for a pair of real states. This reality condition turns out to be much easier to satisfy in chemical reactions, as compared to the electronic states in crystals. In crystals, the crystal Hamiltonian H(k) of electrons is a function of the momentum k, which reverses its sign under time reversal T . Thus, time reversal requires H(k) = H * (-k), which does not guarantee H(k) to be real. To enforce a real Hamiltonian, either P T symmetry, where P is spatial inversion, or C 2 T symmetry, where C 2 is a two-fold rotation, is required for the Hamiltonian to satisfy which allows the choice of a real gauge needed to define the Euler Class. The purpose of this paper is to establish the utility and applicability of modern topological concepts such as the Euler Class in the field of chemical reaction dynamics. The Euler Class allows us to answer this question rigorously. In the following, we will explore these points in detail for a model system. We begin by introducing a 3-state model Hamiltonian, which is a function of two nuclear coordinates R = (R 1 , R 2 ), which we interpret as nuclear vibrational modes of the molecule at R = 0. The vibrational modes and irreducible representations (irreps) of the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian stand in analogy those arising in the isomerization of cyclobutadiene (CBD), however couplings between the states differs from those of CBD. We stress the point that this model does not attempt to accurately model the isomerization of CBD. Instead, we use the key features of this reaction to build a suitable basis for our often abstract discussion. At R 0 = 0, the Hamiltonian possesses D 4h symmetry and is inspired by the high energy antiaromatic configuration of CBD. In the basis of singlet states, the Hamiltonian is given as in which the values of parameters (e.g. a 11 , etc) are listed in the Tab. 1. There are three symmetries (C 4 , C 2 , C ′ 2 ) whose action on the Hamiltonian will be important for the following discussion. The action of the symmetries on the Hamiltonian are expressed through the following where we adopt the convention of labeling irreps along R 1 = 0 with a tilde, e.g. A 1g vs Ã1g . In the following discussion, we will study two regimes of parameters. For both regimes the model possesses almost indistinguishable PESs along the high-symmetry lines, but are distinguished through a topological invariant, the Euler Class. Figure An essential feature of our model is the fact that the PES is virtually identical for our two distinct parameter regimes. In the context of the BOA, in which dynamics are solely determined by energy profiles of the PES, one would expect that the dynamics along the putative reaction pathway connecting the two minima are the same. In addition, there would be no possibility to distinguish the two regimes from each other in the framework of TST, as the mininum energy pathways would be identical. Below, we will show that the two regimes are fundamentally different from each other. They are distinguished by different values of the Euler Class χ defined over the two lowest energy states, which corresponds to a categorically different distribution of NACs. As a central result, we will also show that nonadiabatic effects cannot be dismissed for pathways proceeding along the putative reaction coordinate in one regime, while they can be neglected in the other. For parameter regime A as defined in Table To exemplify this behaviour, we follow the evolution of the CIs as we continuously change the value of a 33 from -1 to 1. During the course of this evolution, we find a convergence of the two CIs into a single degenerate point along R 2 , followed by separation of the pair of CIs along R 1 [Fig. Parameter regime B as defined in Table , and symmetric with respect to the R 1 axis resulting in an overall antisymmetric distribution. While the values of the Euler Form are generally nonzero, the overall antisymmetry results in a cancellation during the integration in Eq. 11, and both integrals vanish identically. As χ = 0, it should be possible to annihilate the two CIs by a suitable smooth change of parameters. Changing the value of a 22 from -1 to 1, we observe convergence of the two CIs along R 2 into a single degenerate point followed by a gapping of energy levels [Fig. What is the connection between the ability to gap out a pair of CIs and the distribution of NACs in their vicinity? To understand their connection, we plot the NACs for both parameter regimes as a function of R. Starting with regime A, Fig. Canonically, the magnitude of the NACs is rationalized by the energy difference between the coupled states |φ 1 ⟩ and |φ 2 ⟩, as already discussed for Eq. 8. In the case of our model, this analysis is not conclusive, since both PES are almost identical energetically, yet the distribution of NACs differs markedly. Fig. As the strong reduction in magnitude of the NACs along this pathway is not fine-tuned and does not explicitly depend on energy separations or other parameters, we expect this phenomenology to be general as long as χ = 1. In contrast, the contribution of NACs to the dynamics in regime B will depend on the details of the Hamiltonian, e.g. the energy gap between electronic states and the separation of the CIs along R 2 . Figure In summary, we have developed a model for a simple chemical reaction that is inspired by the isomerization of cyclobutadiene. The PES of this model possesses two minima which are connected along a minimum energy pathway, which is situated between two CIs. A key feature of this model is the existence of two parameter regimes that feature almost identical PESs, yet a distinct distribution of NACs. In one case, regime A, the reaction is predicted to proceed adiabatically, since the NACs along this path vanish. In the other regime, the NACs do not vanish, and, depending on their magnitude, may influence the dynamics strongly. We The goal of this perspective has been to establish a connection between the topological language of invariants and nonadiabatic reaction dynamics. The connection between the distribution of NACs and the values of the Euler Class suggested here are a first step in this direction, as we have explicitly shown and analyzed how such a connection arises in our model system. It still remains to be explored how general this connection is. It also remains to be shown that the dynamics indeed proceed as predicted here and if approximate methods such as surface hopping can capture the distinction between these regimes. For example, the Zhu-Nakamura variant of surface hopping approximates NACs based only on energetic features of the PES. As we have shown above, the main distinction between the two regimes lies not in the energetics, but in the structure of the matrix elements appearing in the expression for the NACs. We have omitted a detailed discussion about the relation between spatial symmetries and the distribution of NACs. This is due to the fact that the topological quantities discussed here only rely on the presence of time reversal symmetry, i.e. the results discussed here would remain true even if the spatial symmetries were to be weakly broken. Spatial symmetries, however, can greatly simplify the analysis, as it is possible to connect the topological properties with the symmetry eigenvalues of the electronic states involved. The connection between symmetries and topology has been a focal point of research in condensed matter physics and has enabled a systematic search of materials with topological features in their electronic structure. We note that the analysis discussed here is also applicable to pairs of excited states, and is therefore relevant to problems in photochemistry. In photochemical problems, the dynamics take place on excited state PESs and CIs serve as radiationless relaxation pathways lower energy surfaces. However, in realistic calculations one commonly observers transitions to lower energy surfaces in a wide region around the CIs, rather than at the point of energy degeneracy. These transitions are facilitated by large NACs surrounding the CIs, which often is rationalised by small energy gap between states near the CI. Yet, as we have shown, additional complexity arises in cases with complex PES, for which only considering energetic properties can be misleading. Gaining a comprehensive understanding of the distribution of NACs beyond simple energetic pictures could therefore not only help to rationalize the results of dynamical calculations and possibly experiments, but could also provide new guidelines on how to manipulate the dynamics by changing the topological properties of the system. The basis functions of the Along the R 2 axis the point group is D2h . By subduction of symmetry, the basis functions transform as A 1g → Ãg , B 1g → B1g , and B 2g → Ãg The constraints placed on the Hamiltonian by the given symmetry requirements are expressed through a set of commutation relations for each symmetry element g of D 4h For example the action of C 4 is given as Given the form of a Hamiltonian, these commutation relations fix the possible R-dependence of the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian. Computation of the Euler Class for a 3-level system is theoretically straightforward, but practical implementation is subtle. We here briefly outline the necessary steps to calculate the Euler Class numerically. The first step is to define the grid of points which represent the R 1 , R 2 coordinate plane upon which the Hamiltonian depends. In doing so the size of the mesh is dictated, and it is necessary to ensure this resolution is sufficient for accurate calculations. All results in the main text were obtained using a 400×400 point mesh, although sufficient accuracy to obtain qualitatively correct results requires as little as a 60×60 point mesh. For the sake of generality, we will take R 1 to be indexed by n ∈ [0, n max ] and R 2 by m ∈ [0, m max ] for the following discussion. To avoid numerical instabilities in case a mesh point coincides with a point of degeneracy, an infinitesimal shift is introduced to the mesh. This shift is on the order of 10 -6 and is added to both the R 1 and R 2 element of each coordinate in the mesh. Next we obtain the energies and eigenstates of each coordinate by computing the Hamiltonian and performing numerical diagonalization. We adhere to the convention that for each point the eigenvalues are ordered by ascending energy, with their corresponding eigenvectors likewise ordered. It is necessary to perform gauge smoothing on the lowest two eigenstates, which are the states of interest in our model. The initial lack of a smooth gauge arises from the fact that numerical calculation of eigenvectors results in an arbitrary choice of phase for eigenvectors at each point in the mesh. Because our eigenvectors are real, this manifests as multiplication of each eigenvector at each point by a random factor of ±1. While the Euler Class itself is gauge invariant, a consistent choice of gauge must be enforced to ensure its accurate computation, as A 12 is not gauge invariant. The basic procedure in Python which follows must be performed individually for each state of interest, in this case state 1 and 2. Starting from the boundary of the mesh (m, 0) for each m we iterate over all n < n max and enforce the condition ⟨ψ(m, n)|ψ(m, n + 1)⟩ > 0 Generally multiplying the ket by -1 if the condition is not met. This achieves smoothing along R 2 only, and can be considered the 'horizontal' step of the procedure as illustrated in Fig. In contrast to the Chern Number, which can be defined for any number of states, the definition of the Euler Class for systems with more than three states is more involved. If the three states are separated by a gap from the other states, our definition here is sufficient, and we restrict our discussion to this case. These symmetry relations can be derived using the symmetries of the Hamiltonian. We reserve a detailed discussion for a future publication, as it would be beyond the scope of the paper. The general definition of smooth parameter changes can become complicated. For the purpose of this paper, we consider a parameter change smooth if it does not introduce additional crossings between energy levels, while preserving the symmetries of the Hamiltonian. To distinguish the irreps along R 1 and R 2 , we denote the latter with a tilde.