Integrating nanophotonics with electronics promises revolutionary applications ranging from light detection and ranging (LiDAR) to holographic displays. Although semiconductor manufacturing of nanophotonics in Silicon Photonic foundries is maturing, realizing active nanophotonics in the ubiquitous bulk CMOS processes remains challenging. We introduce a fabless approach to embed active nanophotonics in bulk CMOS by co-designing the back-end-of-line metal layers for optical functionality. Without changing any of the design rules imposed by a 65 nm CMOS process, we realize plasmonic liquid crystal modulators that exhibit switching speeds 100 times faster than commercial technologies. Our approach, which embeds 'zero-change' nanophotonics into the most ubiquitous platform for integrated electronics, democratizes fabrication of metal-optic nanophotonics, opens the path to mass production of active nanophotonic components, and overcomes major packaging challenges that have previously hindered the realization of complex metal-optic optoelectronic systems. Nanophotonic devices are redefining the technology landscape across numerous sectors, including telecommunications Despite this progress, an open challenge is the lack of active nanophotonic components in the majority of current semiconductor foundry processes, specifically in CMOS processes. In the bulk CMOS process, shown schematically in Fig. The challenge of co-integrating nanophotonics with electronics within bulk CMOS foundry processes primarily stems from the inability of the bulk silicon layer to support photonic modes (Fig. In this work, we introduce a fabless model for metal-optics using commercial bulk CMOS foundry processes with zero change to the process design rules. Through careful design of the metal interconnect layers in CMOS chips, it is possible to realize most of the building blocks of metal-optic nanophotonics within the constraints of the foundry design rules (see Fig. 2 Fabless CMOS Metal-optics Approach Fig. Depending on the foundry process used, the spatial resolution and the type of metal would differ, with general tendency of advanced processes to have more metal layers and higher spatial resolution. Due to its desirable electronic properties, wires are typically made of copper. Copper is a good plasmonic metal at the red part of the spectrum and has excellent performance in the NIR and IR spectral range Aluminum is used in older CMOS processes and in the top metal layers of most CMOS processes (the ). Aluminum is the best plasmonic metal in the UV range and has good performance across the visible spectrum. It is nearly indistinguishable in terms of optical losses from gold or silver in the NIR range Liquid crystal (LC) modulators are optoelectronic devices that control the intensity, phase, or polarization of light through the electro-optical properties of LC molecules where γ and κ are the viscosity coefficient and the elastic constant of the LC, respectively, and d is the LC cell thickness. Fast LC modulators are conventionally phase modulators where the acquired phase depends on the LC optical anisotropy, cell thickness, and operation wavelength. To obtain a desired phase range for a given LC molecule and operation wavelength, the cell thickness is not a design parameter. In the optical range, the cell size is on the order of a few μm, which results in τ > 1 ms. For many applications such as imaging through scattering media Alternatively, increasing the speed of the LC modulators by decreasing d is possible when modulating a nanophotonic resonance Our design targets the modulator to operate at a wavelength of 700 nm, which is of interest to quantum computing technologies Our designed modulators were fabricated by a CMOS foundry (TSMC) in their 65nm bulk CMOS process. The passivation layer of the as-received chips was removed through reactive ion etching (see Supplementary Materials). In Fig. The rise time vs. voltage results are then fitted with equation 1 to extract the effective cell size d ef f and the value of τ at infinite potential difference τ inf ty in Fig. We have introduced a fabless model that enables the fabrication of metal-optic devices and the co-integration of photonics and electronics in bulk CMOS foundry processes. Using a 65-nm CMOS process, we fabricated arrays of metallic nanorods, which are among the most important building blocks in metal-optics due to their strong optical nonlinearities and high refractive index sensitivity With minimal post-processing, we integrated liquid crystals into the nano-rod array and demonstrated an LC optical modulator with speeds two orders of magnitude faster than those of state-of-the-art LC modulators. This work serves as a foundation for fabricating electro-optic devices in CMOS foundries, including the creation of LiDARs and spatial light modulators. Other electro-optic materials with higher response speeds, such as electro-optic polymers, can also be integrated into these devices. The fabless nanophotonic model has the potential to spur growth in the metaloptic research and industry, similar to the impact of the fabless model on silicon photonics. Due to fabrication difficulties, many metal-optic devices were demonstrated at microwave frequencies In CMOS chips a passivation layer protects the underlying semiconductor devices and circuitry from damage and degradation. We removed this passivation layer to integrate LC molecules with deep metal layers in the CMOS stack. The passivation layer is typically made of dielectric materials with good insulating and chemical barrier properties. Common materials used for passivation layers include silicon dioxide (SiO 2 ), silicon nitride (Si 3 N 4 ), and silicon oxynitride (SiON). We used reactive ion etching (RIE) , (Plasma-Therm) to remove these layers. The etching was done using Carbon Tetrafluoride (CF 4 ) gas. Note that the Cu nanostructures act as a hard mask during the RIE process. This means that right below the Cu structure, a dielectric layer is present. The exact nature and optical properties of the dielectric layer was not supplied by the manufacturer. The etching rate was 40 nm/min and took a total of 3 hours using 200 W and 15 mTorr. The etching process was done in steps of 15 minutes to allow for the sample to cool down and to avoid overheating of the substrate, which would collapse the nanostructures. We found that these conditions vary significantly depending on the tool used. All numerical simulations were carried out using the finite difference time domain (FDTD) method (Lumerical TM ). When designing our plasmonic devices, we used the perfectly matched layer (PML) boundary condition in z direction and the periodic boundary conditions in the x and y directions. The optical constants of Cu were taken from Palik. The ordinary and extraordinary refractive indices of the liquid crystal molecules (E7-Merck) are 1.55 and 1.75, respectively. The unetched dielectric is assumed to be silica with a refractive index = 1.45. Following the FDTD modulator design stage, the modulator designs were imported into Cadence Virtuoso. Here, we confirmed that they followed design rules for the 65 nm process and added connections to underlying metal layers for the interdigitated electrodes. Different designs were combined onto a single die, and the electrodes were routed to wirebond pads for testing. For our reflection measurements we mounted the sample on a microscope with a broadband source (lamp) and coupled the reflected light to a multimode fiber connected to a Thorlabs spectrometer (CCS200). Since the resonance is very broad, it is sufficient to fit it with a quadratic polynomial in order to estimate the resonant wavelength. We fit a quadratic polynomial around the dip: Where α, β and C are fitting parameters. The resonant wavelength λ min is the minimal value: We extract the error for the value from the square root of the covariance matrix of the fit, which gives errors ∆α, ∆β on the fit parameters, and calculate the error ∆λ min for λ min : The same procedure was applied for measuring the resonant wavelength of the simulated spectra. We built an optical microscopy setup (Fig. Where I out,i is the measured intensity of the i th instance, I 0 is the amplitude of the fit, t is time, t 0 is the zero time, c is a constant shift and τ is the rise time. The final value was calculated according to the central limit theorem: Where τ = Σiτi N is the mean value, τ i is the fit of the i th instance, N is the number of instances and σ = Σ i (τi-τ ) 2 N is the standard deviation. We calculated τ for each voltage from 2 V to 5 V and fit the data (weighted least squares) to: where τ ∞ is the minimum value of τ in the limit of U → ∞, U is the voltage, U th is the threshold voltage for E7 LC and is taken to be 1.3 V Where ∆b is the error fir the fit parameter b. For the decay time, the same equation can be used, b → τ decay . We used SHINTECH OPTICS LCDMaster 3D software to model the LC dynamics. The software allows the user to simulate complex 3D rotation of liquid crystals. Fig. The initial alignment director has a pre-tilt of 2 degrees on floor and ceiling. The anchoring conditions were set to zero anchoring on the ceiling (since we drop cast the LCs and the interface is with air) and weak anchoring on the floor. The simulation parameters used were: K1 = 11.0 pN, K2 = 10.2 pN, K3 = 16.9 pN , ε ∥ = 19.6, ε ⊥ = 5.1 where θ(x, y, z, t) and φ(x, y, z, t) are the azimuthal and polar angles of the LC at time t as defined in Fig. Finally, ψ(t) tot was fitted to an exponential (see equation 5) to extract τ , as can be seen in Fig. Our expectation is that the decay time remains consistent across varying bias. A weighted average of the decay times was computed and is illustrated in Fig. We can derive the effective cell thickness for the decay time from equation 8. This calculation yields d eff = 41.9 ± 1.5 nm and d eff = 42.1 ± 1.0 nm for the exponential fitting and 20-80 analysis respectively. The effective cell thickness calculated from the measured decay time and measured rise time are within the error of both, which suggests that the two measurements are statistically consistent within the uncertainties of each method. 