Transition-metal honeycomb compounds are capturing scientific attention due to their distinctive electronic configurations, underscored by the triangular-lattice spin-orbit coupling and competition between multiple interactions, paving the way for potential manifestations of phenomena such as Dirac semimetal, superconductivity, and quantum spin liquid states. These compounds can undergo discernible pressure-induced alterations in their crystallographic and electronic paradigms, as exemplified by our high-pressure (HP) synthesis and exploration of the honeycomb polymorph of ReO3 (P6322). This HP-P6322 polymorph bears a phase transition from P6322 to P63/mmc upon cooling around Tp = 250 K, as evidenced by the evolution of temperature-dependent magnetization (M-T curves), cell dimension and conductivity initiated by an inherent bifurcation of the oxygen position in the ab plane. Insightful analysis of its band structure positions suggests this HP-P6322 polymorph being a plausible candidate for Dirac semimetal properties. This phase transition evokes anomalies in the temperature-dependent variation of paramagnetism (non-linearity) and a crossover from semiconductor to temperature-independent metal, showing a temperature independent conductivity behavior below ~200 K. Under increasing external pressure, both the Tp and resistance of this HP-polymorph are slightly magneticfield dependent and undergo a "V"-style evolution (decreasing and then increasing) before becoming pressure independent up to 20.2 GPa. Theoretical calculations pinpoint this anionic disorder as a probable catalyst for the decrement in the conductive efficiency and 3 muted temperature-dependent conductivity response. Honeycomb layered materials has been extensively studied in recent years, due to their exceptional mechanical, electrical, and optical properties for promising applications in energy storage and quantum devices. These intricacies make such sophisticated layered structures an intriguing platform for probing correlated Dirac electrons and exploring topologically nontrivial magnetic phenomena. Honeycomb layered structure, consisting of two different layers alternately stacked along the c-axis (Fig. Magnetic field can induce a significant moment greater than 0.35 μB per Ir ion at 3 T or higher in an ordered state, resulting in a highly polarized Jeff = 1/2 state in β-Li2IrO3, which is critical in developing innovative electronic instruments with extremely low power consumption. Particularly, the unique crystal structure and harmonic vibrational properties in harmonichoneycomb lattice render them characteristics similar to those of phonon crystals in condensed matter physics for phonon transport and phonon optics applications. structure. Interestingly, α-RuCl3 (C2/m) demonstrates the occurrence of both a QSL state under magnetic field and a spin solid state under hydrostatic pressure, forming a spin singlet valence bond crystal. GPa, accompanied by a structural phase transition from the R-3mH to P-3m1 symmetry around 11 GPa upon pressing. Moreover, the temperature-dependent resistivity in the metallic state of NaYbSe2 exhibits a crossover from non-Fermi liquid to Fermi liquid behavior at low temperatures. These discoveries provide a promising avenue to investigate the characteristics of MIT and the interplay between spin and charge degrees of freedom in QSL systems with strong SOC. Notably, Re 6+ offers a contrasting counterpart of Ir 4+ /Ru 3+ with regards to the electron hole symmetry. Its occurrence within the ReO6 octahedron and consequent possession of one 5d electron in t2g orbital presents an intriguing prospect. In contrast, Ir 4+ /Ru 3+ in the Ir/RuO6 octahedron presents one hole. 2.1 Synthesis and Phase Analysis. Single crystals of HP-ReO3 (~ 0.27 mm) were prepared by treatment of ReO3 (99.99%, Alfa Aesar) at 1173 K under 8 GPa for 30 min, in which samples were quenched by turning off the power to the heater and slowly depressurized over several hours. The phase purity was examined by laboratory powder X-ray diffraction (PXD) data collected in a powder X-ray diffractometer (MiniFlex 600, Rigaku, Japan) equipped with Cu Kα tube (λ = 1.5418 Å at 40 kV and 15 mA). The single crystal X-ray diffraction data of HP-ReO3 was collected on an Agilent SuperNova diffractometer using Mo Ka (λ = 0.71069 Å) micro-focus X-ray sources at 100-300 K. Isothermal magnetization curves were obtained at T = 5-300 K under an applied magnetic field from -5 to 5 T. Ambient pressure electrical resistivity was measured using a physical properties measurement system (PPMS). The in situ high-pressure electrical resistance measurements on HP-ReO3 single crystals were carried out using a miniature diamond anvil cell (DAC) made from Be-Cu alloy. Diamond anvils with a 400-μm culet were used, and the corresponding sample chamber with a diameter of 150 μm was made in the insulating gasket. The gasket was achieved by a thin layer of cubic boron nitride and epoxy mixture. NaCl powders were employed as the pressure-transmitting medium. Pressure was calibrated using the ruby fluorescence shift at room temperature. The standard four-probe technique was adopted in these measurements. A micro-Raman system (Renishaw, UK) with 532 nm laser excitation, including 10% laser intensity with 10 s of integration time, was applied to obtain the Raman spectra. The DAC had a pair of 300 μm diamonds with a 300 μm culet size with a T301 steel gasket. Silicone oil was used as a pressure transmitting media. Our density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed utilizing the projector augmented wave (PAW) Our first-principles calculations for transport properties were carried out separately based on DFT. The VASP with GGA was employed. In situ low-temperature single crystal diffraction studies HPHT syntheses (1173 K and 8 GPa) of HP-ReO3 yield shiny metallic copper-like single crystals (Fig. The vertex-sharing ReO6 octahedra are arranged zigzag along the c-axis with average bond length <Re-O> = 1.906 (4) Å in HP-ReO3. The ReO6 octahedra form a honeycomb configuration when viewed along the c-axis, in strong contrast to the cubic ReO3 phase with <Re-O> = 1.8735 (3) Å. The low temperature structure of HP-ReO3 was solved by single-crystal X-ray diffraction method as presented in Table Interestingly, the <Re-O> (1.906(4) and 1.910(4) Å) bond length remains almost temperature independent with decreasing temperature. Owing to the splitting occupancy of O atoms, the connection between ReO6 polyhedral changed from vertex-shared to edgeshared arrangement, which should be responsible for the metal-semiconductor transition discussed later. Fig. To systematically track the changes in cell evolution of this HP-ReO3 at low temperatures, the cell parameters extracted from in situ VT-PXD data between 280-88 K were plotted in )) of 0.5 × 10 -5 K -1 (Fig. Temperature-dependent four-probe dc conductivity measurements (Fig. The temperature-dependence 1/χ(T) of HP-ReO3 measured at field of H = 5000 Oe is displayed in Fig. Theoretical calculations show that the FM ground state is favored over the AFM one by 0.15 meV per unit cell with a weak magnetism (0.0015 μB per unit cell), which is consistent with experimental results. DFT-calculated spin-polarized band structure, presented in Re atoms, which differs from the well-known 3D Dirac semimetal Cd3As2 whose Dirac cone is contributed by the p orbital of As atoms. In order to gain insight into the independence of resistance on temperature from 2 to 170 K, we calculated the electronic conductivity of ReO3 in P63/mmc space group. Since the transition point of the resistance coincides with the phase transition point, we believe that this phenomenon may be related to the different structures. According to the experiment results, the O atoms of ReO3 in the HP-phase possess fractional occupation, which implies the disorder of O atoms. Disorder will lead to an increase in scattering centers in the material and hinder the movement of electrons, To verify this hypothesis, we perform theoretical calculations using a 3 × 3 × 3 supercell and consider ordered (P6322), ab plane disordered, and disordered in all three dimensions (P63/mmc) conductance models, respectively. The results demonstrate that the conductivity increases (resistance decreases) with temperature for the ordered model, as shown in Fig. Investigation and synthesis of the high-pressure ReO3 (P6322) phase provide important insights into the distinct electronic and structural behavior of transition-metal honeycomb compounds. We have recorded the phase transition from P6322 to P63/mmc, which occurs below 250 K due to the bifurcation of the oxygen position in the ab plane. Band structure calculation suggests that the high-pressure P6322 display a signature of Dirac semimetal properties. This phenomenon is visibly reflected in its impact on paramagnetism and conductivity. The temperature-independent conductivity behavior observed below 250 K at ambient pressure, supported by theoretical calculations, suggests that disorder plays a significant role in the electronic response of this compound. The in situ pressure-and temperature-dependent resistance data show that O split can be inhibited by small external pressure and the Tp varies irregularly within a small range as the pressure increases from 0.7-20.2 GPa. In summary, the multifaceted traits of the P6322 polymorph of ReO3 at high pressure offer a promising path for future research in comprehending the intricate interplay of structural and electronic properties in transition-metal honeycomb compounds. 