We demonstrate aluminum-on-silicon planar transmon qubits with time-averaged T 1 energy relaxation times of up to 270 μs, corresponding to Q = 5 million, and a highest observed value of 501 μs. We use materials analysis techniques and numerical simulations to investigate the dominant sources of energy loss, and devise and demonstrate a strategy towards mitigating them. The mitigation of loss is achieved by reducing the presence of oxide, a known host of defects, near the substrate-metal interface, by growing aluminum films thicker than 300 nm. A loss analysis of coplanar-waveguide resonators shows that the improvement is owing to a reduction of dielectric loss due to two-level system defects. We perform time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry and observe a reduced presence of oxygen at the substrate-metal interface for the thicker films. The correlation between the enhanced performance and the film thickness is due to the tendency of aluminum to grow in columnar structures of parallel grain boundaries, where the size of the grain depends on the film thickness: transmission electron microscopy imaging shows that the thicker film has larger grains and consequently fewer grain boundaries containing oxide near this interface. These conclusions are supported by numerical simulations of the different loss contributions in the device. Limited qubit coherence is still one of the main challenges for developers of solid-state quantum computing hardware. In the gate model of quantum computation, errors per quantum gate well below a tenth of a percent are required to execute meaningful quantum algorithms-and the lower the errors, the less overhead is needed for error correction and error mitigation. Superconducting qubits represent a leading platform for quantum computation. Their coherence time improvement, from nanoseconds at their conception to milliseconds today, is nothing less than remarkable Coplanar-waveguide (CPW) resonators and transmon qubits are commonly used for studying coherence and identifying loss mechanisms in superconducting devices. The dominating decoherence source within these devices is dielectric loss and noise, attributed to charged twolevel-system (TLS) defects at surfaces and interfaces, i.e., in thin sheets at the substrate-metal (SM), metal-air (MA), and substrate-air (SA) interfaces Among superconducting materials for qubits, aluminum (Al) has been a dominant material within the community: the ease and reproducibility of thin-film deposition, low cost, well-described chemistry, and the robust Josephson effect in small tunnel junctions comprised of aluminum oxide sandwiched between aluminum electrodes have made this material an attractive choice. The achieved energy relaxation time (T 1 ) of transmon qubits in a planar geometry whose wiring layer is made of aluminum is currently about 100 μs Here we demonstrate planar transmon qubits made of aluminum on silicon substrates, with time-averaged T 1 of up to 270 μs (Q = ω q T 1 = 5 million, ω q : qubit frequency). The improvement is mirrored in CPW resonators' quality factor measurements: the Q factor's dependence on circulating power indicates that the increased relaxation time is due to a reduction of TLS losses. We achieve this improvement by depositing a thicker layer of aluminum-300 nm or more-compared to our previous standard of 150 nm. We conduct material depth profiling by time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) and identify an aluminum-film-thickness dependence of the oxygen concentration at the SM interface, which decreases for thicker films. Further, we show by transmission-electron microscopy (TEM) that the thicker film has larger grains; we therefore interpret the reduced oxygen presence as being due to a smaller prevalence of grain boundaries in the thicker film and hence fewer sources of interfacial dielectric loss. Our numerical simulations of the loss participation due to the different dielectrics present in the device support this interpretation. We show a representative schematic of the transmon (Xmon) qubit circuit in figure In figure The qubit frequencies range from 2.8 GHz to 5.0 GHz, while the resonator frequencies are between 6.0 GHz and 6.8 GHz, see table II. For simplicity of device design and characterization, there is no Purcell filtering present in the device to mitigate spontaneous emission from the qubit into its resonator and the transmission line. Therefore, for these long-T 1 qubits, Purcell decay is nonnegligible and needs to be included among the limiting factors of the qubits' lifetime Here Q TLS , Q p , Q qp , and Q rad are the theoretical quality factors attributed to TLS, Purcell decay, quasiparticles, and other radiation losses not related to Purcell decay, respectively. The time constant of the Purcell decay for each qubit is calculated as T p = γ -1 , with the decay rate γ where the cavity decay rate is κ = ω r /Q l , the qubitresonator coupling is g = √ χ∆, and the qubit-resonator detuning is ∆ = ω q -ω r . Here ω r denotes the resonator frequency, Q l represents the resonator's loaded (total) quality factor and χ is the dispersive frequency shift. The qubit-resonator detunings vary between the devices due to variation in the Josephson junctions. Qubits with a smaller qubit-resonator detuning are more strongly Purcell-limited than others. As a result, a direct comparison between the qubits based solely on their T 1 is not the correct way of evaluating the qubits' performance. To compare qubits of different frequencies while simultaneously taking the effect of the Purcell decay into account, we plot the qubits' quality factor Q as a function of T 1 /T p in figure In figure 6 for those on the thicker films. For a more stringent case of T 1 ≤ 0.25 T p , the average quality factor becomes 3.8 × 10 6 for the thicker films. Assuming a typical qubit frequency of ω q /2π = 3 GHz, the corresponding relaxation time becomes ∼200 μs for a qubit made from the thicker 300 -500 nm films, in the weakly Purcell-limited regime. We remark that the coherence times quoted in figure 1(b) are mean values gathered by measuring each qubit for at least 24 h. This is necessary to accurately assess a qubit's quality, since the coherence time of superconducting qubits is known to fluctuate over time The improvement of the relaxation time in the thicker films is also reflected in the values obtained for the spin echo decoherence time T 2 echo , as T 2 echo > T 1 for most of our qubits, see table II. Although we find mean values as long as 307 μs, the spin echo decoherence time does not quite reach the theoretical maximum of 2 T 1 , indicating that the coherence of our qubits is not solely limited by T 1 , or by the type of dephasing noise typically cancelled by the spin echo sequence. In order to distinguish and quantify the particular energy loss mechanisms at play, we also fabricate and measure 50 bare λ/4 CPW resonators with resonance frequencies in the range of 4 -8 GHz. The internal quality factors Q i of the resonators are extracted by fitting the transmission scattering parameter S 21 vs. frequency using a resonance circle fitting method with diameter correction adapted directly from For TLS-loss-limited resonators, Q i at low drive powers will be diminished according to the model for interacting TLSs where F δ 0 TLS describes the loss due to parasitic TLSs, with F quantifying the TLS filling (also known as the total TLS participation ratio), and δ 0 TLS the TLS density. n c is the critical photon number required to saturate a single TLS on average, and β describes how quickly the TLSs saturate with power. The temperaturedependent factor tanh ( ̵ hω r /2k B T ) is ∼1 in our temperature regime (T denotes the temperature, and ̵ h and k B are the Planck and Boltzmann constants, respectively). The power-independent term δ 0 quantifies other sources of loss, such as resistive or radiative losses. The average number of photons circulating in the resonator ⟨n⟩ is estimated using where Z 0 and Z r are the characteristic impedances of the transmission line and the resonator, respectively, and P in is the microwave power delivered to the input port of the device. Q l and Q c are the loaded and coupling quality factors, respectively. In figure In the model for interacting TLSs, the parameter β describes how sharply the TLSs saturate with increased power. In our data, β is scattered, falling between 0.15 -0.4 for most resonators (which is typically reported in studies The presence of parasitic TLS defects is mainly attributed to amorphous oxides at the materials interfaces The samples under analysis are pieces of a Si wafer coated with Al films of the three different thicknesses representative of our devices (150, 300, and 500 nm). To discount wafer-to-wafer variation in substrate material properties, these three pieces originate from the same wafer. After the splitting of the wafer, the Si pieces underwent a cleaning and deposition procedure identical to that used during the qubit and resonator fabrication. The intensity of the detected signal identifying Si, Al, and O across the thickness of the sample is plotted in figure In figure In figure The diffusion constant of oxygen in aluminum is low at room temperature We suggest that the peak at the SM originates from both the continuation of oxide along the grains, as well as from an interfacial oxide. The origin of this interfacial oxide could be a result of incomplete silicon oxide removal, or oxide regrowth after removal during transfer to the evaporator or while inside, resulting from residual oxygen content of the evaporation chamber. In section E we show that the oxygen is mainly present in the form of aluminum oxide, which is consistent with the thermodynamically favorable reduction of silicon oxides into aluminum oxides Comparing the three films in figure While it appears in the data as if the Si/Al interface were broadening with increasing film thickness, this is unlikely to be a real feature of the samples. Instead, this broadening is a known artifact caused by surface roughening and atomic mixing during the sputter- assisted depth profiling Increasing a film's thickness has a direct effect on the resulting grain size In this section, we present energy participation ratio simulations of a 2D CPW geometry, showing that the reduced loss at the SM interface is the most likely reason for the improved quality factors of the devices made with thicker aluminum films. We also investigate if and when the loss due to other interfaces becomes dominant. The cross section of the simulated device is illustrated in figure where p i and tan δ i denote the participation ratio and the loss tangent at interface i, respectively (i: Si, MA, SA, SM and corner). The various interfaces are illustrated in figure We ran a second round of simulations to explore the evolution of participation ratios if the thickness of the metallic layer is varied. The presented results in figure 5(c) show only a slight variation in the participation ratios, as well as in the quality factor of the resonator. From the simulations above and the materials analysis in section IV, we conclude that the better performance of the devices with the thicker metallic layers is due to the reduction of the dielectric loss at the SM interface, by way of reducing the number of grain boundaries. We observe a significant improvement in the energy relaxation time of transmon qubits on silicon substrates when fabricated using aluminum films thicker than 300 nm, whereas the previous standard in our laboratory, and generally in the field, has been thinner. This observation is based on measurements of 36 qubits and 50 resonators. We demonstrate transmon qubits with average relaxation times exceeding 200 μs on 500 nm films, with the best qubit showing a time-averaged T 1 = 270 μs, corresponding to Q = 5.1 × 10 6 . Despite removing the native oxide of the silicon substrate prior to Al deposition, we detect a presence of oxygen and aluminum oxide at the Al-Si interface, which, due to the relatively strong electric field at this interface, contributes to dielectric loss. Material-depth characterization by ToF-SIMS reveals a weakening intensity of the oxygen-signal peak at the substrate-metal interface with increasing film thickness from 150 to 300 to 500 nm. We attribute the lower intensity of oxygen at the SM interface of thicker films, hence their lower dielectric loss, to the increased grain size in the thicker film, which we confirm in a TEM analysis. This consequently reduces the prevalence of oxidized grain boundaries in the vicinity of the interface, leading to lower loss. From a study of loss in CPW resonators, we conclude that the contribution from TLS defects decreases for the thicker films and becomes comparable to loss due to other mechanisms. Whether growing even thicker films-or indeed using epitaxial films-can deliver qubits of superior performance demands further investigations. Our experiments and simulations point towards two obstacles: Firstly, a frequency-dependent loss appears for the thickest film of 500 nm. Secondly, with the reduced dielectric thickness at the SM interface (below about 0.2 nm), the corresponding interfacial loss falls below that of the other interfaces, with a lower impact on the total loss. We are grateful for discussions with Liangyu Chen, Simone Gasparinetti, Stefan Gustafsson, Lars Jönsson, Mikael Kervinen, Zeinab Khosravizadeh, Sandoko Kosen, Sergey Kubatkin, David Niepce, Andreas Nylander, Eva Olsson, Marco Scigliuzzo, Daryoush Shiri, Giovanna Tancredi and Lunjie Zeng. The device fabrication was performed at Myfab Chalmers. The ToF-SIMS measurements were performed at the Chemical Imaging infrastructure at Chalmers University of Technology. The TEM was performed at the Chalmers Materials Analysis Laboratory. This work was funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg (KAW) Foundation through the Wallenberg Center for Quantum Technology (WACQT), and by the EU Flagship on Quantum Technology HORIZON-CL4-2022-QUANTUM-01-SGA project 101113946 OpenSuperQ-Plus100. In figure For readout resonators, both the center conductor width w and the gap g to the ground are 12 μm, while for the qubit capacitor w = g = 24 μm. The device structures are surrounded by an array of flux-trapping holes The devices are fabricated on high-resistivity (ρ ≥ 10 kΩ cm) intrinsic silicon substrates. The substrates are stripped of their native oxide in a 2% aqueous solution of HF and subsequently rinsed with deionized water to leave the Si surface terminated with a hydrogen monolayer Immediately after rinsing, we load the Si wafer into the load-lock of a Plassys MEB 550s evaporator, where it is heated to 300 • C for 10 min and then left to cool down to room temperature. This is done to desorb impurities and moisture from the surface of the wafer, and to allow the evaporator to reach a satisfactory vacuum level of ∼3 × 10 -8 mbar in the evaporation chamber. We deposit the aluminum films at the rate of 1 nm s -1 , and then oxidize the top surface in situ in the load-lock without breaking the vacuum, in a static oxidation step. We then define all circuitry barring the Josephson junctions (JJs) in an optical lithography step. This includes the transmission line, the coplanar waveguide (CPW) resonators, qubit capacitors, and flux trapping holes. We use a resist stack of an e-beam resist, PMMA A2, and an optically sensitive resist such as S1805. The PMMA layer underneath the optical resist serves to protect the underlying Al from damage induced by the TMAH present in the photo-developer (MF319), which enables re-patterning. After successful patterning, the PMMA is ashed away in oxygen plasma. The pattern defined in the resist stack is then transferred into the Al layer via wet etching in a mixture of phosphoric, nitric, and acetic acids (aluminum etchant type A). For qubit devices, JJs are fabricated using the patchintegrated cross-type technique adapted from Figure As for the room temperature instrumentation, all resonator spectroscopy measurements necessary for the Q factor extraction are performed using a R&S ZNB8 vector network analyzer (VNA). When necessary, additional attenuation up to -20 dB is placed at the VNA output, in order to reach powers equivalent to a single photon circulating in the resonators. The qubits are characterized using two alternative measurement setups. One setup consists of a multifrequency lock-in amplifier platform (Intermodulation Products Presto-16), where both the pulses necessary to control the qubit and read out its resonator are synthesized directly on an FPGA. The measured signal is also digitized on this FPGA. The alternative qubit measurement setup consists of high frequency signal generators (R&S SGS100a) and arbitrary waveform generators (Keysight PXIe M3202A 1GS/s AWG), whose outputs are upconverted with the help of local oscillators to generate the desired high frequency pulses. The detected signal is digitized using a Keysight PXIe M3102A 500 MS/s digitizer. Both setups have been verified to yield identical coherence results. experimental data to Equation To find the source of the frequency-dependent loss, δ 0 in Equation 3, we measure resonators fabricated on the thick, 500 nm Al film, under different scenarios. The first two chips labeled with Chip 1 and Chip 2 in figure In our measurements we are interested in a depth profile of the various elements across the Si/Al material stack. Therefore, we use an auxiliary 3 keV Cs + sputter beam with a raster size of 300 μm × 300 μm in conjunction with the primary 25 keV Bi 3+ ion beam used for the secondary ion detection. The raster area of the primary Bi 3+ ion beam is 100 μm × 100 μm. The Cs dose density at 2500 sputter seconds was 6 × 10 17 ions/cm 2 . To reduce the signal from residual gases in the chamber in the depth profile, the analysis is performed in high vacuum in the range of 2.6 -3.0 × 10 -9 mbar. We study the distribution of the detected oxygen between silicon and aluminum oxides at the Si/Al interface in figure In an Si/SiO 2 /Al interface, it is thermodynamically favourable for Al to reduce SiO 2 and form Al 2 O 3 instead We notice also a considerable presence of SiOx at the top surface of the metal. The source of this is likely atmospheric. In addition, we analyze a sample where a 500 nm thick film was initially deposited, and later reduced down to 300 nm via argon ion milling. This is done to draw a comparison between this sample and the films of the two respective thicknesses, and trace the origin of the change in interfacial composition. These measurements were performed at 9.1 -9.9 × 10 -9 mbar. We present the obtained intensity traces for Si, Al and O for two samples of the representative thicknesses (300 nm and 500 nm, same samples as figure Figure 