Quantum Spin Hall (QSH) insulators possess distinct helical in-gap states, enabling their edge states to act as one-dimensional conducting channels when backscattering is prohibited by time-reversal symmetry. However, it remains challenging to achieve high-performance combinations of nontrivial topological Q S H states with superconductivity for applications and requires understanding of the complicated underlying mechanisms. Here, our experimental observations for a novel superconducting phase in the pressurized QSH insulator Ta2Pd3Te5 is reported, and the high-pressure phase maintains its original ambient pressure lattice symmetry up to 45 GPa. Our in-situ high-pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction, electrical transport, infrared reflectance, and Raman spectroscopy measurements, in combination with rigorous theoretical calculations, provide compelling evidence for the association between the superconducting behavior and the abnormal densified phase. The isostructural transition was found to modify the topology of the Fermi surface directly, accompanied by a fivefold amplification of the density of states at 20 GPa compared to ambient pressure, which synergistically fosters the emergence of robust superconductivity. A profound comprehension of the fascinating properties exhibited by the compressed Ta2Pd3Te5 phase is achieved, highlighting the extraordinary potential of van der Waals (vdW) QSH insulators for exploring and investigating high-performance electronic advanced devices under extreme conditions. Symmetry-protected topological insulators (TI) hold immense promise for revolutionizing various fields, including quantum information processing, nanoelectronics, and energy technologies, by harnessing the exceptional properties of topologically protected states and enabling unprecedented advancements in these domains. Quantum Spin Hall (QSH) topological insulators are materials with insulating bulk but conductive states on their edges due to the specific topology of their electronic band structures. Recent theoretical works have proposed that the bulk Ta2Pd3Te5 behaves as topological insulator characterized by relatively subtle interlayer vdW interactions. First-principles calculations reveal that the compact phase of Ta2Pd3Te5 characterized by Pnma symmetry at 45GPa, and its volume show 16.12% reduction than that of the ambient pressure phase, manifesting its elevated state density at the Fermi level. Notably, kinetic phase conversion calculations demonstrate that the establishment of Te-Te bonds across bilayers poses a formidable obstacle to the generation of balanced high-pressure frameworks, and the pristine phase (Pnma) exhibits superior energetic stability compared to the possible monoclinic phase (P21/m) and layered sliding orthorhombic phase (Pnnm). According to the schematic diagram presented in Figure The R(T) data could be effectively fitted using the Arrhenius model ρ~exp(Eact/kBT), indicating that bulk Ta2Pd3Te5 manifests narrow-gap semiconductor features with an estimated activation energy of 30 meV. The monolayer Ta2Pd3Te5 is constructed from stacked chains of pyramid-like TaTe5 units, wherein each Ta atom is coordinated to five Te neighbors. These chains of TaTe5 are interspersed with distinct interstitial sites that can accommodate one A site and two B sites filled with Pd atoms. The atomic sites are listed in Table To enhance our understanding of the modified electronic states contributing to the emerging superconductivity, we conducted supplementary investigations using high-pressure transport measurements. Subsequently, the differential resistance measurements were examined in a quasi-fourprobe configuration using the AC lock-in technique (black wires), as shown in Figure The upper critical field, μ 0 H C2 (0), is estimated to be 1.425 T at 41.3 GPa. The in-plane GL superconducting coherence length is further determined to be ξ(0) = 152 Å by using the GL equation The extracted superconducting gap values ∆ g (T) are plotted in Figure ( The obtained zero-temperature superconducting energy gap is ∆ 0 ~2.335 meV and 2∆ 0 /k B T C = 3.8665. Moreover, in order to verify the repeatability of the experiment, the zero-resistance behavior is also observed in the second sample from different flakes under 45GPa (Figure To elucidate whether the pressure-induced transitions to the superconducting phase were triggered by crystal structure changes, in-situ high-pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy measurements were performed to determine the structure evolution of Ta2Pd3Te5. The XRD data have been collected with X-ray wavelength of λ = 0.6199Å (Figure Although the peaks broaden significantly beyond 23.7 GPa, probably due to powder anisotropy, direct identification of the phases becomes challenging. Nonetheless, we efficiently refine the XRD patterns within the pressure range of 1.7~45 GPa using the orthorhombic structure for 10.7 GPa, 23.7 GPa, and 42.8 GPa, as presented in Figure where B 0 is the bulk modulus, B 0 ' is the pressure derivative of B 0 , and V 0 is the volume at ambient pressure, and the results are shown in Figure Raman-active modes in Ta2Pd3Te5. The analogous compound Ta2Pd3Se8 possesses the highly anisotropic features of the heterostructure, enabling its selective detection by linear polarized light, The mapping of normalized Raman spectra in Figure To gain insights into the effects of applied pressure on electronic and structural properties, we conducted first-principles calculations up to 40 GPa, enabling us to analyze how pressure modifies the properties of bulk Ta2Pd3Te5. The calculations presented in Figure To enhance our understanding of the high-pressure phases of Ta2Pd3Te5, we employed crystal structure prediction techniques to explore potential structures for elevated pressures up to 50 GPa. The plotted enthalpy-pressure curves in Figure In this work, we employed a combination of electrical transport measurements, theoretical calculations, optical infrared reflectance, in-situ high-pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction (HP-XRD), and Raman spectroscopy to offer compelling proof of the substantial impact of strain engineering on topological bands. Our electrical resistance measurements confirmed the metallization and emergence of superconductivity. The metallization was further supported by the HP-Raman spectroscopy and HP-IR reflexivity measurements. When pressure exceeded 20 GPa, the Raman signal diminished significantly, and there was a pronounced rise in IR reflectivity, signifying a rapid increase in carriers. Moreover, the patterns derived from synchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction, which did not identify any new peaks, clearly illustrates isostructural modifications at low-pressures and 20 GPa, modifications that correspond to changes in the spatial arrangement of atoms. Furthermore, first-principles calculations revealed remarkable changes in electronic properties, as well as the trend of band shifting between the conduction and valence bands under pressure. We also reconstructed and discussed the potentials of the compressed interlayer slip phase (Pnnm) and monoclinic phase (P21/m) vs the pristine phase (Pnma). Interestingly, the pressure-dependent free energy E(P) simulation showed that the energy across the entire span of pressure levels for the pristine robust structure (Pnma) remained at tis minimum value, as evidenced by the consistency between computed XRD outcomes and actual observations. As pressure increased, the interlayer atomic positions gradually approached each other, inducing a phase transition from the initially loose insulating vdW phase to a denser high-coordination phase, eventually stabilizing the interlayer above the pressure of 40 GPa. The quantum topological phase transition attributes stemming from the strain-induced accelerated the enrichment mechanism of DOS, which involves a reversible volume compression of the topological insulator Ta2Pd3Te5. Our findings established a feasible framework for the practical manipulation of both superconductivity and band topology in 2D vdW materials, which holds significant promise for applications such as superconducting diodes and topological quantum computing. Sample Synthesis and Characterizations. Ta2Pd3Te5 single crystals were synthesized using the selfflux method. A molar ratio of Ta:Pd:Te = 2:4.5:7.5 mixture was placed in alumina crucible and sealed in evacuated quartz tube. The tube was gradually heated to 950°C for over 10 h and held at this temperature for two days. Subsequently, the tube was slowly cooled to 800°C at a rate of 0.5°C/h. Finally, the extra flux was removed by centrifugation at 800°C. Crystalline structure analysis was conducted via single-crystal XRD using Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å) at 273 K. Electrical resistivity measurements were performed under ambient pressure using a physical property measurement system (Quantum Design, Inc.) In-Situ High-Pressure XRD/Raman Spectroscopy/IR Reflectance Spectroscopy. In situ high-pressure synchrotron powder XRD measurements were performed at the 4W2 station of the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation facility (BSRF) with the wavelength 0.6199 Å. A symmetric diamond anvil cell (DAC) with anvil culet diameters of 300 μm was employed. The T301 stainless steel gasket was perforated to generate hole of ∼80 μm providing the sample high pressure chamber. The pressure was determined by the ruby fluorescence technique, with silicone oil serving as the pressure transmitting medium. The sample-to-detector distance and other detector parameters were calibrated using the CeO2 standard. The raw 2D XRD images were integrated into one-dimensional intensity vs. 2θ angles using the DIOPTAS program, The HP-electrical resistance of the sample loaded in Be-Cu DAC was measured using the four-probe method at selected pressures up to 45.1 GPa and temperatures ranging from 1.6 K to 300 K. A rhenium gasket was preindented to ∼30 μm in thickness, and a hole of 150 μm in diameter was drilled through the gasket center. To shield the electrodes (platinum) from the gasket, the insulating cubic boron nitride (c-BN) was placed as the filler for pressurization. The sample chamber was then created by drilling a hole in the middle of the c-BN layer with a diameter of 90 μm, and KBr was used as the pressure medium. A multifunctional measurement equipment, which included a magnet Dewar flask (9 T C-MAG, Cryomagnetic, Inc.), a signal source (Tektronix 6221-Keithley), and a nanovoltmeter (Keithley-2182), was used to test the low-temperature electrical resistance of Ta2Pd3Te5 under high pressure. An Oxford cryostat with a 3 He insert was used to cool the whole DAC setup down to 0.3 K, and a magnetic field was applied along the crystal a-axis up to 1000 Oe to suppress superconductivity. Our density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) 