Interconnect materials with ultralow dielectric constant, and good thermal and mechanical properties are crucial for the further miniaturization of electronic devices. Recently, it has been demonstrated that ultrathin amorphous boron nitride (aBN) films have a very low dielectric constant, high density (above 2.1 g/cm 3 ), high thermal stability, and mechanical properties. The excellent properties of aBN derive from the nature and degree of disorder, which can be controlled at fabrication, allowing tuning of the physical properties for desired applications. Here, we report an improvement in the stability and mechanical properties of amorphous boron nitride upon moderate hydrogen content. With the introduction of a Gaussian approximation potential (GAP) for atomistic simulations, we investigate the changing morphology of amorphous boron nitride with varying H densities. We found that for 8 at% of H doping, the concentration of sp 3 -hybridized atoms reaches a maximum which leads to an improvement of thermal stability and mechanical properties by 20%. These results will be a guideline for experimentalists and process engineers to tune the growth conditions of amorphous boron nitride films for numerous applications. As the semiconductor industry downscales integrated circuits and power consumption increases, materials and reliability are pushed to their limits. It is thus increasingly important to either improve the performances of existing materials and/or develop new materials to meet these stringent demands of power reduction of electronic devices and circuits. While transistors have gone through several generations of design and the introduction of new materials, the back-end-of-line interconnects have seen fewer changes. Nevertheless, significant efforts have been dedicated to address the reduction of the resistance-capacitance (RC) delay Structures for training and validation sets are generated using DFT calculations using the Quantum Espresso package Uniform sparsification has been used for 2b and 3b terms, while the CUR method One of the most common strategies used in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to generate amorphous samples is the melt-quenching protocol. In this method, the sample is first melted by heating above the melting temperature and then rapidly quenched We first present the analysis of the morphology of α-BN:H with different H concentrations employing the melt-quench protocol. A subset of the samples generated in this work is shown in Fig. Even though the first two peaks (≤ 4 Å) are clearly identified, no peak can be recognizable for longer distances, indicating the lack of long-range order. Hence, the amorphous character of α-BN does not change with the H doping. The short-range order in α-BN:H is dominated by the first-neighbor distance, which contributes to the first peak in the RDF located at an average distance of ∼ 1.42 Å, as shown in Fig. Upon investigating the morphology of the generated samples, we also calculate the diffusivity of samples as a function of sample temperature. The diffusivity (as in described in Eq. 2) of samples at any given temperature can be extracted from the mean square displacement (MSD) of atoms where the MSD shows the average mobility of particles, as shown in Eq. 3 where r is position of the atom at any moment. The diffusivity of a sample is zero when MSD approaches a non-zero constant and has a zero slope. However, when the sample under investigation experiences a structural rearrangement and loses its stability, MSD has a non-zero slope. This allows us to evaluate the thermal stability of the samples and understand when they become unstable. Here, thermal sta-bility refers to the material's ability to retain its structural integrity without significant atomic diffusion or rearrangement and loss of short-range order when subjected to high temperatures. In order to assess the thermal conductivity, we calculate the stability of samples between 300 K to 3000 K. We first calculate the MSD and diffusivity at that temperature for 70 ps and then increase the temperature of the samples by 50 K in 30 ps, later we calculate the MSD at the new temperature. The time intervals are determined to be large enough to obtain statistically meaningful data. The NPT (constant number of atoms, pressure, and temperature) ensemble with a Nose-Hoover thermostat has been applied with a timestep of 0.25 fs. The diffusivity of H atoms in α-BN:H is presented in Fig. For highly H-doped α-BN, diffusivity becomes non-zero between 1000-1200 K. However, B and N atoms become diffusive at higher temperatures compared to H atoms. While H atoms begin to diffuse around 1800 K, B and N atoms still have near-zero diffusivity until 2000 K. Similarly at higher H concentration levels, there is a significant difference between the temperature at which H atoms and B and N atoms start to diffuse. At low-level H doping, this temperature difference is quite low. Regardless of the identity of atoms, a monotonic trend between thermal stability and H concentration levels is observed. α-BN:H samples become more stable until the H concentration reaches 8 at% due to the increase in sp 3 -hybridized atoms and reduction in sp 1 -hybridized atoms. Thereafter, thermal stability decreases rapidly since larger H doping reduces the density and causes some red nanovoids within the sample. At H concentrations larger than 20 at%, samples become unstable. At low hydrogen levels, H doping can lead to a more thermally stable structure since it reduces the amount of sp 1 -hybridized B and N atoms, reduces the number of dangling bonds, and increases the density. However, at larger concentrations, H atoms disrupt the stability of the α-BN samples. Kaya et al. To calculate the mechanical properties of α-BN:H samples as a function of H concentration, we compute the elastic constant of the samples by using the stress fluctuations and Born matrix (i.e., the second derivatives of energy with respect to the strain) in a NVT ensemble at 300 K Excellent mechanical properties and ultralow dielectric constant of α-BN opens a new pathway for microelectronics and neuromorphic computing technologies. This study reveals how H doping tunes the morphology, stability, and mechanical properties of α-BN. We first develop a machine-learning interatomic potential for H dopant in α-BN and performed GAP-driven MD simulations to generate realistic structures. Thanks to the accurate machine learning approaches, we show that thermal stability and mechanical properties of α-BN are improved by small H doping levels. Despite α-BN:H's extraordinary properties, it is crucial to perform a thorough benchmark analysis on growth conditions and corresponding properties. The results obtained in our study will provide a guide to process engineers to optimize the growth conditions to achieve the optimum materials performance in the context of microelectronics.