We study the effects of interband pairing in two-band s-wave and d-wave superconductors with D 4h symmetry in both time-reversal invariant as well as time-reversal symmetry breaking states. The presence of interband pairing qualitatively changes the nodal structure of the superconductor: nodes can (dis)appear, merge, and leave high-symmetry locations when interband pairing is tuned. Furthermore, in the d-wave case, we find that also the boundary modes change qualitatively when interband pairing increases: flat zero-energy Andreev bound states gap out and transition to helical edge states. The properties of multiband, in particular two-band, superconductors (SCs) have recently emerged as a subject of substantial interest in condensed matter physics. Starting with the discovery of superconductivity in MgB 2 Theoretically, a two-band generalization of the Bardeed-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) model was introduced in Refs. Recent experimental and theoretical developments have motivated a further extension of the standard theory of multiband superconductivity, by taking into account the pairing among quasiparticles from different bands, i.e. interband pairing. Within the BCS approach of pairing in the momentum space, interband pairing is * kirill.samokhin@brocku.ca feasible if the pairing interaction cutoff energy exceeds the band splitting. Alternatively, starting from a realspace pairing interaction involving different atomic orbitals in a crystalline lattice, we find interband pairing components after transformation into the band representation In this paper, we show how the interband pairing affects the topological properties of a two-band SC, which is manifested in a qualitative reconstruction of the energy gap of the Bogoliubov excitations. We focus on two 1D pairing channels, s-wave and d-wave, on a twodimensional (2D) square lattice and consider both TRinvariant and TR symmetry-breaking superconducting states. The gap functions corresponding to the intraband and interband pairing are introduced using a symmetrybased phenomenological approach. This approach allows one to determine the gap structure, in particular, the location of the gap nodes, even if the microscopic pairing mechanism is not known, and has proved to be very useful in the studies of unconventional fermionic superfuilds and superconductors According to the bulk-boundary correspondence principle, changes in the topology of the bulk state are reflected in the spectrum of the fermionic modes at the boundary The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we derive the possible interband pairing gap functions compatible with s-wave, d xy -wave, and d x 2 -y 2 -wave intraband pairing, respectively. In Sec. III, we discuss the bulk spectrum and, in particular, the movement of the gap nodes in the Brillouin zone when tuning the interband pairing. In Sec. IV, we numerically compute the edge spectrum of a d xy -wave superconductor with a strip geometry and find a topological phase transition driven by the interband pairing strength. Finally, in Sec. V, we analyse the topological phase found in Sec. IV and calculate the corresponding topological invariant(s). Throughout the paper we use the units in which ħ = 1, neglecting, in particular, the difference between the quasiparticle wave vector and momentum. Additionally, the lattice constant is set to unity. We focus on a quasi-2D centrosymmetric time-reversal (TR) invariant crystal described by the point group G = D 4h (however, our results can be straightforwardly generalized to other crystal symmetries); g ∈ G is either a proper rotation R ∈ SO(3) or an improper rotation IR, where I denotes spatial inversion. The electron Bloch states are twofold degenerate at each wave vector k = (k x , k y ) due to the combined symmetry KI, called conjugation We further assume that only two bands n = 1, 2 cross the chemical potential and participate in superconductivity, and also that, despite the presence of the electron-lattice spin-orbit coupling, the Bloch states in both bands transform under the point-group operations and TR in the same way as the pure spin-1/2 states. Then, the conjugacy index s =↑, ↓ can be regarded as a pseudospin projection transforming under time-reversal as K |k, n ↑⟩ = |-k, n ↓⟩ and K |k, n ↓⟩ = -|-k, n ↑⟩, and we have Here, D(1/2) (R) is the spin-1/2 representation of R. In other words, we assume that both bands correspond to the double-valued irreducible representation (irrep) Γ + of D 4h where H 0 is the single-particle Hamiltonian and H sc the attractive two-particle interaction Hamiltonian within a mean-field approximation. The single-particle Hamiltonian is given by where ξ n (k) = ξ n (-k) are the band dispersions counted from the chemical potential, so that ξ 1 (k) < ξ 2 (k) for all k between the two Fermi surfaces. The superconducting mean-field pairing Hamiltonian can be represented in the following form: where are the creation operators in the time-reversed states. The intraband pairing in the nth band is described by ∆nn , whereas ∆12 and ∆21 describe the pairing of quasiparticles from different bands (the interband pairing). In order to have a non-vanishing interband pairing in a BCS-like model, one has to assume that the pairing interaction shells near the Fermi surfaces, which are defined by |ξ 1 |, |ξ 2 | ≤ ε c , overlap, i.e., the pairing energy cutoff ε c exceeds the typical band splitting E b . We do not attempt to derive the pairing Hamiltonian (3) from any microscopic model and regard the gap functions as phenomenological parameters. Note that the gap functions ∆nn ′ (k) are defined in Eq. (3) as the measures of the pairing between the quasiparticles in the states |k, ns⟩ and K |k, n ′ s ′ ⟩, not between |k, ns⟩ and |-k, n ′ s ′ ⟩. The gap function matrices can be represented as where σ0 and σ are respectively the unit matrix and the Pauli matrices in the pseudospin space, then Eq. ( Therefore, ψ nn ′ can be interpreted as the pseudospinsinglet component of the gap function and d nn ′ as the pseudospin-triplet component. It follows from the anticommutation of the fermionic operators that Additional symmetry constraints on the gap functions are obtained by looking at the transformation of the mean-field Hamiltonian (3) under the point-group operations and TR. Different pairing channels correspond to different single-valued irreps γ of G. For G = D 4h , we consider only three even-parity pairing channels: the 'swave' pairing which corresponds to the trivial irrep A 1g and the 'd-wave' pairing which corresponds to either B 1g (d x 2 -y 2 pairing) or B 2g (d xy pairing). It follows from Eq. (1) that if the pairing is described by a 1D irrep, then the gap functions satisfy the following constraints: Here α 1 , α 2 , α and β are real even functions of k. The intraband pairing in the even channels is purely singlet; the interband pairing has both singlet and triplet components. The Pauli principle is not violated because the exchange of electrons in an interband pair involves not only the reversal of their pseudospins and momenta but also the exchange of the band indices. Our system is characterized by three order parameter components η 1 , η 2 , and η which can be found by minimizing the Ginzburg-Landau free energy. It is easy to show that the action of TR on the order parameter components η 1 , η 2 and η is equivalent to complex conjugation, see Appendix A. One can always choose one of the components, say η, to be real and positive; then, η 1 and η 2 are either both real (positive or negative), which corresponds to a TR-invariant superconducting state, or have complex phases other than 0 or π, which corresponds to a TR symmetry-breaking superconducting state, see Appendix B. The point-group constraints on the basis functions take the following form where R(g) denotes the rotational part of g. Below we are looking for real and even-in-k solutions of these equations, for g = C 4z and C 2y (the two rotational generators of the group D 4h ). To facilitate the numerical analysis later in the paper, the solutions are expressed in terms of the lattice-adapted basis functions of the even 1D irreps of D 4h , namely For analytical calculations, it is more convenient to use the expressions that depend only on the direction of the wave vector in the xy plane: where k = k(cos θ, sin θ). For γ = A 1g , the simplest singlet solutions of the symmetry constraints Collecting everything together, we arrive at the following expressions for the gap functions: where ρ is a real parameter. One can say that the interband gap functions in the A 1g channel correspond to an s + ig pairing, with the understanding that the s and g components have a different pseudospin structure. The singlet components of the gap functions can be chosen in the standard form: or d xy -wave pairing, respectively. For the same reason as in the s-wave case, β1 = β2 = 0, and, using B 2g ×A 2g = B 1g and B 2g ×A 2g = B 1g , we obtain: for the d x 2 -y 2 -wave pairing and for the d xy -wave pairing. In both cases, ρ is a real parameter. We would like to add two comments about the structure of the interband gap functions. First, the momentum dependence of their singlet and triplet components corresponds to different even irreps of the point group (for instance, in the case of d xy pairing, it is B 2g for α and B 1g for β3 ). However, the pseudospin also transforms under the point group operations, in such a way that both α and β σ3 corresponds to the same pairing channel. It is in this sense that the interband gap functions in both B 1g and B 2g channels correspond to a d+id pairing. Second, the singlet components in the interband gap functions in Eqs. The mean-field Hamiltonian Eq. ( where we introduced the Nambu spinor operator and the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian which is an 8 × 8 matrix in the tensor product of the band, Nambu, and pseudospin spaces. The gap functions ∆nn ′ (k) are given by Eqs. ( where and τ are the the Pauli matrices in the Nambu space. Since Û⊤ C = ÛC , the Hamiltonian is generically in the tenfold class D (Refs. Therefore, which is equivalent to replacing If the superconducting state is TR invariant, i.e., η 1 , η 2 , and η are all real, then the BdG Hamiltonian satisfies an additional constraint: Since Û⊤ K = -ÛK , the TR invariant BdG Hamiltonian is in the tenfold class DIII. For the pairing symmetries we consider, the Hamiltonian Eq. ( where the Hamiltonians ) act in the two four-dimensional eigenspaces of Σ3 , corresponding to the two pseudospin projections. In Eq. ( and everywhere below, we use the notation β = β3 and the interband order parameter η is chosen to be real and positive, but the phases of η 1 and η 2 can be arbitrary. It follows from Eq. ( Also, they satisfy the relation , where Û = 1 2×2 ⊗ τ2 . Introducing the magnitude and the phase of the interband gap functions with | ∆(k)| = ηg(k) and g = α2 + β2 , one can see that Ĥ↑ and Ĥ↓ are particle-hole symmetric at each k, in the following sense: where Therefore, Ĥ↑ and Ĥ↓ have the same bulk spectrum, which consists of symmetric pairs of eigenstates E and -E. Since Û ⊤ C,↑(↓) = -ÛC,↑(↓) , the pseudospin-resolved Hamiltonians Ĥ↑ and Ĥ↓ are in the tenfold class C. The matrices Ĥ↑ and Ĥ↓ can be diagonalized analytically, see Appendix C, and we find that the bulk Bogoliubov spectrum consists of four branches ±E ± , where The notations are as follows: are the intraband gap functions and One can show that P > Q in the presence of interband pairing. Therefore, E + is strictly greater than E -at all k. Each of the four branches ±E ± is twofold degenerate due to pseudospin. In the absence of interband pairing, we set η = 0 and recover the usual expressions for a twoband superconductor: where is the excitation energy in the nth band. While the upper Bogoliubov excitation branch E + is fully gapped in the superconducting state, the lower branch E -vanishes at the wave vector k if in which case E -(k) and -E -(k) touch, producing a gap node. In two spatial dimensions, the three real functions r 1,2,3 cannot simultaneously vanish at the same k, unless forced to do so by additional symmetries. Writing the intraband order parameters in the form we see that r 3 identically vanishes in the states in which φ 1 +φ 2 = 0 or 2π. This happens, in particular, in the TR invariant states in which η 1 and η 2 are both either real positive or real negative. As shown in Appendix B, the TR-symmetry breaking states with φ 1 + φ 2 = 0 or 2π are stable only if the system's parameters are fine-tuned, the possibility that can be neglected. In a generic state with the interband pairing, i.e., when η ̸ = 0 and In the s-wave case, this can only happen accidentally and is neglected. In contrast, the d-wave intraband gap functions, and therefore r 3 , vanish along the high-symmetry directions for symmetry reasons. Thus, there exist four classes of the stable bulk nodal structures, which are studied below. In this case, the phases of η 1 and η 2 take any values, except φ 1 = φ 2 = 0 or π. The TR invariant states in which η 1 and η 2 are real but have opposite signs are also included here. Since r 3 is nonzero at all k, the s-wave superconducting state is fully gapped, regardless of the strength of the interband pairing. For concreteness, let us consider the evolution of the nodal structure in the d xy -wave case (for the d x 2 -y 2 -wave pairing, the nodes are just rotated by π/4). In the absence of the interband pairing, r 3 identically vanishes and the point gap nodes are located where ξ 1 = ψ 1 = 0 or ξ 2 = ψ 2 = 0, i.e., at the intersections of the axes of the 2D Brillouin zone with the Fermi surfaces. In the presence of the interband pairing and for generic phases of η 1 and η 2 , r 3 only vanishes along the axes k x = 0 and k y = 0 for symmetry reasons. Moreover, r 2 is also zero there and the only remaining gap node condition, Eq. ( where E b > 0 is the band splitting, in which the two Fermi surfaces are circles of radii k F,1(2) = k 0 1 ± mE b /k 2 0 . We use the following gap symmetry factors: see Eqs. along the axes of the momentum space. Taking, for instance, the θ = 0 axis, at η = 0 the two nodes are located on the Fermi surfaces, at k = k F,1 x and k = k F,2 x. As η increases, the nodes move towards each other, to k = k 1 x and k = k 2 x, where Figure Finally, when the interband order parameter η reaches the critical value the nodes merge at k = k 0 x and "annihilate" each other. At stronger interband pairing, our d xy -wave superconductor is fully gapped. Note that the disappearance of the nodes happens only if ρ ̸ = 0, i.e., when the interband gap functions contain the triplet component with the d x 2 -y 2 -wave-like momentum dependence. C. s-wave pairing, φ1 = φ2 = 0 or π In this TR invariant state, r 3 is identically zero everywhere, but we still need to solve the remaining equations r 1 = 0 and r 2 = 0. Assuming, without loss of generality, the same intraband symmetry factors in both bands: One way to satisfy this is to put α = 0, but that does not happen in the s-wave case, whereas in the d-wave case that can happen only along the high-symmetry lines, which was already considered in Sec. III B. Therefore, if we look for the gap nodes away from the high-symmetry axes, then we need to solve the following two equations: Note that the second equation can have solutions only between the two Fermi surfaces, where ξ 1 < 0 and ξ 2 > 0, i.e., ξ 1 ξ 2 = -|ξ 1 ξ 2 |. If the interband pairing is sufficiently strong, so that the right-hand side of the first equation is positive, then Eq. ( To illustrate these points for the s-wave pairing, we use the band structure model Eq. ( see Eqs. ( where at the angles found from the equation In the absence of the interband pairing, this last equation does not have any solutions. As η increases and reaches the nodes emerge in pairs, first at the angles given by θ = π/8, 3π/8, . . . . As the interband pairing further increases, the nodes split and move along the circle defined by Eq. ( These changes in the gap structure are shown in Fig. To develop some analytical insight, we again assume a d xy -wave pairing and use the parabolic bands At η = 0, this equation has no solutions. To illustrate the different scenarios of how the stray nodes are created and destroyed by increasing the interband pairing strength, we solve Eq. ( As the interband pairing strength further increases, the nodes split and move away from each other, staying on the circle At |ρ| ≫ 1, which corresponds to the triplet d x 2 -y 2 component dominating the interband gap functions, the stray nodes appear at θ = 0, π/2, . . . when the interband pairing strength reaches At this point they "peel off" in pairs from the highsymmetry nodes and, as η increases, move along the circle (28) towards the diagonals. Whereas the high-symmetry nodes annihilate each other at ηc > ηc,1 , see Eq. ( To see what happens in the general case, when both the singlet (d xy ) and the triplet (d x 2 -y 2 ) components are present in the interband gap functions, we set ρ = 1. Then, the solutions of Eq. ( and As η increases, the stray nodes first appear on the axes, i.e., at θ = 0, π/2, . . . , where they peel off in pairs from the high-symmetry nodes, then move towards θ = π/4, 3π/4, . . . , where they eventually merge and annihilate each other. Note that ηc,1 is less than the critical strength of the interband pairing at which the high-symmetry nodes disappear, see Eq. ( The stray nodes are accidental, in the sense that they are not protected by the crystal symmetry. In order to destroy them, one has to tune the intraband order parameter phases out of the TR invariance condition φ 1 = φ 2 = 0 or π. However, this condition always corresponds to a critical point of the free energy, see Appendix B, and if this critical point is a minimum, then the state is stable. Therefore, the stray nodes are protected by the TR symmetry. The effect of the interband pairing on the energy gap nodes in the bulk is fundamentally different in the four cases discussed in this section. The least interesting case is the generic s-wave state, which is fully gapped at η = 0 and remains so as η increases. This state is topologically trivial and does not support zero-energy boundary modes. In the TR-invariant s-wave state with φ 1 = φ 2 = 0 or π, a sufficiently strong interband pairing can create and then destroy again point nodes between the Fermi surfaces. The critical values of η separating the gapped and gapless phases, as well as the locations of the nodes, are model-dependent. In the generic d-wave state, the nodes are located only along the high-symmetry lines. As η increases, these nodes leave the Fermi surfaces, move towards each other into the interband space, and merge and disappear at η = ηc . The gapless and gapped phases separated by ηc are expected to be topologically different, which is confirmed in Secs. IV and V below. The TR-invariant d-wave state with φ 1 = φ 2 = 0 or π exhibits the most complex behaviour. In this case, the nodes along the high-symmetry lines can co-exist with the additional (stray) nodes in the interband space, whose number and locations are model-dependent. As the interband pairing increases, the two families of nodes evolve as the system passes through a series of transitions characterized by the creation and destruction of the pairs of nodes. Across these transitions, the topological charges of the nodes are conserved, see Sec. V A. Eventually, at a sufficiently large η, all the nodes will have pairwise collided and annihilated each other, so that the superconducting state will be fully gapped. Having discussed the bulk properties of the different superconducting phases in Sec. III, we turn our attention towards the boundaries of the material. We consider a strip geometry: the system is infinitely extending along The bulk band structure is described by where μ is the chemical potential, t n is the nearest, and t ′ n -the next-nearest neighbor hopping amplitude in the nth band. Superconductivity is either of sor d xy -wave type, given by Eq. ( The formal description of the superconducting strip system follows Ref. Similar to Eq. ( where The spinresolved Nambu operators are given by ck1,1s , ck1,2s , . . . , ckN,2s , where c † ki,ns (c ki,ns ) creates (annihilates) an electron with momentum k = k x at position i = i y = 1, . . . , N y in band n = 1, 2 with spin s =↑, ↓, and The exact forms for the 2N y × 2N y matrices ξ↑(↓) and ∆↑(↓) are provided in Appendix D, for both the sand d xy -wave cases. The BdG Hamiltonian ĤBdG is diagonal in the pseudospin space, with the blocks Ĥ↑ and Ĥ↓ being related by TR, see Eq. We begin the discussion of our results with the s-wave case. For a weak interband pairing, the spectrum is fully gapped in both the generic (cf. Sec. III A) and the exceptional cases (cf. Sec. III C). In the generic case, this situation remains true regardless of the strength of the interband pairing. In contrast, in the exceptional case, there exist two critical values, ηc,1 and ηc,2 , between which the spectrum is gapless for four distinct k values (three k values at η = ηc,1 and two k values at η = ηc,2 ). As the interband pairing strength increases from ηc,1 to ηc,2 , these nodes move towards each other until they annihilate eventually, so that the spectrum is fully gapped again. There are no edge states present-regardless of the interband pairing strength. Next, we discuss the generic d xy -wave case (cf. Sec. III B). The results are summarized in Fig. These correspond to the bulk nodes along the main axes and are located exactly on the two Fermi surfaces. The node at k 0 is four-fold degenerate corresponding to the four nodes of the system along the y direction. Between k LO and k RO the spectrum shows flat ABSs. As soon as the interband pairing is turned on, the ABSs between k LI and k RI gap out, while they remain intact between k LO and k LI as well as between k RI and k RO . As the interband pairing strength increases, the nodes move away from the Fermi surfaces until they meet each other and annihilate. After this point, the bulk is completely gapped but eight zero-energy crossing ABS branches remain. They are singly degenerate (doubly degenerate for Ĥ↑ ⊕ Ĥ↓ if both edges are taken into account, see Fig. The edge states are schematically illustrated in Fig. Finally, we turn our attention towards the exceptional d xy -wave case (cf. Sec. III D). Similarly to the generic case, we observe a topological phase transition when the interband pairing strength increases. However, apart from the phase transition, the behavior of the spectrum significantly differs from the generic case. Weak interband pairing does not immediately and fully gap out the ABSs. Indeed, there are ABSs present until the stray nodes annihilate along the diagonals of the Brillouin zone (cf. Sec. III D). We make two final remarks. First, the topological phase transition occurs regardless of the presence of TR symmetry. The characteristics of the edge states in the strip spectrum (cf. Fig. The results of the previous two sections show that the effects of the interband pairing are most profound in the d-wave states. The evolution of the bulk gap structure, which is reflected in the changes of the ABS spectrum, can be interpreted in terms of a series of transitions between topologically distinct superconducting phases. In this section, we discuss the relevant bulk topological invariants, focusing as before on the d xy -wave states. According to Sec. III, the gap structure of a generic nodal d xy -wave state is insensitive to the phases of the intraband order parameters: the nodes move on the highsymmetry axes as the interband pairing strength varies. In order to study the topological properties, one can focus on the TR invariant states, in which the order parameter components η 1 , η 2 , and η are all real. If η 1 η 2 < 0, then there exist only the high-symmetry nodes (Sec. III B), whereas at η 1 η 2 > 0 the stray nodes are also possible (Sec. III D). For the real order parameters, the Hamiltonians Ĥ↑ and Ĥ↓ , see Eq. ( In the basis in which ÛS is diagonal, the Hamiltonians can be brought to a block off-diagonal form, e.g., where The υ-matrix for Ĥ↓ is obtained from Eq. ( The positions of the gap nodes are determined by the zeros of |det υ|, whereas the topological charges of the nodes are given by the winding number of the phase of det υ: see Refs. where ψ n (k) = η n α(k), assuming the same intraband symmetry factors in both bands. In agreement with the results of Sec. III, we see that the zeros of | det υ| are located in the interband space, either where α = 0 and ξ 1 ξ 2 + ∆2 = 0 (the high-symmetry nodes), or away from the symmetry axes (the stray nodes), the latter being possible only if η 1 and η 2 have the same sign. The topological charges of the nodes can be easily calculated by expanding det υ(k) in the vicinity of the nodes. In the case η 1 > 0, η 2 < 0, we find (see Appendix E) that the gap nodes located on the same axis are oppositely "charged", as shown in Figs. According to Refs. ∇ ky ln det υ(k). The integral here is taken along a straight line which runs between the opposite edges of the Brillouin zone perpendicular to the boundary. In a continuum model, the limits are extended to infinity. Assuming that all gap functions vanish far from the Fermi surfaces, one can integrate along a closed contour C shown in Figs. In this way, we obtain: where k 1,2 are the positions of the bulk nodes, see Eq. We have seen in the previous sections that the bulk Bogoliubov spectrum becomes fully gapped when the interband pairing exceeds certain value. Moreover, if ∆ ̸ = 0, then the Bogoliubov branches E + and E -, see Eq. ( where and ν ± = (η α, ∓η β, ξ) and ξ = (ξ 1 + ξ 2 )/2. Since the Hamiltonians Ĥ↑ and Ĥ↓ are in the class C, the gapped bulk states are characterized by an even (2Z) topological invariant. In the case of the d xy -wave pairing, we have see Eqs. ( and ∆ has the form where ν = ν/|ν| and ν = ν + or ν -. Here we integrate over the 2D momentum space, which can be compactified into an S 2 sphere, because the gap functions vanish outside the overlapping BCS pairing shells, see Sec. II, so that ν = ẑ sign ξ and the integrand in Eq. ( Writing the interband gap functions in the form Eq. ( Finally, neglecting the ξ-dependence of | ∆| and φ inside the pairing shell, sending ε c → ∞, and integrating with respect to ξ, we obtain: where the integration is performed along the ξ = 0 line. Since we neglect the ξ-dependence of φ, one could integrate along either of the two Fermi surfaces, with the same result (note that the lines ξ = 0, ξ 1 = 0, and ξ 2 = 0 all lie within the BCS pairing shell, which encompasses both Fermi surfaces). Thus, the invariant ( For the d xy -wave pairing, see Eq. ( Therefore, each of the four Hamiltonians ĥ± ↑ and ĥ± ↓ has two chiral zero modes near each edge of the sample. These modes have opposite slopes for opposite chiralities, and are also shifted up and down in energy by ±E b /2, as shown in Fig. Based on a symmetry analysis, we determined the possible interband pairing gap functions in the case of twoband superconductors with s-wave, d xy -wave, or d x 2 -y 2wave pairing, which can give rise to both TR invariant and TR symmetry-breaking superconducting states. As the interband pairing strength increases, the nodal structure changes fundamentally. Nodes leave the Fermi surfaces and eventually annihilate each other on the highsymmetry axes, whereas other nodes (stray nodes) appear, move, and merge in the interband space. In the case of a d-wave superconductor with a strip geometry, the boundary modes exhibit qualitative changes when interband pairing increases. Starting from zeroenergy flat ABSs in the absence of interband pairing, these modes partially gap out as soon as interband pairing is turned on. In the limit of strong interband pairing, the system undergoes a topological phase transition to a fully gapped helical d ± id-wave superconducting state. The corresponding topological invariant is the phase winding number of the interband gap, which explains the existence of the eight gap-crossing zero-energy branches near one edge of the sample in the helical state. where ν n = (Re ψ n , -Im ψ n , ξ n ). It is manifestly particle-hole symmetric and one can find its spectrum either by a direct calculation of a 4 × 4 determinant Let us calculate the second and fourth powers of Eq. (C1): we find that M is proportional to the 4 × 4 unit matrix. Therefore, the eigenvalues of Ĥ satisfy the following biquadratic equation: Solving it, we obtain the Bogoliubov energy branches given by Eq. ( We expand Eq. (E1) near the nodes by setting ξ = ±ξ 0 + ξ 0 x, θ = y (|x|, |y| ≪ 1), and obtain det υ = ∓ξ 2 0 (x + iw ± y), where Therefore, the topological charges of the nodes, see Eq. ( In particular, in the absence of the interband pairing, we have q + =sign (η 1 ) and q -=sign (η 2 ). It follows from Eq. (E2) that If η 1 and η 2 have opposite signs, then q + q -< 0, independently of the value of η. The high-symmetry nodes on the same axis have opposite charges and annihilate each other at the critical strength of the interband pairing, given by Eq. ( In contrast, if η 1 and η 2 have the same sign, then Eq. (E3) changes sign at At this value of the interband pairing, one of the highsymmetry nodes splits into two stray nodes of the same charge and one high-symmetry node of the opposite charge, see Sec. III D. All nodes eventually annihilate each other at a sufficiently strong interband pairing.