Cryogenic microcalorimeters are key tools for high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy due to their excellent energy resolution and quantum efficiency close to 100 %. Multiple types of microcalorimeters exist, some of which have already proven outstanding performance. Nevertheless, they can't yet compete with cutting-edge grating or crystal spectrometers. For this reason, novel microcalorimeter concepts are continuously developed. One such concept is based on the strong temperature dependence of the magnetic penetration depth of a superconductor operated close to its transition temperature. This so-called λ-SQUID provides an in-situ tunable gain and promises to reach sub-eV energy resolution. Here, we present some design considerations with respect to the optimization of such a detector that are derived by analytic means. We particularly show that for this detector concept the heat capacity of the sensor should match the heat capacity of the absorber. Fig. Cryogenic microcalorimeters such as superconducting transition-edge sensors (TESs) Fig. T c ≫ T 0 . In contrast, the λ-coil is made from a different superconductor with a transition temperature T c,λ that barely exceeds the operating temperature, i.e. T c,λ ⪆ T 0 . As a consequence, the magnetic penetration depth λ(T ) of the λ-coil and hence the current distribution within the cross-section of the λ-coil shows a strong temperature dependence that affects both, the inductance L λ (T ) of the λ-coil as well as the mutual inductance M in (T ) between the λ-coil and the input coil. Assuming that a constant current I in is injected into the input coil, the flux induced into the λ-SQUID then also becomes temperature sensitive: Φ(T ) = I in M in (T ). As in a typical dc-SQUID, this change in flux can be measured as a change in voltage across or current through the λ-SQUID, depending on the mode of operation. By bringing a suitable particle absorber with specific heat C abs into close thermal contact with the λ-coil, the temperature rise upon particle absorption can be accurately detected and measured. As the central sensing element, the λ-coil has an enormous influence on the performance of the λ-SQUID. Assuming a sophisticated readout chain in which the noise of subsequent amplifiers do not affect the noise performance of the λ-SQUID, e.g. by using an N -dc-SQUID series array as a first-stage low-temperature amplifier, the energy resolution ∆E FWHM of a λ-SQUID is set by two noise contributions, i.e. thermodynamic energy fluctuations S E,TD caused by random energy fluctuations among the absorber, sensor and heat bath, and the noise contribution S E,SQ from the λ-SQUID itself. In the following, we will derive the conditions for the λ-coil which minimize the λ-SQUID noise contribution S E,SQ . We assume a hypothetical λ-SQUID as schematically depicted in Fig. With only two free parameters to choose, we see immediately that we can not choose all three quantities independently. To quantify the remaining dependence, we have introduced the two parameters ν = M/N and μ = M N that fully define a specific layout of the λ-coil. We use the geometric parameters ν and μ to express other relevant parameters: First, we assume that our λ-SQUID is optimized in terms of noise performance In each expression, the term in brackets is independent of the specific design of the λ-SQUID, and depends only on fabrication parameters and the design of a unit element of the λ-coil. The noise contribution S E,SQ caused by the λ-SQUID, expressed in fluctuations of the energy content, is given by the expression Here, S Φ denotes the magnetic flux noise of the SQUID. Moreover, ∂Φ ∂T and ∂T ∂E = 1/C tot are the temperature-to-flux transfer coefficient of the λ-SQUID and the inverse total heat capacity of the detector, respectively. For an optimized dc-SQUID, the flux noise can be approximated by S Φ ≈ 18k B T L 2 /R at the operating temperature T The temperature-to-flux transfer coefficient ∂Φ ∂T of the λ-SQUID is given by where, again, the term in brackets does not depend on the design of the λ-coil as a whole, but rather on the unit element. Using Eq. 4 and Eq. 5 we obtain for the noise contribution Here, we have introduced the substitutions We see that S E,SQ neatly separates into a term η which depends only on the unit element, but is independent of the specific layout of the λ-coil, and a function g (μ), which contains the dependence of the λ-SQUID noise S E,SQ on the arrangement of unit elements that comprises the λ-coil. It is interesting to note that only μ appears here, and that the parameter ν has dropped out. This can be understood as follows: An increase in ν causes a proportional increase in total inductance L and a rise of M in ∝ √ ν. While the latter results in an increase of detector signal, the former affects the flux noise negatively. Ultimately, the signal-to-noise of the λ-SQUID remains unaltered by a change of the inductance L by varying the parameter ν as introduced above. To minimize the noise level S E,SQ , we only have to consider the design parameter μ. Since the prefactor η has no influence on this optimization, we restrict our efforts to the function g (μ) and find for its first and second derivative. In this way, we find that the function g (μ), and thus the λ-SQUID energy noise contribution S E,SQ , has a minimum if the condition μ = μ opt is satisfied, with Thus, we can conclude that the layout of the λ-coil should be chosen such that the total specific heat of the λ-coil exactly equals the specific heat of the absorber C sens = C abs . This resembles a well-known result for cryogenic microcalorimeters The recently proposed λ-SQUID is a superconducting microcalorimeter with in-situ tunable gain and, with a proper choice of absorber and sensor material, promises to reach sub-eV energy resolution. In preparation for such a demonstration, we have presented theoretical design considerations related to the optimization of the layout of the λ-coil, which is the fundamental sensing element of a λ-SQUID. By sub-dividing the λ-coil into a large number of small unit elements, we could abstract the layout of any possible design of the λ-coil for a given fabrication method, and describe the remaining degrees of freedom in the design process by two parameters μ and ν. When considering the influence of these parameters on the energy noise contribution S E,SQ of the λ-SQUID, we draw two conclusions. First, the total inductance L of the λ-coil has no effect on the resulting energy noise, and can thus be chosen freely. Second, the noise contribution S E,SQ is minimized if the total volume of the λ-coil is chosen such that its specific heat directly equals that of the X-ray absorber: C sens = C abs .