The electronic and vibrational properties and electron-phonon couplings of one-dimensional materials will be key to many prospective applications in nanotechnology. Dimensionality strongly affects these properties and has to be correctly accounted for in first-principles calculations. Here we develop and implement a formulation of density-functional and density-functional perturbation theory that is tailored for one-dimensional systems. A key ingredient is the inclusion of a Coulomb cutoff, a reciprocal-space technique designed to correct for the spurious interactions between periodic images in periodic-boundary conditions. This restores the proper one-dimensional open-boundary conditions, letting the true response of the isolated one-dimensional system emerge. In addition to total energies, forces and stress tensors, phonons and electron-phonon interactions are also properly accounted for. We demonstrate the relevance of the present method on a portfolio of realistic systems: BN atomic chains, BN armchair nanotubes, and GaAs nanowires. Notably, we highlight the critical role of the Coulomb cutoff by studying previously inaccessible polar-optical phonons and Fröhlich electron-phonon couplings. We also develop and apply analytical models to support the physical insights derived from the calculations and we discuss their consequences on electronic lifetimes. The present work unlocks the possibility to accurately simulate the linear response properties of one-dimensional systems, sheds light on the transition between dimensionalities and paves the way for further studies in several fields, including charge transport, optical coupling and polaritronics. Over the past three decades, nanostructures have captivated increasing interest, embodying novel physical paradigms and delivering cutting edge technological applications. Dimensionality plays the role of an additional degree of freedom, relevant also beyond fundamental science. As regards one-dimensional (1D) systems, our theoretical understanding and the associated first-principles computational tools are yet less developed with respect to the higher-dimensional cases, that is two-dimensional (2D) layers and three-dimensional (3D) bulk materials. While carbon nanotubes attracted significant attention and success Density-functional perturbation theory (DFPT) is a powerful first-principles tool accurately predicting vibrational properties Proper suppression of these stray interactions across periodic images has been achieved by smoothly truncating the Coulomb interactions between periodic images In the following, we address this challenge by developing a DFPT framework tailored for 1D systems. To this aim, we implement the Coulomb cutoff technique The paper is structured as follows. First, in Section II we discuss the challenge posed by PBCs and we illustrate how to rigorously curate this issue by introducing the Coulomb cutoff technique. In Section III, the implementation of the 1D framework within QE is detailed. In Section IV, we use our developments to study polaroptical phonons (A) and their coupling to electrons (B). We thus discuss the physical understanding provided by our work and, eventually, we comment on the importance of all this for transport applications (C). The conclusions follow in Sections V. First-principles calculations based on plane-wave basis sets rely on PBCs across all three dimensions. When using these PBCs while simulating a system with reduced dimensionality, periodic images will be present in the non-periodic directions; e.g., nanotubes, nanowires, polymeric and atomic chains. Our goal consists in isolating the 1D system in such a way that it does not interact with its images, which otherwise would introduce an additional response in our calculations, eventually hindering the true 1D physics. This is of crucial importance in a variety of cases: systems perturbed at long wavelengths (even if neutral and non polar), polar systems, and when doping or charging is included. In short, suppressing the stray interactions is essential whenever long-range electrostatics are relevant. Let us start by framing the main concepts and the nomenclature. A 1D system is described as a crystal with periodicity only along one directionẑ in this casetermed 'in-chain', while having a limited extension (in the range of 1-100 nm) in the the two other 'out-of-chain' directions, x and ŷ. Henceforth, the term 'chain' might be used to denote a generic 1D system. The cells in the crystal are identified by R z = mb where m is an integer and b is the in-chain primitive lattice vector; the out-of chain components are instead constants. The position of each atom a within a cell is then given by d a which may contain out-of-chain components depending on the structure (e.g., linear or zig-zag chains, tubes, wires). Switching to the reciprocal space, the crystal is described by the reciprocal vector G z generated by the in-chain primitive reciprocal lattice vector b 3 * . Within DFT, the ground state properties of our system are fully determined by the charge density where we sum over the spin-degenerate electronic states, labeled by the in-chain momentum k z and the band index s, f (ε k,s ) is the Fermi occupation and ψ k,s are the Bloch wavefunctions. The Kohn-Sham (KS) potential, V KS , for a neutral/undoped 1D system consists in the external potential created by the ions, i.e., V ext ≡ V ion in this context, plus two electronic contributions: the Hartree V H and the exchange-correlation V xc potentials. The total potential reads: Each of these potentials has the periodicity of the crystal , i.e., V (r ⊥ , z + R z ) = V (r ⊥ , z); the same holds for the electronic density in Eq. 1. It is important to recall here that materials properties can be derived starting from space integrals of the electronic charge density times these potentials. When using 3D PBCs, rather than simulating the isolated 1D system, one deals with an array of copies obtained by periodically repeating the system in the three dimensions of space with a given amount of vacuum to separate them; this is shown in Fig. where |R ⊥ | describes a square periodic lattice of parameter d in the out-of-chain direction (Fig. This issue can be addressed via the Coulomb cutoff technique, as successfully demonstrated in several works The Coulomb cutoff technique consists in explicitly truncating the spurious interactions between periodic images. This is done by modifying the Coulomb kernel, rather than directly the potentials. The kernel v c is thus redefined as vc : and all the long-range (LR) contributions to the potentials (i.e., the ones affected by the stray fields, associated to the spurious interactions between periodic images, V ion , V H ) are then obtained by convolution of this truncated kernel with the electronic charge density in Eq. 1 in such a way that a given charge in the 1D system interacts only with charges within a cylinder of radius l c built around it (see sketch in Fig. In practice, within the code the potentials (or at least their LR part) are generated in reciprocal space. Thus, the truncated kernel from Eq. 4 becomes: where J n (x) and K n (x) are, respectively, the n th order ordinary and modified cylindrical Bessel functions and l c is the cutoff length. Note that for the G z = 0 plane the expression in Eq. 6 is ill-defined since K 1 (x) diverges logarithmically for x → 0. However, we are interested in the total potential given as the sum of the Hartree and ionic terms, both modified consistently via this kernel and each defined up to an arbitrary additive constant. Thus, we follow the original development We start by defining h = N l 0 as the new length of the finite cylinder, where l 0 is a unit-length such that h is always assumed much larger than the cell size in the periodic direction. We get the following expression for the Fourier transform of the truncated kernel in Eq. 4: (7) Focusing on the G z = 0 plane, we are now left with where we can substitute h = N l 0 and then split the expression in two integrals, I 1 and I 2 , of which only the first one depends on the height of the cylinder. The truncated kernel now reads: The first integral, not dependent on h, has the following well-defined solution: while the second integral, I 2 , depends on h and gives: This latter term contains the singularity (i.e., lim N →∞ I 2 = ∞), which can be dropped by invoking charge neutrality as long as we apply the same cutoff correction to both the Hartree and the ionic potentials. At this point, we are interested in fixing the G = 0 term of the potential, that is V (G = 0) = 0, adopting a gauge consistent with the existing 3D code and 2D implementation The difference in the present approach with respect to Ref. , . This corresponds to the conventional choice in QE for both 3D and 2D materials. Eventually, after some manipulations, the final expression for the 1D truncated kernel becomes: ) Since the K(x) functions damp the oscillations of the J(x) functions very quickly, as pointed out in Ref. In the following, we detail the implementation of the relevant physical ground-state properties (potentials, energies, forces, stresses) and linear-response ones (phonons and electron-phonon coupling (EPC)). For the sake of simplicity, we follow the same steps involved in the implementation for 2D systems The KS potential is the sum of the external (in this case, ionic), Hartree, and exchange-correlation contributions: Here, we are interested in modifying only the LR part of these potentials and thus we can neglect the exchangecorrelation term which is short-ranged (SR). Note that this implementation holds for all types of pseudopotentials (i.e., norm-conserving, ultrasoft and projectoraugmented wave). Following the conceptual steps of Ref. and the LR part transforms as where Ω is the volume of the unit-cell of our 1D system (that is length of the cell times the cross-sectional area in the radial directions). For the Hartree term we have As a first validation of the method, we focus on a system with negligible periodic images interactions concerning ground-state properties. This approach allows us to check the modifications introduced so far. We expect the KS potential to be minimally affected by our changes, ensuring the reproduction of the correct physics within the physical region defined by the cutoff length l c . Additionally, we comment on some peculiarities and side effects arising as a consequence of our implementation outside such a region. With this goal in mind, we focus on the simplest system in our portfolio: the BN atomic chain (first panel of Fig. The total energy per unit cell is computed as i.e., as the sum of the electronic kinetic energy, the energy of the electrons in the external potential created by the ions, the Hartree energy, the exchange-correlation energy and the ion-ion interaction energy. Each of these terms involves a convolution of the charge density with the kernel; thus, we simply need to modify the LR contributions (i.e., E ext , E H , and E i-i ) by consistently truncating the Coulomb kernel throughout the code substituting v c (r) with vc (r). In the first panel, we show the KS potential averaged along the chain, with (green) and without (red) the cutoff. In the second panel, we focus on the x-axis cross-section of the KS potential in green (dotted/solid for 3D/1D PBCs) and we highlight the physical region; the electronic charge density is reported for reference in orange. In the last panel, we zoom on the physical region and we plot besides the KS potential also the ionic (blue) and Hartree (red) contributions, always comparing each potential with and without the 1D cutoff (solid and dotted line, respectively). Refer to the main text for details. Once the 1D potentials and energies are obtained, the forces acting on each ion a are obtained as derivatives of the total energy with respect to the displacement u a,i along a given Cartesian direction i: where all the terms which do not involve explicitly interactions with the ions have been dropped, and we always imply derivatives at zero displacement u a,i = 0. Thus, we are left with only two terms: the force on an ion coming from the electrons and the contribution given by the interaction with the other ions. Both terms can be obtained as a straightforward consequence of modifying energies and potentials. Finally, stresses are computed as derivatives of the total energy with respect to the strain tensor: where E tot is proportional to the truncated kernel via the Hartree term (see Ref. . In this case the modifications needed are more extensive and differ with respect to both the 3D case and the 2D truncation. In fact, modifying the kernel and potentials is not enough; one also needs the derivative of the truncated Coulomb kernel with respect to the strain tensor. By applying the chain rule for the derivative and exploiting the fact that ∂G l /∂ε ij = δ li G j , we have: In the 1D case we have, based on Eq. 13: with β z and β p defined as follows: The key ingredient to compute phonon dispersions and EPIs is the response of the electronic density to a phonon perturbation. This is obtained in DFPT by solving selfconsistently a system of equations in which the unknown is the lattice periodic part (in italics) of the perturbed KS potential ∂ VKS(rp,z) ∂ua,i(qz) . In practice, what is needed to compute linear-response properties are the derivatives of the previously defined potentials and energies, already modified, consistently, via the Coulomb cutoff. Once again we are interested only in the LR terms, i.e., the local ionic Vloc ion (q + G) and Hartree VH (q + G) contributions. The truncated response is thus obtained by propagating the truncation of these potentials consistently. Once this is done, the implementation of the dynamical matrix, from which one obtains the phonon dispersion relations and the EPC matrix elements, is straightforward. The crucial consequence of the cutoff implementation on phonons and EPIs will be at the center of the discussion in the following section. For more details about the implementation of all this in QE, the reader can refer to Ref. Besides the implementation of the 1D Coulomb cutoff, another relevant modification concerns the Fourier interpolation of phonon dispersion relations. Fourier interpolation enables to efficiently compute the full phonon dispersion on a dense momentum grid, first computing the dynamical matrix on a coarse grid, then Fourier transforming it into finite-ranged interatomic force constants (IFCs), and finally Fourier transforming the IFCs back in reciprocal space on a finer momentum grid. However, in most semiconductors and insulators, non-vanishing Born effective charges (BECs) drive long-ranged dipoledipole interactions. These are dimensionality dependent and lead to the IFCs slowly decaying in real-space The implementation of D LR ai,bj (q) requires several physical quantities. Masses, eigenvectors, eigenvalues and BECs are directly obtained from the underlying DFT and DFPT calculations. What need to be parameterized are instead the effective radius t of the 1D system and its macroscopic dielectric tensor ε 1D , which in this model is replaced by the dielectric component ε z (i.e., isotropic assumption). As discussed in the literature where c is the out-of-chain length characterizing the supercell geometry (assumed to be the same in the x and ŷ directions). In practice, in implementing the correction to the dynamical matrix, we automatize the choice of the effective radius as t = d/4, where in the most general case d is the size of the cell in the non periodic direction. This choice is reasonable assuming that d has been chosen as the minimum size to satisfy the cutoff requirements as explained in Sec. III A. In most practical cases, atoms in semiconductors and insulators carry non vanishing BECs corresponding to a polarization charge inside the material. This is the origin of non analytic LR contributions affecting phonons (such as polar-optical phonons) and EPIs (e.g., Fröhlich and piezoelectric). Due to the long-range nature of the phenomenon, dimensionality has profound consequences on linear-response properties. The 1D cutoff is thus crucial for their first-principles description. In this section, we apply our developments to the following systems: a BN atomic chain, a BN armchair nanotubes of increasing radius, and a GaAs nanowires (see Fig. Polar-optical infrared-active phonons -namely the longitudinal optical ones (LO)-can generate a LR electric field, macroscopic in the long-wavelength limit Figure of the material (BECs and the high-frequency limit of the dielectric tensor ε ∞ ), its dependency on phonon momenta and size (thickness in 2D, and radius in 1D) is constrained by dimensionality. This phenomenon has undergone extensive investigation in both 3D Our findings revealed notable differences compared to 3D systems, where the dielectric shift remains constant across the Brillouin Zone (BZ), commonly referred to as longitudinal-transverse optical splitting. In nanostructures, however, this shift deviates from the 3D behavior. In 2D materials, it exhibits an asymptotic linear relationship, characterized by ω ≈ q In addition, we emphasize that the discrepancy be-tween the 3D and 1D boundary conditions depends on the vacuum present within the simulation cell, specifically the distance between periodic images in 3D PBCs. The momentum range where the two approaches differ is directly related to it. A larger vacuum leads to a smaller region affected near Γ and consequently a softer behavior of the LO branch, asymptotically approaching the 1D limit. This behavior is illustrated in the inset of Fig. Similar to phonons, electron-phonon interactions can undergo significant modifications due to dimensionality. One prominent example is the Fröhlich coupling between the electrons and the polar-optical phonons discussed in the preceding section. The long-range nature of this interaction gives rise to distinct signatures in 3D, 2D, and 1D systems. In 3D, the Fröhlich interaction is known to diverge as q → 0 [61], while in 2D, it converges to a finite value Here, we focus on the simplest yet instructive system in our portfolio, the BN chain. The dispersion relations for small-momentum LO phonons are shown in the second panel of Fig. where V KS is the lattice periodic part of the Kohn-Sham potential, e ν and ω ν are the phonon eigenvectors and eigenvalues for the ν mode, and m a is the mass of the atom. First-principles results are presented in Fig. This trend is found to be in agreement with our analytical model (Appendix B), as shown in the center panel of Fig. The developments discussed thus far hold significant relevance for charge transport, which is ubiquitous in various technological applications. Specifically, the scattering of electrons with small-momenta phonons is important for doped semiconductors when the Fermi surfaces are small. The theoretical and computational findings presented here suggest notable modifications in this momentum range. It seems particularly important to be able to predict the peak position for the coupling, |g Fr (q)| 2 , and its implications on electronic lifetimes, τ -1 (ε k ). In the following we provide an approximate estimation of the inverse lifetimes for electrons scattered by LO phonons, evaluated as: where the delta function enforces the energy conservation, while N (q) is the Bose-Einstein distribution with index -(+) to indicate phonon absorption (emission). We investigate the consequences of the peaked behavior ex- The analysis is restricted to intraband scattering within the valence or conduction band near Z (although accounting for the degeneracy of the bands as explained). In the top and central panels, we report in red the results from the standard QE code, 3D PBCs, and in green the ones from 1D-DFPT. In the bottom panel,we overlay the analytical model, summarized in Appendix B, onto the 1D-DFPT results for various radii (t) used in its parameterization. hibited by the Fröhlich coupling. In fact, the 1D peaked signature of the coupling is echoed in terms of τ -1 . The peak in this case is shaped -shifted and varied in width -by the Bose-Einstein distribution that accounts for the temperature-dependent phonon population. The overall structure is ultimately determined by the relevant phonon momenta (associated with phonon absorption/emission transitions) fulfilling the energy conservation enforced by the Fermi golden rule. Focusing once more on the BN chain, we consider an initial state at the bottom of the conduction band, around the Z point. For a given initial state, there are two relevant q values associated with phonon absorption processes, and the corresponding coupling strength |g(q)| 2 enters the electronic lifetimes. Building upon the earlier findings, we anticipate the analytical model for the coupling to yield accurate results primarily in the long-wavelength limit, as previously discussed. This implies that the model is applicable mainly to scattering events involving electronic states near each other in kspace, contingent upon the effective masses of the relevant bands. Consequently, for flatter bands, transitions with larger q values become predominant, resulting in diminished predictive power for the model. According to Eq. 29, the position of the peak is primarily determined by two factors: the LO phonon frequencies and the curvature of the band near the selected k i . These two factors govern the phonon momenta relevant for the scattering of electrons. The relevant momenta can be possibly close to the peak of g, maximizing the scattering probability, or they can be more or less distant. This will shape the overall trend of the electronic lifetimes across the bottom of the conduction band. We present our findings in the three panels of Fig. To further support our analysis, we use the analytical developments outlined in Appendix B to qualitatively show the results for the BN nanotube. These are shown in Fig. In summary, we introduce a novel DFT and DFPT framework to comprehensively simulate ground-state and, most importantly, linear-response properties of 1D systems from first principles. This achievement is made possible by implementing the 1D Coulomb cutoff in the QE distribution V Fr (q z ) = 4e 2 ε ⊥ t 2 Lq z a Z a • e a LO (q z ) 2M a ω qzLO 1-2I x is the Meijer G-function, and we assumed a diagonal and isotropic dielectric tensor ε ∞ , i.e., ε m → ε 1D I) (see Ref. where ω 0 is the reference value for the LO branch in the absence of any additional contribution from polarity (which can be or not equal to the TO depending on dimensionality and symmetry considerations). The analytical results displayed in this study rely on first-principles parameters obtained independently through DFT and DFPT calculations under 1D openboundary conditions. In particular, Eqs. B2 and B3 involve various physical quantities directly derived from such calculations, with the exception of the effective radius t and the in-chain component of the 1D dielectric tensor, i.e., ε 1D . For more details on how these two parameters are obtained, see Sec. III B of this paper and the Supplementary Information of Ref. 