While machine learning (ML) interatomic potentials (IPs) are able to achieve accuracies nearing the level of noise inherent in the first-principles data to which they are trained, it remains to be shown if their increased complexities are strictly necessary for constructing high-quality IPs. In this work, we introduce a new MLIP framework which blends the simplicity of spline-based MEAM (s-MEAM) potentials with the flexibility of a neural network (NN) architecture. The proposed framework, which we call the spline-based neural network potential (s-NNP), is a simplified version of the traditional NNP that can be used to describe complex datasets in a computationally efficient manner. We demonstrate how this framework can be used to probe the boundary between classical and ML IPs, highlighting the benefits of key architectural changes. Furthermore, we show that using spline filters for encoding atomic environments results in a readily interpreted embedding layer which can be coupled with modifications to the NN to incorporate expected physical behaviors and improve overall interpretability. Finally, we test the flexibility of the spline filters, observing that they can be shared across multiple chemical systems in order to provide a convenient reference point from which to begin performing cross-system analyses. In the fields of computational materials science and chemistry, machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) are rapidly becoming an essential tool for running high-fidelity atomic-scale simulations. Notably, major breakthroughs in the field have typically been marked by the development of new methods for encoding the atomic environments into machine-readable descriptors, or using architectures from other fields of machine learning to improve regression from descriptors into energies and atomic forces. The seminal work using atom-centered symmetry functions (ACSFs) Despite the success of these MLIPs, there has been a persistent need in the community for the continued development of low-cost classical IPs, particularly for use with large-scale simulations In this work, we develop a new IP model whose hyper-parameters can be tuned to transition smoothly between lowcost, low-complexity classical models and full MLIPs. By basing the proposed model off of a classical spline-based MEAM potential, then extending it using a basic ML architecture, we enable direct comparisons to well-established classical forms as well as modern ML models. These results help to bridge the gap between the two classes of models and highlight methods for improving speeds, interpretabily, and transferability of MLIPs. The model developed in this paper builds heavily upon the spline-based MEAM potential In Eqn. 1 the energy of the i-th atom, E i , is composed of a pair term (φ) and an embedding energy contribution (U ) for a given "electron density" n i , where all five functions (φ, U , ρ, f , and g) are represented using cubic Hermite splines. The pair term is calculated by summing over pair distances r ij = |⃗ r j -⃗ r i | between each atom i and its neighbors j (with r ij less than a chosen cutoff distance, r c ). The electron density n i is further decomposed into 2-body (ρ) and 3-body (products of f and g) contributions. The 2-body term is similar to the summation over φ, while the 3-body term is computed by summing over the product of three spline functions that take r ij , r ik , and cos(θ jik ) as inputs, where θ jik is the bond angle formed by atoms i, j, and k with i at the center. The subscripts on the functions indicate that separate splines are used for evaluation depending on the chemistries c i , c j , and c k of atoms i, j, and k (e.g., g AA for A-A bonds, g AB for A-B bonds, etc.). In order to facilitate comparisons between s-MEAM and the model that will be proposed in this work, we will first define two new functions then re-write Eqn. 1 as where N 2 = 1 and N 3 = 1. We will henceforth refer to G α 3,i and G β 2,i as 3-body and 2-body "spline filters" respectively, in acknowledgement of the fact that they can be thought of as filters that characterize the local environment around atom i in order to produce a scalar atomic environment descriptor n i . In Eqn. 3 we have introduced summations over the superscripts α and β which currently only take on a single value of 1, but will be used later to denote different filters. Shown to be universal function approximators In Eqn. 4, N ci is a neural network, c i is the element type of atom i, and ⃗ D i is the atom-centered symmetry function (ACSF) descriptor parameterized by η β for changing the width of the Gaussian distribution, and R β s to shift the distribution. A smooth cutoff function v c (r ij ) is used with the form: Angular contributions are accounted for using the angular symmetry functions Multiple radial and angular symmetry functions are constructed by making N 2 choices for η β and R β s , and N 3 choices for ζ α , λ α (= ±1), and η α . The evaluations of all of these symmetry functions are then concatenated together into a single vector ⃗ D i which is passed through a feed-forward neural network. Obvious parallels can be drawn between the NNP form in Eqn. 4 and the re-written form of s-MEAM shown in Eqn. 3. What differentiates NNP from s-MEAM, however, are the details regarding the construction of the local descriptors, and the form of the embedding function. Where s-MEAM uses trainable spline filters for both the descriptor and the embedding function, NNP uses ACSFs and an NN respectively. Although an NN would have an increased fitting capacity over the U ci splines used in Eqn. 3, there are many similarities between the ACSF descriptors and the spline filters described in Eqn. 2. For example, the 2-body components of an ACSF descriptor, which are constructed by evaluating D β 2,i with multiple radial shifts R β s for each neighboring atom j, can be viewed as basis functions used for interpolating the desired range of atomic distances. This is conceptually related to how the basis functions of cubic Hermite splines allow G β 2,i to interpolate over its domain as well. A similar argument can be made relating the angular components of ACSFs to the 3-body filters G α 3,i , where Eqn. 2 and Eqn. 5 both multiply functions of pair distances (f α c k (r ij ) and f α c k (r ik )) by a function of the triplet angle (g α c jk (cos (θ jik ))). The ANI model The main contribution of this work is the development of a spline-based neural network potential, outlined in Fig. where N is a neural network, and ⃗ G i is a vector of length (N 3 + N 2 ). Notice that each component of ⃗ G i is computed by evaluating a different 3-or 2-body spline filter for the local environment of atom i. The parameters of an s-NNP that are trained during fitting are the positions of the knots of the f α , g α , and ρ β splines from Eqn. 2, as well as the weights and biases in the neural network N . The hyper-parameters of the model are N 3 , N 2 , the number of knots in each spline, the number of layers in N , and the number of hidden nodes in each of those layers. One benefit of the s-NNP framework is that it is closely related to both classical and machine learning interatomic potentials (see Section 4.2 for more discussion), making it possible to easily probe the performance gap between the two. For example, many classical potentials (LJ Figure A central tenet of constructing interpretable models is designing the model architecture in a way that helps isolate the contributions of specific parameter sets to the final model predictions. With this in mind, we therefore propose the five modifications described in Fig. When applying all of the modifications described in Fig. where E sc,i as a "skip connection" term (as used in other DL fields In order to test our framework, in Section 3.1 we fit s-NNP models to the aluminum dataset from Smith et al. As a test of the flexibility of the spline filters, in Section 3.3 we trained an s-NNP model simultaneously to the Al dataset described in Section 2.3 and the Cu, Ge, and Mo datasets from Zuo et al. In order to attempt to balance the combined dataset, we took a random subset comprised of 20% of the Al dataset in addition to the full Cu, Ge, and Mo datasets, resulting in a total training set size of 1271 Al configurations, 262 Cu, 228 Ge, and 194 Mo. Another logical choice for constructing the multi-element training set would be to further downsample the Al dataset to better balance the relative concentrations of each element type. However, we observed that doing so resulted in worse property predictions for Al, presumably due to the large number of high-energy configurations in the original Al dataset making random sampling of low-energy configurations relevant to the properties of interest unlikely. In all cases, the atomic energies of each element type were shifted by the average energy of that type before training. Using the s-NNP framework, we fit a collection of models to the Al dataset to probe the effects of increasing model capacity in two distinct ways: first by increasing the number of spline filters, and second by increasing the size of the network used for mapping filter outputs to energies. Table The results in Table The introduction of a neural network enables the model to better utilize the additional spline filters, leading to significant improvement of the "(1, 2) l = 3" model over any of the linear models. Increasing the number of spline filters, and subsequently increasing the network width and depth to maintain a "funnel-like" structure (decreasing layer width with increasing depth) can also lead to steady improvements. However, with increasing model size we began to see a commensurate increase in training difficulty, often resulting in larger models with higher errors than what might be expected based on the performance of their smaller counterparts (e.g., "(2,4) l = 6" compared to "(2,4) l = 5", or "(1,8) l = 5, int. wide" compared to "(1,8) l = 5, int. all"). Notably, the interpretability improvements from Section 2.2 did not hurt model performance, demonstrating that accuracy and interpretability are not strictly opposing attributes of a model. Based on the results shown in Table A major advantage of s-NNP over many other MLIPs, especially when coupled with the modifications from Section 2.2, is that the spline filters G α 3,i and G β 2,i lend themselves to easy visualization. This can be valuable for helping model developers and users to better understand how their model is interacting with the data or influencing simulation results. The polar plots in Fig. It's worth mentioning that similar plots to the ones shown in Fig. The high interpretablility of the s-NNP spline filters, as discussed in Section 3.2, is particularly valuable when the filters can be applied to different chemical systems in order to enable cross-system comparisons. For example, if multiple s-NNP models using the same spline filters were trained to different chemical systems, then the networks of each model could be analyzed in order to understand how differences in chemistries result in different sensitivities to the local environment embeddings defined by the spline filters. The multi-element model trained to the datasets described in Section 2.4 uses the same spline filters for all of the data, but separate NNs for each element type. The network architecture maintained a funnel-like structure of (12, 8, 4, 2, 1). It also used four additional 3-body filters in order to increase its fitting capacity, for a total of one short-range pair filter and 12 3-body filters, though without Figure The property predictions of the multi-element model plotted in Fig. Figure In order to gain additional insights into the differences in energetics between the Al, Cu, Ge, and Mo systems, we compute the sensitivities of the energies predicted by the multi-element model with respect to each of the 3-body spline filters. The sensitivity of the total energy, E, for all configurations N with respect to a given 3-body spline filter G α 3 can be computed as: which can be easily computed via back-propagation. Calculation and comparison of these sensitivities for each dataset, as shown in Fig. The main purpose behind the modifications proposed in Fig. The first of these modifications is the use of skip connections, which result in strong theoretical changes that can not only lead to improved trainability as seen in Table In order to further facilitate straightforward interpretation of spline visualizations, we also choose to pin the knots of the radial splines to be 0 at the cutoff distance r c , and we remove bias terms from the layers of the NN. As a result of this, both N ( ⃗ G i ) and E sc,i will smoothly decay to 0 at the cutoff distance, thus incorporating the desired behavior which is enforced in the Behler-Parrinello NNP using the cutoff function v c in Eqn. 6. In order to account for the fact that some datasets may have non-zero energy at the cutoff distance, an external bias term, b is added so that the atomic energy converges to b at r c . In this sense, b corresponds to the learned energy of the isolated atom. We note that this external bias term is preferable to using internal network bias or un-pinning the radial splines because it ensures that N ( ⃗ G i ) and E sc,i behave similarly as r ij approaches r c . Wrapping the network output N no-bias ( ⃗ G i ) in the Softplus activation function guarantees that the NN contributions to the total energy are strictly non-negative. This ensures that any attractive behavior of the model arises solely from the spline filters through the skip connection term, E sc,i , thus helping to isolate certain model behaviors to specific parameter sets. It is important to note, however, that the Softplus activation should only be used in conjunction with skip connections in order to ensure that the model can predict negative energies. A common challenge for many MLIPs is ensuring a repulsive behavior at small values of r ij . This difficulty is not reflected in classical potentials, however, as classical models often include explicit repulsive terms. While a datadriven solution to this problem is possible, by explicitly adding short-range dimers into the training dataset, many MLIP developers choose instead to adjust the form of their IP. One such method used in the literature is to augment the model by introducing an auxiliary potential designed to capture the repulsive behavior of a pair potential. For example, in The s-NNP architecture shown in Fig. The recently-proposed EAM-R model The computational cost of s-NNP is dominated by the evaluation of ⃗ G i , and is particularly dependant upon the choice of N 3 . In fact, basic profiling tests revealed that the filter evaluations accounted for approximately 95% of the total CPU and GPU time. This behavior can be understood heuristically by the fact that Eqn. 2 involves approximately O(N 2 n ) spline evaluations for each filter where N n is the average number of neighbors within the cutoff distance (due to the summation over triplets of atoms), as opposed to the relatively few matrix multiplications associated with the evaluation of the neural network. In general, the computational cost of inference with an s-NNP potential will scale sub-linearly with N 3 (some speedup can be achieved by performing batched spline evaluations for the filters in Eqn. 2). An important practical implication of this is that in order to improve the accuracy of a given s-NNP model (and other NNP-based MLIPs as well), it is much more computationally efficient to increase the size of the network rather than the size of the embedding function. On the other hand, increasing N 3 may lead to larger increases in accuracy (up to a point) than what is achievable by only increasing the network size Given the performances of the s-NNP models in Table In this work we developed a novel framework using spline-based filters coupled with a neural network regressor in order to blend the strengths of both classical and ML IPs. We use this framework to probe the gap between these two classes of models, observing performance limits of linear ("classical") models that can be overcome using even small neural networks. We then show that this improved performance can be maintained while incorporating architectural changes which improve the interpretability of the model, such as the use of skip connections, an external bias term, a Softplus activation function, and a short-range pair term. Finally, we demonstrate that the information-rich filter layer can be used as a reference point for performing cross-system analyses, and correlate well enough with model behavior to enable manual tuning to improve property predictions. Future studies applying the visualization techniques shown here to practical applications, and exploring methods of isolating contributions of specific elements to subsets of the model parameters would be valuable for continuing to refine the interpretability improvements explored in this work. Furthermore, efforts building upon this work could continue to improve the s-NNP design by incorporating equivariance or a message-passing network, which may lead to better performance and improved scaling of model size with number of elements. The code used for training s-NNP models can be found at https://github.com/TrinkleGroup/snnp. All datasets can be obtained from their original sources. All s-NNP models in this work were trained using the code provided at https://github.com/TrinkleGroup/snnp on a single GPU from the HAL computing cluster B Distributions of r ij and θ jik Fig. Fig. Fig. 