The metal-insulator transition (MIT) in vanadium dioxide VO2 due to V-V dimerization has been extensively discussed for decades. While it is widely acknowledged that electron correlations, Peierls instabilities, and molecular orbital formations are crucial for understanding the MIT of VO2, the primary origin of the MIT remains controversial. In this study, we delve into the crystal structure and orbital state of VO2 through synchrotron x-ray diffraction experiments. The molecular orbital formation corresponding to the V-V dimerization is directly observed in the low-temperature insulating monoclinic phase, called the M1 phase, as indicated by the valence electron density distribution. Moreover, diffuse scattering observed in the high-temperature metal phase of rutile structure suggests the presence of short-range correlation of V displacements, which is not directly attributed to the structural fluctuation of the M1 phase. The short-range order in the rutile phase will be the key to understanding the MIT in this system. Introduction. Transition metal compounds with the orbital degree of freedom are an attractive platform for realizing molecular clusters The most direct way to address the long-standing problem is to gain a proper understanding of the crystal structure and orbital state of VO2. X-ray diffuse scattering (XDS) was observed around the R and M points in the first Brillouin zone in the rutile phase In this study, we perform synchrotron x-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments using single crystals of VO2. The valence electron density (VED) analysis observes the molecular orbital formation of V 3d electrons in the M1 phase. We also observe two-dimensional plane-shaped XDS corresponding to the V displacement in the rutile phase, which is not ascribable to the structural fluctuations derived from the M1 phase. Experiments. Single crystals of VO2 were obtained by reducing molten V2O5 powder at 950°C in a flow of N2 gas Results and Discussion. Figures In the M1 phase, the V-O bond length is shortened to 1.75983( Next, we focus on the VED distribution around the V site in the rutile phase, which has an anisotropy different from that of the M1 phase. The VED does not extend along the x-axis direction but along the z-axis direction where oxygen atoms exist [see (i) in Fig. The strong XDS is observed along the Γ-M (0.5, 0.5, 0)-Γ lines in our study, whereas previous XRD measurements reported the XDS around the R (0.5, 0, 0.5) point The anisotropy of the XDS is investigated by one-dimensional plots along the To understand the short-range ordered structure, the XDS pattern is simulated by V displacements. Here, the V displacements propagating along the The direction in which the VED extends around the V site in the rutile phase [Fig. The short-range ordered structure is not a perfect rutile structure but a locally distorted metastable structure, which may be related to an intermediate phase suggested by the previous theoretical calculations In summary, the t2g molecular orbital state is observed from the VED distribution in the M1 phase of VO2. The observed XDS suggests the short-range ordered structure derived from the V displacement, which is different from the structural fluctuations of the M1 phase. This metastable short-range structure may be related to peculiar properties such as the ultrafast transition and dynamics in this system. 