This paper reports an inductorless transimpedance amplifier (TIA) with very compact size and adequate performance for spin qubit readout operations in monolithic quantum processors. The TIA has been designed and fabricated in a 22nm FDSOI CMOS foundry technology commercially available. The measurement results show a transimpedance gain of 103 dBΩ with a bandwidth of 13 GHz, at room temperature, and it is expected to exhibit slightly superior performance at cryogenic temperatures. The power consumption amounts to 4.1 mW. The core area amount to 0.00025 mm 2 , i.e., about two orders of magnitude smaller with respect to the prior-art works, and approaching the qubit size, which makes the inductorless TIA a compact enabling solution for monolithic quantum processors. One of the grand challenges toward the physical implementation of monolithic quantum processors is the development of reliable hardware technology platform capable of integrating millions of identical qubits together with the control and readout integrated circuits, all onto the same chip In such a challenging scenario of the research frontier on quantum technologies, the monolithic integration of qubits together with control and readout circuits onto a single chip opens to new further opportunities to address the quantum processors scalable to large numbers of qubits. In addition to the more compact and scalable implementations, eliminating the large chip-to-chip parasitics associated with the external circuitry alleviates significantly the connectivity problem and enables also the control and readout with lower noise, lower power and higher speed. Therefore, the opportunity to take advantage of the quantum effects in ultra-scaled devices together with the advanced circuit design capabilities emerging from the latest commercial complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) foundry technologies in mass production, offer concrete opportunities toward the implementation of scalable monolithic quantum processors, so accelerating the quantum leap into the quantum era. This perspective, as envisaged in Innovative compact circuit solutions for control and readout of qubits have been reported for some building blocks such as microwave/mm-wave switches The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the inductorless TIA. Section III reports the implementation and measurements. Finally, in Section IV, the conclusions are drawn. This work was supported in part by the European Commission through the European H2020 FET OPEN project IQubits (GA N. 829005). The first stage is a CMOS inverting TIA stage with transistor sizes for a good tradeoff between gain, bandwidth and noise performances, whereas the following stages consist of two Cherry-Hooper amplifier stages with transistor sizes increased by a factor 2-3 (i.e., load driving capability, or fan-out) in order to maximize the gain-bandwidth product. The feedback resistor and transistors of the last stage are sized such that the output impedance of the circuit is matched to 50 Ω over the bandwidth of interest for the qubit readout operations. In this regard, as discussed in Eliminating the inductors from the circuit produces the macroscopic evidence of a drastic reduction of the area footprint on chip. However, this visible and highly desired circuit feature has much deeper positive and enabling effects on the design of microwave and mm-wave building blocks, whose traditional design paradigm is based on cascaded active LC resonant stages made of transistors and large passive components, such as metaloxide-metal (MoM) capacitors, spiral inductors and transformers, and transmission lines (TLs), e.g., In order to achieve the desired performance, the gate width of the n-MOSFET N1 and the p-MOSFET P1 have been sized to a width of 270 nm and 340 nm, respectively. For the impedance matching with the 50Ω output load impedance, the n-MOSFET and the p-MOSFET of the last stage of the TIA were sized with a width of 13.76 μm and 18.88 μm, respectively. All transistors have the minimum length offered by the 22nm FDSOI CMOS by GlobalFoundries. Fig. In particular, the simulations show that the TIA exhibits a Z21 of 108.5 dBΩ and a -3dB bandwidth (BW) of 13 GHz, at room temperature. The output matching (S22) is below -10 dB all over the bandwidth. The DC power consumption amounts to 4.5 mW. The simulation results at 20 K shows that slightly superior performances are expected at cryogenic temperatures. Despite the considerations above, the improvement of performance at cryogenic temperatures have been validated by cryogenic measurements at 2 K for all the pilot building blocks previously designed and tested Fig. The microphotograph of the TIA test-chip is reported in Fig. In order to measure the input equivalent current noise, the input of the TIA is left open circuited. Then, the output power of the TIA is measured. The output noise power is then converted into the equivalent input-referred noise by using the measured transimpedance gain. Fig. Table We have reported the design and implementation of a novel inductorless transimpedance amplifier in 22nm FDSOI CMOS with very compact size approaching the size of the double quantum dot, i.e., the qubit device, and with the desired gain and bandwidth requirements for qubit readout. The transimpedance amplifier circuit was designed using a methodology aiming to eliminate all the inductors, so to minimize both the area and the losses due to the interconnections all through the back-end-of-line, from the transistor level all the way up to the top thick metal layers, so taking better advantage of the inherent performance of the transistors and reducing the power consumption. Also, the design methodology aimed to minimize the noise when driven by a double quantum-dot device, while achieving an adequate gain, bandwidth and broadband output matching to the 50Ω load impedance. Overall, the results have demonstrated that the novel inductorless transimpedance amplifier circuit design reported here allows reducing significantly the footprint on chip by about two orders of magnitude with respect to microwave and mmwave prior-art transimpedance amplifiers and reaching adequate measured performance aligned with the simulation results at room temperature, and expecting slightly superior performance at cryogenic temperatures. b Extrapolated from figure.