We analyze the terahertz detection characteristics of resonant tunneling diodes (RTDs) using a set of simple equations that covers three detection modes; (i) direct detection, (ii) amplified detection, and (iii) selfhomodyne (coherent) detection. (i) and (ii) are based on the square-law detection, and (iii) is on the homodyne detection with the RTD used as an injection-locked local oscillator. The calculated results exhibit small-and large-signal areas depending on irradiation power. In the small-signal area, the detection current is proportional to irradiated power for (i) and (ii), and to square root of irradiated power for (iii). The detection current has a peak at the bias voltage at the boundary between (ii) and (iii). Effect of frequency fluctuation of irradiated wave is analyzed for (iii), and it is shown that the detection current is proportional to irradiated power if the fluctuation becomes wider than injection-locking range. The analytical results in this paper reasonably explain the reported experiments. The terahertz (THz) frequency band (roughly 0.1-10 THz) has a variety of potential applications, including imaging, spectroscopy, high-capacity communications, and radars It has been reported that the THz detectors using RTDs have three detection modes; direct detection, amplified detection, and self-homodyne (coherent) detection The RTD detector in the present analysis is assumed to have the same structure as the RTD oscillator Irradiation with a terahertz wave changes the dc current through RTD, resulting in the THz detection. The detection characteristics can be analyzed using an equivalent circuit shown in Fig. In Fig. where αα is the negative differential conductance By this approximation, αα is given by αα = aa -GG aaaaaa -3bb(VV rraa -VV aa ) 2 . γγ in eq. ( Detection modes of RTD can be classified into the following three types according to the value of αα depending on the bias voltage VV rraa . (i) Direct detection: α + GG aaaaaa < 0 . In this mode, VV rraa is set outside the NDC region. (ii) Amplified detection: 0 ≤ α + GG aaaaaa and α < 0 . In this mode, VV rraa is set inside the NDC region, but RTD is not oscillating. (iii) Self-homodyne (coherent) detection: 0 < α. RTD is oscillating in this mode. In the calculation below, we assume ωω iiaa = ωω 0 in eq. ( and the parameter values used in the calculation). In the detection mode (iii), vv(tt) exists without the irradiation because RTD is oscillating, and changes with the irradiation. We assume that the free-running oscillation frequency of RTD is set nearly equal to the irradiation frequency, i.e., ωω = ωω 0 ≃ ωω iiaa . RTD is thus injection-locked to the irradiation Due to the generation or change of VV aaaa in eq. (1) by the irradiation, the dc current through RTD changes, and the irradiation is detected. The dc current change ΔII rrddaa is calculated as follows For the detection modes (i) and (ii), ΔII rrddaa is calculated as This equals to the square-law detection ( = ⁄ ). In the detection mode (ii), VV aaaa is amplified by the NDC of RTD. The squarelaw detection is the limit of low photon energy of the photon-assisted tunneling For the detection mode (iii), ΔII rrddaa is calculated as In eq. ( where Δff iiaa is the standard deviation of the frequency variation which is proportional to the linewidth of the irradiated wave. The probability that the irradiation frequency is within the locking range is obtained as where Δff llllaall is the locking range approximately given by . QQ rraarr ≃ is the output power of RTD, and erf is the error function. When the irradiation frequency goes out of the locking range, the component of the irradiation frequency included in the oscillation wave of RTD will rapidly decreases, and it becomes impossible to observe the change in dc current by the homodyne detection. Thus, the detection current under the variation of the irradiation frequency is obtained by the product between eqs. ( An example of this detection current is indicated by the dashed line in Fig. If PP iiaa is large enough that the locking range is much wider than the fluctuation (Δff llllaall ≫ Δff iiaa ), equation ( variation, and is given almost solely by eq. ( If PP iiaa is so small that the locking range is much narrower than the fluctuation (Δff llllaall ≪ Δff iiaa ), equation ( ⁄ . Equation ( ⁄ , and thus, the detection current (eq. ( If the irradiated wave is not modulated by an external signal, the linewidth of the irradiated wave is usually caused by the phase noise. The influence of linewidth in this case can be considered as follows. When a phase jump occurs in the irradiated wave due to noise, the phase of the oscillation wave of RTD which is injection-locked to the irradiation wave follows to the phase of the irradiation wave within the time constant ττ llllaall ~1 ΔΔff llllaall ⁄ , as seen from eq. ( If ττ llllaall ≪ ττ aallh , i.e., ΔΔff ≪ ΔΔff llllaall , the phase of the oscillation wave of RTD immediately catches up with the phase jump of the irradiated wave. This means that the phase difference between the irradiation wave and the oscillation wave (φφ in eq. ( A separate analysis will also be required if the linewidth of RTD is wider than the locking range. In this case, it is necessary to add the noise term of RTD In conclusion, we analyzed the detection characteristics of RTDs using a set of simple equations that cover three detection modes; (i) direct detection, (ii) amplified detection, and (iii) self-homodyne (coherent) detection. The calculated results exhibited small-and large-signal areas depending on irradiation power. In the smallsignal area, the detection current is proportional to irradiated power for the modes (i) and (ii), and to square root of irradiated power for the mode (iii). The detection current has a peak at the bias voltage at the boundary between (ii) and (iii). Effect of frequency variation of irradiated wave was also analyzed for the mode (iii), and it was shown that the detection current is proportional to irradiated power if the frequency varies wider than injectionlocking range. The analytical results in this paper reasonably explain the reported experiments.