Barium zirconate BaZrO3 is one of few perovskites that is claimed to retain an average cubic structure down to 0 K at ambient pressure, while being energetically very close to a tetragonal phase obtained by condensation of a soft phonon mode at the R-point. Previous studies suggest, however, that the local structure of BaZrO3 may change at low temperature forming nanodomains or a glass-like phase. Here, we investigate the global and local structure of BaZrO3 as a function of temperature and pressure via molecular dynamics simulations using a machine-learned potential with near density functional theory (DFT) accuracy. We show that the softening of the octahedral tilt mode at the R-point gives rise to weak diffuse superlattice reflections at low temperatures and ambient pressure, which are also observed experimentally. However, we do not observe any static nanodomains but rather soft dynamic fluctuations of the ZrO6 octahedra with a correlation length of 2 to 3 nm over time-scales of about 1 ps. This soft dynamic behaviour is the precursor of a phase transition and explains the emergence of weak superlattice peaks in measurements. On the other hand, when increasing the pressure at 300 K we find a phase transition from the cubic to the tetragonal phase at around 16 GPa, also in agreement with experimental studies. Perovskite oxides constitute a prominent class of materials with a wide range of different properties, such as ferroelectricity, colossal magnetoresistance, electronic and/or ionic conductivity, piezoelectricity, superconductivity, metal-insulator transition, luminescence, and many more The prototypical oxide perovskite structure is cubic, with the general chemical formula ABO 3 , where the A and B sites can accommodate a wide variety of elements from the periodic table. Many perovskites are cubic at high temperatures but upon cooling most undergo one or several structural phase transitions, which depend sensitively on the choice of A and B. These phase transitions are often related to tilting of the BO 6 octahedra, typically referred to as antiferrodistortive transitions. Commonly they are out-of-phase and in-phase tilting phonon modes related to instabilities at the R and/or M-points of the Brillouin zone. Barium zirconate BaZrO 3 is rather unique among the oxide perovskites. Neutron powder diffraction studies show that BaZrO 3 at ambient pressure maintains its high temperature cubic structure down to temperatures close to zero Kelvin While the latter experiments have clearly established the long-range order, the short-range order of the cubic BaZrO 3 phase is more controversial. Raman spectra show pronounced peaks despite that first-order scattering is prohibited by symmetry reasons for cubic systems Recent electron diffraction experiments by Levin et al. The pressure dependence of BaZrO 3 at room temperature has been investigated by several authors Here, we construct a machine-learned potential using the neuroevolution potential (NEP) approach trained with density functional theory (DFT) data to be able to simulate the system over long time-scales (100 ns) using large systems (15 million atoms) with near DFT accuracy. The phase diagram for BaZrO 3 is mapped out as a function of temperature and pressure and compared with experiments. The static and dynamic structure factors as a function of wavevector and frequency are computed and their dependence on temperature and pressure are investigated. Detailed and direct comparison is made with the electron diffraction data by Levin et al. In Fig. Next, we consider the system at finite temperatures and pressures. MD simulations are carried out in the NPT ensemble where the length of the cell vectors are allowed to fluctuate but the angles between them are kept fixed at 90 • . The system is cooled at constant pressure from high temperature at a rate of 40 K/ns, which is sufficiently slow to avoid any noticeable hysteresis. We also note that it is due to the second-order nature of the phase transition that we can sample and observe it directly in MD simulations. To monitor the dynamic evolution of the system we use the temperature dependence of the lattice parameters a i and the phonon mode coordinates Q λ . The latter are obtained by phonon mode projections where e λ is the supercell eigenvector for mode λ. The mode eigenvectors are obtained using phonopy Cooling runs are repeated for various pressures and the resulting phase diagram is determined and shown in Fig. Below about 100 K quantum effects have been shown to be important to correctly model the stability of the cubic phase The phase transition to the tetragonal phase as function of pressure has been investigated experimentally by Raman spectroscopy Next, we consider the temperature dependence of the structure factor at ambient (zero) pressure. The intermediate scattering function is defined as where r i (t) denotes the position of atom i at time t, N is the number of atoms, and ⟨. . .⟩ indicates a time average. The dynamic structure factor S(q, ω) is obtained by a temporal Fourier transform of F (q, t). We calculate the intermediate scattering function F (q, t) from MD simulations in the NVE ensemble. The total simulation time for a run is 1 ns and F (q, t) is averaged over 100 independent such simulations. The corresponding dynamic structure factor S(q, ω) is shown in Fig. Next, we consider the static structure factor S(q), which is related to the intermediate scattering function and the dynamic structure factor via The partial static structure factors S αβ (q) are then evaluated as where α and β denote the atom types (α = Ba, Zr or O), the summation runs over all atoms of the given type and N α is the number of atoms of type α. The static structure factor is calculated from MD simulations in the NVT ensemble at 0 GPa and different temperatures. For each temperature, we average over 40 independent simulations that are each 100 ps long. We consider first the partial static structure factors S αβ at 100 K calculated along the Brillouin zone path q = 2π a (3/2, 1/2, x) with x : 0 → 1, shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of the static structure factor S(q) is shown in Fig. where the sum runs over all phonon modes for the given q-point and F ph λ (q) is the phonon structure factor containing the Debye-Waller factor and mode selection rules FIG. The present MD simulations are based on classical mechanics. Quantum fluctuations of the atomic motion start to become important for the R-mode frequency below 100 K Lastly, to get a one-to-one comparison with the electron beam diffraction experiments carried out by Levin et al. Here, f α (q) are the q-dependent electronic scattering factors for the ions Ba 2+ , Zr 4+ , and O 2 -, with numerical data taken from Ref. 23 (see Fig. FIG. Next, we extend the calculation of the intensity I(q) to the same 2D space of q-points as highlighted by Levin et al. To obtain a more local picture we now consider the tilt angle of each individual ZrO 6 octahedron, and its static and dynamic correlations. We first extract the Euler angles for each octahedron from MD simulations. We employ the polyhedral template matching using ovito The distribution P (θ) over θ α (n x , n y , n z , t) averaged over α, (n x , n y , n z ), and t can now be determined (Fig. Next, we consider the static tilt-angle correlation function between θ α (n x , n y , n z , t) and its neighboring octahedra. Here, we only consider neighbors along the [100], [010] and [001] directions. The static correlation function in the [100] direction is calculated as where d corresponds to the number of neighbor distances between two octahedra in the x-direction and ⟨. . .⟩ denotes an average carried out over (n x , n y , n z ) and t. Sim- The result for the static tilt-angle correlation functions are shown in Fig. Lastly, we consider the dynamic autocorrelation function for the tilt angles θ α (n x , n y , n z , t) defined as where ⟨. . .⟩ corresponds to an averaged carried out over (n x , n y , n z ) and t. The result for the correlation function, averaged over α, is shown in Fig. Let us now consider the pressure dependence of the dynamic and static structure factors at 300 K. The system is studied from 0 GPa to 18 GPa and at 16.2 GPa it transforms from the cubic to the tetragonal phase. The pressure dependence for the dynamic structure factor is shown in Fig. The corresponding static structure factor is shown in Fig. The dynamical structure factor, S(q, ω), calculated from MD for various pressures at 300 K. Here, q = 2π a (3/2, 1/2, 1/2). vergence of the static structure factor S(q) (Fig. P=0 GPa P=4 GPa P=8 GPa P=12 GPa P=14 GPa P=15 GPa P=16 GPa P=17 GPa P=18 GPa FIG. Finally, we consider the tilt angle and its static and dynamic correlations as function of pressure, shown in Fig. The distribution for the tilt angle P (θ) as function of pressure is shown in Fig. The static tilt-angle correlation function as a function of neighbor distance is shown in Fig. for 18 GPa, reflecting the (global) long-ranged tilting in the tetragonal phase. Similar behavior is also seen in the dynamic tilt-angle autocorrelation function C α (τ ) in Fig. Structural instabilities and phase transitions in perovskite oxides are important and have therefore been investigated extensively. Strontium titanate SrTiO 3 (STO) is generally considered to be a model perovskite for the study of soft mode-driven phase transitions At ambient conditions STO is cubic and its antiferrodistortive transition to the tetragonal (I4/mcm) phase can be induced by either decreasing the temperature or increasing the pressure We have performed large scale MD simulations of barium zirconate, an oxide perovskite, using machinelearned potentials based on DFT calculations. Both the temperature and pressure dependence of the local and global structure and the dynamics were investigated, and compared with available electron diffraction results. At ambient pressure it is now well established that BZO remains cubic down to zero Kelvin, although the R-tilt mode softens substantially Levin et al. The pressure dependence at room temperature was also investigated. It is known that BZO undergoes a phase transition from the cubic to the tetragonal phase. Here, we obtain this transition at about 16 GPa in the middle of the experimentally observed range. When approaching the phase transition from lower pressures, the frequency of the R-tilt mode approaches zero and close to the phase transition the motion becomes overdamped. At the same time the static structure factor at the Rpoint increases dramatically by several orders of magnitude. The dynamic tilt-angle autocorrelation function shows a rapid decay on the order of 1 ps, but close to the transition, the correlation function also develops a component with a considerably slower decay. At the phase transition this decay goes over to a constant finite value. The static tilt-angle correlation function shows a similar behavior: The decay rate becomes longer and longer and the correlation function approaches a constant value at the phase transition. The present study shows that large scale MD simu-lations based on a machine-learned potentials with near DFT accuracy can provide immensely detailed and accurate atomic scale information on the local structure and complex dynamics close to phase transitions. V. METHODS The energy, forces, and virials are obtained for the training structures via DFT calculations as implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package For the exchange-correlation functional we employ the van-der-Waals-density functional with consistent exchange (vdW-DF-cx) We construct an NEP model for the potential energy surface using the iterative strategy outlined in Ref. All MD simulations are run with gpumd The phase diagram is obtained from simulations in the NPT ensemble, static properties from simulations in the NVT ensemble, and dynamic properties from simulations in the NVE ensemble. NVT and NVE simulations are carried out with lattice parameters obtained from NPT simulations (see Fig. 