In this study, we develop a time-varying metasurface based on the bound states in the continuum (BIC) with variable conductors, to store electromagnetic waves. The storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves are demonstrated numerically through dynamic switching between quasi-BIC and BIC states by modulating the variable conductors. The storage efficiency exhibits oscillatory behavior with respect to the timing of storage and retrieval. These behaviors can be attributed to the interference of a resonant mode and a static mode that is formed by direct current. In addition, the storage efficiency of a single-layer metasurface can reach 35% under ideal conditions. Metamaterials are artificial media composed of subwavelength structures, whereas metasurfaces are twodimensional metamaterials. They have been developed to extend the tunability of medium parameters. The permeability of metamaterials covers a wide range, including negative values applied to negative refraction An alternative approach is available for realizing the storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves by the dynamic modulation of bound states in the continuum (BIC). The BIC, which is localized modes in a continuous spectrum, was first introduced in the field of quantum mechanics and then extended to general classical waves, including electromagnetic waves In this study, we develop a metasurface composed of periodic planar structures, which are composed of metals and variable conductors with states that can be switched between quasi-BIC and BIC. The storage of plane waves in the BIC state is numerically demonstrated by modulating the conductivity of the variable conductors. Furthermore, the storage efficiency based on a numerical analysis with respect to various storage and retrieval timings, which shows interference phenomena, reveals that energy is stored in an oscillating mode and a static mode that is formed by direct current (DC), which is unique to a time-varying system implemented using conductivity modulation Figure Figure The storage of electromagnetic waves in the proposed metasurface can be demonstrated in the following procedure. First, the metamaterial is prepared in a quasi-BIC state to receive propagating electromagnetic waves, which are tuned to excite the resonance of the cSRRs. Second, the state is switched into the BIC state, and the energy is captured in the metasurface owing to the decoupling of the resonant mode and the outer space. Finally, the state returns to the quasi-BIC state again, and the energy captured in the metasurface is released as propagating waves through the coupling. The input electric field at z = -L/2 is a Gaussian pulse with a temporal duration of t w = 10 ps and carrier frequency of 0.607 THz, which is tuned to the transmission peak of the quasi-BIC state, or off-state, as shown at the bottom of Fig. The total energy released from the metasurface can be estimated by integrating the squares of the reflection and transmission signals after t e . The storage efficiency η can be obtained by dividing it by the input energy, which can be obtained by integrating the square of the input signal. The storage efficiency depends on the input signal parameters and modulation timings. We computed the dependence of the storage efficiency on the start time t s for the following pulse widths: t w = 5, 10 and 20 ps. The results are shown in Fig. To explain the oscillatory behaviors shown in Figs. (The calculation in the presence of ohmic loss is provided in Sec. 4 in Supplement 1.) Steady oscillation is maintained during t s < t < t e , thus indicating that the radiation loss of the BIC state is negligible. It is found that the magnitude of the magnetic field is maximized at the start time t = t s and the end time t = t e of the storage process. Hence, storage efficiency is maximized by switching the states of the variable conductors when the magnitude of the magnetic field is maximized. This can be explained as follows. The cSRRs can be regarded as inductor-capacitor circuits, where the inductor is formed by the metal and the capacitor by the holes. During the resonance process, when the energy stored in the inductors is maximized, that stored in the capacitors is minimized. This is the most appropriate moment to switch the variable conductors from insulators to metals because the capacitors do not accumulate charges that can vanish by short-circuiting the holes forming the capacitances. This is why the start time is optimized at t s = 8.560 ps, when the magnitude of the magnetic field is maximized. The magnitude of the magnetic field reaches its maximum at half the interval of the resonance period. This is consistent with the period of the efficiency oscillation, which is close to half of the resonance period of the cSRRs in the quasi-BIC state, as illustrated in Fig. The case changes significantly when t s = 8.175 ps, where the storage efficiency assumes a local minimum as shown in Fig. In summary, we numerically demonstrated the storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves by switching between the quasi-BIC and BIC states through the modulation of the variable conductors integrated into the metasurface. As demonstrated, the energy is stored not only in the resonant mode but also in the DC mode excited through conductivity modulation, which leads to a peculiar interference in the storage efficiency. The storage efficiency of the single-layer metasurface was 35% for the optimal case. By increasing the number of layers, the efficiency could be improved, and the propagation direction could be preserved during the retrieval process owing to constructive interference of waves emitted from each layer Compared with previous methods using EIT metamaterials with the two resonant modes operated in the microwave regions This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI [grant Numbers 20K05360 and 23K04612]. The author would like to acknowledge the helpful discussions with Prof. Yosuke Nakata, Osaka University, and Prof. Fumiaki Miyamaru, Shinshu University. Storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves in a metasurface based on bound states in the continuum by conductivity modulation: supplemental document 1. SIMULATION SPACE The simulation space and port setup are shown in Fig. FIG. Electric fields in x direction for t s = 8 ps, t 108 ps and t w = 10 ps, are shown in Fig. Total output power is obtained by integrating the squares of transmission and reflection signals. It includes not only stored energy observed after the modulation t > t e but also energy before t < t e , which is not captured in the BIC state. Figure Ohmic loss, which is not considered in the main text, decreases quality factors of the quasi-BIC and BIC states. In order to estimate the effect of ohmic loss, the magnetic field in y-direction at Point P defined in Fig. 