We investigate the magnetization and the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions (DMI) in Pt/Co/Re thin films in the case of perfect interfaces and upon the introduction of intermixing on both Co interfaces. Calculations were implemented on a series of systems with a varied number of cobalt atomic layers (ALs). Remarkably, the Re is able to introduce a DMI at the interface with cobalt and also, increase the DMI at the Pt/Co interface. We demonstrate that the chiral magnetic multilayer Pt/Co/Re with chiral spin structure can achieve a huge DMI value which is almost double of that attained in the prototype system W/Co/Pt. We study also the DMI as a function of the Re thickness finding the optimal thickness to maximize the DMI. When we include a disorder that cancels a contribution from all first-neighbor Co atoms in the intermixed region, we found out that intermixing at the two interfaces affects the strength of the DMI solely when introduced at the Pt/Co interface where the DMI loses almost half of its value. On the contrary, the mixing at the Co/Re interface has very little or no effect as compared to the case with perfect interfaces. The value of the DMI would be somewhere between the perfect interface case and the totally intermixed case. The realization of such a device should focus on the reduction of the Pt/Co intermixing to realize this huge DMI interaction. A trilayer structure that exhibits the lack of inversion symmetry, with a ferromagnetic layer situated between two substantial heavy metals, potentially gives rise to intricate chiral magnetic configurations. At the core of this setup is the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), characterized by an exchange energy term with an antisymmetric nature. This interaction takes on the role of directing the alignment of interacting spins in a non-collinear manner within systems lacking inversion symmetry and featuring robust spin-orbit coupling (SOC) Several research papers have concentrated on investigating the DMI in Pt/Co bilayers, however, enhancing this chiral interaction could be achieved by sandwiching cobalt with another 5d material creating a chiral spin magnetic multilayer The technique of constraining the magnetic moments in a supercell was used to calculate the DMI of Pt/Co/Re multilayers through the density functional theory framework A set of structural models of the Pt/Co/Re of the 4x1 unit cell stack were set up in a close-packed configuration. A primitive P1 space group unit cell was used to build the Pt/Co/Re multilayer stack supercells. For modeling the geometries of the interfaces, the experimental in-plane lattice constant of the Pt (111) surface which is 3.92 Å was used and hcp layer growth was assumed for Co and Re layers, while for Pt, fcc growth was considered. We varied the number of cobalt atomic layers ranging from 1 to 10 Als respective to each of our structures with a constant number of 5 AL for platinum and 5 AL for rhenium. The thin-film calculations were performed using slab geometry with a vacuum layer of 15 Å along the out-of-plane direction. This computational setup based on PBE has been used for the determination of magnetic properties in ferromagnetic multilayers In order to extract the DMI vector, the calculations were carried out in three steps. First, structural relaxations were performed under a ferromagnetic state without SOC to determine the most stable interfacial geometries until the Hellman-Feynman forces converged to less than 0.015 eV/ Å. Next, the Kohn-Sham equations were solved without SOC, to find out the charge distribution of the system's ground state. Finally, SOC was included and the self-consistent total energy of the system was determined as a function of the orientation of the magnetic moments which were controlled by using the constrained method implemented in VASP. The DMI was calculated using the method described by Yang et al. The DMI strength (d [meV]) parameter was calculated from the energy differences between clockwise and anticlockwise energy configurations of the magnetic spirals in the cobalt layers for the perfect interface as shown in Fig. We divide our results into two sections, where we describe the system with perfect interfaces in the first part, while in the second part, we consider the system by adding mixed interfaces with variable selected thicknesses of cobalt ALs. We calculate the micromagnetic DMI for the Pt/Co/Re thin film with perfect interfaces represented in Fig. The layer-resolved DMI strength on each cobalt layer was also calculated by introducing chiral magnetic moments for each layer separately. We calculate the layerresolved DMI strength for Pt 5 /Co n /Re 5 with n=3, 4, 5 and as can be seen from Fig. To further investigate the influence of interfacial roughness on the DMI of the Pt/Co/Re structures, we generated a set of thin films with varying interfacial crystallinity by modifying the atomic arrangement of interfacial atoms. Two different types of mixed interface layers are presented in Fig. The method of the DMI calculations and the structural setup followed the same technique as in the case of perfect interfaces, where the spin spirals were included only on the cobalt atoms and on the other complete cobalt layers. We begin our analysis by examining the situation in which the mixing is specifically implemented at the Pt/Co interface. By applying interfacial Co-Pt intermixing in either scenario, we found a decrease in the DMI which aligns with experimental findings suggesting that enhanced crystallinity leads to a larger DMI. With these kinds of intermixing, we do not have Co atoms first-neighbor in the intermixing region. It is expected to produce a sensitive reduction of the total DMI since the first-neighbor DMI is supposed to give the largest contribution to the total DMI. The results of the micromagnetic DMI for the intermixing case are shown in Fig. After studying the DMI, we discuss the variation of the magnetic moments in the case of intermixing, especially at the interface where the coordination of cobalt atoms completely changes. We present the bar graphs in Fig. However, its magnitude remains negligible, consistent with previously documented values Despite the changes observed in the magnetic moments of Co and Pt due to disorder, Re atoms exhibit no noticeable increase in polarizability, maintaining their state as in the ideal case. Using first-principle calculations, we have proved that the chiral metallic multilayer Pt/Co/Re possesses a huge DMI interaction of up to micromagnetic DMI of 9.25 mJ/m 2 (or DMI strength of 4.19 meV). Re and Pt produce opposite chirality, therefore, the DMIs at the Co/Re and Pt/Co interfaces sum up to produce this huge effect. The Re enhances the DMI at the Pt/Co interfaces. We have also found out that the induced magnetization is large and positive for the Pt up to 0.244 for the atoms interfaced with Co, while it is very small and negative for the Re atoms. We proved that Pt/Co/Re has better properties than the prototype system Pt/Co/W. Upon study of the effect of intermixing on both interfaces, the intermixing on the Pt/Co interface introduces a suppression of the interfacial DMI, while, that on Co/Re shows very little or no effect on the system. Since the biggest contribution to the DMI comes from the Pt side of the stack, the intermixing at the Pt/Co interface produces a larger suppression of the total DMI. Once the grown conditions are optimized to minimize the Pt/Co intermixing, the trilayer Pt/Co/Re could be used for skyrmions transport devices paving the way to new technological applications.