We present a comprehensive theory of light-controlled multi-band superconductivity, and apply it to predict distinctive signatures of light-driven superconducting (SC) states in terahertz multi-dimensional coherent spectroscopy (THz-MDCS) experiments. We first derive gauge-invariant Maxwell-Bloch equations for multi-band BCS superconductors with spatial fluctuations. We consider driving electromagnetic fields determined self-consistently by Maxwell's equations. By calculating the THz-MDCS spectra measured experimentally in the clean SC limit, we identify unique signatures of finite-momentum Cooper-pairing states that live longer than the laser pulse. They are controlled by a pair of THz laser pulses with well-defined relative phase (pulse-pair). The pseudospin oscillators that describe the properties of these SC states are parametrically driven by both finite-momentum Cooper pairing and by time oscillations of the order parameter relative phase. We show that such strong parametric driving leads to drastic changes in the THz-MDCS spectral shape from the predictions of third-order nonlinear susceptibility calculations. These spectral changes strongly depend on the interband-to-intraband interaction ratio and on the collective modes of the light-driven state. For negligible interband interaction, the spectra show a transition with increasing field, from traditional pump-probe, four-wave mixing, and third-harmonic generation peaks determined by the laser frequency to sidebands determined by the excitations of the driven system. These sidebands emerge from difference-frequency Raman processes in the non-equilibrium SC state. For interband couplings weaker than the intraband pairing, we show that the Leggett phase collective mode leads to harmonic sidebands around the traditional pump-probe peaks. Additional Higgs collective mode peaks result from light-induced inversion symmetry breaking in a thin film geometry. For strong interband coupling, we find a transition from a non-equilibrium finite Cooper pair momentum state characterized by hybrid-Higgs amplitude mode peaks in THz-MDCS spectra to a driven state identified experimentally by the emergence of Floquet-like sidebands at bi-Higgs frequencies. Those dominant bi-Higgs-frequency satellites are manifestations of a new order parameter relative phase collective mode that characterizes the non-equilibrium SC state. The predicted interaction-and field-dependent transitions in the spectral profile allow us to propose THz-MDCS experiments for quantum tomography of light-driven superconductivity. Terahertz multi-dimensional coherent spectroscopy (THz-MDCS) is developing into an important tool for unraveling the dynamics of electronic and vibrational excitations of matter. In the past, such multi-dimensional spectroscopy has been used in conventional materials to investigate electronic excitations These experiments have been interpreted by using nonlinear susceptibility expansions More generally, understanding the properties of quantum materials for, e. g., quantum science applications, requires experiments that can measure and control correlation between different elementary excitations, like THz-MDCS. Quantum tomography of THz-driven condensate states is, however, challenging. Unlike in semiconductors, collective modes of SC states do not couple linearly to the electromagnetic fields without a finite Cooper-pair momentum In this paper, we present a comprehensive theory of THz-MDCS experiments on multi-band BCS superconductors, and apply it to identify unique experimental signatures of light-driven superconductivity. By extending the density matrix approach of Ref. their characteristic length (e.g., the mean free path) exceeds the coherence length that characterizes the size of the Cooper pair. The SC state can then be described by introducing Anderson pseudo-spins located at different momentum points k This canting depends on the SC order parameter, which determines the direction of the pseudo-magnetic field that describes the pseudo-spin orientation. For example, for a multi-band superconductor with s ± (s ++ ) order parameter symmetry, a phase difference of π (0) leads to opposite (same) signs between the order parameters of the electron and hole pockets (Fig. We wish to highlight the importance of two competing effects for inducing controllable transitions between different light-driven SC states in multi-band SCs. First is SC driving by a finite center-of-mass Cooper pair momentum (p S ) driven by the laser field. Our results demonstrate that the effective local field that accelerates the SC condensate into a finite p S state is modified from the external THz laser field by electromagnetic wave propagation in a thin film geometry. We show that this modified effective driving field leads to a finite center-of-mass Cooper pair momentum state that can persist well after the pulse. In particular, the moving condensate momentum p S (t) decays slowly in time for a thin-film geometry due to radiative damping The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we summarize the self-consistent gauge-invariant SC Bloch equations for multi-band superconductors. These equations of motion, derived in detail in Appendix B, present the basis for our simulations. In Sec. III we describe the excitations of the non-equilibrium SC state predicted by these equations in the homogeneous limit. In particular, we discuss the role of the competition between finite condensate momentum and long-lived relative phase oscillations. We first apply our theory in Sec. IV to calculate the THz-MDCS signals for multi-band superconductors by neglecting the electromagnetic propagation effects. In this case, the Cooper pair momentum vanishes after the pulse, similar to previous calculations. We discuss the THz-MDCS spectral shape for vanishing interband interaction in Sec. IV A. These results extend the results of Ref. We model spatially-dependent superconductors by using the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian which is explicitly derived in Appendix A by factorizing the full interacting Hamiltonian as in Refs. where θ ν (x) are the corresponding phases and g λ,ν describe the inter-(λ ̸ = ν) and intra-(λ = ν) band interactions. In Eq. ( where V (x) is the Coulomb potential with Fourier transformation V q = e 2 /(ε 0 q 2 ). This contribution moves the Nambu-Goldstone phase mode of the SC order parameters to the plasma energy (Anderson-Higgs mechanism) Its main role is that it ensures charge conservation. To calculate the THz-MDCS spectra, we first model the THz-driven SC quantum dynamics by extending the density matrix approach of Ref. To make the connection with previous theoretical approaches used to describe the SC quantum dynamics, we express the gauge-invariant density matrix in terms of Anderson pseudo-spin components at each wavevector k: where , are the pseudospin components in band ν at momentum k, and ρ(ν) 0 (k) describes the total charge. By retaining only the lowest term in the gradient expansion of the spatiallydependent equations derived in Appendix B, we obtain the following gauge-invariant SC Bloch equations describing a homogeneous system: where k ± = k ± p s /2. In the above equations, we introduced the phase-space filling contribution and the time-and band-dependent energy where μ eff (t) = eφ(x, t) + 1 2 d dt θ ν0 is the effective chemical potential with time-dependent contributions from the phase dynamics and any scalar potential. The Fock energy modifies this effective time-dependent chemical potential to ensure charge conservation at all times: The order parameter amplitude remains real-valued in the numerical calculation at all times and fields. The above equations in the homogeneous limit provide a starting point to add weak disorder effects through a Born approximation treatment of the impurity potential. Disorder effects will enhance the collective mode contributions predicted here to result from a persisting inversion-symmetry breaking controlled by light. In the case of strong spatial fluctuations (e.g., dirty limit SC), a more appropriate starting point are the equations of motion for ρ(ν) (r, R) obtained from Eqs. (B17)-(B19) by Fourier transform. The SC Bloch equations ( (iii) The time-dependent phase difference of the order parameters in different bands ν, δθ ν = θ ν0 -θ ν , is given by the equation of motion This relative phase dynamics follows from the constraint imposed by the gauge invariance, This constraint is satisfied exactly at all times and for any strong driving field; (iv) The order parameter amplitudes |∆ ν (t)| in each band, which are coherently quenched during cycles of THz light-field oscillations via differencefrequency Raman processes To model the THz-MDCS spectra measured in the experiments, we express the gauge-invariant supercurrent density in terms of ρ(λ) 0 (k) as with normalization volume V . The measured nonlinear differential transmission follows from the transmitted electric field obtained by solving Maxwell's equations as described in Ref. Here, E THz (t) corresponds to the applied THz laser electric field, while n denotes the refractive index of the SC system, d is the thickness of the SC thin film, and c is the speed of light. The dynamics of the current density The current density decays due to radiative damping with lifetime where is superfluid density and ρ(ν),0 3 (k) is the equilibrium zcomponent of the pseudo-spin. Following Refs. This expression applies to the case of the collinear 2pulse geometry considered in this paper (Fig. In this paper, we solve the full Bloch equations ( Prior to presenting our numerical results, we first identify the main drivers of nonlinearity that determine the most striking features of the THz-MDCS spectra of SCs. For this purpose, we extract from the full SC Bloch equations pseudo-spin nonlinear coupled oscillator equations of motion, obtained by extending Anderson's random phase approximation treatment of pseudo-spin flips and Higgs collective modes where ρ(ν),0 (k) denotes the density matrix of the thermal state, where ∂ t ρ(ν),0 (k) = 0, and ∆ρ (ν) (k) describes the full non-thermal change induced by the driving field. We then derive nonlinear pseudo-spin oscillator equations for the x and y pseudo-spin component deviations ∆ρ 1,2 (k) by taking the second time derivatives of Eqs. where ∆θ ν (t) = δθ ν -δθ 0 ν describes the canting of the pseudo-spins away from their equilibrium directions. The latter directions are determined by δθ 0 ν = 0, π (δθ 0 ν = 0) for s ± (s ++ ) order parameter symmetry. In Eq. ( Equation ( The two terms on the right-hand side (rhs) of Eqs. ( (k), come from sum-and difference-frequency Raman as well as from quantum transport processes The second terms on the rhs of Eq. ( and δ∆ of the order parameters from their equilibrium values, describe the collective effects, including the Higgs and Leggett collective modes generated by the coupling of all k-point pseudo-spins. The excitation energies are given by the left-hand side of Eq. ( The transverse x and y components of this magnetic field are given by the real and imaginary part of the order parameters, Eq. ( 2 ). Importantly, they depend on the time-dependent coupling between the two transverse components, given by ±∂ . The latter transverse light-induced coupling does not contribute to the third-order response. It becomes important in multi-band SCs when enhanced by the dynamics of the phase difference between electron and hole pockets, ∆θ ν (t). As we show below, in the case of strong interband coupling exceeding the intraband interaction, the product B x k,ν (t)B y k,ν (t) is enhanced by a light-induced relative-phase collective mode of the non-equilibrium SC state. Unlike for the strongly damped Leggett mode, this phase mode at the Higgs frequency is underdamped. The resulting long-lived superconductivity state is characterized by second harmonic (Floquet) sidebands at bi-Higgs frequencies in the THz-MDCS spectra, discussed in Sec. V B. To elaborate further, the above non-equilibrium state is driven by the time-dependent coupling term where we expanded the band dispersions in powers of the center-of-mass momentum p S (t) in the last step. The time-dependence of the first term of Eq. ( Here, ω 0 is the center frequency of the applied two laser pulses, which are denoted by A and B. This term contributes beyond the previously studied third-order nonlinear response and leads to the formation of sidebands at Leggett-and Higgs-mode energies in the THz-MDCS spectra, discussed in Secs. IV A and IV B. The second term of Eq. ( To illustrate further the light-induced ∆ρ (ν) (k) driven by ∆θ ν (t), we may transform the equations of motion In this rotating frame, the SC Bloch equations take the form Analogously to the discussion above, we take the second derivative of Eq. ( with driving source term The nonlinear oscillator equations ( Here, ρ(ν),AB (k) denotes the gauge-invariant density matrix of the non-equilibrium state driven by both pulses. ρ(ν),A (k) (ρ (ν),B (k)) is the gauge-invariant density matrix of the non-equilibrium state driven by pulse A (B). For interpreting the results of the full numerical calculation, it is useful to distinguish between nonlinear processes due to the excitations by a single pulse that are sensed by the other pulse and the excitations generated by both pulses simultaneously. These two different processes lead to different experimental features. For this, we decompose the density matrix ρ(ν),AB (k) as ρ(ν),AB (k) = ρ(ν),A (k) + ρ(ν),B (k) + ∆ρ (ν),AB (k) , where we expanded in terms of p S and ∆θ and neglected all contributions of order O(p 2 S ) and O((∆θ) 2 ). The terms in the first two lines of Eq. ( To demonstrate the importance of the electromagnetic propagation effects in determining the effective driving field, we first consider in this section a driving field given by the laser pulse E THz (t), instead of the effective local pulse Eq. We start with the calculation of the THz-MDCS spectrum by setting the interband interaction to zero, g e,h = 0. The results of this calculation with uncoupled bands extend the corresponding one-band results of Ref. To fully characterize the non-equilibrium condensate state, we must turn to the THz-MDCS spectra. show two examples of the calculated nonlinear differential field E NL (t, τ ) as a function of real time t and inter-pulse time delay τ . By comparing the results obtained with electric fields of 50 kV/cm and 300 kV/cm, we observe a change in the overall time dependence with increasing field. For low driving (Fig. With increasing driving field, the THz quantum quench of the SC order parameter separates the excitation energy of the non-equilibrium state, ω H,h = 2∆ ∞,h , from the second harmonic frequency 2ω 0 ∼ 2∆ 0,h that excites the equilibrium state energy gap. Figure The THz-MDCS signal and additional peaks observed in Fig . This is the case for the few-cycle broadband pulses used in this paper The THz-MDCS spectrum shows four additional competing peaks, two along direction (ω t , 0) and two along (ω t , -ω t ). By increasing the driving field further, Fig. 1 . Noting that the ∆ρ (ν) 1 (k) dynamics is determined by the frequency ω H,h , the source term Eq. ( We end this section by noting that a comparison of the U =0 few-cycle pulse-pair excitation results with the narrowband strong pump-broadband weak probe results of Ref. We now consider how interband interactions can change the above U = 0 picture. Before presenting the THz-MDCS results, we first study the multi-band order parameter amplitude and relative phase spectra as a function of the interband interaction. We consider excitation by a single, relatively weak, few-cycle THz electric field, so that we can map the excitations of the equilibrium state for different U . Figure We first study the behavior of the order parameter for small but finite U , 0 < |U | ≪ 1. This is the case, e. g., in MgB 2 superconductors In the weak excitation regime (blue line), the ∆θ spectrum shows a sharp peak at the Leggett mode energy ω L ∼2.5 meV (solid black line). As discussed above, this peak is located well below the low energy excitation energy gap ω H,h ∼ 8.2 meV (dashed black line). This Leggett mode (solid black line) also shows up in the |∆ h | (|∆ e |) amplitude spectrum, in addition to the Higgs mode (dashed black line, ω H,h ) and second harmonic generation (2ω 0 , solid magenta line) peaks. This coexistence of phase and amplitude mode peaks demonstrates that the amplitude mode and the phase mode are coupled despite their different frequencies. With increasing field, the Leggett mode slightly redshifts, while the order parameter becomes quenched. The latter coherent quench of the hole and electron order parameter ampli- tudes is seen as a low-frequency (ω = 0) enhancement of |∆ h | and |∆ e | spectra in Figs. With increasing field, Fig. These peaks at two-dimensional frequencies (±ω L + ω 0 , ∓ω L -ω 0 ) are marked by the solid black lines. Exchanging pulses A and B produces similar peaks at (±ω L + ω 0 , 0). Finally, for the highest studied field strength of 450 kV/cm, the Leggett mode is close to ω H,h in Fig. We now compare the above THz-MDCS spectral profiles for small U with the case where the interband interaction exceeds the intraband interaction, |U | > 1. This strong interband coupling condition is realized in several iron-based superconductors Here, a hybrid-Higgs amplitude collective mode forms due to the strong coupling between the electron and hole pockets for large U We now turn to the THz-MDCS spectra. Figures We next demonstrate that the bi-Higgs-frequency sidebands observed for strong driving fields and large U are generated by parametrical driving of pseudo-spins by relative phase dynamics at frequency ω H,h arising from the relative-phase collective mode (see Sec. III). The parametrical driving of pseudo-spins by Eq. ( to lowest order in ∆θ. In Regime III, long-lived relative phase oscillations at frequency ω H,h arise from the formation of the under-damped relative phase mode. As discussed in Sec. IV A, the ∆ρ dynamics is dominated by quasi-particle excitations also at frequency ∼ ω H,h . Therefore, the transverse coupling term In summary, a comparison of Fig. So far, we have presented results without including the electromagnetic propagation effects. The latter effects change the effective driving field from the laser field considered in the previous sections, which results in a current that lasts much longer than the laser pulse (Fig. For one-band SCs, Ref. To take into account the light-wave electromagnetic propagation effects, we solved self-consistently the Bloch equations ( It is important to note that the Leggett-and Higgsmode peaks in the THz-MDCS spectra are generated by high-order coherent nonlinear processes. These highorder nonlinearities include difference-frequency coherent Raman processes leading to coherent photogeneration of a DC supercurrent and quantum quench of the energy gap during light field oscillation cycles. In particular, the observed collective mode peaks characterize a superfluid state with a finite Cooper pair momentum p S that includes both oscillating and static ω = 0 components. The finite-momentum Cooper pairing is in addition to the ω 0 oscillatory component determined by the laser frequency. In its presence, the sum-and difference-frequency Raman processes that led to the peaks at ω t = ω H,h ± ω 0 and ω t = ω 0 ± ω L in the THz-MDCS spectra of Fig. The light-induced transition for strong U =2 from a non-equilibrium state characterized by the Higgs mode to a non-equilibrium state determined by the relative phase of Sec. IV B is directly observable in the THz-MDCS spectra when dynamical inversion symmetry breaking is induced by the electromagnetic propagation. Figure In this paper, we have provided a detailed microscopic theory allowing us to propose that THz-MDCS experiments on multi-band superconductors with varying interband couplings can be used to both drive different non-equilibrium SC states and characterize them uniquely by measuring their collective modes. For this purpose, we first extended the gauge-invariant density matrix approach of Refs. We have applied the presented theory in the homogeneous limit to calculate the THz-MDCS spectra for different interband-to-intraband interaction ratios and for weak to strong pulse-pair excitation. The presented results demonstrate a direct ultrafast visualization of THzdriven moving condensate states by using THz-MDCS. In particular, in the case of small interband interactions, the THz-MDCS spectra show a transition from traditional third-order nonlinear signals, i. e. pump-probe, fourwave mixing, and third-harmonic generation signals, to harmonic sidebands that split from the conventional signals due to the quantum quench of the superconductor excitation energy gap as a result of Raman differencefrequency nonlinear processes during cycles of laser field oscillations. With increasing driving field, ninth-order nonlinear signals (with respect to the equilibrium state) emerge as a result of quasi-particle excitations of the nonequilibrium state assisted by difference-frequency Raman processes. For intraband interaction exceeding the inter-band coupling, the Leggett phase mode lies within the energy gap and leads to the formation of harmonic sidebands around the pump-probe peaks. We have shown that the photo-excitation of a long-lived DC supercurrent via light-wave propagation inside a thin superconducting film, neglected in previous works, allows the Leggett and Higgs collective modes to be simultaneously detected as distinct peaks in the THz-MDCS spectra. We also studied the case of multi-band superconductors with interband coupling exceeding the intraband pairing interaction. The drastic change of the THz-MDCS spectral profile in this case reveals a transition from a non-equilibrium state characterized by a hybrid-Higgs amplitude collective mode to a state with a relative phase collective mode. The latter strongly-driven state manifests itself directly in the THz-MDCS spectra via the formation of Floquet-like sidebands at bi-Higgs frequencies. We have demonstrated that such new bi-Higgsfrequency signals are generated by ninth-order nonlinear processes (with respect to the equilibrium state) and arise from the interaction of the relative phase collective mode with quasi-particle excitations, both at the Higgs mode energy. The relative phase collective mode forms above critical driving when the relative phase Leggett mode, which close to equilibrium is located within the quasiparticle continuum, has shifted towards the low-energy Higgs mode. The formed relative phase collective mode parametrically drives pseudo-spin oscillators. This lightinduced effect is enhanced by the strong modulation of the superfluid density, such that the relative phase mode driving of the pseudo-spin oscillators exceeds their superfluid momentum driving at elevated effective fields. As a result, bi-Higgs-frequency signals exceed the harmonic Higgs peaks in the THz-MDCS spectra, but only in the presence of photo-generated DC supercurrent and persistent finite-momentum Cooper pairing. The theoretical approach presented here can be extended to study the THz-driven non-equilibrium dynamics in systems with SC order parameter coupled to spin or charge order, as in iron-based and topological superconductors. There, THz-MDCS could be used to detect new non-equilibrium states and to identify the SC order-parameter equilibrium symmetry. Specifically, we expect that superconductors with d-wave order parameter symmetry will show a very different THz-MDCS spectrum than s-wave superconductors due to the presence of gap nodes. In this context, it will be also interesting to see how the real and imaginary parts of the THz-MDCS spectra change as a function of interbandinteraction strength and field strength for different SC order-parameter equilibrium symmetries. Our theoretical approach can also be applied to study more complex amplitude modes of the SC order parameter, such as e. g. , soliton-like states In summary, by using our developed theory to analyze THz-MDCS experiments and drive quantum nonlinear dynamics with strong phase-locked pulse-pairs, it is possible to reconstruct non-equilibrium driven quantum states with super resolution in a broad range of interesting quantum systems, thus achieving quantum tomography of non-equilibrium light-driven quantum states. Appendix A: Gauge-invariant density matrix approach In this appendix, we extend the gauge-invariant density matrix approach of Ref. with Coulomb potential V (x, x ′ ). Applying a mean-field decoupling of the interaction part of Eq. (A1) leads to with SC order parameter ∆ ν (x) and Hartree potential μ ν H (x) defined in Eqs. ( The Leggett mode corresponds to fluctuations of the phase difference between different order parameters, The center-of-mass acceleration of the Cooper-pair condensate, determined by the electric and magnetic fields in the kinetic contributions of the equations of motion (B5)-(B7), is described by This light-induced Cooper pair total momentum breaks the equilibrium inversion symmetry. The Fock contributions to the gauge-invariant equations of motion are given by These Fock contributions ensure charge conservation of the SC system: the gauge-invariant current density, and electron density, We can simplify the full equations of motion by neglecting contributions of the form (∇ k • ∇ R ) n (p ν s (R) • ∇ k ) in the above equations which is a valid approximation for strong homogeneous electric fields. We then obtain the following simplified equations of motion for the density matrix to treat the case of spatial dependence induced by, e. g., strong disorder: When the SC system is only weakly spatiallydependent, we can neglect all orders O(∇ k • ∇ R ) and higher in the above equations. In the case of a homogeneous system, we then obtain i ∂ ∂t ρ(ν) The equations of motion of superfluid momentum p S simplifies to ∂ ∂t p S = 2e E , while the SC order parameter phase θ ν0 is given by i (k), the SC order third harmonic generation peak emerges at (3ω 0 , -ω 0 ). Exchanging pulses A and B results in pump-probe, fourwave mixing, and third-harmonic generation signals at (ω 0 , 0), (ω 0 , -2ω 0 ), and (3ω 0 , -2ω 0 ), respectively. These signals are observable in the THz-MDCS spectra in the perturbative excitation regime, where the nonlinear response can be described by susceptibility expansion. The second and third term on the rhs of Eq. (C3) describe fifth-order difference-frequency-Raman processes which only slightly contribute to the THz-MDCS spectra 