Pseudopotential locality errors have hampered the applications of the diffusion Monte Carlo (DMC) method in materials containing transition metals, in particular oxides. We have developed locality error free effective core potentials, pseudo-Hamiltonians, for transition metals ranging from Cr to Zn. We have modified a procedure published by some of us in [M. C. Bennett et al, JCTC 18 (2022)]. We carefully optimized our pseudo-Hamiltonians and achieved transferability errors comparable to the best semilocal pseudopotentials used with DMC but without incurring in locality errors. Our pseudo-Hamiltonian set (named OPH23) bears the potential to significantly improve the accuracy of many-body-first-principles calculations in fundamental science research of complex materials involving transition metals. While initially ab initio simulations were primarily used to provide physical insights on properties that are difficult to be observed experimentally The diffusion Monte Carlo (DMC) method is emerging as one the most practical many-body ab initio methods, because of its moderate cost scaling per step (∼ N 3 ) and excellent parallelizability The US government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the US government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for US government purposes. DOE will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan). † ichibha@icloud.com ‡ reboredofa@ornl.gov wave function Ψ T provided by a different ab initio method, like Kohn-Sham density functional theory (DFT) Accurate effective core potentials (ECPs) are also needed for practical problems. ECPs are constructed so as they accurately reproduce multiple electronic scattering properties of all-electron (AE) calculations, often obtained at the frozen core approximation level. In DMC the core electrons and ionic cores are replaced by an ECP to mitigate the computational cost. Without ECPs, the calculation cost of FNDMC scales as Z 5.5-6. 5 , where Z is the nuclear charge The ECP approximation, however, brings a bias depending on the quality of ECPs (ECP errors) for any ab initio method Moreover, these locality errors are sometimes larger for the 4d transition metal elements Another alternative, the auxiliary field quantum Monte Carlo (AFQMC) approach, A possible approach to avoid the locality errors in FNDMC is the pseudo-Hamiltonian (PH) framework However, the PH framework should be now reconsidered because recent progresses such as the multideterminant expansion In this paper, we report newly constructed PH's for the 3d transition metal elements from Cr to Zn with a slight modification of a previous procedure The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II, we explain the theory and the procedures used to generate multiple PHs using a combination of Hartree-Fock (HF) and CCSD(T) methods for each transition metal (TM) element. In Section III, we explain the details of calculations conducted for the optimization and verification of the PHs. In Subsection IV A, we explain how we selected the optimal PHs (named OPH23) based on the atomic properties and TM-O binding curves from the multiple candidate PHs we constructed for each TM element. In Subsection IV B, we confirmed the reproducibility of AE binding curves of TM-O and TM-F molecules by the OPH23 set, which is compared with highly accurate semilocal pseudopotentials used with FNDMC, BFD The general form of pseudo-Hamiltonian Here, p is the momentum operator. The eigenenergies of nodeless orbitals necessarily monotonically increase with the angular momentum l This constraint is not required in theory but needed to be able to use general ab initio packages with PHs because the variable radial mass is not currently implemented in most codes used to obtain the trial functions for FNDMC. However, a sufficient transferability was achieved with this choice in the case of cobalt Our PH is defined as The |lm⟩ are the scalar spherical harmonics as defined in Appendix A. This PH with the constant radial mass looks similar to the semilocal pseudopotentials Here, M -1 is the maximum angular momentum channel of the core orbitals; M=2 for the neon core pseudopotentials for 3d transition metal elements. Our strategy for PHs construction is to construct the parameter functions of the PH, vPH local (r) and v L 2 (r), using the parameter functions of a successful semilocal pseudopotential as starting point. For 3d transition metal elements, we construct the starting vPH local (r) and v L 2 (r) so as they reproduce the pseudopotential up to the d channel: Both sides in Eq. ( Equations ( To facilitate the optimization, we choose to modify v 1 (r) as the function of v 0 (r) because the semilocal 3p orbitals are for transition metals much less important than the valence 3d and 4s orbitals to describe chemical reactions In addition, the parameter function v L 2 has to satisfy the following bounding condition The left-hand side in Eq. ( A negative effective mass would lead to an electronic wavefunction to localize into a delta function lowering its energy. Accordingly, Eq. ( The ramp function R S (x) is shown in Figure The difference between 2r 2 v L 2 (r) and 2r 2 v ′ L 2 (r): was found to be well fitted by Gaussian functions in the case of cobalt From these initial values, the coefficients and coordinates of the Gaussian functions are optimized along with vPH local and Plot of the smooth and shifted ramp function. This figure is a reprint of Fig. We choose the BFD semilocal pseudopotentials to define the initial parameter functions of our PHs via Eqs. ( We optimize the parameters in vPH via three steps. In the first step, we conduct optimization to reproduce all the valence orbital norms and eigenenergies as well as neutral excitation and ionization energy spectrum in 4s and 3d levels obtained with the HF method with SBKJC pseudopotential. In the second step, we select the PH that best reproduces the TM-O binding curve among the multiple PHs for each element. In the third step, we further optimize the selected PHs so as to reproduce all the valence orbital norms and eigenenergies at the HF level and energy spectrum at the CCSD(T) level with ccECP pseudopotential. The details of objective functions and procedures are described in the following subsections. Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn 4s 1 3d 5 4s 2 3d 5 4s 2 3d 6 4s 2 3d 7 4s 1 3d 9 4s 1 3d 10 4s 2 3d 10 The reference electronic states used to optimize the PHs in HF are listed in Table For each element, we optimize the pseudo-Hamlitonian to minimize the following cost function: i indicates a summation over all the valence orbitals. j∋(3d,4s) indicates a summation over excited and ionized electronic states in 3d and 4s levels. Further explanation is found in the last paragraph of this subsubsection. ⟨⟩ r>0.8a 0 indicates an integral outside of the 0.8 a 0 (a 0 : Bohr radius) radius sphere around the core center. O Eigenvalue is lower when the orbital eigenenergies are reproduced better. O Norm is lower when the integration of each orbital norm outside of the 0.8 a 0 cutoff is reproduced better. The starting PH used for subsequent optimization initially alters the shape of the p-channel found in the reference ECP (see Eq. ( O Bound is larger when the bounding condition Excitation is lower when the energy spectrum of neutral excitation and ionization in the 3d and 4s levels are reproduced better. The electron transitions in 3d and 4s orbitals and a variety of oxidation states are essential for the chemistry of 3d transition metals Additionally, it is known that TM-O dimers strongly hybridize s,p,d orbitals. Therefore, since excitations to 4p are not weighted in Eq. ( There are still some degrees of freedom to choose: which excited and ionized states are considered in the evaluation of Eq. For each TM, we select a HFOPT(X) that best reproduces the molecular TM-O binding curve given by CCSD(T) in order to further optimize it at the third step. We make minor and major modifications to the cost function in Eq. ( ∆E CC j ≡ ∆E HF,HFOPT j -∆E CCSD(T),HFOPT j + ∆E CCSD(T),ccECP j (22) We compare the best HFOPT and CCOPT in terms of reproducibility of AE TM-O binding curve and AE atomic ionization energies. We name the better PH OPH23, the optimal pseudoHamiltonian produced in 2023. We compare the OPH23's reproducibility of AE TM-O and AE TM-F binding curves with highly accurate semilocal pseudopotentials used with FNDMC, BFD We used libraries in the Nexus workflow management software We evaluated the ionization energies shown in Figures Similarly, the correlation energy, defined as the difference between CCSD(T) and HF energies, was extrapolated using To calculate binding curves and ∆E CC i in Eq. ( For the OPH23 binding curve relative to the AE, the deviations from the CBS limit were found to be less than 7 meV, in the case of Co-O dimer. Previous research In this Subsection, we discuss (1) how we selected the optimal HFOPT(X opt ) from HFOPT(X) (X =2-6) and ( The comparisons of the PHs are shown in Figure Chromium: Every HFOPT reproduces the AE binding curve given by CCSD(T) within the chemical accuracy. HFOPT(4), HFOPT(5), and HFOPT(6) similarly give the lowest deviations. We made the CCOPT for X=4. Although CCOPT(4) does not reproduce the AE binding curve within the chemical accuracy in the very short distances unlike HFOPT(4), CCOPT(4) much better reproduces the excitation energy (4s 1 3d 5 → 4s 2 3d 4 ) than HFOPT(4). We selected CCOPT(4) as the OPH23. Manganese: Every HFOPT similarly reproduces the AE binding curve almost within the chemical accuracy. HFOPT Iron: The HFOPTs give different binding curves. HFOPT Cobalt: The HFOPTs give similar binding curves and do not satisfy the chemical accuracy for the shorter distances. CCOPT Nickel: Every HFOPT similarly reproduces the AE binding curve within the chemical accuracy. We made the CCOPT for X =5. CCOPT Copper: HFOPT(2) (outside of the display range) and HFOPT(3) gave very large deviations for the binding curve. HFOPT(4), HFOPT(5), and HFOPT(6) reproduces the AE binding curve within chemical accuracy for the longer distances than the Cu-O closest distance in CuO solid. HFOPT(4) gives the lowest error within the HFOPTs so we made the CCOPT for X =4. However, CCOPT(4) does not reproduce the AE binding curve. We selected HFOPT(4) as the OPH23. Zinc: The HFOPTs give very different binding curves depending on X. Among them, HFOPT(3) gives constant deviations from the AE binding curve (i.e., good reproducibility of curvature), so we choose the CCOPT for X =3. CCOPT(3) shows slightly smaller deviations for the binding curve and excellent reproducibility of the AE energy spectrum. We selected CCOPT(3) as the OPH23. Note, with the exception of Mn, the other PHs are within chemical accuracy for the typical oxide's distances listed in Table In summary, we selected CCOPT(X opt ) as the OPH23 for Cr, Fe, Co, and Zn and HFOPT(X opt ) for Mn, Ni, and Cu. In the previous Subsection IV A, we chose a set of PHs OPH23 to be the ones that best reproduce the AE TM-O binding curves and AE ionization energies for each element. In this Subsection, to test the transferability of OPH23, we investigate their ability to reproduce the AE TM-F binding curve. The TM-O and TM-F binding curves obtained by our OPH23 and semilocal pseudopotentials, ccECP For Mn-F case, we used ccECP binding curve as the reference instead of AE's due to a convergence issue with the AE calculations. For these cases, the binding distance is also taken from the ccECP binding curve. Figure Chromium: OPH23 reproduces the AE Cr-O binding curve within chemical accuracy whereas SBKJC and BFD do not satisfy the chemical accuracy. For Cr-F binding curve, OPH23 gives ∼1.5 larger deviation than the chemical accuracy at the binding distance. The deviation gets smaller for longer distances. The deviations at the shorter distances are smaller than the typical magnitude of locality errors, 0.2-0.3 eV Manganese: OPH23 reproduces the AE Mn-O binding curve almost within the chemical accuracy and reproduces the ccECP Mn-F binding curve within the chemical accuracy for distances longer than 1.5 Å. Iron: OPH23 reproduces the AE Fe-O and Fe-F binding curves within the chemical accuracy. On the other hand, SBKJC (BFD) does not satisfy the chemical accuracy for Fe-O (Fe-F) binding curve, respectively. Cobalt: OPH23 reproduces the AE Co-O and Co-F binding curves within the chemical accuracy. BFD gives significantly larger deviations for both Co-O and Co-F binding curves. This is also found for Ni, Cu, and Zn. Nickel: OPH23 reproduces the AE Ni-O binding curve within the chemical accuracy. OPH23 gives slightly larger deviations for the Ni-F binding curve but they are significantly smaller than the typical magnitude of locality errors, 0.2-0.3 eV Copper: OPH23 gives at most 0.1 eV deviation for the binding curves. Nevertheless, the deviations are significantly smaller than the typical magnitude of locality errors, 0.2-0.3 eV Zinc: OPH23 reproduces the AE Zn-O and Zn-F binding curves almost within the chemical accuracy. In summary, OPH23s reproduce the TM-O and TM-F binding curves within or close to chemical accuracy. Even when the deviations do exceed chemical accuracy, they are significantly smaller than the typical magnitude of locality errors, 0.2-0.3 eV We have developed a set of PHs (OPH23) for the Cr-Zn transition metal elements. We have used a revised procedure from our previous work Our aim is, in the future, to employ the use of OPH23s to delve into an in-depth examination of strongly correlated transition metal complexes, focusing on their magnetic structures and other intrinsic properties. While the PHs were designed to reproduce the AE ionization energies and AE TM-O binding curves, they are found to reproduce the AE TM-F binding curves. Further test in solids are required to assess their transferability. This will be and addressed in future works. 