In this work, the experimental optical generation of the fractional Hankel-Bessel vortex beams were investigated through the holographic technique by means of computer generated holograms (CGHs) and reproduced in a spatial light modulator (SLMs). The intensity and phase profiles were simulated and the experimental results are presented in this work, as well as their propagation along the z-axis is demonstrated. The experimental results are in accordance with the theoretical predictions described in the theory and literature. These results presents excellent perspectives of this optical vortex and potential applications in optical manipulation, optical microscopy and optics communications, optical metrology, among others. An optical vortex (OV) is characterized by a helical phase structure that carries orbital angular momentum, whose magnitude depends on the topological charge n. This phase is superimposed onto the beams which lead to a phase singularity at the center of the radiation field, where the phase of the beams is undetermined and its amplitude vanishes To understand the behavior of these OV along the propagation axis, it's necessary to apply optical and electronic techniques and instruments with high efficiency and measurement reliability. The holographic technique is a powerful optical beam generation technique that allows to generate and characterize this beams with high reliability and efficiency 2. Fractional Hankel-Bessel vortex beam Many optical beams are found from the solutions of the Helmholtz equation. Among them, there are the paraxial hypergeometric beams (HyG beams) that have complex amplitude and are described by the Kummer function where r is the position vector in the source plane, k = 2π/λ is the wave number with the wavelength λ, z is the propagation distance, and φ is the azimuthal angle. We are looking for a solution like E(r, φ, z) = E(r, z)r p exp(inφ + ikz), where n and p are integer numbers. Then, equation 1 becames: To avoid amplitude singularities, it's used |p|, so, at n = ±|p|, the third term in equation 2 is eliminated. To solve this equation, let's changing to the parabolic coordinates, Then, equation 2 takes the form. This equation is solved in separable variables with their solutions described by Kummer's functions. After a series of mathematical deductions that we must describe the propagation of laser light in a certain direction, the relationship between Kummer's function 1 F 1 (a, b, z) and the second solution of Kummer's equation, the solution of the original Helmholtz equation in 1, can be written as where n is the topological charge, A 0 is a constant characterizing the beam power, H n 2 is the first-order Hankel function, 2 is a Bessel function of integer and half-integer orders, and The HB vortex beam are described by Eq. 4. Furthermore, as they propagate along the positive z-axis, a divergence of the beams is observed and is proportional to √ z. When we considered a large z, the HB vortex beam diverge hyperbolically. The Bessel beams have a set of concentric rings with constant size following the central spot, whereas the Hankel beams have cylindrical/conical characteristics. Thus, the HB vortex beams present in their shape a characteristic similar to these two separate beams, since they incorporate their structural elements. The normalized intensity projection and the phase map are observed in Fig. Figure Computational holographic method Currently, computational methods allow the generation of the CGHs of optical beams using algorithms that characterize optical beams, particularly non-diffracting beams with OAM (optical vortex). The CGH record the hologram in a numerical and computational way where, α(x, y) and φ(x, y) describe the amplitude and phase of the complex field of the beam; (ξ, η) the spatial frequency of the plane wave that was used as a reference and β(x, y) = [1+α 2 (x, y)]/2, is the function bias converted into a soft envelope of the complex amplitude α(x, y), used to reduce the influence of the central spectrum To select the different orders of diffraction that occur in the Fourier plane of the reconstructed CGH, a system, known as the 4f system, is used, consisting of two lenses, L2 and L3 (focal distance 150 mm), in addition to a circular ID aperture (mask) that is used to selected the first order of diffraction (hologram information). After beam reconstruction, the 1280×960 pixels monochrome USB CCD camera, model DMK 41BU02.H, from The ImagingSource, with a pixel size of 4.65 μm, having a recording rate of up to 15 FPS (frames per second), which can move step by step along the beam propagation axis, captures the image that was generated. Fig. Results. For optical generation of the HB vortex beams, was used the experimental setup Fig. The first results are presented in Fig. Second case -Fractional HB vortex beams: For this second case, the fractionation of the HB vortex beams was considered. In this case, the fractional vortex were simulated and generated experimentally in the laboratory considering one (n = 0.9), two (n = 1.9), four (n = 3.9), six (n = 5.9), eight (n = 7.9) and ten (n = 9.9) fractional HB vortex beams. The theoretical transverse intensity and the phase map obtained through computer simulations (a -1)-(a -12), and the experimental results (b -1)-(b -12) are presented in Fig. The first fractional vortex (n = 0.9) can be observed in Fig. The propagation of the first fractional vortex can be observed in Fig. 