Over the last few decades, both heat and broadband sound reduction have become increasingly significant as a result of concerns about the environment and noise pollution. In order to address this challenge, we provide a finite element analysis study of an acoustic metamaterial panel consisting of a unit cell made of two Helmholtz Resonators with a guide in between. These panels can attenuate and control both sound propagation and heat flux. For noise pollution in a building, we first determine the geometric dimension that corresponds to the operative frequency range. Furthermore, we investigate the sound transmission loss of the proposed panel as a function of the periodicity of an array of unit cells. Additionally, we investigate the thermal flux induced by the panel, especially within a 24-hour period. The simulation results show that the proposed panel provides a level of sound attenuation within the frequency range of 400 Hz to 2.5 kHz, as well as interesting heat protection. The structure is compared to panels made up of a homogeneous medium and without Helmholtz resonators. Climate change and noise pollution have emerged as major global issues in recent decades Recent advances have proven that artificial man-made materials, called "metamaterials, can successfully control sound wave and heat flux propagation. The optimization of these structures can provide novel functionalities based on distinctive physical properties not found in nature Acoustic metamaterials have provided unprecedented noise reduction solutions, especially with regards to mitigating noise propagation. Several variants of metamaterials, such as membranes In this paper, we propose to use Helmholtz resonators (HRs), which are highly classic acoustic systems that have been intensively explored for decades Numerical models of the acoustic and thermal behaviors of panels are based on 2D calculations. This is due to the symmetry of HRs-based panels in the z-direction. In this context, we conduct two studies: the sound transmission loss at low frequencies and the thermal resistance within a 24-hour period, taking behavior properties numerically within the variation of the number of cells (N) in the 2D panel from one to five, and comparing the responses of these panels based on HRs with classical panels as well as hollowed panels (closed cavities). In Table A multiphysics model is used to solve the acoustic wave propagation equations in air and solids for the sound transmis-sion analysis. Sound waves in air are governed by the equation 1 for the differential pressure p. The solid is considered an isotropic linear elastic material, and the acoustic wave propagation is determined by solving the weak formalism of the timeharmonic Navier equation 2. Air-solid interface boundary conditions satisfy the equations corresponding to interface type in the multiphysics coupling; for instance, for the air-solid interface, satisfy equation 3, and for the solid-air interface, satisfy equation 4, where solid tractions equal the pressure where p is the acoustic pressure, u = (u x , u y ) is the displacement vector, ρ a and ρ s are the densities of the air and solid, respectively. is the stress tensor for the isotropic linear elastic material, C is the sound speed in the air, ω is the angular frequency of the acoustic wave, E is the Young's modulus, ν is the Poisson's ratio, and n is the outward unit normal to the air or solid. In order to simulate the normal incident sound wave, a plane wave radiation boundary condition was utilized, and Perfectly Matched Layers (PMLs) were placed at both extremities of the medium to limit spurious reflections, as depicted in Fig. For the thermal analysis, the heat transfer in solids and fluids model was utilized to characterize the thermal insulation through the panels. By solving the transient heat equation ( where i indicates air or solid, k i , ρ i and c i are the thermal conductivity, the density, and the specific heat, respectively. To gain a better understanding of the resonator mechanism utilized in the panel's design, we compared the transmission loss of various acoustic resonators to the mass law. Fig. To promote the use of resonators in the low-frequency range, it is imperative to determine the geometric parameters that allow for the operation of such resonators. This is before we can examine the performance of the insulation in the panels. In the following step, we calculated the sound transmission loss for one unit cell (N = 1) and varied the periodicity constant a from 2 cm to 10 cm and neck size d from 0.1 cm to 1.5 cm. Then the sound transmission loss was calculated in the frequency range from 20 Hz to 6 kHz. The results of the study are illustrated in Fig. It was found that as a increases, the bandwidth decreases, and thus the diffraction limit descends in frequency (Fig. To summarize, the panel with HRs outperforms its counterpart made of homogeneous medium and lacking HRs in terms of sound insulation. In other words, the numerical results of the acoustic analysis show that cells with Helmholtz resonators have a significantly higher level of sound isolation than cells without Helmholtz resonators. This means that, in the frequency range of 20 to 3000 Hz, HRs confine the incoming sound wave more effectively than ordinary panels. Fig. The inner temperature evolution of the panel of N = 2 becomes more resilient than that of the panel composed of a single unit cell with HRs. Additionally, the variation of the inner temperature as a function of time changes with the number of cells N = 3, N = 4, and N = 5, as illustrated in Fig. It is noteworthy that the presence of HRs in the panels functioned as barriers to reduce heat propagation. This demonstrates, in particular, that the improved panels provide higher thermal insulation than conventional panels consisting of homogeneous medium or cells without HRs. The presence of Helmholtz resonators in unit cells influences their thermal prop- erties, resulting in extrathermal change processes. As a result, thermal transmission occurs through three complementary mechanisms in the unit cell: conduction through the solid, radiation, and convection by air within and outside the cavities. To conclude, we demonstrated a panel based on Helmholtz resonators in order to reduce both sound and heat transmission. A series of simulations were performed using the finite element method to characterize the physical characteristics of the proposed panels in the context of determining their physical characteristics. According to the sound transmission loss analysis performed on the proposed metamaterial, the metamaterial's resonance elements (HRs) perfectly reflect the incoming energy by trapping it by its anti-resonance mechanism in the frequency range corresponding to the noise inside buildings, which ranges in three regions: (418, 533) Hz, (905, 2211) Hz, and (2421, 2683) Hz. The results of the heat transfer analysis of panels with HRs indicate that, in comparison to homogeneous panels and panels without HRs, heat propagation decreases with exposure time. In other words, the presence of HRs mitigates the spread of heat fluxes. Conversely, when Helmholtz resonators are involved, it is as if a thermal barrier is created that prevents thermal fluxes from spreading outward. Thus, we were able to develop a bi-functional metamaterial that may be used in the building sector to alleviate noise and heat concerns. a ) 0.025 W/(mK) Specific heat (c a )