Migdal-Eliashberg theory is one of the state-of-the-art methods for describing conventional superconductors from first principles. However, widely used implementations assume a constant density of states around the Fermi level, which hinders a proper description of materials with distinct features in its vicinity. Here, we present an implementation of the Migdal-Eliashberg theory within the EPW code that considers the full electronic structure and accommodates scattering processes beyond the Fermi surface. To significantly reduce computational costs, we introduce a non-uniform sampling scheme along the imaginary axis. We demonstrate the power of our implementation by applying it to the sodalite-like clathrates YH 6 and CaH 6 , and to the covalentlybonded H 3 S and D 3 S. Furthermore, we investigate the effect of maximizing the density of states at the Fermi level in doped H 3 S and BaSiH 8 within the full-bandwidth treatment compared to the constant-density-of-states approximation. Our findings highlight the importance of this advanced treatment in such complex materials. Discovering and designing new and technologically relevant superconductors is one of the grand challenges of modern science The AME formalism is particularly useful in describing the order parameter of weak and strong coupling su-perconductors. However, computing the el-ph matrix elements and numerically solving the Eliashberg equations requires extremely dense electron and phonon meshes in the Brillouin zone (BZ) to overcome the strong sensitivity to the sampling of the el-ph scattering processes involving states around the Fermi level Despite the extraordinary success of the AME implementation in EPW, its main shortage comes from the assumption that the density of states (DOS) is constant for a finite energy window around the Fermi level ε F (of the order of the Debye energies) where the superconducting coupling occurs With the present work, we remedy this shortcoming. Our implementation goes beyond the limitations of the previous approach, by explicitly incorporating scattering processes of electrons with energies and momenta beyond the confines of the Fermi surface. This is made possible through the selfconsistent determination of the mass renormalization function, energy shift, and order parameter at every temperature while ensuring the system's charge neutrality (see Supplemen-tary Method 1). The corresponding theoretical considerations and equations are detailed in the methods section and in Supplementary Method 1. As this leads to an increased computational workload, we have also implemented a sparse, nonuniform sampling scheme over the imaginary axis, considerably lowering the number of Matsubara frequencies needed compared to the uniform sampling scheme, which, in practice, highly decreases the computational costs (see methods section). We apply this implementation to two different classes of topical superhydrides, the sodalite-like clathrates YH 6 and CaH 6 , and the covalently-bonded H 3 S and D 3 S. Results and discussion are provided under General applications and benchmarking and material-specific computational details can be found in the methods section. Moreover, we present compelling evidence that the commonly used approach of computationally optimizing T c by maximizing the DOS at ε F (N(ε F )) is often ineffective, as the reported enhancements in T c are, in fact, artifacts resulting from the constant-DOS approximation. To support this claim, we conduct a detailed study of electron-and hole-doping effects in H 3 S and BaSiH 8 using our full-bandwidth implementation (see Application to doped hydrides). The results shed light on the limitations of the maximizing-N(ε F ) strategy, emphasizing the need for a more comprehensive and accurate approach in predicting superconducting properties, as provided with our implementation. The emergence of superconductivity at record-breaking temperatures has reignited the hope of achieving superconductivity at ambient conditions Among the numerous already predicted and experimentally confirmed superhydrides, H 3 S and D 3 S have received particular attention from the scientific community. Multiple independent experimental groups employing different characterization techniques have confirmed the existence of the cubic Im3m-H 3 S structure at pressures around 100-200 GPa and its superconducting state near room temperature Due to their topical relevance and the amount of experimental data available, we have employed the full-bandwidth method to the sodalite-like clathrates YH 6 and CaH 6 , and to the covalently-bonded H 3 S and D 3 S. In the following, we will consider two levels of approximation when solving the AME. The first is the Fermi-surface-restricted approximation (FSR) Furthermore, our implementation of FBW comes in two different flavors: (i) updating the chemical potential, μ, while solving self-consistently the AME equations to maintain the charge neutrality of the system (referred to as FBW+μ henceforth); and (ii) keeping the chemical potential fixed (referred to simply as FBW) to lighten the computational load. We will also compare our results for T c to the values given by the commonly employed semi-empirical modified McMillan equation In the following, we summarize the important physical properties to understand the emergence of a high-T c in these materials: The electronic band structures and DOS for YH Figures Experimentally, the critical temperature of YH 6 varies depending on the synthesis route. Maximum values for T c ranging from 220 K at 183 GPa As mentioned before, both YH 6 and CaH 6 exhibit a slowly varying DOS around ε F and in such cases, the FSR approximation is reasonable for describing the el-ph scattering process around the Fermi level. This is also evident from the fact that the chemical potential remains almost constant throughout the self-consistent solution within FBW+μ. Nevertheless, it is important to note that the FBW implementation offers a better agreement with experiments even for these simple cases. In contrast to the XH 6 materials described above, the behavior of the DOS around ε F is quite different in the covalently bonded H 3 S and D 3 S hydrides. As indicated in Fig. The solution of the AME equations reveals that H 3 S and D 3 S are single-gap superconductors with a broad energy gap distribution. Compared to the FSR treatment, the FBW calculation with fixed μ lowers the gap energy [see Figs. The highest measured T c in the study of Drozdov et al. As can be appreciated in Tab. I, FBW+μ performs best in approaching the experimental critical temperatures T c exp among the different implementations for solving the AME equations. For H 3 S, our calculations provide T c = 232 K at 200 GPa, a percentage difference of 23-30 % compared to the experimental values of 172-184 K at 200 GPa from Refs. where M H and M D are the atomic mass of hydrogen and deuterium. The experimental values obtained for α are around 0.47 at 150 GPa At the end of this section, we also want to shortly discuss the modified McMillan The machine-learned equation proposed by a group of the University of Florida (UF), on the other hand, has been trained to match the solutions of the Migdal-Eliashberg equations with a dataset of thousands of real and artificially generated α 2 F functions, including high-pressure, high-T c hydrides as well. It thus performs much better than the mMc formula and matches the results obtained with AME fairly well. It is therefore a viable tool to determine an accurate value for T c quickly but does not offer insight into the superconducting gap function and its energy distribution, the superconducting DOS, and so on. We also observe shortcomings when trying to simulate the effects of doping, as detailed in the next section. Doping can be a powerful method to tailor and fine-tune specific material properties, especially in electronic applications. It has been used to metallize semiconducting phases, induce superconductivity, and optimize specific properties of the superconducting phase The doping of hydrogen-rich superconductors and its tentatively beneficial effect on T c has been extensively studied in various works The well-studied hydride superconductor H 3 S is a perfect candidate material where doping to optimize T c appears very tempting due to the VHS-like peak in the DOS in close proximity to the Fermi level, as shown in Fig. While adding dopants may increase the T c by also enhancing the el-ph coupling, we want to specifically address the effect of a change in the number of available electronic states. To this end, we solved the AME equations in the FSR and FBW frameworks for shifts of the Fermi level ∆ε F between -0.5 eV and 0.1 eV in steps of 0.1 eV, corresponding to changes in the electron number ∆ elec of -0.30, -0.26, -0.20, -0.13, -0.06, and +0.05. In Fig. However, within the FSR approximation, there is a notable and unphysical increase in T c values around the maximum of the DOS. This behavior can be attributed to the limitation of the constant-DOS assumption in the FSR approach. Similarly, the UF model exhibits a strong dependence on doping. In contrast, the AME solutions in the FBW approach, which consider the full energy dependence of the DOS, exhibit a much less pronounced effect of doping on T c . Finally, the semi-empirical mMc formula consistently underestimates T c for strongly coupled systems when compared to results obtained from the AME equations. In the context of our analysis of a doped H 3 S system, we would like to address the topic of speculated room temperature superconductivity within this system On a more technical note, we want to add that VHS-like features also pose other problems when trying to arrive at robust numerical results. For example, the exact value of the DOS at the VHS-like peak is difficult to converge and requires extremely dense k-grids and small smearing values. To demonstrate this, we examined the VHS region by performing additional calculations with two different smearing values σ for the energy-conserving δ-functions. The results are shown in Figure The Fm3m phase of BaSiH 8 was recently predicted and described in detail by some of the current authors Independent of the actual critical pressure, this material exhibits a step-like feature around the Fermi level, with an almost constant region of high DOS below the Fermi level and a sharp drop to a region of very low DOS above ε F , as can be appreciated in Fig. We solved the AME equations within FSR and FBW approaches for shifts of the Fermi level ∆ε F between -0.5 eV and 0.5 eV in steps of 0.1 eV, corresponding to changes in the electron number ∆ elec of -0.52, -0.42, -0.31, -0.21, -0.10, +0.09, +0.15, +0.18, +0.20, and +0.22. In Figs. The behaviour of T c with respect to Fermi level shifts for the different methods is quite complex: For a shift of -0.1 eV or below the AME results are similar and also agree with the UF model, while mMc gives considerably lower values for T c . In a region around 0.1 eV shift, the FBW implementation predicts a larger value for T c than FSR, and the simple mMc and UF formulas provide an even smaller estimate. For ε Fshifts larger than 0.2 eV, mMc and UF actually give the largest values for T c and FBW the smallest. In other words, while the dependence of T c with respect to Fermi level shifts was smallest in FBW for H 3 S, it is actually varying the strongest within FBW for BaSiH 8 . These intricate results underscore the importance of taking into account the energy dependence of the electronic DOS around the Fermi level, in particular for systems where the DOS is either strongly peaked close to ε F In summary, we have employed the anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg formalism within the full-bandwidth formulation utilizing maximally-localized Wannier functions as implemented in the EPW suite. This approach enables us to calculate the momentum-and band-resolved superconducting gap more accurately, taking into account the electron-phonon scattering processes around the Fermi level, and not only restricted to the Fermi surface. In addition, we introduced a sparse, non-uniform sampling scheme over the imaginary Matsubara frequencies, which shows similar accuracy and much-improved efficiency compared to the uniform sampling scheme. To validate the robustness of our methodology, we conducted comprehensive tests on two representative classes of superhydrides: the sodalite-like clathrates YH 6 and CaH 6 , as well as the covalent hydrides H 3 S and D 3 S. To assess the accuracy of our approach, we compared our results with previous ab-initio calculations and experimental data. Our results unequivocally demonstrate the indispensable role of the full-bandwidth formulation, particularly for compounds characterized by narrow bands or critical points in proximity to the Fermi level. A noteworthy illustration of the importance of employing the FBW formulation is evident in the case of H 3 S, which possesses a van Hove singularity. Our methodology effectively captures the intricate behavior of such systems, highlighting the superiority of the FBW approach in these critical scenarios. Furthermore, we emphasize the crucial impact of the chemical potential updating scheme within the FBW formulation, which substantially contributes to accurately describing the superconducting phase in these challenging cases. This aspect proves to be a vital component in achieving a comprehensive understanding of the superconducting properties of these complex materials. In addition, we applied the FBW approach to investigate electron-and hole-doped hydride superconductors, namely H 3 S and the recently predicted low-pressure BaSiH 8 . These materials serve as prime examples of systems with distinct DOS features that deviate significantly from the constant-DOS assumption made in the FSR approximation. Previous studies have often focused on maximizing the DOS specifically at the Fermi level, aiming to design high(er)-T c superconductors by doping the system to shift ε F to the maximum of a VHS-like structure. Our calculations reveal significant pitfalls associated with such a simplistic FSR-based approach. We find instances of pronounced under-or overestimation of T c , highlighting the critical importance of adopting the FBW method, particularly in scenarios with strongly peaked DOS or closely adjacent DOS regions exhibiting extremely high and low values. By employing the FBW approach, we can accurately capture the intricate interplay of DOS features and better predict the behavior of superconductors in these complex cases. This sheds light on the limitations of the FSR approach and underscores the significance of our advanced methodology in studying and engineering novel superconducting materials with tailored properties for real-world applications. The Eliashberg theory is a powerful many-body perturbation approach for describing conventional superconductors, where the Cooper pairing between two electrons stems from the interplay between the attractive el-ph coupling and the repulsive screened Coulomb interaction The matrix Green's function is obtained from the Dyson equation where Ĝ0 nk (iω j ) is the non-interacting Green's function in the normal state with band index n and wavevector k, Σpa nk (iω j ) is the pairing self-energy, and iω j = i(2 j + 1)πT is the fermionic Matsubara frequency with T being the absolute temperature and j an integer. An expression for the selfenergy in terms of the electron Green's function can be obtained with the el-ph and electron-electron contributions given by the Migdal Using the Pauli matrices, τ0 , the el-ph and Coulomb contributions to the self-energy can be expressed as and where Ω BZ is the BZ volume, D qν (iω l ) = 2ω qν /[(iω l ) 2 -ω 2 qν ] is the dressed phonon propagator for phonons with wavevector q and branch index ν, iω l = i2lπT is the bosonic Matsubara frequency with l an integer, g mnν (k, q) is the screened el-ph matrix element for the scattering between the electronic states nk and mk + q through a phonon of frequency ω qν , and V nk,mk+q is the static screened Coulomb interaction between electrons with N(ε F ) the DOS per spin at the Fermi level. Eq. ( Ĝod mk+q (iω j ′ )τ 3 where ε nk are the Kohn-Sham eigenenergies, and In Eq. ( Ĝnk iω j Z nk (iω j )τ 0 + ε nk -μ + χ nk (iω j ) τ3 + φ nk (iω j )τ 1 + φnk (iω j )τ 2 where Equating the different components of the Pauli matrix elements in Eqs. ( This set of equations is supplemented with an equation for the electron number, which determines the chemical potential μ where N e is the number of electrons per unit cell (see Supplementary Method 1 for a discussion about the electron number equation). Equations ( The set of coupled equations can be solved self-consistently at various temperatures for the temperature-dependent superconducting gap ∆ nk , given by: The Padé approximation The contribution of the Coulomb interaction to the Eliashberg equation, through matrix elements V nk,mk+q , can be evaluated at the same level as the el-ph interaction for the simpler versions of the Eliashberg formalism The numerical solution of the anisotropic FBW Migdal-Eliashberg equations is computationally very demanding. A common simplification of these equations consists in restricting the energy range close to the Fermi level by introducing the unity factor +∞ -∞ dε δ(ε nk -ε), and to assume that the DOS within this energy window is constant Equations ( All calculated quantities in the Migdal-Eliashberg equations depend on Matsubara frequencies, which are proportional to the absolute temperature. This results in a computational challenge since solving these equations at low temperatures (e.g., necessary for low-T c superconductors) requires a larger number of frequencies within the same energy range. As discussed in the previous section, for the FBW+μ method, one needs a Matsubara frequency cutoff 6-12 times the Fermi energy window in order to converge the chemical potential and, consequently, the superconducting gap energy, leading to a considerable increase in computational cost. While a frequency cutoff of 4 eV has been found to be sufficient for calculations with FSR and FBW with fixed chemical potential at the Fermi level in the case of H 3 S, adopting FBW+μ required a Matsubara frequency 2-3 times larger as shown in Supplementary Figure The computational cost can be reduced by pruning the Matsubara frequencies and where INT[ ] is the rounding to the closest integer, W is an adjustable weight factor, and N max is the maximum Matsubara index for a given energy cutoff ω max and temperature T : Eq. (( We systematically evaluated this sampling approach by computing the superconducting gap function within the FBW+μ method using both the uniform and sparse sampling scheme over Matsubara frequencies up to 6 eV for H 3 S, D 3 S, YH 6 , and CaH 6 . The primary outcomes are presented in Supplementary Figure The electronic structure calculations are performed within the Kohn-Sham scheme The dynamical matrices and the linear variation of the self-consistent potential are calculated within the densityfunctional perturbation theory The maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) are constructed using the Wannier90 code The fully anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations The doping calculations within rigid band model are performed by shifting the Fermi level in EPW before interpolating the el-ph matrix elements. All anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg calculations are performed for electronic energies of ±1 eV around the (shifted) Fermi level and a Matsubara cutoff of ω max = 4 eV, if not stated otherwise.