Materials with kagome lattice have attracted significant research attention due to their nontrivial features in energy bands. In this work, we theoretically investigate the evolution of electronic band structures of kagome lattice in response to uniaxial strain using both a tight-binding model and an antidot model based on a periodic muffin-tin potential. It is found that the Dirac points move with applied strain. Furthermore, the flat band of unstrained kagome lattice is found to develop into a highly anisotropic shape under a stretching strain along y direction, forming a partially flat band with a region dispersionless along ky direction while dispersive along kx direction. Our results shed light on the possibility of engineering the electronic band structures of kagome materials by mechanical strain. The kagome lattice is a two-dimensional (2D) hexagonal Bravais lattice consisting of corner-sharing triangles. It has been discovered as a fertile land for realizing various exotic physics since introduced by Itiro Syôzi in 1951 Unfortunately, materials with kagome lattice are rare in nature. As an alternative approach to explore the physics related to kagome lattice, various artificial kagome systems, such as optical kagome lattices Mechanical strain has proven to be an important tool for engineering electronic band structures In this work, we theoretically study the electronic band structures of strained kagome lattice using both a tightbinding model and an antidot model based on a periodic muffin-tin potential. The main findings include: (i) The Dirac points of kagome lattice are shifted away from the corners of Brillouin zoom under applied uniaxial strain. In contrast to the situation in strained graphene The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we calculate the energy bands of strained kagome lattices using a nearest-neighbor tight-binding model. In Section 3, we first introduce a antidot model for artificial kagome lattice, and then numerically investigate its band structures under uniaxial strain. The results and conclusions are summarized in Section 4. In this section, we investigate the band structures of strained kagome lattice using the tight-binding approximation. Since the band structures of kagome lattice are primarily characterized by the coexistence of Dirac cones and a flat band, here we mainly focus on the shift of the Dirac cones and the reshaping of the flat band in response to applied uniaxial strain. A. Tight-binding model for kagome lattice Fig. The tight-binding Hamiltonian of kagome lattice is given as with the summation of r running over all unit cells. Here a † r , b † r and c † r (a r , b r , and c r ) are respectively the creation (annihilation) operators of electrons at sites A, B and C in the unit cell located at r, and t i (i = 1, 2, 3) is the hopping parameter along the direction of lattice vectors δ i , which are given by where e x and e y are basis vectors of the Cartesian coordinate system, and a is the distance between neighboring sites. Fig. By applying the Wannier transformation to Eq.( Here In an unstrained kagome lattice, the 6-fold rotational symmetry ensures t 1 = t 2 = t 3 . However, as shown in Fig. Meanwhile, as a reasonable approximation for weak strain B. Results and discussions The energy bands of strained kagome lattice can be obtained by solving Eq.( In the unstrained case where α = 1.0, the solutions of Eq.( (2) k at the center of the Brillouin zone (the Γ point). The band structures for α = 0.8 and α = 1.2 were obtained by solving Eq.( The shift of Dirac points are more visible in the energy bands plotted along the k x axis. As shown in Fig. Another notable effect of strain is the reshaping of the flat band E (3) k . In a strained kagome lattice, the hopping anisotropy disrupts the destructive interference, leading to a deformation of the flat band, as depicted in Figs. When α = 0, Eq. ( k touches the quadratic band E k at the Γ point. The value of |k I x | or |k I y | increases with applied strain: For stretching strain, when α → 0, |k I x | → π/2a, i.e., the two intersection points respectively approach C and C ′ . For compressive strain, when α → ∞, |k I y | → π/( √ 3a), i.e., the intersection points approach the S point. An intriguing feature of the deformed flat band E k is the formation of a partially flat region that is dispersionless along k x direction whereas dispersive along k y direction, as shown in Figs. In this section, we numerically investigate the strain effects in artificial kagome lattices using an antidot model. Compared with the tight-binding model with only nearest-neighboring hopping terms, the antidot model based on a periodic potential is more realistic in the sense that it provides the design of antidot patterns required for experimentally fabricating artificial kagome materials from conventional two-dimensional electron gases (2DEGs) Two different antidot models have been proposed in the literature for realizing kagome lattices The analytical expression of V (r) reads where Θ is the Heaviside step function, L = 2a √ 3α ′ e y is the vertical displacement between adjacent barrier circles, and R = mb 1 + nb 2 represents the lattice sites spanned by lattice vectors Apparently, for an unstrained lattice with α ′ = 1, the lattice vectors in Eq. ( In resemblance to the graphene lattice, when α ′ = 1, the Brillouin zone of such a lattice is an irregular hexagon squeezed along k x or k y direction, and the positions of K and K ′ are For an electron system subjected to the periodic potential V (r) given by Eq.( where E k is the eigenenergy of Bloch state ψ k (r) and the Hamiltonian is , where m * is the effective mass of electrons. To calculate the energy bands E k , we expand ψ k (r) with the plane-wave basis set by where c k is the coefficient of the plane wave with wave vector k. Substituting Eq.( where the Fourier coefficients of V (r) are given by Here s = 2 √ 3a 2 /α ′ is the area of the unit cell and J 1 is the Bessel of the first kind. The energy bands k are subsequently obtained by numerically solving Eq.( In the following we present the numerical results obtained using the antidot model described in Sec. 3.1. The calculation was performed with a = 25 nm and m * = 0.04m e , where m e is the free electron mass. These parameters are experimentally achievable by fabricating an antidot array onto a typical 2DEG using e-beam lithography. The first three energy bands of the antidot model are similar to those obtained with the tight-binding model, as shown in Figs. can be tuned by adjusting the parameters of the antidot model. To test how ∆E depends on the model parameters, we calculated ∆E as a function of barrier height V 0 with various values of β ≡ ρ 1 /a, as presented in Fig. (3) k is large. As shown in Fig. The band width ∆E of E k is also slightly influenced by the ratio ρ 1 /ρ 2 . As shown in Fig. As discussed in Sec. 2, when a kagome lattice is strained in y direction, the tight-binding model predicts that the Dirac cones will move horizontally but will never merge. However, as illustrated in Figs. where Obviousely, γ = 1 corresponds to the situation in which the Dirac points D 1 and D 2 are respectively shifted to C and C ′ , and γ = 0 is reached when D 1 and D 2 meet and merge at the S point. In addition, in the antidot model, it is noteworthy that both K and K ′ move with applied strain due to the deformation of the lattice. Therefore, a parameter γ K is similarly introduced to describe the relative position of K, defined as When α ′ = √ 3, Eq. ( k and E k , indicating the occurrence of a phase transition from a semimetal to a semiconductor. The antidot model also predicts a deformation of the flat band E Similar to the results of the tight-binding model, a partially flat region well separated from other bands is also found in the deformed flat band E (3) k with α ′ = 0.8. This highly anisotropic region is almost dispersionless along k x direction whereas clearly dispersive along k y direction, as shown in Figs. (3) k , as presented in Fig. To better illustrate the evolution of the band features in response to applied strain, we plot the band-structure data calculated using both the tight-binding model and the antidot model along the high-symmetry path Γ-M -K-Γ-M ′ -K ′ . As shown in Fig. In summary, we have performed a comprehensive study on the band structures of strained kagome lattices using both a tight-binding model and an antidot model. Both models predict a strain-induced horizontal shift of the Dirac cones in the band structures. In addition, according to the antidot model, when the lattice is subjected to a strong compressive strain in y direction, the Dirac cones will merge and a band gap will open between the two lowest energy bands. Furthermore, in a kagome lattice stretched along y direction, the flat band E (3) k is found to develop into a highly anisotropic shape, with a partially flat region dispersionless along k y direction while dispersive along k x direction. Our results pave the way for engineering the electronic band structures of kagome materials by mechanical strain.