Broken symmetries and electronic topology are nicely manifested together in the second order nonlinear optical responses from topologically nontrivial materials. While second order nonlinear optical effects from the electric dipole (ED) contribution have been extensively explored in polar Weyl semimetals (WSMs) with broken spatial inversion (SI) symmetry, they are rarely studied in centrosymmetric magnetic WSMs with broken time reversal (TR) symmetry due to complete suppression of the ED contribution. Here, we report experimental demonstration of optical second harmonic generation (SHG) in a magnetic WSM Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 from the electric quadrupole (EQ) contribution. By tracking the temperature dependence of the rotation anisotropy (RA) of SHG, we capture two magnetic phase transitions, with both the SHG intensity increasing and its RA pattern rotating at T C,1 =175K and T C,2 =120K subsequently. The fitted critical exponents for the SHG intensity and RA orientation near T C,1 and T C,2 suggest that the magnetic phase at T C,1 is a 3D Ising-type out-ofplane ferromagnetism while the other at T C,2 is a 3D XY-type all-in-all-out in-plane antiferromagnetism. Our results show the success of detection and exploration of EQ SHG in a centrosymmetric magnetic WSM, and hence open the pathway towards the future investigation of its tie to the band topology. Topological Weyl semimetals (WSMs) Very recently, it has been shown that the second order nonlinear optical effects are present in SIpreserved centrosymmetric crystals by the virtue of the next order electric quadrupole (EQ) or magnetic dipole (MD) contribution To resolve magnetic phases for both the out-of-plane and in-plane spin components, we leverage the symmetry sensitivity of SHG by performing the rotational anisotropy (RA) measurements in which the SHG intensity I 2ω is recorded as the light-scattering-plane is rotated about the c-axis from the in-plane a-axis by an angle φ (Fig. We begin with performing RA measurements of SHG and linear responses for both normal and oblique incidence configurations to confirm the crystallographic symmetry of Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 at T = 293 K (Fig. We then proceed to study the temperature dependence of SHG and linear responses, to explore their evolution across the magnetic phase transitions at T C, 1 and T C, 2 . Figure To reveal the nature of these new SHG processes, we compare RA SHG results at different temperatures in all polarization channels for both normal and oblique incidence geometries. Figure To gain insight into the two types of magnetism-induced processes across the two magnetic phase transitions, we perform systematic temperature-dependent RA SHG measurements over a temperature window ranging from 90 K to 200 K containing both T C, 1 and T C, 2 . Figure Therefore, we establish that the two magnetic orders (with order parameters of M I and M II ) turn on both i-type and c-type EQ SHG processes, introducing χ and χ below T C,1 and then further χ and χ below T C,2 on top of χ from the crystal structure that is present at all temperatures. We can also derive the magnetic point groups for the two orders, both belonging to 3 m′, via searching for magnetic subgroups of the high-symmetry structural point group 3 m that preserve both C 3 and SI symmetries and break the TR and mirror symmetries. We further comment that here M I and M II have the same magnetic point group 3 m′ with no further symmetry reduction below T C,2 , under the analysis based on the crystallographic point group 3 m. If we were to analyze based on the kagome lattice of Co magnetic sites, we will see the subsequent symmetry reductions below both T C,1 and T C,2 (Supplementary Section 6). We note that subgroups of 3 m′ with lower symmetries would, in principle, be consistent with our results. We can then simulate the functional forms for RA SHG at the three temperature ranges: above T To understand the I T and ∆φ T traces in Figs. Ising-type. Consequently, the most plausible possibility is the in-plane AFM of 3 m′ as depicted in the option iv) To conclude, we have successfully detected the EQ SHG from a magnetic WSM Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 , further leveraged its polarization and temperature dependencies to capture two magnetic phase transitions, and eventually managed to pin down the nature of magnetism across both transitions. It successfully demonstrates the advancement of using nonlinear optics to study nontrivial magnetic textures, even those with centrosymmetry, representing a further step forward from detecting complex electric dipolar textures and paving the way towards reliably investigating multipolar orders. Looking forward, we foresee multiple additional opportunities. First, it would be insightful to explore the relationship between the out-of-plane FM and in-plane AFM for providing a comprehensive picture of magnetic domains and domain walls in this kagome magnetic system. Second, it could be fruitful to examine the evolution of electronic band topology across T C,1 and T C,2 , to shed light on the interplay between magnetism and topology. Third, the photon energy involved in the current study is beyond the Weyl cone of Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 . Therefore, the EQ SHG processes perhaps mostly concern about topologically trivial bands, and our focus here is about broken symmetries rather than band topology. Yet, it remains as an open theoretical question whether the magnitude of χ can be expressed in relation to the Berry curvature at Weyl nodes, and also a challenging experimental adventure of how EQ SHG or EQ photocurrent would turn out with lower photon energies ranging from near the Weyl points to within the Weyl cones. The RA optical response measurements were conducted under a geometry shown in Fig. Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 single crystals were grown from excess tin using the self-flux method First, in order to obtain non-zero tensor elements for EQ SHG under 3 m point group under normal and oblique incidence geometries, we derived a matrix for a polar tensor 1 using an equation: where χ is the polar EQ susceptibility tensor and σ is a generating matrix for each point group. This equation can be applicable for the derivation of tensor elements for both structural 3 m and i-type time-reversal invariant 3 m′. The number of derived independent non-zero tensor elements 2 is 14. An effective nonlinear polarization P is expressed by where E is the electric field of incoming light. The additional constraint of degenerate SHG symmetries (j = l) reduces the non-zero tensor elements to 11 as shown below 4 Then, we applied a transformation of the tensor elements into the rotation frame of the scattering plane using the rotation matrix R about the crystallographic c-axis to simulate the rotational anisotropy of the second harmonic generation using a following equation 3 Finally, the functional forms for the EQ SHG intensity are derived from the equation where ê is the polarization of the incident and reflected light, and I(ω) is the intensity of the incoming light. By selecting the polarization of the incident and reflected beam to be crossed or parallel for the normal incidence geometry and P or S for the oblique incidence geometry, the functional forms under a series of polarization geometries are given below. where θ = 11° for the experiments performed in this work. All simulated SHG RA patterns are displayed in Fig. While the ED contribution to SHG is forbidden due to the preserved inversion symmetry in the 3 m, the surface ED contribution is plausible due to an absence of the inversion symmetry at the surface, resulting in the reduced point group to 3m. Following the same procedure in section 1, we obtained the non-zero tensor elements for time-invariant i-type ED contribution as below. Here, the degenerate SHG symmetries (j = k) are considered to reduce the number of the non-zero tensor elements. The transformed matrix χ into the rotated frame is used to derive the intensity of SHG RA as a function of φ, following an equation In the SP channel, the intensity of SHG RA pattern is predicted to exhibit six even lobes as a function of φ, which is not consistent with the alternating lobes in the SP channel for EQ 3 m as shown in Fig. Here, this equation is only applicable for a generating matrix σ for operations including the time-reversal operator m' in the 3 m′ point group. Other generating matrixes should be applied following the equation for the i-type surface ED SHG. Considering the degenerate symmetries (j = k),the obtained susceptibility tensor elements are Employing the procedures to transform the matrix into the rotated frame, we obtained the functional forms for all polarization channels used in the experiment as described below. The simulated result in the SP polarization channel for the c-type surface ED contribution is compared with the room temperature data in Fig. Since the MD contribution is axial, the SHG response from bulk MD contribution is allowed in centrosymmetric media. The derivation of the MD susceptibility tensor elements is obtained by using 1 where σ is a generating matrix for symmetry operations and |σ| is a determinant of σ (1 or -1). Non-zero MD tensor elements under 3 m and 3 m′ (time-reversal invariant i-type) are given as below. The intensity of SHG RA from the MD contribution can be obtained using an equation where ε is the Levi-Civita matrix and χ φ is the transformed matrix into the rotated frame from the tensor elements in the unrotated frame χ . The functional forms for all probed polarization geometries are given below. The derived functional form for the SP channel predicts the even six lobes of the SHG RA (Fig. Here, the equation is only applicable for a generating matrix σ for operations including the time-reversal operator such as m' in 3 m′. Other generating matrixes should be applied following the equation for the itype MD SHG. The obtained susceptibility tensor elements are The same procedure as the functional forms of the i-type MD contribution can be used to obtain the functional forms as given below. The simulated result in the SP polarization channel is shown in Fig. The existence of electric field in centrosymmetric media can effectively break the inversion symmetry, resulting in non-zero second harmonic generation. We considered the centrosymmetric media under a built-in electric field along the out-of-plane direction, and thus the nonlinear effective polarization P is expressed by where χ is the third order nonlinear optical susceptibility tensor of the electric dipolar contribution under the point group 3 m, and E is the electric field along the out-of-plane direction. χ for 3 m and 3 m′ i-type contributions shares the same tensor elements as bulk χ for 3 m and 3 m′ i-type contributions with 11 nonzero tensor elements as given below. The susceptibility matrix was transformed into the rotated frame, and then the EFISH intensity is given from The polarization of the incident and reflected light was chosen to be consistent with our experimental polarization geometry, and the functional forms under selected polarization geometries are given below. In the SP polarization channel, the simulated SHG RA pattern preserves six-fold rotational symmetry with six even lobes, which is inconsistent with three-fold rotation symmetry of EQ 3 m in the SP channel given in Fig. Here, the multiplication of -1 is only applied for the generating matrix for operations including the timereversal operator. The obtained susceptibility tensor elements for the c-type EFISH for 3 m′ are given below The susceptibility matrix was transformed into the rotated frame, and then the functional forms of EFISH intensity under employed polarization geometries are derived as below. The simulated SHG RA pattern in the SP polarization channel exhibits a distinct angular dependence with the preserved six-fold rotational symmetry from the data obtained in the SP channel as shown in Fig. The time-reversal broken c-type tensor elements for the polar EQ SHG can be obtained using a following equation 1 Here, the multiplication of -1 is only applied for the generating matrix for operations including the timereversal operator. The obtained susceptibility tensor elements for the c-type EQ SHG for 3 m′ are given below With the obtained tensor elements, the functional forms under parallel and crossed polarization geometries at the normal incidence are which exhibits distinct φ-dependence from those for crystallographic and i-type contributions under 3 m and 3 m′ as given in section 1. Due to this angular difference, the emerging c-type contribution across the phase transitions can lead to the rotation of the SHG RA patterns, which is described as follows. From the experiment, we observed two phase transitions manifested by the anomalies of the SHG RA patterns at T C,1 = 175 K and T C,2 = 120 K. In order to understand characteristics of these two phase transitions, we identify and analyze the emergences and anomalies of the temperature dependent SHG RA patterns for three different temperature ranges, attributed to emerging nonlinear susceptibilities and relevant magnetic order parameters, which are summarized in Table In contrast, c-type χ and χ are time-noninvariant, and thus have different tensor components from i-type counterparts, so that the emergence of c-type tensors is responsible for the rotation of SHG RA patterns as described in section 3. These c-type tensors scale with the odd powers of the order parameters. Below we provide how the functional forms of intensity and rotation of the SHG RA patterns are derived with respect to crystallographic (χ ), magnetic i-type (χ , χ ) and c-type (χ , ) nonlinear susceptibilities as well as magnetic order parameters (M I , M II ) for three temperature ranges with a focus of crossed polarization channel. Above T C,1 , the SHG intensity in the crossed polarization channel as derived in section 1 is given by I φ ∝ χ sin 3φ 2) Between T C,2 < T < T C,1 where M I ≠ 0 and M II = 0, EQ SHG contributions from M I coherently interfere with the crystallographic contribution, and the functional form in the crossed polarization channel becomes I φ ∝ χ sin 3φ χ 