The GW approximation is widely used for reliable and accurate modeling of single-particle excitations. It also serves as a starting point for many theoretical methods, such as its use in the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE) and dynamical mean-field theory. However, full-frequency GW calculations for large systems with hundreds of atoms remain computationally challenging, even after years of efforts to reduce the prefactor and improve scaling. We propose a method that reformulates the correlation part of the GW self-energy as a resolvent of a Hermitian matrix, which can be efficiently and accurately computed using the standard Lanczos method. This method enables full-frequency GW calculations of material systems with a few hundred atoms on a single computing workstation. We further demonstrate the efficiency of the method by calculating the defect-state energies of silicon quantum dots with diameters up to 4 nm and nearly 2,000 silicon atoms using only 20 computational nodes. As a first-principles approach based on many-body perturbation theory, the GW approximation has been successfully applied to accurately compute quasiparticle excitation in weakly and moderately correlated materials During the last decade, different formulations and algorithms have been proposed and implemented for accelerating GW calculations to meet the challenge of modeling large and complex materials In GW calculations, one of the most computationally expensive steps is calculating the frequency-dependent screened Coulomb potential W . In many implementations, the irreducible polarizability function and then the inverse dielectric function are calculated to compute W Here, we propose a method that avoids solving the Casida equation while still allowing us to perform fullfrequency GW calculations analytically and efficiently. To better illustrate the concept, we discuss our method applied to finite systems, for which real-valued wave functions and simplified notations can be used. Initially, we perform DFT calculations to obtain Kohn-Sham orbitals |φ m ⟩ and their corresponding energies ε m , which are used as an initial approximation for quasiparticle wave functions and energies, respectively. Next, the Casida equation can be constructed The dimension of matrices A and B is N 2 vc , where N vc = N v • N c scales as O(N 2 ) with respect to system size N . Here N v and N c represent the number of occupied and empty orbitals, respectively. With the random-phase approximation (RPA) used in the GW approximation, the matrix elements of A and B are given as We use indices v and v ′ for occupied states, c and c ′ for empty states, and k, l, n, and m for general orbitals, respectively. For finite systems, the Casida equation can be reformulated as a smaller eigenvalue problem where where η n is 1 for occupied orbitals and -1 for empty orbitals, and δ is a positive infinitesimal number to avoid singularity. The matrix elements W s nm are The exchange part of the self-energy Σ ex mm is independent of frequency and relatively easy to compute, while the correlation part Σ corr mm (ω) includes the frequencydependent screening effects of dielectric responses. The poles of frequency-dependent screened effects can be determined by the eigenvalues of C. As a result, the most expensive step of the aforementioned method is diagonalizing the Casida equation, as the computational cost scales as O(N 6 ). To make further progress, we intend to avoid this costly step by defining a vector |P nm ⟩ of dimension N vc , which has elements given by (P nm ) vc = (nm|vc)(ε c -ε v ) 1/2 . Then W s nm becomes Σ corr mm can be rewritten as where where Examining Eq. 11, we note the formula for Σ corr mm (ω, n) is similar to a general resolvent matrix element of the form k ⟨⋆|k⟩⟨k|⋆⟩/(z -λ k ) = ⟨⋆|1/(z -H)|⋆⟩, where H is a general Hermitian matrix with eigenvalues λ k and eigenvectors |k⟩, z is a complex number, and |⋆⟩ is a ket. Motivated by this observation, we reformulate Eq. 11 as the resolvent of a symmetric matrix D Matrix D satisfies D 2 = C and its eigenvalues are the square root of those of matrix C, i.e., DZ s = Z s Ω s . We use a g-th degree polynomial function p g to fit the square root function , which is the range between minimum and maximum eigenvalues of matrix C. Accordingly, D can be approximated by D = p g (C) + ∆ g ≈ p g (C) = a 0 I + g k=1 a k C k , where I is an identity matrix and the fitting error ∆ g can be controlled via the degree g of the polynomial function and fitting procedures. More discussions on Eq. 10 to Eq. 12 are presented in Section 1 of the Supplemental Material Given Eq. 12 and matrix D, the Lanczos method can then be applied to efficiently compute the resolvent of matrix D, which is an important step in calculating Σ corr mm (ω, n). In the calculation of Σ corr mm (ω), we prepare |P nm ⟩ for each state n in the summation of Eq. 10, where |P nm ⟩ is used as the starting vector for the Lanczos tridiagonalization procedure of the symmetric matrix D. With L steps of Lanczos iterations, one can construct a tridiagonal matrix D L with dimension L in the following form: Once the tridiagonal matrix D L is obtained, a resolvent matrix element (such as Eq. 12) can be computed using the continuous fraction which is also known as the Haydock method There are several advantages to using the Lanczos method for computing Σ corr mm . Solving the eigenvalue problem of the Casida matrix C is avoided, and the resulting full-frequency GW calculations become more efficient than the conventional method represented by Eq. 7, which explicitly requires the eigenpairs of C. Frequency grids, analytical continuation, and approximations like plasmonpole models are not required, as the frequency dependence of W and Σ corr mm are implicitly treated via Lanczos iterations. Moreover, the method is in principle applicable to any basis sets of wave functions, as our derivation does not rely on any features of specific basis functions. As a general-purpose algorithm, Lanczos-based methods have been used in computational material science, such as computing Green's function The accuracy of the Lanczos-based method for the GW approximation is checked by calculating the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecule orbital (HOMO/LUMO) energies of the GW100 set tion. G 0 W 0 -level calculations are carried out throughout this work. As studied in previous work, G 0 W 0 -level calculations depend on the starting point, while quasiparticle self-consistent GW (QSGW) and fully self-consistent GW can alleviate the dependence of calculation results on the starting points The computationally expensive steps in our method are: (1) calculating electron-repulsion integrals (kl|nm) and ( where the required number of auxiliary basis functions N μ for accurately representing the orbital pairs is expected to be small and scale as O(N ) and C μ nm are fitting coefficients. With the approximation given in Eq. 15, one can calculate integrals (kl|nm), which contribute to the elements of C and D, with the following equations These methods reduce four-center integrals to two-center integrals and also factorize C and D as products of small matrices to accelerate the matrix-vector products. Here we used the interpolative separable density fitting (ISDF) method to efficiently construct low-rank approximations of orbital pairs Combined with the ISDF method The main calculation parameters and required computation resources for these calculations are shown in Table In summary, a full-frequency GW formalism based on a Lanczos method is proposed to realize efficient modeling of hundreds of atoms with modest resources. This method can be used for highly efficient full-frequency GW calculations of large finite systems, such as semiconductor quantum dots and ligand-protected superatomic clusters with a few hundred atoms. Our method can also facilitate the construction of computational databases with quasiparticle-energy data, which were challenging to accomplish with limited computational costs before. This method is ready to generalize to extended systems, for which complex-valued wave functions are required. If the Tamm-Dancoff approximation is used (i.e., setting matrix B = 0 in the RPA Casida matrix) for extended systems, then the calculation is greatly simplified as only a Hermitian matrix A remains, and a standard Lanczos algorithm for Hermitian matrix can be used. On the other hand, if RPA is used, then a Lanczos-based method designed for pseudo-Hermitian matrices Weiwei Gao 1 , Zhao Tang 2 , Jijun Zhao 3 and James R. We start from W nm s defined in Eq. ( Here we introduce an auxiliary vector P nm of dimension N v N c to get Eq. ( The elements of P nm are defined by (P nm ) vc = (nm|vc)(ε c -ε v ) 1 2 . By comparing Eq. Using Eq. ( which is Eq. ( where the matrix elements are One can see that A(q) vck,v ′ c ′ k ′ = A(q) * v ′ c ′ k ′ ,vck and B(q) vck,v ′ c ′ k ′ = B(q) v ′ c ′ k ′ ,vck . This means that A(q) is a Hermitian matrix and B(q) is a symmetric matrix. The vectors and eigenvalues of C RPA (q) take the following form ]. If one uses the Tamm-Dancoff approximation, which is commonly used for studying the optical properties of periodic systems, the RPA Casida matrix C RPA (q) is reduced to The structures of hydrogen-passivated silicon clusters are relaxed using a real-space based pseudo-potential density functional theory code PARSEC. Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof exchangecorrelation functional We use graphic processing units (GPU) to accelerate the Lanczos iteration steps. The most expensive step in Lanczos algorithm is computing the matrix-vector multiplication |V′⟩ = D|V⟩ = (a 0 I + ∑ a k C k ) g k=1 |V⟩, which can be reduced to a series of computations of C |V⟩. In our current code implementation, only the computation of matrix-vector products C |V⟩ is accelerated using cuBLAS or rocBLAS library, while the interpolative separable density fitting method and the calculation of two-center integrals (α|β) = ∫ In the main text, we compare the HOMO and LUMO energies of the GW100 dataset for the Lanczos-based method and the reference, the difference between the two methods appears to plateau at 20 meV. The source of discrepancy between our new method and the reference method mainly comes from the polynomial fitting of square-root function √x ≈ a 0 + a 1 x + a 2 x 2 + a 3 x 3 + ⋯, which is not exact and results in small numerical errors. To further demonstrate our statement (i.e., the error mostly comes from the polynomial fitting), we have examined all the GW100 molecules that show large mean absolute differences between the results calculated with Lanczos-based and conventional GW methods. The eigenvalues Ω s We compared the HOMO-LUMO gaps of hydrogen-passivated silicon clusters (without defects) calculated with our implementation and those with previous work, as shown in Table To analyze the theoretical scaling of our method, we examine the formula of Σ m corr (ω) Here N v , N c , g, and N μ are the number of valence states, the number of empty states, the degree of the fitting polynomial, and the number of auxiliary basis functions used in interpolative separable density fitting, respectively. Since g and L scale as constants, while N v , N c , and N μ scales as O(N) , the total scaling is O(N 4 ) . The cost for interpolative separable density fitting procedure is O(N 3 ). To show the computational scaling of the Lanczos-based method applied to clusters of different sizes, we fitted the computation costs with curves of order N 2.3 , N 3 , and N 4 . As shown in Fig. node t wall (hr)