Electromagnetic interactions of protons and alpha particles are modeled in a form that is suitable for Monte Carlo simulation of the transport of charged particles. The differential cross section (DCS) for elastic collisions with neutral atoms is expressed as the product of the DCS for collisions with the bare nucleus and a correction factor that accounts for the screening of the nuclear charge by the atomic electrons. The screening factor is obtained as the ratio of the DCS for scattering of the projectile by an atom with a point nucleus and the parameterized Dirac-Hartree-Fock-Slater (DHFS) electron density, calculated from the eikonal approximation, and the Rutherford DCS for collisions with the bare point nucleus. Inelastic collisions, which cause electronic excitations of the material, are described by means of the plane-wave Born approximation, with an empirical simple model of the generalized oscillator strength (GOS) that combines several extended oscillators with resonance energies and strengths determined from the atomic configurations and from the empirical mean excitation energy of the material. The contributions from inner subshells are renormalized to agree with realistic ionization cross sections calculated numerically from the DHFS self-consistent model of atoms by means of the plane-wave Born approximation. The resulting DCS allows analytical random sampling of individual hard inelastic interactions. Monte Carlo simulation of the transport of fast charged particles in matter is difficult because of the large number of interactions undergone by these particles before being brought to rest For the sake of generality, the theoretical interaction models are formulated for the general case of projectile particles with mass M 1 , assumed to be larger than the electron mass m e , and charge Z 1 e, where e denotes the elementary charge. The considered interactions are elastic collisions with atoms (i.e., interactions that do not cause excitations of the material) and inelastic interactions, which result in electronic excitations of the medium. These interactions are essentially electromagnetic and can be described quite reliably from first-principles calculations or from appropriate models. A simulation program transports particles in the laboratory (L) frame, where the material is at rest and the projectile moves with kinetic energy E before the interaction. In order to cover the range of kinetic energies of interest in applications, we shall use relativistic collision kinematics. For simplicity, we consider that the z axis of the reference frame is parallel to the linear momentum of the projectile, which is given by where c is the speed of light in vacuum and M 1 is the projectile rest mass, M 1 = m p = 1836.15 m e for protons, m a = 7294.30 m e for alphas. ( The rest energy of the electron is m e c 2 = 511.00 keV. The total energy of the projectile is We recall the general relations where is the speed of the particle in units of c and is the particle's total energy in units of its rest energy. The present article describes the essential physics involved in the calculation of the DCS and general aspects of the sampling algorithms; details and specific formulas are given in a document available as supplementary material. Let us consider elastic collisions of the projectile with neutral atoms. These collisions involve a certain transfer of kinetic energy to the target atom, which manifests as the recoil of the latter. The recoil of the target atom is easily accounted for by sampling the collisions in the center-of-mass (CM) frame, which moves relative to the L frame with velocity where M A is the mass of the atom. That is, A neutral atom of the element of atomic number Z consists of the atomic nucleus and Z bound electrons in their ground state. The atomic nucleus is a system of Z protons and N neutrons, bound together by the nuclear forces. The total number of nucleons, A ≡ Z + N , is called the mass number. The atomic mass of the isotope A Z is estimated by means a mass formula The calculated cross sections for each element are obtained as an average over those of the naturally occurring isotopes, weighted by their respective natural abundances where A w is the molar mass of the element, and u = m( 12 C)/12 is the atomic mass unit. This simplification permits reducing the required information for each element (and projectile kind) to a single cross section table, irrespective of the number of isotopes of that element. In the CM frame the linear momenta of the projectile and the atom before the collision are, respectively, p ′ i = p ′ 0 and p ′ Ai = -p ′ 0 , with Notice that linear momenta in the CM frame are denoted by primes. After the elastic collision, in CM the projectile moves with momentum p ′ f = p ′ 0 in a direction defined by the polar scattering angle θ and the azimuthal scattering angle φ, and the target atom recoils with equal momentum p ′ Af = p ′ 0 in the opposite direction. The final energies and directions of the projectile and the atom in the L frame are obtained by means of a Lorentz boost with velocity -v CM . Thus, elastic collisions are completely determined by the differential cross section (DCS) per unit solid angle, dσ/dΩ, in the CM frame. We follow the approach described by Salvat and Quesada The interaction potential between a charged projectile and the target atom is expressed as where r is the distance between the projectile and the center of mass of the atom, V nuc (r) is the interaction energy of the projectile and the bare atomic nucleus, and Φ(r) is the screening function, which accounts for the shielding of the nuclear charge by the atomic electrons. If the nucleus is represented as a point structureless charged particle, the nuclear potential reduces to the Coulomb potential where Z 1 e the projectile charge (Z 1 = 1 for protons, = 2 for alphas). To facilitate calculations, we use approximate screening functions having the analytical form with the parameters given by where a 0 = ħ 2 /(m e e 2 ) = 5.292 × 10 -9 cm is the Bohr radius. The interaction energy of the projectile with a bare nucleus of the isotope A Z having atomic number Z and mass number A can be described by a phenomenological complex optical-model potential where the first term is a real potential that reduces to the Coulomb potential at large radii, and the second term, iW nuc (r), is an absorptive (negative) imaginary potential which accounts for the loss of projectile particles from the elastic channel caused by inelastic interactions with the target nucleus. Except for the Coulomb tail, the nuclear potential is of finite-range, it vanishes when the distance r from the projectile to the nucleus is larger than about twice the "nuclear radius", Parameterizations of optical-model potentials have been proposed by various authors. In the calculations for protons (and neutrons) we use the parameterization of the nuclear global optical-model potential given by Koning and Delaroche In principle, given the interaction potential, the collision DCS can be calculated by the method of partial waves The scattering of nucleons and alpha particles by nuclei can be described by using the partial-wave expansion method in the CM frame. The underlying physical picture is that of a stationary process represented by a distorted plane wave, i.e., by an exact solution of the time-independent relativistic Schrödinger equation for the potential V nuc (r), with the relativistic reduced mass which asymptotically behaves as a plane wave with an outgoing spherical wave. Owing to the assumed spherical symmetry of the target nucleus, the angular distribution of scattered projectiles is axially symmetric about the direction of incidence, i.e., independent of the azimuthal scattering angle in both the CM and L frames. In the case of scattering of spin-unpolarized protons (and neutrons), the optical-model potential contains spin-orbit terms, and the wave function is a two-component spinor. The DCS per unit solid angle in CM is where the functions f (θ) and g(θ) are, respectively, the direct and spin-flip scattering amplitudes. They are evaluated from their partial-wave expansions, where P l (cos θ ′ ) and P 1 l (cos θ ′ ) are Legendre polynomials and associated Legendre functions of the first kind are the S-matrix elements. The quantities δ la , with a = sign[2(j -l)], are the phase-shifts, which depend on the total and orbital angular momenta of the projectile, j and l, respectively. Inelastic interactions with the nucleus cause a loss of projectile particles from the elastic channel. The reaction cross section, σ react , (i.e., the total cross section for inelastic interactions) is given by The quantities T la = 1-|S la | 2 , the so-called transmission coefficients, measure the fraction of flux that is lost from each partial wave. Since alpha particles have zero spin, the wave function of these particles is a scalar. The DCS for elastic collisions of alpha particles with bare nuclei in the CM frame is given by with the scattering amplitude where The reaction cross section for inelastic interactions of alpha particles with the nucleus is The phase shifts δ la and δ l are calculated by using the Fortran subroutine package radial of Salvat and Fernández-Varea It is well known that optical-model potentials are not very reliable for light target nuclei. For collisions of protons with light isotopes having A ≤ 6 we use the empirical parameterization of the nuclear DCS described by Galyuzov and Kozov Let us consider elastic collisions of the projectile and a target atom of the element of atomic number Z, assuming that the atomic nucleus can be regarded as a point particle. The corresponding interaction potential takes the form of a screened Coulomb potential, where we have introduced the analytical screening function The DCS for collisions of charged particles with a bare point nucleus, described by the unscreened Coulomb potential V C (r), Eq. ( where is the momentum transfer. As indicated above, the smallness of the proton wavelength makes the partial-wave calculation of the DCS for scattering by the screened Coulomb potential unfeasible. A practical approach adopted in Refs. The DCS for scattering by a screened Coulomb potential resulting from the eikonal approximation is The function is the eikonal scattering amplitude at the polar scattering angle θ for a particle of mass μ r and momentum p ′ 0 = ħk. J 0 (x) is the Bessel function of the first kind and zeroth order, and χ(b) is the eikonal phase for projectiles incident with impact parameter b. For the analytical potential where K 0 (x) is the modified Bessel function of the second kind and zeroth order. The eikonal scattering amplitude can thus be evaluated by means of a single quadrature. Because the effect of screening decreases when the scattering angle increases (i.e., when the classical impact parameter b decreases), the DCS calculated from the eikonal approximation, Eq. ( Although the eikonal approximation is expected to be valid for scattering angles up to about (kR at ) -1 For still larger angles the calculation loses validity and presents numerical instabilities. Following Salvat with the coefficients A, B and C obtained by matching the calculated numerical values of the eikonal DCS and its first and second derivatives at θ = θ eik . The ratio of the calculated DCS to the Rutherford DCS, measures the effect of screening; it approximates unity at large angles (see Ref. Considering that 1) the effect of screening is limited to small angles (large impact parameters), and 2) the DCS for scattering by the bare finite nucleus differs from the Rutherford DCS only at large angles (small impact parameters), it follows that screening and nuclear effects do not interfere. Hence, the CM DCS for collisions of protons and alphas with neutral atoms can be evaluated as The total elastic cross section is finite and given by For simulation purposes, it is convenient to consider the DCS as a function of the angular deflection of the projectile, measured by the quantity which takes values between 0 (forward scattering) and 1 (backward scattering). Notice that and We can also write where p(μ) is the normalized probability density function of μ in a single collision. A Fortran program named panel has been written to calculate differential and integrated cross sections for elastic collisions of protons and alphas (and neutrons) with neutral atoms. This program computes cross sections for elastic collisions of a projectile particle with a given isotope Z A for the kinetic energies of the projectile specified by the user. Alternatively, it can produce a complete database of DCSs and integrated cross sections for collisions of projectiles of a given kind, with laboratory kinetic energies covering the range from 100 keV to 1 GeV for each element from hydrogen (Z = 1) to einsteinium (Z = 99). As indicated above, the atomic DCSs in the database are obtained as the average over naturally occurring isotopes of each element. The database grid of energies is logarithmic, with 35 points per decade. For each energy the program calculates the DCS in CM, Eq. ( c 2 times the square of the momentum transfer in CM. The original table is "cleaned", by removing points in regions where the DCS varies smoothly, to define a reduced grid that allows accurate natural cubic spline interpolation in t. The DCS interpolated in this way is estimated to be accurate to four or more digits. For each projectile energy, the database includes the values of the total elastic cross section, Eq. ( and the second transport cross section where ⟨μ n ⟩ denotes the n-th moment of the angular deflection in a single collision. The values of these integrated cross sections serve to assess the accuracy of the DCS interpolation scheme adopted in the simulation. We recall that the total elastic cross section and the reaction cross section have the same values in the CM and L frames. Figure As indicated above, collisions of protons with nuclei of light isotopes are described by means of the optical-model potential of Watson et al. The global potential of Koning and Delaroche Let us assume that the projectile is moving with kinetic energy E in a compound medium whose molecules consist of n i atoms of the element with atomic number Z i (i = 1, . . . , N ). The molecular elastic DCS is obtained from the additivity approximation, i.e., as the sum of DCSs of the various atoms in a molecule, where dσ el (Z i )/dμ denotes the DCS for collisions with the element of atomic number Z i . The total elastic molecular cross sections are expressed similarly, and the ratios p i = σ el (Z i )/σ el define the probabilities of colliding with the various atoms of the molecule. In accordance with the additivity approximation, we disregard aggregation effects and, consequently, the atoms in the molecule are assumed to react as if they were free and at rest. We consider the detailed simulation of elastic collisions of the projectile with an atom of the element of atomic number Z. The kinematics of these collisions is completely determined by the polar scattering angle θ in CM. In the CM frame, after an elastic collision the magnitudes of the linear momenta of the projectile and the target atom are the same as before the collision, and the scattering angles θ, φ determine the directions of motion of the two particles. As mentioned above, the final kinetic energy E f and the polar scattering angle θ 1 of the projectile in the L frame are obtained by applying a Lorentz boost with velocity -v CM . The final energy of the projectile in L is with the energy loss W given by where is the maximum energy loss in a collision, which occurs when θ = π. The polar angle θ 1 of the final direction of the projectile in L is given by with and where is the speed of the scattered projectile in CM. Notice that the azimuthal angle of the projectile direction in L is the same as in the CM frame. After the collision, in the L frame the target atom recoils with kinetic energy E A = W and direction in the scattering plane with the polar angle θ A given by In class II simulations If τ is less than, or equal to unity only the plus sign before the square root has to be considered. For τ > 1, there are two values of the CM deflection θ, given by Eq. ( where the last factor is the DCS in the CM frame. From the relation (56), we obtain (a derivation of this expression is given in the supplementary document) If τ < 1 only the plus sign is valid and the scattering angle θ 1 varies from 0 to π. When τ ≥ 1, the DCS in L vanishes for angles θ 1 larger than for angles θ 1 < θ 1,max , Eq. ( The energy-loss DCS is and the so-called nuclear stopping cross section is given by where σ el,1 is the first transport cross section in the CM frame, Eq. ( is tabulated at the same grid energies. The CM scattering angle θ of a projectile with laboratory energy E in the interval (E i , E i+1 ] is sampled from the distribution with which is obtained from the tabulated distributions by linear interpolation in ln E. The sampling is performed by using the composition method: 1) select the value of the index k = i or i+1, with respective point probabilities π i and π i+1 , and 2) sample μ from the distribution p(E k , μ). With this interpolation by weight method, μ is generated by sampling from only the distributions at the grid energies E i . This sampling is performed by the inverse transform method by using the RITA (rational interpolation with aliasing) algorithm Let us now consider the description and simulation of inelastic collisions of charged particles, i.e., interactions of the projectile that result in electronic excitations of the material. The most probable effect of inelastic collisions is the excitation of weakly bound (valence or conduction) electrons of the material, which can be described by means of the relativistic plane-wave Born approximation (PWBA) Formally, the adopted model is analogous to the one employed in penelope for inelastic collisions of electrons and positrons, which is slightly modified to yield a finite stopping power for slow projectiles. We disregard the fact that the mass of the target is finite and, consequently, inelastic collisions are described in the laboratory frame, where the stopping material is at rest. For the sake of generality, we consider a molecular medium, with Z M electrons in a molecule. Its electronic structure is described as a number of bound electron subshells, each with f k electrons and binding (ionization) energy U k , which essentially retain their atomic properties, and, in the case of conducting materials, a set of f cb nearly free electrons in the conduction band, with U cb = 0. By construction, Individual inelastic collisions of a projectile (mass M 1 and charge Z 1 e) with kinetic energy E and linear momentum p are conveniently characterized by the energy loss of the projectile, W = E -E f , and the magnitude q of the momentum transfer q ≡ pp f , where E f and p f are, respectively, the kinetic energy and the linear momentum of the projectile after the interaction. Notice that (cp and To simplify the form of the DCS, it is customary to introduce the so-called recoil energy, Q, which is defined as the kinetic energy of an electron with momentum equal to the momentum transfer where θ = arccos(p• pf ) is the polar scattering angle. Equivalently, The doubly-differential cross section (DDCS), differential in W and Q, can be expressed as (see, e.g., and where df (Q, W )/dW is the generalized oscillator strength (GOS), which completely characterizes the response of the material. The first term in expression (68) describes excitations caused by the instantaneous Coulomb interaction; the second term accounts for excitations induced by the transverse interaction (exchange of virtual photons). We should mention that the transverse contribution in Eq. ( For a given energy loss W , the allowed values of the recoil energy lie in the interval (Q -, Q + ), with endpoints given by Eq. (66) with cos θ = +1 and -1, respectively. In other words, When W ≪ E, the lowest allowed recoil energy can be calculated from the approximate relation Note that the curves which, when W ≪ E, reduces to It follows that, for given values of E and Q [< Q + (0)], the only kinematically allowed values of the energy loss are those in the interval 0 < W < W m (Q). The energy-loss DCS is defined by The probability distribution function (PDF) of the energy loss in a single inelastic collision is given by where is the total cross section for inelastic interactions. It is convenient to introduce the quantities where ⟨W n ⟩ denotes the n-th moment of the energy loss in a single collision (notice that σ in and σ in are known as the stopping cross section and the energy-straggling cross section, respectively. The mean free path λ in for inelastic collisions is where N is the number of molecules per unit volume. The electronic stopping power S in and the energy straggling parameter Ω 2 in are defined by and respectively. The stopping power gives the average energy loss per unit path length. The physical meaning of the straggling parameter is less direct; the product Ω 2 in (E) ds gives the variance of the energy distribution of charged projectiles that start moving with energy E after traveling a (small) distance ds within the medium. Although realistic GOSs may be available for simple systems, given either by analytical formulas (hydrogenic approximation Here we use a model of the GOS, adapted from the penelope code where with The quantity b (> 0) is a free parameter; a comparison with calculated subshell ionization cross sections by means of the PWBA with the DHFS potential The first term in expression (82) represents low-Q (distant) interactions, which are described as a single resonance at the energy W k . The second term corresponds to large-Q (close) interactions, in which the target electrons react as if they were free and at rest (W = Q); close interactions are allowed only for energy transfers W larger than U k . It is worth noticing that in the case of conductors the model can be used for describing the GOS of the conduction band (with U cb = 0), and the resulting stopping power only vanishes at E = 0. Figure where f k is the number of electrons in the k subshell. For bound shells, the resonance energy is defined as where is the plasma energy of a free electron gas with the electron density of the medium, and a is an adjustable parameter, the so-called Sternheimer factor. The term 2f k Ω 2 p /(3Z M ) in expression (86) accounts for the Lorentz-Lorenz correction (the resonance energies in a condensed medium are larger than those of isolated atoms or molecules). In the case of conductors, excitations of the conduction band are represented by a single oscillator with oscillator strength f cb equal to the number of free electrons per molecule, null binding energy (U cb = 0), and resonance energy Note that W cb is the plasmon excitation energy of a free-electron gas with the electron density of the conduction band. When a material is qualified as a conductor, f cb is set equal to the average lowest negative valence of the elements present (f cb = 0 for insulators). For free-electron-like materials, such as metallic aluminum, the value (88) is close to the energy of volume plasmons. The GOS model (85) satisfies the Bethe sum rule, for all Q. In the limit Q → 0 the GOS reduces to the optical oscillator strength (OOS), which characterizes the optical properties of the medium, and determines the density effect correction to the stopping power of highenergy particles. Indeed, the OOS resulting from our GOS model, with the resonance energies (86), coincides with the OOS assumed by Sternheimer et al. Thus, the GOS is completely determined by the mean excitation energy I, which is the only free parameter of the model. By default the simulation code uses I values from the ICRU Report 37 The GOS completely characterizes the response of individual molecules to inelastic interactions with the projectile (within the PWBA). The molecular DDCS can be expressed as where d 2 σ k /(dQ dW ) is the DDCS for excitations of a single electron described by the one-electron GOS F k (Q, W ). Hereafter the summation over oscillators k includes a term corresponding to the conduction band, with oscillator strength f cb , resonance energy W cb , and ionization energy equal to zero. The DDCS for collisions with an oscillator is conveniently split into contributions from close collisions and from distant (resonant) longitudinal and transverse interactions, The DDCSs for close collisions and for distant longitudinal interactions are, respectively, and The quantity W ridge is the maximum energy loss in collisions of the projectile with free electrons at rest, which is given by Notice that, when M 1 = m e , W ridge = E. For projectiles heavier than the electron (M 1 ≫ m e ) with kinetic energies much less than their rest energy M 1 c 2 , R ∼ 1 and The response of molecules in a dense medium is modified by the dielectric polarization of the material, which modifies the distant transverse interactions and causes a reduction of the stopping power known as the density-effect correction. The DDCS for distant transverse interactions is approximated as (98) where δ F is the density-effect correction to the stopping power. It is worth mentioning that this approximate DDCS results from 1) neglecting the angular deflection of the projectile in distant transverse interactions, which is generally very small, and 2) requiring that it gives the exact contribution of the distant transverse interactions to the stopping power for high-energy projectiles, in accordance with the corrected Bethe formula for the stopping power The quantity δ F is calculated as where L is a real-valued function of β 2 defined as the positive root of the equation (100) The function F(L) decreases monotonically with L, and hence, the root L(β 2 ) exists only when 1 -β 2 < F(0); otherwise δ F = 0. In the high-energy limit (β → 1), the L value resulting from Eq. ( The energy-loss DCS for collisions with the k-th oscillator, can also be split into contributions from close, distant longitudinal, and distant transverse interactions, where and These energy-loss DCSs, as well as the one-electron cross sections integrated over an arbitrary interval (W 1 , W 2 ), can be evaluated analytically (see the supplementary document). Evidently, the molecular integrated cross sections for inelastic collisions are σ Figure Inelastic collisions cause small deflections of the projectile and contribute to the directional spreading of particle beams when they penetrate matter. For simulation purposes, it is convenient to describe angular deflections by means of the variable μ, Eq. ( In distant interactions with the k-th oscillator, W = W k and the magnitude p f,k of the linear momentum of the projectile after the collision, is fixed, which implies that μ is a function of Q only. In close collisions (110) The total angular cross section, the first transport cross section, and the second transport cross section for inelastic collisions with the k-th oscillator are defined, respectively, as and where dσ in /dμ is the DCS, differential in the deflection μ. Naturally, both the differential and the integrated angular cross sections per molecule are the sums of contributions from the various oscillators, The contribution of close collisions with the k-th oscillator to the integrated angular cross sections can be calculated in terms of the energy-loss DCS, while that of distant longitudinal interactions is conveniently calculated in terms of the DCS differential in the recoil energy, Distant transverse interactions do not contribute to the transport cross sections because the projectile is not deflected in those interactions. In the simulation program, the integrals in Eqs. (111) are calculated numerically (details of this calculation are given in the supplementary document). The details of the oscillator GOS model have been tailored to allow exact random sampling of the energy loss W and the recoil energy Q. In addition, the model can be used for describing interactions with both bound electrons and conduction electrons. An exact sampling algorithm, which keeps the correlations between Q and W embodied in the GOS model, is described in the supplementary document. Each inelastic interaction with the k-th oscillator causes the release of a secondary electron with kinetic energy E s = W -U k in the direction of the momentum transfer, defined by the polar angle θ r given by Eq. (70). In the case of excitations of a bound subshell, the energy loss distribution associated with distant interactions is described as a single resonance (delta function), while the actual distribution is continuous for energy losses above the ionization threshold. As a consequence, energy loss spectra simulated from the present GOS model will show unphysical narrow peaks at energy losses that are multiples of the resonance energies. To get rid of this kind of artifact, we spread the resonance line by sampling the energy loss in distant interactions from the continuous triangular distribution in the interval from That is, we consider the distribution which gives the correct average value, ⟨W ⟩ = W k (see Fig. That is, the quantity W k is replaced with this modified value in all formulas pertaining to the distant excitations of bound subshells. Also, to prevent an anomalous increase of the ionization cross section of bound subshells for projectiles with kinetic energy near the threshold, we multiply the DCS for distant excitations by the factor which reduces to unity when Thus, the maximum allowed energy loss in distant excitations of bound subshells, Eq. (114), is given by which never exceeds W m (Q c ). The energy loss in distant excitations is sampled from the pdf (115) by using the sampling formula where ξ is a random number uniformly distributed in (0,1); this formula results from the inverse transform method The GOS model given by Eq. (85) provides a quite realistic description of the correlations between the energy loss and the scattering angle in inelastic collisions of charged particles. However, the subshell total cross section obtained from that GOS model may differ appreciably from results of experiments and of more accurate calculations. Inaccuracies in the total cross section for ionization of inner electron subshells become apparent when we consider the emission of x rays induced by impact of charged particles: the number of x rays emitted is proportional to the ionization cross section of the active subshell. To provide a more accurate description of the emission of x rays and Auger electrons, we have calculated a complete database of cross sections for ionization of inner subshells (K shell, L, M, and N subshells with binding energy larger than 50 eV) of all the elements from hydrogen to einsteinium (Z = 1 to 99), by impact of protons and alpha particles with energies up to 10 GeV. The calculations were based on the relativistic PWBA, as formulated by Bote and Salvat In our simulation program, the total cross section, σ in , is decomposed into contributions from inner and outer electron subshells, where the first summation is over inner subshells (i.e., K to N7 subshells with binding energies U i greater than the cut-off energy E cut = 50 eV); the second summation is over outer subshells (i.e., those with U j < E cut or with principal quantum number larger than 4). Figure when σ in,i (E) > 0. It is worth noticing that because of the neglect of the motion of atomic electrons in close collisions, the GOS model gives effective ionization thresholds that are higher than those of the reference cross sections. That is, we may have σ in,i (E) = 0 but σ in,i (E) ̸ = 0, in which case the projectile particles can ionize the inner shell at energies lower than the corresponding ionization threshold; under these circumstances, the energy transfer is set equal to the binding energy of the subshell, W = U i , and the projectile's trajectory is not deflected. Of course, this procedure implies increasing the inner-subshell contribution to the stopping power in the (small) quantity U i σ The program reads a table of the stopping power, S in (E), from the input material-data file, which is considered to be the actual stopping power of the material. By default, this table is calculated from the GOS model (85) as described above. In order to avoid altering the input stopping power, the total cross sections of outer subshells, f j σ j (E), are multiplied by an energy-dependent scaling factor, N (E), the same for all outer subshells, given by in,i (E) where σ in,j (E) is the one-electron stopping cross section for excitations of the j-th outer subshell, Eq. ( The interaction models described above permit the formulation of a class-II tracking scheme In our simulation code the cutoff deflection μ c , which separates hard and soft elastic collisions, is determined by two energy-independent user parameters, C 1 and C 2 , which typically should be given small values, between 0 and 0.2. These two parameters are used to fix the mean free path between hard elastic events (i.e., the average step length between consecutive hard elastic collisions), which is defined as where λ el,1 = [N σ el,1 ] -1 is the first transport mean free path, see Eq. is the CSDA range calculated from the input electronic stopping power. The identity then fixes the cutoff μ c as a function of the energy E of the projectile, which may be different for the various atoms in a molecule. The recipe (123) forces high-energy particles to proceed in steps of average length λ (h) el = C 2 R CSDA , while low-energy projectiles have the average step length λ (h) el = C 1 λ el,1 . Figure That is, C 1 sets an approximate upper limit for the average angular deflection (measured in the CM frames) at the end of the step. On the other hand, C 2 limits the average fractional energy loss along the step. An increase of C 1 or C 2 leads to increased values of both the mean free path between hard events, λ el , and the cutoff deflection, μ c , in certain energy ranges The angular deflection effect of the soft interactions that occur between each consecutive pair of hard interactions is determined by the transport cross sections of orders l = 0 and 1 of the soft interactions in the L frame. The contributions from elastic collisions are where μ 1 is the angular deflection in the L frame. It is important to notice that soft inelastic collisions also cause a small deflection of the projectile. The scattering effect of these interactions is accounted for by considering their contributions to the soft transport cross sections, where is the sum of contributions of all oscillators restricted to energy losses less than W cc . The combined (elastic plus inelastic) soft scattering process is then described by the transport mean free paths of orders l = 1 and 2. Assuming that the energy loss is small, the first and second moments of the angular deflection after a path length s, under the sole action of soft elastic and soft inelastic interactions, are [6; 8] and ⟨μ 2 s ⟩ = ⟨μ s ⟩ - In practical simulations the angular deflection μ s after a path length s is sampled from an artificial distribution, P (μ s ), which is required to have the same moments, of orders n = 1 and 2 as the real distribution, Eqs. ( As indicated above, the simulation of inelastic collisions is tuned by the cutoff energy transfer W cc set by the user, which separates soft and hard interactions. Hard inelastic interactions with energy-loss higher than W cc are simulated individually from the corresponding restricted DDCS. To simplify the programming, distant interactions with an oscillator are considered to be hard only if U k ≥ W cc , i.e., distant excitations of oscillators with U k < W cc are all soft. This classification avoids the need of splitting the continuous distribution (115). The sampling of hard interactions is performed exactly by using the algorithms described in the supplementary document, modified so as to deliver energy losses larger than W cc . Along each trajectory step (to or from a hard interaction), soft interactions with W < W cc may occur. The cumulative effect of these soft interactions is described by means of a multiple scattering approach determined by the restricted stopping power, A difficulty of class-II algorithms arises from the fact that the energy of the particle decreases along the step between two consecutive hard interactions. Because the cutoff energy W cc does not change with E, we can assume that, at least for small fractional energy losses, the DCSs for soft energy-loss events vary linearly with E. Under this assumption we can calculate the first moments of the distribution of the energy loss W s of a particle with initial energy E 0 after traveling a path length s under only the influence of soft events We have presented DCSs for elastic and inelastic collisions of protons and alpha particles suited for class-II Monte Carlo simulations of the transport of charged particles in matter. The DCS for elastic collisions are calculated from realistic nuclear optical-model potentials by using highly accurate partial-wave methods, and corrected to account for the effect of screening of the nuclear charge by the atomic electrons. Atomic DCSs in the CM frame have been calculated for the elements with atomic numbers 1 to 99; they have been included in an extensive database for protons, alpha particles (and neutrons) with kinetic energies between 100 keV and 1 GeV. Inelastic collisions are described by means of the PWBA, in order to provide a description of electron binding effects and of the correlations between the energy loss and the deflection angle of the projectile in inelastic events. The proposed GOS model satisfies the Bethe sum rule, and partially incorporates the effect of aggregation by using an empirical value of the mean excitation energy I as a defining parameter. As a consequence our DCSs lead to the correct electronic stopping for high energy projectiles. A simple renormalization of the DCS of inner subshells, to agree with ionization cross sections calculated with the DHFS self-consistent potential, ensures that simulations will generate the correct number of ionizations and the ensuing emission of x rays and Auger electrons. In addition, a further renormalization of the DCSs of outer electron subshells permits incorporating more realistic stopping powers for projectiles with intermediate and low energies. The proposed interaction models can be used in class-II simulations of charged-particle transport. They permit the formulation of adequate sampling algorithms for hard interactions, i.e., elastic collisions with angular deflections larger than μ c and inelastic collisions with energy loss larger then W cc , with arbitrary cutoffs. An exact sampling algorithm for inelastic collisions is described in the supplementary document. These models and databases have been implemented in a Fortran simulation code named penhan that, in conjunction with penelope de Investigación / European Regional Development Fund, European Union, (project no. PID2021-123879 OB-C22) is gratefully acknowledged.