The dynamics of Higgs mode in superconductors, manifested as coherent oscillations of the superconducting order parameter amplitude, provides vital insights into the nature of the superconducting gap structure and symmetry. Here we utilize twodimensional terahertz coherent spectroscopy to investigate Higgs dynamics of a newly discovered infinite-layer nickelate superconductor. While we observe distinct nonlinear terahertz responses from the superconducting state, well-defined long-lived Higgs modes, as commonly observed in s-wave superconductors, are entirely absent in the nickelate film. Instead, we find the coherent nonlinear terahertz response is dominated by the quasiparticle excitations. These observations strongly indicate that the Higgs mode in infinite-layer nickelates is heavily damped by the quasiparticle excitations at arbitrarily low energies, which is a characteristic of d-wave pairing symmetry. Additionally, by examining the temperature dependence of the nonlinear terahertz response, we discover short-range superconducting fluctuations in the vicinity of Tc. Our findings provide proof of a new d-wave system and establish a foundation for investigating the unconventional superconductivity in nickelates. The quest for new superconductors that are structural and electronic analogs of cuprates is crucial to settle the long-standing puzzle of the pairing mechanism in high-T c superconductors. The recent discovery of infinitelayer nickelate superconductors fills this void and expands the spectrum of unconventional superconductivity in oxides The ambiguity in the nature of the superconducting gap structure and symmetry can be elucidated by investigating the Higgs modes and their dynamics which are inherently interconnected with the superconducting order parameter Here we employ two-dimensional (2D) terahertz (THz) coherent spectroscopy to investigate the superconducting pairing symmetry of an optimally doped nickelate film Nd 0.85 Sr 0.15 NiO 2 (T c = 17 K) is recorded as functions of both gate time t and delay time τ . Here τ is the time separation between pulses A and B. E AB (t, τ ) is the transmitted signal when both pulse A and B are present. E A (t) and E B (t, τ ) are the transmitted signals with only pulse A or B present, respectively. The 2D FFT of the time-domain traces E NL (t, τ ) with respect to t and τ yields the amplitude spectrum E NL (ν t , ν τ ) in the 2D frequency space. The measured NL signal is generated by NL processes that involve excitations by both THz pulses, e.g., pump-probe, four-wave mixing, third harmonic generation, and higher order processes. These NL processes can be isolated in 2D frequency space via well-separated frequency vectors, e.g., ν A = (ν, 0), and ν B = (ν, ν). Here ν could be the central frequency of the driving THz field, the Higgs collective mode frequency 2∆, or the peak energy of the broad nonlinear quasiparticle excitations in superconductors. We present the measured NL signal E NL (t, τ ) and the corresponding FFT amplitude spectrum E NL (ν, τ ) at 4 K and 20 K in Fig. Figure Our measured 2D THz spectra of nickelate superconductor imposes strong constraints on the possible superconducting gap symmetries. In s-wave superconductors, no matter one-band We now present additional experimental evidence to support the claim that the Higgs mode in the nickelate film is highly damped. In Fig. To make our comparison more clearly, in Fig. To further support the d-wave scenario in the nickelate superconductor, we simulate the 2D THz coherent spectra of a d-wave system by solving the gaugeinvariant superconducting Bloch equations including the electron-impurity scattering Finally, we discuss the role of superconducting fluctuations in the nickelate film. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, we use 2D THz coherent spectroscopy to study the Higgs dynamics in a newly discovered nickelate superconductor. Neither the NL THz response in the 2D frequency space nor the detailed temperature dependent NL signals resolve well-defined Higgs mode signals. These results demonstrate the existence of a continuum of quasiparticle excitations at arbitrarily low energies that couples strongly to the Higgs mode, resulting in highly damped Higgs mode behaviors in the infinite-layer nickelates. Our observation is consistent with the recent theoretical prediction of a d x 2 -y 2 -wave pairing symmetry in nickelate superconductors 2D THz coherent spectroscopy. A home-built 2D THz coherent spectrometer driven by a 1 kHz Ti : sapphire regenerative amplifier, which has 800 nm central wavelength and 40 fs pulse duration, is used for this work. The laser is split into three beams. Two are used to generate a pair of intense phaselocked THz pulses up to 350 kV/cm that are separated by a time delay τ using the tilted pulse front technique. The third beam is used to detect phase-locked THz electric fields in timedomain via standard electro-optic sampling. The two intense THz pulses are chopped with a frequency of 250 and 500 Hz respectively, which enables us to isolate the nonlinear correlated signal Here, τ is the time separation between pulse A and B. t is the gate time of electro-optic sampling. E AB (t, τ ) is the transmitted signal when pulse A and B are both present. E A (t) and E B (t, τ ) are the transmitted signals with only pulse A or B present, respectively. A few THz polarizers are placed inside the spectrometer to control the THz electric field strength. Sample growth. ∼15 unit cells of perovskite Nd 0.85 Sr 0.15 NiO 2 thin films (∼ 4.3 nm) were synthesized by pulsed-laser deposition with a KrF excimer laser (λ = 248 nm) on 5 × 5 mm 2 LSAT (001) substrates, with the growth conditions specified in Ref. In this paper, we use a microscopic model of electron-impurity scattering Here, ψ † α (x) and ψα(x) represent the electron creation and annihilation operators, respectively, with α denoting the spin index. The real space Bogolubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian, H BdG , contains the complex superconducting order parameter ∆ , where g represents the effective electron-electron pairing interaction and θ(x) denotes the phase of the spatially-dependent order parameter. The energy band dispersion is ε(p), where p = -i∇x (ħ = 1) is the momentum operator, -e is the electron charge, and μ represents the equilibrium chemical potential. The coupling of the SC system to the electromagnetic fields is described by the vector potential A(x, t) and the scalar potential φ(x, t). The Fock energy Ensures charge conservation of the SC systems, whereas the Hartree energy, moves the in-gap phase mode of the SC order parameter up to the plasma frequency, which is located inside the quasiparticle continuum. Here, V (x) is the Coulomb potential whose Fourier transformation is given by Vq = e 2 /(ε 0 q). The second part of the Hamiltonian To investigate the non-equilibrium dynamics of superconductors under THz excitation, we use the gauge-invariant density matrix approach presented in Refs. where σn (n = 1 • • • 3) are the Pauli spin matrices, σ 0 is the unit matrix, and ρn(k) are the pseudo-spin components. For a weakly spatially-dependent superconducting system, at the lowest order in the gradient expansion of spatial fluctuations, the gauge-invariant Bloch equations expressed in terms of pseudo-spins are given by In the above equations, the effective driving field E(t) differs from the laser field due to electromagnetic propagation effects as determined by Maxwell's equations. Importantly, the above equations describe non-perturbatively the dynamical coupling between charge fluctuations (ρ 0 and pseudo-spin fluctuations (ρ 3 induced by the electromagnetic field, which leads to condensate quantum transport effects that arise to linear order in the driving electric field (paramagnetic current contribution)and have been discussed at length in our previous publications. For a homogeneous system, the time-dependent SC order parameter amplitude is given by The effective time-dependent chemical potential μ eff (t) is determined by the time-varying phase θ(t) of the SC order parameter and by the scalar potential φ(t) induced by external electromagnetic fields according to The acceleration of Cooper pairs by the electric field results in a superfluid momentum p S (t) = -2 e A(t), which is modified by spatial fluctuations in the effective chemical potential. In contrast to conventional pseudo-spin models The electron-impurity scattering contributions to Eq. ( given by with coherence factors and quasiparticle energy Note that, in our calculations here, the scattering terms arising from disorder contain the equilibrium coherence factors and quasiparticle energy for simplicity. The latter are determined by the equilibrium superconducting order parameter ∆ 0 k . This is a good approximation in the weak excitation regime where the nonequilibrium ∆ k (t) remains close to its equilibrium value. The delta functions in Eq. ( To obtain an expression for the normal state Drude scattering rate, we first study the equations of motion (5) in the normal state where T > Tc: The above equations correspond to semiclassical Boltzmann equations can be derived from the quantum kinetic equations ( As a result, Γ = 1 τ (k F ) corresponds to the normal-state scattering rate which is experimentally obtained by THz conductivity measurements. Simulation of 2D THz coherent spectra For a thin film geometry, the transmitted E-field that drives the SC dynamics can be expressed based on Maxwell's equations as follows where E 0 (t) is the applied laser electric field, n is the refractive index while is the gauge-invariant current. We include the electromagnetic propagation inside the thin SC film in our calculation by selfconsistently solving Eq. ( Here, E A (t) (E B (t, τ )) is the transmitted electric field induced by pulse A (B). In this work, we performed simulations that compare an swave order parameter, ∆ k = ∆ 0 , with a d x 2 -y 2 -wave, ∆ k = ∆ 0 (cos(kx)-cos(ky))/2, SC order parameter, with 2∆ 0 = 1.2 THz. We considered a tight-binding band dispersion with a square lattice nearest-neighbor structure given by ε(k) = -J[cos(kx) + cos(ky)] + μ with hopping parameter J = 50.0, meV and μ = 0. Please note that previous magnetotransport measurement of the superconductivity in nikelate flilms reveals that the superconductivity in nickelates is in the dirty limit Data availability. All relevant data are available on reasonable request from J.W.