We study the second-order optical response of Weyl semimetals in the presence of a magnetic field. We consider an idealized model of a perfectly linear Weyl node and use the Kubo formula at zero temperature to calculate the intrinsic contribution to photocurrent and second harmonic generation conductivity components. We obtain exact analytical expressions applicable at arbitrary values of frequency, chemical potential, and magnetic field. Our results show that finite magnetic field significantly enhances the nonlinear optical response in semimetals, while magnetic resonances lead to divergences in nonlinear conductivity. In realistic systems, these singularities are regularized by a finite scattering rate, but result in pronounced peaks which can be detected experimentally, provided the system is clean and interactions are weak. We also perform a semiclassical calculation that complements and confirms our microscopic results at small magnetic fields and frequencies. Recently, topological semimetals have been proposed as a promising platform for applications in solar cells and infrared photodetectors The mechanism for generating large photocurrents in semimetals is the bulk photogalvanic effect (PGE). This term stands for the generation of rectified second-order current under uniform irradiation of light in materials with broken inversion symmetry. From the fundamental perspective, photocurrent and corresponding nonlinear conductivity are intimately related to the topology and geometry of the band structure Depending on the microscopic origin of photocurrent, one can distinguish intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms. The former contribution is associated with photogeneration of electron-hole pairs, and can be calculated directly from the Bloch wave functions of a crystal. The latter mechanism, on the contrary, originates from the scattering processes or recombination of the electron-hole pairs. It depends on the details of the electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions and the nature of disorder. Inspired by the potential applications of topological Weyl semimetals, we explore how a finite magnetic field may significantly enhance their nonlinear optical response We apply the Kubo formula to calculate zerotemperature second-order conductivity tensors for both photocurrent and second harmonic generation (SHG), which is the response of the electric current at a double frequency of the incident electromagnetic wave. As such, we derive the most generic analytic expressions applicable for any frequency, chemical potential, and magnetic field, provided all the corresponding energy scales are smaller than the characteristic cutoff beyond which the spectrum cannot be considered as linear any longer. In the absence of any magnetic field, the second-order response of an isolated Weyl node is limited to a nonzero CPGE only, due to high emergent symmetry of a system at low energies We find that even relatively weak fields may signif- 1. Schematic picture of a setup considered in this paper. Weyl semimetal with nodes at different energies is placed under external static magnetic field B along the z-direction. As an example, PGE experiment is shown: An electromagnetic wave with frequency ω propagates toward the sample along the magnetic field, and its electric field components lie in the x -y plane. As a result, the photocurrent J flows in the z-direction. icantly increase nonlinear optical response. We analyze various limiting cases, particularly examining divergences in SHG originating from magnetic resonances. In a realistic experimental setup, these singularities would be smoothed out by a finite scattering rate; however, they could still substantially enhance nonlinear conductivity if interactions and disorder are weak. To corroborate our findings, we also perform a semiclassical calculation which agrees with the Kubo formula result in the limit of low fields and frequencies. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the model and outline main steps of our calculation. In Sections III and IV, we derive the general expressions for the photocurrent and SHG conductivity components, respectively, and discuss various limiting cases along with the divergences. The semiclassical calculation is presented in Section V. We wrap up with the discussion in Section VI. Technical details of our calculations are delegated to numerous Appendixes. We perform our analysis for the simplest model consisting of a single Weyl node with linear dispersion. To obtain a physical result, we must sum up the contributions from all the nodes located close to the Fermi energy. Assuming magnetic field B is in the z-direction (see Fig. Here v F is the Fermi velocity near the Weyl point, η = ±1 is its chirality, σ x,y,z are the Pauli matrices, and -e is the electron charge (we use the convention e > 0, B > 0). In this gauge, crystal momentum components ħk x,z remain good quantum numbers, and the energy levels are given by where we introduced characteristic magnetic frequency ω 2 B = 2eBv 2 F /ħ, and E 0 (k z ) is a single chiral band with linear dispersion (see Fig. Such an idealized description is valid as long as all the relevant energy scales, such as Fermi energy, magnetic energy, and frequency of external light, remain much smaller than the ultraviolet cutoff (of the order of the bandwidth) within which the dispersion may be approximated as linear. Furthermore, in Weyl semimetals, the nodes always come in pairs of opposite chirality. As we demonstrate below, the second-order response for a single node is proportional to its chirality; hence, the resulting current may only be nonzero if the nodes of opposite chirality are located at different energies. To achieve this, inversion and all mirror symmetries of the crystal must be broken, since these spatial symmetries relate the nodes with the opposite chiralities The most generic form of the second-order current is given in terms of the nonlinear conductivity tensor σ αβγ (ω 1 , ω 2 ) and reads as where we defined Ω ≡ ω 1 + ω 2 , E α (ω i ) are the components of the electric field at frequency ω i , and the summation over the repeated indices α, β is implied. To calculate σ αβγ (ω 1 , ω 2 ), we use the generalization of the Kubo formula for the higher-order response functions. The diagrammatic derivation for the most general system within the Keldysh formalism can be found, e.g., in Ref. In particular, we express the second-order conductivity through the three-point correlation function χ αβγ : where in the zero-temperature limit and V is the system's volume. In this expression, the trace also implies integration over the intermediate coordinates, and we introduced the exact Green's function in the external uniform magnetic field: Here, |Ψ n,kx,kz (r)⟩ are the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where H k is the band Hamiltonian. We stress that all the higher-order derivatives vanish for a Weyl node, δ 2 H k /δk α δk β = 0, consequently, Eq. ( When rewritten in momentum space, the trace in Eq. ( where Θ(ε) is the Heaviside step function, and we defined ) All the matrix elements entering Eq. ( Equation ( A schematic picture of Landau levels around a single Weyl node, Eq. ( reproduce the exact answer for χ αβγ (iω 1 , iω 2 ) in the limit B → 0, obtained in Ref. In this section, we consider the photogalvanic effect, i.e., generation of the second-order dc photocurrent under incident light. In particular, we calculate the injection current, which is the dc component that grows unrestricted with time in the clean noninteracting limit: In realistic systems, the injection current eventually saturates after scattering time τ to the value j γ ≈ τ β αβγ (ω)E α (ω)E β (-ω) To extract injection current and calculate nonlinear conductivity β αβγ from the general expressions in Eqs. ( Tensor β(ω) can be found as with Ω → 0. The structure of the form-factors Z αβγ and corresponding matrix elements from Eqs. ( This conclusion seems at first in contradiction with the exact answer for the B = 0 case, derived in Appendix B, which is fully isotropic and obviously does not have any preferred direction. The seeming inconsistency originates from different orders of limits that do not commute. Indeed, to derive Eq. (B6) for B = 0, we assumed that ω B ∝ √ B → 0, while keeping ω 1 and ω 2 (hence, Ω) most generic and finite. On the contrary, to derive Eq. ( The presence of the delta-function in Eq. ( The dependence of these components on frequency and magnetic field is illustrated in Figs. First, we consider component β xyz given by Eq. ( This component describes circular photogalvanic effect (CPGE), i.e., the part of the photocurrent which changes sign upon switching light chirality. It can be shown from the structure of the step functions that this contribution is nonzero provided and we focus on the case μ, ω > 0 for simplicity in this section henceforth. (a) (b) Typical dependence on frequency and magnetic field (at fixed chemical potential) is shown in Figs. (16) We find that, upon finetuning, β xyz exhibits an unsaturated growth in the low-frequency low-field limit. Indeed, consider the limit At fixed magnetic field and chemical potential, this limit We emphasize that such a giant photocurrent is possible due to a finite though small magnetic field. This regime, however, is only realized in a very narrow window of frequencies: Finally, we comment on the field dependence shown in Fig. Next, we consider linear photogalvanic effect (LPGE) described by Eq. ( In this region, CPGE and LPGE components are related as In particular, LPGE demonstrates the same unsaturated growth at small frequencies and fields around ω ≈ ħω 2 B /2μ. Additionally, in the limit of a vanishing field ω B → 0, it is nonzero in the narrow frequency window of the width ħω 2 B /μ around ω ≈ 2μ/ħ and equals The conditions in Eqs. ( and 2. one of the two conditions, where we defined E -n ≡ -E n for n > 0. As is clear from Fig. This condition, in turn, picks the frequencies which forbid direct transitions n → -n -1 due to the Pauli exclusion principle, see Fig. Another type of the second-order response generically present in noncentrosymmetric materials is second harmonic generation, a frequency doubling of incident light through its interaction with media. To calculate the corresponding conductivity components, we start again with Eqs. ( Straightforward but lengthy calculation shows that the only nonzero SHG components for a Weyl node are σ xxz = σ yyz , σ zxx = σ xzx = σ zyy = σ yzy , and σ xzy = σ zxy = -σ yzx = -σ zyx . Below, we consider all these components in detail separately. We start by considering the components σ xxz = σ yyz . The general expression in Matsubara frequencies is derived in Appendix D 1 and given by We have defined the short-hand notations: such that ħk n /v F is the momentum at which the chemical potential μ crosses the n-th Landau level and ⌊x⌋ is the floor function, i.e., the greatest integer not exceeding x. To extract physical response, we analytically continue Eq. ( The analytic continuation in Eq. ( We start with the case of sufficiently large magnetic field ħω B > |μ|. In this extreme quantum limit (EQL), only the n = 0 term in Eq. ( We see that the real part diverges logarithmically at ħω 1 = ±( ħ 2 ω 2 B + μ 2 ± μ), while the imaginary part has power-law divergence at ω = ±ω B . The real part also exhibits divergence at ω = ±ω B if small but finite scattering rate is taken into account [which is absent in Eq. ( In the opposite limit of vanishing field B → 0 (ω B → 0), the summation in Eq. ( This expression is valid provided We emphasize that its real part has more sophisticated behavior in the vicinity of ħ|ω| ≈ 2|μ|, while the width of the delta-function is proportional to the magnetic field. In the low-frequency limit, ω → 0, we may simply Taylor expand Eq. ( We see that this component grows unlimited if additionally magnetic field approaches zero. Now we discuss the divergences of SHG components. The first set of logarithmic divergences in Re σ xxz occurs at discussed earlier in the context of the EQL. Furthermore, away from the quantum limit, at ħω B < |μ|, it has additional set of logarithmic divergences at These resonant frequencies exactly correspond to the boundaries of the frequency range defined by the inequal-ities in Eqs. ( where N max is given by Eq. ( We note that, in the EQL, ħω B > |μ|, Im σ xxz has stronger power-law divergence at ω3 , while Re σ xxz remains finite at this frequency in the limit of vanishing scattering rate (the divergence reappears, however, when small but finite scattering rate is included). At low fields ħω B ≪ |μ|, the resonant frequencies become Equations ( Next, we consider components σ xzx = σ zxx = σ zyy = σ yzy . The general expression is derived in Appendix D 2 and given by where f n (iω) and N max are defined in Eqs. ( In the EQL, ħω B > |μ|, only the n = 0 term contributes, and we find The real part of this expression has logarithmical divergences at ω = ω± 1 and ω = ω± 1 /2, where ω± 1 is defined in Eq. ( At small magnetic fields At low frequencies, ω → 0, we obtain (39) Away from the EQL, at ħω B < |μ|, the divergences occur at ω = ω± i and ω = ω± i /2, i = 1, 2, 3, where all ω± i are defined in Eqs. ( C. σ xzy component of SHG Finally, we present the result for the components σ xzy = σ zxy = -σ yzx = -σ zyx . The general expression looks much more complicated compared to all the other components, so we find it convenient to subtract the contribution at zero chemical potential μ = 0. This extra term cancels out upon summation over the nodes with the opposite chiralities, which is required to get the physically measurable result (we assume that these nodes have the same Fermi velocity v F ). We obtain while a n (iω), k n , and N max are defined in Eq. ( In the EQL, ħω B > |μ|, we find after analytic continuation At small fields ω B → 0, we use the Euler-Maclaurin formula to find where ζ(s, x) is the Hurwitz zeta function, and ⌊x⌋ is the floor function. The presence of the Hurwitz zeta function results in pronounced quantum oscillations even at small fields. Unlike other components, this one is proportional to ω 3 B at the smallest fields. We also note that the term proportional to ω 4 B quickly takes over upon increasing field; hence, we keep it in the asymptotic expansion as well. At low frequencies ω → 0, we obtain which vanishes as frequency approaches 0. Finally, we note that this component exhibits more divergences compared to all other components. Indeed, apart from the familiar divergences at ω = ω± i and ω = ω± i /2, i = 1, 2, 3, defined in Eqs. ( , with n = 1, . . . , N max . In this Section, we complement our microscopic result with the semiclassical calculation. We neglect the interband and internodal transitions, focusing on a single band where the Fermi energy resides. This approach is justified provided ħω ≪ |μ|. Furthermore, we perform our analytic calculation to the linear order in small magnetic field B only, which requires additionally ω B ≪ ω. For large magnetic fields, a different approach is required, see, e.g., Ref. The calculation scheme we implement is similar to that of Refs. where is the Berry curvature and |u k ⟩ is the periodic part of the Bloch wave function. The quasiparticle energy dispersion is modified according to , and the orbital magnetic moment is given by These equations can be readily resolved to give ṙ = 1 where is the phase-space volume correction due to a finite Berry curvature In the case of the uniform electric and magnetic fields, the kinetic equation for the distribution function f in τ -approximation is given by where we assume for simplicity that the scattering time τ is a constant. The zero-temperature equilibrium distribution function is given by f 0 = Θ(μ -ε k ), where, again, Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function and μ is the chemical potential. The electrical current is then expressed as A monochromatic electric field with frequency ω is given by while the distribution function can be expanded in powers of small electric field, each corresponding to different harmonics: In the expression above, f 1 ∝ E and f 2 , δf 0 ∝ E 2 , where E = |E ω |, and we only keep the terms up to order O(E 2 ). The iterative solution of the kinetic equation in powers of E is straightforward but rather lengthy and cumbersome. Indeed, an algebraic mistake in solving the kinetic equation is what led to a disagreement in numerical coefficients for the semiclassical field-induced conductivity obtained in Sections III-V of Ref. while the band energy at zero field equals where ζ = +1/-1 corresponds to the conduction/valence band, respectively. Assuming the magnetic field B = B ẑ is weak and keeping the terms linear in B only (of the order of ω 2 B ), we find for the nonzero components of dc conductivity and for SHG conductivity while all other components equal 0. We emphasize that these semiclassical results are only valid provided ω B ≪ ω ≪ |μ|/ħ. In the clean limit ωτ → ∞, the nonvanishing components equal The SHG components are consistent with the low-field microscopic calculation in Sec. IV, in particular, with Eqs. ( In summary, we studied the second-order optical response of a model with an ideal Weyl node in the presence of a magnetic field. Applying the Kubo formula, we calculated the intrinsic contribution to the conductivity components of photocurrent and second harmonic generation at arbitrary frequency, chemical potential, and magnetic field. Our results showed that the magnetic field significantly enhances the nonlinear response in general, while tuning the frequency (or magnetic field) to certain resonant values results in an unsaturated growth in magnitude. Although this growth would be eventually saturated in realistic systems due to disorder and interactions, our study suggests a method to realize photocurrents of extremely large magnitude. Our results can be applied to Weyl materials with low crystal symmetry, such as SrSi 2 The nodes with different chiralities contribute oppositely to photocurrent and SHG, so they must be separated in energy in order to produce nonzero net current. This is only possible if inversion and all mirror symmetries are broken We emphasize again that the physically measurable response is obtained after summing up our analytical expressions over all the nodes with different chiralities. Since these nodes are located at different energies, they effectively experience "different" chemical potentials (with respect to the node location), thus leading to nonzero second-order current. The resulting expressions depend sensitively on the energy separation between the nodes and the position of the actual chemical potential, which itself depends on the magnetic field. We can comment, however, on two limiting cases which admit simple analytical interpretation. The first case is the nearly compensated semimetal with identical nodes (i.e., having the same velocity), such that the chemical potential is located almost exactly in between the nodes. In this case, the effective chemical potentials experienced by different nodes will have the same magnitude but opposite signs. This implies that the components with the even dependence on μ (i.e., CPGE component β xyz , SHG component σ xzy , and those related by symmetry) will cancel out upon summation, while the components having odd dependence on μ (i.e., LPGE component β xxz , SHG components σ xxz and σ xzx , and those related by symmetry) will enhance each other, merely multiplying our analytical expressions for a single node by the total number of the nodes. The second limiting case which can be easily analyzed is if the chemical potential nearly coincides with the position of one of the nodes, i.e., its distance to the node is much smaller compared to other energy scales dictated by frequency and magnetic field. In this case, we can set μ ≈ 0 for one of the nodes, which immediately nullifies its contribution to all the components except for the CPGE component β xyz . It means that only nodes located away from chemical potential will contribute to the final result, except for β xyz and other components related by symmetry. Naturally, the overall second-order response in actual crystals may differ substantially from our analytical predictions derived for an idealized model As a potential future direction, we find it interesting to explore second-order responses in Weyl semimetals in the presence of pseudomagnetic fields originating from, e.g., external strain Finally, we note that the method of Green's functions used in this paper can be easily extended to study the effects of interactions or disorder, as well as applied to other types of nodal points. In the absence of a magnetic field, the effect of Coulomb and short-ranged interactions on photocurrent was studied in Ref. where is the energy spectrum, y 0 (k x ) = ħk x /eB determines the center ("position") of the wave function with momentum k x , and L x and L z are linear dimensions of the system in the x-and z-directions, correspondingly. We have introduced properly normalized harmonic oscillator eigenfunctions: with the Hermite polynomials Using orthogonality of the Hermite polynomials, we find for the matrix elements where the wave functions Ψ m and Ψ n have the same quantum numbers k x and k z , and we adopted the convention with sgn(0) = 1. Appendix B: Second-order response in the limit B → 0 In this Appendix, we reproduce the most general result for the second-order (three-current) correlation function for a Weyl node at B = 0, obtained in Ref. where we dropped argument k z in E ni (k z ) for brevity. In the limit B → 0, one may write δ |n2|,|n1|±1 ≈ δ |n2|,|n1| , and we obtain Next, we plug this expression into Eq. ( , where we defined -μ (since we excluded n = 0), and Ω ≡ ω 1 + ω 2 . The limit B → 0 allows us to change the summation over n with an integral. Furthermore, we find it convenient to introduce new variables ρ ∈ (0, ∞) and φ ∈ (0, π/2), such that Using these variables, the integral can be easily calculated: All other nonzero components of χ αβγ can be calculated absolutely analogously. Collecting them all together, we find that, in the limit B → 0, the correlation function is given by in full agreement with Ref. At vanishing field and fixed frequency and chemical potential ω B ≪ |ω|, |μ|/ħ, we may change the summation over Landau levels with integration and get in full agreement with Refs. In the low-frequency and low-field limit |ω| ≪ ω B ≪ 2|μ|/ħ, the system can be tuned to the resonance frequency |ω| ≈ ħω 2 B /2|μ|, where the current is significantly enhanced. Indeed, in the regime | -2|ωμ| = 0, while Eq. ( where, again, we changed the summation with the integral. The whole procedure for calculating β xxz = β yyz is analogous to that for CPGE components. The relevant matrix elements are now given by In combination with Eq. ( which after integration over k z and summation over Landau indices leads to Eq. ( Finally, in the low-field limit, ω B ≪ |ω|, |μ|/ħ, the two step functions can be combined into a single one, and we obtain This expression is nonzero only in the narrow frequency range of the width 2ω For an ideal Weyl node, the only nonzero SHG components are σ xxz = σ yyz , σ zxx = σ xzx = σ zyy = σ yzy , and σ xzy = σ zxy = -σ yzx = -σ zyx . It is straightforward to see from the structure of Z αβγ n1n2n3 factors, Eq. ( We start with the simplest nonzero component σ xxz (iω) = χ xxz (iω, iω)/ω 2 . We note that there is only one term in this expression, which merely accounts for the fact that both electric field components in this case have the same frequency and polarization and are physically indistinguishable. The starting point for the calculation is Eq. ( Plugging this expression into Eq. ( where We find it convenient to further split this expression into the quantum contribution σ xxz q , involving n = 0 Landau level, and the nonquantum part σ xxz nq , with n 1,2 ̸ = 0 only. After some simplification, the former is given by ) where v.p. stands for the Cauchy principal value and ε ±1 = ±E 1 (k z ) -μ refers to the first Landau level in this particular equation, while the latter equals It is straightforward to check that both quantum and nonquantum components are odd functions of chemical potential μ and node chirality η. Focusing on μ > 0 and η = +1 for simplicity, one may perform the summation over one of the Landau indices explicitly (again, positive and negative Landau levels should be considered separately). Upon simplifying the resulting expressions, we obtain where n = 0 term exactly corresponds to the quantum contribution. Integration over k z can now be performed explicitly leading to Eqs. ( where we defined (D7) in accordance with Eq. ) and purely real for N 0 (ω) + 1 ≤ n ≤ N max (provided N max > N 0 (ω)). To derive this result, we used analytic continuation of functions f n (iω) from Eq. ( Equation (D6) is convenient for analyzing various limiting cases and divergences. In particular, we find that, at ħω B < |μ| (away from the EQL), divergences take place at frequencies given by Eqs. ( These divergences are indicated by black dotted lines in Fig. The summation over n can then be replaced with integration, and we find When performing analytic continuation, we use the identity and obtain Eq. Finally, in the low-frequency limit, |ω| ≪ min ω B , |μ|/ħ, ħω 2 B /|μ| , we perform Taylor expansion and find that After plugging this expression into Eq. ( We continue our analysis with the component The extra factor of 2 comes from the observation that the Kubo formula calculates the total contribution to j x (2ω) from fields E x (ω) and E z (ω) in Eq. ( The sum of the form-factors for this component equals Plugging this into Eq. ( This component is also an odd function of μ and η. Following the steps outlined in the previous section, we end up with Eq. ( After analytic continuation, the result reads as where N 0 (ω) and N max are defined in Eq. (D7) and f ± n (ω) are defined in Eq. (D8). Finally, we calculate the components σ xzy (iω) = σ zxy (iω). While the basic approach for calculating these components is similar to the previous ones, certain technical details are rather nontrivial, so we discuss them in more detail. We find it more convenient to subtract the corresponding contribution at zero chemical potential, i.e., we define This extra contribution, obviously, does not depend on μ; consequently, it cancels out after summation over the nodes with opposite chiralities (since each component is proportional to the chirality of the node). The sum of the form-factors for this component equals The derivation then is lengthy but straightforward, and we arrive at Eq. ( The analytic continuation, however, requires extra care and better be performed directly in integrals from which Eq. (40) was derived, rather than from Eq. (40) itself. Below, we calculate the corresponding integrals in Matsubara frequencies and perform their analytic continuations explicitly. This component is well defined for n ≥ 1, and we used k n = (μ/ħ) 2 -ω 2 B n for n ≤ N max to simplify the answer (we note that k 0 = |μ|/ħ). Upon analytic continuation iω → ω + i0, this component becomes At vanishing field, the first term ∝ ω 3 B is formally the dominant one, and the Hurwitz zeta function leads to pronounced oscillations. However, the second term, which is of the order of O(ω 4 B ), quickly becomes important as the magnetic field increases, so we keep it as well. We note that the series in Eq. ( After performing analytic continuation, we obtain Eq. ( We also used the identities To derive low-frequency behavior, ω → 0, we expand Eq. ( which after analytic continuation reproduces Eq. (44). Finally, applying low-frequency expansion to the EQL (ħω B > |μ|) expression given by Eq. (42), we find that Eqs. (44) and (D36) are valid in this case as well. We start the analysis in this Appendix with the semiclassical equations of motion which have the form: where Ω k = i⟨∇ k u k | × ∇ k u k ⟩ is the Berry curvature. In the presence of external magnetic field B, the quasiparticle energy dispersion is modified according to where ε 0 k is the bare band energy at B = 0, H k |u k ⟩ = ε 0 k |u k ⟩, and the orbital magnetic moment is given by These equations can be readily resolved to give ṙ = 1 where we have also introduced the phase-space correction factor D k = 1 + (e/ħ)(B • Ω k ). The contribution of the magnetization current -e k ∇ r × m k • f can be neglected in the case of a uniform system. Then, the overall current density is given by The distribution function f satisfies the conventional kinetic equation, which for the uniform system, in the relaxation time approximation, takes the form: where k is given by Eq. (E4), τ is the relaxation time, and f 0 = f 0 (ε k ) is the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution (as a function of ε k , not ε 0 k ), which at zero temperature takes the form f 0 = Θ(μ -ε k ). In the case of a periodic electric field, the steady-state distribution function admits the expansion f (t) = f 0 + δf 0 + (f 1 e -iωt + f * 1 e iωt ) + (f 2 e -2iωt + f * 2 e 2iωt ) + . . . , where , etc. The time-independent correction δf 0 ∝ E 2 appears due to the second-order optical transitions and contributes to PGE (second-order dc current). The reality condition requires that E -ω = E * ω . Expanding the kinetic equation into different harmonics, we find a set of coupled equations: Generically, this is a complicated system of differential equations. However, it admits a straightforward iterative solution in the case of a small magnetic field. Up to the linear order in B, the solution reads We stress here that the equations determining f 1 and f 2 are well defined in the limit τ → ∞ and lead to the solutions which are still described by Eq. (E10), i.e., the limits B → 0 and τ → ∞ commute for these harmonics. On the contrary, the equation for δf 0 becomes much more complicated if we set τ → ∞ from the beginning, and it does not allow for a solution then which is simply an expansion in powers of B. This implies that Eq. (E10) is not applicable for δf 0 in the limit τ → ∞ any longer, indicating that the most general solution depends sensitively on the parameter ω B τ . Having solved for the distribution function in the limit B → 0 (at fixed finite τ ), we plug the solution given by Eq. (E10) into Eq. (E5) to calculate the nonlinear current. Its quadratic part is given by the sum of the dc current j dc 2 (photocurrent) and the SHG current j 2ω 2 e -2iωt + c.c.: Finally, we apply these general equations to the case of a Weyl node, which is characterized by where η = ±1 is the chirality of the node and ζ = +1/ -1 corresponds to the conduction/valence band. We assume that the electric and magnetic fields are given by E ω = (E x , E y , E z ) T and B = (0, 0, B) T , correspondingly. Expanding Eqs. (E11) up to linear order in B (recall that f 0 depends on ε k = ε 0 k -m k •B rather than on ε 0 k ), we evaluate integrals over k and find The part linear in B exactly corresponds to Eqs. (55)-(56). The contribution to photocurrent independent of B, surprisingly, does not follow from our exact microscopic result at B = 0, Eq. (B6). This observation poses a separate question about the origin of the discrepancy in the answers obtained within different approaches. One possible resolution could be the proper gauge choice for the electric field. Indeed, since this term does not depend on chemical potential, it necessarily cancels out after summation over the nodes with the opposite chiralities and, consequently, does not contribute to the physical answer. Another opportunity might be the inclusion of both conduction and valence bands into semiclassical calculation and accounting for the interband transitions. We leave the detailed analysis of this issue to future work.