Understanding of the critical atomistic steps during the dehydrogenation process of liquid organic hydrogen carriers (LOHCs) is important to the design of cost-efficient, high-performance LOHC catalysts. Based on the density functional theory (DFT) we studied the thermodynamics and kinetics of the complete dehydrogenation path of perhydro-N -ethylcarbazole (12H-NEC) on Ru(0001) surface, involving the adsorption of 12H-NEC, the discharge of H ions onto Ru surface, and the desorption of H2 and hydrogen-lean NEC. It was found that the bonding of nH-NEC is significantly strengthened for n≤4 because of the flat aromatic ring. Although the whole dehydrogenation process is endothermic, the release of H from nH-NEC, with H adsorbed onto the Ru surface, was found to be exothermic. The desorption of flat, hydrogen-lean NEC, which costs ∼255 kJ/mol, was identified as the most energy demanding step. In addition, the effect of surface morphology on adsorption was studied based on an amorphous surface model. Overall, the results imply more efficient dehydrogenation could be achieved from relatively weak bonding of NEC to catalysts, either through engineering catalyst surface (such as surface defects or smaller catalyst particles) or different catalyst materials. Our calculations also revealed possible dealkylation at elevated temperatures. Liquid organic hydrogen carriers (LOHCs) have attracted extensive research interests As an ideal tool for investigating atomistic process and complementary to experiments, first principles modelling based on the density functional theory (DFT) has been often used to provide fundamental insights into the LOHC-catalyst reactions NEC and compare with the other events in energetics. Geometry optimization of all the relevant structures in this work was performed using the code VASP To examine the effect of an imperfect Ru surface on adsorption, we first constructed an amorphous bulk Ru based on classical molecular dynamics, with the atomic interactions described by an embedded atom method (EAM) potential 20 . To this end, a bulk Ru of 224 atoms (similar to the slab structure mentioned above but with 4 layers) was well liquefied at 2500 K and then quenched to 100 K at 50 K/ps. The simulations were carried out under an NPT (constant particle number, pressure, and temperature) ensemble using code LAMMPS A previous study on natural LOHCs 6 indicates that DFT calculations using a PBE-based hybrid functional (HSE03) plus thermal corrections, which include the zero point energy and the enthalpy of the molecules, can predict the dehydrogenation enthalpy reasonably well. However, the thermal corrections result in extra computational cost and, more importantly, sometimes we experienced difficulties for the hybrid functional calculations to converge, especially for metals. To examine the feasibility of studying the dehydrogenation reactions using the PBE functional alone, we tested the performace of PBE and HSE03, with or without thermal and van der Waals corrections, on several example molecules following the parameters in reference For the dehydrogenation process, we assume the initial state (denoted as state A) as a 12H-NEC molecule far from the Ru surface and the final state (state F) as a NEC molecule plus 6 H 2 molecules far from the Ru surface, as schematically shown in Fig. where n decreases from 12 for the initial state A to 0 for the final state F. For reaction 2, we considered the transition from state B to state E, with the released H ions directly forming gas H 2 molecules far from Ru surface. This hypothetical case is similar to reaction 1 except the nH-NEC molecule is adsorbed on Ru surface, and so it allows for identifying the effect of nH-NEC adsorption alone on dehydrogenation energetics. In this case, the system energy is Similarly, we considered transitions from B to D (reaction 3) and from B to C (reaction 4), with the released H ions forming adsorbed H 2 molecules and adsorbed H ions, respectively. This allows for identifying the adsorption effects of H 2 and H ions. Here we treat H 2 (or H ions) and the nH-NEC separately, and hence for reaction 3, the system energy can be written as where the chemical potential μ H 2 =(E H2/Ru -E Ru ) represents the energy of H 2 adsorbed on Ru surface. E(n) for reaction 4 can be similarly defined. The structures for nH-NEC we considered at various steps are shown at the bottom of Fig. The computed system energies for the four reactions, all referenced to that of state A, are listed in Table where n(ε) is the PDOS density, E F is the Fermi energy, and N a is the number of H, C, or Ru atoms contributing to the PDOS. We found E e values of s H , p C and d Ru of 4H-NEC/Ru are lower than those of 8H-NEC/Ru by ∼0.3, ∼1.2, and ∼1.3 eV, respectively. This indicates the stronger bonding between 4H-NEC and Ru, consistent with the charge density analysis. For nH-NEC adsorption we tested the effect of the ethyl group state (pointing down to the surface or pointing up) by rotating the ethyl group around the neighboring N-C bond. We found that for n ≤ 4 the up state is highly favorable (by energy difference more than 70 kJ/mol) while for the other nH-NEC structures the two states are nearly equally favorable (with energy difference less than 10 kJ/mol). For 4H-and 2H-NEC, pointing-down of the ethyl group reduces the bonding of the molecule with Ru by displacing the aromatic ring from the favorable position (Fig. If the released hydrogen are adsorbed onto the Ru surface, their chemical potential is lower than that of gas H 2 molecule and hence reduces the system energy. We studied the adsorption of hydrogen molecules and ions on various Ru surface sites (Fig. Due to the strong NEC-Ru bonding and the relatively weak nitrogen-alkyl bonding, it is possible for dealkylation to occur before the desorption of NEC. Here we considered the dealkylation reaction by comparing the energy of NEC/Ru with two additional H atoms adsorbed on two fcc sites and that of a carbazole and an ethane adsorbed on Ru. It was found the latter is higher in energy by ∼98.5 kJ/mol, much smaller than the desorption energy of NEC, implying the possibility of dealkylation under suitable situations. Further, we note that the desorption of the resulting carbazole and ethane costs ∼212 kJ/mol, while the desorption energies of NEC and 2H (from two fcc sites to gaseous H 2 ) sum to ∼255+123=378 kJ/mol. This indicates that the dealkylation approach is thermodynamically favorable by 378-212-98.5≈67 kJ/mol, which essentially is energy difference between (NEC+H 2 ) and (carbazole+ethane) in their gaseous state. Experimentally, dealkylation of NEC on Pt(111) surface The above discussions reveal the thermodynamics during the (de)hydrogenation process of NEC on Ru. We also studied the kinetics of the process by computing the energy barrier of relevant steps on the Ru surface using the climbing image nudged elastic band method For most 12H-NEC isomers (see Fig. We also computed the activation energies for other relevant events on Ru surface. For hydrogen migrating from a fcc site to a neighboring hcp site, the activation energies was found to be ∼14.9 kJ/mol only, which is consistent with the high mobility of H on Ru surface. For the combination of two neighboring fcc-site H atoms into an atop H 2 molecule, ∼68.9 kJ/mol is necessary to activate the process. Finally, we examined the desorption of H 2 and NEC. For these events, we set the final states to be local energy minima corresponding to the H 2 and NEC molecules being ∼4 and ∼6 Å, respectively, above the Ru surface. We note that these final states are slightly lower in energy than the states with the molecules infinitely away from the surface (by ∼4.2 and ∼5.5 kJ/mol for H 2 and NEC, respectively). Based on the selected final states, we computed the activation energies for H 2 and NEC desorption to be 54.3 and 249.5 kJ/mol, respectively, which are close to the desorption energies. In the above discussion of H 2 desorption, we assumed the path of two H atoms recombining into an atop H 2 before the desorption. The intermediate atop H 2 tends to decompose back into H atoms due to the small activation energy. Hence, we also studied the direct desorption of two H atoms from neighboring fcc sites into a gaseous H 2 molecule, as shown in Fig. Overall, the kinetics calculations also identify the desorption of NEC as the critical step for dehydrogenation. On the other hand, the discharged H ions are found to be very mobile on Ru surface. In the above we have discussed the dehydrogenation thermodynamics and kinetics of perhydro-Nethylcarbazole on perfect Ru(0001) surface. In practice, a crystal surface may have structural defects and these defects may impact on the behavior of adsorbed molecules. For example, a previous study 17 has shown that surface steps enables more stable adsorption of 8H-NEC as compared to a flat surface. Here, in a more general way, we use an amorphous Ru surface to represent an imperfect surface in view of its rich local structural features. Fig. Based on first principles calculations we studied the thermodynamics and kinetics of the complete dehydrogenation path of perhydro-N -ethylcarbazole (12H-NEC) on Ru(0001) surface, involving the adsorption of 12H-NEC, the release of H ions, H ion diffusion and recombination into H 2 , and the desorption of H 2 and hydrogen-lean NEC. During the dehydrogenation process, the adsorption of nH-NEC on Ru(0001) is significantly strengthened upon the formation of aromatic ring, of which the flat structure allows for stronger C-Ru bonding. Although the whole dehydrogenation process is endothermic, the release of H from nH-NEC was found to be exothermic because of H adsorption onto Ru surface. The desorption of flat, hydrogen-lean NEC, which costs ∼255 kJ/mol, was identified as the most energy demanding step. Based on an amorphous model, we also showed that the surface morphology has a great impact on the stability of molecule adsorption. Overall, the results imply more efficient dehydrogenation could be achieved by weakening the bonding of NEC to catalysts, either through engineering catalyst surface (such as surface defects or smaller catalyst particles) or different catalyst materials. Our calculations also revealed possible dealkylation at elevated temperatures. . Bader charges of selected surface Ru atoms (refer to Fig.