Triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) are promising self-powering supplies for a diverse range of intelligent sensing and monitoring devices, especially due to their capability of harvesting electric energy from low frequency and small-scale mechanical motions. Inspired by the fact that contact-separation mode TENGs with small contact areas harvest high electrical outputs due to fringing effect, this study employed discontinuity on the dielectric side of contact-separation mode TENGs to promote fringing electric fields for the enhancement of electrical outputs. The results reveal that the TENGs with more discontinuities show higher overall electric performance. Compared to pristine TENGs, the TENGs with cross discontinuities increased the surface charge by 50% and the power density by 114%. However, one should avoid generating discontinuities on tribonegative side of TENGs using metal blade within a positive-ion atmosphere due to the neutralization through electrically conductive metal blade. The computational simulation validated that the TENGs with discontinuities obtained higher electrical outputs, and further investigated the effect of discontinuity gap size and array distance on TENGs performance. This study has provided a promising method for the future design of TENGs using discontinuous structures. Nanogenerators have recently attracted much attention for energy harvesting due to their ability to convert mechanical energy associated with small-scale physical motions into electric power. Since the first proposal in 2012 Despite the high output voltage of TENGs, their output current is relatively low, and hence, the output power has potential to improve. For example a fluorinated ethylene propylene Such power densities have potentially enabled TENGs to become alternative to batteries in lowpower devices ranging from 300 nW to 100 μW For contact-separation mode TENGs, multiple researchers have reported that their electrical outputs by unit area (e.g., current density and power density) decrease as the total contact area of TENGs increase One computational simulation study has taken into consideration of the fringing effect to array TENGs by optimizing the ratio of TENG size and array distance to achieve the highest electrical outputs Herein, we propose to study the effect of fringing effect on TENGs electrical performance. In this study, fluoriertes ethylen-propylen (FEP) copolymer was used as the dielectric side of TENGs, due to its strongest electron affinity among the various fluorine-containing polymers FEP film (RCT®-OHL-1833) with thickness of 50 μm was used here (RCT Reichelt Chemietechnik GmbH + Co, Germany). FEP was used as the triboelectric negative layer, with one side coated with a layer of ca. 100 nm thick copper as electrode using a sputter coater (JEOL JFC-1300, Japan) equipped with a copper target (99.99 %, Micro to Nano, Netherlands). The morphology of FEP surface was observed with a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) (JEOL JSM-IT510LA). Aluminum foil with the thickness of 70 μm was used as the triboelectric positive layer, as shown in Fig. For contact area study, TENG samples with fixed thickness were used and the contact area varied from 3 × 3 cm 2 , 2.5 × 2.5 cm 2 , 2 × 2 cm 2 , 1.5 × 1.5 cm 2 , 1 × 1 cm 2 , to 0.5 × 0.5 cm 2 . For discontinuity study, TENG samples with the contact area of 1.5 × 1.5 cm 2 were prepared. The cyclic contact-separation of TENG with specific frequency, distance, and force was controlled by a linear stage (Linmot DM01-37x120F-HP-R-95), as shown in Fig. The analytical modelling of the effect of fringing electric field on TENG output was conducted according to parallel capacitor models. The numerical modelling was carried out using finite element method (Supplementary Materials Note 1). Fig. First, the condition of the maximum electrical energy was determined. The effect of frequency, distance and force on the electrical outputs can be found in the Supplementary Information Fig. The electrical outputs of FEP-based TENGs with various contact areas were measured. The maximum peak-to-peak value of short-circuit current Isc increased from 2.48 μA to 7.2 μA with the increase of contact area size from 1×1 cm 2 to 3×3 cm 2 (Figs. where A denotes contact area (in cm 2 ), d the air gap distance, σ u SC the short-circuit surface charge density, and t time. As voltage is also dependent on surface charge density, the maximum peak-to-peak value of open-circuit voltage Voc and the maximum peak-to-peak value of output voltage augmented from 128 V to 364 V (Fig. In the meantime, to eliminate the influence of increased applied pressure due to smaller contact area, additional experiment was conducted by maintain a constant area while varying the effective area for electrical outputs. This approach allowed to explore how changes in the contact area affect the conversion of mechanical energy into electrical energy, aligning with the assumption that the mechanical energy depends on the contact area. The results show that the contact area has direct influence on electrical output regardless of the applied force (Supplementary Information Fig. To investigate the discontinuity induced fringing effect on electrical outputs, single discontinuity was applied on the FEP side of TENGs. The electrical outputs before cutting (no discontinuity) and after cutting (single discontinuity) were measured, as shown in Fig. Furthermore, two-parallel discontinuities were applied on the FEP side of TENGs (Fig. For Isc, the presence of two-parallel discontinuities led to an enhancement to 1.34 times of Isc of TENG prior cutting (first measurement), whilst the Isc of control sample increased to only 1.15 times of the first measurement (Fig. A more complicated case -cross discontinuity was also investigated (Fig. As one of the common cutting tools, a metal blade was also used to create discontinuities on the FEP side of TENGs, and their electrical outputs were measured in comparison to the control sample and the counterpart of ceramic blade (Fig. Another assumption was the atmospheric electricity, which means the air is dominant by positively charged ions on sunny days and more likely full of negatively charged ions on rainy days The computational modelling was employed to study the mechanics behind the effect of discontinuity on boosting TENGs' outputs. By validating the experimental results and simulating a variety of parameters, the modelling can further provide directions to higher output induced by various discontinuities. The relationship between electric field E and charge q can be derived by the Coulomb's Law as where ε denotes the constant permittivity of the dielectric material, r is the field point where the electric field is evaluated, and r ′ is the point source of electric charge. Based on the computational model The TENG was modelled by using the FEM as shown in Fig. The fringing effect was clearly observed on the edges of aluminum side (Fig. Fig. original entire TENG, a TENG with single discontinuity in the middle of dielectric film, a TENG with two-parallel discontinuities on the dielectric side, and a TENG with cross discontinuity on the dielectric side. The electric field strength was simulated based on the input surface charge. Here, the surface charge Q from experimental measurement was used: 2.03 nC for original TENG, 2.68 nC for single-discontinuity TENG, 3.25 nC for two-parallel-discontinuity TENG, and 3.4 nC for cross-discontinuity TENG. The resulting electric field strength at the corners increased with the introduction of discontinuities. Compared to the original TENG, the single discontinuity led to the rise of electric field strength at the corners from 1.17 × 10 7 V/m to 1.47 × 10 7 V/m (Fig. The effects of discontinuity gap width on TENG electrical outputs were investigated. Taking the TENG with single discontinuity as an example, there was a tendency that a wider gap width led to higher electric potential on the tribonegative surface of TENGs in open circuit (Fig. An array composed of nine TENGs were investigated in terms of the vertical distance between TENGs (z), and the ratio (W/L) of horizontal distance between TENGs (W) and TENG length (L) (Fig. The ability of TENG with or without discontinuity to charge capacitor was measured using the circuit shown in Fig. In this study, it was shown that the fringing effect generated by the discontinuity of contactseparation mode TENG surface can boost the electrical outputs. By introducing single, twoparallel, and cross discontinuity, it was found that more discontinuities to increase more electrical outputs, reaching maximum value of Pmax by 114% after introduction a cross discontinuity on the tribonegative side of TENGs. Additionally, atmosphere conditions such as relative humidity and atmospheric electricity also have significant influence on the surface charge density of TENGs, where further research can be conducted to take the advantage of this property for fabrication process. The study employed the computational simulation to validate the enhancement of electrical outputs of TENGs with discontinuities. The results indicated that smaller discontinuity gaps led to higher electrical outputs, making TENG arrays with smaller horizontal distances a favorable choice. However, it remains a subject of ongoing research to fully comprehend why TENGs with discontinuities attract more surface charge compared to pristine TENGs. This intriguing phenomenon warrants further investigation in the future to unlock its potential benefits and applications. 