Molecular electronics targets tiny devices exploiting the electronic properties of the molecular orbitals, which can be tailored and controlled by the chemical structure/conformation of the molecules. Many functional devices have been experimentally demonstrated; however, these devices were operated in the low frequency domain (mainly, dc to MHz). This represents a serious limitation for electronic applications, albeit molecular devices working in the THz regime have been theoretically predicted. Here, we experimentally demonstrate molecular THz switches at room temperature. The devices consist of self-assembled monolayers of molecules bearing two conjugated moieties coupled through a non-conjugated linker. These devices exhibit clear negative differential conductance behaviors (peaks in the current-voltage curves), as confirmed by ab initio simulations, which were reversibly suppressed under illumination with a 30 THz wave. We analyze how the THz switching behavior depends on the THz wave properties (power, frequency), and we benchmark that these molecular devices would outperform actual THz detectors. At the nanoscale, the interactions between molecular-based devices and microwave-to-terahertz electromagnetic waves are a fascinating and relatively recent field of research since the beginning of molecular-scale electronics fifty years ago. From a device point of view, molecular-scale electronics suffers a serious limitation for electronic applications, because their electronic transport properties have been mainly studied in the dc regime, or restricted to low-frequency (< MHz). However, most of the metrics of these molecular devices (e.g., injection barrier height at the electrode interfaces, electron transit time...) scale in the THz frequency range. For example, transit times through molecular junctions of a few femtoseconds (i.e., THz frequency range) were theoretically predicted. The molecules are based on a dihydroanthracene core which was symmetrically linked to two π-conjugated ethynylthiophene units. Both compounds were end-capped with two thiol functions protected by 2-cyanoethyl or 2-(trimethylsilyl)ethyl groups referred to as AH1 and AH2 (Fig. show that the molecules are chemisorbed on the bottom electrode by Au-S bonds with the amplitude ratios of [S-Au]/[S-C] consistent with the molecule stoichiometry (Fig. THz, with irradiating power up to 43 mW on the MJs. All three molecules showed a marked NDC behavior at RT, which is suppressed under THz irradiations. Figure for the TS Au-AH1//PtIr tip MJs without THz wave irradiation. We observed a negative differential conductance (NDC), i.e., a decrease in the current when increasing the applied voltage, for all the I-V traces shown in the dataset. The I-V curves are rather symmetric and the voltage positions of the peaks of current at positive and negative voltages (inset Fig. THz laser (5 cycles). The switching occurs in less than 24 ms, the minimal time accessible between two successive acquisitions of the current with our C-AFM equipment. The real switching time is much faster, the switching being purely electronic in nature (e.g. ≈2 ps in the model proposed in Ref. The same behavior was observed for the TS Au-AH2//PtIr tip MJs (Fig. The switching effect depends also on the THz frequency. We did not observe the suppression of the NDC effect under irradiation at 2.5 THz (Figs. We note that we have not observed, under these THz irradiation conditions, an increase of the background current due to THz photon-assisted tunneling effect (PAT) 9, 17 see section 4.2 in the Supporting Information. The I-V datasets with the THz laser off are well explained by the two-site model developed for this type of π-σ-π molecule. To explain and rationalize the experimental results, we performed DFT (density functional theory) calculations coupled to the NEGF (non-equilibrium Green function) formalism 31 (Supporting Information, section 5). Figure The simulations are in good agreement with the experiments. The simulated NDC peaks are at +/-0.7V (∼ +/-0.5 to +/-0.7 V in the experiments). At zero bias, the degenerate HOMO/HOMO-1 levels lie at 0.47 -0.49 eV below the Fermi energy, while the value deduced from the fits of the two-site model on the experimental datasets gives ε0 around 0.35 -0.47 eV (vide supra). Since the protecting groups could remain at the top surface of the SAMs, we also consider calculations for the Au-AH1//Au MJ (one side chemisorbed, one with mechanical contact with the C-AFM tip). Globally, we end up with similar conclusions: the splitting of the HOMO and HOMO-1 levels gives rise to the NDC behavior, but due to the strong asymmetry, the NDC peak is only present at a positive voltage (Fig. Thus, the THz wave can induce charge transfers and interactions between these two levels, which can cancel the NDC peak current. The current at the NDC peak is strongly reduced and only a virtual MO is generated by this ac driven ET in the MJs. In summary, we have demonstrated an efficient conductance switching at room temperature in MJs made of π-σ-π molecules under the irradiation of THz waves. In the following, we envision potential applications as THz detectors. Quantum-well photodetectors (QWPs) based on electron intersubband transitions have a high responsivity among several types of THz detectors based on THzinduced electronic current variations (photocurrent) but they require working at low temperatures (<77 K). To implement such molecular THz detectors, we need integrated MJs compatible with modern nanoelectronic fabrication processes, with electrodes of large areas and transparent to THz waves. A candidate of choice is a single layer graphene (SLG) top electrode, SLG being practically transparent to THz waves. The synthetic step to obtain each of the three molecules is based on a palladiumcatalyzed Sonogashira coupling with key compound 3 (See Scheme). For that purpose synthetic blocks end-capped with different protected thiols, as the anchoring unit on gold electrodes, were iodinated to generate derivatives 4, 5 and and 340 nm with a slight broadening of the absorption edge for AH2 (Fig. When thiophene is replaced by the more aromatic phenyl moiety, the absorption maxima in AH3 shift to higher energies (311, 318, and 330 nm) consistent with a lesser conjugated system. Reagents and chemicals from commercial sources were used without further purification. Solvents were freshly dried and purified by distillation from sodium-benzophenone ketyl. Flash chromatography was performed with analytical-grade solvents using Aldrich silica gel (technical grade, pore size 60 Å, 230-400 mesh particle size). 3-(thiophen-2-ylthio)propanenitrile (260 mg, 1.54 mmol ) was dissolved in EtOH (10 mL) at room temperature. N-Iodosuccinimide (370 mg, 1.64 mmol) was later added followed by ptoluenesulfonic acid (10% mol) and the mixture was left to stir for 2 hours. CH2Cl2 cooled to -10°C. After 10 min of stirring at this temperature, the reaction mixture was allowed to warm to 20°C over a period of 0.5 h, after which silica gel was separated by filtration. The filtrated solution was washed with a saturated aqueous solution of Na2CO3, dried over Na2SO4, and concentrated to dryness to give pure (2-bromoethyl)trimethylsilane as slightly yellow oil (600 mg, 50% yield). The compound is not stable at room temperature, even when stored at +4°C, hence was directly used after synthesis. 1 H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3): δ 3.59-3.55 (m, 2H), 1.39-1.36 (m, 2H), 0.04 ppm (s, 9H). Under Argon atmosphere, a solution of CsOH.H2O (205 mg, (185 mg, 0.54 mmol), bis(triphenylphosphine) palladium(II) dichloride (19 mg, 0.026 mmol), and copper(I) iodide (6 mg, 0.03 mmol) was degassed several times under argon atmosphere, before adding 4 mL of freshly distilled dry NEt3. The mixture was heated under inert atmosphere at 90°C for 6 hours, after which the solvent was removed by rotary evaporation and the residue was diluted with water and extracted with dichloromethane. The combined organic layers were dried over anhydrous Na2SO4, evaporated in vacuo and the product was flashed through a short plug of silica to remove the catalyst and baseline impurities. Then, to reach a high degree of purity, the resulting product was injected in a recycling preparative HPLC following the procedure described above to give 100 mg (0.15 mmol, 58% yield) of a crystalline yellow solid. An oven-dried microwave tube containing a stirring bar was charged with 4-bromothiophenol (1.1 g, 5.9 mmol), vinyltrimethylsilane (0.7 g, 1.07 mL, 7.06 mmol) and di-tert-butyl peroxide (0.13 g, 0.88 mmol). A septum-cap was crimped on the tube to form a seal. The mixture was degassed 3 times by vacuum-argon filling cycles before exposing the reaction to microwave irradiation for 2 hours at 100°C. After cooling down to room temperature, the reaction mixture was diluted with hexane and washed twice with aqueous NaOH solution (1 m). The organic layer was dried over MgSO4 and subsequently concentrated under reduced pressure. Finally, the crude product was purified by column chromatography (silica gel, petroleum ether as eluent) to yield the desired product as a colorless liquid (1.2 g, 71% yield). The dark solution was stirred at -78 °C for 30 min, then allowed to warm to room temperature and stirred for an additional 2 hours. The mixture was quenched with Na2SO3, and the aqueous layer was extracted with DCM three times. The combined organic layers were subsequently washed with brine and dried over MgSO4. The end residue was purified using column chromatography on silica gel with petroleum ether as eluent to provide the product (0.8 g, 70% yield) as a pale yellow oil. hours, after which the solvent was removed by rotary evaporation and the residue was diluted with water and extracted with dichloromethane. The combined organic layers were dried over anhydrous Na2SO4, evaporated in vacuo and the product was flashed through a short plug of silica to remove the catalyst and baseline impurities. Then, to reach a high degree of purity, the resulting product was injected in a recycling preparative HPLC following the procedure described above to give 90 mg (0.14 mmol, 53% yield) of a crystalline white solid. The thickness of the SAMs was measured using a UVISEL (Horiba Jobin Yvon) spectroscopic ellipsometer equipped with DeltaPsi 2 data analysis software. The system acquired a spectrum ranging from 2 to 4.5 eV (300-750 nm) with intervals of 0.1 eV (or 15 nm). The data were taken at an angle of incidence of 70°, and the compensator was set at 45°. We fit the data by a regression analysis to a film-onsubstrate model as described by their thickness and their complex refractive indexes. We estimated the accuracy of the SAM thickness measurements at ± 2 Å. length. The S-to-S length is taken from the geometry optimization in gas phase. We also give the length assuming that the end groups remain on the top of the SAM surface after the chemical grafting since no deprotection agent was used. High resolution XPS spectra (Physical Electronics 5600 spectrometer fitted in an UHV chamber with a residual pressure of 3x10 -10 mbar) were recorded with a monochromatic AlKα X-ray source (hν = 1486.6 eV), a detection angle of 45° as referenced to the sample surface, an analyzer entrance slit width of 400 μm and with an analyzer pass energy of 12 eV. Background was subtracted by the Shirley method. The XPS spectra of the AH1, AH2 and AH3 SAMs show the expected elements. In particular, the S 2p region shows the expected two doublets (S 2p1/2 and S 2p3/2) associated to the sulfur bonded to gold, S-Au (S 2p1/2 at 162.3 eV, S 2p3/2 at 163.5 eV) and the "unbonded" to gold S atoms, i.e., S-C (S 2p1/2 at 163.6 eV, S 2p3/2 at 164.9 eV) (Fig. The UPS spectra (Fig. The current-voltage characteristics were measured by conductive atomic force microscopy (Icon, Bruker), using PtIr coated tip (RMN-12PT400B from Bruker, 0.3 N/m spring constant). The 30 THz QCL laser was placed near the Icon and the THz beam was focused on the sample below the tip using an optical fiber (focus spot diameter = 300 μm). The emission wavelength of the QCL was set at 966.5 cm -1 or 29.3THz (continuous wave), and the output power was adjustable. To form the molecular junction, the conductive tip was located at a stationary contact point on the SAM surface at a controlled loading force (6-8 nN). The voltage was applied on the substrate, the tip is grounded via the input of the current-voltage preamplifier. The C-AFM tip is located at different places on the sample (typically on an array -10x10 grid -of stationary contact points spaced of 50-100 nm), at a fixed loading force and the I-V characteristics were acquired directly by varying the voltage for each contact point. The I-V characteristics were not averaged between successive measurements and typically hundreds I-V measurements were acquired on each sample. The load force was set at ≈6-8 nN for all the I-V measurements, a lower value leading to too many contact instabilities during the I-V measurements. The tip contact area was estimated (6-7.5 nm 2 ) with a mechanical model (vide infra, For the 2.5 THz laser irradiation, we used a Bruker Multimode C-AFM mounted on the optical bench. The THz source is a CO2 pumped methanol gas laser emitting at 2.522 THz (continuous wave) and its power was adjustable. To adapt the beam size to the dimension of the internal optics of the bench, the beam size is reduced with a set of two confocal parabolic mirrors (focus spot diameter = 160 μm). Then, the beam enters the optical bench and it is focused on the tip-sample junction with another parabolic mirror. In addition, an infrared laser was aligned with the THz laser, and a camera was used to observe the sample, giving a convenient view point to focalize the THz laser spot on the junction under the C-AFM tip. The same protocol as above was used to acquire the I-V datasets. Before to fit the I-V curves with the analytical models, the raw set of I-V data is analyzed and some I-V curves were discarded from the analysis: -At high current, the I-V traces that reached the saturating current during the voltage scan (the compliance level of the trans-impedance amplifier). -The traces displaying abrupt steps during the voltage scan (due to contact instabilities). -At low current, the I-V traces that reached the sensitivity limit (almost flat I-V traces) and displayed noisy and random staircase behavior (due to the sensitivity limit of both the trans-impedance amplifier and the resolution of the ADC (analogdigital converter). The measurement yield for the three samples is summarized in Table For the histograms (Figs. 4, S11 -S14) of the fitted parameters with Eqs. (S4) and (S6), we have fitted all the I-Vs shown in the datasets (Figs. 2, S8 -S10), we have inspected all the fits and discarded those not fitting the data (bad coefficient of determination R 2 <0.9 and fitted I-Vs not matching the data I-Vs). The load force was set at ≈ 6-8 nN for all the I-V measurements, a lower value leading to too many contact instabilities during the I-V measurements. Considering: (i) the area per molecule on the surface (as estimated from the calculated geometry optimization), and (ii) the estimated C-AFM tip contact surface (see below), we estimate N, the number of molecules contacted under the C-AFM tip, as follows. As usually reported in literature The I-V curves with a NDC behavior were fitted by a two-site model. The currentvoltage behavior is given by: As a control experiment, we measured I-Vs under 30 THz irradiation (same power of 40 mW) of MJs made of SAMs of oligo(phenylene ethynylene) (OPE). We did not observe any modification of the I-Vs (Fig. The geometric structure of the molecule was first optimized in the gas phase at the DFT level, with the B3LYP functional For the MJ with the molecule chemisorbed at only one interface, the same approach was used, except that for the second gold electrode added on the top side of the molecular layer (Fig. In order to simulate the molecular junctions under bias, the transmission spectra have been first calculated out of equilibrium for each bias in a self-consistent way, that is, the electronic structure of the entire junction is re-optimized for every applied bias. Then, the I-V characteristics have been calculated based on the Landauer-Büttiker formalism, The voltage drop is the difference in real space in effective potential δVE(r,V) between two self-consistent calculations, i.e. δVE(r,V1) -δVE(r,V0) where the reference calculation "V0" is associated to zero bias. The obtained quantity shows how the applied bias "V1" is distributed across the device, i.e. where the voltage drops. In this work, we have calculated the voltage drop for the Au-AH1-Au and Au-AH1//Au junctions under their peak voltage; 0.7V and 0.6V, respectively. The results reveal that most of the voltage drop takes place around the molecule, not near the electrodes (Fig. To estimate the coupling between the AH1 molecule and the electrodes (Γ), we fitted the width of the HOMO and HOMO-1 transmission peak with a Lorentzian function. I temperature through a set of two JAIGEL-2H and 2.5H columns at an elution rate of 10 mL.min -1 . NMR spectra were recorded with a Bruker AVANCE III 300 ( 1 H, 300 MHz and