We unravel the effect of La substitution and hence antisite disorders on the exchange bias (EB) mechanism in Sr2-xLaxCoNbO6 (x = 0, 0.2) double perovskite samples using the detailed analysis of the field cooled magnetization isotherms (M-H) and training effect. The field dependence of the freezing temperature deviates from both Gabay-Toulouse (GT) and de Almeida-Thouless (AT) lines and the analysis suggests that the x = 0 sample follows a different universality class with moderate anisotropy in the frozen spins. Interestingly, we find that the EB effect is significantly suppressed in the x = 0.2 sample due to increase [decrease] in the size of ferromagnetic (FM) [cluster glass (CG)] domain, which reduces the effective disordered interface responsible for the EB. The changes in fraction of FM, AFM, and CG like interactions with the La substitution and applied magnetic field are found to be crucial in governing the EB effect in these samples. Further, the training effect measurements show the unequal shift in the left and right branches of the M-H loops and their different evolution with the field cycles (n). The analysis reveals that the rotatable spins relax approximately one order of magnitude faster than the frozen spins at the disordered interface. We find a possible correlation between the observed EB effect and the antisite disorders in these samples. I. The exchange bias (EB) effect arises from the unidirectional magnetic anisotropy resulting from the exchange interactions at the ferromagnetic (FM)-antiferromagnetic (AFM) interface and is manifested by a horizontal and/or vertical shift in the M-H loop, recorded after cooling the sample in the applied magnetic field below the AFM transition temperature (T N ) In this context, the Co-based perovskite oxides have gained huge attention due to various possible valence and spin states of Co in the octahedral environment, resulting * rsdhaka@physics.iitd.ac.in in several competing magnetic interactions and hence peculiar magnetic ground states such as spin glass, cluster glass, spin liquid, spin ice, Griffiths phase etc. In this paper, we present the effect of antisite disorders on the frozen spins and hence EB phenomena in Sr 2-x La x CoNbO 6 (x = 0, 0.2) samples. In the first section, we investigate the field dependence of the irreversibility temperature (T irr ) in the zero-field-cooled (ZFC) and field-cooled (FC) magnetic susceptibility curves for the x = 0 sample, which shows deviation from both Gabay-Toulouse (GT) and de Almeida-Thouless (AT) lines, and the analysis suggests the moderate exchange anisotropy in this sample. In the next section, we present the field dependence of the EB effect in the x = 0 and 0.2 samples and found that the EB parameters increase with the cooling field (H CF ) up to a certain value and then decreases with further increases in the H CF for both the samples. More importantly, the La substitution significantly reduces the EB effect due to enhancement in the size of the FM domains, which reduces the effective disordered interface. Then, we performed the training effect measurements on both the samples and use various models to understand the low temperature complex spin dynamics. We observe the asymmetric training effect in both the samples and a more stable EB mechanism in case of the x = 0.2 sample. In the last section, we discuss the possible origins and evolution of the EB effect and their correlation with the antisite disorders in these samples. The polycrystalline samples of Sr 2-x La x CoNbO 6 (x = 0 and 0.2) were synthesized by usual solid-state reaction route. The detailed synthesis process and physical properties can be found in our recent papers A. Field dependence of the blocking temperature In Figs. Further, we analyze the magnetic field dependence of the irreversibility temperature in the ZFC-FC curves (T irr ) using the following power law where T irr (0) is the irreversibility temperature in the zero field regime, A is a constant which is the measure of the anisotropy in the system, and the value of power exponent p defines the nature of the magnetic interactions. For the highly anisotropic Ising spins, the value of p is 2/3, which gives de Almeida-Thouless (A-T) line, whereas p = 2 in the weak anisotropy regime corresponds to the Gabay-Toulouse (G-T) line To check this, we plot the T irr as a function of H 2/3 and H 2 in Figs. 1(g) and (h), respectively. Interestingly, we observe a clear deviation from the linearity in both the cases, which indicates that none of the two ir-reversibility lines reproduces the observed behavior in the present case. Therefore, we fit the T irr (H) curve using the equation 1 by keeping the exponent p as a free parameter, which gives A = 0.028±0.001 Oe -0.29 , p = 0.29±0.03, and T irr (0) = 20.5±0.3 K and the best fit curve is shown by the black solid line in Fig. The value of power exponent p is significantly lower than both A-T and G-T lines, which indicate the existence of a different universality class in the present case. Kotliar and Sompolinsky theoretically redefine the A-T and G-T lines with the D/k B T >> (μH/k B T ) 2/3 and D/k B T << (μH/k B T ) 5/2 conditions in the strong and week anisotropic regimes, respectively, where D is the strength of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and μ is the magnetic moment of a spin , which is close to the value obtained in the present case. Thus, we believe that the x = 0 sample follows a different universality class with an intermediate random anisotropy, lying between A-T and G-T lines. A similar behavior is also reported in the other disordered compounds such as Mn 0.25 Ti 1.1 S 2 In order to further unravel the low temperature spin dynamics, we measure the field dependent magnetization (M-H) curves between ±70 kOe at 5 K for the x = 0 and 0.2 samples, after cooling the samples in the different magnetic fields (H CF ), as shown in Figs. where M S is the saturation magnetization, terms a/H and b/H 2 are attributed to the structural defects and magnetocrystalline anisotropy, respectively, and χ hf represents the high field susceptibility due to the enhanced spontaneous magnetization as a result of the applied magnetic field. The best fit curves for both the samples are shown by the solid red lines in the respective insets (a1) and (b1) of Figs. significantly lower than the theoretical saturation moment (M S ) for free Co 3+ /Co 2+ ions (g J Jμ B = 6 μ B ), which further confirm the local AFM coupling/canted spins and/or the strong crystal field in these samples. The higher value of M S in case of the x = 0.2 as compared to the x = 0 sample suggests the stronger FM interactions in the former. Moreover, the Co 2+ in the octahedral environment shows significant unquenched orbital magnetic moment Here, it is important to emphasize again that the mixed FM-AFM interactions result in the low temperature cluster glass (CG) behavior of these samples , where H C+ and H C-are the positive (right) and negative (left) coercive fields, and M C+ and M C-are the positive (upper) and negative (lower) remanent magnetization, respectively where J is the exchange integral per unit area at the FM-AFM interface, S AFM and S FM are the magnetization at the AFM and FM interfaces, respectively, t FM and M FM are the thickness and magnetization of the FM film, respectively. The increase in H CF enhances the interfacial magnetization S AFM and S FM as well as t FM and M FM due to growth and alignment of the FM domains, respectively, which causes an overall enhancement in the H EB . However, at the higher H CF , the FM clusters grow in size, which decreases the FM-AFM interface area and hence the values of S AFM and S FM accompanied by enhancement in the t FM and M FM . Therefore, the H EB decreases for the strong enough H CF (equation 3). It is clear from the above discussion that the value of this critical cooling field (H crit CF ) above which H EB decreases depends on the strength of the exchange interactions at the FM-AFM interface. Therefore, to further understand this, the cooling field dependence of the EB field is expressed using the following relation, given by Niebieskikwiat and Salamon for μ 0 H CF < k B T where J is the exchange integral at the FM-AFM interface, μ 0 =4.0 and 3.8μ B for the x = 0 and 0.2 samples, respectively [4.0 μ B for HS Co 3+ (S=2) and 3.0 μ B for HS Co 2+ (S=3/2) ions], μ B is the Bohr magneton, g = 2 is the Lande g-factor, L represent the Langevin function, μ=Nμ 0 is the ferromagnetic moment, N is the number of spins in a ferromagnetic cluster, k B is the Boltzmann's constant, and T f is the freezing temperature below which FM-AFM clusters coexist. For the smaller values of H CF the first term in equation 4 dominates, i.e., H EB ∝ J 2 , whereas for the higher cooling field second term dominates, i.e., H EB ∝ J. So, for the negative value of J, the H EB is expected to first increase with the H CF and then decrease at the higher values where second term starts dominating over first, which can even change the sign of the H EB In order to further understand the effect of frozen spins on the EB phenomena, we plot the positive and negative coercivity, and remanent magnetization separately in Figs. It is important to understand the evolution of the anisotropic exchange interactions and hence the EB parameters with the M-H cycles in these samples. Therefore, we perform the training effect measurements on both the samples, where we first cool the samples down to 5 K in the presence of 50 kOe magnetic field, and then record the consecutive M-H curves, as enlarged view is shown in Figs. To quantitatively understand the nature of these glassy magnetic interactions, first we fit the variation of the EB field and the EB magnetization with the number of recorded M-H loops using the power law where n is the number of recorded M-H loops, H ∞ EB and M ∞ EB are the values of H EB and M EB for n = ∞, and √ n for the x = 0 and 0.2 samples, respectively, where the black solid lines represent the best fit using the power law for the n > 1, as equations 5 and 6 are not valid for the first cycle. The best fit parameters are summarized in Table -2498 where γ H and γ M are the constants. The H EB and M EB curves are generated using the above equations by taking the experimental H EB (1) and M EB (1) data, and the values of γ H , H ∞ EB , γ M , and M ∞ EB as given in Table Therefore, we further analyze the training effect data using the model proposed in Ref. here the pre exponent term A represents the weight factors having dimensions of magnetic field, the dimensionless parameters p are the measure of the relaxation times, and the subscripts f and r represent the frozen and rotatable spin components, respectively. The solid black lines in Figs. In Fig. Origin and evolution of the EB effect It is important to mention that the Co is present predominantly in 3+ valence state in the x = 0 sample The influence of antisite disorders on the EB effect of Sr 2-x La x CoNbO 6 (x = 0, 0.2) samples is investigated in detail using the FC M-H and training effect data analysis. The field dependence of the T irr deviates from both the AT and GT lines, which suggest the presence of different universality class with the moderate unidirectional exchange interactions in the x = 0 sample. A significant reduction in the EB effect is observed in case of the x = 0.2 sample due to the larger FM and smaller CG domains as compared to the x = 0 sample. The EB effect show a notable reduction at the higher H CF for both the samples and the positive (negative) coercivity (remanent magnetization) is found to predominantly govern this effect. Further, both the samples show the asymmetric training effect, which is mainly governed by the negative coercivity branch. The analysis of the decay in the EB effect with the M-H cycles shows that the rotatable spins relax 10 and 13 times faster than the frozen spins at the disordered interfaces of the x = 0 and 0.2 samples, respectively. Through the training effect measurements, we reveal a much more stable EB effect with the M-H cycles for the x = 0.2 sample as compared to that of the x = 0. The detailed investigation of the low temperature spin dynamics responsible for systematic tunning of the EB effect with the La substitution in these samples can be useful to engineer the suitable candidates for the desired applications. V.