We report a theoretical study of the effects of electron correlations and structural confinement on the electronic properties and magnetic state of LaNiO3 (LNO) thin films epitaxially deposited on the (001) LaAlO3 (LAO) substrate. Using the DFT+U method we compute the electronic band structure, magnetic properties, and phase stability of the 1.5 unit-cell-thick NiO2-terminated LNO thin films. Our results reveal complex diversity of the electronic states caused by the effects of structural confinement, interfacial charge transfer and electronic correlations. Our calculations suggest the appearance of in-plane (110) charge disproportionation of the Ni ions in the interface NiO2 layer of the antiferromagnetically ordered LNO thin films. Moreover, the electronic states of both the AFM and FM LNO/LAO show a large orbital polarization of the Ni ions in the surface NiO2 layers. We propose the crucial importance of oxygen defects to explain the metal-to-insulator phase transition experimentally observed in a few-unit-cell-thick LNO/LAO thin films. The theoretical and experimental understanding of the electronic structure, magnetic state, and phase stability of ultrathin films and heterostructures of strongly correlated transition metal oxides A particular interest has been devoted to the understanding of the electronic structure and magnetic properties of LaNiO 3 thin films (and heterostructures) epitaxially deposited on the LaAlO 3 or SrTiO 3 substrates (which are non-magnetic wide energy gap band insulators) In LNO/LAO (LNO/STO) thin films structural confinement lifts the Ni e g orbital degeneracy both in the surface and at the interface layers, resulting in complex structural transformations (distortions of the perovskite lattice) with a large orbital polarization of Ni ions in the surface layer . Furthermore, the effects of structural confinement and strong correlations in the partially occupied Ni 3d shell in LNO thin films (and heterostructures) give rise to a metal-to-insulator phase transition experimentally observed in such systems for a few-layerthick LNO A. Computational details. In our paper we study the electronic structure and magnetic properties of LaNiO 3 thin films epitaxially deposited on the (001) LaAlO 3 substrate. We explore the effects of electron correlations, structural confinement, and interfacial charge transfer on the electronic band structure and magnetic state of LNO/LAO using the DFT+U approach In our study, we explore the interplay of long-range magnetic ordering and charge disproportionation of Ni ions tuned by structural confinement on the properties In contrast to the bottom layer, the total Ni 3d orbital occupations in the NiO 2 surface layer are nearly equal (homogeneous), with a rather small difference ∼0.02-0.04. The calculated Ni 3d magnetic moments are nearly the same, about 1.08 μ B (for the AFM states). That is for the surface layer the DFT+U calculations give no evidence for the breathing-mode lattice distortions and charge disproportionation that makes the LNO/LAO interface metallic. It is interesting to note that upon structural optimization of the initially breathing-mode distorted surface NiO 2 layer we obtain the lattice with nearly equal average Ni-O bond lengths. This implies that charge disproportionation of Ni ions and cooperative breathing-mode distortions of the lattice are unstable in the surface NiO 2 layer. This is in contrast to the bottom layer where the breathing-mode lattice distortions and charge disproportionation are found to be robust. Our results for the in-/out-of-plane Ni-O distances in the surface layer NiO 5 square pyramids are 1.92/2.16-2.24 Å. We also notice the importance of interlayer charge transfer. Thus, the average total Ni 3d occupation in the surface layer is by ∼0.2 electron smaller than that in the interface NiO 2 layers. Moreover, for Ni ions in the surface layer we observe large spin-orbital polarization of about 0.58 with enhanced 3z 2 -r 2 minority spin hole density relative to the x 2 -y 2 orbital states (driven be the 3d level splitting and strong correlation effects), implying the crucial importance of the quantum confinement and charge transfer effects. The total polarization of the Ni e g orbitals including both majority and minority spin channels is about 0.12. Moreover, Ni ions in the interface NiO 2 layer reveal a rather weak orbital polarization with an opposite sign (with an enhanced x 2 -y 2 hole density), below ∼0.06. Our DFT+U total energy results suggest that the C-type AFM is energetically favorable compared to the AFM ( 1 Our DFT+U calculations show that structural confinement and relaxations effects in combination with strong correlations alone are not sufficient to explain the experimentally observed insulating state of a 1.5 unit-cell-thick LNO/LAO, implying the possible importance of oxygen defects and non-local correlations, in agreement with Refs. In conclusion, using the DFT+U method we computed the electronic and magnetic properties of LaNiO 3 thin films epitaxially deposited on the (001) LaAlO 3 substrate. Our results reveal a remarkable interplay of the effects of electron correlations, structural confinement, and interfacial charge transfer on the electronic band structure and magnetic state of the LNO thin films. It was shown that the in-plane breathing-mode lattice distortion and charge disproportionation of Ni ions in the surface NO 2 layer are unstable. The surface layer is metallic, charge-homogeneous, although with a large orbital polarization of the Ni ions. Similar behavior we observe for the long-range FM ordered LNO/LAO thin films. Irrespective to the magnetic state we observe a sufficient charge disproportionation between the Ni ions in the surface and interfacial NiO 2 layers, implying the importance of interlayer charge transfer and strong correlations. Our DFT+U results show that structural confinement and relaxations effects in combination with strong correlations alone are not sufficient to explain the experimentally observed insulating state of a 1.5 unit-cell-thick LNO/LAO. This suggests the possible importance of oxygen defects to explain a metal-to-insulator phase transition experimentally observed in a few-unit-cell-thick LNO/LAO thin films. We believe that this topic deserves further detailed theoretical and experimental considerations.