An ever present challenge for Li-ion batteries is the formation of metallic dendrites on cycling that dramatically reduces cycle life and leads to the untimely failure of the cell. In this work we investigate the modes of Li-cluster formation on pristine and defective graphene. Firstly, we demonstrate that on a defect free surface the cluster formation is impeded by the thermodynamic instability of Li 2 and Li 3 clusters. In contrast, the presence of a vacancy dramatically favours clustering. This provides insights into the two modes of Li-growth observed: for the pristine basal plane if the Li-Li repulsion of the small clusters can be overcome then plating type behaviour would be predicted (rate / voltage dependent and at any point on the surface); whilst dendritic growth would be predicted to nucleate from vacancy sites, either pre-existing in the material or formed as a result of processing. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have emerged as one of the most important electrochemical energy storage technologies in the quest for a sustainable fossil fuel-free energy future. These challenges relate to the formation of lithium dendrites at the anode surface, and irreversible lithium plating. The calculations were performed spin polarised using the CP2K eV, and 0.005 eV / Å for forces, with an energy cutoff of 750 Ry and a relative cutoff of 60 Ry to achieve an initial convergence of 0.1 meV / formula unit. To identify the lowest energy cluster configurations for each size, an exhaustive sampling was performed starting from the single atom (Li 1 ). In each case the identified lowest energy configuration becomes the starting point for Li (n+1) . The process is iterated for the cluster n = 1 -12 presented here. For completeness, the results for the higher energy cluster configurations are included in the supplementary information Fig Here, E Li n@surf ace is the total energy of the Li n cluster on the surface, E surf ace is the total energy of the surface, n the number of Li, and μ Li the lithium chemical potential. The Li chemical potential was varied from the vacuum (μ Li defined as a single Li atom in vacuum) to metallic reference (μ Li defined from Li bulk). To explore how V C impact the Li nucleation on graphene, two key questions need to be addressed. Firstly, how the presence of a vacancy impacts E bind of successive Li atoms with respect to the isolated Li, in essence how is surface-Li binding aided or impeded by the presence of a V C defect? Secondly, how does the presence of the defect influence the morphology and E coh of the forming clusters? Probing whether the cluster formation is significantly aided or frustrated on forming at a vacancy site. To act as a reference, cluster binding is first calculated on the defect free basal plane, Li-atoms are added step-wise to the lowest energy sites identified in ref, It is clear from the configurations in Figure Li cannot be accommodated at the high symmetry hole site, as a result it is distorted from its central position. For the smallest clusters (n = 2 and 3) the repulsive energetic penalty can be estimated for the induction of a single neighbouring Li as 0.34 eV. This is expressed in both E bind (Figure Figure This geometry remains stable for n = 1 & 2, however for clusters n ≥ 3 the 5-membered ring opens, partially for n=3 and completely at n = 4 resulting in a Li sitting at the central C 3 site (Figure As the cluster increases in size E bind will converge to that of the pristine (the influence of the vacancy bound Li becomes negligible in per atom terms). Whereas E coh will converge towards Li-metal (-1.78 eV / atom) for clusters of sufficient size. The presence of the vacancy in essence anchors the cluster in place, allowing the repulsive interactions seen in the small clusters on the pristine to be overcome. Hence cluster nucleation would be predicted to be favourable at the V C for all of the cluster sizes considered. It is clear that in both the pristine and the V C there is a propensity to form clusters by preferentially adding Li-atoms to the next layer for clusters greater than n=3 and n=4, respectively. In each case it is most energetically favourable to grow the cluster via filling the adjacent hole sites, followed by the addition to the top site. This leads to the stepwise growth of the cluster, for the range of cluster sizes considered here the growth is limited to 2-/ 3-layers. The main difference between the two binding modes is the magnitude of the surface binding energy, with binding at the vacancy dramatically favoured. It should be noted that the reduction in the cluster binding energy for the pristine is largely driven by strain between neighbouring Li with the system attempting to minimise repulsive Li-Li interaction, while maximising Li-surface interaction. Here the average picture given by E bind gives a reasonable picture of cluster binding as each site is approximately equivalent. In the V C system the situation is complicated as there is a large discrepancy in E bind between sites, 28 in this case the vacancy site (n = 1), and the filling of the adjacent sites (n = 2 -4) are in essence anchored in position interacting strongly with the vacancy site(s). As the cluster grows the available sites for the next Li begin to resemble the pristine system and this is seen in the increase in C-Li separation (Figure Figure In contrast the presence of the V C dramatically increases the binding strength for the small clusters, the formation of which is unfavourable on the pristine surface. In addition, this strong binding anchors the growing cluster onto the vacancy site. As the cluster size increases the available site resemble the pristine basal plane, reducing the effect of the V C . In summary, cluster growth is explored on both the pristine basal plane and the V C system. Cluster formation in the pristine system is hampered by the thermodynamic instability of the small Li-clusters with respect to disperse Li adsorption. Therefore, clustering would only be observed at high deposition rates (Li-concentration). This mode of growth would be homogeneous across the surface and analogous to the Li-plating behaviour observed. In contrast the presence of the V C results in a dramatic increase in Li-binding energy, facilitated by the relaxation of the cluster to strongly bind the n = 4 cluster. The result of this is two-fold firstly, the thermodynamic instability of the small clusters seen on the pristine surface is overcome. Secondly, the forming cluster is anchored in place at the vacancy site. This results in inhomogeneous growth mediated by surface vacancies resulting in dendritic growth. Further investigations are underway to characterise those additional defect types that favour, or indeed hamper clustering. This work made use of the Dutch national e-infrastructure with the support of the SURF 