Spontaneous generation of time-reversal symmetry breaking in unconventional superconductors is currently a topic of considerable interest. While chiral superconducting order is often assumed to be the source of such signatures, they can sometimes also arise from nonmagnetic disorder. Here we perform a theoretical study of the impact of dislocations on the superconducting order parameter within a microscopic one-band model which, in the homogeneous case, features either extended s-wave, d-wave, or s + id-wave superconductivity depending on the electron concentration. We find that the dislocations minimize their impact on the superconducting condensate by inducing localized supercurrents pinned by the dislocations, even well outside the s + id regime. We map out the parameter and density dependence of the induced currents. From these results we conclude that quite generically unconventional superconductors hosting dislocations tend to break time-reversal symmetry locally. A growing class of unconventional superconductors have been discovered to exhibit evidence of spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) below their critical temperatures T c Thus, it is important to pursue further possibilities for the origin of TRSB generated inside the superconducting phase. In particular, one might ask what mechanisms exist for TRSB for superconducting condensates composed of a single component order parameter? The answer to this question necessarily involves the presence of spatial inhomogeneities. For example, it is well-known that nonmagnetic impurities can generate magnetic mo-ments on nearby sites below T c Here, motivated by the above-mentioned developments we perform a detailed theoretical study of the possibility of generation of localized supercurrents by dislocations in single-component order parameter superconductors. For concreteness, we focus on a one-band model with nearest neighbor attractive interactions. This model supports either B 1g (d-wave) or A 1g (extended s-wave) spin-singlet superconductivity in the homogeneous case, depending on filling. In addition, there exists a coexistence regime where the complex combination s + id is favored. We start from a single-band picture without any materialspecific details, except the assumption that the orbital states are of d x 2 -y 2 symmetry. To obtain the modifications of the hopping integrals due to a dislocation, we remove a line of l atoms and simulate the equilibrium positions assuming parabolic potentials between the atoms in a molecular dynamics setup. The hopping integrals are then the expectation value of the kinetic energy in atomic-like d x 2 -y 2 orbitals separated by the distances determined in this manner. From selfconsistent real-space studies and associated calculations of the free energy, we find that the dislocations favor the local generation of complex pair potential order in a rather broad range of parameters and electron concentrations. This implies that TRSB dislocation-bound orbital currents are spontaneously stabilized. Our results highlight the role of spatial inhomogeneity in generating TRSB and associated magnetic signals within the superconducting phase. The normal state Hamiltonian of a system of real space points with hopping matrix elements t ij is given by where the operator c † iσ creates an electron at real-space point i with spin σ. For a homogeneous system, we set t ij = t = -1 if i and j are nearest neighbors (NN). In the presence of a dislocation, the displacements of lattice points modifies the hopping integrals which we capture in the following way. Given the distance vector r ij = (x ij , y ij ), we calculate the hopping from the expectation value t(r) of the kinetic energy -1/(2m)∇ 2 for overlapping atomic d x 2 -y 2 wavefunctions. A map of the hopping integral is shown in Fig. The relaxation under the harmonic potential with periodic boundary conditions is then done to find all positions r i of the lattice points. This procedure yields symmetric positions close to the dislocation and reproduces the strain expected from continuum theory far away from the dislocation. An example of the lattice positions (black dots) for l = 5 is shown in Fig. The study presented here is based on the following oneband BCS mean-field Hamiltonian where The corresponding Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations are solved selfconsistently for systems of size N × N with a dislocation of length l as described above. The convergence criterion is set to , where H is the BdG Hamiltonian and s denotes the iteration counter. All results are computed with open boundary conditions (OBC) to avoid super-cell interference effects and we set V = 0.75 |t| and N ×N = 39×39 unless otherwise specified. Additionally, the average electron density will be fixed by adjusting the chemical potential, μ, in the selfconsistent iterations. Results presented here are obtained for the hole-doped region of the phase diagram (⟨n⟩ < 1), but applies also to the electron-doped region due to particle-hole symmetry at half-filling (μ = 0) with the symmetry ⟨n⟩ → 2 -⟨n⟩. To study the possibility of spontaneous TRSB induced by the atomic dislocations and manifested by generation of orbital currents, the bond-current densities of all converged results are computed as where e denotes the electron charge, u in↓ , v in↑ are the usual eigenvector components from the Bogoliubov transformation and f (E n ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. All results are obtained with the temperature fixed at T = 0.001 |t|. The selfconsistency ensures current conservation as confirmed by incoming and outgoing currents being equal in magnitude at all lattice sites Introducing spatial inhomogeneities in the selfconsistent solution of the model vastly extends the parameter space in which the free energy should be minimized. As the selfconsistency only ensures results to be at stationary points in the free energy landscape, an enhancement of parameter space also increases the risk of obtaining converged results which do not represent the global minimum. Thus, to ensure that the spontaneous TRSB and generation of local loop currents are indeed energetically favorable, we compare the free energy of converged configurations with and without TRSB. The latter is obtained by restricting the superconducting order parameters to take real values at all bonds throughout the system. In this context, it should be noted that while Eq. ( where the expectation value is calculated using the eigenvalues E n and eigenvector components u in↓ , v in↑ of the Hamiltonian Eq. ( To establish a baseline for the results obtained for systems with dislocation defects, the phase diagram for the homogeneous system as a function of electron density is shown in Fig. In the intermediate region (0.36 < ⟨n⟩ < 0.48) a complex superposition of the two channels is favored, yielding a TRSB solution of the form A 1g ± iB 1g . A possible nematic solution A 1g ± B 1g exhibits line nodes at k x = ±π/2, while the TRSB solution reduces the line nodes to point nodes at k x = ±k y = ±π/2, resulting in a gain in condensation energy. This energy gain is reflected by the free energy difference shown in black in Fig. Several earlier studies investigated the emergence of orbital currents induced by non-magnetic defects in TRSB superconductors employing both phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau approaches and microscopic meanfield methods While the generation of defect-induced supercurrents in the A 1g + iB 1g phase might be expected, the emergence of currents in the pure A 1g or B 1g phases would require spontaneous TRSB occurring solely due to the lattice inhomogeneity associated with the presence of a dislocation. Surprisingly, we find that this scenario is indeed realized for a range of densities well within the homogeneous B 1g phase. This is unlike the property of single impurities which are unable to seed orbital currents in this region. Figure Since supercurrents arise from modulations in the phase and amplitude of the order parameter, we display the bond order parameters corresponding to Fig. Given the rather unexpected finding of energetically favorable loop currents far inside the homogeneous B 1g phase, it is desirable to perform a more extensive study of this phenomenon as a function of dislocation length and electron density. Thus, in Fig. More interestingly, the generation of loop currents is clearly extended far beyond this main dome with reemerging TRSB domes ranging all the way to ⟨n⟩ ∼ 0.7. While the density ranges and current strengths of the TRSB domes varies for different dislocation lengths, the multi-dome feature is universal across all systems investigated here, where some show an additional shoulder at the edge of the main dome (e.g. l = 9, marked in orange) and other show clearly distinguishable domes (e.g. l = 2, marked in purple, or l = 5, marked in cyan). Figure It is relevant to highlight a fundamental difference between the spatial inhomogeneity introduced by disloca-tion defects and multiple impurities acting as dopants. Refs. Here we have demonstrated a similar scenario within a microscopic model, and also shown that the degeneracy need not be particularly close. Additionally, apart from a few bonds located at the dislocation edges, all bonds exhibit near-homogeneous values of the hopping integrals leading to the expectation that a near-homogeneous B 1g phase should develop. To examine this in detail, we performed a systematic investigation of the amount of lattice distortion necessary to reproduce TRSB domes within the homogeneous B 1g phase and found within additional self-consistent calculations that even small modifications in the hopping integrals down to 5% must be included to qualitatively reproduce the results shown in Fig. In summary, we have performed a theoretical study of the preferred superconducting order near dislocations of a microscopic model that incorporates two symmetrydistinct superconducting order parameters. It is found that dislocations tend to nucleate orbital currents and thereby locally break time-reversal symmetry spontaneously. This takes place even in regions of the phase diagram where the corresponding homogeneous superconducting condensate is single component order. This effect may be important for the understanding of experiments reporting TRSB at T c in unconventional superconductors.