Superconductivity emerges from the spatial coherence of a macroscopic condensate of Cooper pairs. Increasingly strong binding and localization of electrons into these pairs compromises the condensate's phase stiffness, thereby limiting critical temperatures -a phenomenon known as the BCS-BEC crossover in lattice systems. In this study, we demonstrate enhanced superconductivity in a multiorbital model of alkali-doped fullerides (A 3 C 60 ) that goes beyond the limits of the lattice BCS-BEC crossover. We identify that the interplay of strong correlations and multiorbital effects results in a localized superconducting state characterized by a short coherence length but robust stiffness and a domeless rise in critical temperature with increasing pairing interaction. To derive these insights, we introduce a new theoretical framework allowing us to calculate the fundamental length scales of superconductors, namely the coherence length (ξ 0 ) and the London penetration depth (λ L ), even in presence of strong electron correlations. The collective and phase coherent condensation of electrons into bound Cooper pairs leads to the emergence of superconductivity. This macroscopic coherence enables dissipationless charge currents, perfect diamagnetism, fluxoid quantization and technical applications λ L and ξ 0 quantify different aspects of the SC condensate: The penetration depth is the length associated with the mass term that the vector potential gains through the Anderson-Higgs mechanism In addition to influencing the macroscopic properties of superconductors, λ L and ξ 0 play an important role to understand strongly correlated superconductors, as is epitomized in the Uemura plot The BCS-BEC crossover has been studied in ultracold Fermi gases In this work, we demonstrate how multiorbital effects in Fig. For this reason, we introduce a novel theoretical framework to microscopically access λ L and ξ 0 from the tolerance of SC pairing to spatial OP variations. Central to our approach are calculations in the superconducting state under a constraint of finite-momentum pairing (FMP). Via Nambu-Gor'kov Green functions we get direct access to the superconducting OP and the depairing current j dp which in turn yield ξ 0 and λ L . The FMP constraint is the SC analog to planar spin spirals applied to magnetic systems In this work, we implement FMP in Dynamical Mean-Field theory (DMFT) The remaining paper is organized as follows: First, we motivate how the FMP constraint is linked to λ L and ξ 0 from phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau theory after which we summarize the microscopic approach from Green function methods. Technical details are available in the Supplementary Information as cross-referenced at relevant points. Subsequently, we discuss our results for the multiorbital model of A 3 C 60 . Readers primarily interested in the analysis of these results might skip the first part on the physical motivation for obtaining superconducting length scales from the FMP constraint. In most SC materials, Cooper pairs do not carry a finite center-of-mass momentum q = 0. Yet, in presence of external fields, coexisting magnetism, or even spontaneously SC states with FMP, i.e., q ≠ 0, might arise Before turning to the implementation in microscopic approaches, we motivate how the FMP constraint relates to λ L and ξ 0 . The Ginzburg-Landau (GL) framework provides an intuitive picture to this connection with q = |q|. α, b, and m * are the material and temperature dependent GL parameters. Here, the temperature-dependent (GL) correlation length ξ (T) appears as the natural length scale of the amplitude mode (∝ |α|) and the kinetic energy term with its zero-temperature value ξ 0 being the coherence length for fixed T (see Supplementary Note 5-A for more information). The finite center-of-mass momentum of the Cooper pairs entails a charge supercurrent j q ∝ |Ψ q | 2 q, c.f. Eq. ( with the magnetic flux quantum Φ 0 = h/2e. The temperature dependence with the quartic power stated here is empirical where ψ † k,q = c † k+ q 2 ↑ c -k+ q 2 ↓ (orbital indices suppressed) are Nambu spinors that carry an additional dependence on q due to the FMP constraint. G (F) denotes the normal (anomalous) Green function component for electrons (G) and holes ( Ḡ) in imaginary time τ. For s-wave superconductivity as in A 3 C 60 which is the same for all orbitals α. This allows us to work with a single-component OP. The current density can be calculated via (c.f. Eq. ( where ħv = ∇ k h(k) is the group velocity obtained from the one-electron Hamiltonian h(k) and the trace runs over the orbital indices of v and G q . Underlined quantities indicate matrices in orbital space, N k is the number of momentum points, and e is the elementary charge. See Methods and Supplementary Note 4 for details on the DMFT-based implementation and Supplementary Notes 3 for a derivation and discussion of Eq. ( We apply FMP superconductivity to study a degenerate three-orbital model H = H kin + H int , where H kin is the kinetic energy and the electron-electron interaction is described by a local Kanamori-Hubbard interaction with total number N, spin Ŝ, and angular momentum operator L. The independent interactions are the intraorbital Hubbard term U and Hund exchange J, as we use the SU(2)×SO(3) symmetric parametrization. This model is often discussed in the context of Hund's metal physics relevant to, e.g., transitionmetal oxides like ruthenates with partially filled t 2g shells In the special case of negative exchange energy J < 0, it has been introduced to explain superconductivity in A 3 C 60 materials We connect the model to A 3 C 60 by using an ab initio derived model for the kinetic energy 79 where t αγ (R i j ) is the hopping amplitude between half-filled t 1u orbitals (α, γ = 1, 2, 3) of C 60 molecules on sites connected by lattice vector R i j . We take the bandwidth W as the unit of energy (W ≈ 0.3 -0.5 eV for Cs to K based A 3 C 60 ) Turning to the correlation length, we observe that, away from T c , ξ (T) is strongly reduced to only a few lattice constants (a ∼ 14.2 -14.5 Å) by increasing U, i.e., pairing becomes very localized. At the same time, λ L (T) is enlarged. Hence, the condensate becomes much softer as there is a reduction of the SC stiffness D s ∝ λ -2 L upon increasing U. Fitting Eqs. ( We speculate that disorder and spontaneous orbitalsymmetry breaking The inverted Hund's coupling is crucial for superconductivity in A 3 C 60 . This premise motivates us to explore in Fig. As long as |J | < U/2, we find that strengthening the negative Hund's coupling enhances the SC critical temperature with an increase up to T c ≈ 5 × 10 -2 W, i.e., by a factor of seven compared to the ab initio motivated case of J/W = -0.04. There is, however, a change in the role that U plays in the formation of superconductivity. While U was supportive for small magnitudes |J | ≲ 0.05 W, it increasingly becomes unfavorable for |J | > 0.05 W where T c is reduced with increasing U. The effect is largest close to the MI phase where superconductivity is strongly suppressed. We indicate this proximity region by a dashed line (c.f. Supplementary Note 5-C). The impact of U on the SC state can be understood from the U-dependence of the London penetration depth: λ L grows monotonously with U and reaches its maximum close to the MI phase. Hence, the condensate is softest in the region where Mott physics is important and it becomes stiffer at smaller U. We find that this fits to the behavior of the effective bandwidth W eff = ZW ∝ D s where the quasiparticle weight Z is suppressed upon approaching the Mott phase. The behavior of Z shown in Fig. The J-dependence of λ L is much weaker than the U-dependence, as can be seen in Fig. ξ 0 , in contrast, depends strongly on J. By just slightly increasing |J | above the ab initio estimate of |J |, the SC state becomes strongly localized with a short coherence length on the order of 2 -3 a. Remarkably, the small value of ξ 0 is independent of U and thus the proximity to the MI phase. The localization of the condensate with ξ 0 on the order of the lattice constant is reminiscent of a crossover to the BEC-type SC state. However, the dome-shaped behavior, characteristic of the lattice BCS-BEC crossover The reason for this circumvention of the lattice BCS-BEC phenomenology can be understood from an analysis of the local density matrix weights ρ |φ n ⟩ , where |φ n ⟩ refers to the eigenstates of the local Hamiltonian of our DMFT auxiliary impurity problem. We show ρ |φ n ⟩ of four different points in the interaction phase space in Fig. By increasing |J |, the system is driven into a strong coupling phase where local singlets are formed as Cooper pair precursors 77 while electronic hopping is not inhibited. On the contrary, hopping between the N = 2, 3, 4 ground states is even facilitated via large negative J. It does so by affecting two different energy scales (c.f. Supplementary Note 7): Enhancing J < 0 reduces the atomic gap Correspondingly, as the superconducting state at -J/W > 0.05 relies on direct transitions between the local inverted Hund's ground states from filling N = 3 to N = 2 and N = 4, the local Hubbard repulsion U has to fulfill two requirements for superconductivity with appreciable critical temperatures. First, significant occupation of the N = 2 and 4 states at half-filling requires that U is not too large. Otherwise, the system turns Mott insulating (around U/W ≳ 1.6 for enhanced |J |) and the SC phase stiffness is reduced upon increasing U towards the Mott limit. At the same time, a significant amount of statistical weight of the N = 3 states demands that U must not be too small either. We find that Δ at > 0 and thus U > 2|J | To indicate a general trend, each quantity is normalized to its maximal value within the line cut. The phenomenology of the SC regimes resembles the BCS to lattice BEC crossover when approaching the Mott insulator (b), which is distinct from the multiorbital strong coupling case (a) (c.f. summary listed in Table is necessary for robust SC pairing. At Δ at < 0 there is a predominance of N = 2 and 4 states, which couple kinetically only in second-order processes and which are susceptible to charge disproportionation We summarize the overall change from a weak-coupling BCS state to the multiorbital strong coupling SC state characterized by T c , ξ 0 , and D s ∝ λ -2 L upon enhancing |J | in Fig. Thus, two distinct localized SC states exist in the multiorbital model A 3 C 60 -one facilitated by local Hubbard repulsion U and the other by enhanced inverted Hund's coupling |J |. One might speculate under which conditions THz driving or more generally photoexcitation On general grounds, the bypassing of the usual lattice BCS-BEC scenario via multiorbital physics is promising for optimization of superconducting materials to achieve higher critical currents or temperatures. Generally, limits of accessible T c are unknown with so far only a rigorous boundary existing for two-dimensional (2D) systems We emphasize that the framework to calculate the coherence length ξ 0 and the London penetration depth λ L introduced in this work can be implemented in any Green function or density functional based approach to superconductivity without Table We study the multiorbital interacting model H kin + H int of A 3 C 60 using Dynamical Mean-Field theory (DMFT) in Nambu space under the constraint of finite-momentum pairing (FMP). In DMFT, the lattice model is mapped onto a single Anderson impurity problem with a self-consistent electronic bath that can be solved numerically exactly. The self-energy becomes purely local Σ i j (iω n ) = δ i j Σ(iω n ) capturing all local correlation effects. To this end, we have to solve the following set of self-consistent equations in DMFT Convergence of the self-consistency problem is reached when the equality G loc (iω n ) = G imp (iω n ) holds. We can study superconductivity directly in the symmetrybroken phase by extending the formalism to Nambu-Gor'kov space. The Nambu-Gor'kov function under the constraint of FMP (c.f. Eq. ( then takes the place of the lattice Green function G k (iω n ) ↦ → G q (iω n , k) in the self-consistency cycle in Eq. ( Further details on code implementation are given in Supplementary Note 4. It entails a comparison of finite-momentum pairing to the zero-momentum case Author contributions: N.W. performed the calculations, prepared the figures and wrote the manuscript with input from all authors. Y.N. and R.A. provided the code for the DMFT calculations of the A 3 C 60 model which A.I.L. and N.W. modified to include FMP. N.W. and S.B. analyzed the GL formulation of the FMP constraint. All authors discussed the results and physical implications. T.W., A.I.L., and N.W. conceived the project. T.W. supervised the project. Competing interests: All authors declare that they have no competing interests. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. We start from the GL expansion of the free energy of the symmetry-broken state in terms of the complex superconducting order parameter (OP) Ψ(r) = |Ψ(r)|e iφ(r) close to the phase transition point T c which reads where F N is the free energy of the normal state and α(T) = α 0 (T -T c ) (α 0 > 0), b > 0, and m * are the material dependent GL parameters. The GL functional encodes the two types of collective modes that emerge in the symmetry-broken state: fluctuations of the amplitude (Higgs mode) and the phase (Nambu-Goldstone mode) of the OP. The constraint of FMP means that we require the Cooper pairs to carry a finite fixed momentum q, which translates to the requirement for the OP to be of the form Ψ q (r) = |Ψ q |e iqr . Then, the GL free energy density becomes The gradient term in this expression has an associated length scale which is the temperaturedependent correlation length ξ (T) given by with the coherence length ξ 0 = ħ/ √ α 0 m * T c at T = 0 [4]. The system's stationary point is 1 of 27 Supplementary Figure Ginzburg-Landau expectation of the momentum (q)-dependent (a) order parameter modulus |Ψ q | and (b) the concomitant supercurrent density j q of a system under the constraint of finite-momentum pairing superconductivity in units of the correlation length ξ. We marked the characteristic length scale on which the order parameter is reduced and the point of the depairing current density j dp . which results in the q-dependence of the OP given by with the homogeneous OP |Ψ 0 (T)| 2 = -α(T)/b ∝ T -T c . We plot this relation in Figure The q-dependence of the OP also connects to the depairing current j dp [61]. To see this, we derive the current density in the superconducting state. For this purpose, we (briefly) introduce a vector potential A via minimal coupling to the free energy [4, 55] where we choose the Coulomb-gauge ∇ • A = 0 and use e * = 2e. We can explicitly set e * and, in this regard, treat the charge differently to the mass m * because e * and (e * ) 2 couple the same way to the OP, i.e., the charge of the Cooper pair is not renormalized. We obtain the steady-state current density from the first derivative with respect to the vector potential with the magnetic flux quantum Φ 0 = h/(2e) = πħ/e. By inserting the OP from Eq. ( that directly shows how the Cooper pairs carry the supercurrent with their finite center-of-mass momentum along the direction q = q/q. The current density, j q = | j q |, is a non-monotonous function of q that exhibits a maximum called depairing current, j dp (c.f. Figure Since the supercurrent j is directly related to the vector potential A, it is possible to derive the London equation within GL theory. We obtain the second London equation by taking the curl of Eq. ( Here, the London penetration depth λ L is introduced which, in turn, can be reformulated to depend on the correlation length and depairing current: The temperature dependence with the quartic power stated here is empirical (derived from the Gorter-Casimir model) and often used to fit experimental data [39, 40]. In Note 5-B, we show that this temperature dependence models our DMFT data better than a linear power law as assumed in GL theory. To summarize, we obtain the correlation length ξ (T) and depairing current j dp (T) from analyzing the OP Ψ q (r) = |Ψ q |e iqr subject to the FMP constraint. In a second step, we can derive the London penetration depth λ L (T) from these two quantities. This connection also holds in microscopic theories, where we calculate the OP and current density from the Nambu-Gor'kov Green function (see main text and Note 5). Lastly, we want to note that the analysis of length scales ξ (T) and λ L (T) as done in this work is equivalent to discussing energy scales of Higgs and Nambu-Goldstone modes [3]. ξ, λ L , and j dp link to several experimental observables [40, 61] where we suppress the Tdependence for brevity. j dp constitutes an upper theoretical bound to the critical current density, j c , that limits the maximal current which the superconducting state of a material can endure and which is the observable measured in experiment. The value of j c crucially depends on sample geometry and defect densities as a current only flows near the surface shell of thickness ∼ λ L . ξ and λ L are used to distinguish type I (ξ/λ L > √ 2) and type II (ξ/λ L < √ 2) superconductors and they relate to the critical magnetic fields: The first critical magnetic field that separates the Meissner and Abrikosov vortex lattice phases, the second critical magnetic field that determines the magnetic field strength boundary at which the superconductor becomes a normal metal, and the thermodynamic critical field In the following, we show that the translation defined by Eq. ( with the single-particle Hamiltonian h(r) = -ħ 2 2m ∇ 2 + V (r) containing the lattice periodic potential V (r) = V (r + R n ) and with the FMP pairing potential or gap function Δ q (r) = |Δ|e iq•r . Since Δ ∝ Ψ, the superconducting gap carries over the phase dependence of the order parameter under the FMP constraint. From the last line of Eq. ( Thus, the generalized translation in Eq. ( In this section, we will derive how to calculate the charge supercurrent associated with the finite center-of-mass momentum of Cooper pairs under the FMP constraint. We start with the definition of the current operator ȷ. Generally, a current j in a system is induced by the change of the local polarization P. The polarization operator is given by for electrons of charge e sitting at a lattice site i (we suppress orbital and spin indices for now). The current is given by the time derivative (von-Neumann equation) of the polarization operator We want to study the Hamiltonian with a superconducting pairing field Δ i j , where we here recast Eq. ( for discrete lattice sites i instead of the continuous positions r. To evaluate expression (18), we have to solve three kinds of commutators For calculating the current density j = ⟨ ȷ⟩ we can make simplifications using the fact that we have local s-wave pairing in our system, i.e., Δ i j ≡ δ i j Δe iq R i . Since ⟨c i c j ⟩ = -⟨c j c i ⟩ and Δ i j = Δ ji , the expectation value of the anomalous part ⟨ ȷAN ⟩ vanishes then. Since the anomalous part does not contribute, we only have to evaluate the normal component (20) of the current. For this purpose, we we will assume that the states at site i represent Wannier orbitals i → ( R i , α i , σ i ) (orbital α, spin σ) which are centered on the unit cell center as is the case in the A 3 C 60 model (c.f. Note 4-D). Then, we can insert the Fourier transform of the creation and annihilation operators to yield with the velocity v( k) = 1 ħ ∇ k h( k). Thus, the current density is given by where we introduced the index q to the expectation value ⟨. . .⟩ q to stress that the reduced density matrix ⟨c † kα↑ c kγ↑ ⟩ q is evaluated for the FMP constraint imposed on the gap and order parameter, i.e., Δe iq R n . We connect to Green function theories by writing We want to stress that the velocity v(K) and the reduced density matrix ⟨c † Kσ c Kσ ⟩ have to carry the same momentum label K to fulfill Eq. ( Thus, we obtain an expression for the current density derived from the Nambu-Gor'kov Green function as stated in Eq. ( In practical calculations, however, we use Eq. ( We want to note that a similar expression to Eq. ( The corresponding single-particle Green function (Nambu-Gor'kov Green function) becomes a 2 × 2 matrix in Nambu space where we used Ḡ (τ, -k) = -G (-τ, -k) for the hole propagator and F denotes the anomalous (Gor'kov) Green function. The Nambu-Gor'kov Green function is determined from a Dyson equation where the non-interacting Green function and self-energy also become matrices in Nambu space which can be expressed by Pauli matrices σ i (i = 0, x, y, z) for inversion symmetry h( k) = h(-k). The self-energy S is obtained from solving the appropriate impurity problem defined by the Weiss field G W in Nambu space and the particlehole-transformed interaction Hamiltonion. In addition to the normal component Σ N ≡ Σ, the self-energy gains an anomalous matrix element Σ AN for which the gauge is chosen such that it is real-valued, i.e., only σ x is involved in constructing S. Thus, the lattice Green function in Nambu-Gor'kov space is given by The self-consistency circle of DMFT (Eq. ( We now want to incorporate the FMP constraint into the Nambu-Gor'kov formalism. To treat the phase e iqr of the OP and gap in the framework of DMFT, several possibilities exist. For the simplest implementation, we introduce a phase gauge shift that cancels the momentum dependence of the order parameter Ψ q ( R i ) = |Ψ|e iq R i = ⟨c i↑ c i↓ ⟩ at site R i . By applying the transformation c iασ ↦ → c iασ e iq R i /2 (c † i,σ ↦ → c † i,σ e -iq R i /2 ), the hopping amplitudes t ( R i j ) are modified to yield t ( R i j ) = t ( R i j )e iq R i j /2 such that the dispersion ε k obtained from diagonalizing h( k) is effectively replaced by ε k±q/2 , i.e., the dispersion for up and down spins gets shifted by ±q/2, respectively. This shows that the introduction of FMP breaks time-reversal symmetry. The advantage of completely transferring the q-dependence to the hopping matrix is that we keep the gauge freedom to choose the anomalous self-energy to be a real-valued function. To this end, we recast Eqs. ( The Nambu-Gor'kov Green function consequently is parameterized by q as well Generally, it holds that G ↑↑ q (τ, k) ≠ -G ↓↓ q (-τ, -k) for arbitrary, finite q due to the time-reversal symmetry breaking. Note that it is possible to define the Fourier transform of c ( †) i differently such that the pairing is non-symmetric with respect to q. Another often employed notation describes Cooper pairs with electrons of momenta k (in G ↑↑ ) and -k + q (in G ↓↓ ) (as depicted in Fig. On Matsubara frequencies, the Nambu-Gor'kov Green function is set up via (c.f. Eq. ( We note that the approach outlined here does not require the computationally more demanding use of supercells as, e.g., implemented in Refs. [101, 102] and discussed in the review by Kinnunen et al. [59] to study FFLO-type superconductivity. To induce symmetry-breaking in our calculations, we add a small pairing field η = 0.1 meV on the off-diagonal of the Nambu-Gor'kov Green function throughout the calculation. We keep it for the whole superconducting DMFT loop because it helps stabilizing the calculations. We checked that the presence of the small, but finite η does not change the results. In this work, we always choose q = qb 1 along the direction of a reciprocal lattice vector b 1 (c.f. Note 4-D). The calculations with finite q are performed in practice as in the case of q = 0, but with q becoming an additional input parameter. Calculations can be sped up by first converging the DMFT loop for q = 0 and then using the result as a starting point for finite q > 0 values. In our calculations, we adjust the chemical potential μ in each DMFT iteration in order to keep the filling of the system fixed to ⟨n⟩ q = N orb = 3, i.e., the t 1u bands of A 3 C 60 are half-filled. The code implementation was done in Ref. [67] (see also Ref. [68]) for DMFT in the Nambu-Gor'kov formalism with q = 0, but it can also be used for finite momenta. To determine the chemical potential, we solve the following equation In the second step, we relabeled momentum k ↦ → k + q for the spin down sector. Taking the difference G ↑↑ q -G ↓↓ q helps with the convergence of the Matsubara sum to evaluate the Green functions at τ = 0 + since the frequency tail becomes O (1/(iω n ) 2 ). The expression for the current density, Eq. ( We now define Since G N describes a time-reversal symmetric system, the following term has to vanish. Eq. ( which has a better convergence with respect to Matsubara frequencies, since δG ↑↑ ∝ 1/(iω n ) 3 at large frequencies. To see the convergence behavior, we do a Taylor expansion where we focus on the isospin dependence only: The first term of the last line does not have any diagonal components since G N = 1/G -1 N ∝ . . . σ 0 + . . . σ z and G -1 Δ ∝ σ x such that their product has only off-diagonal components. Hence, the lowest order term contributing to the ↑↑ component of δG is O (G 3 N G We here give further details on the lattice model of A 3 C 60 materials derived in Ref. [79]. In this model, the C 60 molecules reside on a fcc lattice for which we construct Bravais lattice vectors and momenta as with i ≡ (n 1 , n 2 , n 3 ). We choose the lattice and corresponding reciprocal lattice vectors to be instead of numerically evaluating the gradient of h( k) in Eq. (40). The direction of the velocity and, hence, the supercurrent can be used as an internal consistency check of the code. The condition of j ∥ q demands that = a( j To have the correct sign of the direction, we need j 1 > 0 (i.e., j 2 , j 3 < 0). Since the fcc lattice has a very high symmetry, we can approximately treat the system to be isotropic. Because of this, we discuss in Fig. Supplementary Note 5: Details on the calculation of |Ψ q |, ξ 0 , j dp , and λ L from DMFT In this section, we illustrate how the order parameter |Ψ q | and concomitantly the coherence length ξ 0 (c.f. Note 5-A) as well as the depairing current j dp and London penetration depth λ L (c.f. Note 5-B) are obtained from the q-and T-dependence of the Nambu-Gor'kov Green function in practice. Furthermore, we elaborate on how the critical temperature extracted from the temperature dependence of ξ (T) and λ L (T) can be used to scrutinize the proximity region of the Mott insulating phase and how it impacts the superconducting region (c.f. Note 5-C and Fig. Generally, the superconducting order parameter carries an orbital dependence. The superconducting pairing in A 3 C 60 , however, is orbital diagonal. Because of this, we perform an orbital average over the self-energy components Σ N and Σ AN in each iteration step of the DMFT loop such that they are diagonal matrices in orbital space with degenerate entries (Σ (A)N αγ = δ αγ Σ (A)N ). As a result, we explicitly prevent spontaneous orbital symmetry breaking in the self-energy [73] and the anomalous Green function F also becomes a degenerate, diagonal matrix in orbital space. obtained from Ψ q (T). In GL theory, we found that ξ (T) = q -1 c for lim Ψ q (T) = 0. Since the point where Ψ q goes to zero is difficult to evaluate numerically, we use in our DMFT calculations the criterion |Ψ Q (T)/Ψ 0 (T)| = 1/ √ 2 deriving from Eq. ( Fig. As we conclude this section, we want to address the robustness of our criterion for extracting ξ (T) from the q-dependence of the order parameter. To this end, we compare different methods of evaluating ξ (T) given by: (ii) Curvature method: Calculate ξ from the curvature of (iii) Ginzburg-Landau fitting: Fit the square-root Ginzburg-Landau (GL) expression |Ψ q /Ψ 0 | = √︁ 1 -ξ 2 q 2 (to data points close to q) to determine ξ. Fit: Fit: |Ψ q /Ψ 0 | = 1ξ 2 q 2 q cut = 0.5Q q cut = 0.6Q q cut = 0.9Q q cut = 1.0Q q cut = 1.2Q q cut = 1.5Q ξ Q 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1. which is associated with the coherence length ξ determined by method (i), see the text for labeling of methods. The right column contrasts ξ Q (black squares) with different calculation methods for ξ ★ : (ii, left parts) evaluating the curvature of f q = |Ψ q /Ψ 0 | 2 for different step sizes Δq i , and (iii, right parts) fitting the Ginzburg-Landau expression (5) for different momentum cutoffs q cut . Note that the step size Δq i varies across temperatures due to differing q-meshes, which is why only the index i is listed in the legend (refer to the plots in the left column). We compare the results for ξ (T) using two sets of interaction parameters in Figure Overall, we observe strong quantitative agreement across all methods. The comparison of the two parameter sets in panels a and b reveals no systematic trend of deviations from ξ Q . We find the fitting (iii) to show less variance than calculating the curvature (ii). Intricacies with numerically evaluating second derivatives from numerical data are quite common. Among the tested methods, analyzing the suppression of the order parameter at momentum Q (i) has the advantage that it does not rely on fixing fitting intervals or step ranges for numerical derivatives, albeit it can pick up higher order effects in q. Therefore, we employ method (i) in this work. We derived in Note 3 an expression for the current density j q (Eq. ( From combining the depairing current and the coherence length, we obtain the London penetration depth λ L (T). In GL theory, the T-dependence of λ L is linearized to depend on t = T/T c . However, our calculations are better described by using the empirical quartic power law t 4 as stated in Eq. ( From our analysis of the T-dependence of the zero-momentum OP |Ψ 0 |, correlation length ξ (T), and London penetration depth λ L , we are able to obtain different values of the superconducting transition temperature T c . In this section, we discuss how they compare and use the notation of T A first understanding can be gained by analyzing Fig. In Figure The second criterion that we analyze is the ratio of the gap to the Fermi energy E F . This ratio Δ/E F can be interpreted as a dimensionless coupling strength [25] which is small in the weak-coupling region but grows to the order of 0.1 -1 in the crossover and strong-coupling regime [24]. We note, however, that the theoretical determination of E F is not trivial. To gauge the order of magnitude, we here resort to the non-interacting, renormalized definition where we inserted the quasiparticle weight Z = m * /m e . The density is n = 3/(a/4) significant increase of the numerical complexity. Thus, our work opens the gate for "in silico" superconducting materials' optimization targeting not only T c but also ξ 0 and λ L . [n m , c † i c † j ] = c † i [n m , c † j ] + [n m , c † i ]c † j = (δ mi + δ m j )c † i c † j where we used [ A, BC] = B[ A, C] + [ A, B]C and [n m , c † i ] = δ im c † i ([n m , c i ] = -δ im c i ). We inspect the normal and anomalous component separately ( ȷ = ȷN + ȷAN ): t 4 0 t 2 0 t for R = (0.5, 0.0, 0.5), t 3 0 -t 0 t 4 0 -t 2 0 t 1 for R = (-0.5, 0.0, 0.5)