Recycled aluminum alloys are pivotal for sustainable manufacturing, offering strength, durability, and environmental advantages. However, the presence of iron (Fe) impurities poses a major challenge, undermining their properties and recyclability. Conventional manufacturing processes result in coarse Fe-rich intermetallic compounds that limit the tolerance of Fe content and negatively influence performance of advanced aluminum alloys. To address this, rapid solidification techniques like direct strip casting have been explored. In this work, a detailed study of the strip cast microstructure was conducted by scanning electron microscopy, electron backscattered diffraction and atom probe tomography. Our results reveal that alloys produced by DSC exhibit significantly refined microstructures and are free from coarse Fe-rich intermetallics, thereby retaining the majority of Fe in solid solution. These findings indicate that strip casting significantly enhances Fe-tolerance in aluminum alloys, making it an attractive process for future aluminum recycling, with implications for sustainable high-performance applications. Recycled aluminum alloys are indispensable materials in today's sustainable manufacturing practices, offering a compelling combination of strength, durability, and environmental benefits. These alloys, derived from various sources of aluminum scrap, hold significant potential for reducing energy consumption and minimizing environmental impact when compared to primary aluminum production Fe, as the most common impurity in aluminum alloys, plays a notorious role in diminishing their corrosion resistance and mechanical properties. Unlike other metallic alloys, aluminum has a very limited solubility for Fe, maximum 0.05 wt.% at 650°C One promising avenue for overcoming the challenges posed by Fe impurities in recycled aluminum alloys is through rapid solidification techniques that offer the advantage of refinement of the intermetallics. Direct strip casting (DSC) is an advanced near-net-shape casting technique that processes liquid aluminum directly into sheet, which offers significant cost reduction and energy savings In this study, we examined aluminum alloys with different Fe concentrations. The specific chemical compositions of these alloys are detailed in Table The experiments on direct strip casting were conducted using a lab-scale simulator, known as a dip tester, designed at Deakin University. This dip tester simulates the initial interaction between the molten material and the twin-roll caster's rolls during the twin-roll direct strip casting process APT experiments were conducted to determine the chemical composition of the solid solution as well as the local distribution of elements. These experiments were performed on a Local Electrode Atom Probe (LEAP 5000 XR, CAMECA) instrument with a pulse fraction of 20%, a pulse repetition rate of 250 kHz, a detection rate of 0.5%, and a specimen temperature of 25 K. APT samples were electropolished with a standard two-step process Figure The EDS mapping result in Fig. The emergence of the metastable Fe phase during rapid solidification can be attributed to the progressively increasing supercooling and to the change in conditions for nucleation and growth 1) Alloys produced by strip casting exhibited an elongated grain structure aligned with the solidification direction, with the microstructure increasingly refined with higher Fe content. 2) In contrast, the sand-cast Al-2.5Fe alloy exhibited coarser grains with an average diameter approximately three times larger than strip-cast Al-2.5Fe. Additionally, coarse needle-shape Ferich intermetallic phases were found in the sand cast alloy, while these were notably absent in the strip-cast counterpart. 3) APT analysis of the strip-cast Al-2.5Fe alloy measured the Fe content in solid solution to be 1.90 ± 0.13 wt.%, which is significantly higher than that measured in the sand-cast alloy (0.44 ± 0.02 wt.% Fe). 4) Rapid solidification during direct strip casting can substantially enhance the tolerance of aluminum alloys to Fe, rendering it an appealing process for future aluminum recycling endeavors.