Ultrafast laser irradiation can induce spontaneous self-organization of surfaces into dissipative structures with nanoscale reliefs. These surface patterns emerge from symmetry-breaking dynamical processes that occur in Rayleigh-Bénard-like instabilities. In this study, we demonstrate that the coexistence and competition between surface patterns of different symmetries in two dimensions can be numerically unraveled using the stochastic generalized Swift-Hohenberg model. We originally propose a deep convolutional network to identify and learn the dominant modes that stabilize for a given bifurcation and quadratic model coefficients. The model is scale-invariant and has been calibrated on microscopy measurements using a physics-guided machine learning strategy. Our approach enables the identification of experimental irradiation conditions for a desired selforganization pattern. It can be applied generally to predict structure formation in situations where the underlying physics can be approximately described by a self-organization process and data is sparse and non-time series. Our work paves the way for supervised local manipulation of matter using timely-controlled optical fields in laser manufacturing. The emergence of instabilities and symmetry breaking leading to the formation of coherent structures, is one of the most fascinating aspects of the complex dynamics governing light-surface interaction Upon laser irradiation, a hazy boundary separates selforganized and organized surface patterns. When a material is exposed to sufficiently intense laser irradiation, it tends to organize along the stationary electromagnetic fields due to scattered/excited waves Consequently, any preexisting or transient organization can be disrupted by random perturbations, which can be amplified by positive feedback to lead the system towards new patterns. Ultrafast laser texturing has recently been used to obtain deep sub-wavelength periodic patterns, which raises questions about the relevant electromagnetic processes that drive the formation of these patterns well below the diffraction limit Various types of 2D surface patterning have been reported, including patterns with oriented, triangular, hexagonal, labyrinthine, or chaotic symmetries The Kuramoto-Sivashinsky approach has become a paradigm for describing pattern formation and spatiotemporal chaos on surfaces eroded by ion bombardment, which ultimately reproduces ripple formation and other organized patterns The purpose of this letter is to demonstrate that laserinduced pattern formation at the nanoscale can be efficiently characterized and predicted by a stochastic SH model that is variational in time and conservative in space. Our original strategy relies on the use of machine learning (ML) integrating partial physical information in the form of the SH model, which allows us to identify dominating stable modes for a set of parameters independently of initial roughness conditions. Incorporating data and prior knowledge is naturally expressed in terms of Bayesian inference, for which well-established domainspecific methods exist dating back to Laplace The role of laser fluence is revealed by fixing ∆t = 25 ps and N = 25, as depicted in Figure The adimensional form of the generalized Swift-Hohenberg equation (SH) used in this letter is (see derivation in Suppl. Mat.): The SH model was introduced in ũ2 dx and u = -δL δ ũ , as can be readily verified. During the SH dynamics, the Lyapunov functional L decreases in the same way as entropy decreases during the formation of physical patterns, and it converges asymptotically to a stable value A ML model is employed to learn the relationship between observed laser parameters θ and patterns, using only few, non-time series data (I), assuming an approximately SH process, not explicitly given in terms of θ, parameterized by φ (consisting of a scale factor l, the maximum wavenumber in a domain of side 224 pixels given as multiple of 2π, the adimensional model parameters ε and γ, and t, which can be seen as a stabilization time) (II), with unknown initial conditions u 0 (III). We motivate this choice by symmetry considerations (Suppl. Mat.) as well as the similarity between SEM images and SH solutions (Fig. Assuming that the distribution of φ given θ is peaky, we label experimental u i with φi the SH parameters of its nearest neighbor (NN), in the image of F m , among a large number of u pre-generated with the SH solver from random u 0 . By integrating physical knowledge in this way, the problem of maximizing the likelihood above can be replaced with a lower bound. Explicitly, assuming data is generated i.i.d. from a Gaussian distribution, which is a low-dimensional problem that can be solved with few data This parameter is particularly important as the characteristic size of a stable mode is of great interest for applications. Because l p and other parameters are correlated, it cannot be set freely; but as seen in Fig. Interestingly, (γ p ) determines whether holes or bumps are observed; F = 0.2 J/cm 2 separates a region of high and low γ p , roughly independently of N ; the sign of γ p appears to be determined by F and ∆t only. Furthermore, for large bifurcation parameter (ε p ), many modes are non-attenuated and patterns are less ordered. Correspondingly, large ε p patches are observed at high F /low ∆t (highest energy coupling). For N = 25, superimposing the γ p = 0 isosurface on the ε p prediction, it can be seen that it is roughly perpendicular to isosurfaces of ε p . These abrupt transition regimes of ε p are consistent with experimental observations where two patterns of different order are superimposed on the same SEM image. ( tp ) for constant l p , ε p , γ p , symmetry increases with tp , as symmetrical patterns require large tp to stabilize from a uniformly random state. As can be seen in the bottom row, tp tends to increase with N , consistently with the physical view that a large N increases the time the dissipative system is in a far from equilibrium state. This increase is not uniform across F, ∆t pairs, and the area of laser parameter space of relatively large tp decreases with N . We show that ultrafast laser-irradiated surface nanoscale patterns can be numerically modelled by a scale-invariant generalized Swift-Hohenberg equation. A machine learning model is trained to learn the connection between the stochastic SH equation and laser parameters, independently of initial conditions, using a deep convolutional network to extract features and by incorporating physical information. Our original strategy can generally be applied to accurately predict the shape and scale of physical patterns generated by other self-organization processes, even if the underlying physical model is only approximate and experimental data is limited and nontime series. The ML model is able to identify regions of laser parameters that are relevant for applications and can even be used to predict novel patterns, since the convolutional neural network features are not learned from observed patterns. Regions where pattern superpositions are observed could be modeled more accurately via a mixing of SH processes, as a manifestation of superposed states of self-organization, providing new routes toward nanoscale surface manipulation by light. This work has been funded by a public grant from the French National Research Agency (ANR) under the "France 2030" investment plan, which has the reference EUR MANUTECH SLEIGHT -ANR-17-EURE-0026. Appendix on experimental set-up. In the proposed experiment, Mach-Zehnder interferometry was used to combine the effect of polarization mismatch with an adjustable inter-pulse delay ∆t, enabling fine control of surface topography at the tens of nanometer scale Appendix on Image similarity. It is important to note, regarding the ML strategy, that the problem is approached within the image of a feature mapping F m , where the concept of similarity differs from visual similarity. In this feature space, an image is equivalent to any of its images in the orbit of the group of symmetries of F m , such as translations, but also a variety of other symmetries that are learned from data automatically. Intuitively, similarity in feature space corresponds to similarity of patterns, which can be described in terms of e.g. "bumpiness," "roundness," etc. Delay, Fluence and number of double-pulses dependence Scanning electron microscopy images (SEM) of several organization regimes are presented in Fig. Fig. The laser dose is the third parameter exploited to guide the final patterns. Fig. of the ũb = 0 solution are selectively amplified, as only the Fourier modes whose wave vector norm lies on a certain interval centered at on 1 with width depending on ε, will be amplified, all others being attenuated (see fig. SH can be derived on symmetry grounds alone Given appropriate boundary conditions (e.g. periodic) SH is the simplest equation with a type-I-s instability that is isotropic, invariant with respect to translations and to field inversion ũ → -ũ the quadratic term allowing small amplitude destabilization and the existence of the hexagonal patterns which we observe experimentally, with the negative cubic term, which dominates for large amplitudes, still controlling the magnitude of the instabilities, which would otherwise grow without bound. Rescaling to obtain the adimensional version Consider the SH equation introduced in where u(x, y, t) is a real scalar field, τ 0 is the characteristic time scale of the instability and has dimensions of time, ε 0 is a dimensionless control parameter chosen such that ε 0 = 0 defines the onset of instability, ξ 0 is the coherence length determining the spacial range over which local disruptions (boundary or topological defects) perturb the surrounding pattern, q 0 is the critical wave number (the wave number that gets selected at onset), γ 0 is a parameter with dimensions of u -1 determining the strength of the u 2 nonlinearity, which is the only term of the equation which is not odd and thus breaks invariance with respect to the transformation u → -u, and g 0 controls the magnitude of the cubic terms and has dimensions of u -2 . Throughout this letter we assume periodic boundary conditions. It is clear by inspection that equation 4 can be obtained from 5 upon a rescaling of time t = a 4 τ 0 t, length [67] x = ± λ0 2π x, ỹ = ± λ0 2π y, and magnitude ũ = ± √ g 0 a 2 u, with ε = a 4 ε 0 and γ = √ g 0 a 6 γ 0 and a = λ0 2πξ0 . SH has rich pattern solutions but simple dynamics In spite of the complexity of its pattern solutions, SH has a simple dynamics (with the periodic boundary conditions on the domain Ω used throughout the paper): indeed, a Lyapunov functional L[ũ] exists such that u = -δV δ ũ . For N [ũ] = γ ũ2 -ũ3 , using the Euler-Lagrange equations we can show that ũ2 dx. This potential decreases during the dynamics and, since it is bounded below, it converges asymptotically to a stable value Consider a physical field u(x, t) which is mainly the result of a certain physical process, described in terms of unknown initial conditions u 0 and physical process parameters φ, using a PDE u = f (φ, u 0 ) The quantity of physical interest is often not u, however, but a certain function F (u), where F (u) is typically simpler than u. With this in mind, assume that F is such that p(F (u)|u 0 , θ, φ) = p(F (u)|θ, φ), and further assume p(φ|θ) is peaky, in the sense that there is a φ such that p(φ|θ) = 0 for φ ̸ = φ (if p is continuous, in particular, p(φ|θ) = δ(φ -φ(θ)). The first assumption implies p(F (u)|θ) = u0 φ p(F (u)|θ, φ)p(u 0 , φ|θ) = φ p(F (u)|θ, φ)p(φ|θ). The second assumption implies that φ is a function of θ, which implies that θ is at least locally a function of φ and we can write p(F (u)|θ) = p(F (u)| φ). To learn the relationship between F (u) and φ from experimental data we can parameterize φ with a Neural Network (α), for example, and maximize the log likelihood of observing the F (u i ): If F (u) is high-dimensional, this relationship is potentially complex, requiring N large to model satisfactorily. Having physical knowledge in the form of a differential equation solver u = Solver( φ, u 0 ), considerably simplifies the problem, since in feature space, for a process satisfying the conditions above, we can choose arbitrary u 0 and fit only the relationship between θ and the parameters of the PDE, which generally have much lower dimension than the field F (u). This being a simpler task, we expect that a smaller N will suffice to produce a satisfactory model. Assuming data is generated i.i.d. from a fixed-variance Gaussian distribution, this objective corresponds to minimizing the mean squared error between experimental images and generated images, in feature space Having an efficient solver and assuming sufficient regularity, one can pre-generate a number of fields U p = u k p k=1...M such that the expected distance to the nearest neighbor in feature space is as small as one would like. Assuming that we can pre-generate fields at will, δ → 0, which implies that we can we can set φi as the solver parameter of the nearest neighbor in feature space, among pre-generated fields, of u i . By integrating physical information in this way, we are able to learn the desired relationship using any method suited to few data, such as support vector regression. Choosing the feature transformation F The feature mapping F is clearly not unique, as if F is a suitable feature mapping so is aF + b for real a, b, for example. Given a sufficiently detailed model, it could be derived from first principles or, given enough data and for simple dynamics, it could be learned Strang-splitting pseudospectral solver The ML workflow requires the unsupervised generation of many accurate numerical solutions of the SH equation. To that effect, we implemented a second-order split-step 2 ) where u * , u * * are intermediate solutions. Note that that periodic boundary conditions are automatically enforced by the Fourier transform. Stability control Stability of the split step method is determined by that of the explicit step, since the region of absolute stability of the Trapezoidal rule includes the entire left half of the complex plane, making it suitable for the solution of stiff equations The predictions of the different SH parameters φ = l, ε, γ, t by the ML model trained on the experimental data according to the method described in this letter are correlated for each value of N . To see that, for each value of N and for predicted SH parameter, we calculate the Pearson correlation coefficient between pairs of the 5012 point prediction plots in Fig. We present a heatmap with calculated correlations for all parameter pairs for N = 5, 25, 50 in Fig. We now show that the timescale of convective instability τ 0 is consistent with the transversal dissipation time of ≈ 10 ps reported in . For a perturbation of u = 0, for small ∆t and close to onset, ∆u is mostly due to the growth of the q 0 mode. Hence, to first order, ∆u ∆t = σ(q 0 , ε 0 )u q0 (0). Assuming u q0 (0) is of the same order of magnitude throughout the domain and small compared to u q0 (ε 0 , ∆t), we have σ(q 0 , ε 0 ) ≈ uq 0 (ε0,∆t) uq 0 (0)×∆t . Since τ -1 0 ≈ ∆σ ∆ε0 we obtain τ 0 = u ∆u ∆t∆ε a 4 . ∆t is of the order of 10 ps, and we are certain that some evolution of u already took place. For τ 0 to be of the same order of magnitude u ∆u ∆ε a 4 must be order one. To remain in the limit of small u where this approximation is valid, u/∆u is of order one. a 4 ∼ 1 -10 4 , assuming η 0 small compared to λ 0 , which implies a change in ε of the order of 10 -4 and 10 0 . We recover the small ε limit, which we did not impose specifically, which is evidence of agreement between SH and experimental results. Moreover, the simulation time for our solver for experimental patterns being of order 1 to 10 3 , assuming this corresponds to the resolidification time of the fluid material ≈ 100 ps 