A surprising "planar" thermal Hall effect, whereby the field is parallel to the current, has recently been observed in a few magnetic insulators, and this has been attributed to exotic excitations such as Majorana fermions or chiral magnons. Here we investigate the possibility of a planar thermal Hall effect in three different cuprate materials, in which the conventional thermal Hall conductivity κxy (with an out-of-plane field perpendicular to the current) is dominated by either electrons or phonons. Our measurements show that the planar κxy from electrons in cuprates is zero, as expected from the absence of a Lorentz force in the planar configuration. By contrast, we observe a sizable planar κxy in those samples where the thermal Hall response is due to phonons, even though it should in principle be forbidden by the high crystal symmetry. Our findings call for a careful re-examination of the mechanisms responsible for the phonon thermal Hall effect in insulators. The conventional thermal Hall effect describes the appearance of a transverse temperature gradient along the y direction when a heat current J is applied along the x direction and a magnetic field H is applied along the z direction. The thermal Hall effect has become a powerful technique to probe neutral excitations in various quantum materials. It has been shown both theoretically and experimentally that neutral excitations, such as magnons Recently, the thermal Hall effect measured in a "planar" configuration, i.e. by applying the field inside the xy plane of the sample (as shown in Fig. It has been argued that phonons may in fact be responsible for generating the conventional κ xy measured in those two materials The second material is Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (NCCO), an insulator at low doping where the conventional κ xy is entirely caused by phonons The third cuprate is the superconductor La 2-y-x Eu y Sr x CuO 4 (Eu-LSCO) at dopings p = 0.21 and 0.24, that locate right on the two sides of the critical doping p ⋆ = 0.23. It has been shown that phononic conventional κ xy only exists inside the pseudogap phase, i.e. when p < p ⋆ Our detwinned single crystal of YBa 2 Cu 3 O y with y = 6.54 was grown at the University of British Columbia by a flux method, as described in ref. For the thermal transport measurements, crystals were cut and polished into rectangular platelets with the longest edge along the crystal a-axis. For YBCO p = 0.11 sample, gold contacts are diffused on it. For NCCO x = 0.04, Eu-LSCO x = 0.21 and 0.24, contacts were made using silver epoxy, diffused at 500 • C under constant oxygen flow for 1 h. The dimensions (length between contacts L × width w × thickness t, in μm) of all the measured samples are listed in TABLE I. The thermal conductivity κ xx and thermal Hall conductivity κ xy are measured by applying a heat current J along the x axis of the sample (longest direction) and a magnetic field H either perpendicular to J (H ∥ z in Fig. where w is the sample width, t its thickness and L the distance between T + and T -. When a magnetic field is applied along either x, y or z direction, a transverse temperature difference ∆T y can be measured along the y axis. The thermal Hall conductivity κ xy is then given by In a tetragonal system, such as NCCO and Eu-LSCO, we can take κ yy = κ xx . In an orthorhombic system like YBCO, κ yy is measured in a separate sample with the heat current along the y direction The measurement procedure is the following: a magnetic field of +H is applied at T = 90 K, then the sample is cooled down with the +H field to the base temperature (∼ 2-3 K). The +H data was taken by changing temperature in discrete steps at a fixed magnetic field during the warm up process. After the +H data were taken, a magnetic field of -H is applied at the same temperature of T = 90 K, then the sample is cooled with -H field down to base temperature. The -H data were taken by the same method during the warm up process. During the measurement, after the temperature is stabilized at each step, the background of the thermocouple is eliminated by subtracting the heater-off value from the heater-on value. The contamination from κ xx in κ xy due to contact misalignment is removed by doing field anti-symmetrization of the transverse temperature difference ∆T y . That is to say, ∆T y are measured with both positive and negative magnetic fields in the same conditions, then κ xy is calculated using the field anti-symmetrizaed ∆T y , i.e. ∆T y (H) = [∆T y (T, H) -∆T y (T, -H)] /2. More details regarding the technique can be found in refs. In a second sample cut from the same mother crystal, we performed the same measurement of κ xy , but with the field applied parallel to the current (H ∥ J ∥ a). The data measured also at H = 1 T is shown in Fig. Then we turn to the antiferromagnetic (AF) insulating cuprates NCCO at a doping x = 0.04 (Fig. The temperature-dependent thermal conductivity κ xx measured at H = 15 T with three different configurations is plotted in Fig. C. Eu-LSCO p = 0.21 and 0.24 After studying the planar κ xy in materials where the conventional κ xy is either dominated by electrons (YBCO p = 0.11) or phonons (NCCO x = 0.04), we turn to the third cuprate material, Eu-LSCO, where the phononic conventional κ xy can be switched on and off by changing the doping level. It has been shown in a previous study The two Eu-LSCO samples measured in this study are p = 0.21 and p = 0.24, respectively located on each side of p ⋆ = 0.23 (Fig. In Eu-LSCO p = 0.21, the conventional κ xy taken with J ∥ a, H ∥ c at H = 15 T is plotted as the blue curve in Fig. Our results in YBCO p = 0.11 at H = 1 T and Eu-LSCO p = 0.24 at H = 15 T show that the planar κ xy coming from electrons is zero in cuprates, as expected since electrons feel zero Lorentz force when the magnetic field is parallel to the heat (H ∥ J). These two sets of experiments also establish that our measurement procedure is reliable, i.e. doing field antisymmetrization κxy measured with the conventional configuration of J ∥ a, H ∥ c (blue) is taken from ref. on ∆T y between +H and -H runs give the expected result. Our results in NCCO x = 0.04 and Eu-LSCO p = 0.21 clearly show that phonons are able to generate a sizable planar thermal Hall signal. The question is how to reconcile our results with the symmetry requirements? Theories point out that in order to have a non-zero planar κ xy , certain symmetry requirements have to be fulfilled to make H ∥ J different from H ∥ -J Our speculation is that a non-zero planar κ xy signal could potentially result from a locally broken symmetry due to impurities, defects, or domains. A possible mechanism for NCCO, an AF insulator with T N ∼ 200 K, is the scattering of phonons by antiferromagnetic domains. This is reminiscent of the nonmagnetic insulator SrTiO 3 , where the conventional κ xy was attributed to the scattering of phonons by antiferrodistortive structural domains Our findings call for a re-evaluation of the previously reported results in the Kitaev candidate materials. In α-RuCl 3 , a non-zero planar κ xy was only observed with a configuration of H ∥ J ∥ a but not with H ∥ J ∥ b Note that in addition to cuprates, some of us have also observed a phononic planar thermal Hall signal (comparable in magnitude to the conventional thermal Hall signal) in both the Kitaev magnet Na 2 Co 2 TeO 6 We report a systematic study of the planar thermal Hall response in three cuprate materials. In orthorhombic YBCO (at p = 0.11), the large electronic κ xy observed in the conventional configuration (H ∥ c) disappears entirely when the field is applied parallel to the current (H ∥ a), as expected in the absence of a Lorentz force when H ∥ J. In tetragonal Eu-LSCO at p = 0.24, where the conventional κ xy is entirely electronic, we also find zero Hall signal in the planar configuration (H ∥ J ∥ a). In dramatic contrast, we observe a planar Hall response that is as large as the conventional Hall response in the tetragonal cuprate NCCO (at x = 0.04), an insulator in which the Hall response is entirely due to phonons. We conclude that phonons can produce a planar thermal Hall effect even in materials where it is forbidden by global symmetry. We propose that the planar thermal Hall signal emerges from a local symmetry breaking, presumably associated with impurities, defects or domains. Our findings call for a re-examination of the mechanism responsible for a phonon thermal Hall effect in insulators and also a re-evaluation of the planar thermal Hall conductivity reported in Kitaev candidate materials. . Sample information including the doping level and dimensions of the contacts (length between contacts L × width w × thickness t, in μm).