The traditional picture of solid-solid phase transformations assumes an ordered parent phase transforms into an ordered daughter phase via a single unique pathway. Zirconium and its prototypical phase transition from hexagonal close-packed (hcp) to simple hexagonal (hex-3) structure has generated considerable controversy over several decades regarding which mechanism mediates the transformation. However, a lack of in situ measurements over the relevant atomistic timescales has hindered our ability to identify the true pathway. In this study, we exploit femtosecond X-ray diffraction coupled with nanosecond laser compression to give unprecedented insights into the complexities of how materials transform at the lattice level. We observe single-crystal zirconium changing from hcp to a hex-3 structure via not one but three competing pathways simultaneously. Concurrently, we also observe a broad diffuse background underlying the sharp Bragg diffraction during the transition. We corroborate our observation of the diffuse signal with multimillion-atom molecular dynamics simulations using a machine-learned interatomic potential. Our study demonstrates that the traditional mechanistic view of transitions may fail for even an elemental metal and that the mechanisms by which materials transform are far more intricate than generally thought. Solid-solid phase transitions have been an active area of scientific inquiry for the last hundred years The conventional picture of the atomistic pathways is based upon atomic mapping from an ordered parent phase to an ordered daughter phase via lattice strain and atomic shuffles. Each transition pathway is differentiated by the orientation with which it leaves the daughter phase relative to its parent. Thus, by measuring the orientation relationship (OR) between specific crystallographic planes and directions within the parent and daughter phases using diffraction, one can experimentally constrain the atomistic transition mechanism. Due to the commercial and technological importance of zirconium (Zr), titanium (Ti), and their alloys, the transformation mechanism between the ductile α-phase (hcp) and the brittle high-pressure ω-phase (simple hexagonal) has been the subject of intense theoretical and experimental scrutiny In this study, we approach the α → ω phase transition from a new direction by combining uniaxial laser-shock compression of high-purity, well-oriented single-crystal Zr with in-situ diffraction measurements using a high-brightness femtosecond X-ray free electron laser (XFEL) source. We produce near-instantaneous snapshots of atoms in the high-pressure shocked state as the material is transforming using the femtosecond probe duration, revealing lattice-level details of the phase transition mechanism. We performed laser-driven shockcompression experiments at the Matter in Extreme Conditions (MEC) endstation of the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) In Fig. We show the azimuthally averaged lineouts at five pressures above the αω phase boundary in Fig. To accurately account for the observed intensity distribution in each Debye-Scherrer ring, we constructed a forward model to calculate the expected diffraction signal for our experimental geometry. This model accounts for X-ray beam energy and direction, detector positions, and crystallographic information about the sample, such as crystal structure, unit cell dimensions on compression, phase volume fraction, and crystallographic texture of each phase (see Methods section for details). We present the results of the forward model calculation for the 15.2 GPa shot in Fig. The azimuthally localized yet diffuse diffraction alludes to further complexity during the phase transition. To investigate the origin of this diffuse signal, we performed large-scale classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of [0001]-oriented Zr single crystals with initial dimensions of 40 × 40 × 100 nm 3 shocked to 14 GPa using LAMMPS In Fig. The new variant III OR we observe in our experiments has never been observed in quenched ω-Zr captured from recovery experiments. This observation is in contrast to numerous experimental static and dynamic compression studies reporting variant I and variant II ORs In our MD simulations, the vast majority (99%) of the ω-phase assumes the variant II OR, with only trace amounts of variant I present. This prediction contrasts with the multimechanism picture painted by the experiment. However, the simulation properties can rationalize this behavior. Zong et al. Our MD simulations predict a small amount of the intermediate bcc β-phase in the tens of ps timescale. Our forward diffraction model predicts that the {220} β reflection should be observable in our experiments for the expected Burger's OR In summary, the dynamic behavior of the elemental metal Zr under shock compression is far more intricate than previously thought, involving multiple competing phase transition pathways and a partially disordered state in a single ns shock volume. While we initially attempted to use the more conventional EAM potential for Zr, only the machine-learned inter-atomic potential partially reproduced our experimental observations. Our experiments and analysis highlight the importance of in situ measurements on highly oriented crystals in validating our best theoretical models at extreme conditions. While our results focus on zirconium, we expect our results to apply to the transformation dynamics of other material systems at high pressure and temperature. Forward model. Given a material system with a known crystal structure, lattice parameters, temperature, and crystallographic orientation distribution function, the forward model computes the expected diffraction signal in 2θ-φ space. In any diffraction experiment in the transmission geometry and a single sample view, only a single ring of the complete pole figure is observable. Therefore, given an orientation distribution function, the forward model modulates the powder diffraction intensity in the azimuthal direction by the observable pole density for each one of the reflections. Fig. Laser compression. The output of the 527-nm drive laser at MEC, temporally shaped into a 15-ns flattop pulse, was focused into a 250-μm spot on the front of the polyimide. This generated an ablatively-driven shock into the target assembly, which an applied uniaxially load along the c-axis of the Zr crystal. Shock pressure in the sample is directly proportional to the laser intensity, and, therefore precise control of the on-target energy allowed for precise tuning of the pressure within the Zr sample Molecular dynamics simulations. Large-scale classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of dynamically compressed zirconium were performed using the open-source code LAMMPS The crystals we simulate are initially defect-free blocks of α-Zr with their [0001] direction aligned with the compression axis, z. The crystals are subjected to periodic boundary conditions in the transverse directions, x and y, to simulate laterally confining material present behind a uniform, uniaxial shock front. All crystals span at least 40 x 40 nm 2 in the x and y directions to mitigate finite-size effects that might otherwise influence grain growth. Shock waves were driven into the crystal using a momentum mirror ramped to the final particle velocity U P over 250 ps. A 1-fs timestep is used throughout. To relax computational costs, we use an iterative scheme whereby the length of the crystal is grown incrementally at a rate that keeps pace with the shock front. At every timestep, there exists a tracer layer at a distance δ = U e S t eq from the crystal's rear surface, where U e S is the speed of the elastic precursor wave, and t eq is the time required for a pristine block of crystal to thermalize (∼ 1 ps). When the tracer velocity exceeds 0.5U e P , a new block of Zr of thickness δ is seamlessly appended to the rear surface; the new material thermalizes for at least time t eq before the shock front sweeps through it. By comparing simulations carried out under an EAM potential with and without this incremental scheme, we have verified that the stress waves generated by the addition of new material (which cause oscillations in the pressure and shear stress of ±1% and ±5% of their peak values, respectively) do not substantively change the final thermodynamic state reached by the system. By building the 'runway' required by the shockwave iteratively -rather than constructing the crystal with its ultimate dimensions at the outset -we avoid needless simulation of ambient mate-rial waiting to be compressed and thus double our computational efficiency. We also set a 'cutoff time' after which we isolate a relatively small portion of the crystal far behind the shock front for study, and delete the remainder. Once a sufficiently large volume of phase-transformed Zr has accumulated near the front surface, we find the greatest z-coordinate at which the average particle velocity is no less than 95% of the Hugoniot particle velocity U P , insert at this limit a second momentum mirror co-moving with the first at fixed velocity U P , and remove all atoms beyond the second mirror. The remaining block of Zr, which comprises at least 2 million atoms, evolves under constant-volume boundary conditions until the global phase fractions stabilize. To partition the crystal into its constituent α, β, ω, and non-crystalline phase fractions, we use the following pipeline [executed in , or 'other' structures. The third classification includes atoms in the bulk partially disordered phase, those found on grain boundaries, and 'false negatives' whose local crystalline environment was so strongly perturbed by thermal fluctuations as to be unrecognizable to the AJP or aCNA. 4. Atoms whose assigned phase differs from that of all but no more than one of its nearest neighbors are reassigned to the structure of those neighbors. This corrective step further mitigates misidentifications from thermal noise. Whenever identifying phases, we use atomic coordinates that have been timeaveraged over 200 fs (approximately one oscillation period) to further reduce the number of false negatives incorrectly assigned a non-crystalline structure. To synthesize diffraction patterns from a set of (identical) atoms, we first calculate the ionic structure factor on the locus of q-vectors forming the Ewald sphere using the standard expression where the {r α } are the (instantaneous) coordinates of the N atoms of interest. The raw ionic scattering intensity ∥S i (q)∥ 2 is calculated and post-multiplied by atomic-form, Lorentz-polarization, and self-attenuation factors. Experimental x-ray diffraction study of the Ti alloys. OR between αand ω-phase was theoretically determined by studying projections of different planes. Experimental study on orientation relationship between bcc α-phase in Vanadium-Nitrogen system and hcp V 3 N precipitate using transmission electron microscopy The lack of any Bragg diffraction is a result of the highly-oriented nature of the starting sample. For this shot the XFEL X-rays were timed to probe the sample before the shock arrived at the Zr, therefore any small contribution from laser plasma X-rays is recorded on the detectors as a background level for the high pressure shots (e.g., Fig. Shock compression experiments along with in-situ x-ray diffraction were conducted for polycrystalline Zr samples in the same pressure ranges as discussed in the main text. A waterfall plot of the azimuthally averaged intensities for the ambient sample and shock compressed Zr in intermediate pressure regime [regime (ii)] of 10 -15 GPa is shown in Fig. !""# !""# !""# 1 GPa], the diffraction signal is composed almost entirely of the ω-phase, with a small amount of diffraction from the compressed α-phase, pointing to near complete conversion of the α → ω phase transition. There is a substantial reduction in the diffuse background signal and further evolution in the azimuthal intensity distribution. The nanoclusters of noncrystalline material that form between the ω grains have an atomistic structure differing from that of the prevailing ω-phase and residual β-phase. While the structure is not perfectly crystalline, it does exhibit a degree of translational and orientational order (hence our referring to this structure as 'partially' disordered). Figs. In Fig. An intermediate bcc β-phase was initially hypothesized in Ref. Our MD simulations also show the transition of the hcp α-phase to the bcc β-phase via rapid atomic shuffling in the (0001) α plane [the Burgers mechanism We checked the consistency of our data with the presence of an intermediate bcc β-phase persisting in the ns timescale. The orientation relationship between the hexagonal close-packed α and bcc β-phase in Zr has been experimentally determined to be the Burger's OR ((0001) α || (110) β and [2 11 0] || [ 111] β ) We also checked the consistency of other hcp-bcc ORs with our data. We list the different ORs we considered when interpreting our data in Table We also note that while the Rong-Dunlop ( Each of the orientation relationships listed in Table The number of orientation variants, N α→ω is then given by the following expression Here, |A| represents the number of elements in group A. Each orientation variant, α i can be calculated from symmetry elements, g α i the parent phase point group, G α . The orientation variants for each OR can be computed using the symmetry group of the parent phase. If T α→ω denotes the transformation matrix between the α and the ω-phase given by the OR, then the orientation variants are the unique elements in the set, T ′ α→ω , given by T ′ α→ω = G α T α→ω . The reader is referred to (29) for a more comprehensive description of the mathematical structure of orientation variants. All orientation variants of the different ORs in the literature and their respective pole figures were computed to compare with our experimental measurements. Fig. These supercells and location of atoms are shown in Fig. The strain magnitude for the other shots are of comparable magnitude. The maximum magnitude of the shuffle for an atom in the unstrained α-basis is given by ( while the root mean squared shuffle is given by For the lattice parameters in shot 93 (Figs. 1, 2a) of our experiment, δ max = 0.6634 Å and δ RMS = 0.6026 Å. The shuffle magnitudes for the other shots are of comparable magnitude. References for each of these studies can be found in Table For the lattice parameters in shot 93 (Figs. 1, 2left) of our experiment, δ max = δ RMS = 0.8243 Å. In addition to variant I and II ORs, we observe the presence of a third, previously experimentally unreported orientation relationship in our measurements. This OR is very closely related to the one reported by Zong et al. tive common-neighbor analysis (aCNA). Atoms are assigned to α (hcp), β a = 3.15, c = 4.52, ρ = 7.8, c/a = 1.5 a = 4.78, c = 2.948, ρ = 7.79, c/a = 0.617 Saransh Singh, Martin G. Gorman, Patrick G. Heighway, Joel V. Bernier, David McGonegle, Hae-Ja Lee, Bob Nagler, Jon H. Eggert, Raymond F. Smith