The experimental results hinting at the room temperature and ambient pressure superconductivity and magnetic levitation in LK-99 attracted an unprecedented interest. While attempts of other teams to reproduce the reported observations on similar samples failed so far, it seems worthwhile to try building a theoretical model that would explain the ensemble of the available data. One of important features that needs to be explained is an apparent contradiction between an extremely high critical temperature Tc and rather modest critical magnetic field Bc and critical current jc reported for LK-99. We show theoretically, that these data may be quantitatively reproduced assuming the interplay between exciton-and phonon-induced superconductivity, while the conventional BCS or Brinkman-Rice-Bardeen-Cooper-Schriefer (BR-BCS) mechanisms would result in a much higher Bc for the same Tc. The initial excitement induced by the reports on the room temperature and ambient pressure superconductivity In what follows we compare the experimental temperature dependencies of the critical current and critical magnetic field with predictions of various models and conclude that neither Brinkman-Rice-Bardeen-Cooper-Schriefer (BR-BCS) nor flat band BCS superconductivity model, evoked by some recent theories In order to directly compare predictions of several models, we shall analyze the gap equation represented in the integral form where Δ is the superconducting gap, k B is the Boltzmann constant, U 0 is the effective electron-electron interaction potential , ξ is the electron energy difference with respect to the Fermi energy, E = √ξ ′ 2 + Δ 2 (ξ ′ , T). The cutoff for the integral Ω is usually associated with the Debye frequency, that is the maximum frequency for the lattice vibrations. In the simplest approximation, U 0 (ξ) is assumed to be constant below the Debye frequency. The critical magnetic field B c and critical current density j c are linked with the temperature-dependent value of the gap function at zero energy by the relations where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, N(0) the electron density of states near the Fermi surface, and ħk F the electron Fermi momentum. In what follows we show that the experimental findings of Refs. At non-zero temperatures, a significant number of electrons would be situated in the first subband above the Fermi level, and a significant number of holes would be situated at the subband below the Fermi level. If the binding energy of excitons formed by such electron-hole pairs exceeds the energy splitting between relevant subbands, these excitons would be stable even at zero temperature, and a sort of the excitonic insulator (Mott insulator) phase would be formed in the plane of SQW. This excitonic insulator could coexist with a free electron (hole) gas in a partly filled subband. Scattering of excitons with electrons from this subband would trigger an excitonic mechanism of Cooper pairing qualitatively similar to the familiar phonon-induced Cooper pairing (see the diagram in Fig. The differences of the exciton-induced and phonon-induced Cooper pairing are in the energy dependences of the corresponding coupling potentials. Compared with the electron-phonon interaction, the electron-exciton interaction might be much stronger as it is governed by the Coulomb interaction of electrons with dipole-polarised excitons in the same SQW. The energy dependence of the exciton contribution to the electron-electron interaction potential would be governed by the density of excited exciton states that is expected to be staircase-like due to the multitude of subbands where excitons may be scattered to. In order to evaluate the exciton-induced electron-electron interaction potential let us consider a model SQW that might be formed due to the local strain in LK-99. It is well known that the electronic band bending occurs at the interface of two different materials with a disparity of chemical potential, resulting in the formation of a built-in electric field at the surface or interface where m e is the electron effective mass, J i are the Bessel functions, and i ∈ {1,2,3, ... } indicates the index of the quantization subband. An infinitely high barrier is assumed for z < 0. We shall consider the excitonic scattering between three subbands whose energies are E 1 = 16.87 meV, E 2 = 29.50 meV, E 3 = 39.84 meV, respectively, see the scheme in Fig. For the electron-exciton interaction in the first subband, Skopelitis et al , where X = 1 is the Hopfield coefficient for exciton, L = 20 nm is the average electron-exciton spacing, d = 10 nm the exciton dipole length, n p the exciton density, A is the normalization area, N(0) is the free electron density of states at the Fermi surface, g 0 is the interaction constant, ε is the dielectric permittivity of the background. We estimate X = 1, L = 5 nm, d = 7 nm, n p = 5 × 10 10 cm -2 , N(0) = m e πħ 2 , g 0 A ~3 meV Where 0.7466 . The cut-off frequency of the electron-electron interaction channels corresponding to the exciton scattering within the first and the second subband must be close to the energy splittings between the corresponding subbands. We shall assume Δ 1 = E 2 -E 1 = 12.63 meV, Δ 2 = E 3 -E 2 = 10.34 meV , respectively, for the first two steps of the interaction potential. We shall neglect steps caused by the exciton scattering to the third, firth etc subbands as the probability of such scatterings would be very low. In this approximation, the total effective electron-electron interaction potential profile is composed by the two-step electron-exciton interaction potential with magnitudes η 1,2 and the comparatively lower magnitude electron-phonon interaction potential having a cut-off at the Debye energy, as shown in Fig. We shall be solving the gap equation ( Figure We explain this difference between the predictions of three models by the interplay of two mechanisms of superconductivity resulting in a specific three-step interaction potential within our model. The non-trivial energy dependence of the interaction potential leads to the smoother dependence of Δ(0) on temperature as compared to the other models. Due to this smooth temperature dependence of Δ(0), very high critical temperatures may coexist with relatively modest critical magnetic field and critical current. In conclusion, we have reproduced the experimental dependencies of the critical current on temperature and magnetic field in LK-99 within the model assuming an interplay between exciton-and phonon-induced superconductivity in superconducting quantum wells. We have also checked that the conventional BCS model and the BR-BCS model evoked in Ref. 2 would lead to the critical current and critical magnetic field strongly exceeding the experimental values. Clearly, our estimations are inexact as we do not know that exact shape of the superconducting quantum wells in LK-99. It is no more than the hypothesis. Still, it allows one to explain the apparent controversy between the extremely high value of Tc reported in Refs. We would like to note at this point that, while the exciton-induced superconductivity is a theoretical concept that still lacks experimental confirmation, it is worth attention of the community in view of a rapidly expanding class of systems and materials where free electrons and excitons may coexist. Clearly, when the concept was brought forward by Bardeen and Ginzburg that was not the case. One should expect that the excitonic mechanism will strongly manifest itself sooner or later, which justifies our effort to analyse its potential impact on the temperature dependencies of critical current and critical magnetic field. Finally, we would like to emphasize that we do not consider one-dimensional superconductivity in this work. Rather, we believe that two-dimensional superconducting layers may be formed in the interface regions of polycrystalline LK-99 sample. Two-dimensional superconductivity could be responsible for the reported SQUID data We thank Professor Anvar Zakhidov for many enlightening discussions.