Topological insulator/superconductor two-dimensional heterostructures are promising candidates for realizing topological superconductivity and Majorana modes. In these systems, a vortex pinned by a prefabricated antidot in the superconductor can host Majorana zero-energy modes (MZMs), which are exotic quasiparticles that may enable quantum information processing. However, a major challenge is to design devices that can manipulate the information encoded in these MZMs. One of the key factors is to create small and clean antidots, so the MZMs, localized in the vortex core, have a large gap to other excitations. If the antidot is too large or too disordered, the level spacing for the subgap vortex states may become smaller than temperature. In this paper, we numerically investigate the effects of disorder, chemical potential, and antidot size on the subgap vortex spectrum, using a two-dimensional effective model of the topological insulator surface. Our model allows us to simulate large system sizes with vortices up to 1.8 μm in diameter (with a 6 nm lattice constant). We also compare our disorder model with the transport data from existing experiments. We find that the spectral gap can exhibit a nonmonotonic behavior as a function of disorder strength, and that it can be tuned by applying a gate voltage. Majorana zero modes (MZMs) are exotic quasiparticles that obey non-Abelian exchange statistics and can be used for topological quantum computation Presently, the most commonly investigated platform for creating MZMs is semiconductor nanowires with large spin-orbit coupling and proximity-induced superconductivity On the other hand, an MZM platform based on the surface of a three-dimensional topological insulator (3D TI) covered by a superconductor (SC) A possible way to create and control vortices in a 3D TI-SC platform is to use an antidot structure, where part of the SC is removed, as shown in Fig. Recently, Ref. In this paper, we present a more microscopic modeling of the antidot structure using a two-dimensional (2D) effective lattice model for the proximitized 3D TI surface, with the disorder potential included explicitly. The model is described in detail in Sec. II. It allows us to simulate large system sizes up to 3.6 μm × 3.6 μm with a lattice spacing a = 6 nm, and to capture the low-energy physics near the Dirac point. We investigate how the minigap depends on various parameters, such as disorder strength, antidot radius, and chemical potential (i.e., electron density), in Sec. III. We also compare our disorder model with experimental mobility data to estimate realistic disorder levels in existing materials. We discuss the implications of our results for the feasibility of observing MZMs in this platform in Sec. IV. To be able to efficiently simulate a 2D surface of a 3D TI with a single Dirac cone, we utilize an effective square-lattice model of the surface that breaks global time-reversal symmetry x + k 4 y ) for small k. The presence of the term M k thus effectively creates a 2D surface with a single Dirac cone at Γ. We refer the reader to Ref. Proximity-induced superconductivity is included by constructing a Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian H = where ∆ is the proximity-induced effective pairing potential in the TI and the basis spinor is The superconducting correlations in the TI are generated through the tunneling between the TI and the parent SC, and the effective Hamiltonian (2) can be calculated by integrating out the SC degrees of freedom in the combined SC-TI system and computing the SC-TI interface self-energy In our simulations we choose a discretization with the lattice spacing a = 0.03πξ 0 , where ξ 0 = ħv D /(π∆ 0 ) is the superconducting coherence length We note that, when |∆ 0 | ≪ |m| and |μ| ≪ |m|, the model has a non-zero Chern number C = sign(m), which is due to the presence of time-reversal symmetry breaking terms in To simulate the antidot device, we write the Hamiltonian (2) in the position space, and allow spatial variation of the chemical potential μ and the pairing potential ∆. Spatial variation of λ, which could emerge due to the proximity-induced renormalization of v D , is neglected. A schematic sketch of the modeled sample is shown in Fig. which is a valid approximation in the case of a thick superconductor with a short London penetration length. We choose B 0 = Φ 0 /(πR 2 ), such that the sample is permeated by a single flux quantum Φ 0 = h/(2|e|). The magnetic vector potential compatible with the assumed magnetic field distribution is expressed in the London gauge as The flux trapped by the antidot induces a phase winding of the pairing potential Furthermore, the vector potential A(r) is introduced into the hopping terms via the Peierls substitution, where L 01 is the straight line pointing from r 0 to r 1 . The chemical potential profile is made up of two parts: μ(r) = μ 0 (r)+δμ(r). The first part describes an idealized impurity-free sample, while the second part represents the effect of the disorder. We assume that the chemical potential is fixed in the SC part of the system, while in the antidot it can be controlled by gating, and write C. Disorder model and its relation to the scattering rate The disorder in the system is modeled by distributing 2N C charged impurities at randomly chosen distinct lattice sites r C n throughout the sample. The charges have equal magnitude, although half of them are negative and half are positive, such that the net charge in the system is exactly zero, and the correction to the chemical potential due to disorder is As our TI surface model (1) features spin-polarized bands away from Γ, the disorder-induced scattering could potentially generate a magnetic gap in the surface Dirac spectrum. To avoid this issue, we choose the single impurity potential V (r) to have a Gaussian profile, such that the high momentum scattering is suppressed. The model potential in ( where V 0 is the magnitude of the potential, while σ gives the radius of the potential well, and N = i∈lattice exp -r 2 i /σ 2 is the normalization factor designed to fix the variance of V (r) at the lattice sites r i such that i∈lattice V 2 (r i ) = V 2 0 . The parameter σ -1 gives an estimate for the largest momentum change in the scattering process. We fix σ = 2.5a in all calculations, for which choice the sum can be approximated by an integral and N ≈ π(σ/a) 2 . Finally, we connect the abstract parameters of the numerical model with measurable disorder characteristics. For μ 0 = 0, we estimate the electron elastic scattering rate, averaged over fluctuations of δμ, to be where is the estimated variance of δμ(r) at fixed r. Expression ( III. RESULTS Our main objective is to investigate how the minigap and the local density of states change upon introducing disorder in the sample. To that end, we calculated the energy spectrum of the antidot system, while varying the impurity potential magnitude V 0 and the impurity density ρ imp . In addition, we considered different values of the antidot radius R and of the chemical potential μ in,0 inside the sample, as these are the degrees of freedom that can be controlled directly in experiments. While, in principle, the results depend on the details of the distribution of impurities, in the main text we focus on the data calculated for a specific distribution, for which the minigap approaches zero at relatively weak disorder strengths, especially if the antidot radius equals about 14ξ 0 . With this method, we capture the qualitative features of the investigated phenomena that are likely to manifest in experimental observations of actual samples. Furthermore, to gain a more comprehensive view of the quantitative details, we calculated statistical distributions of the minigap value for various configurations of the antidot systems, with different realizations of random disorder. We discuss these results in Appendix C. A thorough study of statistical distributions of energy levels in disordered antidot systems in the limit ξ 0 → 0 can be found in Ref. We characterize the antidot system with dimensionless quantities μ/∆ 0 , R/ξ 0 = πR∆ 0 /(ħv D ), and V 0 /∆ 0 . Furthermore, we fix the chemical potential in the SC part of the system to be μ out = 2∆ 0 . We have verified numerically that varying μ out in the range of several ∆ 0 has a negligible effect on the minigap, although the energies of higher excited states can be affected more significantly. First, we consider a fixed impurity density ρ imp ξ 2 0 ≈ 17, which in our model corresponds to the fraction of 0.15 of the lattice sites being occupied by impurities, and two different antidot radii: R = 1.26πξ 0 ≈ 4ξ 0 and R = 4.5πξ 0 ≈ 14ξ 0 . The smaller (larger) value of R represents the regime in which the antidot area constitutes the minority (majority) of the area ≈ π(R + πξ 0 ) 2 occupied by the wave functions of states bound to the vortex core. The specific numerical values of R are dictated by the convenience of numerical calculations. In Figs. We account for this effect by adjusting μ in,0 such that ⟨μ in ⟩ = 0 in every calculation. To provide a statistical context to the spectra presented in Figs. As illustrated most clearly in Fig. We complement the above results obtained for a fixed value of ρ imp and variable V 0 with a series of calculations performed for fixed V 0 = 6∆ 0 and changing ρ imp with values ranging from 0 up to ρ imp ξ 2 0 ≈ 20, which corresponds to Γ ranging from 0 to 0.43∆ 0 . The energy spectra calculated for the two antidot radii, R ≈ 4ξ 0 and R ≈ 14ξ 0 , are presented in Figs. Our findings consistently indicate that the energy spectrum of the smaller antidot is less susceptible to disorder. The calculated dependence of the spectrum on the antidot radius is presented in Fig. In analogy to Figs. So far, we have adopted a fixed average chemical potential ⟨μ in ⟩ = 0, although in a real device it would generally attain a different value determined by the specific properties of the materials comprising the heterostructure and its fabrication quality. However, it is our assumption that ⟨μ in ⟩ can be effectively controlled by an external electric field through tuning μ in,0 in In Figs. 4(a)-4(d) we present the energy spectra of the antidots of radii R ≈ 4ξ 0 and R ≈ 14ξ 0 plotted as functions of ⟨μ in ⟩, which is varied in the range of a few ∆ 0 . Figures In the presence of disorder with Γ ≈ 0.33∆ 0 (as calculated at ⟨μ in ⟩ = 0), the two samples with different radii respond differently to adjusting ⟨μ in ⟩. Figure For |⟨μ in ⟩| above a certain value, both in the clean and the disordered system, the minigap nearly closes, and the spectrum can feature densely spaced energy levels corresponding to trivial Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) states bound to the vortex core localized inside the antidot. This is consistent with scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS) experiments with Abrikosov vortices in SC-TI heterostructures, where the bound states manifest themselves as an apparent splitting of the zero-bias peak at a certain distance from the vortex core Statistical distributions of the minigap value obtained for 1000 random disorder realizations at selected values of ⟨μ in ⟩ for both antidot sizes are shown in Figs. Importantly, tuning the chemical potential ⟨μ in ⟩ also results in the change of the MZM wave function distribution. In a clean sample at ⟨μ in ⟩ = 0, the MZM is almost evenly distributed throughout the antidot area and spills into the surrounding SC region with an exponentially decreasing amplitude. For nonzero ⟨μ in ⟩, however, the MZM density develops a distinct peak at the vortex core. The radial profiles of the MZMs in clean samples are shown as dashed lines in Figs. 4(e) and 4(f). In the disordered antidots case, on the other hand, the MZMs exhibit spatial fluctuations and peaks at random points, even at ⟨μ in ⟩ = 0. Upon the variation of the chemical potential, the spatial profile of the wave function is altered, such that the existing peaks level off, and the new peaks emerge at different locations. The MZMs in disor-dered samples are represented by solid lines in Figs. The above results motivate a comprehensive study of the antidot with the smallest meaningful size, which is estimated by the radius of the core of an Abrikosov vortex ≈ ξ 0 . We expect that the disorder magnitudes allowed by our model have a minor effect on the spectra of such systems. Instead, we focus on the case of R = 0.8πξ 0 ≈ 2.5ξ 0 , which is closer to the theoretical limit than the previously investigated radii. We calculate the minigap as a function of both the chemical potential inside the antidot ⟨μ in ⟩ and the impurity potential strength V 0 , for a fixed impurity density ρ imp ≈ 17/ξ 2 0 . The results are shown as a color map in Fig. We performed a detailed numerical analysis of the TI-SC device with an antidot structure, using realistic parameters. We focused on how the minigap, which separates the zero-energy Majorana mode in the antidot from the first excited trivial CdGM state, depends on various factors, i.e., geometrical dimensions, Fermi energy, and disorder strength. We also examined how these factors affect the Majorana wave function profile inside the antidot. We considered a realistic correlated disorder model mimicking randomly distributed charged impurities. We established a relationship between impurity density, potential strength, and the corresponding scattering rate, see Fig. Our results have implications for the current and future experiments on antidots in TI-SC devices, which are a promising platform for topological quantum computing. The minigap is the crucial parameter for such applications-it has to be larger than the temperature to enable fast and reliable quantum information processing and storage. We studied the dependence of the minigap on antidot radius in clean and disordered limits, as shown in Figs. We found that disorder has a negative effect on the minigap, which is the case in other proposed MZM platforms and is in qualitative alignment with earlier results of Ref. Our findings are supplemented by a basic statistical analysis of the distribution of minigap values in random disorder realizations. For the strongest investigated disorder in the antidot of radius R ≈ 14ξ 0 , which falls within the regime ξ 0 ≪ R, we approximately recover the theoretical distribution of the minigap predicted by random matrix theory For the smallest investigated antidot size with R ≈ 2.5ξ 0 , we found that the scattering rate as high as Γ ≈ 4.5∆ 0 allows a minigap of about 0.5∆ 0 . This value is comparable to the largest minigap values observed for the antidot of radius R ≈ 4ξ 0 at similar Γ; mesoscopic fluctuations of the minigap allow for large minigaps in certain disorder realizations, as indicated by the broad distribution of minigaps (see Fig. For typical TIs, such as (Bi 0.4 Sb 0.6 ) 2 Te 3 (BST) where we used |E| = λa|k|. In our model, a = 0.03πξ 0 , and thus the Fermi contour warping can be neglected if |E| ≪ 81.7∆ 0 . Near Γ, the effect of the TRS breaking terms in the Hamiltonian (1) is given by ma 4 8 (k 4 x + k 4 y )s z . We compare the physical Dirac term in (A1) to the magnetic perturbation: For the parameter values used in our lattice model, the effect of TRS breaking terms near Γ is negligible if |E| ≪ 58.3∆ 0 . Furthermore, we note that the magnetic gap at X and Y points in the Brillouin zone is 4|m| = 200∆ 0 , and at M it is 8|m| = 400∆ 0 . Our analysis is confined within these energy gaps. where |k⟩ and |k ′ ⟩ are the eigenstates of the 2D Dirac Hamiltonian (A1) at zero energy. Without loss of generality, we choose μ 0 > 0. The square modulus of the matrix element of δμ, as defined in where Ω is the surface area, φ (′) is the polar angle in the reciprocal space, and In the double sum in (B2) the terms with m = n sum to 2N C . Assuming the uniform probability distribution of r C i , the disorder average of the exponents in the remaining terms, in the limit of infinite Ω, is where ρ imp = 2N C /Ω is the impurity density per unit area. In the limit of the infinite surface area, the summation in (B1) is replaced with the integration, and the k = k ′ term becomes negligible. The integral evaluated for small σ|k| thus yields Here we used the fact that the Fermi momentum satisfies |k| = |μ 0 /(ħv D )| and that the density of states per unit area is |μ 0 |/(2πħ 2 v 2 D ). As our primary interest lies in the case of μ 0 = 0, we replace the chemical potential in (B6) with appropriate averages of |δμ|. Per the central limit theorem, at any position r the probability density function of δμ(r) is given by the normal distribution where It is straightforward to show that the averages in the normal distribution are from which it follows that (B10) In For larger fluctuations δμ and for μ 0 ̸ = 0, the approximation expressed in where I α (x) are modified Bessel functions of the first kind. Then, we substitute μ 0 → μ 0 + δμ and calculate numerically averages of 1/τ k with respect to the probability distribution (B7). The scattering rate obtained in this way is compared to the approximate formula Analogous data for the smaller antidot with R ≈ 4ξ 0 is shown in red in Fig. For the strongest investigated disorder, the minigap distribution in the larger antidot follows approximately the analytical distribution derived from random matrix theory Figure To supplement Fig. Finally, Fig. variance of the disorder potential s, both in units of vD/σ, evaluated for average chemical potential μ0 = 0. Approximation for small impurity potential fluctuations given by Eq. (10) (blue curve) and the true dependence evaluated by means of numerical integration (orange curve). Γ ≈ 0.16Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.11Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.21Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.33Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.44Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.32Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.48Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.65Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.81Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.65Δ 0 and by tuning the parameter V0 in 1000 random disorder realizations, with the longest lines denoting the medians. The figure presents data obtained with a disorder realization different than in Fig.2(b).Γ ≈ 0.64Δ 0 Γ ≈ 1.29Δ 0 Γ ≈ 1.93Δ 0 Γ ≈ 2.58Δ 0 Γ ≈ 3.22Δ 0 Γ ≈ 3.87Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.64Δ 0 Γ ≈ 1.29Δ 0 Γ ≈ 1.93Δ 0 Γ ≈ 2.58Δ 0 Γ ≈ 3.22Δ 0 Γ ≈ 3.87Δ 0 Γ ≈ 0.64Δ 0 Γ ≈ 1.29Δ 0