Motivated by high-temperature superconductivity in pressurized La3Ni2O7, we investigate the pair correlations in the two-orbital Hubbard ladder, which consists of the nearly half-filled and nearly quarter-filled orbitals. By employing the density matrix renormalization group method, we demonstrate that the pair correlation exhibits a power-law decay against the distance while the spin correlation decays exponentially. The decay exponent of the pair correlation of the nearly halffilled orbital is comparable to the exponent of the quasi-long-range superconducting correlation in the doped single-orbital Hubbard ladder, which suggests the importance of the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital in La3Ni2O7. Bilayer systems exhibit rich electronic properties unrealized in single-layer systems. A representative example is the twisted-bilayer system, where twist-angle engineering enables us to create a new platform of correlated electron physics The recent discovery of high-temperature (high-T c ) superconductivity in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under pressure In a recent paper by three of the present authors, a two-orbital bilayer (four orbitals in a unit cell) model derived from first-principles calculation was studied within the fluctuation exchange (FLEX) approximation Given this background, in this article, we investigate the problem using an alternative approach that can cope with strong correlation effects with accuracy, namely, we adopt the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) method to study a two-orbital Hubbard ladder model, a one-dimensional analog of the two-orbital bilayer Hubbard model. In one-dimensional ladderlike structures, a hallmark of superconductivity is given by quasi-longrange pair correlation, which decays as a power law against the distance (due to the Mermin-Wagner theorem) To address a similar situation to the bilayer nickelate in a one-dimensional system, we consider a two-orbital Hubbard ladder at 3/8 filing, i.e., three electrons per unit cell, which consists of two sites with two orbitals on each site (see Fig. ĉ † j,l,μ,σ (ĉ j,l,μ,σ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron at site j in chain l (= 1, 2), where μ (= a, b) and σ (=↑, ↓) denote the orbital and spin degrees of freedom, respectively, and nj,l,μ,σ = ĉ † j,l,μ,σ ĉj,l,μ,σ . Considering this model as a one-dimensional version of that of the bilayer nickelate, orbitals a and b correspond to the d 3z 2 -r 2 and d x 2 -y 2 orbitals, respectively. t μν ∥ is the hopping integral between the nearest neighboring μ and ν orbitals along the chain direction, and t μμ ⊥ is the interchain hopping integral of the orbital μ. ε μ is the energy level of the orbital μ, and the energy-level difference is denoted by ∆E = ε b -ε a . U (> 0) is the on-site repulsive interaction. We set ∆E > 0 at 3/8 filling, where the lower-energy a orbital can be nearly half-filling while the higher-energy b orbital is nearly quarter-filling, as shown in Fig. ) orbital is elongated in the in-plane (out-of-plane) direction. Note that our model neglects the interorbital repulsion U ′ for simplicity. However, if we keep electron filling 3/4 < n a < 1 for the a orbital at U > U ′ (including the Hartree energy shift), U ′ may not qualitatively change the single-site electron configuration and effective magnetic interactions. We will comment on the roles of Hund's coupling J H later. This 3/8-filled two-orbital ladder model consists of a lightly doped Mott insulator in the a-orbital network and a nearly quarter-filled itinerant electron system in the borbital network (see Fig. In Fig. Ŝz j+r,l,μ ⟩ in the L x = 64 system, where we set j = j ref = 18 as the reference site. Interestingly, we find that the spin correlations of both a and b orbitals exhibit an exponential-like decay against the distance r, i.e., the spin correlation cannot be dominant in the long-range part. This decay tendency is a signature of a spin-gapped state. The exponential decay of F zz a (r) can be interpreted by the presence of the rung spin-singlet in the a-orbital system as shown in Fig. The present numerical results support the scenario that the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital, which is nearly half-filling, in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 importantly contributes to superconductivity. The interlayer pairing in the d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital network may be interpreted in terms of the magnetically meditated pairing discussed in the doped single-orbital ladder and bilayer We have studied the pair correlations in the two-orbital Hubbard ladder at 3/8 filling, a one-dimensional analog of the bilayer Hubbard models recently proposed for mimicking La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under pressure. Our DMRG calculations demonstrated that the pair correlations exhibit a power-law decay while the spin correlations decay exponentially. The decay exponent of the pair-correlation function is comparable to the exponent of the quasi-longrange superconducting order. Our numerical results suggest that the 3/8-filled two-orbital Hubbard ladder or bilayer with strong rung hopping can be a good platform for superconductivity. For La 3 Ni 2 O 7 , our finding provides support for the scenario that the nearly half-filled d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital importantly contributes to superconductivity.