We consider the Casimir pressure between two metallic plates and calculate the four contributions to it determined by the propagating and evanescent waves and by the transverse magnetic and transverse electric polarizations of the electromagnetic field. The range of interplate separations is considered where nearly the whole pressure has its origin in the electromagnetic response of conduction electrons. In the Casimir physics, this response is described either by the dissipative Drude model resulting in contradictions with the measurement data or by the experimentally consistent but dissipationless plasma model. It is shown that the total transverse magnetic contribution to the Casimir pressure due to both the propagating and evanescent waves and the transverse electric contribution due to only the propagating waves, computed by means of the Drude model, correlate well with the corresponding results obtained using the plasma model. The conclusion is made that a disagreement between the theoretical predictions obtained using the Drude model and precision measurements of the Casimir force is not caused by the account of dissipation in itself, but arises from an incorrect description of the response of metals to the low-frequency transverse electric evanescent waves by this model. It is demonstrated that the Drude model has no supporting experimental evidence in the range of transverse electric evanescent waves, so that the above conclusion is consistent with all available information. The alternative test of the Drude model for the transverse electric evanescent waves suggested in the framework of classical electrodynamics is discussed. The Casimir effect is the relativistic and quantum phenomenon which has attracted widespread attention in the 75 years since its prediction in 1948 The Casimir force is unique in being important for such diverse fields of physics as theory of elementary particles, gravitation and cosmology, quantum electrodynamics, condensed matter physics, atomic physics, and also for nanotechnology. As a result, a great number of papers was devoted to this subject during the last decades (see the lists of references in the monographs The present stage in measuring the Casimir force started with an experiment The many times repeated measurements of the Casimir force performed by means of a micromechanical torsional oscillator The contradiction between theoretical predictions of the Lifshitz theory obtained using the apparently well-tested Drude model and measurements of the Casimir force is often named the Casimir puzzle Particular emphasis has been placed on the frequency region of the anomalous skin effect where the Drude dielectric function becomes inapplicable due to the spatial nonlocality The important step was made in Furthermore, it was shown that at separations exceeding the thermal length (i.e., above approximately 6 μm at T = 300K) the contributions of the transverse electric propagating and evanescent waves to the total Casimir force calculated using the Drude model are equal in magnitude and cancel each other In this paper, we investigate the contributions of both the transverse magnetic and transverse electric propagating and evanescent waves into the Casimir force per unit area (i.e., the Casimir pressure) for two parallel Au-coated plates in the experimentally relevant separation region from 0.5 to 4 μm where the total force value, in the limits of measurement errors, is determined by the dielectric response of conduction electrons. The contributions of the transverse magnetic and transverse electric propagating and evanescent waves are calculated in the framework of the Lifshitz theory employing either the Drude or the plasma model. For this purpose, we combine the computational results obtained using the formalisms represented in terms of the pure imaginary and real frequencies. It is shown that the contributions of the transverse magnetic waves to the total Casimir force computed using the Drude and plasma models nearly coincide. The contributions of the transverse electric propagating waves to the Casimir force computed using the Drude and plasma models also turned out to be rather close. As a result, the relatively big difference between the theoretical predictions for the total Casimir force made by means of the Drude and plasma models over the experimentally relevant range of separations comes from different contributions of the transverse electric evanescent waves. Taking into account that this big difference is experimentally excluded by the measurement data of numerous experiments mentioned above, the conclusion is made that the Drude model breaks down in the region of transverse electric evanescent waves. We demonstrate that this conclusion is not in conflict with numerous experimental tests of the Drude model. The obtained results are discussed in connection with the role of dissipation of conduction electrons in the Lifshitz theory. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly present the formalisms of the Lifshitz theory in terms of either pure imaginary or real frequencies separating the contributions of the transverse magnetic and transverse electric polarizations and the propagating and evanescent waves. Section 3 is devoted to computations of the Casimir pressure between metallic plates using the Drude and the plasma models and the optical data for the complex index of refraction. In Section 4, the contributions of the propagating and evanescent waves are studied for the transverse magnetic and transverse electric polarizations using the Drude and plasma models. Section 5 discusses the failure of the Drude model for the transverse electric evanescent waves, the role of dissipation of conduction electrons, and the possibilities of alternative tests disconnected with the Casimir effect. Section 6 contains our conclusions. We consider the Casimir force per unit area of two similar metallic plates described by the dielectric permittivity ε(ω), i.e., the Casimir pressure. The plates are at temperature T in thermal equilibrium with the environment and are separated by a distance a. Then, the Casimir pressure can be expressed by the Lifshitz formula In terms of real frequencies, the Casimir pressure is given by the sum of contributions from the propagating and evanescent waves each of which, in its turn, consists of two components determined by the transverse magnetic (TM) and transverse electric (TE) polarizations P(a, T) = P prop TM (a, T) + P prop TE (a, T) + P evan TM (a, T) + P evan TE (a, T). (1) Here and In these equations, the following notations are introduced. The Boltzmann constant is k B , the magnitude of the wave vector projection on the plane of plates is k ⊥ , the reflection coefficients for the TM and TE polarizations are and Note that by solving the Maxwell equations with the continuity boundary conditions on the surfaces of metallic plates, one determines the Casimir energy via the sum of discrete photon eigenfrequencies (or the cavity modes or the wave guide modes, as they are often referred to As is seen from ( In terms of the pure imaginary Matsubara frequencies, ω = iξ l = 2πik B Tl/h with l = 0, 1, 2, . . ., the Casimir pressure is expressed by the most commonly used Lifshitz formula where The prime on the summation sign in ( where ε = ε l ≡ ε(iξ l ) Equation ( The numerical computations of all four components of the total Casimir pressure between metallic plates using different dielectric functions of a metal are presented in the next sections. It has been known that the dielectric response of metals to the electromagnetic field is determined by the combined action of conduction and bound (core) electrons. In doing so, the corresponding contributions to the dielectric permittivity make a substantially different impact on the Casimir pressure Taking into account that the problem of disagreement between experiment and theory discussed in Section 1 arises exclusively due to the role of conduction electrons, it is appropriate to consider the separation region where the role of core electrons in computations of the Casimir pressure is negligibly small. In this section, the sought for region is found for two Au plates at room temperature T = 300 K (the same results are valid for the plates made of any material coated with an Au layer of thickness exceeding several tens of nanometers As discussed in Section 1, the conduction electrons are commonly described by the dielectric permittivity of the dissipative Drude model where, for Au, the plasma frequency ω p ≈ 1.37 × 10 16 rad/s and the relaxation parameter at T = 300 K takes the value γ ≈ 0.53 × 10 14 rad/s The dielectric permittivity of the plasma model, which disregards the dissipation properties of conduction electrons, is obtained from This model is physically applicable only at high frequencies in the region of infrared optics. However, as mentioned in Section 1, the theoretical results obtained using the plasma model at low frequencies, including the zero frequency, agree with measurements of the Casimir force. As to the Drude model, which is physically applicable at low frequencies, it leads to contradictions between theoretical predictions of the Lifshitz theory and the measurement data. As it was discussed many times in the literature starting from It immediately follows that at large separations, where the Casimir pressure is determined by the terms of ( where ζ(z) is the Riemann zeta function. This is one half of the result obtained at large separations for the ideal metal planes. For the plasma model, the case of ideal metal planes is obtained in the limit ω p → ∞ where lim and the terms of ( These are the same results as are obtained for the ideal metal planes. The quantities ( To determine the region of separations, where the dielectric permittivities of the Drude and plasma models Numerical computations of the Casimir pressure at T = 300 K were performed by ( The relative deviation between the Casimir pressures obtained using the simple Drude and plasma models and using the optical data taking into account the core electrons can be characterized by the quantity δP D,p (a, T) = P D,p (a, T) -P core D,p (a, T) P core D,p (a, T) In Figure Note that in the separation region above 0.5 μm the already performed precision determinations of the effective Casimir pressure between two parallel plates by measuring the force gradient in the sphere-plate geometry Now we are in a position to find all the four contributions to the Casimir pressure (1) when using the simple Drude and plasma models and determine which of them is responsible for a disagreement between experiment and theory. In accordance with the results of Section 3, this should be done at separations between the plates exceeding 0.5 μm where the dielectric permittivities of the simple Drude and plasma models contribute nearly total value of the pressure. There is no point also in considering too large separations because the experimental situation there is uncertain. We begin with contribution of the TM polarized waves to the Casimir pressure. The contribution of the TM polarized waves, P TM , is calculated by The computational results for P TM normalized to P 0 D at T = 300 K are shown in Figure In order to understand the measure of agreement between the theoretical predictions of the Lifshitz theory using the Drude and plasma models we consider the relative deviation In Figure First of all, it is evident from (3) that This is because the dielectric permittivity of the plasma model where P TM,p is already shown by the red dashed line in Figure For the Drude model, the computations of P evan TM,D are again performed by ( Figure We calculate the contribution of the transverse electric polarization, P TE , to the Casimir pressure by To answer this question, we compute the quantities P evan TE,D and P evan TE,p by because the dielectric permittivity of the plasma model i.e., that for the plasma model the total Casimir pressure determined by the transverse electric polarization is equal to the contribution of TE-polarized propagating waves. This is the same as was proven above for the TM polarization. Thus, P prop TE,p is given by the upper solid line in Figure The computational results for P evan TE,D obtained by ( All contributions to P TE are now computed using both models of the dielectric response of Au and it is possible to analyze the role of each of them. First of all, from Figure A completely different type of situation occurs for P evan TE,D shown by the bottom longdashed line in Figure For better understanding of this situation, we should take into account that the Drude model has a wealth of alternative experimental confirmations in the area of propagating waves with any polarization, as well as for the transverse magnetic evanescent waves, but lacks of confirmation for the transverse electric evanescent waves (see a discussion of experimental situation in the next section). On this basis one can conclude that experiments on measuring the Casimir force between metallic test bodies invalidate the dielectric permittivity of the Drude model in the area of transverse electric evanescent waves. It is apparent that the alternative experimental confirmations of such a conclusion are highly desirable (see the next section). As discussed in Section 1, the theoretical predictions of the fundamental Lifshitz theory are in conflict with the measurement data of many precision experiments of Casimir physics if the dielectric response of conduction electrons is described by the dissipative Drude model. However, by disregarding the dissipation properties of conduction electrons, i.e., by using the plasma model, one can bring the measurement data in agreement with the theoretical predictions. This situation is unacceptable because the dissipation of conduction electrons at low frequencies is the much studied and confirmed by many experiments physical effect. According to the results presented above, an account of dissipation by means of the Drude model in the transverse magnetic contribution to the Casimir pressure leads to the same results as are obtained using the dissipationless plasma model. This is because the dissipation-induced terms in the Casimir pressure arising from the evanescent and propagating waves cancel each other. The dissipation-induced term in the contribution to the Casimir pressure from the transverse electric propagating waves is found to be reasonably small and does not bring the theoretical predictions found using the Drude model in contradiction with the measurement data. The performed computations show that the roots of contradiction are not in the account of dissipation in itself, but in how the Drude model describes the response of metals to the low-frequency transverse electric evanescent waves. These computations compared with the measurement data lead us to conclude that the theoretical description of the electromagnetic response of metals to the transverse electric evanescent waves given by the Drude model is in error. In this context, it is necessary to discuss what are the alternative experimental evidences about the validity of the Drude model other than the Casimir effect. In the area of both the transverse magnetic and transverse electric propagating waves there is an abundance of experimental confirmations of the Drude model in physics, electrotechnics, and even in the day-to-day life, so that it makes no sense to discuss them. However, direct measurement of the reflection coefficients of a metal in the case of evanescent waves presents difficulties because all commonly used methods (ellipsometry, for instance) are adapted for the propagating waves. Great interest to the evanescent waves during the last decades is connected with the fact that they made it possible to surmount the optical diffraction limit The information provided above allows to conclude that the failure of the Drude model demonstrated by experiments on measuring the Casimir force does not contradict to all the available experimental evidences in favor of this model which are irrelevant to the area of transverse electric evanescent waves. Despite the fact that there are many experiments mentioned above, which demonstrate the failure of the Drude model resulting from the region of transverse electric evanescent waves, it would be highly desirable to perform one more independent test disconnected with the Casimir effect. Recently such an alternative test in the field of classical electrodynamics was proposed in As an example, in Finally, if it is confirmed that the Drude model is really invalid in the region of low-frequency transverse electric evanescent waves, the question arises on how it could be corrected. Recently the modifications of the Drude model at low frequencies caused by the spatial dispersion were again considered To conclude, in this paper we have performed the comparison studies of four contributions to the Casimir pressure between metallic plates caused by the transverse magnetic and transverse electric polarizations of the electromagnetic field and by the propagating and evanescent waves. The region of separations was determined where the major contribution to the pressure is given by the electromagnetic response of free electrons described by the dissipative Drude model or the experimentally consistent but dissipationless plasma model used in comparisons between experiment and theory. According to our results, the transverse magnetic contributions to the Casimir pressure computed by using the Drude or plasma models are equal to a high degree of accuracy. In so doing, if the Drude model is used, the relatively small contribution from the evanescent waves (which is equal to zero when using the plasma model) is canceled by an excessive contribution from the propagating waves. Thus, the use of the Drude model for computation of the Casimir pressure determined by the transverse electric polarization does not lead to contradictions between experiment and theory. It was shown also that the transverse electric contribution to the Casimir pressure caused by the propagating waves, which is computed by using the Drude model, deviates reasonably small from the transverse electric contribution computed using the plasma model (the latter is again determined by the propagating waves alone). This deviation is due to the dissipation processes of propagating waves taken into account by the Drude model. It cannot explain a discrepancy between the theoretical predictions obtained using the Drude model and the measurement data because of its smallness. Next, it was found that the experimental inconsistency of the Drude model is determined by the relatively large contribution of the transverse electric evanescent waves. This leads to a conclusion that the response of metals to the transverse electric evanescent waves is described by the Drude model incorrectly. In such a manner, the reason why the Lifshitz theory using the Drude model is experimentally inconsistent is not that it takes into account dissipation of free electrons, as opposed to the plasma model, but that it takes it into account incorrectly in the region of the transverse electric evanescent waves. The presented analysis of experimental tests of the Drude model demonstrates that it is lacking experimental confirmation in this important region of the wave vectors and frequencies. Therefore, the recently proposed alternative test of the Drude model as a response function to the transverse electric evanescent waves should shed new light on the problem of disagreement between theoretical predictions of the Lifshitz theory and the measurement data. Physics 2023, 5, 952-966. https://doi.org/10.3390/physics5040062 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/physics