The prediction of crystal properties plays a crucial role in the crystal design process. Current methods for predicting crystal properties focus on modeling crystal structures using graph neural networks (GNNs). Although GNNs are powerful, accurately modeling the complex interactions between atoms and molecules within a crystal remains a challenge. Surprisingly, predicting crystal properties from crystal text descriptions is understudied, despite the rich information and expressiveness that text data offer. One of the main reasons is the lack of publicly available data for this task. In this paper, we develop and make public a benchmark dataset (called TextEdge) that contains text descriptions of crystal structures with their properties. We then propose LLM-Prop, a method that leverages the general-purpose learning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) to predict physical and electronic properties of crystals from their text descriptions. LLM-Prop outperforms the current state-of-the-art GNN-based crystal property predictor by about 4% in predicting band gap, 3% in classifying whether the band gap is direct or indirect, and 66% in predicting unit cell volume. LLM-Prop also outperforms a finetuned MatBERT, a domain-specific pre-trained BERT model, despite having 3 times fewer parameters. Our empirical results may highlight the current inability of GNNs to capture information pertaining to space group symmetry and Wyckoff sites for accurate crystal property prediction 1 . Predicting the properties of crystals is a problem with many useful applications, such as understanding the behavior and functionality of crystalline solids Similarly to proteins 2) The complexity of incorporating critical atomic and molecular information such as bond angles The aforementioned challenges are due to the complexities of crystal graph representation. We aim to mitigate these challenges by modeling the crystal structure from its text description as opposed to its graph representation. Textual data contain rich information and are very expressive; additionally, incorporating critical/desired information in text is generally more straightforward compared to graphs. Crystal representations can for instance be learned by pretraining large language models (LLMs) on a large body of scientific literature which contains diverse chemical and structural information about crystal design principles and fundamental properties In this work, we demonstrate effective strategies for the use of LLMs for the accurate prediction of crystal properties from their text descriptions. Existing approaches for finetuning LLMs for prediction tasks often either rely on both the encoder and the decoder or leverage encoder-only large models that tend to have as many parameters as encoder-decoder models. In this paper, we make the simple choice to use a pretrained encoder-decoder model, here T5 Contributions. We make two main contributions, as summarized below: • We collect, curate, and make public a benchmark dataset that contains approximately 144K crystal text descriptions and their properties. • We propose LLM-Prop, an efficiently finetuned network that allows us to achieve state-of-the-art performance in crystal property prediction, outperforming the current best GNN-based crystal property predictors. GNNs for crystal property prediction. One of the main GNN-based crystal property predictor is CGCNN ALIGNN There have been very recent efforts using LLMs to learn representations of crystalline materials from their text descriptions. We collected the dataset used in this work from the Materials Project database T5 Transforming each task to text-to-text format requires T5 to use its decoder part to generate the output. While the decoder is necessary for generative and many downstream tasks, it adds unnecessary memory, time complexity, and work overhead when adapted for predictive tasks. Furthermore, How can we leverage T5 for highly accurate performance on predictive tasks, especially regression tasks? We propose LLM-Prop as an approach. LLM-Prop leverages T5 by directly adding a linear layer on top of its encoder for regression tasks. This linear layer can be composed with a sigmoid or softmax activation for classification tasks. Relying only on the T5 encoder reduces the total number of parameters by half which allows us to train on longer sequences and therefore incorporate more crystal information to improve predictive performance. Removing stopwords. We removed stopwords from the text descriptions as this preprocessing step has been shown to improve performance on predictive tasks token. Several works have shown that LLMs struggle to resolve contextual numerical information required for general common-sense reasoning Prepending a [CLS] token to the input. [CLS] token in front of every input and also in the vocabulary, and then learning its representation jointly with the rest of the model. We used the embedding of the [CLS] token as the input to the linear layer for prediction. For regression tasks, we train LLM-Prop on normalized targets using different label normalization techniques: z-score normalization, min-max normalization and log normalization. Then we denormalize the outputs to calculate the prediction errors on the actual values. Suppose that we have N crystals X 1 , . . . , X N and their corresponding properties Y 1 , . . . , Y N as a training set. Here X i denotes the text description of the i th crystal. Denote by μ and σ the mean and standard deviation over all targets in the training set, respectively. Denote by Y min and Y max the minimum and the maximum target value in the training data, respectively. The three normalization techniques we explored normalize a given target value Y i as follows: We compare LLM-Prop with four baselines: three GNN-based models-CGCNN CGCNN. We directly use the publicly available code MEGNet. We train MEGNet from scratch and evaluate it on our benchmark dataset following the same implementation details and configurations described in the original article using the publicly available code released by the authors Similarly to other baselines, we follow the original implementation details of ALIGNN released in the paper using the publicly available code from the authors MatBERT. We finetune MatBERT on our benchmark dataset using its original tokenizer. We initially preprocessed the input text descriptions of MatBERT as described in 3.2. However, these preprocessing steps led to worse performance for MatBERT. The possible reason might be that since MatBERT can process only 512 tokens as input, the compressed information in 512 tokens that the preprocessing step gives, does not provide enough context for MatBERT. We therefore finetuned MatBERT with a batch size of 64 crystal descriptions, a learning rate of 5e -5, and a dropout rate of 0.5 for 200 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a onecycle learning rate scheduler For LLM-Prop, we finetune the original T5 encoder directly on our benchmark dataset without further pretraining it on domain-specific data. We first train the original T5 tokenizer on the benchmark data with the vocabulary size of 32k, then preprocess the data as described in 3.2. For regression tasks, we finetune LLM-Prop on normalized property values and denormalize the predicted values to calculate the error on the original values. Unless otherwise mentioned, we use z-score normalization when finetuning both LLM-Prop and MatBERT. Unless otherwise mentioned, we finetune LLM-Prop on 888 input tokens, using a batch size of 64, a learning rate of 1e -3, and a dropout rate of 0.2 for 200 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a onecycle learning rate scheduler. For all models, we save the checkpoint of each epoch and evaluate on the test set with the checkpoint that gives the best performance on the validation set. For regression tasks, we train both MatBERT and LLM-Prop with the mean absolute error (MAE) loss and evaluate them in terms of MAE error while the GNN-based models are trained with root mean square error (RMSE) loss and evaluated with the MAE error. For classification, we train them with binary cross entropy (BCE) loss and evaluate with the area under the ROC curve (AUC). LLM-Prop vs GNN-based models. We find that LLM-Prop outperforms all GNNbased baselines on both regression and classification tasks. For band gap prediction, LLM-Prop outperforms the best-performing baseline (ALIGNN) on both validation and test sets by approximately 8% and 4% improvements, respectively (see Table For fair comparison, we first consider LLM-Prop and Mat-BERT when they are trained on the same sequence length (512 tokens). LLM-Prop Although MatBERT was pretrained on in-domain data, LLM-Prop shows stronger transfer learning ability when transferring between models finetuned on volume and band gap (see Table How much data does LLM-Prop need to achieve SOTA results? We finetune LLM-Prop with randomly sampled data from the training set with the data size How does each LLM-Prop design choice improve its performance? Table with its original tokenizer and without preprocessing the input (LLM-Prop-baseline) and then add to it each strategy separately. We also compare the performance of each strategy to when all strategies are combined together to make LLM-Prop (LLM-Prop+all). Overall, LLM-Prop+all provides the best results except on volume prediction where it shows comparable performance with the LLM-Prop+[CLS] version. Among all strategies, adding the [CLS] token for pooling seems to give the best improvement on all property prediction tasks. Replacing bond distances with the [NUM] token tends to slightly harm the performance, especially on volume prediction, compared to replacing bond angles with How does LLM-Prop perform with respect to the label scaling strategy? We also analyze how each label scaling technique impacts performance on regression tasks. The results in Figure How does LLM-Prop perform with respect to the number of input tokens? Figure We introduced LLM-Prop, a carefully finetuned network derived from T5 for crystal property prediction. We showed, through an extensive set of experiments, that LLM-Prop achieves superior performance in predicting the physical and electronic properties of crystalline solids, outperforming the current state-of-the-art and ubiquitously used GNN-based architectures such as ALIGNN by a large margin on certain tasks. Our results highlight the great potential that text-based methods have in materials science and we release a benchmark text data, TextEdge, composed of text descriptions of crystals and their properties to encourage research in this nascent area. ID Code and data can be found at https://github.com/vertaix/LLM-Prop. https://materialsproject.org/api https://github.com/igorbrigadir/stopwords https://github.com/txie-93/cgcnn https://github.com/materialsvirtuallab/megnet https://github.com/usnistgov/alignn