The relevant length scales for superconductivity are of the order of nanometers. By confining the superconducting condensate to such dimensions, many physical properties change substantially, and novel phenomena emerge, which are absent in the pristine material. We discuss various methods of creating artificial nanostructures by top-down approaches in metallic and copper-oxide superconductors and their applications. Such nanostructures can be used to control magnetic flux quanta in superconductors, anchoring them to engineered defects to avoid dissipation, guiding their motion, or building artificial flux-quanta arrangements. Nanopatterned superconductors are essential for creating model systems for basic research and enable building almost dissipationless and ultrafast electronic devices and highly sensitive sensors. Superconductivity originates from the long-range coherence of bosonic quantum particles that condense into a lower energy state and is thus called a macroscopic quantum phenomenon. One might wonder what could be the advantage of confining the superconducting condensate to the nanoscale? The answer lies in two essential characteristic lengths that characterize superconductivity. The Ginzburg-Landau coherence length ξ determines the distance over which the density of superconducting carriers can change from its peak value to zero and vice versa. The size of ξ can vary from several tens of nm in metallic superconductors down to about 1 nm in the copper-oxide superconductors with high critical temperature T c (HTS). The other length scale is set by the London penetration depth λ, which describes the decay of an external magnetic field from the edge of a superconductor toward its interior, from which it is ultimately expelled. The ratio between these two lengths bifurcates between two types of superconductors. While so-called type-I superconductors expel a magnetic field completely (Meissner effect), the more abundant and more widely used type-II superconductors let the magnetic field enter in quantized portions of the magnetic flux Φ 0 = h/(2e), where Φ 0 is termed the flux quantum, h and e are Planck's constant and the elementary charge, respectively. These flux quanta in a superconductor are called fluxons or vortices; the latter name results from the fact that circular supercurrents in the surrounding material stabilize these flux quanta. Coming back to the two characteristic lengths, it turns out that the so-called Ginzburg-Landau parameter, the ratio κ = λ/ξ, determines the type of a superconductor, with κ ≥ 1/ √ 2 leading to type-II superconductivity. Another important observation is the temperature dependence of ξ(T ) = ξ(0)(1 -T/T c ) -1/2 which implies a diverging enhancement of ξ(T ) from its minimal value ξ(0) at T = 0 when T c is approached. Ginzburg-Landau theory also predicts the same temperature dependence also for λ(T ) and, thus, κ is temperature-independent near T c . In what follows, we will mainly discuss thin films of superconductors. In many situations, these can be considered threedimensional (3D) materials, as long as the coherence length perpendicular to the surface is smaller than the film's thickness t z . However, from the temperature dependence of ξ(T ) it is evident that close to T c a transition to a two-dimensional (2D) behavior in very thin films might occur when ξ(T ) > t z . Another issue becomes important for film thicknesses t z ≲ λ(T ). Then λ(T ) has to be replaced by an effective penetration depth (also called Pearl length) Λ(T ) = 2λ(T ) 2 /t z . Since λ(T ) (and Λ(T ), respectively) control the range of interactions between vortices, the relevant length scales can become macroscopic in very thin films. In any case, vortices separated by distances smaller than the (effective) penetration depth will behave as collective ensembles, occasionally termed 'vortex matter'. Note that in a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the surface of a thin superconductor, large demagnetization effects lead to a complete penetration of the magnetic flux and to suppression of the Meissner screening. Vortex physics is a fascinating and complex field of research, and only an introductory glimpse can be presented here to underpin the key issues related to nanostructured superconductors. For deeper insights, see Confining the superconducting condensate to the range of the length scales introduced above inevitably means that superconductors need to be structured to dimensions of few-μm and, primarily, to the nanoscale. The use of thin films and lateral nanostructuring allows one to substantially change many physical properties and create novel phenomena, absent in the pristine material. For example, the controlled manipulation of vortices by anchoring them to engineered defects, guiding their motion, or building artificial vortex matter plays a significant role. Engineered vortex systems are essential for creating model systems for basic research and enable to build almost dissipationless and ultrafast electronic devices based on vortex manipulation, the so-called fluxonics. Taking advantage of Josephson effects in weakly-coupled superconductors requires barriers of only a few nm in width. The Josephson junction is the central building block for sensitive magnetic field sensors, rapid single flux quantum logic circuits, THz frequency generators, and, last but not least, superconducting quantum computing. This chapter focuses on the nanostructuring of HTS, which offer easy operation using cryocoolers or liquid nitrogen. However, the brittle nature and complex crystallographic structures of HTS make the fabrication of nanopatterns a problematic endeavor and call for new techniques. Many of these concepts have been developed since the first edition of this Encyclopedia. For a detailed overview of nanostructured metallic superconductors, the reader is referred to the book of The standard techniques for nanopatterning of superconductor structures focus on thin-film processing. One of the most commonly used methods is photo-or electron-beam lithography, which is well-known for the fabrication of semiconductor devices. After growing thin films on a suitable substrate and depositing a photoresist layer on top, the planar structures are defined by illuminating the photoresist through a mask or directly processing it with an electron-beam (e-beam) writer. While the wavelength of the light limits the former method, ebeam lithography can provide resolutions at the order of 10 nm but is a slow sequential technique. Unfortunately, the subsequent etching processes of both photoresist and the superconductor result in significant degradation of resolution. Another issue is that etching artifacts, such as underetching below the photoresist layer, progressively limit resolution as the thickness of the superconducting film increases. Thus, patterns in metallic superconductors are generally reported with lateral structures on the order of 100 nm. For example, a vibrant application is the fabrication of single photon detectors For HTS, the situation is even more complicated because they are brittle and have a complex crystallographic structure. Lithographic techniques combined with etching steps have been successfully applied to create patterns with several hundred nanometers features sizes An elegant way to further narrow the cross-section of superconductor bridges fabricated by conventional lithography is based on electromigration. This usually undesirable process, combining a local temperature rise and a high electric field, leads to a displacement of atoms from their original crystal-lattice positions. Closed-loop controlled electromigration, however, can avoid adverse effects. With the gradual reduction of the cross-section of aluminum constrictions to ≲ 150 nm 2 , a geometry-induced transition from thermallyassisted phase slips to quantum phase slips has been reported In bottom-up fabrication methods, the nanostructures are already predefined during the growth process. Since patterning the substrate material is often less challenging, several methods have been developed that take advantage of the controlled imperfection in the substrate to introduce the desired structures into the superconductor. One example is the self-organized growth of highly ordered porous alumina, a membrane-like system consisting of triangular arrays of pores. A superconducting Nb thin film deposited directly on the alumina template with a pore spacing of 50 nm acts as a nanoscale array for vortex pinning Nanowires of metallic superconductors less than 10 nm in diameter and up to 1 μm in length can be fabricated by 'molecular templating' Another technique uses vicinally cut substrates with a periodic nanoscale step structure of the clean substrate surface. YBCO films grow on such substrates in a roof-tile-like arrangement of the copper-oxide layers by self-assembly. The morphology and microstructure of such vicinal films strongly depend on the miscut angle of the SrTiO 3 substrate and the thickness of the on-top grown YBCO Strategies based on substrate modification are very versatile. Nanostructures can be deposited on the substrate prior to the deposition of a superconductor film to modify its structural and superconducting properties. A variety of interactions can be tailored with thickness modulation of the superconductor by insulating dots, proximity effects caused by metallic dots, or magnetic interactions with ferromagnetic dot arrays that interact with the vortex lattice in the superconductor The previously discussed patterning techniques have several disadvantages, especially when applied to HTS. First, all methods that remove material result in open side faces of the HTS, allowing the relatively mobile oxygen ions to escape from the crystallographic framework and thus lowering the oxygen content. In most cases, this leads to a degradation of the superconducting properties. On the other hand, the brittle nature of HTS limits the stability of the remaining material structures, making it challenging to achieve sub-μm resolution. Irradiation of HTS with electrons, protons, and light or heavy ions provides an alternative route to modify the properties of HTS while leaving the surface of the material nearly intact. Before going into further details, a brief account of the limiting parameters is in order. A first consideration concerns the penetration range of irradiation. Only neutrons and high-energy ions can penetrate deeply enough into bulk materials A more subtle method of tailoring superconducting properties is to create point defects while leaving the crystallographic framework intact. They can be produced by irradiation with electrons, protons, or light ions. Point defects are imperfections at the atomic level that occur when the energy transfer from the incident particle to the crystal is on the order of the energy required to form vacancies. At energies up to a few MeV, the incident particle collides with and displaces a nucleus, eventually creating a collisional cascade that propagates through the material. The tradeoff in the choice of parameters stems from the fact that lighter particles, such as electrons, require extremely high fluence to achieve any appreciable change of the superconducting properties. In contrast, heavier particles have limited penetration depths and more significant scattering of the collisional cascades A suitable candidate for the controlled fabrication of point defects in thin films of the most commonly used HTS, YBCO, are He + ions of moderate energy. The superconducting properties are tailored by displacing mainly oxygen atoms, which are more loosely bound than the other atomic species, with binding energies of 1 . . . 2 eV for the chain atoms O1 and about 8 eV for the O2/O3 atoms in the CuO 2 planes, as shown in Fig. Another process is responsible for reducing T c : In classical superconductors with s-wave symmetry of the superconducting gap, the introduction of point defects has little effect on T c and is even used technically to improve the critical current. In con- trast, the anisotropic d-wave nature of the gap in HTS makes it susceptible to tiny defects that reduce not only the normalstate conductivity and carrier mobility but also T c However, a uniform statistical distribution of point defects is not very helpful. By focusing the ion beam before it hits the surface of the HTS film, one can create nearly cylindrical domains populated with point defects. These columnar defects (CDs) form a landscape where superconductivity is locally suppressed. Lateral modulation of ion fluence can be achieved mainly by two different methods outlined in Fig. An extensive array of multiple ion beams can be created by masking a wide-field collinear ion beam, which is commonly available with ion implanters, as schematically shown in Fig. Different techniques were used to create the mask. Either a photoresist layer was deposited on the HTS and processed with standard UV The main advantage of masking techniques is the parallel processing of many structures. Shortcomings are the resolution limitations resulting from the preparation of the mask, and in the case of freestanding masks, there are geometrical limitations, e.g., disconnected blocking elements are not possible. In contrast to conventional focused ion beam (FIB) machines, which use Ga to ablate the material, devices for focused ion irradiation with light ions have only recently become available. The helium ion microscope (HIM) Using a He or Ne beam instead of the conventional Ga-FIB technique, contamination of the target material by Ga ions is avoided and achieves higher lateral resolution. For example, nanopores as small as 1.3 nm in diameter have been fabricated in 1 nm-thick carbon nanomembranes The use of He-FIB relies on the weak bonding of oxygen in HTS and cannot be employed in the same way for other superconductors. However, a focused Ne beam offers a compromise between Ga-FIB and He-FIB for direct milling of metallic superconductors. This has been demonstrated, for example, for patterning constrictions in NbN films to form nanowires Other techniques for growing superconductor nanostructures using focused electron and ion beams are discussed in this Encyclopedia by Nanostructuring of superconductors enables selective tailoring of the superconducting condensate on length scales smaller than the London penetration depth, mainly by creating lateral structures. Such patterns allow controlled interaction of vortices, their manipulation, as well as tunneling effects between two superconducting condensates weakly coupled by a small non-superconducting interlayer. Some of these applications are described below. Lateral nanostructuring of superconducting films with regular arrays of CDs allows the creation of artificial pinning land-scapes that lead to commensurability effects with the flux line lattice. This occurs at the so-called matching fields B k = kΦ 0 /A, where k is an integer number of pinning sites (or a rational number of vortices) in the unit cell of the pinning array of area A. For square lattices A = a 2 and for hexagonal patterns A = √ 3a 2 /2 with a the nearest neighbor spacing of the CDs. The number of flux quanta that can be trapped inside a cylindrical hole or in a non-superconducting pinning site depends on its diameter r p and the coherence length ξ(T ) of the superconductor. For anisotropic layered materials such as HTS, the inplane coherence length ξ ab (T ) is relevant. Once all pinning sites are filled by one flux quantum, the formation of multiquanta vortices becomes energetically favorable when r p exceeds a certain critical radius A special situation arises for blind holes in a superconductor, i.e., holes that do not completely penetrate the material. The remaining superconducting bottom layer carries the screening currents of individual vortices trapped in the blind hole. Although several flux quanta are trapped in the blind hole, individual vortices can still be made visible Multiquanta vortices are a phenomenon that occurs only in nanostructured superconductors and does not exist in pure homogeneous superconductors. Conversely, when small pinning sites cannot accommodate the total flux, the excess flux is forced to enter the material via interstitial vortices. The various commensurability effects in a pinning landscape for different magnetic fields applied orthogonally to the film surface are illustrated in Fig. When the diameter of holes in a superconducting film is increased to a size close to their spacing, a gradual change from a pinning lattice to a multiply connected network of superconducting wires takes place. Such wire networks exhibit a modulation of the critical temperature with the magnetic flux, the Little-Parks effect In HTS, commensurability effects can be preferably detected by electric transport measurements, e.g., in YBCO thin films patterned with a square lattice of holes A demonstration of vortex commensurability effects at high magnetic fields is shown in Fig When moving from pinning lattices with hexagonal or square arrangements to more complex periodic or aperiodic tilings, numerous unusual phenomena occur. Some examples are shown in Fig. In HTS, such studies are more challenging and could be hampered by strong intrinsic pinning. However, complex pinning structures lead to competition between the pinning forces at the CDs and the elastic energy of the vortex lattice, attempting to restore the natural hexagonal vortex configuration of a clean superconductor. For example, pinning landscapes that force the magnetic flux quanta in an ice-like flux arrangement due to a geometrically frustrated energy landscape can transition to a periodic flux distribution at higher temperatures, thawing the vortex ice Another example of a complex pinning landscape, the quasi-Kagomé tiling, shows an unconventional commensurability effect. At elevated temperatures, all pins are occupied by vortices, and one interstitial vortex is magnetically caged in each void of the lattice. The balance between the pinning forces exerted by the CDs and the vortex caging potential can be tuned with the temperature By introducing spatial asymmetry into the pinning arrays, many exciting effects emerge. In general, the idea of a 'Brownian motor' refers to Brownian motion in combination with an unbiased external input signal that can induce submicron directional motion of particles Vortex ratchets can be realized by various concepts, such as 2D asymmetric channel walls. They can be further extended to design 'fluxon optics' devices, concave/convex fluxon lenses that disperse/concentrate fluxons in nanodevices Interestingly, ratchet effects are proposed in binary particle mixtures without needing for an asymmetric substrate Finally, understanding ratchet effects in different systems is an exciting topic. Studying these effects with fluxons provides a more direct and controllable experimental approach than most other systems. Ultimately, these investigations may pave the way to cellular automata as an alternative concept A related concept is the lossless superconducting diode. This is an electronic device that has zero resistance only for one direction of applied current and is a desirable device for building electronic circuits with ultra-low power consumption. It can be realized as a superconducting film patterned with a conformal array of nanoscale holes that breaks spatial inversion symmetry Controlled vortex motion along a predefined path can be achieved by patterning narrow channels or parallel rows of defects into a superconductor. This so-called 'guided vortex motion' results from an easy track in which vortex pinning is reduced A ubiquitous need for nanostructuring of superconductors arises from the fabrication of Josephson junctions (JJs), where two superconducting systems are separated by an insulating or metallic barrier of a few nm thickness or by another weak coupling link. It is crucial that the Josephson weak links are stable and can be reproducibly fabricated. While for metallic superconductors the industrial fabrication of circuits based on JJs has been established for many years JJs consisting exclusively of HTS materials have been produced by introducing a crystallographic fault (break junctions), by using a grain boundary between different crystallites, by growing thin HTS films over a substrate step, by narrow constrictions (Dayem bridges), or by multilayers forcing the current along the c-axis Several attempts have been made to fabricate JJs by irradiation techniques. Initially, direct writing of narrow lines with an electron beam across a pre-patterned YBCO bridge in a scanning electron microscope resulted in somewhat unstable JJs and required high electron doses. Later, creating a weak link in YBCO bridges by implanting oxygen ions through a lithographically defined mask led to superconducting-normalsuperconducting (SNS) JJs with resistively shunted junction (RSJ) properties A similar technique, but using 200 keV Ne + ions, allows complete penetration of the ions through the YBCO film, avoiding implantation and limiting the intended damage to the creation of point defects Focused He + ion irradiation in a HIM took the fabrication of JJs one step further. Tunnel junctions can be directly written with the focused He-ion beam into YBCO films, as illustrated in Fig. The He-FIB technique can, in principle, be applied to other HTS, as has been demonstrated for La 1.84 Sr 0.16 CuO 4 In this chapter, we have outlined various methods for fabricating nanostructured superconductors. While established lithographic and ion-milling techniques enable the patterning of metallic superconductors, novel techniques are required for nanoscale structures in copper-oxide superconductors. For example, focused He + -ion beam irradiation creates columnar channels of point defects and can be used to create vortex pinning landscapes and weak links for Josephson junctions. Superconducting nanostructures are already indispensable for many applications and will bring further significant advances to applications of superconducting electronics, from fluxonics to ultrahigh sensitivity magnetometers and many others. Beyond that, the dawning age of superconducting quantum computing depends heavily on precise and reproducible nanostructured circuits on a large scale.