We present a theoretical analysis of mid-infrared radiative recombination in InAs/GaSb superlattices (SLs). We employ a semi-analytical plane wave expansion method in conjunction with an 8-band k • p Hamiltonian to compute the SL electronic structure, paying careful attention to the identification and mitigation of spurious solutions. The calculated SL eigenstates are used directly to compute spontaneous emission spectra and the radiative recombination coefficient B. We elucidate the origin of the relatively large B coefficients in InAs/GaSb SLs which, despite the presence of spatially indirect (type-II-like) carrier confinement, are close to that of bulk InAs and compare favourably to those calculated for mid-infrared type-I pseudomorphic and metamorphic quantum well structures having comparable emission wavelengths. Our analysis explicitly quantifies the roles played by carrier localisation (specifically, partial delocalisation of bound electron states) and miniband formation (specifically, miniband occupation and optical selection rules) in determining the magnitude of B and its temperature dependence. We perform a high-throughput optimisation of the room temperature B coefficient in InAs/GaSb SLs across the 3.5 -7 μm wavelength range, quantifying the dependence of B on the relative thickness of the electron-confining InAs and hole-confining GaSb layers. This analysis provides guidance for the growth of optimised SLs for mid-infrared light emitters. Our results, combined with the expected low non-radiative Auger recombination rates in structures having spatially indirect electron and hole confinement, corroborate recently observed high output power in prototype InAs/GaSb SL inter-band cascade light-emitting diodes. The narrow-gap semiconductors InAs and GaSb, members of the so-called "6.1 Å family" of III-V compounds, The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Our theoretical model is described in Sec. II, beginning in Secs. II A and II B with the respective details of our SL electronic structure and radiative recombination calculations. Technical considerations related to the mitigation of spurious solutions are described in Sec. II C. Our results are presented in Sec. III, beginning in Sec. III A with benchmarking of our electronic structure calculations against experimental data for SLs having equal InAs and GaSb layer thickness. In Sec. III B we elucidate the electronic and optical properties of equal layer thickness SLs, and quantify the impact of miniband formation on radiative recombination. In Sec. III C we consider InAs/GaSb SLs having unequal InAs and GaSb layer thickness, and undertake systematic optimisation of the radiative recombination coefficient B across the 3.5 -7 μm wavelength range. In Sec. IV we summarise and conclude. A. Electronic properties: k • p Hamiltonian, plane wave expansion method and SL miniband structure Our calculation of SL electronic properties is based on an 8-band k • p Hamiltonian, including spin-orbit coupling, In the EFA, the PWEM consists of expanding the envelope functions F nbk (z) as a truncated Fourier series, such that a general SL eigenstate |ψ nk (z)⟩ having energy E nk at wave vector k = (k ∥ , q) is given by where N b = 8 is the number of Bloch bands included in the underlying bulk k • p Hamiltonian, and k ∥ and q are respectively the components of the wave vector in the plane perpendicular to the growth direction and along the growth direction. The terms in parentheses describe the expansion of the envelope function F nbk (z) associated with each bulk band b over a su- which is a complex-valued (2M + 1) × (2M + 1) matrix. In Eq. ( The discrete wave vectors G m encapsulate k z quantisation along the growth (z) direction. The choice of the plane wave basis states introduces periodicity along the growth direction with period L, the miniband dispersion associated with which is described by the wave vectorπ L ≤ q ≤ + π L . Typically, plane wave k • p calculations for single-or multi-QW heterostructures are undertaken by neglecting any q dependence -i.e. by setting q = 0 in Eqs. ( While an appropriately parameterised 8-band k • p Hamiltonian provides a robust approach to compute SL electronic properties, its artificially high symmetry neglects the impact of microscopic interface asymmetry (MIA) associated with InAs/GaSb layer interfaces. where 2π L is the SL Brillouin zone (BZ) extent along z. In the axial approximation we further replace dk ∥ by 2πk ∥ dk ∥ , reducing the integral of Eq. ( To quantify SL radiative performance, we firstly compute the SE spectrum r sp (hω), where hω is the photon energy. This requires evaluation of the inter-band optical (momentum) matrix elements p n c n v k between an electron eigenstate |ψ n c k (z) ⟩ in conduction subband n c and a hole eigenstate |ψ n v k (z)⟩ in valence subband n v , at wave vector k (where strict k-selection, ∆k = 0 for optical transitions, imposes that the electron and hole states have equal wave vector). We compute p n c n v k via the Hellmann-Feynman theorem, where e is a unit vector denoting the polarisation of the emitted or absorbed photon, with e • ∇ k H then denoting the directional derivative of the supercell Hamiltonian with respect to the component of k parallel to the photon polarisation. Evaluation of Eq. ( The polarisation-averaged (squared) momentum matrix element is which includes contributions associated with the emission of transverse electric (TE-) and transverse magnetic-(TM-) polarised photons, which respectively have polarisation in the plane perpendicular to the growth direction ( e = x, y) and parallel to the growth direction ( e = z). The SE rate is then evaluated in the quasi-equilibrium approximation as where E n c (n v )k is the dispersion of conduction subband n c (valence subband n v ), f e(h) is the electron (hole) Fermi-Dirac distribution function at temperature T , F e(h) is the associated electron (hole) quasi-Fermi level corresponding to an injected electron (hole) carrier density n (p), and the Dirac distribution δ imposes conservation of energy for photon emission. Integration of r sp (hω) with respect to hω yields the radiative current density J rad , which is given in the Boltzmann approximation by J rad = eBnp, where B is the radiative recombination coefficient. We impose net charge neutrality in our calculationsi.e. n = p -and fix n = 10 17 cm -3 as a carrier density representative of LED operation. The combination of physical transparency and computational efficiency offered by the k • p method have established it as the de facto standard approach to compute the electronic properties of III-V quantum-confined heterostructures. However, the conventional 8-band k • p Hamiltonian for zinc blende is known to provide an incomplete description of the electronic structure of tetrahedrally-bonded semiconductors, which can lead to the introduction of spurious solutions in the bulk band dispersion. We begin our analysis by using the InAs and GaSb bulk band parameters (including the Varshni parameters for the bulk band gap temperature dependence), and the InAs/GaSb VB offset (= 0.56 eV), recommended by Vurgaftman et al. In the 8-band k • p Hamiltonian the CB dispersion is described in part by the parameter s c , alternatively denoted by A c in the literature, where the first and second terms respectively describe the free-electron and remote-band contributions to the CB edge effective mass m * c , where E g and ∆ 0 are the Γ-point band gap and VB spin-orbit splitting, and E P is the Kane parameter. This parameter appears in the Hamiltonian as h2 k 2 2m 0 s c and, since s c < 0 for most conventional semiconductors, this can lead to unphysical downward bending of the CB dispersion into the band gap at large k = |k|. This is of particular importance for the simulation of short-period SL structures using the PWEM. Since G m ∝ L -1 , the plane wave basis set can readily sample wave vectors corresponding to large real values of the bulk k z , and can therefore pollute the heterostructure eigenstates by sampling spurious large-k z CB states. Additionally, InAs/GaSb SLs demonstrate type-II-like (spatially indirect) carrier confinement, so that the Bloch character of a given eigenstate can abruptly change from being, e.g., predominantly CB-like to predominantly VB-like across an InAs/GaSb interface. These factors mandate careful selection of the (i) band parameters, and (ii) plane wave basis set, in numerical calculations. Solid red and blue lines in Fig. where P (= m 0 E P 2 , where m 0 is the free electron mass) is the inter-band (Kane) momentum matrix element, and γ 1 and γ 2 are the modified VB Luttinger parameters. Our combined analytical and numerical analysis of Eq. ( We note that while enforcing s c = 0 removes a complexvalued SB from close to the zone centre in InAs, this SB is replaced by an evanescent state having large imaginary wave vector. Calculation of bound heterostructure eigenstates, which are formally equivalent to a linear combination of bulk states having complex-valued wave vectors, typically requires matching of envelope function amplitudes and (appropriately weighted) spatial derivatives at material interfaces. Motivated by the structures considered in Ref. 45, we begin our analysis by considering InAs/GaSb SLs having equal InAs and GaSb layer thicknesses t InAs = t GaSb ≡ t. The corresponding length of our calculational supercell -i.e. the SL period -is L = 2t. Firstly, in order to establish an appropriate choice of plane wave basis set, we take exemplar structures and compute the k = 0 bound state energies as a function of the number of plane waves -i.e. by varying M in Eq. (1). A basis set containing 2M + 1 = 51 plane waves was found to be sufficient to converge all calculated bound state energies to within 0.1 meV, with respect to further increases in the size of the basis set. We therefore set M = 25 for all of our calculations. This choice of plane wave basis set generates a distinct plane wave Hamiltonian matrix H k of size Energy, E (eV) Bulk complex bands, Ref. 67 Energy, E (eV) Bulk complex bands, Ref. 67 Bulk complex bands, s c = 0 Bulk complex bands, s c = 0 Energy, E (eV) Temperature, T (K) Band gap vs. temperature 8(2M + 1) × 8(2M + 1) = 408 × 408 at each wave vector k. Having established an appropriate choice of plane wave basis set we proceed by performing benchmark calculations of the SL peak energy and its temperature dependence, and compare to the EL measurements of Ref. 45. Here, it is important to note that the measured EL peak energy does not correspond directly to the SL band gap -between the lowest energy bound electron state e1 and the highest energy bound hole state h1 at k = 0 -due to band filling effects under carrier injection. Band filling effects act to blueshift the EL/SE peak relative to the SL band gap, such that both the in-plane (k ∥ ) and miniband (q) dispersion play important roles in determining not only the EL/SE peak energy, but also its temperature dependence. The results of our benchmark calculations are summarised in Fig. where E gap/peak (0) is the zero-temperature SL band gap or SE peak energy. To facilitate comparison to literature experimental data, we follow Ref. 80 by fixing β = 270 K when fitting the theoretical data of Fig. Despite that the T -dependence of the bulk InAs and GaSb band gaps used as input to our calculations -by applying Eq. ( Carrier localisation -We begin by considering the electron and hole localisation, summarised in Fig. We note that the h1 state is tightly confined within GaSb layers in the structure, with its probability density dropping rapidly to near-zero values at the centre of InAs layers as a consequence of the large VB offset and HH VB edge effective mass in GaSb. Conversely, we note that the e1 state is, while primarily localised in InAs layers, comparatively delocalised. The e1 probability density retains significant nonzero values throughout GaSb layers. This partial delocalisation of the e1 state is a consequence of the combination of low InAs CB edge effective mass and low GaSb layer thickness, and reflects strong coupling between electrons in neighbouring SL periods. As we will describe below, this leads to (i) strong dispersion of the e1 miniband along q, and (ii) significant electron-hole spatial overlap, leading to optical matrix elements that can be considered high for a structure possessing spatially indirect electron and hole confinement. Before proceeding, we note a technical consideration relevant to the calculation of the carrier envelope functions. Our preliminary calculations of the e1 probability density demonstrated oscillations, This mismatch in the dispersion of the e1 and h1 minibands, combined with strict k-selection for optical transitions, acts to reduce the radiative recombination rate. Specifically, holes occupying h1 miniband states at large |q| are without electrons having matching wave vector, and hence have no available electrons with which to recombine. We therefore expect, and will demonstrate below, that the presence of this mismatched e1 and h1 miniband dispersion leads to a reduc- tion of B at fixed temperature and carrier density vs. an equivalent QW structure (i.e. without miniband dispersion). We note that this behaviour mirrors that associated with the mismatch of the in-plane CB and VB edge DOS in conventional QW structures, which served as a key motivation for the development of strain-engineered QW structures to improve the performance of LEDs and diode lasers. While the mismatch in the range of q over which electrons and holes occupy miniband states is exacerbated at low temperature, we note that this behaviour is partially mitigated at T = 300 K. As T is increased to 300 K the emergence of a high-energy tail in the electron Fermi-Dirac distribution above the quasi-Fermi level allows electrons to occupy e1 miniband states over a significantly larger fraction of the SL BZ (cf. Fig. Optical matrix elements -Using the SL Hamiltonian H k and eigenstates |ψ nk ⟩ we explicitly compute the TE-and TMpolarised optical matrix elements for e1-h1 transitions using Eq. ( At k ∥ = 0 the TE-polarised matrix element decreases with increasing |q|, becoming zero at |q| = π L , as has been observed in some previous calculations (see, e.g., Fig. For n = p = 10 17 cm -3 we compute at T = 300 K that 100% of injected electrons occupy e1 band states, while > 99.6% of injected holes occupy h1 band states. The SE spectrum and B are therefore determined almost entirely by radiative recombination of e1 electrons and h1 holes. For our high-throughput calculations of B below, we therefore compute SE spectra by restricting the evaluation of Eq. ( The results of our calculations of the T -dependent B coefficient for this equal layer thickness SL structure are summarised in Fig. The T dependence of B is summarised in the inset to Fig. We note that our calculated values of B are, for structures having spatially indirect (type-II-like) carrier confine-ment, relatively high. At T = 300 K and n = p = 10 17 cm -3 our full SL calculation -i.e. including miniband dispersion and q-dependent optical matrix elements -yields B = 1.81 × 10 -11 cm 3 s -1 for an InAs/GaSb SL having t InAs = t GaSb = 2.14 nm. This value is close to B computed for bulk InAs from first principles, Having elucidated the nature of the electronic structure and radiative recombination for an exemplar SL having equal InAs and GaSb layer thicknesses t InAs and t GaSb , we now turn our attention to the maximisation of B in InAs/GaSb SLs having unequal layer thicknesses, t InAs ̸ = t GaSb . For a chosen emission wavelength λ peak -corresponding, as above, to the peak of the calculated SE spectrum at temperature T = 300 K for carrier density n = p = 10 17 cm -3 -we identify SLs that maintain fixed λ peak by systematically varying the relative thickness r = t InAs /t GaSb of the InAs and GaSb layers. In the PWEM, a basis set consisting of 2M + 1 plane waves possesses a minimum wavelength of L/M (cf. Sec. II A). Since the SL period L = t InAs + t GaSb can vary significantly with emission wavelength, and in fixed wavelength structures having t InAs ̸ = t GaSb , we treat SLs having different L on an equal footing by varying M so as to maintain L/M as close as possible to the value 4.28/25 nm = 0.1712 nm employed to analyse the equal layer thickness (r = 1) SL of Sec. III B above. This ensures that the plane wave basis sets employed in the electronic structure calculations maintain equivalent real space resolution for the different structures considered. The results of this high-throughput structure search are summarised in Fig. Having identified these sets of fixed emission wavelength SLs, we then compute B as a function of relative layer thickness r = t InAs /t GaSb for each value of λ peak . The results of these calculations are summarised in Fig. Across the investigated wavelength range, our analysis predicts a strong reduction in B for SLs having r < 1 (i.e. t InAs < t GaSb ). At λ peak = 4.5 μm we find that B is reduced by ≈ 15% when the relative thickness is reduced from 1 to 0.8, and that this reduction in B is exacerbated with increasing emission wavelength (e.g. decreasing by ≈ 40% when r is reduced from 1 to 0.8 at λ peak = 6.5 μm). The origin of this behaviour is straightforwardly understood: SLs in which the thickness of the hole-confining GaSb layers exceeds that of the electronconfining InAs layers reduce the ability of the e1 probability density to penetrate towards the centre of the GaSb CB barrier. This enhanced electron localisation acts to strongly reduce the e1-h1 optical matrix element (i.e. the e1-h1 spatial overlap), and hence the radiative recombination rate. Our analysis therefore suggests that to maximise the radiative recombination rate, regardless of the choice of emission wavelength, priority should be given during growth to ensuring that the thickness of the electron-confining InAs layers is equal to or greater than that of the hole-confining GaSb layers. More generally, these results emphasise the importance of enhancing electron-hole spatial overlap in heterostructures having spatially indirect carrier confinement: the thickness of electronconfining layers, and the CB offset between those layers and the hole-confining layers, should be chosen to enhance electron delocalisation into the centre of the hole-confining layers in order to maximise B (since such delocalisation is typically more readily achieved for low effective mass electrons than for high effective mass holes). For SLs having r > 1 we find that the optimum relative layer thickness depends strongly on the chosen emission wavelength. Beginning with the λ peak = 4.5 μm results, we note that an equal layer thickness (r = 1) SL already presents a near-maximised B coefficient. The maximum computed value of B at λ peak = 4.5 μm occurs for relative thickness r = 1.15, and is only 2.0% larger than that calculated for the r = 1 SL. However, moving to longer wavelengths, our calculations identify significant potential to enhance B by increasing the relative layer thickness r. Achieving longer emission wavelengths requires increased t InAs , which in turn mandates a significant reduction in t GaSb to maintain fixed λ peak (cf. Fig. We have presented a theoretical analysis of radiative recombination in broken-gap InAs/GaSb SLs, based on multi-band k • p calculations of the SL electronic and optical properties. Exploiting the spatial periodicity of a plane wave basis set we established full k-dependent calculations of SL band dispersion and eigenstates, with these quantities then used explicitly to compute the inter-band optical matrix elements, SE rate and radiative recombination coefficient B. Systematic optimisation of B via high-throughput calculations provided guidelines for the growth of optimised SLs that maximise the radiative recombination rate across the application rich 3.5 -7 μm mid-infrared wavelength range. The presence of spurious solutions in the calculated SL electronic properties was elucidated semi-analytically via the bulk complex band structure, and it was confirmed that the prescription of Ref. 71 is sufficient to mitigate their impact in heterostructure calculations. The resultant renormalised InAs and GaSb band parameters were employed in full SL calculations, where it was demonstrated that the calculated temperature-dependent SE peak energy is in quantitative agreement with experimental EL measurements. Detailed analysis confirmed that miniband filling acts to decrease the temperature dependence of the SE peak energy compared to that of the fundamental zone-centre SL band gap. Extracted Varshni parameters for the temperature dependence of the SL SE peak energy were also found to be in quantitative agreement with additional experimental measurements. Next, we considered InAs/GaSb SLs having equal InAs and GaSb layer thicknesses, and quantified the impact of miniband formation on the SE rate and B. Here, our calculations revealed the important roles played by (i) electron and hole localisation, (ii) carrier occupation of miniband states, and (iii) optical selection rules vs. SL wave vector q along a given pair of minibands. Firstly, it was shown that a combination of low InAs CB edge effective mass and GaSb layer thickness leads to partial electron delocalisation, allowing for high spatial overlap with hole states that are strongly localised in GaSb layers. This allows for high optical matrix elements, and hence for B values that are large relative to other structures admitting spatially indirect carrier localisation. Secondly, the SL band structure was found to be characterised primarily by a mismatch between the dispersion of the lowest energy electron and highest energy hole minibands. The calculated electron minibands were found to be strongly dispersive such that, in the structure considered, only states out to |q| ≲ π 2L have appreciable occupancy at room temperature. Conversely, the calculated hole minibands were found to be almost dispersionless, with holes then occupying miniband states throughout the entire SL BZ, |q| ≤ π L , at all temperatures. This mismatch in miniband dispersion prevents holes close to the SL BZ edge undergoing radiative recombination, so that miniband formation decreases both the magnitude of B and its dependence on temperature. Finally, we undertook a systematic analysis of SLs having unequal InAs and GaSb layer thicknesses. We demonstrated that, at fixed emission wavelength: (i) at shorter wavelengths close to 3.5 μm B is maximised in structures in which the InAs layer thickness is close to equal to the GaSb layer thickness, (ii) at longer wavelengths approaching 7 μm B is maximised for InAs layer thickness ≈ 1.5 -2 × the GaSb layer thickness, and (iii) B decreases rapidly if the InAs layer thickness is reduced below that of GaSb. Strategies to increase the radiative recombination rate in SLs should incorporate reduction of the mismatch between the dispersion of the occupied electron and hole minibands, an approach akin to that deployed in the design of strained-layer QW lasers. Since the q-dependent optical matrix elements decrease strongly in magnitude with increasing |q|, our analysis suggests that it is beneficial to engineer the band structure such that the hole miniband dispersion is increased, so that fewer holes occupy states close to the SL BZ edge. Therefore, the ability to increase B at fixed emission wavelength in SL structures beyond InAs/GaSb will rely in part upon the ability to match the electron and hole effective mass along the growth direction. This can potentially be achieved by exploiting layer thickness and/or strain engineering (enabled, e.g., via alloying and/or metamorphic growth). Overall, our results emphasise the importance of considering the full k-dependent miniband dispersion and eigenstates when analysing SL electronic and optical properties, and indicate that explicit calculations of this nature are essential to enable predictive analysis and quantitative interpretation of experimental data. While we have focused in this paper on InAs/GaSb as an archetypal mid-infrared SL system, we note that the established calculational framework is generally applicable to systems whose constituent material bulk band structures can be well described via a multi-band k • p Hamiltonian. This provides an accurate and computationally inexpensive approach to compute SL electronic and optical properties, providing a suitable platform for high-throughput calculations to support device design. Further analysis will be required to enable rigorous in silico optimisation of SL internal quantum efficiency, mandating accurate high-throughput calculation of the Auger recombination coefficient C due to the importance of this non-radiative recombination process as a loss mechanism in narrow-gap heterostructures. where E g is the band gap, ∆ 0 is the VB spin-orbit splitting energy, and P is the inter-band (Kane) momentum matrix element, related to the Kane parameter via E P = 2m 0 P 2 h2 . The modified inverse CB edge effective mass s c is given by while the modified VB Luttinger parameters are defined as where γ L 1 and γ L 2 are the bare VB Luttinger parameters. We compute the complex band structure admitted by Eq. ( , where H (0) , H a) Electronic mail: conalmurphy@umail.ucc.ie b) Electronic mail: c.broderick@umail.ucc.ie where I is the 3 × 3 identity matrix. Diagonalising Eq. ( Following the parameter renormalisation described in Sec. II C of the main text, we note that it is not possible to conclude that the impact of spurious solutions on the SL electronic structure calculated using the 8-band k•p Hamiltonian have been removed entirely. We will now demonstrate this explicitly. Firstly, we note that setting s c = 0 allows for a discontinuity to occur at an InAs/GaSb interface in amplitude of the CB Bloch component of the envelope function. where a = h2 s c 2m 0 and b = h2 2m 0 (γ 1 + 4γ 2 ). We can use Eq. ( In addition to the usual Kane solution k 2 z,+ , which describes the evanescent band linking the VB and CB edges, with κ 2 -→ ∞ as a → 0. The corresponding eigenstates of H 2×2 approach |ψ + ⟩ = e ±κ + z | 1 2 ; + 1 2 ⟩ as a → 0, where | 1 2 ; + 1 2 ⟩ is the k z = 0 CB Bloch (basis) state. then the allowed solutions must satisfy the boundary conditions that both ψ and A dψ dz + 1 2 Bψ are continuous, , and C = E c 0 0 E v , (10) are the respective coefficient matrices of Eq. ( These boundary conditions appear to mandate that the CB component of ψ must always be continuous. However, the term A dψ dz can allow for a jump discontinuity in the amplitude of ψ as a → 0. For E ≈ E c we have dψ - dz ≈ ± P √ ab ψ -, so that the CB component of A dψ dz can then vary as -a dψ - dz ≈ ∓P a b ψ -, which vanishes as a → 0. This behaviour, discussed by Foreman in the a = 0 limit, 4 accounts for the observed discontinuities in the e1 envelope function at InAs/GaSb interfaces in the full 8-band calculations (cf. Fig. We note that our calculated InAs and GaSb bulk complex band structures, using renormalised parameters with s c = 0 (cf. Fig. In the main text we noted that the optical (momentum) matrix element between the k ∥ = 0 e1 and h1 SL eigenstates goes to zero as q is varied from zero to π L (cf. Fig. The results of these calculations are summarised in Fig. 