Flux transformers and superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) are two key superconducting devices used in the cutting-edge magnetic-field sensor systems, such as magnetocardiography (MCG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG). They are superconductor integrated circuits enabled by two superconductor elements, superconductor wire and Josephson junction, based on Meissner's effect and Josephson effect. The principles of SQUID sensors are unfamiliar for electronics engineers who are trained with semiconductor electronics, due to the superconductor physics. We present an introduction to SQUID sensors, ranged from superconductor elements to the superconductor-semiconductor hybrid system. It is demonstrated that, SQUIDs inside are the resistor-inductor-capacitor (RLC) network driven by Josephson currents, and share the common network equation with normal RLC circuits; SQUID outside are magnetic-field-effect transistors (MFETs), and are dual to the semiconductor FETs in signal conversions; SQUID magnetic-field sensors are linear current amplifiers, as semiconductor FET electric-field sensors are linear voltage amplifier. After the discoveries of Meissner effect Flux transformers are flux-to-current convertors, and SQUIDs are the most sensitive flux-to-voltage convertors; they are combined to develop many advanced magnetic field measurement systems successfully applied for biomagnetism In this article, we introduce the principles of SQUID sensors in the way that can be easily understood by the electronics engineers. We interpret the basic principles of superconductor elements and derive the general network equation of superconductor integrated circuits to reveal the working mechanism inside SQUIDs; We find the general analytical expression of dc SQUIDs, and present a magnetic field-effect transistor (MFET) concept to describe the function of SQUIDs in the design of the fluxor current-based analog circuits. It is shown that SQUID-based analog circuits are dual to the analog circuits based on the metal-oxide semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs), in both the design concepts and working principles. The overview of SQUID electronics, ranged from basic superconductive elements to sensor system, is illustrated in Fig. 1) Superconductor wire: it is a strip of superconductor, which is not only a perfect conductor, but also a magnetic field coupler. its macroscopic phase difference at two terminals records the integral of magnetic vector potentials There are four levels of abstraction in the design of a SQUID sensor systems, as summarized in Fig. 2) At circuit level, FF-OPAs are the analog integrated circuits of SQUID-based MFETs and room-temperature amplifiers; they use fluxes as inputs, similar to the semiconductor OPAs, in the design of analog circuits and systems. 3) At module level, SQUID sensors are the combination of a pick-up coil and a SQUID-based TIA; they combine the functions of the flux-transformer and the closedloop FF-OPA. 4) At system level, a multi-channel SQUID system is a group of SQUID sensors configured with different pick-up coils; it is a contactless current sensing system, where, the pick-up coils sense the currents flowing inside the object under test, and linearly convert them into voltages through SQUID TIAs. Fig. The comparison between SQUID-based MFET and MOSFET electronics is summarized in Table Table Four variables are used in the analysis of electric circuits 1) Magnetic field-oriented circuits are the flux-current systems; they are usually analyzed with Φ and i as variables; 2) Electric field-oriented circuits are the charge-voltage systems; they are usually analyzed with Q and v as variables. SQUIDs and their application circuits are magnetic-filed oriented, and are analyzed as flux-current circuit systems. Details about circuit variables and analysis methods are seen in the reference Superconductor circuits are superconducting RLC networks, in which superconductor wire and Josephson junction shown in Fig. where Φ0 is the flux quantum, Φ0= h/2e = 2.07×10 -15 Wb. Josephson junctions have a superconductor-insulator-superconductor (SIS) structure, as illustrated in Fig. where I0 is the critical current of the Josephson junction. Josephson junctions implement two functions in superconducting circuits: 1) They are phase-difference generators, which create a phase gap between two superconductors. 2) Their Josephson currents are voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs) which are oscillating with a fundamental frequency ωrf controlled by the average voltage Vs at the two terminals. The VCO function of Josephson currents is described as follows: J rf where Cθ is a bounded constant for the ∆θ, and ωrf is the angular frequency controlled by the average voltage Vs, with a voltage-to-frequency ratio of 0.438 GHz/μV. The closed loops connected by two kinds of superconductor elements will comply with the fluxoid quantization law (FQL) The factor σi exhibits the polarity of θi inside the loop, with the direction of loop current icir as the reference. For instance, in Fig. Therefore, we can derive the so-called fluxoid-quantization law (FQL) as The derivative of FQL with respect to time is the Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction and the Kircholff's voltage law (KVL): In other words, the FQL is the integral form of the Faraday's law and KVL, in which the constant is specified as nΦ0. Therefore, the closed-loop law in ( In a loop with a self-inductance Lm, the flux Φm coupled by the loop is applied by the external flux Φa and generated by the loop current icir, thus, where the self-induced flux is assumed to cancel the applied flux Φa. A Flux-transformer is a superconducting loop purely connected by superconductor wires, as illustrated in Fig. where, nT is the number of flux quanta trapped in the loop. The flux-transformer will turn the flux Φp picked-up by the pick-up coil linearly into loop current iT; the function of iT will be calculated by Φp as Accordingly, flux transformers are linear flux-to-current convertors. Pick-up coils have various styles to extract the components of magnetic fields A dc-SQUID is a superconducting loop inserted with two Josephson junctions, as shown in Fig. The dc-SQUID loop contains a superconducting current icir, as defined in Fig. First, the FQL in the SQUID loop is written as Second, two current-phase relations of Josephson junctions are The circuit equations of dc-SQUID in 1) In zero-voltage state, θ1 and θ2 are stable in a certain value that enable iJ1 and iJ2 to cancel the i1 and i2 supplied by Ib and icir. 2) In voltage state, θ1 and θ2 will keep increasing because iJ1 and iJ2 are less than i1 and i2; the average increasing speed of θ1 and θ2 is proportional to the measured voltage Vs of dc-SQUID. 3) The external Φa is turned into icir to adjust the bias currents of two Josephson junctions, and thereby modulates the average speed of θ1 and θ2; this is how the flux-modulated current-voltage characteristics of dc-SQUID are formed. Therefore, under the same average voltage Vs, two Josephson currents are working as two VCOs, and are driving the two-port RLC network in oscillation state; the fundamental oscillation frequency ωrf is defined in (3). SQUIDs and single-flux-quantum (SFQ) gates, as well as Josephson qubits, are all the superconducting RLC networks driven by additional Josephson currents, and are unified with normal RLC circuits with a common network equation The variable vectors and parameter matrices for the dc-SQUID shown in Fig. This general network equation is derived by a genal flux-based circuit theory For example, the dc-SQUID shown in Fig. The current-voltage characteristics of dc-SQUID are illustrated in Fig. With Vs and ib as the coordinates, the current-voltage curves under different Φa are shown in Fig. It is a periodical function for the flux input Φa, in which, the period is 1Φ0. By setting ib as Ib, we can observe a periodical flux-voltage characteristic, as illustrated in Fig. Those functions achieve practical physical meanings, in the system model shown in Fig. In the current-voltage curves shown in Fig. The analytical expression of ( We proposed a general analytical expression of dc SQUIDs where ib and Φa are the dependent variables of the resonance frequency Vs and the average phase difference between θ1 and θ2, namely ∆θdc. This general analytical expression is derived by using a general two-port network model of dc SQUIDs, as shown in Fig. 1) Under a nonzero voltage Vs, two Josephson currents are VCOs, they generate both dc and ac currents into two-port network; the dc component of Josephson currents is proportional to the total power transferred by the ac components, due to the zero-power consumption principle of Josephson currents. 2) In response to ib and two Josephson currents, the two-port network creates both the Vs and ac voltages at two ports. In frequency domain, the two-port network implements its transfer-function with only four network impedances, such as Z11, Z22, Z12, and Z21 (Z12 = Z21 for reciprocity principle). The Gcmm in 1) A bare-washer dc-SQUID shown in Fig. Accordingly, for a symmetric bare-washer dc-SQUID, we can derive that the Vs0 at the LC-resonance point is decided by the loop inductance and the capacitance of one Josephson junction To be notice that, Vs0/Φ0 is not the resonance frequency of the SQUID loop composed of two junction capacitances which resonance frequency is 1/π√(2LsCj). More details are seen in 1) It can be used to characterize circuit parameters of a dc-SQUID with the measured current-voltage characteristics. 2) It can be used to predict the current-voltage characteristics of a dc-SQUID with the network impedances extracted from the circuit layout. 6. Flux-feedback operational amplifier Operational amplifiers (OPAs) are the general scheme to design linear analog circuits using nonlinear devices A simple SQUID-based FF-OPA is shown in Fig. The flux-flower based on the negative feedback mechanism is accordingly implemented with the SQUID-based FF-OPA, as shown in Fig. This nw records the period where the working point is located, with which the fluxvoltage function in ( The transfer function of this dc-SQUID is modeled as shown in Fig. 1) If Vs > Vw, the room-temperature amplifier will increase Vf and Φf to push Φa back to left, as shown in Fig. In Fig. 1) The response time is approximately linear to the deviation of Φa, if the state (Vs, Φa) is located at the positive slope, as shown in Fig. 2) The response time is nonlinear to the deviation of Φa, if the state (Vs, Φa) is located at the negative slope, as shown in Fig. In the flux-voltage characteristic shown in Fig. The negative feedback mechanism of the FLL keeps canceling the ∆Vs, and Φa will be fixed at the working point dynamically, thus where the Φn is the equivalent flux noised contributed by the voltage noise Vn of the room-temperature amplifier, and Accordingly, the flux-voltage conversion function of FLL in static state is Meanwhile, to a given Vf_FS which is the full-scale range of Vf, the full-scale range of the input flux, namely Φe_FS will be For a limited Vf_FS in the measurement instruments and a fixed Mf in the given SQUID chip, the Φe_FS is only adjusted by Rf in the practical operations. In frequency domain, the transfer function of the FLL is defined by where Rftr is the trans-impedance of the dc-SQUID seen from the two terminals of the feedback coil, and This Rftr is decided by the transfer coefficient of the SQUID. From the transfer function, the cut-off frequency fc of the FLL can be defined as where GBP (f) is the gain-bandwidth-product (GBP) of the room-temperature amplifier with a gain G(ω), and The maximum slew-rate, SRmax(f) The GBP(f) is a constant for the room-temperature amplifier implemented by one operational amplifier or one integrator; the maximum slew rate for the FLL with a constant GBP(f) is decided by the cut-off frequency fc as However, the fc is limited by the phase-margin (PM) of the G(ω), and the PM is reduced rapidly in the cascaded amplifier; this is why we suggest to design a FLL with no more two amplifiers The advantages of SQUID sensors are low noise, low drift, wide range, and high slew-rate; they are achieved by using the different readout schemes as summarized in Table For a given dc-SQUID, the transfer coefficient depends on the location of working point in the current-voltage curves; the working point is set by room-temperature amplifier. Two schemes of the room-temperature amplifier in non-inverting and inverting modes are exhibited in Fig. The dc-SQUID in Fig. When the FLL based on either the CBVA or the VBCA mode is in the locking state, the output of OPA1 will be kept at zero, Vm = 0; the current flowing into Rg is ignored, and the ib is totally supplied by the current source Ib; the V+ and V-at two inputs of the OPA1 are equal, V+ = V-. Therefore, the working point of the dc-SQUID in either bias mode is selected by two load lines: The first load line, which is named as Load-line1 The second load lines, which is called Load-line2 Two load lines set in CBVA mode together with the current-voltage characteristics of the dc-SQUID are drawn in Fig. When the FLL is in opened-loop state, the flux-voltage characteristic of the dc-SQUID is read out by the OPA1 in CBVA mode, which is the projection of the currentvoltage characteristics on the Load-line1, as illustrated in Fig. Similarly, two load lines set in VBCA mode together with the current-voltage characteristics of the dc-SQUID are drawn in Fig. 1) The first one is to achieve the maximum swing of Vm scanned by the input Φa; the swing of Vm is adjusted by the Load-line1 in CBVA mode; it is adjusted through Load-line2 in VBCA mode. 2) The second one is to set the zero-baseline of Vm in the middle of the swing. The baseline of of Vm is set by the Load-line2 in CBVA mode, and is adjusted by Load-line1 in VBCA mode. By comparing Fig. In either CBVA or VBCA circuit, the small-signal response of the dc-SQUID around the selected working point is described as where Rd is the dynamic resistance of the dc-SQUID working at W1; it is defined by 0 The Thevenin's equivalent circuit of the dc-SQUID in small signal mode, is equivalent to a flux-controlled voltage source in serial with an internal resistor Rd, as shown in Fig. The voltage noise Vn of room-temperature amplifier is the dominant noise source, if the Rr, Rd, and Rwire meet the impedance matching condition where Rn is the so-called noise-impedance of the preamplifier. Therefore, in both bias and amplifier modes, the Φn contributed by the Vn is only decided by the ∂Vs/∂Φa at the selected working point. In practical operations, the two bias modes will set their working points at different locations in the current-voltage curves, and will therefore achieve different noise performances, if different working points achieve different ∂Vs/∂Φa. For a practical dc-SQUID, we can measure its current-voltage curves as shown in Fig. The noise spectra of the FLLs in two bias schemes are compared as shown in Fig. To further improve the transfer coefficient of dc-SQUID in the CBVA and VBCA circuits, the near-SQUID feedback schemes, such as additional positive feedback (APF) scheme Three kinds of near-SQUID feedback schemes in Fig. In the locked FLL, the near-SQUID feedback schemes are also working in small signal mode, which small-signal circuit is shown in Fig. The final Thevenin's equivalent circuit of the near-SQUID feedback schemes in small-signal mode is shown in Fig. where the stable condition for the feedback schemes is ; We find that the near-SQUID schemes modify the transfer coefficient and dynamic resistance through two trans impedances RI and RV: 1) The RV is the only parameter that can improve the transfer coefficient. The increase of RV will accordingly increase both the transfer coefficient and the dynamic resistance. 2) The RI has no effect on the transfer coefficient; it is only used to adjust the dynamic resistance for the noise matching condition in The working point shift in a FLL is illustrated in Fig. After the working point shifts from W1 to W2, nw is changed from 0 to 1, and the FLL will have a flux jump of 1Φ0 in Φf, according to Therefore, to extend the range of FLL, we can track the change of nw, ∆nw, from the flux jumps of Φf, and include the ∆nw in The conventional FLL reads out the Φe with Φf by assuming that the nw in (24) remain unchanged, ∆nw = 0. If we reset the FLL intentionally when the output of FLL exceeds a threshold, and infer the ∆nw according to the flux jumps in the measured FLL output, we can extend the measurement range of Φe by including both the results of ∆nw and Φf in However, additional comparator and control circuits are used to reset the FLL; their response time is the dead time of FQC schemes, because the FQC scheme will miss counting the change of nw during the dead time. To reduce the dead time and avoid the miscounting of nw, FQC schemes enhanced by simple proportional feedback are developed The proportional feedback schemes that reset the working point automatically are illustrated in Fig. If the scheme shown in Fig. A practical two-stage readout scheme is exhibited in Fig. Different with the conventional two-stage schemes 1) The first one is the APF scheme nearby SQ1; it is used to improve the transfer coefficient of SQ1. 2) The second one the proportional feedback scheme; it is used to enable the secondstage SQUID amplifier to achieve quasi-linear flux-voltage characteristics shown in Fig. In the practical SQUID sensor systems that maintain cryogenic state with liquid Helium, the drop of the liquid Helium level will increase the Rwire in the readout circuit shown in Fig. 1) In the CBVA mode, increase of Rwire will move the downward zero-baseline of Vm, and arouse the dc-offset drift in Φf. 2) In the VBCA mode, increase of Rwire will decrease the swing of Vm, and will also induce the dc-offset drift in Φf. A low differential amplifier scheme that suppresses the voltage offset created by Rwire is shown in Fig. The scheme shown in Fig. The CI-MFETs have current inputs as the control gate, as the MOSFETs have the voltage inputs as the control gate. The input currents modulate the current-voltage characteristics of CI-MFET, as the voltage inputs modify the current-voltage characteristics of MOSFET. 12. Multichannel SQUID system A Magneto-cardio-gram (MCG) system based on multi-channel SQUID sensors is exhibited in The equivalent circuit of the multichannel SQUID system is shown in Fig. 1) The first group of current loops, JX-1, ..., JX-Q, are assumed to generate the target magnetic fields coupled by the pick-up coils. They contain the currents circulating inside the object under test, namely jx1, ..., jxQ. Those loops are coupled through mutual inductances. Four mutual inductance matrices for the SQUID loops are defined in Fig. Three current vectors for the target currents, feedback currents, and bias currents, are defined in Fig. Therefore, the transfer function of the mutual-channel SQUID system is derived as Therefore, the feedback currents are the linear projection of the target currents together with other loop currents. The crosstalk factors between SQUID sensors are induced by multiple mutual-inductance matrices. Since the calibration of those crosstalk factors through experiments is a heavy task We presented a comprehensive introduction to SQUID sensors, ranged from basic principles of superconductor elements to the general transfer function of multi-channel SQUID systems. SQUID sensors are the analog 'integrated' circuits of superconducting devices and semiconductor amplifiers working in different working temperatures. The understandings of SQUIDs and SQUID sensors are: 1) Superconductor and normal RLC circuits share the same circuit laws and analysis methods, except that the macroscopic phase or the integral of voltage will be used to define Josephson currents. 2) Flux-transformers are superconducting inductance loops wired by pure superconductor wires; SQUIDs are the superconducting RLC networks driven by Josephson currents. A flux-transformer is a linear flux-to-current convertor; a dc-SQUID is a MFET with flux-modulated current-voltage characteristics. 3) SQUID sensors are the linear flux-and current-based analog circuits, while MOSFET amplifiers are the linear charge-and voltage-based analog circuits. 4) A flux-follower implemented by the SQUID-based FF-OPAs is exactly the SQUID-based FLL. 5) A dc-SQUID can be read out by either CBVA or VBCA modes in a FLL. The VBCA mode will be better than the CBVA mode in selecting a working point. 6) Three near-SQUID feedback schemes are equivalent for improving the transfer coefficient of dc-SQUID. 7) A SQUID-based TIA is a flux-flower tightly coupled by an input coil. A SQUID sensor is a SQUID-based TIA connected to a pick-up coil. 8) A multi-channel SQUID sensor system, is a contactless current measurement system, where SQUID sensors read out the circuits circulating inside the target under test, through mutual inductances. In summary, a dc-SQUID is a two-port RLC network driven by two Josephson currents; it is used as a MFET with flux-modulated current-voltage characteristics in FF-OPAs; a SQUID-based TIA is an FF-OPA coupled with an input coil; a SQUID sensor is A SQUID-based TIA connected with a pick-up coil. Multi-channel SQUID sensors are contactless current amplifiers. SQUID-based MFETs are dual to semiconductor FETs, in the design of analog circuits and systems. System level