NiTe2, a type-II Dirac semimetal with strongly tilted Dirac band, has been explored extensively to understand its intriguing topological properties. Here, using density-functional theory (DFT) calculations, we report that the strength of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in NiTe2 can be tuned by Se substitution. This results in negative shifts of the bulk Dirac point (BDP) while preserving the type-II Dirac band. Indeed, combined studies using scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) confirm that the BDP in the NiTe2-xSex alloy moves from +0.1 eV (NiTe2) to -0.3 eV (NiTeSe) depending on the Se concentrations, indicating the effective tunability of type-II Dirac fermions. Our results demonstrate an approach to tailor the type-II Dirac band in NiTe2 by controlling the SOC strength via chalcogen substitution. This approach can be applicable to different types of topological materials. Quantum materials have been intensively investigated to understand their intriguing topological properties, which have the potential for utilization in future applications. A representative example of such quantum materials is a topological insulator. This material behaves as an insulator in bulk, but it has conducting surface states protected by non-trivial symmetry. Symmetry-protected Dirac fermions on the surface open an exciting opportunity to develop novel spintronic devices and transistors without dissipation. The octahedral prismatic 1T-NiTe2, schematically represented in Figure Band inversion driven by SOC plays an essential role in determining the topological characteristics. In this regard, it is very important to understand the role of heavy chalcogen elements when tailoring the topological properties of NiTe2. Figure As shown in Figure while the E-band is dominated by Te px, py (see Figure The 5,6-band moves above the EF, while the 4-band moves below the EF near the -point; these shifts are related to the strength of SOC (ESOC). Accordingly, the symmetry-protected type-II BDP moves to about 0.1 eV above the EF and k z = ±0.35c * (c * = 2π c ⁄ ) (near the A-point), as shown in Figure indicate that 1T-phase NiSe2 is dynamically unstable. Without considering SOC, the A1-band and doubly degenerate E-band of NiSe2 cross about 0.65 eV below the EF, resulting in the symmetryprotected BDP point (red circle in Figure All peaks are well oriented along the c-axis, indicating the single-crystallinity of our samples. The diffraction peaks slightly shift towards a higher angle (i.e., the lattice constant of NiTe2-xSex decreases) as the Se content (x) increases. This is caused by the fact that the atomic radius of Se is smaller than that of Te. The measured lattice constant along the c-axis decreases linearly as a function of Se content (as shown in Figure In addition, Figure Particularly, the BDP is shifted from +100 meV to -440 meV across the EF as Te atoms are substitutionally replaced with Se atoms. This result implies that our method to control the BDP via Se substitutional alloying is as effective as conventional electron doping. Furthermore, our calculations indicate that the type-II BDP is located at the exact EF for 1T-NiTe1.4Se0.6 (see Figure Theoretical Calculations: A 2 × 2 × 1 supercell of bulk NiTe2 was used to study the effects of alloying for Se concentrations of 12.5% and 50%. To model the distribution of the model atoms, we used the special quasi-random structure (SQS) method. Sample preparation: Single crystals were grown by using the vertical temperature gradient Bridgman method. For the preparation of NiTe2-xSex single crystals, we used high-purity Ni (99.999 %), Te (99.99999 %), and Se (99.999 %) elements as starting materials. The elements were put into a quartz ampoule with a capillary bottom in order to grow only one seed after the inside wall of the ampoule was coated with carbon. Then, the ampoule was evacuated and sealed under a pressure of 10 -6 Torr and placed in a furnace. First, the furnace was raised up to 600 o C and held for 48 h. The reason for maintaining this intermediate temperature was to avoid excessive pressure buildup due to the high vapor pressures of Te and Se and possible explosion during NiTe2-xSex formation. Then, the furnace temperature was raised to 1150 °C at a rate of 20 °C/h, which was followed by soaking for 72 h. For single crystal growth, the temperature was slowly cooled to room temperature over 10 days. The single crystals had a cylindrical form of about 10 mm in diameter and 15 mm in length. The mole fraction x was determined by an electron probe microanalyzer (EPMA-1400, SHIMADZU). 