Photonic integrated circuits (PICs) are enabling major breakthroughs in a number of areas, including quantum computing, neuromorphic processors, wearable devices, and more. Nevertheless, existing PIC measurement methods lack the spectral precision, speed, and sensitivity required for refining current applications and exploring new frontiers such as point-of-care or wearable biosensors. Here, we present the "Sweeping Optical Frequency Mixing Method (SOHO)", surpassing traditional PIC measurement methods with real-time operation, 30 dB higher sensitivity, and over 100 times better spectral resolution. Leveraging the frequency mixing process with a sweeping laser and custom control software, SOHO excels in simplicity, eliminating the need for advanced optical components and additional calibration procedures. We showcase its superior performance on ultrahigh-quality factor (Q) fiber-loop resonators (Q = 46×10 6 ) as well as microresonators realized on a new optical waveguide platform. An experimental spectral resolution of 19.1 femtometers is demonstrated using an 85meter-long unbalanced fiber Mach Zehnder Interferometer, constrained by noise resulting from the extended fiber length, while the theoretical resolution is calculated to be 6.2 femtometers, limited by the linewidth of the reference laser. With its excellent performance metrics, SOHO has the potential to become a vital measurement tool in photonics, excelling in high-speed and high-resolution measurements of weak optical signals. Photonic integration is revolutionizing the field of optics in the same way that integrated circuits revolutionized the world of electronics in the 1960s. Miniature optical circuits known as photonic integrated circuits (PIC) leverage the principles of photonics to integrate multiple optical components on a single chip. PICs are becoming increasingly common in quantum computing, data centers, lidar and autonomous vehicles, neuromorphic processors, medical diagnostics, optical sensing, and astronomy. In particular, ultra-high quality factor microresonators (Q ≥ 10 6 ) have been extensively employed in various emerging applications including optical sensing Addressing these limitations, we introduce a novel PIC measurement method termed the "Sweeping Optical Frequency Mixing Method (SOHO)" SOHO is a measurement method based on the optical frequency mixing process. As depicted in Fig. The experimental setup of SOHO is shown in Fig. We proceeded to conduct a thorough characterization of SOHO, deriving its linearity performance parameters. To check the linearity of the signal amplitude as a function of input power, a variable optical attenuator (VOA, shown in Fig. The microcavity resonators (racetrack) were fabricated using a hybrid waveguide platform that we recently developed In order to characterize the SOHO setup, we fabricated fiber ring resonators with different Q values (Q= 3×10 To further demonstrate the resolution enhancement, the transmission spectrum of a fiber ring resonator with a Q= 46×10 6 was measured using SOHO and with the standard method where the sample laser was substituted with a state-of-the-art tunable laser system (EXFO, T500S-CLU+CTP10) and alterations were made to the detectors and compensation algorithms. To remove the polarization difference between the two setups and make measurements comparable, the device under test was placed between two polarizers in tandem with polarization controllers (not shown in Fig. The spectral measurements of the MZI device were performed by using both the SOHO setup and the standard method. SOHO clearly resolved the interference fringes, as depicted in Fig. We further advanced the SOHO approach to be able to do real-time spectral measurements. Toward this goal, we dithered the output wavelength of the sample laser by triangular and sinusoidal signals using a function generator. In this configuration, the amplitude of the applied signal dictates the ultimate linewidth, while its frequency determines the dithering frequency. As the dwell time of the laser wavelength is higher near the minimum and maximum of the sinusoidal modulation signal, the spectrum has an M shape, whereas it becomes flatter for a triangular modulation signal as shown in Fig. In the experiments, sinusoidal and triangular waves with 200 kHz frequency and 50% symmetry were used. Real-time spectral measurement speed is highly dependent on the measurement's frequency span and with 6 GHz bandwidth (≈48 pm) it is performed at a frame rate of around 4.15 frames/s (see Supplementary Video 2), which is limited by the capture rate of the ESA. To showcase the real-time spectral measurement capabilities, we monitored the racetrack resonator's resonance shift as its temperature gradually increased by illuminating it from above with a 150 W lamp. Figure Since the SOHO approach relies on down-converted frequency detection on ESA, the precision and stability of the sample laser are inconsequential, as they will be referenced against the frequency of a stable laser. Furthermore, for the same reason, the linewidth of the sample laser does not have any effect on the frequency resolution of the measurement. In the current configuration of the experimental setup given in Fig. Another advantage that stems from the innate amplification property of optical frequency mixing is that it can measure very weak signals with a good signal-to-noise ratio. This is important in particular for PIC devices with low fiber-chip coupling efficiency. Additionally, measurements of nonlinear high-Q microcavity resonators can benefit from this approach dramatically as a few microwatts of optical power can excite unwanted thermal and nonlinear effects SOHO has potential particularly in optical sensing applications. For accurate measurement and continuous monitoring of resonance shifts in on-chip resonators, it is advantageous to employ a wide linewidth laser as a sample laser, aligning its wavelength with the resonator's resonance. This configuration makes it possible to view the resonance spectrum without scanning the laser frequency and thereby it substantially enhances the measurement speed, limited only by the maximum scan rate of the ESA. Hence, with this method, we can employ a non-scanning, stable laser as a reference along with a cost-effective, free-running sweeping laser that doesn't necessitate frequency stabilization, providing a practical advantage for wearable devices. Furthermore, the innate amplification and high sensitivity of our method relaxes the stringent requirements for input and output coupling, enabling the development of disposable optical biosensors. Figure , therefore the crosstalk between adjacent waveguides is low. Considering that alignment issues represent a significant bottleneck in the advancement and widespread adoption of disposable optical sensors, our approach offers a distinct solution to address this challenge. The theoretical spectral resolution of SOHO is determined as 6.2 fm by dividing the linewidth of the reference laser (2.2 MHz) by 2√2, assuming a Lorentzian line shape and applying the Sparrow criterion. We experimentally demonstrated 19.1 fm, using the unbalanced fiber MZI. However, the long fiber arm's susceptibility to mechanical vibrations and thermal fluctuations hindered the demonstration of the theoretical spectral resolution. Such additional noise leads to very fast changes in the spectrum and distorts the real spectral shape. In conclusion, SOHO offers the advantage of high sensitivity, speed, and precision in PIC measurements, making it a valuable tool for researchers and engineers working on the development, testing, and optimization of photonic devices and integrated circuits. Its excellent performance metrics hold significant promise for advancing current applications and unlocking new possibilities, including next-generation wearable devices, disposable pointof-care sensors, and many more. Optical frequency mixing process: Optical frequency mixing involves two optical signals, whereas the mixing product is an electrical signal. If the device under test is put after the sample laser, by sweeping the frequency of the sample laser, its optical transmittance spectrum, ( ), can be extracted from the measured RF spectrum, ( ). In this configuration the optical intensity after the interference of two lasers is: where, and are the intensity of reference and sample lasers, respectively, and ( ) is the transmittance of the sample as a function of optical frequency, . The detected signal on the photodiode (proportional to the AC part of the intensity) is: where is a relative coefficient representing the optical to electrical conversion responsivity of the setup and is the electrical frequency derived from the optical down-conversion of the beat frequency between the lasers, i.e. = | -|. The ESA measures electrical power spectral density as a function of and demonstrates it in the dBm scale. The following formulas represent it in linear scale: log ( ) 10 3 10 ( ) 10 where is the input impedance of the ESA and varies based on the measurement conditions; i.e. > or < , either the positive or negative sign is applied. By combining these two equations, ( ) is obtained as: Microcavity resonator design and fabrication: A 100-nm thick a-SiC layer was deposited on an 8-μm-thick thermally-oxidized silicon wafer using the inductively coupled plasma chemical vapor deposition (ICPCVD) method with an optimized recipe 