This paper investigates wake-up and imprint in ferroelectric Al0.70Sc0.30N films. The study employs a series of I-V and P-E measurements with varying electric field amplitudes and voltage cycles as well as structural investigation via Scanning Electron Microscopy to understand the origin and underlying principle of wake-up and imprint as well as their relation. It is shown that the material can be considered wake-up free, however inherent imprint and imprint shift in combination with minor loops result in a wake-up like effect. We introduce a proposition to explain the influence of initial switching cycles on domains, their stabilization and corresponding changes in imprint. Unipolar fields and temperature investigations are used to explore the reversibility of imprint and ways to program it, while partial switching is applied to investigate domain propagation and support the aforementioned approach. It is concluded, that after an energetically more demanding domain nucleation, domain wall motion can switch the majority of polarization in Al1-xScxN. As a consequence, the presence of initial domains reduces the coercive field in respect to unipolar films. Ferroelectricity is defined as the ability to switch the spontaneous electric polarization present in certain materials with a non-centrosymmetric crystal structure with the help of an external electric field. This property has been found to offer promising solutions in various fields such as non-volatile information storage, sensors and actuators. In the context of bringing wurtzite-type ferroelectrics like Al1-xScxN to applications, a comprehensive understanding of common phenomena in ferroelectrics will be required. This includes the wake-up and imprint of their polarization vs. electric field (P-E) hysteresis loops. While imprint is defined as an asymmetric ferroelectric hysteresis loop where one polarization state is preferred over the other, This work is separated into three sections. In the first, wake-up is investigated on Al70Sc30N films via current density vs. electric field (I-V) measurements and the results are compared to Al1-xBxN. Further, the evolution of imprint up to 10 4 switching cycles is analysed. In the second part, the influence of the inversion domains on the electrical response/ I-V peaks is investigated, supported by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) polarity investigations after wet etching. An explanatory model for the interplay between imprint, wake-up like effects and domains will be specified and delimitated from the approach for Al1-xBxN. In a third part, thermal annealing is applied to investigate possible domain growth and the influence on imprint. For the investigation of wake-up, capacitor structures with 420 nm thick Al1-xScxN films where prepared on oxidized Si (100) covered by a 100 nm Mo bottom electrode on a 100 nm AlN seedlayer. The Al1-xScxN films were grown in an Evatec MSQ 200 magnetron sputter tool by cosputtering from two single element targets. The Sc concentration was measured to be 30 at% by SEM EDX. Details regarding the deposition process were published elsewhere. For additional structural investigations the capacitor structures were etched in hot (80°C) phosphoric acid (80% H3PO4: 20% H2O) at different states of cycling and investigated with scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Zeiss Ultra 55 Plus). Futhermore, X-ray diffraction on similar samples was performed in a previous study. Initially, we discuss under which measurement conditions our ferroelectric Al0.70Sc0.30N films feature wake-up like effects, while in general they can be considered wake-up free. Here, we follow the standard definition of wake-up as an increasing remanent Polarization (Pr) over the number of voltage cycles the material has seen. Measurements at only < 5% lower voltage amplitudes instead show a strong increase of Pr in the initial cycles which can appear as a classical wake-up effect without measurements at higher fields. The lower the amplitude, the more cycles are necessary to wake-up the material, similarly to that was reported by Zhu et al. We interpret these results such, that initial minor loops gradually transform into saturated loops mainly through an increasing Ec -. This increase in Ec -then shifts the hysteresis loop inside the probed voltage interval. Since virtually the whole volume of the film can however be switched in the first loop, provided a high enough voltage is selected, and a saturated Pr is available in this loop, the term wake-up free can be applied to our Al1-xScxN films. This nonetheless raises the question what is the origin of the imprint and the varying coercive fields we observe, which are responsible for the wake-up like behavior of the minor loops. We consider a similar explanation as given by Zhu et al. for Al1-xBxN (formation of permanent inversion domains), to be responsible for the variation of Ec and therefore also the wake-up like effects as well as the imprint While Zhu et al. consider stable inversion domains to grow from top and bottom electrode for E > Ec and remain there even after switching back, we did not find direct evidence for the existence of stable M polar residues after switching to N polarity at the film surface. To investigate whether the stabilized imprint after the first cycles is reversible, I-V curves were measured at 211 Hz before and after 5 unipolar cycles (0.1 Hz) with all voltage peaks of either exclusively positive or negative polarity. Applications of a negative field to a sample that was cycled 40 times resulted in a shift of the peaks and a reduced imprint as shown in Figure A similar argumentation is true for the dipolar defects: The internal field would only allow for the positive end of the majority of the dipole defects to face towards the top electrode. Therefore a positive applied field should rotate these, reducing the internal field and a negative applied field should increase the imprint. This is again opposite to the observations of this work and can therefore be ruled out as the driving mechanism. In contrast to that, the direction of the shifts is coherent with our proposed explanation of domain growth which also provides a reasonable explanation as to why both coercive fields do not shift in unison. When a negative field is applied to the sample, the N-polar film is switched to M-polarity. Keeping the field applied reduces the residual N-polar inversion domains and in return N polarity requires higher fields to switch in subsequent cycles. Therefore the hysteresis is shifted to lower imprint, especially on the positive side. For a positive field, the stabilization is reversed. Switching to M-polarity requires larger fields and the hysteresis shifts back to a higher imprint. To further support our interpretation of the origins of imprint and the resulting wake-up like behavior of minor P-E loops in Al1-xScxN, we investigated the interplay between nucleation and the continuation of polarization switching in more detail. The influence of nucleation and the subsequent growth of inversion domains on the electrical properties becomes especially clear in the observation of I-V peaks during and after partial unipolar switching. In the first cycle a minor loop (90% of Ec) was applied to partially switch an N-polar film to M-polarity (or vice-versa, the switching polarization was kept between 5% and 25% of 2Pr for each case). During the second pulse, the previously partially switched polarity was saturated. A third pulse was used to fully switch the sample back to its initial polarity and the forth pulse to reach saturation in M-polarity (or N-polarity) again in a single step to determine the full polarization. These measurements were conducted on both pristine and repeatedly switched samples as well as under different frequencies between 50 Hz and 700 Hz. As shown in Figure Figure By using the approach of inversion domains from the last section and applying it to the results of the unipolar measurements, the 1 st and 4 th loop can be considered to be in a polarization state with fewer and/or smaller inversion domains. In the first step, the applied field induces the nucleation of further domains at higher electric fields. Therefor growth also takes place at these higher fields even though less energy would be necessary for the domains to expand. This becomes evident from the fact that polarization continues to switch even after reducing the voltage below the initial onset of the switching current. For the 1 st cycle this results in a counter clockwise current peak. For the 2 nd cycle, where inversion domains are already present from the 1 st loop, the domains already grow at lower electric fields, while further nucleation might start at higher electric field. Consequently, Ec + appears to be reduced by about 10%. This suggests that the majority of the volume can be addressed through domain wall motion from the initial domains. In addition, the overall displacement current peak becomes broader as the domain growth originating from the initial domains is nonetheless likely not able to progress to the whole sample volume. Because similar results were obtained for both polarities of pristine films as well as capacitors that were already switched over 2000 times, most inversion domains appear to be resolved by switching. Since the Al1-xScxN P-E loops still exhibit a noticeable imprint after thousands of cycles and annealing of PZT and HfO was reported to be an effective way to manipulate the center of the hysteresis loop, this section is focused on investigating the effect of temperature on imprint in Al1-xScxN. In the second step a partially switched sample was heated to 200 °C for 10 min to see whether inversion domains grow, vanish or are otherwise influenced by additional thermal energy. For this, as a reference, a capacitor was first cycled ~50 times with a field amplitude of -4.7 MVcm -1 . Afterwards a unipolar field of -4.1 MVcm -1 was introduced to partially switch the film to M-polarity, followed by a unipolar field of 4.7 MVcm -1 to ensure full reversal to N-polarity. For the actual measurement the capacitor was partially switched to M-polarity as described before (-4.1 MVcm -1 ), annealed and then fully switched back to N-polarity with 4.7 MVcm -1 . For the partially M-polar sample (Figure One possible explanation for the imprint shift is a classical defect driven mechanism as proposed for PZT or HfO, where charged defects migrate along the direction of an incompletely screened polarization and therefor change the internal electric field and imprint accordingly. The more likely explanation, which also agrees to the imprint shift induced by electric fields, is again the stabilization of the present polarization of the films due to structural changes/defects that favor the nucleation or presence of a certain polarity. As the films during deposition grow in the Npolar state at elevated temperature, this polarization state is already stabilized in the process. Mpolarity on the other hand is energetically not favored in as deposited films. The introduction of temperature to these films enables the reduction and reorientation of structural defects, making it easier to switch to M-polarity, while at the same time making it harder to switch back to N-polarity. The imprint shift therefor is much stronger for M-polar than for N-polar films. From the partially switched film it becomes evident, that existing minority domains do neither grow nor shrink. However, because minority-polar volume was still stabilized locally during the annealing, it became harder to switch back and the imprint became less negative. Ferroelectric Al1-xScxN films were investigated for wake-up and imprint. While the films experience a wake-up like behavior when cycled with minor loops in the range of the coercive field, they reach full Pr when the voltage amplitude is sufficiently above the coercive field and therefor can be considered wake-up free. We attribute the wake-up like behavior to a shift in the imprint of the films, which is due to the emergence of regions which either are stable inversion domains or at least regions were the as grown minority polarization is favored. For our N-polar films, this results in a pronounced reduction of Ec -during the initial switching events. This way minor loops turn into major loops and Al1-xScxN films appear to feature wake-up. Based on these observations, previous studies and SEM imaging of anisotropically etched surfaces, an explanation is proposed for the initial switching cycles. For N-polar films, M-polarity propagates from the top-electrode through the film, likely by domain wall motion. At the bottom electrode N-polar inversion domains remain and serve as initial sites for back-switching while in switched N-polar film regions remain at top electrode which are more favorable for nucleation of Mpolar domains, therefor leading to a reduces negative Ec and shift in imprint in consecutive cycles. Imprint was further investigated under the influence of unipolar fields which were found to destabilize and reduce oppositely oriented inversion domains (or regions, were such inversions are energetically more favorable) present in the film, therefor shifting the hysteresis to higher or lower electric fields. The general presence of inversion domains was also found to lower the energy required for full polarization inversion in partially switched films such that the coercive field is reduced and the I-V peak broadens in the consecutive cycles. We attribute this to a mechanism were a larger volume of the films becomes addressable to energetically less demanding domain wall motion in the presence of already switched sample volume, in line with our explanation for imprint. Furthermore temperature was also found to stabilize the polarization present in the heated films and be able to shift the imprint close to 0 MVcm -1 for 10 min at 200 °C. This way temperature offers an opportunity to program imprint to a desired value. No domain growth at elevated temperatures was observed.