measured the mass flux of superfluid 4 He through a capillary into an evacuated chamber for various temperatures and pressures of the reservoir chamber. They found a sharp transition from low flux at low pressures to high flux at large pressures. Here it is shown that the superfluid condition of chemical potential equality predicts the induced temperature and also the transition pressure, which is attributed to the transition from a semispherical cap to a pool of 4 He at the exit of the capillary. The results show that the two-fluid equations of superfluid flow, Landau's phonon-roton theory, and Feynman's critical vortex theory are unnecessary for a quantitative account of the measured transition pressure. measured the mass flow rates of superfluid 4 He through a capillary into an evacuated chamber as a function of temperature and pressure of the reservoir. Figure The basis of their analysis is that the flow velocity is proportional to the square root of the chemical potential difference (divided by mass) between the reservoir and the evacuated chamber (Botimer and Taborek 2016, equation ( Botimer and Taborek (2016) calculate the temperature of the evacuated chamber based on certain equations for the evaporation rate, and find T 2 =0.7-0.8 K, this being relatively insensitive to T 1 and independent of p 1 . This is He in the high pressure chamber 1, with superfluid flowing through the nanopore and evaporating in the evacuated chamber 2. The puddle invoked by Botimer and Taborek (2016) (left) is compared to the semispherical cap envisaged here at low pressure drops (magnified, right). used to calculate the chemical potential, μ 2 = μ sat (T 2 ). The reservoir pressure at which μ 1 = μ(T 1 , p 1 ) first exceeds μ 2 is taken by them to be the transition pressure, p 1 = p tr . Botimer and Taborek (2016) acknowledge that their calculations predict zero flow rates below the transition pressure, and monotonically increasing flow rates above the transition pressure, both of which are contrary to the observed behavior. As mentioned above, the condition for superfluid flow is that the chemical potentials are equal This determines T 2 , the temperature of the evacuated chamber (figure The effect is larger for larger pressure drops. At small pressure drops, the flow rate is too small to form the puddle assumed by The temperature of the evacuated chamber T2 versus the reservoir temperature T1 for reservoir pressure p1 = 1 kPa (solid curve) and p1 = 2 kPa (dashed curve), as given by equation (1). The dotted line is T2 = T1. The thermodynamic data is taken from Donnelly and Barenghi ( surface tension. The evaporation across this interface is arguably proportional to the surface area of the cap, which is πR 2 tube for p 1 → p sat (T 1 ), and 2πR 2 tube for p 1 → p tr . Obviously the area of the semispherical cap is substantially less than the area of the pool that forms at high pressure drops, which explains the transition from low to high flow rates. Invoking the superfluid condition μ 2 = μ 1 one obtains in the semispherical cap regime For given T 2 , T 1 , and p 1 this gives R lv , which decreases with increasing reservoir pressure. The condition R lv = R tube defines the transition pressure. The transition pressure predicted by this agrees semiquantitatively with the measured values (figure The present calculations explain the sharp transition from low to high flow rates with increasing pressure as being due to the transition from a semispherical cap at low pressure drops to, as suggested by Botimer and Taborek (2016), a flat pool of large surface area at high pressure drops. The present calculations do not invoke the superfluid velocity, or attempt to predict the mass flow rates, which Botimer and Taborek (2016) do do. In any case, the fact that the transition in flow rates can be accounted for by a simple morphological change says that dynamic considerations such as the superfluid critical velocity, the Feynman estimate of the critical vortex size, or the Landau theory of rotons, are superfluous. 