Molybdenum clusters, characterised by their unique structure and intriguing catalytic properties, have gained significant attention in recent years. In several existing studies density functional theory (DFT) methods have been used to find the lowest energy Mo clusters and explore their electronic and magnetic structure. In all cases, with the exception of a single recent study, where a genetic algorithm was employed, initial geometries of the clusters, prior to geometry optimisation, were chosen using heuristic approaches based on symmetry considerations and known structures. DFT calculations were performed using different types of pseudopotentials, from hard to soft, and different types of basis sets. However, no comprehensive study has yet been done in which a DFT method with the best control on its precision would be complemented by a reliable global minimum search method to find the lowest energy Mo clusters. In this work, we employ a combination of a plane wave-based DFT method and ab initio random structure searching (AIRSS) technique to find the lowest energy clusters of up to 10 Mo atoms. In each case, the search has been performed for clusters with different spin multiplicities, which enabled us to explore their magnetic structure. The results are compared for both hard and soft pseudopotentials stressing the importance of treating more electrons explicitly, in agreement with some of the previous studies. For most of the lowenergy magnetic structures found, we investigate the distribution of their spin densities, and for all low energy clusters, we confirm their stability by calculating their phonon structure. Finally, free energies of the Mo clusters, within the quasi-harmonic approximation, are also calculated and discussed. Adsorption and catalysis play vital roles in the fields of physics and chemistry. Transition metal (TM) clusters, particularly Molybdenum (Mo) clusters, have demonstrated great potential as adsorbents for removing heavy metal ions, organic pollutants, and radioactive nuclides from water Over the last decade or so, Mo clusters have been extensively studied both theoretically In In all research mentioned so far, Mo clusters were chosen by considering various initial geometries with different symmetry including linear, planar and 3D geometries, from both a large set of representative structures as well as those obtained previously; in addition, when preparing initial geometries, distorted versions of known and/or symmetric clusters were also tried. Only recently Even though in To address these issues, we present here a systematic study of Mo clusters with n = 2 -10 using a plane wave DFT method with both hard and soft pseudopotentials and high energy cutoff. In all calculations, a vdW correction to the total energy was added. For each value of n, spin multiplicities M = 2S + 1 of up to 7 were considered individually to find all clusters with the binding energies within a 1.0 eV threshold, so that all clusters MO n within that threshold across all considered spin multiplicities could be predicted. To generate initial structures prior to their geometry optimisation, we employed an ab initio random structure searching technique that with high probability enabled us to obtain the lowest energy structures for each spin multiplicity (the 'putative' global minimum). All the atomic positions of the global min-imum configurations and those close to them in energy isomers obtained in this study are reported in Supplementary Information. The stability of each structure is confirmed by a comprehensive vibrational analysis, and in each spin-polarised case, the distribution of the spin density is also given. The obtained lowest-energy structures are compared with those reported in the literature. The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next Section, we discuss our computational method. In Section III results are considered. Finally, in Section IV conclusions are drawn. For each number of Mo atoms n in the cluster, several values of the spin multiplicity M = 2S + 1 were considered, where S = 1 2 N ud is the total spin with N ud being the difference in the numbers of the electrons of both directions of the spin. In this study, we limited ourselves to the values of M = 1, 3, 5, 7 only (correspondingly, N ud = 0, 2, 4, 6). Higher values of M are considered unlikely even for clusters with large n. A significant set of several hundreds of initial structures was chosen, for each value of n and M , using a random structure search package AIRSS (Atomic and Ionic Relaxation from Structure Searching) Once the potential structures are identified, VASP (Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package) The local structural relaxations and total energy calculations were performed within a DFT framework using the Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) generalised gradient approximation (GGA) functional Two types of pseudopotentials are compared: a hard core Mo pseudopotential that only treats explicitly 4d 5 5s 1 valence electrons on each Mo atom, and a soft Mo pseudopotential under which 4s 2 4p 6 4d 5 5s 1 electrons are considered explicitly. A plane-wave kinetic-energy cutoff of 300 eV was used, and each relaxation calculation was considered finished when the energy threshold of 10 -5 eV was reached, while the atomic forces were not larger than 0.01 eV/ Å. To assess the accuracy of the calculations, the optimisation of Mo 2 was performed. The computed bond lengths (1.931 Å) and bond energy (1.973 eV/atom) closely match the experimental findings (bond length: 1.93 ̃1.94 Å and bond energy: 2.06 ± 0.38 eV/atom The binding energy of a Mo n cluster is defined in the usual way as where E 1 is the total energy of a single Mo atom and E n is the total energy of the cluster of n Mo atoms. All calculations were performed using spin-polarisation and by fixing the number of spin-up and spin-down electrons, even if these two numbers were the same (M = 1). The spin density s(r) = ρ ↑ (r) -ρ ↓ (r) is defined as a difference of the electronic densities of either of the spins. When integrated over the whole space of the cluster, it gives the number N ud of the electrons with unpaired spins. To preview the spin density, we used VASPKIT For each cluster obtained using AIRSS an additional geometry relaxation was performed with more stringent relaxation criteria (the maximum atomic force 0.01 eV/atom) prior to running the vibrational calculations. The latter calculations were performed using finite differences (the frozen-phonon method) as implemented in the VASP code. To calculate the (Helmholtz) free energy of the clusters, we used the quasi-harmonic approximation where E DF T is the DFT total energy and the second term accounts for the contribution from atomic vibrations. There, we sum over all vibrational frequencies ω i excluding rotations and translations (there are exactly six of these to be excluded in all cases considered below as linear clusters have far lower binding energies than nonlinear ones We have used the DFT method and the AIRSS code to find the lowest energy Mo clusters of different multiplicities with the number of Mo atoms n ranging between 2 and 10. To initiate our discussion, we first would like to show, for each n, all structures we have found that are within, say, 1.0 eV in their binding energy from the lowest energy structure. Figure These observations underscore the importance of conducting comprehensive and systematic structure searches as in many cases there are structures very close in energy and hence of a similar likelihood to exist and be observed. Results of DFT calculations corresponding to the zero temperature will be discussed first. Only the lowest energy structures are considered in detail here. These are indicated in Fig. Before we discuss in detail the Mo atom clusters we have found, a note is in order concerning difficulties we have encountered when trying to compare our structures with those reported in this literature. We provide in the Supporting Information atomic positions of all high binding energy structures and describe their symmetry in detail. However, with a single exception of Ref We have found 5 isomers with the energies within 1 eV from the lowest energy structure. Three lowest structures are shown in Fig. In addition to the previously discussed structures, there is also another structure labelled 3-2. The geometry of the structure 3-2 is similar to 3-1, but it has different Mo-Mo distances and multiplicity. The binding energy of 3-3 is by 0.002 eV lower than that of 3-2. The three lowest energy structures, as having almost identical energies (the energy differences are smaller than the precision of DFT), are all equally likely and hence all have to be accounted for in any Mo clusters studies. A notable observation is that the energy associated with a linear three-atom arrangement (not shown) is elevated by approximately 1 eV per atom compared to that of the best triangular arrangement discussed above. There are seven isomers whose energies lie within 1 eV from the lowest energy structure, two of them are analysed in detail in Fig. Both our geometries are of high symmetry which contradicts the result found in We exclude other structures from our discussion due to energy disparity from the second lowest energy structure of at least 0.2 eV. There are 9 isomers found in this case whose energies are within 1 eV range from the lowest energy structure. Four lowest energy configurations are shown in Fig. binding energy with multiplicity M = 3 and C 2v symmetry, the second order axis going vertically through the upper atom. Despite the differences in the symmetry between these four configurations, their appearances closely resemble one another. Our best structure 5-1 agrees well with the cluster found in There are 8 isomers whose energies lie within 1 eV from the lowest energy structure, 6-1. Two lowest energy configurations are shown in Fig. The most stable structures of six Mo atoms reported in We have found 14 isomers whose energies are within the 1 eV range from the lowest energy structure. Four lowest energy configurations are shown in Fig. We have found our structure 7-1 looking similar and of the same symmetry C s as in A total of 41 isomers fall within the 1 eV energy range of the lowest energy structure. In Figure Configuration 8-1 has the highest binding energy of 3.714 eV/atom exhibiting the D 2 symmetry with multiplicity M = 5. Eight atoms of this cluster split into two 4-atom sets lying in two parallel planes; one second order axis of the D 2 point group passes vertically through the centres of the two quadrilaterals; two other perpendicular second order axes, perpendicular to the former one, pass within the plane located midway between the two planes of the quadrilaterals. Compared to 8-1, structures 8-3 and 8-8 have similar symmetry, interatomic distances and binding energies; however, all three clusters have different multiplicities and hence electronic structures. 8-2 and 8-4 also share the same symmetry, C 2 this time, with the 2nd order axis passing vertically through the middle points of the pairs of upper and lower atoms. 8-5 may look similar to 8-1 or 8-3; however, it has higher symmetry D 4d : the two parallel quadrilaterals are perfect squares placed symmetrically on top of each other and rotated by 45 • around the vertical C 4 axis passing through the centres of the two squares. 8-6 and 8-7 have almost identical geometry corresponding to the group C s ; the only mirror plane passes through the four atoms arranged vertically on the picture. 8-9 is somewhat similar to 8-5: there are two quadrilaterals formed by the four upper and four lower atoms; however, only the lower 4 atoms form a square, the upper 4 atoms actually form a parallelogram reducing the symmetry to C 2v . Cluster 8-10 has the highest T d symmetry with one of the third order axis passing vertically through the upper and lower atoms; it is only by 0.126 eV lower in binding energy than the lowest energy structure 8-1. Finally, structure 8-11 possesses high D 3d symmetry with the third order axis passing vertically through the upper and lower atoms. Compared to available literature, our structure 8-1 looks similar to the one reported in We have identified 36 isomers with energies falling within the 1 eV range of the lowest energy structure. A considerable energy gap becomes apparent between the fifth and sixth lowest energy configurations. In Figure Structures 9-1, 9-2, and 9-4 display remarkable similarities and are very close in their energies (per atom). They have D 3h point group symmetry with the third order axis passing vertically through the centres of the two equilateral triangles formed by the three upper and three lower atoms. All three structures have different multiplicities, however. Yet again we observe geometrically almost identical structures and of practically the same energies (9-4 is only lower by 0.162 eV from 9-1), but with remarkably different electronic structures. Next, 9-3 and 9-5 look similar and have the same C 2V symmetry formed in the following way: there are four atoms at the bottom in a form of a rhombus; four atoms above them form a rectangular; the ninth atom above them is placed along the vertical second order axis that passes through the centres of both quadrilaterals. In spite of almost identical geometry, the two clusters have different multiplicities. Our best structure has a higher symmetry than reported in Refs. In this case, there are 64 isomers whose energies lie within 1 eV from the lowest energy structure, only three configurations exhibiting the lowest energies (see Fig. The clusters proposed in Refs. In the preceding sections, we presented results of zero-temperature DFT simulations based on structural searches to identify the lowest energy configurations for clusters composed of varying numbers of Mo atoms. No- tably, our analysis revealed many clusters of close energies (isomers), especially for large values of n. To shed light on the stability of different isomers at higher temperatures, we conducted the calculations of vibrational frequencies for all low-energy structures (marked blue in Fig. The vibrational frequencies of the clusters are given in the Supporting Information for the soft pseudopotential. First of all, we note that the frequencies are found real in all cases which proves that the obtained geometries reported in Figs. The calculated free energies for the temperatures of up to 400 K and soft pseudopotentials are shown in Fig. These intriguing observations highlight a subtle interplay in the structural stability of some of the clusters with temperature. The free energy calculations underscore the complex nature of cluster stability and provide valuable contributions to the understanding of Mo atom clusters' thermodynamic behaviour. The spin density distributions for clusters showing spin polarisation (some of these have multiplicity M = 1) are shown in Fig. Note that we specifically checked that most of the clusters with M = 1 do not have any spin polarisation even though all calculations, even for this multiplicity, were done with spin polarisation switched on. However, clusters 3-2, 8-7 and 10-2 do have non-zero spin density as can be seen from the Figure: regions of both positive and negative spin density s(r) occupy practically equal regions of space leading to no net spin density overall, s(r)dr = 0. In cluster 3-1 we have M = 3 corresponding to two more electrons having spin up; it is seen in the Figure that the excess of the spin-up electrons is localised on the lower two atoms, while the upper atom has excess of spin-down electrons. In 5-4 (also M = 3) the excess of the spin up density is localised mostly on the three atoms forming a vertical plane, and there is a localisation of the spin-down density that is distributed over two side atoms. In clusters 3-3, 5-2, 6-2, 7-1, 8-3, 8-4, 8-6 , 9-1, 9-5, and 10-1 two unpaired spin-up electrons are distributed over the whole cluster; only small pockets of negative spin density are seen in clusters 5-2, 7-1, 8-4, 8-6, and 10-1, these are not expected to affect appreciably the value of their magnetic moments. In clusters 8-1 and 9-4 we have 4 unpaired spin-up electrons (M = 5); their density is distributed over the whole volume of the clusters. We have also performed similar calculations with a hard pseudopotential. The results are collected in the Supporting Information. The geometries of the clusters with lowest energies (the highest binding energies) are shown in Fig. In this work we have presented a comprehensive investigation of Mo clusters with up to n =10 atoms. Using the AIRSS method Generally, the low energy clusters are found to possess some symmetry ranging from C s to T d ; note, however, that most of the clusters have low symmetry like C 2 or C s . We have also found that in many cases there are clusters of almost identical geometries and energies; however, their multiplicity is rather different and hence their electronic structure. In all cases there are at least a few clusters of almost identical energy; this is important to take into account, e.g., when interpreting experiments We have also reported spin densities of all clusters with non-zero unpaired electrons. Interestingly, in three clusters with multiplicity M = 1 the spin density is also non-zero with positive and negative regions distributed equally within the cluster space. We hope that the present study demonstrates an intriguing interplay of spin, symmetry, and electronic properties, that would be useful for researchers interested in physics of nanoparticles to uncover valuable insights into the fundamental principles governing these systems. This understanding holds promise for the development of novel materials, catalysts, and technologies that leverage the unique characteristics of nanoscale structures.