High-entropy alloys (HEAs), containing several metallic elements in near-equimolar proportions, have long been of interest for their unique mechanical properties. More recently, they have emerged as a promising platform for the development of novel heterogeneous catalysts, because of the large design space, and the synergistic effects between their components. In this work we use a machine-learning potential that can model simultaneously up to 25 transition metals to study the tendency of different elements to segregate at the surface of a HEA. We use as a starting point a potential that was previously developed using exclusively crystalline bulk phases, and show that, thanks to the physically-inspired functional form of the model, adding a much smaller number of defective configurations makes it capable of describing surface phenomena. We then present several computational studies of surface segregation, including both a simulation of a 25-element alloy, that provides a rough estimate of the relative surface propensity of the various elements, and targeted studies of CoCrFeMnNi and IrFeCoNiCu, which provide further validation of the model, and insights to guide the modeling and design of alloys for heterogeneous catalysis. Catalysts are widely used in modern industrial chemistry processes to lower the barriers and thus enhance the rates of a multitude of diverse chemical reactions. Among the many different classes of catalysts, a lot of attention has been recently devoted to high-entropy alloys (HEAs). Initially introduced by Yeh 1 and Cantor 2 for metallurgic and mechanical applications, HEAs were shown to exhibit promising catalytic The range of HEAs applications for catalysis includes decomposition of water for hydrogen production The computational study and modeling of HEAs, and in particular their catalytic properties, is a promising approach to rapidly explore the enormous composition space. However, this is a challenging endeavor: Disordered alloys typically require large unit cells to obtain a statistically representative structure, what makes the ab initio simulations of HEAs computationally expensive and time consuming. Simulations of both elemental metals and HEAs based on empirical interatomic potentials are much faster, but are usually less accurate In our previous work We demonstrate that by extending the bulk training set with a small number (less than 20%) of surface and molten structures, it is possible to arXiv:2310.07604v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 11 Jan 2024 achieve a similar level of accuracy also for these defective configurations. We trace the transferability of the model to the feature space contraction matrix, which is optimized based on the bulk structures and reduces the chemical complexity of the training problem, as well as the data requirements. We then perform a simulation of the segregation process in a Cantor-style alloy with an equimolar content of all the 25 transition metals included in the training set to evaluate the segregation propensity of different elements. Finally, we study the segregation process in two selected HEAs. The details of the reference DFT calculations and the structure of the ML model closely follow those used in a recent paper focused on bulk structures The training data on energies and interatomic forces of the structures was obtained from density functional theory (DFT) simulations performed with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) The behavior of the core electrons and their interaction with the valence electrons was described with projector-augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials For the sake of consistency between our previous work on bulk HEAs and our current work, we kept the model architecture unchanged. Here, we summarize the main ideas underlying the model, while for all the details, the reader is referred to the Ref. 53. The model is based on a combination of ridge regressions built upon a chemical composition, two-and three-body correlation features, and a fully-connected neural network (NN) based on three-body features. We use the alchemical compression method introduced in Ref. 54 to prevent the steep increase of model complexity due to the large size of the chemical space. The model connects a representation of the atomic environment A i of the atom i with its contribution to the potential energy of the system V (A i ): (1) Here, the first term V (aeb) (A i ) = w (aeb) ai correspond to an atomic baseline that depends only on the chemical identity a i of each atom. The second term corresponds to a pair potential, that is trained in the full 25 × 25-dimensional space of two-element correlations. The three-body potential instead, is based on descriptors that are contracted from the original, 25-elements chemical space (a) to a much compressed pseudo-element space (b), The coefficients u ba are collected in the alchemical coupling matrix u, that determine the compression from the full to the reduced chemical space. For consistency, we compress the chemical space to 4 pseudoelements, see Ref. 53 for a discussion of convergence. The bra-ket notation represents in a concise manner the (al)chemical dimensions, as well as the indices of the radial basis (n, n ′ ) and the angular momentum channel (l) that discretize the expansion of the neighbor-density correlations. A final NN term is designed to capture the non-linear, many-body components of the target potential: For each environment, a multi-layer perceptron F is applied to the set of compressed 3-body descriptors. Although, as discussed above, we chose to build a non-magnetic model, one can see quite easily how this framework could be modified to incorporate some recent ideas to describe spin in a ML framework. The simplest approach is to simply train the model on spinpolarized data with a fully relaxed spin subsystem. This approach provides an accurate description of a systems with a clear-cut magnetic ground state (such as the ferromagnetic bcc iron The starting point for this study is the dataset of Ref. 53, which contains approximately 25000 bulk configurations, each containing between 3 and 25 transition metals (the entire d block except for Tc, Re, Os, Cd, Hg) arranged as a regular, or randomly distorted, fcc or bcc lattice. We refer to this original dataset as "subset O". Although the resulting model was remarkably stable, and it was possible to perform molecular dynamics simulations of mixtures with 25 elements at temperatures well above the melting point, it would be unwise to use it for surface effects. To obtain a model that is capable of a reliable description of the surface segregation process in HEAs with up to 25 d -block elements, we need an extended data set, which we build iteratively by including three additional groups of structures. The first part of our extended dataset (labeled as "A") follows the same philosophy as the bulk data, but aims to capture surface energetics. We generate a few subsets of on-lattice surface slab structures based on bcc and fcc lattices and Miller indices of (100), (110) and (111). The unit cell of each structure contains 45 atoms, obtained by replicating the appropriatelyoriented primitive cell of the surface according to a 3 × 3 × 5 geometry. The atomic composition is randomly assigned by sampling from a random subset In order to increase the structural diversity, we use replica-exchange molecular dynamics with atom swaps (REMD/MC) for structure generation and FPS for selection. These simulations use a preliminary version of the surface-enabled potential trained on a combination of subset A and the original dataset O. We perform high-temperature (2000 K -4000 K) REMD/MC of 100 FPS-selected HEA bulk systems and intermediate-temperature (300K -1500 K) REMD/MC of 100 FPS-selected HEA surface slabs. From the resulting trajectories, an additional round of FPS selection yields a collection of 1000 molten bulk structures (subset B) and 1000 thermally equilibrated surface slab structures (subset C). Finally, using a preliminary potential trained on subsets O, A, B, and C, we generate a Cantorstyle alloy surface slab containing all 25 elements in roughly equimolar proportions, perform intermediatetemperature REMD/MC sampling, and select by FPS a set of 500 structures (subset D) that mimics closely the setup we use to investigate the segregation propensity of different elements. All datasets used in this paper are summarized in Table I The modeling scenario we investigate here -the extension of an existing ML model to a substantially different type of configurations -is common in practical applications to chemical and materials modeling. The simplicity and interpretability of the architecture of the HEA25-4-NN model allows us to gain some generally applicable insights into successful strategies. For this reason, as well as because of the excellent performance of HEA25-4-NN in out-of-sample, extrapolative predictions, we chose to use exactly the same model architecture, despite the fact that recent results have shown that deep-learning models have the potential of improving substantially the in-distribution accuracy for the bulk HEA dataset The extensive set of experiments in Ref. 53 shows that the HEA25-4-NN model is able to perform both low-temperature and high-temperature MD without actually being trained on MD trajectories, and it even achieves respectable accuracy when making predictions for some elements that are not represented in the training set, thanks to the interpretable form of the alchemical contraction matrix. The predictions of the HEA25-4-NN model on the new structural subsets are up to 20 times less accurate than the in-sample predictions. While this might appear a very large degradation in performance, one has to consider that these structures are entirely different from the bulk structures included in dataset O, and indeed the errors on the high-temperature bulk structures are much smaller. In Figure As the amount of training data increases, the accuracy of the model on this new data approaches the accuracy on the O subset. It is clear that the model can quickly adapt to new types of structures: adding the "ideal" surfaces from subset A improves the error by almost tenfold error not only on subset A, but also on the MD surface structures in subsets C and D; adding the bulk structures in subset B improves the accuracy on subset B, but also on the slab MD subsets C and D. The accuracy on dataset O degrades slightly initially, but the final model is only marginally worse than the one fitted exclusively on O-like structures. This indicates that, at least when including a substantial part of the original data in the new training, the model is flexible enough to incorporate new structures without substantially affecting the in-sample accuracy. We note however that learning curves exhibit a small slope which indicates that a much larger amounts of data would be needed to improve further the accuracy. Overall, this suggests a nuanced answer to our general question above. The trained model requires only a few structures to capture the gist of completely new types of configurations, and it can use the correlations from one set of structures to accelerate learning on new ones (for reference, the accuracy of the HEA25-4-NN model trained on 200 and 1000 O structures is approximately 150 and 30 meV/atom MAE 53 ). However, reaching uniform accuracy across completely different structural motifs may require almost-uniform train-set sampling. We also see that keeping fixed alchemical weights has a minimal impact on model accuracy, an observation we elaborate on in Sec. III B. From this we can conclude that all the general information about the interatomic interaction is already contained in the original dataset O, and one only needs to slightly adjust the model weights by adding a small amount of new data during training to reach semi-quantitative accuracy. The total number of structures in datasets A,B,C is less than 20% of the 24'000 bulk structures that were used in Ref. 53 to train the parent modeland the learning curves indicate that an even smaller number may suffice with a limited impact on the accuracy. The relatively small change in model accuracy when adding the dataset D (which effectively corresponds to another iteration of a rudimentary activelearning protocol) is further indication that, within the level of accuracy we seek, the alchemical model can effectively combine information on different structure types, capturing the relevant information on surface effects from the dataset A and the defect properties of high-temperature molecular dynamics from the bulk dataset B to finally transfer this combined knowledge to the molecular dynamics of surface slabs. Test MAE on energies, meV/at. Optimized weights Figure The alchemical coupling matrix u is used to contract the power spectrum features from the original chemical space of 25 elements to a reduced-size alchemical space. In Ref. 53 it was shown that the weights are relatively insensitive to the details of the fit, and that can be interpreted in terms of the layout of the elements in the periodic table . Here we can investigate further the generality of the contraction, by assessing how much it depends on the compositions of the training dataset. To study this, we start from the pre-trained HEA25-4-NN model and consider the dataset that combines the full O, A, B, C subsets, and perform two training exercises -one with fixed alchemical weights and one in which the coupling coefficients are optimizable parameters. The inset in Figure Datasets O -C consistently sample the configuration space for simulations involving both bulk and surface-slab HEA configurations. Subset D serves mainly as a demonstration of convergence with respect to structural diversity. However, given that the application focus of this work is the study of surface propensity of different transition metals, we decided to train a final model that also includes these validation structures, allowing the weights of the alchemical coupling matrix to be optimized during the training to obtain the best possible accuracy with the current architecture. We refer to this combined dataset as the HEA25S dataset, and to this final model as the HEA25S-4-NN potential. Its accuracy on the holdout test sets, computed separately for each subset, is presented as the last points of Figure In order to verify more quantitatively that the HEA25S-4-NN model can describe chemical and structural realaxation and surface effects, we generate a small set of more targeted test structures. We construct (a) five 2 × 5 × 10 fcc bulk structures of 100 atoms with 25-elements equimolar composition. Atoms are fixed to the ideal lattice positions, and the molar volume adjusted following the same logic used for the main dataset. Starting from these five structures, we use the HEA25S-4-NN model to generate: (b) bulk structures with the atomic ordering relaxed by Monte Carlo atom swaps at T = 300 K, keeping a rigid lattice; (c) fully-relaxed bulk structures using combined REMD/MC sampling, followed by geometry optimization starting from uncorrelated lowtemperature snapshots; (d) (111) slabs of the same size obtained by rigidly cleaving the random structures; (e) MC-relaxed (111) slabs ; (f) fully-relaxed (111) slabs. For each configuration, we recompute the DFT energy, and the overall energy MAE for this set is 25.7 meV/atom -with the largest errors being associated with on-lattice MC structures (see SI). We then compute quantities that have a more direct bearing on relevant physical processes: Fig. quantify the enthalpic gain from short-range order, surface segregation and/or geometry relaxation. The subscript in these expressions corresponds to a specific subset from the list above. The ML model predicts these terms with an accuracy of 50.3, 12.5, 31.7, and 18.5 meV/atom respectively, which is less than 5% of the typical relaxation energy on average. We note that the typical error on MC relaxation energies prediction is significantly higher than in the case of REMD/MC relaxation. The main reason for such a difference is lack of the MC-relaxed structures in the training set. Therefore, the evaluation of the model on MC relaxation may be considered as another test for the model's generalization capabilities. Fig. While these should not be interpreted to correspond exactly to a surface energy (averaging over multiple configurations, as well as incorporating entropic effects, would be necessary) they gauge the accuracy of the model for enthalpic terms that are directly associated with the creation of a surface. The accuracy (2.3, 14.4, 4.4 meV/ Å2 ) is a fraction of less than 10% the magnitude of the cleaving energy, except for the case of the on-lattice MC relaxed structures, that represent an extrapolative regime. In the SI we also compare relaxation and cleaving energies computed with and without spin polarization. The errors are comparable to or smaller than the errors associated with the ML model, and small on the scale of the typical relaxation or cleaving energies, indicating that neglecting magnetic effects is an acceptable -if harsh -approximation when study-ing finite-temperature and surface effects on the structure and stability of HEAs. In heterogeneous catalysis, the composition and structure of the surface are among the most important factors determining the activity of a material. In this respect, HEAs are interesting because they often exhibit differential segregation of their components at the surface We compute and analyze the concentration profiles of different elements along the normal direction to the surface plane. Fig. where N a and N B a correspond to the total number of atoms in the slab, and the number of atoms inside the bulk region of the surface slab. N and N B represent the total numbers of sites in the simulation and inside the bulk region, respectively, and S is the surface area. We define the bulk region of a surface slab as a 10 Åthick region around the center of the slab (shown as a shaded region in Fig. Figure The surface segregation study in the previous section is intended to provide insight into the overall surface propensity of transition metals commonly found in HEAs. However, it cannot substitute an explicit study of specific compositions, nor does it provide validation for our computational framework. Ideally, one could assess the reliability of our framework by directly comparing the equilibrium surface composition for specific HEA compositions with the surface distribution of elements observed in experiments. Nevertheless, there are some key concepts that need to be considered when evaluating our results. First, the model is trained on DFT data and thus the accuracy is limited by the accuracy of the DFT reference -which notably, for our model, neglects effects due to magnetism. Second, our sampling protocol allows to achieve highly ergodic sampling, whereas kinetic trapping plays a key role in (meta)stabilizing HEAs. Third, we consider the HEA surface slabs under vacuum conditions, at variance with experimental setups where a significant amount of oxygen is often present. In fact, the presence of a chemically-active environment can dramatically affect the surface concentration of different species, due to the formation of oxides on the surface (see Ref. 70) or the leaching of some of the elements in solution. In this section, we first validate the ML potential against DFT calculations for the prototypical Cantor alloy CoCrFeMnNi and comment on the suitability of "static" approaches to evaluate segregation patterns, which are commonly used in combination with first-principles calculations We begin by ensuring that the accuracy of the HEA25S-4-NN model is sufficient to reproduce the energetics of surface segregation relative to reference DFT calculations. To do so, we apply a simplified version of the protocol used in Ref. 70: we generate multiple slabs using the ideal lattice, an equimolar composition and random element distribution, and compute the difference in enthalpy when all the surface sites are filled with a specific atom type X=Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, keeping the overall composition fixed: H segr = H X,surf -H rand . This quantity is averaged over 16 different random realizations. As shown in Fig. Having access to a fully-flexible and inexpensive ML model, we can then verify whether estimates based on static calculations, and on the overly simplified picture of the formation of a pure surface monolayer on top of a random alloy, provide reliable indications of actual surface propensity. To do this, we prepare a surface slab with a fcc lattice, (111) orientation, and a larger 7 × 7 × 11 supercell containing 539 atoms. We perform a REMD/MC run of this surface slab for 200 ps in the NPT ensemble using a 2 fs timestep, following the same workflow we applied to the 25-elements Cantor alloy. As shown in the SI, the resulting REMD/MC trajectories reach equilibrium very quickly, which allows performing a single run, analyzing the surface composition by averaging over the final 100 ps of the trajectory. Even the replicas at the highest temperature retain an ordered fcc structure, consistent with the fact that the simulations are performed below the melting point. To complement this analysis, we show in the SI the values of H segr computed with spin-polarized DFT, and compare them with the mean enthalpy of structures that are relaxed with MC sampling on a rigid lattice at 300 K using the (non-polarized) HEA25S-4-NN model, and with combined REMD/MC sampling, also at 300 K. Neglecting finite-temperature sampling of short-range order and structural relaxation is an approximation that is at least as severe as neglecting effects due to magnetism. Compositional and structural relaxation stabilize greatly (up to several hundred meV/atom) the slab, in comparison to the static calculations in Ref. 70. This is also true when considering spin-polarized DFT calculations, even though the relaxation procedure neglects magnetic effects. In other terms, performing a full relaxation using a nonmagnetic ML model leads to a better prediction of surface segregation incorporating magnetism a posteriori than using spin-polarized DFT calculations limited to highly-idealized static structures. ML potentials that are capable of describing atomic spins Analyzing more carefully the surface structure for ML-driven REMD/MC calculations, we observe that the concentration profiles of the elements at 300 K (see Figure Even though obtaining a realistic description of local ordering is necessary to extract reliable estimates of thermodynamical properties, experimental conditions often require a description of kinetic effects and of the presence of a reactive environment at the surface. To investigate these effects, we consider the case of an equimolar IrFeCoNiCu HEA, for which a detailed experimental characterization of the surface composition has been recently described. The comparison of these results with the experimental data in Ref. 80, shown in the inset, requires a brief description of the experimental setup. First, the IrFeCoNiCu nanoparticles synthesized in that work were treated with a 0.1 M solution of perchloric acid (HClO 4 ) at room temperature under an applied voltage, which essentially washed away the outer shell of the nanoparticle. Scanning transmission electron microscopy with energy dispersive spectroscopy imaging reveals an iridium-rich region at the surface. As evidenced by the high concentration of all elements but iridium found in the solution, this process is driven by the reactivity of the metals in the aggressive chemical environment, rather than by an intrinsic tendency of Ir to accumulate at the surface. Our simulations suggest that in the absence of an electrochemical treatment, thermodynamic drive would favor the formation of a Cu/Ni thin layer at the surface. This suggests a broader investigation of the stability of the IrFeCoNiCu alloy, which we tackled by performing a REMD/MC simulation of a 5x5x5 bulk fcc crystal supercell (500 atoms in total), over the same temperature range (300 K -1500 K) used for the slab, and at a constant pressure of 1 bar. Our results (Fig. It would be desirable to have an alloy that is both thermodynamically stable in bulk form and that shows an intrinsic drive towards surface accumulation of Ir. While chemical treatment might still be useful to accelerate the formation of the Ir layer, such alloy would likely be easier to manufacture and more stable in practical applications. Based on the observation that the Ir-Fe-Co phase remains stable in our REMD/MC simulation and the relatively higher surface propensity of Ir over Fe and Co, we investigated the ternary IrFeCo system, which was recently patented as a promising candidate for applications in catalysis We extend a recently-developed machine-learning potential trained on the DFT energetics of arbitrarily complicated alloys of 25 d -block metals to include surfaces and defective structures, allowing us to study equilibrium surface segregation of the various components. By investigating in detail the effect of incorporating new structures and re-optimizing a pretrained model, we infer some general guidelines for the broadly-relevant goal of training models for chemically and structurally diverse problems. First, it appears that the "alchemical embeddings" we use to reduce the complexity of learning across a large sector of the periodic table are transferable between different types of structural environments. The weights that describe how individual elements are projected on a smaller-dimensional set of pseudo-elements change only minimally if we re-optimize them on the extended data set, and the impact on the model accuracy is negligible. We also observe that very few structures need to be added to improve the accuracy for a new class of configurations: whereas the bulk-only model reached saturation with approximately 10000 structures, a few 100s of surface and molten configurations are sufficient to improve the validation error by almost an order of magnitude. On the other hand, the error saturates at a semi-quantitative level of accuracy, with errors between 10-20 meV/atom that are too large to resolve the fine details of the energetics of intermetallic phases. It appears that more flexible models would be necessary to reach quantitative levels of accuracy The new model, which we name HEA25S-4-NN, is then used to thoroughly sample configurations and element distributions for a large slab of a 25-elements Cantor-style alloy. Based on the quasi-stationary state of these simulations (that never fully achieve equilibrium due to the glassy nature of the system) we compute the Gibbs surface excess of all 25 elements. This quantity, that can be interpreted as a measure of their surface propensity, shows clear periodic trends, that are consistent with the known surface stress effects that would favor the presence at the surface of atoms with a large metallic radius, and correlates very strongly with a measure of chemical similarity that was derived in Ref. 53 based exclusively on bulk short range ordering information. Thus, one can use the bulk-derived similarities as a guide for alloy design also in terms of the surface activity of the various components. We then present two examples of the application of the HEA25S-4-NN model to the study of surface segregation of equimolar quinary alloys. We perform a direct validation of the accuracy of the model against a DFT assessment of the surface segregation enthalpy of different species in CoCrFeMnNi, finding errors that are well below 10% of H segr . Furthermore, we demonstrate that the kind of static, idealized calculations that are usually employed to investigate surface propensity with explicit electronic-structure calculations can lead to qualitative errors, such as estimating a strong tendency towards surface depletion of Cr, whereas explicit REMD/MC sampling shows a tendency for Cr to accumulate in the sub-surface layer. The errors associated with treating the HEAs as random and/or rigid lattices are comparable (and usually larger) than those associated with the neglect of magnetism, which is one of the most prominent physical limitations of our ML model. At the same time, one has to acknowledge that simulations that aim to compute the equilibrium thermodynamics of a solidvacuum interface cannot directly describe more complicated experimental or in operando conditions. Our simulations of a IrFeCoNiCu suggest that the bulk alloy is only metastable, and tends to phase separate into a NiCu and an IrFeCo phases. The instability is also reflected in the strong tendency of Cu and Ni to form a surface bilayer. The accumulation of Ir at the surface of seemingly stable quinary alloy nanoparticles that has been recently observed in experiments This study demonstrates the ease by which ML potentials for chemically-diverse datasets can be extended to include new types of structures, and used to capture the qualitative behavior of complex materials in finite-temperature conditions. Even though ad hoc models trained for more restricted sets of compositions and thermodynamic conditions, and the incorporation of magnetic effects at least at the level of spin-polarized DFT, are still needed to achieve errors of a few meV/atom, the semi-quantitative accuracy we achieve is sufficient to gather insights on subtle phenomena such as surface segregation, to study in a detailed way the structure and energetics of specific alloy compositions, and to propose new alloy compositions for applications to heterogeneous catalysis. All data and code used to train the HEA25S-4-NN model, as well as the fitted parameters and code to run the simulations discussed in this work is available in the Supporting Materials or from publicly-accessible repositories.