VEvYTb5kfIbr0xSgn+19zuWw/dI=">AAACBXicdVDLSgNBEJz1GeMr6lEPg0EQhLCbBBNvQS8eI5gHJGGZne0kQ2Znl5lZNay5ePFXvHhQxKv/4M2/cfIQVLSgoajqprvLizhT2rY/rLn5hcWl5dRKenVtfWMzs7VdV2EsKdRoyEPZ9IgCzgTUNNMcmpEEEngcGt7gbOw3rkAqFopLPYygE5CeYF1GiTaSm9m7bV8zHzTjPiT+yE1u3KMRbksiehzcTNbOFWy77BSxIScFp1AwpFwq5fN57OTsCbJohqqbeW/7IY0DEJpyolTLsSPdSYjUjHIYpduxgojQAelBy1BBAlCdZPLFCB8YxcfdUJoSGk/U7xMJCZQaBp7pDIjuq9/eWPzLa8W6W+4kTESxBkGni7oxxzrE40iwzyRQzYeGECqZuRXTPpGEahNc2oTw9Sn+n9TzOec451wUs5XTWRwptIv20SFyUAlV0Dmqohqi6A49oCf0bN1bj9aL9TptnbNmMzvoB6y3T5bnmUg=</latexit> The recent discovery of superconductivity in La3Ni2O7 with Tc ≃ 80 K under high pressure opens up a new route to high-Tc superconductivity. This material realizes a bilayer square lattice model featuring a strong interlayer hybridization unlike many unconventional superconductors. A key question in this regard concerns how electronic correlations driven by the interlayer hybridization affect the low-energy electronic structure and the concomitant superconductivity. Here, we demonstrate using a cluster dynamical mean-field theory that the interlayer electronic correlations (IECs) induce a Lifshitz transition resulting in a change of Fermi surface topology. By solving an appropriate gap equation, we further show that the leading pairing instability, s±wave, is enhanced by the IECs. The underlying mechanism is the quenching of a strong ferromagnetic channel, resulting from the Lifshitz transition driven by the IECs. Based on this picture, we provide a possible reason of why superconductivity emerges only under high pressure. The recent discovery of superconductivity in bilayer nickelate La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under high pressure [Fig. In this respect, an important open question concerns how interlayer electronic correlations (IECs) driven by t x/z ⊥ modify the low-energy electronic structure and how they affect superconductivity. Since t z ⊥ is the largest among all the hopping amplitudes In this Letter, we employ a cluster (cellular) dynamical mean-field theory (CDMFT) We consider a Hamiltonian on the bilayer square lattice: Here, H 0 is a tight-binding term for the Ni-e g subspace describing the band structure for which we use the maximally localized Wannier function (MLWF) description for the DFT result of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under high pressure (29.5 GPa) The impurity problem is solved using the hybridizationexpansion continuous-time quantum Monte Carlo method Figure The IECs, however, significantly modify this picture [Fig. Ë n [eV] leading to the disappearance of the γ pocket. To further pinpoint the microscopic role of IECs, we investigate the CDMFT self-energy Σ l (iω n ) where ω n = (2n + 1)π/T is the fermionic Matsubara frequency with n being integer and l ∈ {x + , z + , x -, z -}. Without IECs, Σ x+/z+ (iω n ) = Σ x-/z-(iω n ), so IECs are manifested by a difference of the self-energies between the BA orbitals. We first find that Σ x+ (iω n ) ≃ Σ x-(iω n ) over the entire frequency range due to small t x ⊥ resulting in negligible IECs. In contrast to the x ± components, large t z ⊥ gives rise to strong IECs in the z ± components. We investigate the real part RΣ l (iω n ) which modifies the on-site energy level of the orbital l; see Fig. In a low-frequency regime (ω n ≪ 10 eV), however, RΣ z+ (iω n ) is smaller and RΣ z-(iω n ) is larger than the value at infinite frequency. This, in turn, shifts effectively the onsite energy levels of z ± upward (z -) and downward (z + ) with respect to their DFT counterparts, thereby enhancing the hybridization gap. In fact, this low-energy behavior is the origin The irreducible susceptibilities at the lowest bosonic frequency χ 0 lmlm (q, iν0) calculated using DMFT (left) and CDMFT (right) Green's functions. Q and the associated χ 0 (q, iν0) components are highlighted with colored arrows. (c) Upper panel: the spin-singlet pairing interaction Γ s z zzz (q, iν0) between top and bottom layer z orbitals in the FBZ. Lower panel: χ sp z zzz (q = 0), Γ s z zzz (q = 0), and λsc (inset) as a function of scaling factor ζ for DMFT χ 0 z + z + z + z + (q). αsp = 0.95 and J/U = 0.2 for both panels. of the shifts of spectral weight and concomitant FS change seen in Fig. Having analyzed the effects of IECs on the electronic structure, we below investigate how they affect superconductivity. In light of the reported signatures of a spin density wave (SDW) in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 at ambient pressure A phase transition to the superconducting state occurs when the corresponding pairing susceptibility diverges, which requires numerical evaluation of the pairing vertex Γ s/t for singlet (s) or triplet (t) Cooper pairs where λ sc is the eigenvalue, G(k) the (C)DMFT Green's function, and ∆(k) the gap function. k ≡ (k, iω n ) and q ≡ (q, iν n ) with k and q being the crystal momentum and ν n = 2nπ/T the bosonic Matsubara frequency. N indicates the number of k-points in the FBZ. The transition to the superconducting state is indicated by the maximum eigenvalue λ sc reaching unity. Since Γ sp/ch (U , J) are more sparse in the original e g basis than the BA basis, so are the resulting χ sp/ch and Γ s/t . We therefore discuss χ sp/ch and Γ s/t in the e g picture. We find the predominance of singlet over triplet pairings arising from antiferromagnetic (AFM) fluctuations. Figure , which is the lowest-order term of the spin susceptibility, Thus, α sp is determined entirely from U and J, provided χ 0 (q, iν 0 ) is given The most notable feature of the phase diagram presented in Fig. We first find that the γ pocket has a "Janus-faced" role: It hosts both obstructive and supportive magnetic fluctuations for the singlet pairing. This can be, in fact, traced back to the behavior of χ 0 lmlm (q, iν 0 ) by investigating the (l, m) = (z + , z + ) and (z + , z -) components of the DMFT calculation in Fig. The disappearance of the γ pocket from the FS due to IECs within CDMFT results in the suppression of both channels, especially the χ 0 z+z+z+z+ component involving solely the γ pocket [Fig. To further corroborate this argument, we analyze how the DMFT superconducting instabilities are affected by the FM fluctuation by introducing a scaling factor ζ for χ 0 z+z+z+z+ (q). Namely, χ 0 z+z+z+z+ (q) is rescaled to ζχ 0 z+z+z+z+ (q) before constructing χ sp/ch and Γ s . Indeed, as shown in the lower panel of Fig. We now turn to the question of "Why does superconductivity emerge only in the high-pressure phase?" A useful insight is obtained from a recent experiment which reports that pressure mainly shrinks the out-of-plane Ni-O bond length while the in-plane one is weakly affected ) calculated using CDMFT Green's functions for three different values of t z ⊥ (in units of eV). (b) χ sp max (q, iν0) at αsp = 0.95 and J/U = 0.2 for t z ⊥ = -0.45 eV. (c) FSs obtained from DMFT and CDMFT for the same values of t z ⊥ . We used U = 3.7, J = 0.6 eV, and U ′ = U -2J for all the cases. QSDW in (b) is highlighted with the orange arrow. To trace the origin of the difference between the two lowpressure cases and the high-pressure (t z ⊥ ≃ -0.63 eV) case, we investigate the CDMFT FSs [lower panels in Fig. We finally discuss implications of the above pressureinduced FS change for the available experimental data. Since the SDW is known to emerge in the ambient-pressure phase To conclude, we have demonstrated that IECs play a critical role in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 by inducing a Lifshitz transition. The superconducting instability is found to be enhanced by this transition due to the quenching of the FM fluctuation, which may also explain why superconductivity emerges only under high pressure. Supplemental Material for "Quenched pair breaking by interlayer correlations as a key to superconductivity in La We consider a Hamiltonian on the bilayer square lattice: Here, H 0 is a tight-binding term describing the noninteracting band structure, which reads where d † il,σ (d jm,σ ) is the electron creation (annihilation) operator for site i, j of the bilayer square lattice, spin σ ∈ {↑, ↓}, and orbital l, m ∈ {η, η} where η and η represent Ni-e g orbitals η ∈ {x 2y 2 , z 2 } in the top and bottom layers, respectively. We simply denote x 2y 2 by x and z 2 by z. {t il,jm } are the hopping amplitudes for which we use values obtained from the maximally localized Wannier function (MLWF) description of the DFT result for La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under high pressure (29.5 GPa) where We take U = 3.7, J = 0.6 eV, and U ′ = U -2J by taking ab initio estimates for the e g MLWF model To mitigate the Monte Carlo sign problem of the two-site cluster impurity, we solve the model in a bonding-antibonding (BA) basis in which the electron annhilation operator d iη±σ is defined as the symmetric (+) and antisymmetric (-) combinations of the top and bottom layer e g orbital operators: Under this basis transformation, H 0 and H int are rewritten as The transformed Coulomb interaction tensor to the BA basis, namely , has in general nonzero four-index elements. While the four-index terms cause the Monte Carlo sign problem, it is actually largely alleviated in the BA basis compared to the e g basis thanks to the orbital-diagonal hybridization function. The imaginary part of the CDMFT self-energy, IΣ l (iω n ) is presented in Fig. We have used ab initio estimate of U (U = 3.7 eV) and J (J = 0.6 eV) obtained from the constrained random phase approximation (cRPA) Using the BA basis for CDMFT calculations, the nearest-neighbor interlayer interactions can be addressed on the same footing as onsite interactions (U and J) without invoking further computational complexity. In light of this, we here consider the effects of density-density interaction V within CDMFT by introducing an additional term H V to our Hamiltonian. H V reads We use the cRPA estimate of V : V = 0.5 eV Since La 3 Ni 2 O 7 realizes a multiorbital system, it would be informative to investigate how Hund's coupling J affects the lowenergy physics. Figure FIG. In this paper, we have addressed the (C)DMFT results to the ab initio lattice model derived from DFT as defined in Sec. SM1. We here argue that charge self-consistency in the spirit of DFT+(C)DMFT may not affect the findings of our paper. To mimic the charge self-consistency in the low-energy lattice model H = H 0 + H int , we here resort to a strategy by noting that a redistribution of electrons by (C)DMFT modifies a charge-density profile ρ(r) and the resulting local electron occupation, from which the subsequent DFT would result in new on-site energy levels of x and z orbitals for the kinetic part H 0 . In short, we iterate (C)DMFT calculations for the updated H 0 , which we call H0 in which the on-site energy levels (ε x/z ) are adjusted such that the noninteracting electron occupation (⟨n x/z ⟩ 0 ) is equal to the self-consistently determined (C)DMFT occupation (⟨n x/z ⟩ (C)DMFT ) of the previous iteration; see Fig. To model lower pressure cases, we look at a recent experimental study on the evolution of Ni-O bond length as a function of pressure (a) DMFT CDMFT α β γ t z ⊥ = -0.45 DMFT CDMFT (d) ⊥ | increases (or, equivalently as the applied pressure increases). In CDMFT, FS is also basically the same as the noninteracting FS for the lowest pressure case in which t z ⊥ = -0.45 eV. Interestingly, however, as |t z ⊥ | increases, the β pocket becomes more diamond-shaped in CDMFT. The shape change of the β FS pocket in CDMFT is traced back to the upward energy shift of the spectral weight near the X point of the Brillouin zone in the CDMFT spectral function compared to the DMFT as highlighted with white arrows in Fig. where ω is real frequency, k the crystal momentum, μ a chemical potential. A bold capital letter represents a 4 × 4 matrix in the space of BA orbital l (l ∈ {x + , z + , x -, z -}). I is the identity matrix. H 0 (k) is a one-particle Hamiltonian derived from DFT, and Σ(ω) a self-energy calculated by DMFT or CDMFT. We are interested in how the poles of G(k, ω) are shifted by electronic correlations, so it is useful to investigate the quasiparticle energies which are the solutions ω(k) of Near the Fermi level (ω = 0), RΣ(ω) can be expanded to the linear order in ω: where is the inverse of the quasiparticle weight Z. In practice, we evaluate Z using IΣ(iω n ) defined in the Matsubara frequency space ω n by employing the fourth-order polynomial fitting By plugging Eq. (S9) in Eq. ( One can identify a Hermitian matrix √ Z{H 0 (k) -μI + RΣ(iω 0 )} √ Z as the quasiparticle Hamiltonian whose eigenvalues at each k correspond to the quasiparticle energies. A useful insight can be obtained from the change of basis of Eq. (S11) to the "band basis" by which H 0 (k) becomes diagonal: where bold capital letters with hat represent 4 × 4 matrices in the band basis. Ĥ0 (k) is the diagonal matrix whose elements e n (k) (n: band index) are the band energies. We find that off-diagonal elements of √Z and R Σ(iω 0 ) are much smaller than the diagonal elements. Thus the band energy e n (k) approximately turns into a quasiparticle energy ên (k): where √Z nn and R Σ(iω 0 ) nn are the n-th diagonal elements, respectively, of √Z and R Σ(iω 0 ). Equation (S13) allows us to trace how e n (k) is shifted in energy due to electronic correlations. Evaluating Eq. (S13) at k = X for the β pocket (n = β) yields the approximate quasiparticle energy êβ (X) which reads where √ Z l and RΣ l (iω 0 ) are the diagonal elements corresponding to the orbital l of √ Z and RΣ(iω 0 ), respectively. |c l | 2 is the weight of the Wannier function We find that c x+ = c z+ = 0 in this case. Furthermore, near the X point of the β pocket x -and z -orbitals have almost equal weight as highlighted with dotted black ovals in Fig. Figure The γ pocket is absent in the available ARPES data The β Fermi surface pocket is also modified by the interlayer electronic correlations (IECs) in CDMFT as discussed in the previous section. This change is beneficial for the nesting of the irreducible susceptibility χ 0 x-x-x-x-(q, iν 0 ) as shown in Fig. In Fig. x-x-x-x-(q, iν 0 ) and ii) a better-nesting for the nesting vectors connecting the two dotted white ovals facing each other along the zone diagonal direction; see, e.g., Q DMFT and Q CDMFT , as can be confirmed from Fig. xxxx -(q, iν0) are highlighted with colored arrows. To obtain the effective singlet and triplet pairing interactions, we begin with the spin and charge irreducible vertices in the particle-hole channel, which read is displayed in Fig. FIG. using these vertices from the Bethe-Salpeter equation: where Here indices repeated twice should be summed over. We below keep this summation convention. By employing the parquet equations, one can formally express the singlet (s) and triplet (t) pairing interactions using Γ sp/ch and χ sp/ch as [S36, S37] Using the symmetry relations of singlet and triplet gap functions C. Solving the gap equation using the intermediate representation basis We solve the gap equation [Eq. ( -1 data (1 is unity matrix in orbital space and μ the chemical potential) on its full and equidistantly sampled frequency mesh (N ωn = 1846 for ω n > 0) to the IR basis functions U l from the expansion via least-square fitting. We set the truncation error to δ IR = 10 -5 to not overfit the statistical noise from the quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations. This corresponds to using N IR = l max -1 = 31 basis coefficients. Note, that we here use the notation ab instead of lm for orbital indices {x, z, x, z} in the e g basis to prevent confusion with the IR basis index l. We set the basis size from analyzing the decay of the local (C)DMFT Green's function expansion coefficients G loc l [Fig. Throughout the paper, we discuss the superconducting phase diagram in terms of the Stoner enhancement factor α sp . It is a proxy for the system's tendency towards a magnetic instability that we obtain from analyzing where the spin susceptibility χ sp [Eq. (S23)] diverges, i.e., where the denominator becomes zero. This is true, if the largest eigenvalue α sp = max q {Γ sp χ 0 (q)} reaches unity. Here, we comment further on the Stoner enhancement of the (C)DMFT calculations. For a given χ 0 (q), α sp is a a function of the effective Hund's coupling J and the effective intraorbital Coulomb interaction U . By fixing the value of J/U , the ratio α sp /U is uniquely determined, as we show in Fig. For completeness, we mention that an identical analysis of possible charge instabilities can be made. Here, the charge Stoner enhancement α ch = max q {-Γ ch χ 0 (q)} needs to be analyzed [Fig. While the γ pocket gives rise to strong ferromagnetic fluctuations, the actual magnetic transition occurs at a finite transfer momentum as shown in Fig. Importantly, the aforementioned peak of χ sp max (q, iν 0 ) at q = Q SDW in the low-pressure phase is not driven by the γ pocket, but by the α-β nesting. To see this, we present in Fig. To further corroborate this argument, we analyze how the DMFT superconducting instabilities are affected by the FM fluctuation by introducing a scaling factor ζ for χ 0 z+z+z+z+ (q). Namely, χ 0 z+z+z+z+ (q) is rescaled to ζχ 0 z+z+z+z+ (q) before constructing χ sp/ch and Γ s , and then we monitor how λ sc behaves due to this change. Interestingly, indeed, λ sc increases with decreasing ζ for all the J/U values we investigated. Looking into the related spin susceptibilities, the components involving solely z or z characters are found to be most affected by the rescaled χ 0 z+z+z+z+ (q) as expected. In effect, as presented in Fig. * sryee@physnet.uni-hamburg.de arXiv:2310.17465v5 [cond-mat.supr-con] 30 Aug 2024 k G l1l3 (k + q)G l4l2 (k) and 1 is identity matrix in orbital space. We finally arrive at the gap equation presented in the main textλ sc ∆ l1l2 (k) = -T 2N k ′ ,l3l4l5l6 Γ s/t l1l4l3l2 (kk ′ )G l4l5 (k ′ )G l3l6 (-k ′ )∆ l5l6 (k ′ ). (S24) 