Magnetic monopoles, despite their ongoing experimental search as elementary particles, have inspired the discovery of analogous excitations in condensed matter systems. In chiral condensed matter systems, emergent monopoles are responsible for the onset of transitions between topologically distinct states and phases, like in the case of transitions from helical and conical phase to A-phase comprising periodic arrays of skyrmions. By combining numerical modeling and optical characterizations, we describe how different geometrical configurations of skyrmions terminating at monopoles can be realized in liquid crystals and liquid crystal ferromagnets. We demonstrate how such complex structures can be effectively manipulated by external magnetic and electric fields. Furthermore, we discuss how our findings may hint at similar dynamics in other physical systems, and their potential applications. Magnetic monopoles, hypothetical elementary particles, which are the point sources of magnetic fields, are the holy grail of particle physics. Despite promising restoration of duality symmetry in the electromagnetic theory and various theoretical predictions, the experimental discovery of magnetic monopoles has remained elusive In this article, using externally applied magnetic and electric fields, we demonstrate the dynamical control of π ! (S ! ) skyrmions and the accompanying π ! (S ! ) topological defects, monopoles in the emergent field. We show that, much like the skyrmion A-phase, periodic lattices of skyrmions can also form in LCs when embedded within either a uniform or a helical background. Moreover, we find that skyrmions and monopoles can be effectively controlled by external fields while the motions of the monopoles are directly observed with an optical microscope with which observations benefit particularly from in-plane configurations of skyrmions. Furthermore, we demonstrate that in a chiral LC material, the vertical skyrmion terminating at monopoles (the socalled torons) can be hosted in a helical or uniform field background with controllable inter-soliton interaction, modulated by the applied voltage. While the analogy of our skyrmions and monopoles to their high-energy-physics counterparts like Dirac monopoles π ! (S ! ) point defects are monopoles in emergent field that embed π ! (S ! ) skyrmions in topologically trivial backgrounds Ubiquitously observed in the order-parameter field n(r) of condensed matter systems, a hedgehog point defect and a hyperbolic point defect are both topological point defects classified by the π ! (S ! ) homotopy group and have a topological charge of unity (Fig. The emergent field B "# derived from n(r) of a toron shows the corresponding two defects in B "# are a pair of a monopole and an anti-monopole, acting as the source and sink of the emergent field (Fig. In chiral materials such as chiral LCs and chiral magnets, skyrmions are often recognized as axisymmetric whirling configurations that smoothly transition into a uniform far-field n . . Such uniform-far-field skyrmions can be approximated analytically by the hedgehog ansatz n(r) = (sinf(r)cos(θ + γ), sinf(r)sin(θ + γ), cosf(r)) , where f(r) is a monotonic function with f(0) = π and f(∞) = 0, θ is the polar angle of the 2D spatial coordinate r, and γ = π/2 for right-handed chiral material. The corresponding B "# (or equivalently, skyrmion number density) derived from the ansatz also possesses the axial symmetry (Fig. The richness in geometrical configurations of skyrmions expands the confinement and alignment conditions that can host the solitons and associated monopoles. In particular, torons and skyrmions can also emerge in cells with planar alignment, where their stability could be established by frustration induced by cholesteric compression/dilation or by coupling to externally applied electric and magnetic fields. Computer simulations based on Frank-Oseen free-energy minimization show skyrmions stabilized both in a uniform-field background and in a helical-field background, respectively (Fig. To observe in-plane skyrmions experimentally, we confined chiral LCs between substrates with planar anchoring in LC cells with a thickness-to-pitch ratio of d/p = 1. Under such conditions, the uniformly helical (cholesteric) state with far-field helical axis χ . perpendicular to the substrates is the global ground state and no stable skyrmions or monopoles are observed. Upon heating and quenching from the isotropic state to the cholesteric state, dark fragments of stripelike patterns seen under a polarizing optical microscope (POM) between crossed polarizers can be stabilized when a voltage across the substrates of U ≈ 1.4 V is applied to the LC with positive dielectric anisotropy (Fig. Besides spontaneous emergence after quenching, in-plane skyrmions can also nucleate from sample edges or be controllably generated by local melting and reorienting of LCs using laser tweezers when an electric field is applied (Methods). As the skyrmions increase in number and fill the sample, they form a 1D lattice in the direction perpendicular to the direction of planar alignment (Fig. In-plane skyrmions can also be realized in a uniform-field background (Figs. For a confined chiral LC with planar anchoring and d/p ≈ 1, an in-plane electric field ~1 V/μm unwinds the helical n(r) configuration and makes the uniform state n . ∥ E the ground state. Uniform-background in-plane skyrmions and monopoles can thus be created spontaneously through quenching or controllably by laser tweezers. Compared to the case of helical-background skyrmions, the stabilization of uniform-background skyrmions with an electric field requires high voltages (at least ~ 1000 V) because of the large lateral dimensions compared to the thickness in our LC samples. However, more sophisticated sample geometry such as those with patterned electrodes that reduce the gap size should alleviate the need for high voltages. Stabilization of in-plane skyrmions by an electric field E is enabled by the balance between elastic energy and dielectric coupling energy, where dielectric coupling energetically favors n(r) ∥ E in a material with positive dielectric anisotropy. In the case of helical-background skyrmions, E ∥ ẑ promotes vertical n(r) orientations and the expansion of skyrmions, which counters the shrinking tendency due to mismatch between twist deformation in the skyrmion and molecular pitch p. Beyond simply stabilizing n(r) configurations, modulation of E can also be used to control the dynamics of monopoles on which the skyrmions terminate. Here we focus on in-plane helical-background skyrmions because of their ease of manipulation and observation, though the same field-controlled dynamics can be straightforwardly applied to other geometrical configurations. For a pair of a monopole and an anti-monopole at the ends of a skyrmion fragment, we define the separation velocity as the rate in the change of their distance of separation. Away from the equilibrium voltage at U < 1.4 V, the dielectric coupling is not strong enough to compensate for the cost in elastic energy in the skyrmion, and the skyrmion shrinks (Fig. Whereas at U > 1.4 V, it becomes favorable in the overall free energy for the skyrmion to grow and acquire larger regions of vertical orientations in the system (Fig. The dynamics and stability of skyrmions and monopoles can also be controlled by magnetic fields in chiral LC ferromagnets where magnetically monodomain nanoplates are uniformly dispersed at high concentrations in the hosting chiral LC Thus far, we have focused on in-plane skyrmions and monopoles because of their accessibility for manipulation and observation. However, vertical skyrmions along the normal of substrates and terminating at monopoles in a cell with homeotropic boundary conditions, also known as torons, also display manipulable interaction and assembly modulated by an electric field. In a homeotropic cell, when the confined chiral LC has an elastic anisotropy such that K (( /K !! ≤ 1, i.e., the energetic penalty of bend deformation is smaller than that of twist deformation, the background n(r) can be switched between the helical state and the uniform state by an electric field. For a material with positive dielectric anisotropy, the background is helical at no field and can be unwound to the uniform state when an electric field is applied In this work, we have presented the magnetic and electric control of the equilibrium configuration of π ! (S ! ) topological configurations, namely skyrmions and monopoles (with their composite structures referred to as torons), and their dynamics in chiral LC materials. We found that π ! (S ! ) point defects at the termini of skyrmions are indeed monopoles in the emergent magnetic field. We further demonstrated that LC skyrmions can take on versatile geometrical configurations under different boundary conditions and applied fields. Notably, in-plane skyrmions in planar-confined cells offer exceptional accessibility for observation and manipulation by external fields. Compared to vertical skyrmions in a homeotropically aligned cell (torons), in-plane skyrmions offer the opportunity of controlling the separation of monopoles in the lateral dimensions, whereas the separation between the monopoles in vertical skyrmions is limited due to confinement by the substrates, though their lateral spatial extent can be controlled by fields The linear coupling enabled by magnetic fields, distinct from the quadratic nature of dielectric coupling to electric fields, could also potentially allow for orientational control of solitons and monopoles. Additionally, we showed that the pair-wise interaction between vertical skyrmions can be switched between attractive and repulsive, by altering the background configuration that embeds them through applying electric fields. We expect that similar switching can be achieved as well in LC ferromagnets using magnetic fields, where the far-field m(r) can be polarized by H applied to the sample. Crossover between different pair-wise interactions of LC skyrmions has been observed between vertical and in-pane skyrmions in homeotropically aligned cells, albeit it was done differently through changing the dimension of the confined LC or anchoring On the application side, the high degree of distortion in the alignment field around the monopole and the central isotropic core are elastic energy traps for micro-or nanoparticles Thus, potential technological applications could arise from dynamical control of skyrmions and monopoles, such as electro/magneto-optic devices, microfluidic devices, optical logic devices, etc. The widespread electro-optic applications of LCs typically rely on switching between topologically trivial states that are homeomorphic one to another, but our findings point to the possibility of realizing controlled conditions for achieving novel electro-optic effects either by morphing topologically nontrivial configurations or even by changing topology, for example, through the monopole-mediated skyrmion nucleation and reconfiguration. Lastly, the study of dynamics and control of LC skyrmions and monopoles could shed light on the physics of topologically equivalent solitonic structures in other ordered systems, such as in the solid-state magnetic Chiral LC mixtures used in this work comprise 4-Cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl (5CB, from EM Chemicals) added with the right-handed chiral dopant CB-15 (EM Chemicals). The helical pitch p of the mixture was measured in a wedge cell and ranged from 2.33 to 60 μm LC cells were assembled from substrates of glass slides or coverslips coated with indium tin oxide (ITO) and treated with polyimide PI2555 and SE5661 (both from Nissan Chemicals) for planar and homeotropic boundary conditions (anchoring) for LC director, respectively. The treatment involves spin-coating polyimide onto ITO glasses, followed by baking at 180°C for 1h. PI2555-coated glass slides or coverslips were additionally rubbed to impose unidirectional planar anchoring. Silica microbeads or microcylinders were used as spacers to assemble treated ITO glasses into cells with well-defined thicknesses ranging from 7 to 60 μm by UV-activated glue. Finally, metal wires were soldered to ITO glasses as electrodes. For LC cells where an in-plane electric field parallel to the confining substrates was applied, glasses without ITO coating were polyimide-treated and used as confining substates of LCs, and a pair of ITO glasses with a gap of ~3 mm were assembled perpendicular to the substrates and soldered with wires. LC mixtures were introduced into cells via capillary force. Electric control of LCs was achieved by connecting the electrodes of LC cells to a function generator (DS345; Stanford Research Systems) operating at a1 kHz carrier frequency to preclude complex hydrodynamic effects. To achieve an ~1 V/μm electric field in the in-plane direction, a high-voltage amplifier (Model 10/10B, Trek) was used to raise the voltage to ~3000 V. Magnetic control of LC ferromagnets was achieved by permanent neodymium magnets (K&J Magnetics) or a previously reported home-built electromagnet system containing solenoids with machined castiron cores driven by power supplies (BOP20-5M, Kepco) Skyrmions and monopoles were controllably generated by laser tweezers that locally melt and align LC directors. The tweezers setup is based on an ytterbium-doped fiber laser (YLR-10-1064, IPG Photonics) and a phase-only spatial light modulator (P512-1064, Boulder Nonlinear Systems) integrated with an inverted optical microscope (IX81, Olympus) Bright-field microscopy and polarizing optical microscopy were performed using an Olympus IX-81 inverted microscope and a charge-coupled device camera (Flea-COL, from PointGrey Research) Nonlinear optical imaging via three-photon excitation fluorescence polarizing microscopy (3PEF-PM) was performed using a previously reported setup to unambiguously characterize 3D n(r) configurations in LCs Barium hexaferrite BaFe11CrO19 ferromagnetic nanoplates were synthesized by the hydrothermal method described in To obtain LC ferromagnets, 15 μL of LC mixtures were mixed with 15 μL of ethanol and 15 μL of 1 wt% magnetic nanoplates dispersed in ethanol. The mixture was kept at 90°C for 3 h for the ethanol to fully evaporate before being cooled rapidly to nematic phase while vigorously disturbed to reduce formation of aggregates at domain boundaries. The ensuing mixture was then centrifuged at 2,200 rpm for 5 min to remove any residual aggregates. To achieve monodomain LC ferromagnets, an unwinding electric field (~0.5 V/μm) and a colinear magnetic field perpendicular to the substrates (~15 mT) were applied while filling the LC cell Numerical modeling of configurations and energetics of skyrmions and monopoles was based on energy minimization of Frank-Oseen free energy that describes energetic penalties of different elastic deformations modes in n(r) , supplemented by dielectric and magnetic (for LC ferromagnets) coupling terms In the dielectric coupling term, ε . is vacuum permittivity, ε 3 is the dielectric anisotropy of the LC and E is the applied electric field. In a chiral LC ferromagnet, the magnetization unit vector field Here, μ . is vacuum permeability and |M(r)| = ρm ; is the magnetization of the material (approximated to be uniform) as the product of the nanoplate density ρ (10 /μm 3 ) and the average magnetic moment of a nanoplate m ; (1 × 10 0'1 Am 2 ), both adopted from experiments The free energy was iteratively minimized using an energy-minimization routine with finite difference discretization in space and forward Euler method in time implemented in MATLAB Material parameters in simulations were chosen to match those of 5CB (Table 