Size plays an important role on the deformation mechanism of nanopillars. With decreasing size, many FCC nanopillars exhibit dislocation starvation state which is responsible for their high strength. However, many details about the dislocation starvation mechanism like how often it occurs, and how much is its contribution to the total plastic strain, are still elusive. Similarly, the size below which the dislocation starvation occurs in the nanopillars is not clearly established. In this context, the atomistic simulations have been performed on the compressive deformation of <110> Cu nanopillars with size (d) ranging from 5 to 21.5 nm. The molecular dynamics (MD) simulation results indicate that the nanopillars deform by the slip of extended dislocations and exhibit dislocation starvation mainly at small sizes ( < 20 nm). The frequency of the occurrence of dislocation starvation is highest in small size nanowires and it decreases with increasing size. Above the nanopillar size of 20 nm, no dislocation starvation has been observed. Further, we define the dislocation starvation strain and based on this, it has been shown that, the contribution of dislocation starvation state to the total plastic strain decreases from 70% in small size nanopillars to below 5% in large size pillars. The present results suggest that the dislocation starvation is a dominant phenomena in small size nanopillars. It is well known that the mechanical properties and associated plastic deformation behaviour of crystalline materials is mainly governed by the movement of partial or full dislocations and depends mainly on temperature and strain rate. In bulk materials, the yield stress and the plastic deformation mechanisms were independent of size. However, when the sample size is reduced to nanoscale, the mechanical properties along with plastic deformation mechanisms exhibit strong size dependence Investigating the dislocation starvation related mechanism using conventional experimental methods is quite tedious and requires sophisticated instruments. In this context, computational methods based on molecular dynamics (MD) and dislocation dynamics (DD) simulations are adopted to understand the dislocation related behaviours in nanopillars All MD simulations have been carried out in Large scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) package The compressive stress-strain behaviour of <110> oriented Cu nanopillars with crosssection width (d) ranging from 5 -21.5 nm is presented in Figure In order to reveal the deformation mechanisms, the evolution of atomic configurations at various stages of deformation were analyzed for all the nanopillars. It has been observed that the deformation is dominated by the slip of extended dislocations and no twinning was noticed. Figure MD simulations on nanopillars with other sizes, i.e., d = 5, 7.5, 10 and 16 nm indicated that the yielding and the subsequent plastic deformation is dominated by the slip of extended dislocations. However, few important differences were observed during the plastic deformation of nanopillars with smaller sizes. Since the probability of dislocation interactions within the nanopillar decreases with decreasing size, the dislocations gliding on the slip plane easily escape to surface and leads to easy dislocation starvation in small size nanopillars. Figures In order to find the frequency of occurrence of dislocation starvation and also its contribution to plastic strain, the number of stacking fault atoms were measured as a function of strain for all the nanopillars. Since the deformation is dominated by the extended dislocations (partial dislocations separated by stacking faults), the absence of stacking fault atoms and/or zero change in the stacking fault atoms over a period of strain indicates dislocation starvation in the nanopillar (Figure In order to characterize the contribution of dislocation starvation to the plastic strain or in turn plastic deformation, the aggregate strain over which the dislocation starvation occurs during the plastic deformation is measured for all the nanopillar sizes. This is obtained by combining the strain duration corresponding to the each arrow mark shown in Figure The present results indicate that the <110> Cu nanopillars which deform by an extended dislocation slip exhibit an extensive dislocation starvation mechanism especially in small size pillars with d < 20 nm. In this context, it is interesting to understand the possibilty of dislocation starvation when the nanopillar deforms by twinning mechanism. Since <110> oriented FCC nanopillars are expected to deform by twinning under tensile loading Since the dislocation starvation is mainly due to the easy escape of dislocations to the surface, it is interesting to understand how the temperature, strain rate and stacking fault energy (SFE) influences the dislocation starvation mechanism in nanopillars. In nanoscale materials with high SFE, a pronounced dislocation starvation is reported Atomistic simulations have been performed to understand the size effects on the dislocation starvation mechanism in Cu nanopillars under compressive loading. Based on this study, the following conclusions have been drawn: (1) The <110> Cu nanopillars with size (d) ranging from 5 to 21.5 nm deform by the slip of an extended dislocations and exhibit dislocation starvation mainly in small size nanopillars with d < 20 nm. (2) The frequency of the occurrence of dislocation starvation state is highest in small size nanopillar with d = 5 nm and it decreases with increasing nanopillar size. Above 20 nm size, no incident of dislocation starvation has been observed. (3) The dislocation starvation strain has been defined in this study and based on this, the contribution of dislocation starvation to the total plastic strain or plastic deformation is characterized. The contribution of dislocation starvation state to the total plastic strain is measured in terms of the ratio of dislocation starvation strain to that of the plastic strain. This ratio decreases from 0.7 to 0.05 when the size is varied from 5 nm to 21.5 nm. This indicates that for nanopillar with d = 5 nm, over 70% of the duration of the plastic deformation is spent in dislocation starvation state. This duration of dislocation starvation state decreases with increasing size and reduces to below 5% for the nanopillar with d = 21.5 nm. (4) The variation of yield stress (y s ) as a function of nanopillar size (d) obeys the power law relation y s = md -k , with m = 24.5 and exponent (k) = 0.50. (5) The dislocation starvation is not observed even in small size nanopillars when the deformation is dominated by twinning mechanism. This suggest that the dislocation starvation is a dominant phenomena when the deformation is dominated by the slip of partial/extended dislocations. The authors report that there are no competing interests to declare.