Two-dimensional (2D) materials have drawn immense interests in scientific and technological communities, owing to their extraordinary properties that are profoundly altered from their bulk counterparts and their enriched tunability by gating, proximity, strain and external fields. For digital applications, an ideal 2D material would have high mobility, air stability, sizable band gap, and be compatible with large scale synthesis. Here we demonstrate air stable field effect transistors using atomically thin few-layer PdSe2 sheets that are sandwiched between hexagonal BN (hBN), with record high saturation current >350 μA/μm, and field effect mobilities 700 and 10,000 cm 2 /Vs at 300K and 2K, respectively. At low temperatures, magnetotransport studies reveal unique octets in quantum oscillations, arising from 2-fold spin and 4-fold valley degeneracies, which can be broken by in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic fields toward quantum Hall spin and orbital ferromagnetism. Recently, a class of 2D materials with puckered pentagonal lattice structures Despite the increasing interest in NMDCs in the past few years, transport measurements so far are performed only under high bias and at room temperature, with little optimization with regard to contact resistance or systematic investigation of device behavior. Here we report transport studies of atomically thin PdSe2 field effect transistors that are stable in ambient conditions for > 1 month, record high saturation current among atomically thin semiconductors, as well as record high field effect mobility. This ultra-high mobility enabled the first experimental observation of Shubnikovde Hass oscillation and the quantum hall effect in this pentagonal 2D material. Interestingly, the Landau fan reveals an 8-fold degeneracy, arising from 2-fold spin and 4-fold valley degeneracies Each unit cell of PdSe2 consists of two inversion-symmetric planes of d 8 Pd 2+ ions bonded in a square-planar-like coordination with diselenide dianions (Fig. To fabricate air stable, high performance field effect transistor devices, we take advantage of hexagonal BN (hBN) layers, which have been shown to provide protection for air-sensitive materials such as phosphorene We now focus exclusively on hBN-sandwiched PdSe2 devices. Fig. To examine the dominant scattering mechanism, we plot the average field effect mobility between 4.5 and 6.5x 10 12 cm -2 as a function of temperature T for two separate devices. As shown by Fig. We now turn to the magneto-transport measurements at the cryogenic temperatures. Here we focus on a sample that is ~3.5 nm thick or ~7 layers. Fig. The effective mass of the charge carriers is extracted by evaluating the amplitude of the SdH oscillations with temperature. Fig. , k is the Boltzman constant, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, and T is the temperature, we obtain an effective mass m*=0.29m / , here m / is the bare electron mass in vacuum. This result is in excellent agreement with previous theoretical calculations At higher fields, degeneracy of the quantum Hall octets is partially lifted. Major resistance valleys occur at filling factors n=8N, where N=1, 2, 3... is an integer denoting the Landau level (LL) index; between the major valleys, minor resistance dips are visible at n=4Nodd, where Nodd= 1, 3, 5... is an odd integer. To gain insight into the nature of this quantum Hall ferromagnetism, we perform measurements in tilted magnetic fields, since the valley (orbital) degrees of freedom depends only on the perpendicular component of B, whereas the spin couples to the total magnetic field Bt. Fig. These data enable us to determine the schematic of LL resolution. At low field, the 8-fold degenerate LLs are separated by cyclotron gaps Ec=ħω 1 (N + 2 ) ), where ω 1 = /0 # - * is the cyclotron frequency. Increasing B^ first lifts the spin degeneracy, giving rise to Zeeman-split LLs with energy difference EZ=gμBBt, where μB is the Bohr magneton and g the effective electron g-factor including the Coulomb interaction correction. In titled field measurements, increasing B|| further enhances the Zeeman splitting, giving rise to LL crossing at large B|| (Fig. respectively, using m*=0.29me obtained earlier. This enhancement from the bare value of g=2 in a nearly spin-orbit-coupling-free system substantiates the presence of electron-electron interaction effect and the resulting quantum Hall spin ferromagnetism. Finally, we perform measurements at even higher B^ fields up to 29T and observe that the 4-fold valley degeneracy is broken (Fig In conclusion, we demonstrate that few-layer pentagonal PdSe2, when sandwiched between hBN layers, is an excellent 2D semiconductor, boasting air stability, record high saturation current, exceedingly high field effect mobility, and quantum Hall octets and ferromagnetism in magnetic fields. Our work paves the way for future electronic, photonic, and topological applications of this pentagonal material. V tg (V)