Purple membranes from the archaeon Halobacterium salinarum consist of two-dimensional crystals of the light-driven proton pump bacteriorhodopsin, which convert photons into a proton gradient across the cell membrane. This functional feature and the structural rigidity make them appealing candidates for integration into biomimetic devices. To this end, and in order to carry out their function, purple membranes must be positioned in the correct orientation at the position of interest. Precise placement and control over the orientation of nanoscale objects still constitutes a formidable challenge. Here we show that isolated purple membrane patches can be transported and positioned at predefined locations in nanofluidic confinement, with control over their orientation at the target sites. The transport is achieved through a rocking Brownian motor scheme, while the controlled deposition of the membranes is realized by engineering the surface potential of a fluid-filled nanofluidic slit. This controlled manipulation of purple membrane patches outlines a new pathway towards the integration of biological or other delicate supramolecular structures into top-down-fabricated patterns, for the assembly of nanoscale hybrid devices that serve as a light-driven source of (chemical) energy. A component that converts radiant energy into chemical energy is a desirable building block for nanoscale devices. Given the inherent asymmetry in their functionality, an integration of the PMs in any kind of device necessitates control over their orientation. Surface adsorption of PMs with a preferential orientation has been previously demonstrated by engineering the substrate surface charge Today, it is still a challenge to manipulate and integrate delicate biological building blocks into artificial devices without damage. To address this issue, a range of trapping methods have been developed over the years to control and study biological objects in a state comparable to their free state (i.e., without surface tethering). The most common methods are based on polarizability-dependent external fields (e.g., optical tweezers) that suffer from an unfavorable scaling of trap depth with the volume of the particle, with a limited range of applicability for small biomolecules. It has been shown where y is the electrostatic potential and n0 is the number density of molecules at the surface, kB is Boltzmann's constant and T the temperature of the system. In the case of flat surfaces, the resulting 1D electrostatic potential, obtained by solving the Poisson-Boltzmann equation for y(zp), can be approximated by the linearized expression y(zp) = ys exp(-k zp) Here k -1 is the Debye length, typically 10-50 nm, that is proportional to 1/√c , where c is the salt concentration in the solution. ys is an effective surface potential, related to the surface charge via the pH of the aqueous solution, as modeled by Behrens and Grier. The nanofluidic apparatus is also capable of transporting objects to the desired trapping sites by so-called "Rocking Brownian Ratchets". These entail a combination of asymmetric electrostatic potentials and a net-zero oscillating force, externally applied, which create a flowfree transport of nano-objects in the slit. Membrane trapping. We used the nanofluidic confinement apparatus described earlier Membranes were dispersed in ultrapure water at a concentration of 0.1 -0.2 mg ml -1 without any further addition of salts or buffer. For the trapping experiments, 25 μl of membrane solution were placed on the patterned substrate already positioned in the nanofluidic setup. Then, the cover slide containing the glass pillar and the electrodes was lowered into contact with the drop, creating a slit of controlled gap height. Despite of their thickness of only about 5 -6 nm, the PM patches produced a contrast in ISCAT which allowed us to image the PMs in the nanofluidic gap and track their position. As expected given their smaller scattering cross-section, the contrast of the ISCAT images was less pronounced than that observed for 60 nm gold nanoparticles (NPs). The fact that the membranes can be both trapped and directed by an electroosmotic flow indicates that they might be prone to directional transport in an asymmetric ratchet potential. Thus, we tested their behavior in a rocking Brownian motor. We prepared ratchet patterns in PPA using t-SPL (scheme Figure PMs that are confined in the circular holes of the trap arrays can be permanently deposited by decreasing the nanofluidic gap to near contact (2h ~k-1 ). In this configuration, the membranes approach the trap surface enough for Van der Waals forces to overcome electrostatic repulsion and hydration layer forces. To control the orientation of the membranes prior to their deposition on the substrate, we engineered the surface potential at the top and bottom of the trapping sites independently, thus energetically favoring one or the other membrane orientation. To this end, we prepared two kinds of trapping substrates, one with all interfaces made of SiO2 (Type A) (Figure In addition to unmodified 'wild type' PMs, we applied PMs with a deca histidine (His10)tag attached to the bR protein to determine and control membrane orientation. Previous studies of PM orientation relied on membrane features visible in high-resolution electron microscopy, For marking the His-tag, we used fluorescently labelled antibodies specific to the Histag, which were applied after the deposition of the membranes. Only when PM patches were presenting their His-tag on top, the His-tag could be recognized by the antibody and the membranes showed fluorescence (schemes in Figure For the charge distribution of the His-tagged PMs, the contribution of the His-tag itself to the surface charge of the membranes had to be considered. The pH of the unbuffered solutions of both C-terminal His-tagged and N-terminal His-tagged membranes was measured to be 6.3. The imidazole side chain of the histidine has a pKa of 6 In the described experiments, the addition of buffer was generally avoided to maintain a high Debye length and thereby a strong trapping potential (Eqn. 2). The use of 1 mM TRIS-HCl buffer at pH 8 decreases the Debye length to approximately 10 nm. Accordingly, stable trapping and membrane deposition is achievable at smaller gap distances. After each deposition experiment, an antibody assay was performed. Control experiments with wild type PM patches (on Type B traps) showed no fluorescence from antibody binding, thus excluding any unspecific binding of the antibodies on the PM surfaces. In the traps entirely made of SiO2 (Type A), the membranes were consistently deposited with the His-tag facing the bottom of the trap, i.e., displaying no fluorescence. For the analysis, we only counted traps with either a single membrane patch or several membrane patches that were not overlapping or folded over. Traps containing overlapping membrane patches or aggregates of membranes were easily identified in the AFM scans through the height of the membrane structures. These frequently displayed fluorescence, because part of the membrane (or the PM patch on top of a first membrane) was positioned with the His-tag facing upward. Sometimes, aggregates of several membrane patches were trapped and displayed fluorescence because of the high probability of some Histag surface of the aggregate being accessible to the antibodies. Such traps were also excluded from the evaluation. However, such multilayer or aggregate assemblies, typically fluorescent, were a useful internal control of the functionality of the antibody assay. Figure Substrates for the preparation of alumina-bottom trap arrays comprise a sandwich layer structure with 15 nm of alumina and 20 nm of SiO2 on top. t-SPL-patterned trap arrays were transferred by RIE into the SiO2 with the alumina serving as a stop layer, thus exposing alumina exclusively at the bottom of the traps (for details see Methods). Alumina surfaces commonly have their isoelectric point at higher pH values (pH 7 -9) Permanent deposition of the membranes in the alumina-bottom traps was achieved by completely closing the gap. Comparing the ratio of fluorescent and dark membranes (Figure It is remarkable that the position of the His-tag (N-or C-terminus) is the critical factor for the final orientation of the membranes and that the charge asymmetry that is already present in the wild type We have shown that nanofluidic confinement in combination with an ISCAT setup can be used for the label-free imaging and manipulation of biological entities. Our objects of interest, PMs, are characterized by a directional functionality (light-driven proton pump), hence control of their orientation is crucial for their activity. We were able to trap, transport and immobilize PM patches at pre-defined trapping sites. Tuning of the materials used to fabricate the lithographic structures, employed for electrostatic confinement, yielded unprecedented fine control over the membrane orientation within the trapping site. The nanofluidic apparatus, combined with the tunability of both geometry and surface properties of the trapping substrate, constitutes a powerful tool for the manipulation and integration of supramolecular bio-structures into top-down-fabricated patterns, an essential prerequisite for the development of functional hybrid devices. All chemicals and solvents without a special supplier specification were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The pH was measured with a handheld pH Meter (Horiba). Zeta-potential measurements were performed with a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Panalytical). The samples in our experiments originated from a highly doped silicon wafer and were diced to a size of 8 mm x 8 mm. We fabricated two types of trapping devices, Type A and B. Type A were additionally thermally oxidized to a thickness of 500 nm and featured a silica surface throughout the array of trapping sites. We would like to point out that silica is expected to develop a negative charge when in contact with an aqueous solution at neutral pH. In the next step, Type A samples were coated with a solution of 9 wt% of the thermally sensitive resist polyphthalaldehyde (PPA) (Phoenix 81, Allresist), dissolved in anisole. The PPA solution was spin coated at 3000 rpm and annealed at 110°C for 2 min, resulting in an 80 nm thick layer of PPA. We defined the trap locations via thermal scanning probe lithography (t-SPL), using a home-built instrument The PPA was patterned via a heated tip (tip heater nominally between 950 and 1250°C), capacitively pulled into contact with the substrate. The local decomposition of the PPA resulted in cylindrically shaped indentations, all the way through the polymer. Each device contained arrays of 9x9 or 7x6 cavities, 1.2 -1.5 μm in diameter, arranged with a spacing of 2 μm. After an oxygen descum, the pattern was transferred to a depth of 20 nm in the silica layer, using Reactive Ion Etching (RIE). We utilized a mixture of CHF3, argon and oxygen gases (12, 38 and 1 sscm, respectively) with a power of 100 W and 30 mbar chamber pressure. Type B devices were fabricated by covering the bare silicon wafer with alumina using atomic layer deposition (ALD, Picosun). We deposited 15 nm of alumina at 300°C, and immediately covered this layer with 20 nm of SiO2, also via ALD (Oxford Instruments). After this step, the devices were covered by PPA and patterned as described above. The RIE etch in this case ensued the complete removal of silica from the bottom of the voids, and resulted in exposed alumina, which is expected to attain a positive charge in contact with an electrolyte at pH 7. The thickness of silica essentially defined the depth of the indentations since the alumina film acts as a stopping layer when using the same RIE recipe as for Type A devices. Type A and B devices can be re-used after a cleaning procedure: The devices were sonicated for 20 min in 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution. After washing with copious amounts of DI water they were dried and treated with a 200 W oxygen plasma twice for 30 s with a break of 1 min (Tepla AG). A C-terminal His10-tag was introduced into the gene encoding bacterio-opsin (bop) by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the forward primer 5'-AAA AGG ATC CGA CGT GAA GAT GGG GC-3' and the reverse primer 5'-AAA AAA GCT TGA TTC AGT GGT GAT GAT GGT GAT GAT GGT GGT GAT GTC CGT CGC TGG TCG CGG CCG CGC-3'. Membranes were dispersed in ultrapure water at a concentration of 0.1 -0.2 mg ml -1 without any further addition of salts or buffer. The dispersion was stable over weeks in the refrigerator. Before use, pre-diluted aliquots were taken from the refrigerator, allowed to reach room temperature and vortexed for a few seconds to disperse settled membranes. Antibody assay. We removed the sample from the nanofluidic confinement stage, carefully removing excess liquid without completely drying the substrate. In order to avoid unspecific deposition of the antibody on the substrate surface, we then applied SuperBlock (Thermo Fisher) solution. The SuperBlock solution was left on the sample for 10 min. Then the liquid was carefully removed again without complete drying and antibody solution (20 μl, His-tag monoclonal antibody-Alexa Fluor 488, Thermo Fisher) (20 μg ml -1 in PBS, pH 7.4) was applied to the pattern for 30 min. Next, the sample was rinsed with ultrapure water (2 x 100 μl) and dried in a gentle stream of argon. Sample arrays were first analyzed with the fluorescence microscope (Axiotech, Zeiss), followed by the capture of AFM images (Dimension V, Bruker) for the same fields. In one case scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Leo 1550, Zeiss) were taken as well. Fluorescence images were captured with μManager For each combination of trap type (SiO2, Al2O3) and membrane type (C-His, N-His) at least two independent experiments, together representing at least 7 trap arrays and at least 100 membranes were evaluated for the ratio of dark and bright membranes. The ratios of the individual trap arrays for one combination of trap type and membrane type were averaged and the result, with standard deviation as error bars, plotted in Figure Filter to enhance contrast in the ISCAT images. Due to the small difference in refractive index of the membranes and the surrounding fluid, the membranes had low contrast in the ISCAT images. To enhance their visibility, we first recorded a 20 s long video of trapped membranes, probing the trap potentials at a frame rate of 100 fps. In the next step, we determined the temporal median of the video which eliminated all moving objects, i.e., the membranes, and delivered a static background. Then, we took a single frame from the middle of the video and divided it by the static background. The resulting image was then rescaled such that it encompassed a full range of 12bit again. In the last step, the rescaled image was overlaid with the static background at a ratio of 30 to 70. FEM modelling. We performed all computations on a desktop computer using finite element software. The calculation was performed using the Fenics 