The first experience of virtual free-radical copolymerization (FRCP) of vinyl monomers with stable radicals in the framework of the digital twins (DTs) concept (arXiv:2309. The digitalization, recently proposed for the free-radical polymerization of vinyl monomers Necessary information regarding the FRP and FRCP of vinyl monomers, the need to introduce PP and its advantages in describing specific systems have been discussed earlier Figure 2) Bold data are determined from the barrier profiles similar to shown in Figure NIPA stands somewhat apart from the bulk of vinyl monomers, which is due to the water solubility of its copolymers with C60 fullerene, in contrast to the dominant majority of vinyl polymers that are insoluble in water. Water-solubility is of particular interest due to the promise of NIPA polymers use in biology and medicine, for example, as nanocontainers for the delivery of drugs to 'sick' cells. They can also be used for water purification from microimpurities or extraction from aqueous solutions of valuable substances present in low concentrations. The copolymerization reaction of NIPA with fullerene C60 is described in detail in works Table 1) M, R, F mark DT's chemical attribution to NIPA, initiating free radical AIBN ⦁ , and fullerene C60, respectively. Superscript black spot distinguishes radical species. Considering the picture of the kinetics of FRCP, presented by the values of E a in Table This is in perfect agreement with the reality: the addition of fullerene stops the free-radical polymerization of NIPA, which resumes after the added C60 is fully consumed. This work completes a series of studies of virtual free-radical copolymerization of vinyl monomers with small additives of stable radicals, such as TEMPO and C60 fullerene In the case of fullerene C60, the situation is drastically changed. Not one, but three elementary reactions may influence the FRP of monomers. These are the formation of monomerradical FM ⦁ , initiated with fullerene (k 1m F ); the capture of free radicals-initiators R ⦁ with C60 FR (k R F ); and the capture of monomer-radical RM ⦁ with fullerene FRM (k rm F ). All the reactions provide the formation of different fullerenyls, thermodynamics and kinetics of which depends on the chemicals attached to the C60 core according to the general rules of the fullerene nanochemistry The virtual variability of the first stage of the FRCP of the monomers with fullerene C60 discussed above finds its confirmation in reality. Thus, the domination of the reaction FR means the reduction of the current concentration of free radicals, which should slow down the polymerization of monomers and should be represented empirically as a decrease in the slope of the x(t) curve with respect to the time axis. The decrease should progress when the concentration of C60 increases The domination of k 1m F in the case of the FRCP of styrene with C60 means that the first reaction, occurred in the chemical solution with the monomer, AIBN and fullerene, is the formation of the monomer-radical FM ⦁ , which provides the polymerization of styrene on fullerene. The reaction proceeds until all the amount of fullerene is consumed, after which the routine styrene polymerization proceeds as if it were in the FRP case. Accordingly, x(t) curve should contain two fractions related to two ways of the monomer polymerization, the former related to the polymerization stimulated with and occurred on fullerene and the latter once pretty similar to the FRP of styrene under the same conditions. In reality, the former fraction of the x(t) curve should be of extremely low intensity because of three-order magnitude difference in the concentration of fullerene and monomer The domination of the FRM reaction characterized with rate constant k rm F was revealed virtually twice, related to styrene The current study showed that basic chain-reaction concept involving a discrete set of independent elementary reactions is reasonably valid for the FRP of vinyl monomers. Following from this "polymerization-passport"-based approach is highly productive, on the one hand, and allows to share friendly the responsibility of the polymerizable system study between virtual and real experiments. Modern quantum chemistry is able to construct required passports within wide limits. As a consequence, digitalization of polymerization reactions may prove to be a broad platform for introducing this approximation into polymer science and technology.