Interfaces play a crucial role in determining the overall performance and functionality of electronic devices and systems. Driven by the data science, machine learning (ML) reveals excellent guidance for material selection and device design, in which an advanced database is crucial for training models with state-of-the-art (SOTA) precision. However, a systematic database of interfaces is still in its infancy due to the difficulties in collecting raw data in experiment and the expensive firstprinciples computational cost in density functional theory (DFT). In this paper, we construct ample interface structures of graphene nanoribbons (GNR), whose interfacial morphology can be precisely fabricated based on specific molecular precursors. The GNR interfaces serve as promising candidates since their bandgaps can be modulated. Their physical properties including energy bands and density of states (DOS) maps are obtained under reasonable calculation parameters. This database can provide theoretical guidance for the design of electronic devices and accelerate the ML study of various physical quantities. Graphene, a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice, possesses a range of unique and remarkable properties such as exceptional electrical and thermal conductivity, mechanical strength, biocompatibility, flexibility and transparency. For semiconductor materials, a limiting fact is that the intrinsic graphene has no energy band gap and a promising option is that the transformation of graphene into a quasi-one-dimensional nanoribbon structure can open the band gap These devices offer higher quality due to the absence of issues like lattice mismatch, as compared to conventional interfaces First-principles calculation is a powerful and fundamental approach in the field of computational materials science and device physics. Unlike empirical methods that rely on experimental data, firstprinciples calculations can predict the properties of materials and devices even in situations where experimental data may be limited or nonexistent. This predictive power is essential for exploring novel materials and designing new devices with desired functionalities. Here, following this paradigm, we quantitatively model crucial GNR interfaces and acquire their physical properties to constitute the database. The GNRs utilized to form interface are categorized into the armchair and the zigzag types based on the shape of their edges. Then the two selected basic structures fabricate diverse interface structures according to various coupling modes. Finally, the energy band structure and DOS are obtained by the high-throughput DFT calculations, with their projected contributions by the two components, respectively. There is now a total of 397 armchair and 345 zigzag interfaces in Table Modeling Interfaces DFT is a method for studying the electronic structure of many-body system and is one of the most commonly used methods in the fields of condensed matter physics computational materials science and quantum chemistry. For a quantum many-body system, the Schrödinger equation is where the three terms in square brackets are the kinetic energy of each electron - , the energy of interaction between each electron and all nuclei ∑ V(r i ) N i=1 , and the energy of interaction between different electrons ∑ U(r i , r j ) N i=1 . For this Hamiltonian quantity, ψ is the electron wavefunction which is a function of the spatial coordinates of each of the N electrons namely ψ = ψ(r 1 , ... , r N ), E is the ground state energy of electrons. The ground state energy is independent of time, so this equation is time-neutral. However, the all-electron wavefunction has too high a dimension of N × 3. The single-electron approximation needs to be introduced to allow the allelectron wavefunction to take the form of a Hartree Product ψ = ψ(r 1 )ψ(r 2 ) ... ψ(r N ) . The researchers measure the probability of only N electrons appearing at a particular coordinate, equal to ψ * (r)ψ(r), where the asterisks are conjugate. Based on the single-electron wavefunction, the charge density at a specific location in space is written as , where 2 represents the two spins of the electron. The Hohenberg-Kohn theorem states that the energy of the ground state obtained from the Schrödinger equation is a unique function of the charge density. The ground state charge density uniquely determines all the properties of the ground state, including the energy and the wavefunction. The ground state energy is expressed as E[n(r)], where the square brackets are the functional. The charge density that minimizes the generalized function is the true charge density. To solve the true charge density is expressed as calculate a full set of equations, where each equation relates to only one electron. The Kohn-Sham equation is its solution is a one-electron wavefunction ψ i that depends only on three spatial variables. The solution process is a self-consistent cycle. First, defines an initial attempted charge density n(r). Second, solves the Kohn-Sham equation determined from the attempted charge density to obtain the single-electron wave function ψ i . Third, solve for the charge density n KS (r). Fourth, compare the two charge densities and iterate the loop until the accuracy requirement is satisfied. Above is the computational flow of DFT and the database is obtained in this self-consistent computational loop. The ab-initio computational software QuantumATK As shown in Figure Next, define the projection operator p M ̂ on the subspace M, and obtain the weight ω n,k M of band and wavefunction (E n,k , ψ n,k ). The PDOS is obtained as: The above plentiful physical images serve as an excellent theoretical basis to guide interface characterization and device design. We randomly select a number of interface structures in the dataset for explanatory illustration. In Copyright (c) 2023 wow2512311 Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. 