In magnetic crystals, despite the explicit breaking of time-reversal symmetry, two equilibrium states related by time reversal are always energetically degenerate. In ferromagnets such time-reversal degeneracy can be manifested by hysteresis loops in the magnetic field dependence of the magnetization and, if metallic, in the anomalous Hall effect. Importantly, both quantities simply change signs but not their absolute sizes under time reversal, which follows from their fundamental definitions. Our integral experimental and theoretical study shows that in the metallic kagome spin ice HoAgGe subject to finite magnetic fields parallel to the kagome plane, an emergent time-reversal-like degeneracy appears between magnetic states that have the same energy and net magnetization, but different sizes of the anomalous Hall effect. These degeneracies are unraveled by finite hysteresis in the field-dependent anomalous Hall effect contrasted with the vanishing hysteresis in the magnetization, which appears only at low-temperatures T<4K when the kagome spin ice is fully ordered into the √3 × √3 state. By explicitly determining the degenerate states and calculating the corresponding physical properties using a tight-binding model, we nailed down the time-reversal-like operation that transforms these degenerate states into each other. The operation is related to the nontrivial distortion of the kagome lattice in HoAgGe and is effective only because of the richness of degenerate states unique to kagome spin ice. Our work points to the powerful role of the anomalous Hall effect to diagnose hidden symmetries in frustrated spin systems. Geometrically frustrated spin systems are a promising platform for novel states of matter As a fundamental discrete symmetry operation, time reversal T plays a particularly important role in magnetic crystals. Adding T to space group operations leads to the establishment of magnetic space groups which allow systematic classification and investigation of magnetic phases both experimentally and theoretically. Moreover, governed by basic principles of quantum mechanics, almost all measurable physical quantities have definite transformation properties under T, which can often provide system-independent predictions. For example, for magnetic phases that break the T symmetry, two states related by T are energetically degenerate (a macroscopic manifestation of Kramers theorem). If the magnetic phase is characterized by a nonzero net magnetization M, the two phases must have mutually antiparallel M of same size and if the phase displays the AHE HoAgGe is an intermetallic compound consisting of stacked kagome lattices with nontrivial distortion formed by Ho 3+ ions HoAgGe crystals were cut into different shapes for magnetic and transport measurements with the demagnetization correction considered. As shown in Fig. More interestingly, Fig. To show that the hysteresis of ρca is inseparable from the finite-magnetic-field ordering derived from the √3 × √3 ground state, we directly compare the thermodynamic and transport data versus H along b at two temperatures (8K and 3K) in Fig. The experimental data above suggest that there exist at least two degenerate states on the 1/3 and 2/3 plateaus at low temperatures. First we focus on the 1/3 plateau and discuss the 2/3 plateau later. We have pointed out in Ref. 38 that besides the state depicted at the top of Fig. To see whether S 1/3 and S′ 1/3 can have different AHE, we constructed a toy model respecting the symmetries of HoAgGe and directly calculated the intrinsic contribution to the anomalous Hall conductivity. The toy model (Supplementary Note 4) 41 describes s-electrons hopping between nearest-neighboring Ho sites subject to local exchange fields parallel to the ordered Ho moments and to spin-orbit coupling determined by the inversion symmetry breaking with respect to the nearest-neighbor bond centers. Surprisingly, despite the complex lattice structure and magnetic order, the band structures for S 1/3 and S′ 1/3 are completely identical (Fig. What is more interesting, however, is that the two states generally have different Berry curvatures (summed over occupied bands) at the same positions in the Brillouin zone (Figs. To understand why the symmetry operation X that connects S 1/3 and S′ 1/3 preserves the band structure but not the anomalous Hall effect, we first note that X can be represented by R b π D, where R b π is a usual π-rotation about the b axis by π on both orbital and spin degrees of freedom, and D is a special operation that reverses the distortion of the lattice but keeps the spin degrees of freedom untouched (Fig. We also prove that the classical spin model that successfully captured the various phases of HoAgGe gives identical energies for S 1/3 and S′ 1/3 even with the long-range dipolar interaction considered. Therefore, the two states are degenerate in the same magnetic field range corresponding to the 1/3 plateau. The reason why the size of the anomalous Hall conductivity is not invariant under X is more subtle. In the SI we show that the distortion reversal D critically changes the Berry connection, or the position operator's matrix elements between Bloch states, due to the shift of sublattice positions under D, which changes the Berry curvature of occupied states and hence the anomalous Hall conductivity. Such a contribution is separate from the transformation of the Hamiltonian under D, and is a manifestation of the fact that the Berry curvature encodes geometric information of the Bloch wavefunctions beyond the Hamiltonian itself. We note that the above mechanism will generally be relevant in structurally distorted magnetic systems in which the distortion reversal operation is not equivalent to a magnetic space group operation. We finally turn to the 2/3 plateau. Despite the same Am'm2' symmetry as the 1/3 plateau states, the 2/3 plateau only has one nondegenerate state S 2/3 (arrows in Fig. The existence of degenerate states alone does not explain why there is hysteresis across the whole 1/3 and 2/3 plateaus, since the degeneracy is not lifted by the external magnetic field as in the hysteresis of a ferromagnet. A possible explanation is that the barriers and kinetic pathways between the degenerate states and those on a neighboring plateau are not the same. Starting from a uniform state on a neighboring plateau and gradually changing field, transition to the degenerate state with a lower kinetic barrier will be dominant at low temperatures. The hysteresis at a given plateau will then appear if the transition from a higher-field plateau and that from a lower-field plateau do not favor the same state kinetically. For noncollinear magnetic order the kinetic pathways between nearly degenerate states are expected to be more complex than collinear magnets In conclusion, with the help of electrical transport measurements in the metallic kagome ice compound HoAgGe at low temperatures, we identified an emergent timereversal-like degeneracy between metastable ice-rule states that have the same net magnetization but different anomalous Hall effect. The different sizes of the intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity can be traced to the distortion-induced Berry connection of the Bloch electrons. We expect that similar phenomena should commonly appear in frustrated spin systems with nontrivial structural distortion and finite ordering wave vectors. The appearance of opposite toroidal moments on the two degenerate 1/3 plateau states also points to a mechanism for using the AHE to distinguish toroidal orders. Our study suggests a significant potential for transport measurements in distinguishing hidden symmetries in metallic frustrated spin systems. High quality single crystals of HoAgGe were grown using the Ag-Ge-rich self-flux method, with typical concentration R0.06(Ag0.75Ge0.25)0.94 (R: Ho and Lu). Mixtures were placed in alumina crucibles and sealed in a quartz tube, heated to 1150 • C, held there for 10h and cooled to 836 • C within 76 hours, where the flux was decanted using a centrifuge. All single crystals were characterized via x-ray diffraction with a Rigaku X'pert diffractometer using Cu Kα1 radiation. Magnetization (M) measurements were performed using a vibrating sample magnetometer (Quantum Design MPMS). Electronic transport and specific heat data were obtained with Quantum Design PPMS. A photo of the HoAgGe crystal for Hall effect measurements is included to Fig. The magnetic specific heat Cmag data in Fig. In a skyrmion lattice, the topological Hall effect (THE) is induced by the topological spin texture; and the system stays in the same magnetic state before and after the skyrimon phase, which enables the quantitative analysis of THE signal [3]. However, such a method is not directly applicable for the HoAgGe system, since the metamagnetic phase transitions would also strongly influence the band structure at the Fermi surface. Furthermore, we analyzed the transport signal in terms of the conductivity tensor in Fig. We focus on the effect of time reversal T on the eigenenergies of a mean-field Hamiltonian. The total energy for a mean-field Hamiltonian is where ρ is the density matrix. It is then clear that, by using the property of trace, In other words, two systems with the Hamiltonian H and THT -1 have the same total energy, regardless of the TR properties of H. One can also establish the relationship between the band structures of H and THT -1 . Suppose |ψ nk 〉 is a Bloch eigenstate of H with band energy ε nk , we have Namely, T|ψ nk 〉 is an eigenstate of THT -1 , with the same eigen-energy ε nk . One may generally write T|ψ nk 〉 as |φ mk′ 〉. The labeling of the bands is arbitrary, but k and k′ are related to the eigenvalues of the discrete translation operator and must have a definite relationship. Considering T R which stands for translation by an arbitrary lattice vector R, we have Applying T on both sides of the above equation, we have or equivalently To understand how a structural transformation is reflected in a general tightbinding Hamiltonian, we consider a complete set of orthonormal Wannier functions {|a〉}. The tight-binding representation of an arbitrary non-interacting Hamiltonian is where t ab = 〈a|H|b〉 . For a standard O(3) transformation, e.g. inversion I , the Hamiltonian of the transformed system, independent of basis, is H ̃= IHI -1 . One can write H ̃ in the original Wannier basis of H, but the resulting hopping parameters will not have simple relations to t ab . Instead, one can define a new Wannier basis {|a ̃〉} = {I|a〉}, so that Namely, the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian are unchanged as long as one regards the basis as that transformed by I. However, since the distortion reversal is not a space group operation, the transformed Hamiltonian, denoted as H′, in general does not have a definite relationship with H without specifying the representation. If we use a Wannier basis based on the atomic sites of the distortion-reversed lattice, denoted by {|a′〉}, we can write Although the relationship between H′ and H is unknown, one can use the same rules that lead to t ab to obtain the matrix elements 〈a′|H′|b′〉, thereby establishing an effective transformation between H′ and H in the respective Wannier bases. To this end we first consider how an arbitrary bond is modified by the distortion reversal in the present model. If the three sublattices of the original nonmagnetic unit cell are located at τ 1,2,3 , the lattice vectors of the nonmagnetic lattice are Positions of 1′, 2′, 3′ can be obtained as where r 1c is the center of mass of sites 1, 2, 3. Note that if the kagome lattice is not distorted, we have In other words, It is also easy to show that δτ i′ = δτẑ× (τ i 0 -r 1c ) Naively, an arbitrary bond (together with its surrounding atoms or environment) between (0, i) and (R, j) will be transformed by D to that between (0, i′) and (R, j′). The two bond vectors are To establish equivalence between the hopping parameters for the two systems, a first criterion is that the bond length remains unchanged. This leads to which is a rather strong constraint. However, we can replace r i′j′ (R′) by r j′i′ (R′) . Namely, the two sites are transformed to (0, j′) and (R, i′). Then instead of Eq. ( Namely, One can easily see that Therefore the hopping from (0, j′) to (R′, i′) can be obtained from the hopping in the original lattice from (0, i) to (R, j) by performing the R τ j 0 +τ i 0 -2r 1c π transformation on the internal degrees of freedom of the model. Namely T′ αβ (0, j′; R′, i′) = (U † TU) αβ (0, i; R, j). ( For the nearest neighbor bond in our model, because T αβ only has ↑↑ and ↓↓ elements, which change sign under R τ j 0 +τ i 0 -2r 1c π , we have T′ αβ (0, j′; 0, i′) = -T αβ (0, i; 0, j) = T αβ (0, j; 0, i). ( Therefore the nearest-neighbor spin-dependent hopping is invariant under distortion reversal. In more complex models, however, Eq. ( Since the ê vectors on the inter-layer bonds in Fig. This relation can also be seen by comparing Fig. In particular, the one-body velocity operator of the original system is v = where m, n label bands. For the distortion-reversed system, we have = σ AH + e which leads to the momentum space representation r = ∑ α,i,k,k′ |α, i, k〉[τ i δ k,k′ + ∑ R Re iR⋅(k′-k) ]〈α, i, k′|. The relationship between Wannier and Bloch states is |α, i, R〉 = in agreement with Eq. ( The derivation above only considers the situation that 〈a′|H′|b′〉 = 〈a|H|b〉. If we specialize to the case that D also changes the Hamiltonian matrix by k z → -k z , the z component of the velocity operator v z will have an additional sign change. This leads to the largely opposite Berry curvature and σ AH between S 1/3 and S′ 1/3 . It also makes the sum rather than the difference of the σ AH of the two states correspond to the contributions by A, which is the reason why the mean of the two curves in Fig. In general, for a magnetic crystal that has certain distortion, and the distortionreversed system with the same magnetic order has nearly the same energy due to some emergent distortion reversal symmetry and/or weak spin-orbit coupling, the two systems can in principle have very different anomalous Hall effect since the distortion reversal generally changes the current operator. Conversely, if two magnetic states can be made equivalent through a proper rotation together with a distortion reversal, while their energies may or may not be the same depending on the underlying symmetry of the system, the AHE of the two magnetic states should in general have different sizes. the √3 × √3 ground state of the dipolar kagome ice when the magnetic moments are represented by Ising variables. The state is degenerate with 5 other states obtained by time-reversal and translation, equivalent to the 6-fold degeneracy of the √3 × √3 ground state of the kagome ice. Since the ordering of the in-plane components on the 2/3 plateau also has a six-fold degeneracy by time reversal and translation, there are 6 possible variants of each unique state of the in-plane components with C2 ′ symmetry. Moreover, these 6 variants can be grouped into 3 pairs, with the two states in each pair connected by the R y π D operation. Fig. Also since R x π I is still a symmetry, the band structures of the two states will be identical, but the Berry curvatures will generally differ, as shown in the figure below. Assuming the same out-of-plane components order also exists on the 1/3 plateau, each of S 1/3 and S′ 1/3 will have 6 variants, similar to the 2/3 plateau case. However, the in-total 12 states can also be grouped into 6 pairs, with the two states in each pair coming from S 1/3 and S′ 1/3 separately and can be transformed to each other by R y π D (up to a translation). Fig. dH BZ d 3 ke -ik⋅R |α, i, k〉.