The explosion of data volume in communications, AI training, and cloud computing requires efficient data handling, which is typically stored as digital electrical information and transmitted as wireless radio frequency (RF) signals or light waves in optical fibres. Today's communications systems mostly treat the RF and optical signals separately, which results in unnecessary conversion losses and increased cost. In this work, we report the first fully on-chip signal processor for high-speed RF and optical signals based on a silicon photonic circuit. Our chip is capable of both generation and detection of analog electrical and optical signals, and can program a user-defined filter response in both domains. The 1 Today's increasingly interconnected and data-driven society relies on always-accessible high-speed data connections. Communication networks are evolving towards an increasingly granular infrastructure, powered by fixed-line optical fibers and highbandwidth wireless access networks. To distribute the digital data, systems use separate devices to generate and process optical signals and wireless radio frequency (RF) signals, which results in unnecessary conversion and propagation losses, as well as increased cost. We need a more versatile approach to effectively handle the signals in both the RF and the optical domain. Silicon photonic circuits have emerged as a widely deployed solution for optical signal transmission Because optical signals can span a massive bandwidth, photonics is used to generate, manipulate, transport, and measure high-speed RF signals. This field is commonly known as Microwave Photonics (MWP) In this work, we report the first single-chip signal processor built in silicon photonics technology, capable of implementing programmable operations on both optical and RF signals, and converting between the two domains. The chip contains two widely tunable lasers, a reconfigurable modulator, optical switches, a fully tunable Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) loaded with 4 independent ring resonators, and two high speed PDs. The silicon photonic chip is fabricated in imec's iSiPP50G process, supplemented with micro-transfer-printed optical amplifiers. The system's configuration is locally programmed through thermo-optic phase shifters and monitored by on-chip tap PDs. Our signal processor consists of four main subcircuit blocks, which are the tunable laser (with 2 lasers), the reconfigurable modulator, the reconfigurable optical filter and the high-speed PD block, shown in Fig. Optical-to-optical (O/O) response. Figure The tuning procedures are explained in the supplementary information S2. Electrical-to-optical (E/O) response. Combining the laser(s) and the modulator, we can imprint RF signals onto the optical carrier(s), corresponding to a pure electrical-to-optical response. The on-chip tunable lasers consist of a Fabry-Pérot (FP) laser and a ring laser with intra-cavity wavelength filters. The measurements show -3 dBm optical power coupled to fiber with a tuning range of 60 nm. Depending on the design of the transfer-printed SOA, the lasing range can be adjusted Opto-electronic oscillator (OEO). With additional electronic amplifiers compensating the loss of the RF bandpass filters shown above, our signal processor can form an OEO with a tunable central frequency, as shown in Fig. Except for the functionalities shown above, our signal processor can also work as an optical wavelength meter or RF frequency meter using the tap monitors in the filter block, where the resolution is limited by the Q factor of the loaded ring (Supplementary information S3.4). The single-chip signal processor provides a fully programmable filtering response for optical and RF signals, as well as generation and detection of electrical and optical signals. As a demonstrator, the performance of this processor is limited by its system scale, and the packaging and crosstalk management leave room for improvement. Microwave photonic filtering based on double-sideband modulation. The E/E response of the reported signal processor is based on double sideband modulation. Compared to SSB modulation schemes, our algorithm allow a simpler filter design and a lower intrinsic RF loss. The scheme relies on the reconfigurable modulator, which can generate RF sidebands with a tunable phase difference, while the tunable couplers ensure the minimum optical loss in all scenarios. In this case, the optical filters used to filter the modulation introduced sidebands can just be as simple as cascaded tunable ring resonators. Filtering performance and scale-up analysis. The optical and electrical filters are both based on the same optical filter block in our signal processor. As a tunable filter, the minimum 3 dB bandwidth depends on the quality (Q) factor of the rings, which were ∼ 50000 at critical coupling. The monitor PDs inside the ring introduce extra loss (limiting the Q), but they monitor the ring status for configuration. Better calibration schemes or a tunable power tap could allow us to reduce the impact of these monitor PDs. The filtering performance is also limited by the filter order, which corresponds to the number of ring filters in the block. For a higher-order RF filter, we only need to cascade additional ring filters, which is very scalable in terms of optical losses and tuning scheme. For optical filtering, increasing the order requires extra ring pairs over both arms of the MZI. Equalized E/O conversion with widely tunable optical carriers. The two onchip laser sources both show 50 nm tuning ranges in a different wavelength region, and a total 90 nm tuning range (from 1508 nm to 1598 nm). With the on-chip modulators, an E/O conversion with widely tunable optical carriers can be reached. The programmable filter can also be used as an RF equalizer. In the supplementary information S3.2 we show how we compensate the uneven RF loss of the PCB and bonding wires, boosting the 3 dB bandwidth from 4.5 GHz to 26 GHz. In addition, the on-chip laser together with two PDs can also be configured as a coherent receiver with tunable local oscillator (LO). But due to the high RF crosstalk (discussed in the crosstalk section), we did not further evaluated this. RF signal generation. We reported two demonstrations for RF signal generation. We showed frequency doubling with 40 dB 2f /1f extinction ratio using the configurable modulator, and a tunable OE oscillator with an external fibre and RF amplifier. The OEO's RF generation covers the 4-24 GHz span with almost constant phase noise of -114 dBc/Hz at 100 kHz using an off-chip PD. This is superior to commercial products (R&S SMR, -105 dBc/Hz at 100 kHz offset frequency for 10 GHz central frequency). The frequency generation of the OEO system is not limited to 24 GHz with our signal processor, but its phase noise measurement is limited by the used spectrum analyzer (26 GHz). Thermal crosstalk. For configurability, the system contains 52 thermal tuners, making it quite sensitive to external and internal temperature fluctuations. In addition, the power dissipation of the transfer-printed laser (300 mW) and the modulator termination (80 mW at -2 V) make the thermal control even more challenging. Even though the sample is mounted on a temperature controller, it still drifts with ambient temperature. Apart from this, the system shows a high stability and repeatability, which means that the different crosstalk contributions can be compensated with the tuners. Optical crosstalk. The chip has an integrated laser, but no optical isolator. This makes the laser cavities vulnerable to all reflections along the optical path. As these are not fully avoidable, all phase tuners will also affect the reflected light, introducing small perturbations to the laser cavity. However, the tunability of the system allows us to compensate for most of these. A key limitation to our demonstration reported here is the RF crosstalk. This can be mostly attributed to the packaging: the high-speed PCB couples the RF signal directly from the input connectors to the output connectors, bypassing the chip. Because we did not boost the PD output with transimpedance amplifiers (TIAs), their relatively weak signal is swamped by the direct RF crosstalk and cannot be retrieved. For the reported experiments we always used an off-chip EDFA to boost the modulated optical signal and then fed it back into the chip. With a proper TIA and better RF isolation, the extra EDFA would not be necessary. Details of this characterization are shown in the supplementary information S2.5. In this work, we reported the first single-chip microwave photonic signal processor based on silicon photonics. It can be programmed as a reconfigurable filter for optical signals and RF signals, and provide E/O and O/E conversions. The laser sources based on transfer printing make it work without an external light source. Using multiple monitor detectors, the system can be configured locally. In addition, the processor shows its capabilities for RF signal generation and RF frequency doubling. In general, this demonstration suggests a promising and comprehensive approach for the generation, distribution, and processing of optical and RF signals and its potential use in data centers, wireless and satellite communication, and other optical and microwave applications. Supplementary information. See the attachment file. Silicon chip Fabrication. The photonic chip was fabricated in the imec iSiPP50G silicon photonic platform with 200 mm wafers. The chip size is 1.3 × 5 mm 2 without grating couplers and 3.3 × 5 mm 2 with grating couplers. The chip layout is designed using IPKISS by Luceda Photonics. Transfer printing process. Transfer printing technology is using a stamp to pick up a prefabricated SOA coupon from a III-V source wafer and print it on to the target position of the silicon photonic sample (or wafer). In this process, SOAs are fabricated on a 2" wafer of InP epitaxial layer stack, grown by metal-organic vaporphase epitaxy (MOVPE) method at III-V Lab. A release layer is incorporated beneath the SOA device layer stack. After devices are patterned, the release layer is selectively etched, resulting in free-standing components held by tethers. A polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp is then laminated against these released devices, termed "coupons". When the stamp is rapidly pulled away, the coupons adhere due to strong bonding, break the tethers, transferring the devices to the stamp. After pick-up, the stamp now carrying the device (either single or array), is aligned to the destination wafer using pattern recognition through the transparent PDMS stamp. The printing process entails laminating the stamp to the target wafer and retracting it slowly, using a shear force, ensuring the coupons adhere to the target wafer. To enhance coupon adhesion, an divinylsiloxane bisbenzocyclobutene (DVS-BCB) adhension layer is used. After the process, one metallization step is necessary to link the transfer-printed components with the bondpads on the original silicon photonic sample On the imec iSiPP50G platform, a localized back-end opening (recess) is necessary to interface with the Si waveguide, permitting the seamless integration of III-V SOAs with Si structures. The 40 μm wide III-V SOA measures 1 mm, including two 180 μm adiabatic tapers to enhance the coupling efficiency. Underneath the SOA, there's a continuous poly-Si/c-Si waveguide (with respective thicknesses of 160 nm and 220 nm) ensuring optimal optical coupling between the III-V device layer and the Si waveguide below it. Moreover, an added taper structure aids in channeling the optical mode to the 220 nm thick crystalline Si wire waveguide. Detailed information regarding the design and production of the III-V/Si SOAs can be found in Optical, electrical and RF Packaging. Fiber arrays are used for coupling the light in and out of chip. A fiber array is actively aligned by maximizing transmission through a shunt waveguide and then fixed in place on the processed sample using UV-curable epoxy. A 15 dB loss is measured for the reference waveguide ports, corresponding to a 7.5 dB loss per grating coupler. The use of edge couplers instead of grating couplers could significantly reduce the insertion loss of the fiber interfaces The 68 DC channels (heaters, tap monitors and grounds) and 3 RF ports (1 input, 2 outputs) are wirebonded to a high-speed printed circuit board (PCB). More details are shown in the supplementary information S1.3. However, the modulator and the PD performance show that the wirebonding to the transmission line introduces a high loss and high RF crosstalk, which limits the maximum frequency that the full system can support to 25 GHz. A better RF packaging solution may relax these constrains and bring the performance up to the level of what we measured using RF probes: 33 GHz for the modulator and 50 GHz for the PDs. Electrical driving system. The transfer-printed SOA, the tap monitors and the on-chip PDs are driven by a Tektronix Keithley 2401. The heater-based optical phase shifters for tuning and configuration are driven by a PXI 6704 from National Instruments. No external laser is used to generate the different functions described above. The transmission spectrum for the O/O functionality was measured with an optical network analyzer (LUNA, OVA5000), which does contain a tunable laser, but which is only used for characterisation purposes. The off-chip PD is a 42 GHz PD (Discovery LabBuddy DSC10H, 0.54 A/W at 1550 nm). Electrical response measurement. The E/E response is measured by a Keysight vector network analyzer(E8364B, 50 GHz). The RF signal source in Fig. Optical and Microwave Signals Supplementery material Hong Deng, Jing Zhang, Emadreza Soltanian, Xiangfeng Chen, Chao Pang, Nicolas Vaissiere, Delphine Neel, Joan Ramirez,Jean Decobert,Nishant Singh, Guy Torfs, Gunther Roelkens, Wim Bogaerts S1 Chip Fabrication, Post-processing and Packaging The chip is designed with Luceda IPKISS, and fabricated on the imec iSiPP50G silicon photonic platform. This is a standarized silicon photonics platform based on a 220 nm thick silicon-on-insulator (SOI) layer. It supports three waveguide cross sections (strip, rib and deep rib), multiple implantations for high-speed modulators (up to 50 GHz in some configurations), germanium photodetectors (PDs), and two layers of Cu damascene metallization. Our chip design and fabrication were based on the standard process flow which is also offered through multi-project wafer services The on-chip optical gain is provided by transfer-printed prefabricated semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs). III-V SOAs in this work are fabricated based on two epitaxial layer stacks with two multi-quantum wells (MQWs) zone variants to achieve photoluminescence (PL) peaks around 1500 nm and 1550 nm. Using these two epistacks in this work leads to laser emissions around 1525 nm and 1575 nm. The micro-transfer-printing (μTP) concept is illustrated in the Fig. The sample is wirebonded to a printed circuit board (PCB) and cured with a fiber array. The photonic integrated circuit features a total of 15 optical input/output ports, 3 RF ports, 52 thermal tuners, 8 monitor PDs, and a transfer-printed laser. As a result, a comprehensive optical, DC, and RF packaging approach is essential to ensure the stability and robustness of the system. A printed circuit board (PCB) was designed for the electrical connections. The processor chip was placed face-up on the board, and the bondpads were connected using wirebonding. The optical packaging process involves the attachment of a fiber array. Specifically, a 32-channel fiber array was positioned with active alignment on the reference waveguide, and then fixed in place with UV-curable glue. The transmission of the reference waveguide was measured with an optical vector analyzer (LUNA, OVA 5000), and the setup is presented in Fig. During the measurement, the OVA swept the wavelength spectrum while considering both polarizations. However, due to the grating coupler's limitation in supporting only the TE mode, we observe an additional 3 dB loss incurred for the polarization averaging. Consequently, the coupling loss per pair of grating couplers was determined to be 14.7 dB, with the peak transmission at 1543.3 nm. To encapsulate the DC and RF wires, a significant amount of UV glue was added during the optical packaging process. Unfortunately, this resulted in a somewhat uneven curing process, leading to higher optical losses than normal. Nevertheless, this measured transmission curve will be used as the normalization reference for all optical responses in subsequent sections (Section S2.1 and S2.4). The high speed PCB for the packaging is a 4-layer stacked PCB with high-speed materials (Megtron 6) as dielectric layers. The used RF connectors are Rosenberger solderless RF connectors. A straight referencing transmission line (2 cm) shows a 3 dB drop over 40 GHz between two connectors, as shown in Fig. Our single-chip signal processor contains a laser block, a reconfigurable modulator block, an optical filter block, and two high-speed PDs. Optical switches are used for connecting the blocks, and guiding the light in/out of the optical path. Their characterizations are shown in this section. In our signal processor, there are two different laser cavities designed in the laser block, which are based on a Fabry-Pérot (FP) cavity and a ring cavity laser, respectively, as shown in Fig. There are three thermal phase shifters in each laser cavity: two for the phase tuning in the ring and one for the cavity phase. By tuning the phase of the rings and optical cavity, we can tune the lasing wavelength. The laser tuning results are shown in Fig. Optical switches are used to connect the functional blocks on the chip and guide light into / out of the optical path. In addition, tunable couplers are used in the modulator block and optical filter block to tune the relative power in each path with specific coupling coefficients. In our designs, the optical switches and tunable couplers are achieved by single-and double-stage Mach-Zehnder interferometers (MZIs). A schematic for a single stage MZI is shown in Fig. where E out1 and E out2 are the electrical field of the MZI's outputs, E in1 and E in2 are the inputs' electrical field, κ is the splitting ratios of the splitter and combiner, and φs is the phase shift introduced by the phase shifter. If perfect 50:50 DCs are used for the splitter and combiner, the transfer function from E in1 to E out1 and from E in1 to E out2 can be expressed as: From here we can notice that the output signal's magnitude follows a sinusoidal relation of the half of the φs , and the output signal's phase is shifted also by half of the φs. And we can also get the power transformation of the MZI, which is: It can be noted that the power coupling ratios |r MZI | 2 and |κ MZI | 2 fully depend on the phase shifts φs, which makes it an optical tunable coupler or optical switch where κ 2 is the power coupling ratio of the normal coupler, κ 1 is the power coupling ratio of the tunable coupler, and φ 2 is the phase shift from the shifter 2 in figure S2.5. Then the field transfer function can be written as: (S2.8) Then the optical power transfer functions become: In order to get a full tuning range of coupling ratio [0, 1] for the equations S2.9 and S2.10, we can set that |r MZI | 2 ∈ [0, 1], thus we get: 12) Then from equation S2.11, we can get: 14) Here, we can know that, if κ 1 + κ 2 = 1, this circuit can be tuned to have a high extinction ratio or closer to 0 at bar state (|r MZI | 2 = 0) and if κ 1 = κ 2 , this circuit can be tuned to have a zero loss or closer to 1 at bar state (|r MZI | 2 = 1). In actual fabricated devices, there will be some insertion losses for the DCs and waveguides. This will increase the overall insertion loss of the tunable coupler, and slightly drift the working conditions of κ 1 and κ 2 for compensating loss imbalance. The first coupler is a tunable coupler discussed above. If we assume that all basic couplers are similar, from equation S2.10 we can get: ) where φ 1 is the phase shift from the shifter 1 in figure S2.5. Substituting equation S2.15 into S2.13 and S2.14 we can get: For a tunable φ 1 , we can get: where α is the loss factor of the PN modulator, φs represents the relevant phase difference of the two arm (tuned by the phase shifter), and φm is the modulator introduced phase shift, which can be expressed as: In which the V rf cos(ω rf t + φ rf ) is the modulation RF signal. Here we assume that the loss of the modulator is unrelated with the modulation signal to simply the modulated signal's expression, which means the modulator is a pure phase modulator. For an actual PN junction based phase modulator, there will be a slightly spurious intensity modulation, which will be discussed later. The equation derivation also holds for actual devices, while all configurations will be slightly different. Assuming the light signal E in1 = e -j(ωct) is fed from input 1, the modulated light signal at bar port can be expressed as: Using the Jacobi-Anger expansion, where Jn is is the n-th Bessel function of the first kind, we can expand Eq.S2.21 as: )(e -j((ωc-ω rf )t-φ rf ) + e -j((ωc+ω rf )t)φ rf ) = A 0 e -jφ A 0 e -j(ωct) + jA 1 (e -j((ωc-ω rf )t-φ rf ) + e -j((ωc+ω rf )t+φ rf ) ) (S2.23) Here only the first sidelobes are kept. The gain of the carrier and left and right modulated sideband are give by When the modulated light signal is received by a PD, we can get the photocurrent with the square law detection, which can be expressed as: A 0 e -j(ωct) + jA 1 (e -j((ωc-ω rf )t-φ rf ) + e -j((ωc+ω rf )t+φ rf ) )] × [A 0 e jφ A 0 e j(ωct) -jA 1 (e j((ωc-ω rf )t-φ rf ) + e j((ωc+ω rf )t+φ rf where R is the responsibility of the used PD. Then we can know that the field amplitude of the recovered RF signal at the original frequency is (with Eq.S2.24): which is determined by the coupling ratio of the tunable couplers κ and the phase shifter's phase change φs. The recovered RF signal at the original frequency can also be expressed as: This signal consists of the two modulated optical sidebands that are down converted with the optical carrier after the square law detection by the photo diode. The relative phase of the two signals (2φ A0 ) can be turned by the phase shifter (φs), which can be calculated with Eq. S2.24. Indeed, when κ = 0, all light goes through the PN modulator and φ A0 is zero, no signal will be detected after the photodiode as the light was purely phase modulated. However, when κ = 0.5, half of the light goes through the phase modulator and the modulator block is configured as an MZ intensity modulator, which can be verified with Eq. S2.26 when κ(1κ) and sin φs are maximized. To enable both working conditions, full κ tuning range is required, such that double-stage MZI structures are employed as tunable couplers. The modulator block is measured with the setup shown in Fig. The measured S21 results of the modulator block are shown in Fig. A multistage ring-loaded MZI with tunable couplers can reach arbitrary magnitude responses by tuning all phase and coupling ratios. In our signal processor, we used a MZI structure with two cascaded rings on both two arms, see in Fig. A tunable coupler's transmission can be found as Eq. S2.2 and Eq. S2.3, and the waveguide transmission can be expressed as αre -jφ2 where αr is the ring's propagation loss factor and the φ 2 is the ring's phase shifts. Then, the transfer function of a ring resonator with a tunable coupler, as shown in Fig. 2)e -j(φ1/2+π/2)αre -j(φ1+φ2) 1 + αre -j(φ2) sin(φ 1 /2)e -j(φ1/2+π/2) (S2.28) Because αr cannot be one (lossless), the ring resonator will not be a perfect all-pass filter and will have a free spectral range (FSR), which can be calculated as where λ is the optical carrier wavelength, ng is the group index of the waveguide and L is the round trip length of the ring resonator. The MZI structure in our signal processor is designed to be balanced, leading to a nearinfinite FSR. The ring resonators we used in our signal processor are designed identically, thus their FSR are very similar, and this defines the FSR of the entire filter block. By tuning the splitter and the combiner's coupling ratio κ to either 0 or 1, we can measure the transmission of a single ring. The measurement setup is shown in Fig. The full width at half-maximum (FWHM) or 3 dB bandwidth of the measured ring resonators in their critical coupling states are 30.7 pm, 35.8 pm, 35.8 pm, 43.6 pm, corresponding to quality (Q) factors of 50489, 43296, 43296, 35550, respectively. The tap PDs introduce extra loss in the ring cavities, which will limit the Q factor of the rings. The PDs help to monitor the ring status, but they are not strictly necessary if the circuit is fully calibrated and isolated. The tap PDs couple a fraction of light (∼ 2%) out of the ring and are monitored with an electrical current meter. The monitored photocurrents can help to calibrate the phase shifters (φ 1 and φ 2 ). We swept the phase shifters' electrical power in the tunable coupler (φ 1 ) and the ring (φ 2 ). The PD readings are shown in the Fig. Based on this calibration data, the whole filter block can now be configured with these phase shifters. First, a Chebyshev type II type bandpass filter is defined, as shown in Fig. The roll-off transition can also be improved with a higher-order filter. As can be seen in Fig. When the ring filters are critically coupled, the ring loss can no longer be neglected and the rings are no longer all-pass filters. If the splitter and combiner's κ of the filter block is set to 0 or 1, the rings act as independent tunable band-stop filters, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, the filter block of our signal processor can in principle be configured for arbitrary magnitude responses (limited by the performance of fabricated circuits). We have shown measurement results with bandstop filters (with single rings), bandpass filters (Ringloaded MZI with critical coupled rings), and flat-top Chebyshev type II type bandpass filters (Ring-loaded MZI with over coupled rings). Thanks to all the tap PDs, the system can be monitored and calibrated locally. There are two high-speed PDs in our signal processor for optical-to-electrical conversion. Due to the lack of transimpedance amplifiers (TIA), the PDs are directly wirebonded to the PCB and connected with RF connectors. The measurement setup and the results are shown in Fig. As discussed in Section 1, the RF packaging is not ideal and there is a high crosstalk which the RF signal couples from input to output port directly. Comparison of the on-chip PD recovered signal and the electrical crosstalk is shown in Fig. With the characterized and calibrated optical system, we demonstrated several applications with our signal processor. One target application for our signal processor is microwave photonic filtering. Here we assume an input RF signal V in (t) as a board band arbitrary signal. To get the small signal modelling of the system, this input signal can be decomposed as a large offset signal and a small signal variance as: V in (t) = V 0 + v in (t) (S3.1) where V 0 is the offset signal and v in (t) is the small signal. Then the modulated light phase can be expressed as: Instead of using Jacobi-Anger expansion in Eq. S2.22 , we can use Taylor expansion around V 0 here to get the linear transfer function of the system: Take it into Eq. S2.21, we can get the output field of the modulator block as: κe -jφs e -jωct (S3.4) for φs is defined as the phase difference of the two arm, it can cover the static shifts of V 0 . If we just focus on the first order of sidelobes, the output field can be simplified as: If we assume the modulator phase modulation is linear, the input RF signal v in (t) can be expressed as a summation of different frequency components, as: Thus the modulated signal can be expressed as: j(1κ)α πvs 2Vπ (e -j(ωst+φω s ) + e j(ωst+φω s ) )e -jωct ] = ωs [M 0 e -jφ M 0 e -jωct + jM 1 vs(e -j(ωst+φω s ) + e -j(-ωst-φω s ) )e -jωct ] (S3.7) where now By tuning the tunable couplers' coupling ratio κ and the phase shifter φs in the modulator block, we can arbitrarily set M 0 , φ M0 , and M 1 For a broadband RF signal modulated light signal, the optical spectrum can be shown as Fig. • Lower sideband: L(ω cω s )e -jφ L (ωc-ωs) • Upper sideband: U (ω c + ω s )e -jφ U (ωc+ωs) • Central frequency: C(ω c )e -jφ C (ωc) The filtered optical signal can be expressed as: jM 1 vs(U e -j(ωst+φω s +φ U ) + Le -j(-ωst-φω s +φ L ) )e -jωct ] (S3.9) Then the signal is fed into the PD, and the generated photocurrent is: where R is the responsibility of the PD. And I PD can be calculated as: jM 1 vs(U e -j(ωst+φω s +φ U ) + Le -j(-ωst-φω s +φ L ) )e -jωct ][M 0 Ce j(φ M 0 +φc) e jωct + jM 1 vs(U e j(ωst+φω s +φ U ) + Le j(-ωst-φω s +φ L ) )e jωct ] + mixed signal = I dc + I 1 st + I 2 nd + mixed signal (S3.11) where I dc , I 1 st , I 2 nd are the DC signal, first order signal (original frequency ωs), and second order harmonics (doubled frequency 2ωs ), respectively. Here again, if we just focus on the linear response I 1 st of this microwave photonic filtering system and ignore the mixed signal, we can get that: (S3.12) If we get the phase term out, it becomes: This shows the full expression of the linear frequency response, and it can be rewritten as: where and in which Thus, we got the full transfer function for the original frequency ωs : In reality, the used phase modulator cannot have a perfect linear phase response, while the tuning of modulator's κ and φs can linearize the phase modulation If we make an assumption that the lower sideband region of the optical transmission spectrum (L) and the upper sideband region (U ) are fully independent (which is not true for continuous broadband spectrum transmissions, but is a valid assumption for microwave signals modulated on a carrier frequency), the microwave photonic filter design can also use allpass filters to define a filter function similar to the optical filter design discussed in Section S2.4.. The "splitter" and "combiner" in this "interferometer" are implemented by the modulator and PD, which can be regarded as perfect 50:50 coupling ratio without any insertion loss, and the all-pass filter can still be ring resonators, and then it can also be regarded as a difference of two all-pass filters, as shown in Eq. S3.17. Because the ring resonators will both work in the upper and lower sidebands, the design method can only target at half of the FSR of the ring resonators (in our case, 53.5 GHz), and in the other half the response shape will be the image of the first one. Here we show some demonstrations for the RF filter design. If the reconfigurable modulator is set as a phase modulator and the filter block is set as a single notch filter (a critical coupled ring resonator), we can achieve a single bandpass filter in the RF domain, as shown in Fig. If the ring resonators are over coupled, they act as all-pass filters for the RF signal loaded light carriers. By tuning the modulator block and the cascaded rings (R1 and R2), we can get tunable low-pass filters (LPF), high-pass filters (HPF), and bandpass filters (BPF), as shown in Fig. One important application of the microwave photonic filter is an RF equalizer. Here we implement it for our intensity modulator with PDs. The results can be seen in Fig. Another application for our signal processor is the frequency multiplier. Here we used the modulator block to achieve frequency doubling with high original signal extinction. It is based on the carrier-suppressed double-sideband modulation scheme with the reconfigurable modulator, the configuration of which is shown in Fig. Demonstrations were implemented with our signal processor, as shown in Fig. We also did the same measurement with an on-chip PD (Fig. Our signal processor can not only generate optical signals with the on-chip laser block, but also can form an opto-electronic oscillator for RF signal generation. We also did the tests with an off-chip PD or an on-chip PD, and their schematics are shown in Fig. Apart from the applications discussed above, our signal processor has more possibilities. Here we show that it can work as an optical wavelength meter or RF frequency meter. The optical wavelength meter or the RF frequency meter is based on the ring resonators in the filter block. The optical power in the ring can be read with the tap PD. Then if we sweep the phase shifter in the ring, we can know the power distribution along the wavelength or frequency within one FSR of the ring. The results are shown in Fig. In conclusion, the single-chip signal processor presented in this study serves as a versatile reconfigurable filter for both optical signals (S2.4) and RF signals (S3.1), while also providing optimized electro-optical (E/O) (S2.3) and opto-electrical (O/E) conversions (S2.5). The implementation of tunable laser sources through micro-transfer-printing allows for an impressive tuning range of up to 90 nm (S2.1). The system's flexibility is enhanced by using multiple monitor detectors, enabling local configuration. Furthermore, the processor exhibits remarkable capabilities in RF signal generation (S3.3) and RF frequency doubling (S3.2). Overall, this demonstration offers a promising and comprehensive approach to generating, distributing, and processing both optical and RF signals, with potential applications in data centers, wireless and satellite communication, and various optical and microwave fields. The seamless integration of functionalities on a single chip represents a significant advancement in signal processing technology.