We study spin-orbit torques (SOTs) in Ni/Pt bi-layers and multi-layers by ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) and harmonic-Hall measurements. The effect of multi-layering and crystal orientation on field-like (FL) and damping-like (DL) torque efficiencies is examined by exploiting the samples with different crystal orientations: epitaxial and poly-crystalline structures on Sapphire and SiO2 substrates, respectively. We find that both DL and FL torque efficiencies are larger in multi-layer samples and there is no complete cancellation of torque efficiencies that is generally expected for ideal symmetric stacking structures. The results of SOT-FMR indicate that the epitaxial samples show higher efficiency for SOT generation compared to the poly-crystalline samples, suggesting that SOT generation is modified depending on the interfacial contribution. In addition, the spin Hall conductivity of the epitaxial multi-layer is the largest among the samples. The present results signify the importance of crystal orientation, multi-layering and interface-quality in improving the efficiency of SOTs generation combined with larger spin hall angle for developing future spintronic devices. Spin-orbit torques (SOTs) The SOT efficiency is a figure of merit for characterizing its potential for future spintronic applications. New materials which can offer higher SOT efficiency are continuously being investigated including ferromagnets, anti-ferromagnets In this paper we study the effect of multi-layering and crystal orientation on the generation of SOTs in Ni/Pt bi-layers and multi-layers. This is done using ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) and harmonic-Hall measurements. There have been some interesting results on SOT engineering in multi-layer systems for example in Co/Pt multi-layers On Sapphire (0001) Subs. The Ni/Pt multi-layer films were grown using magnetron sputtering in an ultrahigh vacuum system with a base pressure below 2 × 10 -7 Pa. Two types of substrates were used -sapphire(0001) and SiO 2 for epitaxial and polycrystalline growth, respectively. A Pt layer was first deposited on top of the substrate followed by growth of the Ni layer. The thicknesses of Ni and Pt layer were fixed at 3 and 1 nm, respectively, for all the samples. The sample label and stack structure is summarized in Table . I where [Ni/Pt] ×5 represents the five time repetition of [Ni/Pt] layers. The deposition temperature was optimized to achieve the epitaxial growth on sapphire and to ensure successful formation of the layered structure • C which was maintained constant throughout the deposition process. Finally, a 5 nm thick Al 2 O 3 capping layer was deposited on the top. The magnetic anisotropy induced at the interface of Ni/Al 2 O 3 was negligible, confirmed by using a reference sample of Ni single layer film with Al 2 O 3 capping layer. The samples K-02 and K-04 were deposited on SiO 2 substrate at room temperature. The crystal orientation and morphology were monitored in-situ during growth using reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and we present some of them in Fig. correspond to epitaxial growth on a sapphire substrate (Figs. Magnetisation curves for the samples measured using vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). The red curves are the results measured with in-plane magnetic field (IP) while the black curves denote the measurements with out-of-plane magnetic field (OOP). The measurements were done at room temperature. sample K-02 exhibits a few small peaks around 2θ = 40 • . Taking into account the fact that the RHEED patterns are the ring shapes for K-02, we confirm that K-02 is a polycrystalline film. However, its XRD peak positions fairly match with those calculated. This suggests that the (111) crystal orientation is preferential in the film, despite its polycrystalline behaviour confirmed by RHEED. An important point is that the calculated XRD profile uses the bulk lattice constant of Ni and Pt, and the calculation results can explain the peak positions of both K-01 and K-02, suggesting that there is no remarkable difference in the lattice constant between K-01 and K-02. Thus, from both RHEED and XRD results it is confirmed that the samples grown on sapphire substrates show epitaxial growth whereas those on SiO 2 form a polycrystalline film. The magnetic hysteresis loops were measured using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) at room temperature. Figure In order to study the spin transport by SOT-FMR measurements, the samples were cut into 5 mm × 5 mm chips prior to device fabrication using standard lithography and Ar-ion milling techniques. Rectangular bars of width 5 μm and length of 400 μm (K-01 and K-02) and 200 μm (K-03 and K-04) were defined for FMR measurements. The device circuitry and bar pattern are illustrated in Fig. We quantified the SOT efficiency and magnetic parameters using two independent techniques of SOT-FMR and harmonic-Hall resistance measurements as described below. By FMR measurements, we are able to extract the SOT efficiency in Ni/Pt multi-layer films. The measurement setup is illustrated in Fig. The DL and FL SOT efficiencies are calculated using the value of effective fields obtained by fitting angular dependence of symmetric and anti-symmetric components of V (see Appendix D). The symmetric component of voltage, V sym ∝ h z , is related to DL torques whereas the FL torques and Oersted torques are obtained from the anti-symmetric component, V asym ∝ h x , h y . In Fig. where To characterize the SOT efficiency, the FMR linewidth μ 0 ∆H was measured as a function of dc current, similar to technique used in In Eq. 2 the terms γ, e, , d FM and H ext are gyromagnetic ratio, electronic charge, reduced Planck's constant, thickness of ferromagnet and magnetic field, respectively. Using Eq. 2 we calculated the effective spin Hall angle given as θ SHA = J s /J c where J s is the spin current density in the Pt layer and J c is the charge current density. θ SHA takes into account not only the contribution from bulk spin Hall effect but also other contributions originating from spin-orbit coupling as discussed in section IV. θ SHA for each sample is presented in Fig. In the multi-layer samples, we still observe sizable values of θ SHA . We discuss the details about this enhance- ment in multi-layer samples in discussion section. We therefore use Eq. 2 to characterise averaged torques generated in the entire FM layers, from which the efffective spin-Hall angle in the entire device can be still discussed. We would like to mention here that the θ SHA for multilayer epitaxial samples ∼ 0.15 is larger than previous reported values To validate the conclusions drawn we used another method for obtaining θ SHA . This was done by calculating the slope of the power dependence of V sym (see Appendix E and Fig. We also calculated the SOT efficiency by measuring harmonic Hall resistance. Inset of Fig. In this section we discuss possible sources of large DL and FL torque generation efficiencies in multi-layer and epitaxial samples. Both epitaxial samples (K-01 and K-03) show larger ξ DL than the polycrystalline counterparts. While a number of parameters contribute to ξ DL , we speculate a few as follows. The momentum scattering rate is expected to be different between polycrystalline and epitaxial samples due to different numbers of e.g. defects, crystallographic domain boundaries and chemical disorders. This difference naturally leads to the variation of resistivity, the extrinsic spin-Hall effect as well as the spin-relaxation rate. Nguyen et al. In our experiments, the magnitude of DL torque efficiency is always larger in multi-layer samples than bilayers. This is unexpected because both DL and FL torques should be cancelled in a Ni layer sandwiched by two Pt layers, i.e. those in our multi-layers where only the bottom-most Ni layer is expected to be torqued when we apply a current. This does not seem to be the case in our devices where sizable spin torques were experimentally observed, suggesting that the spin-torque properties in our multi-layer device are not as simple as the ideal case. For example, the quality of top and bottom interfaces cannot be necessarily the same due to different magnitudes of intermixing and/or strain propagation at the interfaces Finally we consider other current-induced spin-torque generation mechanisms In this study we presented the measurement of the DL and FL torque efficiencies in Ni/Pt multi-layer and bilayer samples using techniques of SOT-FMR and harmonic Hall resistance. The effects of layer stacking and crystal orientation on SOT was examined. We found that the DL torque efficiency (ξ DL ) is enhanced by multi-layer epitaxial growth and the value of ξ DL per unit applied current density obtained for epitaxial multi-layer samples ( 0.08 ± 0.01) ∼ 160% larger than the value for bilayer poly-crystalline samples ( 0.03 ± 0.002). The results show a large spin Hall angle in multi-layer samples, without cancellation coming from the symmetry of stacking structure, which is attributable to the different interface qualities between upper and lower interfaces. The value of θ SHA ∼ 0.15 in multi-layer epitaxial films is larger than previous reported values. These findings provide a new route for enhancement of DL SOT efficiency through multi-layer epitaxial growth. The results also indicate that epitaxial samples show larger ξ FL compared to the poly-crystalline samples. Apart from the bulk spin Hall and interfacial effects, some other sources such as selfinduced SOTs in Ni and orbital Hall effect can potentially play an important role in SOT generation. Although we could not experimentally separate the different contributions to SOTs, the relatively large efficiency of spin current generation that is observed is promising for applications that utilize SHE to manipulate ferromagnetic dynamics. Our results shed light on the importance of crystal orientation, multi-layering and interface quality for enhancing the magnitude of SOT which is important for spintronic devices. K-01, existence of intermixing layer (i.e. a very thin Ni-Pt alloy layer) is assumed in order to fit the experimental XRR. Without considering the intermixing layer, the experimental XRR cannot be fitted numerically. This intermixing is attributable to the substrate deposition temperature of 400 • C. This might be related to the higher DL torque for the epitaxial Ni/Pt. For polycrystalline K-02 sample, an intermixing layer (i.e. Ni-Pt alloy layer) is not taken into account because the room temperature deposition for K-02 did not promote intermixing. Even without intermixing layer, the experimental XRR is fairly fitted numerically. where I e is Thomson scattering intensity, F Ni(Pt) (Q) is the structural factor of Ni(Pt), D Ni is the thickness of the Ni layer, Λ is the superlattice period, and Q is the scattering vector. N -1 k=0 exp(iQkΛ) 2 corresponds to Laue function L(Q), and is expressed as where N is the repetition number. The term of structural factor is expressed as Using the areal atomic density (η Ni and η Pt ), lattice spacing (d Ni and d Pt ), atomic scattering factor(f Ni and f Pt ) and number of lattice plane (n Ni and n Pt ), the term of structural factor can be transformed into Then, the x-ray scattering intensity was calculated for [Ni(3 nm)/Pt(1 nm)] x5 with the (111) crystal orientation. where V sym and V asym are the Lorentzian components in symmetric and anti-symmetric lineshape given below. The terms A sym and A asy are the scalar amplitudes of the magnetic susceptibility (A i = χ i /M s ) and depend on the magnetic anisotropy of the device. The other terms are the external field (H ext ) and H 1 , H 2 are the terms containing demagnetisation field and in-plane/outof-plane anisotropy fields. h x , h y , h z are the components of current-induced effective field at microwave frequency, f , which drives the magnetic moments given as: h eff = (h x , h y , h z ) e j2πf t . γ, M s , H res , ∆H, I 0 and ∆R are the gyromagnetic ratio, saturation magnetisation, resonance field, half width at half maximum linewidth of resonance, current amplitude in the device and AMR resistance change respectively. The anisotropy fields used for obtaining H 1 , H 2 are calculated by fitting the frequency dependence of resonance field shown in Fig. The value of α is fairly constant and very large ∼ 0.1 for all the samples as can be seen in Table . IV. Similar damping values amongst all the samples suggest that damping is not affected by crystal structure. The enhancement of α in the measured films can originate from several mechanism and one such mechanism can be due to spin pumping and H FL+Oe from which we estimate the DL ( FL) efficiency using Eq. 1. The value of ξ DL ≈ 0.08 ± 0.01. The FL contribution, ξ FL ≈ 0.03 ± 0.003 which can be explained as entirely coming from Oersted field due to 1 nm thick Pt layer. The DL and FL efficiency are similar to value calculated from FMR measurements. The consistency of the DL and FL efficiency values obtained from both methods justify the claim that multi-layer epitaxial samples show better DL and FL efficiency. A detailed discussion and possible reasoning for variation of efficiency with multi-layer growth and crystallinity follow in the next section.