The dynamics of magnetic flux quanta (Abrikosov vortices) determine the resistive response of superconductors. In pinning-free planar thin films, the penetration and motion of vortices are controlled by edge defects, leading to such arrangements as vortex chains, vortex jets, and phase-slip regimes. Here, relying upon the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation, we predict that these vortex patterns should appear in superconductor open nanotubes even without edge defects, due to the inhomogeneity of the normal magnetic induction component B n , caused by the 3D tube geometry. The crossing of the half-tubes by dc-driven vortices induces GHz-frequency voltage U oscillations with spectra U f (B) evolving between n f 1 and n m f 1 [ f 1 : vortex nucleation frequency; n, m ≥ 2] and blurred in certain ranges of currents and fields. An n f 1 -spectrum corresponds to a single vortex-chain regime typical for low B and for tubes of small radii. At higher fields, an n m f 1 -spectrum points to the presence of m vortex chains in the vortex jets which, in contrast to planar thin films, are not diverging because of constraint to the tube areas where B n is close to maximum. A blurry spectrum implies complex arrangements of vortices because of multifurcations of their trajectories. Finally, due to a stronger confinement of single vortex chains in tubes of small radii, we reveal peaks in dU/dB and jumps in the frequency of microwave generation, which occur when the number of fluxons moving in the half-tubes increases by one. In all, our findings are essential for novel 3D superconductor devices which can operate in few-and multi-fluxon regimes. Superconductivity and dynamics of magnetic flux quanta (Abrikosov vortices, or fluxons) in open nanotubes possess a number of features distinct from those in planar thin films 1 . For instance, the curved geometry of a nanotube leads to inhomogeneous normal, B n , and tangential, B t , components of the magnetic induction When a vortex array moves in a superconductor, it induces ac voltage oscillations However, the aforementioned studies were performed so far for planar superconductor structures. At the same time, the maturity of advanced nanofabrication techniques has recently made available 3D superconductor nanoarchitectures featuring curved geometries and complex topologies Here, we investigate theoretically the dynamics of vortices in 3D superconductor open nanotubes (nanotubes with a slit) exposed to an azimuthal transport current and an external magnetic field directed perpendicular to the tube axis. We predict distinct voltage spectra U f for the various regimes in the vortex dynamics, which evolve between n f 1 and n m f 1 [ f 1 : vortex nucleation frequency; n, m ≥ 2] and are blurred in a certain range of currents and fields. Our theoretical predictions can be examined experimentally for, e.g. open Nb nanotubes fabricated by the self-rolling technology The performed numerical modeling is based on the timedependent Ginzburg-Landau (TDGL) equation. Evolution of the global observables in conjunction with the spatial distribution of the superconducting order parameter reveals the following correlation: A voltage frequency spectrum of the n f 1type corresponds to a single vortex chain regime typical for low B and for tubes of small radii. At higher fields, a n m f 1 voltage spectrum points to the presence of m vortex chains in the vortex jets which, in contrast to planar thin films, are not diverging because of constraint to the tube areas where B n is close to maximum. A blurry voltage spectrum implies complex arrangements of vortices emerging because of multifurcations of their trajectories. Furthermore, due to a stronger confinement of single vortex chains in tubes of small radii, we reveal peaks in dU/dB and jumps in the frequency of microwave generation, which occur when the number of fluxons in the half-tubes increases by one. The paper is organized as follows. After the problem statement in Sec. II, in Sec. III A we discuss the voltage spectra in conjunction with the vortex arrangements. In Sec. III B we examine the oscillatory behavior of the induced voltage as a function of the magnetic field. In Secs. IV A and IV B, we summarize the major theoretical findings and comment on the frequency range of the generation. In Sec. IV C we demonstrate that a reduction of the nanotube radius results in promotion of single-vortex-chain regimes and noticeable deformations of vortex paths due to the enhanced interaction between vortices in the both half-tubes. Finally, in Sec. IV D we compare the induced voltage spectra for nanotubes with those for planar structures and conclude our presentation in Sec. IV E with an outline of the applicability of the obtained results. The geometry of the problem is shown in Fig. The open-tube geometry requires a note on the terminology. Thus, for planar structures, a transport current can lead to the nucleation of vortices and antivortices at the opposite edges The modeling is done relying upon the TDGL equation for two tubes of radii R = 390 nm and 240 nm. Both tubes have a length L = 5 μm, a slit width δ = 60 nm and a thickness d = 50 nm, such that a current density of 1 GA/m 2 corresponds to a transport current of 0.25 mA. An additional planar structure of width W = 750 nm and the same length L = 5 μm is considered further for comparison. Details on the equations, boundary conditions, and materials parameters, which are typical for Nb thin films, are provided in the Appendix. The modeling is performed at temperature T /T c = 0.952, where T c is the superconducting transition temperature. We denote the period of time between two subsequent vortex nucleations at the same half-tube edge as ∆t n and the timeof-flight for a vortex from an edge to the opposite one as ∆t fl . The characteristic times ∆t n and ∆t fl depend on B and j tr . The motion of vortices induces a voltage between the leads attached to the ∂ D x boundaries. The time-dependent voltage U(t) is calculated as the difference of the electric potential averaged over the entire length of the voltage leads at a certain instant of time t. For the calculation of the voltage frequency spectrum U f a discrete fast Fourier transform (FFT) is applied. Before the FFT, the initial voltage is multiplied with the Hann function to reduce numerical artifacts The voltage induced by a moving vortex is proportional to its velocity which, in its turn, is affected by the vortex-edge and vortex-vortex interactions in our model which neglects vortex pinning due to possible structural defects Figure As follows from Fig. Figure Figure To explore the factors contributing to the emergence of subharmonics, in Fig. In summary, the presence of subharmonics f q in the nonblurry spectrum can be attributed to the alternation of vortices between a number of paths in a periodic manner. In regimes with a blurry spectrum, vortices are not restricted to specific paths, though some paths may be more probable than others. The geometrical properties of the nanotube play a crucial role in determining a specific regime characterized by certain paths. While the number of vortex paths remains stable even with changes in the nanotube length, the radius of the nanotube has a significant influence on it. The dependence of the voltage spectrum and the vortex trajectories on the nanotube radius will be discussed in Sec. IV C. Moving vortices induce a non-zero voltage between the slit banks. As vortices typically nucleate and denucleate at different instants of time, the number of vortices in the open tube is alternating. This may create appreciable oscillations of the induced voltage as a function of time U(t). However, when the ratio τ = ∆t fl /∆t n is an integer n ∈ N, nucleation of vortices at one edge of the half-tube and their denucleation at the other edge of the half-tube occur nearly simultaneously. This leads to an almost constant number of vortices in the open tube, resulting in the suppression of the voltage oscillations. Such a discretization of the ratio τ can be achieved via magnetic induction and transport current variation. To describe the amplitude of the alternating voltage phenomenologically within a simple model, we make use of the RMSD σ U from the average voltage ⟨U⟩ where ⟨. . .⟩ means averaging over time. In our model, we assume that the motion of vortices is uniform and each moving vortex induces the same voltage U 0 , i.e., the total voltage U(t) = 2U 0 N(t) is proportional to the total number of vortices N(t) in each half-tube at the time instant t. The model does not account for the constant voltage component arising due to the normally conducting leads since this component does not contribute to the RMSD. Furthermore, we assume that there are 2N 0 vortices in the open tube during the fraction of time 1x and 2(N 0 + 1) vortices during the fraction of time x, where x ∈ [0, 1]. Then, the average voltage and its RMSD read The average number of vortices is determined by the ratio τ, and where ⌊•⌋ and {•} denote the integer and fraction parts of a number. A higher magnetic field favors a larger τ, resulting in the oscillations of σ U as a function of the magnetic field due to the periodicity of the function {τ}, namely, {τ + 1} = {τ}. The validity of this reasoning is confirmed by the RMSD σ U shown in Fig. The underlying mechanism of this effect, which involves the shift between the nucleation and denucleation events, is elucidated by Fig. We first discuss the evolution of the voltage frequency spectrum U f as a function of the magnetic field, with the aim to link the changes in U f to transitions between various vortex array arrangements. We next proceed to confinement effects in nanotubes of smaller radii and compare the vortex arrangements with those for planar thin films. The discussion is concluded with remarks on the applicability of the model and its potential experimental examination. The major findings of the present work are related to two groups of results. First, predictions are made for the voltage frequency spectrum which evolves between an n f 1 -type and an m n f 1 -type [ f 1 : vortex nucleation frequency], and is blurred in certain ranges of magnetic fields and currents. The frequency voltage spectra can be measured experimentally by connecting a nanotube to a spectrum analyzer Second, predictions are made for novel vortex array arrangements and transitions between them with increase of B and j tr . In contradistinction to planar thin films, in which vortices nucleate at many points along the sample edge At low magnetic fields (4-8 mT in Fig. At moderately strong fields (8-13 mT in Fig. At higher magnetic fields (13-21 mT in Fig. As a major result of comparison of the voltage spectra in Fig. To summarize, the major features of vortex jets in open tubes are the following: (i) a vortex chain remains stable for up to about ten vortices, (ii) vortex jets may consist of more than two vortex chains and (iii) these jets are not diverging, as distinct from the previously studied planar geometries An array of moving vortices is known to generate alternating electromagnetic field On the one hand, major features in the voltage spectra are predicted for the microwave range. The frequencies 10-100 GHz correspond to the voltage oscillation periods between 100 ps to 10 ps, respectively, see Fig. The fast motion of vortices in a chain also implies that the unpaired electrons (quasiparticles), which escape from a vortex core, have enough time to relax before being trapped by the subsequent vortex, requiring characteristic times τ larger than the time of quasiparticle energy relaxation, τ > τ ε = L/(10v) = 500 ps. This difference in the time scales stems from the TDGL equation involving a much faster dynamics of the superconducting order parameter rather than capturing a particular quasiparticle relaxation mechanism for a given superconductor. In the numerical modeling, the adequate frequency and time scales for the vortex dynamics can be obtained by adding a numerical factor in front of the order parameter derivative with respect to time. After this adaptation of the diffusion coefficient, the features in U f fall into the radiofrequency and low-frequency microwave range 0.1-10 GHz, which are relevant for communication and information processing. As demonstrated above, the vortex dynamics in nanotubes of 390 nm radius exhibit a diverse range of behaviors. The system undergoes distinct transitions in its operating mode, which are reflected in the voltage spectra and vortex paths. In order to extend operations within a single regime over a wide range of magnetic fields, one can force vortices to move one behind another following a single path. This can be accomplished by reducing the nanotube radius, as it is illustrated for a nanotube with R = 240 nm. In the case of this smaller nanotube, we subject it to a larger j tr = 20 GA/m 2 , since the commencement of vortex nucleation necessitates a larger current or higher magnetic field compared to the bigger nanotube. The voltage spectrum for the nanotube with R = 240 nm is shown in Fig. It is worth noting that, in the general case, the actual number of vortices n v in the superconductor can be larger (if there are edge defects The hypothesis of a stronger intervortex interaction in nanotubes of smaller radii is supported by the vortex paths in Fig. The considered vortex arrangements in open nanotubes can be compared with those in planar systems studied in previous works In a different study For comparison, Fig. We note that for planar superconductor strips, a highercorrelated regime in the vortex dynamics can be realized via creation of a slit for the vortex nucleation at a given point An experimental examination of our predictions requires an outline of the effects which are captured and which are not captured by the considered model. First, as detailed in the Appendix, we consider a steady conversion of the transport current entering the normal leads into the superconducting current inside the tube over a certain transition area embedding the scalar potential. This is achieved by a self-consistent solution of the TDGL equation and the Poisson equation for the scalar potential. However, the model does not account for further areas with suppressed superconductivity which could appear because of sharp bends of the membrane in the regions where it touches the substrate. Like for the aforementioned transition area from normal metal to superconductor, an account for the suppression of superconductivity at the slit banks is expected to lead to a constant voltage contribution in addition to the voltage discussed in the present work. Second, a uniform temperature distribution over the tube is assumed, what requires an efficient Joule heat removal from the nanotube to the cryogenic environment Third, the interaction between vortices in the upper and lower half-tubes via the stray fields is neglected in the model, since this interaction has been proven to be small for tubes of the considered radii and thicknesses Fourth, the geometry-induced non-uniformity of B n weakens requirements to the edge quality of the nanotube Finally, vortex pinning and edge defects are not included in the model. This approximation is hence justified for materials characterized by weak volume pinning, such as amorphous superconducting films. At the same time, the roll-up technology In summary, we have considered the dynamics of vortices in open superconductor nanotubes exposed to an azimuthal transport current and a perpendicular-to-tube-axis magnetic field. On the basis of a numerical solution of the TDGL equation, the induced voltage U oscillations at GHz-frequency have been predicted with spectra evolving between n f 1 -type and n m f 1 -type and blurred in certain ranges of currents and fields. Snapshots of the spatiotemporal distributions of the superconducting order parameter have revealed that an n f 1spectrum corresponds to a single vortex-chain regime typical for low magnetic fields and for tubes of small radii. At higher fields, an n m f 1 -spectrum implies the presence of m vortex chains in the vortex jets which, in contrast to planar thin films, are not diverging because of constraint to the tube areas where B n is close to maximum. A blurry spectrum points to complex arrangements of vortices emerging because of multifurcations of their trajectories. A reduction of the nanotube radius results in promotion of single-vortex-chain regimes and noticeable deformations of vortex paths due to the enhanced interaction between vortices in the both half-tubes. In addition, due to a stronger confinement of single vortex chains in tubes of small radii, peaks in dU/dB and jumps in the frequency of microwave generation occur when the number of fluxons moving in the half-tubes increases by one. Our findings suggest that vortex jets can be constrained and possibly steered using the curvature of 3D superconductor membranes. Namely, the presence of a convexity with a maximum of B n may act as a conveyor for vortices, offering a new paradigm for the vortex guiding Overall, while time-and space-resolved experimental studies of vortex dynamics in supeconductor 3D nanoarchitectures remain to be performed, deduction of vortex configurations from an analysis of global observables -as discussed in the present work -represents one of the viable approaches to that end. Our predictions regarding the average voltage, voltage oscillations and voltage frequency spectra can be examined experimentally for, e.g. open Nb nanotubes fabricated by the self-rolling technology. In all, our findings are essential for novel 3D superconductor devices which can operate in fewand multi-fluxon regimes. equation, which, in its dimensionless form, reads Here, ∂ t denotes the derivative with respect to time t, ∇ is a 2D nabla operator on the surface, A is the vector potential, the scalar potential φ determines the electric field E = -∇φ, and ψ ≡ ψ(x, y,t) is the complex superconducting order parameter, which depends on the coordinates x and y and evolves with time t. The gauge of the vector potential A is chosen such that the following expressions are zero at the surface of the nanotube D: ∇ n A n = A n = 0, where subscript n denotes the projection of the corresponding vector onto the normal vector n. Being defined in the entire 3D space, the vector potential determines the magnetic induction B = [∇ 3D × A], where ∇ 3D is the nabla operator in the 3D space. The units for the dimensionless quantities in Eqs. (A1)-(A4) are provided in Table The superconducting current density is determined as j sc = Im(ψ * (∇ -iA)ψ). The effects of the magnetic field induced by the superconducting currents are neglected. The applicability of this approximation is discussed elsewhere The Poisson equation for the scalar potential φ follows from the continuity of the total current density which is given by the sum of the superconducting j sc and normal j n components The boundary conditions As gauge-dependent numerical schemes may introduce enormous errors dy (φ(t,W, y)φ(t, 0, y)) . (A5) The modeling was done for parameters typical for Nb structures, see Table More details on the applicability of the mathematical model, link variables, splitting of the electric potential, and further numerical details are given elsewhere V. M Fomin, R. O. Rezaev, and O. G. Schmidt, "Tunable generation of correlated vortices in open superconductor tubes," Nano Lett. 12, 1282 (2012).