Confined electron systems, such as 2D electron gases (2DEGs), 2D materials, or topological insulators show great technological promise but their susceptibility to defects often results in nanoscale inhomogeneities with unclear origins. Scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM) is useful to investigate buried confined electron systems non-destructively with nanoscale resolution, however, a clear separation of carrier concentration and mobility was often impossible in s-SNOM. Here, we predict a previously inaccessible characteristic "fingerprint" response of the prototypical LaAlO3/SrTiO3 2DEG, and verify this using a state-of-the-art tunable narrow-band laser in mid-infrared cryo-s-SNOM at 8 K. Our modelling allows us to separate the influence of carrier concentration and mobility on fingerprint spectra and to characterize 2DEG inhomogeneities on the nanoscale. This spatially resolved information about the local electronic properties can be used to identify the origin of inhomogeneities in confined electron systems, making the s-SNOM fingerprint response a valuable tool for nanoelectronics and quantum technology. Layered heterostructures of complex oxides have become an integral part of novel electronic, spintronic and magneto-ionic device concepts. The 2D electron gas (2DEG) at the interface between the two insulators LaAlO3 (LAO) and SrTiO3 (STO) Figure This near-field scattering amplitude and phase depends on the frequency-dependent optical properties of the sample, expressed as the dielectric function or permittivity  (). Figure To showcase the influence of the different layers, Figure Figure Figure To illustrate how fingerprint spectra of the 2DEG (cf. Figure Figure To conclude, we presented theoretical predictions of a characteristic spectral region for the s-SNOM investigation of the LAO/STO 2DEG at low temperatures. In this region, s-SNOM fingerprint spectra of the 2DEG can be recorded by normalizing samples of different substrate termination. These fingerprint spectra are highly sensitive to changes of the electronic properties, even though the overall s-SNOM signal in this spectral region is very low. Three characteristic peaks can be found, which are differently influenced by 2DEG carrier concentration and mobility, allowing for their disentanglement from spectroscopic measurements. The changes introduced by rising 2DEG mobility mostly relate to the main fingerprint peak around 750 cm -1 , with a saturation of the influence around μ = 80 cm2/Vs. The influence of the charge carrier density is stronger by comparison and influences all three peaks similarly. Using a newly-developed light source in combination with cryo-s-SNOM at 8 K, we were able to record s-SNOM fingerprint spectra of the 2DEG in this previously inaccessible spectral window with pseudoheterodyne point spectroscopy, due to the high signal-to-noise ratio. We found local variations in measured fingerprint spectra, which could be explained with changes of the 2DEG and phonon properties. In the future, this can be used to disentangle the local carrier concentration and mobility in investigations of the 2DEG in LAO/STO, for example for the characterization of different types of defects, Eight unit cells of LaAlO3 were deposited on wet-etched, TiO2-terminated (100)-SrTiO3 substrates using pulsed laser deposition (PLD). The films were deposited at a laser frequency of 1 Hz at a fluence of 1.0 J/cm 2 and an oxygen pressure of 1×10 -4 mbar. The growth temperature was 800°C and the samples were quenched down to room temperature after a relaxation at growth temperature. The Finite Dipole Model (FDM) • exp (-z z 0 ) • e 2 ε 0 m * and γ = e m * μ for an exponentially decaying carrier concentration. 