We analyze dynamical transport properties of a hybrid nanostructure, comprising a correlated quantum dot embedded between the source and drain electrodes, which are subject to an ac voltage, focusing on signatures imprinted on the charge transport by the side-attached Majorana zero-energy mode. The considerations are based on the Kubo formula, for which the relevant correlation functions are determined by using the numerical renormalization group approach, which allows us to consider the correlation effects due to the Coulomb repulsion and their interplay with the Majorana mode in a non-perturbative manner. We point out universal features of the dynamical conductance, showing up in the Kondo-Majorana regime, and differentiate them against the conventional Kondo and Majorana systems. In particular, we predict that the Majorana quasiparticles give rise to universal fractional values of the ac conductance in the well-defined frequency range below the peak at the Kondo scale. We also show this Kondo scale to actually increase with strengthening the coupling to the topological superconducting wire. Dynamical transport properties, such as shot noise or ac response, give valuable information about the charge carriers and can provide evidence for their unique character In particular, the dynamical response studies could be adopted to identify unique signatures of hybrid nanostructures with topological superconductors (TSs), harboring the Majorana quasiparticles. Fluctuations of the charge currents through various arrangements of TSs and QDs attached to them have been recently studied, focusing on the shot noise In this paper we investigate dynamical hallmarks of the Majorana mode coupled to the strongly correlated quantum dot that would be observable in charging-discharging processes driven by the external ac field. For microscopic considerations we choose the single dot hybrid structure, displayed in Fig. Hybridization of the quantum dot with a topological superconducting wire gives rise to a leakage of the Majorana boundary mode onto the side-attached QD In what follows, we analyze the universal ac conductance over extended range of frequencies, bounded from above by the energy scale corresponding to the Majorana coupling, ω max ∼ 2Γ M , and from below by the scale related to the overlap of Majorana modes, ε M , encountered in short-length topological superconducting systems, , where V M is the matrix element between the QD and TS, while Γ denotes the coupling strength to the left and right leads. In the case of long topological superconducting nanowire, ε M → 0, the universal feature corresponds to the zero-bias peak, and ω max is the maximal ac frequency allowing for its observation. Taking the Coulomb interaction effects into account, we carefully investigate what dynamical response characterizes the Kondo-Majorana fixed point, which (to the best of our knowledge) is still awaiting its experimental observation. With the present paper we aim to provide means of such detection. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the model and describe the numerical methods, based on numerical renormalization group (NRG) technique The considered nanostructure (Fig. The system's Hamiltonian consists of the following terms Ĥ = j=L,R Ĥj + Ĥj-QD + ĤQDM . ( The external electrodes are assumed to be reservoirs of the itinerant electrons where ĉ † jεσ (ĉ jεσ ) denote the creation (annihilation) operators of spin-σ electrons in j-th lead, which satisfy an- , and μ jσ (t) is the corresponding time-dependent chemical potential. Electron tunneling between the j-th lead and the quantum dot is described by where v j is the hopping matrix element and ρ j (ε) is the density of states of j-th lead. Since our considerations refer to a narrow energy region (of a width ∼ meV) inside the topological gap of superconducting nanowire, we assume the density of states to be flat, ρ j (ε) = ρ ≡ 1/2D, where D is the band energy cut-off, used as a convenient energy unit throughout, D ≡ 1. The hybridization effects (3) can be taken into account by introducing the couplings Γ j = π|v j | 2 ρ j . The last term of the Hamiltonian (1) describes the quantum dot combined with the Majorana modes of the TS where d † σ ( dσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for spin-σ electrons on the QD of energy ε d and Coulomb correlations U , nσ = d † σ dσ is the corresponding electron number operator, and γ1,2 are the operators of the boundary zero-energy modes. Hybridization of the quantum dot spin-↓ electrons with the left hand-side Majorana quasiparticle is denoted by V M , while ε M stands for an overlap between the Majorana modes. It is useful to represent the Majorana operators γi in terms of the conventional fermion operators which obey the standard anti-commutation relations. The charge current flowing from the j-th lead to the quantum dot in spin channel σ can be expressed by the operator Îjσ (t) = e ∂ t Njσ (t), where Njσ = ĉ † jεσ ĉjεσ dε counts total number of spin-σ electrons in the aforementioned lead, time argument indicates the Heisenberg picture, and e = |e| stands for the elementary charge. Assuming the topological superconductor to be grounded, the applied time-dependent voltage affects the chemical potentials of external leads as V jσ (t) ≡ -μ jσ (t)/e. Within the linear-response Kubo formalism with the system's admittance where is the Fourier-transform of the retarded Green's function of the current operator, ]⟩ (we set the time units such that ħ ≡ 1 throughout the paper). In what follows, we shall focus on the properties of the frequencydependent conductance of the system The current operator for our setup is given by being the corresponding field operator for the creation of a spin-σ electron in the j-th lead. We introduce an effective tunnel-matrix element, v = v 2 L + v 2 R , and perform a transformation from the left-right to the even-odd basis Then, for the even (odd) current operator one finds with such that Îjσ can be expressed as Thanks to where Note that ψo σ is not present in the tunneling Hamiltonian, Eq. ( with the functions and where To deal with the correlation effects in the lowtemperature regime where the Kondo effect emerges, we make use of the NRG approach As can be seen from the above discussion, the behavior of the ac conductance is essentially determined by two dimensionless conductances g o σ (ω) and g e σσ ′ (ω). Therefore, it is of great importance to analyze those functions separately. This will be crucial in understanding different contributions to G σσ ′ jj ′ (ω) as well as depending on a way how the system is biased. We start the discussion from the odd dimensionless conductance, cf. Eq. ( As long as T K > V M , it is practically independent of V M , and therefore the well-known estimation For larger V M , however, the results indicate increase of the Kondo scale. Similar tendency has already been reported in earlier numerical studies based on the spectral densities and temperature dependence of the dc conductance The other energy scale known from the analysis of conventional spectral functions of Majorana devices is the effective coupling strength to TS While g o σ (ω) provides comparable insight into the system's properties as the local quantum dot spectral density, the even contribution, g e σσ ′ (ω), probes a different Green's function, cf. Eq. ( As can be seen in Fig. which remains valid when the TS wire is short, ε M ̸ = 0, cf. Fig. For 0 < V M ≤ 10 -2 U , the picture changes mainly quantitatively: the negative peak position shifts toward higher ω as a consequence of increase of T K . However, it should be noted that for V M ≳ T K , while the peak in g e ↑↑ (ω) becomes higher in the presence of TS, the negative peak in g e ↓↑ (ω) is reduced and supplemented with a small positive one at lower ω; cf. the curves for V M = 10 -2 in Fig. The most prominent result for the even response function is presented in Fig. stant bias and can be understood as the current flowing into TS. This result extends to higher ω, in fact to ω ∼ ω max = 2Γ M ≈ 4V 2 M /Γ, as indicated in Fig. The topological superconducting nanowires should be sufficiently long in order to prevent any overlap between the Majorana zero-energy modes. In practice, however, this may be difficult to achieve and a non-negligible ε M may exist, as assumed in Eq. ( This is simply the energy scale related to crossing to a stable fixed point, which for ε M ̸ = 0 is not the Majorana-Kondo but rather the conventional Kondo fixed point. As a summary of this section, all the relevant energy scales are plotted in Fig. Having discussed the odd and even response functions, let us now examine the characteristics of the frequencydependent conductance for three different bias configurations. In the first one, referred to as antisymmetric bias configuration, the voltage is applied as, -V Lσ (ω) = V Rσ (ω) ≡ V o (ω)/2. Then, assuming symmetrical coupling of the quantum dot to the leads, Γ L = Γ R , we have with the ac conductance given only by the odd response function This is in contrast to the symmetric bias configuration, V Lσ (ω) = V Rσ (ω) ≡ V e (ω) in which one can probe the even contribution to the frequency-dependent conductance. In this case, the total ac current entering the quantum dot from the normal leads can be written as with the conductance in spin σ channel In general, for Γ L = Γ R , any spin-independent voltage bias V j↑ (ω) = V j↓ (ω) = V j (ω) can be decomposed into the even and odd parts. Still, we find it useful to discuss also the case when the time-dependent voltage is applied to one lead, i.e. V R = 0. One then has with The total conductance between the normal leads and (b) its spin polarization calculated as function of ω suming small spin-independent bias applied antisymmetricaly to the left and right leads. The parameters are the same as in Fig. and the minus sign in Eq. ( In the static limit, ω → 0, the net current flowing from the normal leads to the dot must drain into the superconducting nanowire. In contrast, for ω ̸ = 0, the processes of charging and discharging can yield non-zero signal. Note that we assume here the superconductor to be always grounded, i.e. no bias is ever applied to it. In the following, we discuss the total conductances and the corresponding spin polarization, given by where x is one of the labels {e, o, LL, LR}, instead of addressing each spin component separately. It should be noted that in our model we do not include any magnetic field acting on the QD, so only the hopping to TS determines the spin quantization axis. This might be relevant for TS nanowires achieved through deposition of magnetic adatoms on the ferromagnetic substrate. It may be also relevant for more conventional semiconductor-based wires, assuming the correspondingly different g-factor for the quantum dot. ↓ (ω) in this regime. The parameters are as in Fig. Let us start with the situation when an antisymmetric bias is applied to the system, i.e. -V Lσ (ω) = V Rσ (ω) = V o (ω)/2. In such a case, according to Eq. ( While the behavior of g o σ (ω) has been discussed in the context of Fig. Any non-zero V M leads to spin imbalance, also at ω = 0, where g o ↑ (0) = 2g o ↓ (0). This leads to P o (ω ≪ ω max ) = 1/3, as is visible in Fig. In turn, we focus on the case of symmetric biasing, that is, we assume V Lσ (ω) = V Rσ (ω) = V e (ω) and define the conductance through the total current entering the quantum dot from both normal leads. Note that in this biasing situation, the total conductance is given by the even contribution only, i.e. G(ω) ≡ G e (ω) = σ G e σ (ω). The corresponding conductance is displayed in Fig. As has been pointed out in the context of Fig. C. The case of one-lead pumping Finally, as an example of a general situation, where both odd and even channels are present, we consider ac bias applied to only one (left) lead. The conductance between this lead and the quantum dot is given by Eq. In this section, we point out possible extensions and limitations of our considerations, discuss other treatments using effective Hamiltonians and comment on the influence of disorder on Majorana quasiparticle features. Correlation effects driven by the Coulomb repulsion between opposite-spin electrons on an Anderson-type impurity can be described under certain conditions within effective spin models, determining the exchange coupling perturbatively by canonical transformation A possible route for treating the nonequilibrium effects induced by a periodically varying voltage applied across the quantum dot would be the time-dependent Schrieffer-Wolff transformation. Such approach adopted to the correlated quantum impurity placed between two normal leads displayed the two-channel Kondo physics More generally, joint influence of the strong correlations and periodic driving can be investigated from the perspective of the Floquet theory, which can be regarded as time-equivalent of the spatial Bloch treatment. Using such an approach to the setup with the Kondo impurity embedded between two metallic leads, a coherent dressing of the driving field manifested by side replicas of the Kondo resonance of the averaged conductance has been predicted The boundary modes harbored in topological phases should be immune to disorder, although in particular setups this situation can vary. For instance, disorder might play an important role by inducing local features resembling the topological boundary states. For this reason, additional checks, e.g. by inspecting the behavior of the ac-conductance, could resolve the true nature of the zeroenergy quasiparticles. In particular, robustness of the Majorana modes of the inhomogeneous Rashba nanowire deposited on superconducting substrate has been discussed in Ref. We have investigated the dynamical charge transport through the correlated quantum dot side-attached to the topological superconducting nanowire, focusing on the strong coupling regime. We have identified the frequency range where the signatures of Majorana modes occupying the ends of the wire can be observed. Our analysis of all the contributions to conductance between the normal leads and the quantum dot revealed that in general total conductance is a combination of two contributions: the odd and even in exchanging the left and right leads, respectively. We have proposed several biasing schemes allowing for addressing each of these contributions separately, and we also discussed the case of driving only one of the normal leads when both contributions are relevant. We have shown that at low frequencies the even contribution remains non-zero, leading to generalization of the zero-bias anomaly known from dc studies to the ac case. At higher frequencies clear signatures of the Coulomb interactions and the Kondo effect are reported. When properly tuned, the device can be used to generate the spin current (with much smaller charge current still present) and fully spin-polarized electric current. The full frequency dependence uniquely characterizes the relevant low-temperature Kondo-Majorana interplay, which we hope will stimulate and foster further endeavors to observe it experimentally. For experimental verification of our predictions we propose to use the quantum dot-Majorana mode hybrid structures, either based on semiconducting nanowires As we have shown in the main text of the paper, application of the symmetric or antisymmetric voltage bias between the leads may be used to address the chosen response function summed over source spins. However, even if spin-sensitive measurements are performed, the even contribution is always a sum of two terms, cf. Eq. ( Appendix B: The case of conventional superconductor One of the most prominent results of our study is that the even contribution to the frequency-dependent conductance maintains the universal value of G 0 over an extended range of frequencies. Here we would like to stress, that while the existence of non-zero conductance at low ω is a result of superconductivity, its universal character is a clear hallmark of a topological protection. Namely, we have verified through direct calculations that when the TS is replaced by a conventional superconductor, G e (ω → 0) > 0, but is not universal. Its magnitude becomes significant only for the quantum dot-superconductor coupling strength Γ S exceeding ∼ U/4. Therefore, any effect stemming from direct coupling of the dot to the superconducting shell, covering the nanowire in typical realizations of TS, can be safely ignored.