Scaling superconducting digital circuits requires fundamental changes in the current material set and fabrication process. The transition to 300 mm wafers and the implementation of advanced lithography are instrumental in facilitating mature CMOS processes, ensuring uniformity, and optimizing the yield. This study explores the properties of NbxTi(1-x)N films fabricated by magnetron DC sputtering on 300 mm Si wafers. As a promising alternative to traditional Nb in device manufacturing, NbxTi(1-x)N offers numerous advantages, including enhanced stability and scalability to smaller dimensions, in both processing and design. As a ternary material, NbxTi(1-x)N allows engineering material parameters by changing deposition conditions. The engineered properties can be used to modulate device parameters through the stack and mitigate failure modes. We report characterization of NbxTi(1x)N films at less than 2% thickness variability, 2.4% Tc variability and 3% composition variability. The films material properties such as resistivity (140-375 ⋅cm) and critical temperature Tc (4.6 K -14.1 K) are correlated with stoichiometry and morphology of the films. Our results highlight the significant influence of deposition conditions on crystallographic texture along the films and its correlation with Tc. Superconducting digital logic has the potential to provide high computing density and energy-efficient alternatives In this study, we demonstrate the fabrication of NbxTi(1-x)N films on 300 mm Si wafers at a deposition temperature of 420 oC, using different underlying substrates and employing a large variety of sputtering conditions, including N2 flow, Ar flow and deposition power. As a result, we have achieved a wide range of films with critical temperatures (Tc) spanning from 4.63 K to 14.1 K, compositional variations measured by the N/(Nb + Ti) ratio, which extends from 0.55 to 0.92, and resistivity values ranging from 140 μΩ⋅cm to 375 μΩ⋅cm. We observe that the main predictor of high Tc is the crystallographic orientation. Furthermore, we assess the consistency of the aforementioned parameters across the entire wafer successfully achieving remarkably tight variability, with film thickness varying by 1.3%, Tc by only 2.4%, the N/(Nb + Ti) ratio showing a minimal variability of just 3%. Nevertheless, we have observed variations of resistivity up to 17% which are linked to crystallographic orientation changes across the wafer radius. NbxTi(1-x)N films were deposited on 775μm double side polished (100) Si wafers by physical vapor deposition (PVD). In total seven different samples were prepared, as indicated in Table Room temperature resistivity and critical temperature were measured at the centre of each film (Figure Note that sample 2, 3 and 4 have different Tc despite using exactly the same deposition parameters. This points out the effect of the underlying substrate on Tc. Even when using the same underlying material substrate, the deposition technique and processing affects the crystal structure of the NbxTi(1-x)N film deposited on top. Finally, we examine the proportions of Nb, Ti and N present at the centre of each film (Figure The resistivity maps show a concentric pattern with the highest resistivity values at the centre and the lowest at the edges (Figure We have deposited NbxTi(1-x)N films at 420 oC on 300 mm Si wafers covering a broad spectrum of Tc, resistivity, and composition values. By conducting a comparative analysis of these properties both across wafers and within each individual wafer, we have established a correlation between Tc and a singular parameter: the (200):(111) and (220):(111) XRD peak ratios. This correlation is independent of deposition conditions and substrate type and reveals that higher peak ratios correspond to higher Tc values. Furthermore, our understanding of the interplay between resistivity, composition, and deposition parameters offers the prospect of tailoring NbxTi(1-x)N films to meet specific requirements. Lastly, we have achieved thickness variability values below 2% and Tc variability values below 2.4% on 300 mm wafers. This development paves the way for the integration and upscaling of superconducting digital electronic devices using alternative materials.