Defects in laser powder bed fusion (L-PBF) parts often result from the meso-scale dynamics of the molten alloy near the laser, known as the melt pool. For instance, the melt pool can directly contribute to the formation of undesirable porosity, residual stress, and surface roughness in the final part. Experimental in-situ monitoring of the three-dimensional melt pool physical fields is challenging, due to the short length and time scales involved in the process. Multi-physics simulation methods can describe the three-dimensional dynamics of the melt pool, but are computationally expensive at the mesh refinement required for accurate predictions of complex effects, such as the formation of keyhole porosity. Therefore, in this work, we develop a generative deep learning model based on the probabilistic diffusion framework to map low-fidelity, coarse-grained simulation information to the high-fidelity counterpart. By doing so, we bypass the computational expense of conducting multiple high-fidelity simulations for analysis by instead upscaling lightweight coarse mesh simulations. Specifically, we implement a 2-D diffusion model to spatially upscale cross-sections of the coarsely simulated melt pool to their high-fidelity equivalent. We demonstrate the preservation of key metrics of the melting process between the ground truth simulation data and the diffusion model output, such as the temperature field, the melt pool dimensions and the variability of the keyhole vapor cavity. Specifically, we predict the melt pool depth within 3 μm based on low-fidelity input data 4× coarser than the high-fidelity simulations, reducing analysis time by two orders of magnitude. Laser Powder Bed Fusion (L-PBF) is an Additive Manufacturing (AM) process that enables the construction of parts with complex geometries. During L-PBF, a heat source melts and fuses successive layers of microscopic metallic powder. This production paradigm enables the fabrication and rapid prototyping of parts difficult to manufacture with conventional machining methods Several methods for high-fidelity simulations of the melt pool dynamics experienced during L-PBF have been proposed The computational expense associated with high-fidelity simulations have motivated the use of deep learning tools for both global prediction and surrogate modeling in physical applications Super-resolution has been applied for a variety of tasks in image processing Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) are a class of generative models that create synthetic samples by iteratively transforming a Gaussian latent variable to the empirical distribution that defines the original dataset. DDPMs were originally designed for unconditional probabilistic sampling, to generate a synthetic datapoint by sampling arbitrarily from the parameterized data distribution, p(x). The conditional setting extends the DDPM framework to enable sampling based on a specified input condition, modeling the data distribution p(y|x), as opposed to the marginalized distribution p(x). Figure Figure DDPMs learn these potentially complex empirical data distributions by using a parameterized Markov chain. The Markov chain approach iteratively transforms a sampled Gaussian latent variable to a point in the empirical data distribution. To execute this, a forward diffusion process and a reverse denoising process are carried out during model training and inference respectively. The interaction of these two processes are represented visually in Figure The variance schedule defines how the scale of the noise applied to the image changes as a function of the diffusion timesteps. Typically, the noise scale will be smaller near the beginning of the forward process, and increase as the image becomes increasingly noisy. By reparameterizing the expression for x t , it can be determined simply in terms of the variance schedule, the initial datapoint x 0 , and the diffusion timestep t with the following expression: where α t = 1 -β t and ᾱt = t s=1 α s . The reverse process begins with a data point assumed to be isotropic Gaussian noise, x T , and iteratively de-noises the image by removing a predicted amount of noise, εt at each time-step. This reverse process is given by where p θ is a neural network. The network is trained to correctly predict the mean of the noisy data distribution conditioned on the noiseless image, μ(x t |x 0 ). Therefore, the neural network representing p θ is trained to optimize the difference between the predicted noise, ε θ and the added noise ε at each timestep. The structure of the p θ network is shown in Figure During the inference process, a noise vector is sampled from the standard normal distribution, and undergoes the reverse process, transforming into a sample from the empirical data distribution, p(x 0 ). In the conditional variant of this framework, the input signal that conditions the probability distribution is provided to the p θ network alongside the noise vector. This restricts the training and inference process to learn the probability distribution p(y|x), as opposed to the unconditional formulation, p(y). Here, we follow the conditioning methodology outlined in To transform the low fidelity data into the mean of the high fidelity distribution conditioned on the low fidelity data, we make use of the Residual in Residual Dense architecture (RRDN), show in Figure The overall model pipeline consists of an encoder model that predicts the approximate mean of the empirical distribution of potential high fidelity results given a low fidelity input, followed by a diffusion process to fine tune and sample this distribution. Specifically, we first feed the low fidelity input image to the CNN encoder model, which is an RRDN generator architecture as described in Section 2.2. This model is trained based on an objective that minimizes the L 1 loss between the produced image and the target image. Once this model has been trained, the output of the model before the last convolution layer is combined with the noise sampled to input to the diffusion model, to form an input that provides conditioning information for the diffusion model denoising process. At the conclusion of the denoising process, the recovered image is the final model output. The overall inference process for the conditional diffusion model is shown in Figure The simulation data for this work is generated by simulating bare plate, single track runs of Stainless Steel Grade 316L (SS316L) and Ti-6Al-4V at varying process parameters. Each simulation is conducted with multiple mesh sizes to extract low-fidelity and high-fidelity information for the model training. Specifically, 295 simulations are conducted using SS316L at a 10μm mesh element size for high-fidelity training data and a 20μm mesh element size for low-fidelity training data. Forty simulations are conducted using Ti-6Al-4V, with a 5μm mesh element used for the high-fidelity training data, and 20 μm mesh elements used for low-fidelity training data. The process parameters for the SS316L case are chosen to span the conduction mode and keyhole mode regimes of melt pool behavior, while the process parameters for the Ti-6Al-4V case are selected to prioritize simulations that contain complex, non-deterministic keyhole behavior. Each simulation describes the behavior resulting from a 100μm diameter moving laser impacting a solid build plate spanning 1mm in the laser plane of travel, 0.6mm perpendicular to the plane of travel, with a thickness of 0.4mm. The laser travels along the build plate for 500 μs with a specified constant velocity, V and power, P , varying from 150 mm/s to 1400 mm/s and 100 W to 500 W respectively. The 3D simulation output fields are captured at intervals of 5μs during the laser melting process. From the transient 3D temperature field produced by the simulation, a 2D cross-section is taken along the laser plane of travel. This cross-section is cropped to focus on the melt pool, and travels with the laser to ensure the melt pool is consistently centered within the image. Specifically, this cross section is a 320μm × 320μm area horizontally centered on and extending downwards from the impact point of the laser with the substrate. The material parameters of the SS316L simulations were validated through comparison with the geometrical properties of experimental single-bead melt tracks The computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software FLOW-3D is used to simulate the melting behavior where ⃗ g is gravity, α is the coefficient of thermal expansion, ⃗ P is pressure, ρ is the density, ⃗ v is velocity, h is the specific enthalpy and k represents heat conductivity. Additionally, the Boussinesq approximation models the variation of density with temperature. These equations are simulated on a Cartesian mesh, with a Volume-of-Fluid (VOF) framework to represent the interface between the plate and the plate surroundings In high energy density cases, the substrate vaporizes, causing a recoil pressure that creates a keyhole-shaped vapor cavity within the melt pool. This cavity increases the effective absorptivity of the laser from the nominal flat surface value due to reflection effects The recoil pressure exerted on the free surface by the vaporization process is described in Equation The evaporative mass loss, Ṁ is approximated according to Equation T (P sat l -P p ) (7) To evaluate the effectiveness of the model, we design a 4× upscaling task (20μm to 5μm) and a 2× upscaling task (20μm to 10μm) based on the collected Ti-6Al-4V and SS316L datasets respectively. In this experiment, the dataset consists of 40 simulations with mesh elements of size 5 μm and 40 simulations with 20 micron μm mesh elements. Each simulation describes a single melt track on bare plate Ti-6Al-4V, at conditions ranging from P = 120 W to P = 520 W, and V = 400 mm/s to 1200 mm/s. The encoder CNN model is trained for 300 epochs with a learning rate of 1E-4, using the Adam optimizer. Data augmentation is applied by flipping 25% of the samples observed during training about the x-axis, emulating a laser traveling in the opposite direction in the same plane. These augmentations aim to reduce overfitting and improve the model performance on unseen data by increasing the effective number of unique samples that the model is trained on. Following the completion of the CNN encoder training process, the CNN weights are frozen, and the diffusion model is trained. This training process takes place using the pre-trained encoder to condition the diffusion prediction on the low-fidelity input. The diffusion model is also trained for 300 epochs to minimize the Huber loss of the predicted noise distribution against the sampled noise distribution at each time step of the process. Here, the diffusion model uses 1000 noising timesteps with a linearly interpolated variance schedule between 0.0001 and 0.02 in order to train the model and produce new samples. A modified sampler, taken from Following this qualitative benchmark of the melt pool image reconstruction, we evaluate the reconstruction of the melt pool with quantitative metrics. Due to the influence of the melt pool and keyhole geometry on the mechanical properties of the final printed part, we select the melt pool depth and keyhole depth as evaluation metrics for the overall model. The contour lines for a set of predicted target and reconstructed melt pools are shown in Figure Next, we extract more sophisticated metrics of the melt pool behavior to further evaluate the performance of the diffusion model. Finally, to examine the image reconstruction quality of the diffusion pipeline, the L 1 loss between the upscaled result and the high fidelity result is observed. The L 1 loss is calculated as and measures the discrepancy between the temperature of the reconstructed and target images. Accordingly, there is a clear increase in the quality of the image in the high fidelity image, when compared to the bicubic upscaling of the low fidelity sample. To quantify the performance of the upscaling model for applications directly relevant to Laser Powder Bed Fusion, we define two metrics, the MP-MAE and the VC-MAE to quantify the error in the produced melt depth and vapor cavity respectively. Specifically, we find the deepest points along the melt pool and vapor cavity in both the predicted and ground truth for each image in the dataset, and calculate the mean average error of the predicted depths compared to the ground truth depths. These results are reported in Table The coarse resolution of the low-fidelity model sacrifices the ability to resolve smallerscale features of the melt pool for faster run-time. Here, we quantitatively examine the discrepancy between the low-fidelity and high-fidelity model predictions based on the melt pool dimensions, and evaluate the ability of the diffusion model to recapture the unresolved behavior. To do so, we examine the melt pool depth and keyhole depth at a specific simulation time step across a range of laser energy densities for the low-fidelity model, the high-fidelity model and the diffusion model output (Figure This effect is again likely due to the rapidly fluctuating keyhole cavity that forms at higher energy densities, which is difficult to resolve on a coarse mesh. However, this divergence is no longer observed in the predictions of the diffusion model (Figure In both simulation cases included in the training set and unseen cases drawn from the withheld test set, the diffusion model produces predictions that closely align with the highfidelity melt pool and keyhole depths, generally falling within a ± 20 μm margin as shown in Figure To evaluate the performance of the model on this task, we again examine the melt pool dimensions and the MAE of the prediction task on the overall temperature field. The results of these evaluation metrics are reported in Table We evaluate the image quality of the reconstructed images for the 2× upscaling task by comparing the performance of bicubic interpolation, the upsampling CNN model, and the implemented diffusion model. A qualitative comparison between the three methods is made in Figure Next, the reconstruction output of the 2× upscaling tasks is quantitatively evaluated based on the error in the reconstructed melt pool dimensions, the reconstructed keyhole dimensions, and temperature field error. The bicubic interpolation error is compared to the diffusion model error visually for both the 4× and 2× upscaling tasks in Figure The FLOW-3D simulations were run using a workstation with a 16 core Intel i7-10700F 2.90 GHz processor. The training and inference processes are carried out on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX-2080 GPU with a 11 GiB memory capacity. Using the aforementioned computational configuration, direct simulations using FLOW-3D at a 5 μm mesh element resolution require three hours of run time per simulation on average. A single epoch (165 iterations of a batch of size 128) is trained in 1.67 minutes for the CNN encoder model, and 1.51 minutes for the diffusion U-Net model. Therefore, the overall training process is completed in 32 hours. The inference process, accelerated by the modified sampler, is completed in 0.41 seconds for a single sample. A comparison of inference time against the total simulation time for the resolutions studied in this work is presented in Figure In this work, a method for deep-learning based spatial upsampling of melt pool temperature distributions produced during laser powder bed fusion is presented. To do so, a generative model is trained to capture the distribution of potential high-fidelity outputs possible given a sample created with a low-fidelity model of the melt pool process. We generate these low-fidelity models of the melt pool by running low-fidelity simulations of the melt pool behavior, where complex high-frequency phenomena is unlikely to be fully resolved. To upsample the data while accounting for the large scale morphology differences between the low-fidelity input and the high-fidelity target fields, we first employ a CNN encoder that predicts the mean of the distribution of the potential high-fidelity output fields. The embedded features learned by this CNN are then taken as the conditioning input for the diffusion model. This model stabilizes training by reducing the distance from the empirical data distribution of the high fidelity target fields from the conditioning used as input. The performance of this model is demonstrated on two tasks, a 2× upscaling from SS316L simulations ran at 20μm and 10μm resolutions respectively, and a 4× upscaling from Ti-6Al-4V simulations ran at 20μm and 5μm respectively. Due to the fact that the diffusion model is a generative model that parameterizes the empirical high-fidelity data distribution, the individual samples produced by a given trained model are stochastic. Thus, conventional metrics, such as the MAE, are misleading in this application. However, the MAE is reduced from non-deep learning based approaches, such as bicubic upscaling. To capture the performance of the model in a more principled manner, the variability of the keyhole behavior and the dimensions of the melt pool are examined as predictors for the onset of porosity. In these cases, the proposed diffusion model is better able to capture the intrinsic variability of these parameters, producing superior image quality. The upscaling process enables implicit information about varying process and operating conditions to be embedded in the low-fidelity simulation physics, as opposed to being explicitly provided to the model as manually constructed feature information. Therefore, this framework accelerates studies of the process-structure-property relationship, by enabling faster parameter sweeps and extraction of high-fidelity information from lightweight computational simulations. Alternatively, extensions of this model to three-dimensional training data can enhance multi-scale modeling approaches, integrating directly into large-scale coarse simulations to provide information on the small-scale effects that would otherwise be neglected. Upsampling Method MAE [K] MP-MAE [μm] VC-MAE [μm]