We report a Krylov projected random Green's function (rGF) method for linear-scaling electronic structure calculation. In this method, the rGF is defined on a set of random states and is calculated by projecting onto Krylov subspace to obtain Fermi-Dirac operator efficiently. To demonstrate the applicability, we implement rGF method with density-functional Tight-Binding method. We show the Krylov subspace can maintain at small size for gaped materials at low temperature T. We find, with a simple deflation technique, the rGF self-consistent calculation of H2O clusters at T = 0 K can reach an error of ∼1meV per H2O molecule in total energy, compared to deterministic calculations. The rGF method provides an effective stochastic method for large-scale electronic structure simulation. An accurate and linear-scaling electronic structure (ES) method is essential for large-scale applications, and has being highly pursued in the materials simulation community. √ N e N s (N e is the electron number) due to the self-average. The present implementation of random-state based DFT utilizes the Chebyshev polynomial expansion to represent the Fermi-Dirac operator, where G is the exact GF which models the system's spatial and temporal response possessing wide applications in quantum physics. For example, the Keldysh's GF G K and the retarded GF G R are the central quantities for simulating the respective nonequilibrium and equilbrium systems. where |X i ⟩ is the random state with the random elements 1 or -1 of equal probability (other choice of Ĩ is possible.), N s is the number of random states. It is clear that Ĩ = I + δ with δ ii = 0. The random δ ij (i ̸ = j) satisfies the Gaussian distribution (due to the central limit theorem) with the average ⟨δ ij ⟩ = 0, and a standard deviation ⟨δ 2 ij ⟩ = 1/N s . The randomization of GF has been applied to accerlerate GW calculations. For equilibrium noninteracting ES, we consider a physical system with the overlap O (for generality) and Hamiltonian H defined with N localized bases. Then, a randomized matrix function, F (O -1 H), e.g. Fermi-Dirac function F (X) = 1/(exp(β(X -μ)) + 1) (β = 1/k B T , μ is chemical potential) can be connected to the rGF by, where the rGF GR (z) is given by the retarded GF G R (z) = [zO -H] -1 (z = ε + iη,η is infinitesimal). F bears only the statistical error, namely F • δ, which is controllable with the finite N s . For a large scale system, N s presenting a good accuracy can be much smaller than the dimension of H. By introducing the polynomial expansion to F (ε) in Eq.3, one can obtain the polynomial approximation of F (O -1 H), e.g. the Chebyshev expansion for the DM, where the vector |R i (z)⟩ satisfies the linear equation which features a shif ted complex symmetric linear system for different z which can be solved by Krylov subspace methods. where v is the size of subspace, m ⟩, m = 1, ..., v} in which the involved O -1 -vector product is solved efficiently with the iterative conjugate gradient (CG) linear solver. Then, we can obtain a projected v × v subspace overlap to give rGF in Eq.4. As a result, by combining Eq.4 and Eq.6, Eq.3 is projected onto a Krylov subspace integration, namely which can be obtained analytically with subspace diagonalization or numerically with accurate complex-contour technique (based on the analyticity of retarded GF). It should be noted that Eq.8 essentially provides a Krylov expansion with v polynomials of H ′ (distinct from the Chebyshev expansion), featuring a linear scaling computational cost. As an application of rGF, the generalized non-interacting DM, using Fermi-Dirac function in Eq.3, can be obtained as The Krylov subspace method provides a controllable approach to calculate D with high accuracy. The convergence of the Krylov subspace for D can be related to the number of distinct clusters of eigenvalues of the material system and their width. In DFTB, the total orbital energy is obtained as and then the DFTB total energy is given by, where E rep is pairwise energy in which the parameters are fitted to the high-level theoretical calculation(e.g. KS-DFT), and E coul is coulomb energy that corrects the double counting in E orbit . Finally, the inset of Fig. In summary, we have developed a linear scaling rGF method for simulating large-scale materials. The rGF is defined on a set of random states and is projected onto a small Krylov subspace to calculate the DM. By combining with the DFTB, we have demonstrated the rGF selfconsistent electronic structure calculation can reach an error of ∼1meV per H 2 O in total energy, in comparison with the deterministic calculation. The random Green's function is generally applicable to many other electronic structure methods, including density functional theory, Tight-Binding model and nonequilibrium Green's function method for nanoelectronics, quantum many-body method. Y.Ke acknowledges financial support from NSFC (grant No.12227901), and S.Yuan.thanks the financial support from NSFC(grant No.11974263,12174291). The authors thank the HPC platform of ShanghaiTech University for providing the computational facility.