This study investigated the magnetic field (H) dependence of thermal conductivity (κ) in type I (Pb) and type II (Nb) superconductors. The κ of Nb displayed hysteresis, showing a local minimum during increasing H process but not during decreasing H process. Different magnetic field dependencies were observed in Pb with varying purity: κ of 3N-Pb exhibited broad hysteresis, while that of 5N-Pb showed hysteresis similar to 3N-Nb. In recent years, research endeavors have been undertaken to control thermal conductivity (κ) through the utilization of external fields, specifically electric and magnetic fields (H), without the need for mechanical moving Recently, Sn-Pb solders, which are almost phase-separated, have attracted attention as nonvolatile MTS materials maintaining a high κ value at zero field even after experiencing H Nonvolatile MTS caused by a similar mechanism has also been reported for MgB 2 The H dependence of κ for the 3N-Nb (polycrystalline, 3N purity, Nilaco) sheet with a thickness of 0.1 mm, 3N-Pb (polycrystalline, 3N purity, Nilaco), and 5N-Pb (polycrystalline, 5N purity, Nilaco) wires with a diameter of 0.5 mm, was measucite using a four-terminal configuration. These measurements were conducted with the thermal transport option (TTO) with the physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). The samples were mounted to ensure that the direction of the heat flow was antiparallel to the magnetic field. X-ray fluorescence (XRF) was conducted to assess the elemental composition of each sample. XRF results indicated the absence of any elements other than the primary elements in 3N-Nb and 5N-Pb. However, 3N-Pb exhibited the presence of Cu with a mass concentration of 0.07 %. Figure However, once H falls below H c2 , κ shows a decrease. Notably, κ does not show a local minimum during the decreasing H process and dose not return to its initial value. The H dependence of κ in Nb is commonly known to exhibit the local minimum during the application H process As is widely know, the total thermal conductivity (κ total ) consists of two components: the electron contribution (κ e ) and the phonon contribution (κ ph ). As illustrated in Fig. Figure However, since the wire-shaped 5N-Pb is carefully mounted to align with the cylindrical and magnetic field directions, the shape effect is considecite small. Moreover, even if the absence of the local minimum can be explained by an intermediate state, both the initial zero-field state and the zero-field state after experiencing H must be Meissner states, which cannot explain why κ at the zero field is different. In order to discuss this point in more detail, it will be necessary to clarify the temperature dependence of κ in the magnetic field and the H dependence of κ at several temperatures in more detail. In this study we measucite the H dependence of κ of the type-I superconductor Pb and the type-II superconductor Nb. Nb exhibits different H dependences of κ with and without local minimum during increasing and decreasing H processes, attributed to the different H dependence of κ ph due to trapped magnetic flux. Pb results are different with sample purity. Less pure 3N-Pb shows broad hysteresis, potentially due to magnetic flux trapping by impurities. In 5N-Pb, despite its high purity, the local minimum and hysteresis were observed, but it is difficult to clarify the origin of these in this study. Previous research on MTS using superconductor has highlighted factors like the operational temperature range and switching ratio. However, when employing a superconductor as a MTS, it becomes important that κ reverts to its initial value at zero field, alongside considering the switching speed. As this study shows, even for pure metals, κ in the magnetic field depends on the sample quality and the magnetic field history, and this study suggests that it is also important to study the switching operation with the ON/OFF of the magnetic field. 