The control of nonthermal, all-optical magnetization switching under the regime with an independent state of laser polarization opens up new opportunities for ultrafast magnetic recording. Here, we investigate the photo-magnetic back-switching capabilities of the write and erase magnetic domain pattern using double-pump pulse excitations in an iron garnet film with pure cubic magnetocrystalline symmetry. It is essential to note that forward and backward magnetization switching is achievable in two distinctive scenarios: using identical linearly polarized laser pulses and with pulses having orthogonal polarization planes. By observing the switch of magnetization at domains independent of the initial state, one can nonthermally toggle the magnetization, equivalent to XOR logical operation, at frequencies reaching up to 50 GHz. In the past decade, several mechanisms, finally leading to the ultrafast all-optical switching (AOS) of magnetization in both metals and dielectric materials have been shown In the case of dielectric materials, ultrafast magnetization control can be achieved through thermal effects The determination of possible frequencies and repetition times for controlling the magnetization state can be directly obtained by employing double-pump pulses, separated by a defined time delay. This method is recently commonly applied in the case of metallic ferrimagnets, such as GdFeCo Recently, the nonthermal toggle switching regime observed in YIG:Co films with pure magnetocrystalline cubic symmetry To observe the magnetic domain pattern and magnetization switching we utilized the magnetooptical microscope in Faraday geometry. The magnetization dynamics of photo-magnetic switching were examined using the time-resolved pump and probe technique Two pumps, referred to as pump A and pump B, were directed to separate optical parametric amplifiers, enabling wavelength conversion and selecting the 1300 nm wavelength. Next, the beams were directed toward separate mechanical delay lines, which allowed for adjusting the mutual delay between the first pump A and the second pump B set as ‫ݐ߂‬ time. The probe beam illuminated the sample at normal incidence and two pump beams were directed at an angle of about +/-10° from the normal incidence. All measurements were performed without an external magnetic field and at room temperature. Since the back-switching can be observed in the statics regime, in which the exposure time enabling obtaining magneto-optical images can be arbitrarily long and last several hundred milliseconds, in a relatively simple experiment using double pump excitation, we were able to analyze pump pulse pair interference. First, we precisely adjusted the optical parameters of pumps A and B to match each other. The pump fluence (50 mJ/cm 2 ), polarization plane along to Because determining the normalized switching area in the case of a labyrinth-like structure may not be obvious, we used the same repeatable procedure for every analyzed image. Firstly, the analyzed image was prepared in differential form. Next, to remove any remaining background non-uniformities, the image was once again differentiated with a copy blurred in a Gaussian filter and subjected to bandpass filtration. Such an image was separated into two parts with a low threshold and a high threshold, selecting a particular part (with white or black contrast) of the domain structure. Next, the images were added together once again and binarized. Finally, after a set of binary operations, including filling holes and closing the structure, the switching size was determined and could also be translated into switching efficiency. During the double-pump excitation, the magnetization switching occurs up to ‫ݐ߂‬ = 320 ps. The dependence of the switching area for ‫ݐ߂‬ time is depicted in Fig. In order to conduct these measurements, we utilized a double pump and probe setup capable of time-resolved tracking of magnetization precession for pump laser fluence (<10 mJ/cm 2 ) below the switching threshold. In this configuration, the probe beam, operating at a 1 kHz repetition rate and focused on the sample with a 50 μm diameter polarized orthogonally to the pump pulse polarization was employed. In order to detect temporal changes in the Faraday rotation signal, which is proportional to the magnetization component ‫ܯ(‬ ௭ ) along [001] crystallographic direction in the sample, a scheme with an auto-balanced photodiode was used. After traversing the sample, the probe beam was directed to a half-wave plate and a Wollaston prism, which separated it into two linearly polarized beams with orthogonal polarization. These beams were directed to two separate branches of an auto-balanced photodiode, which monitored the change in their intensities corresponding to Faraday rotation. In this case, for every particular delay between pulses A and B, the probe beam was swept with the delay ‫,ݐ߂‬ revealing both pump beams' impact on magnetization precession. Both pump pulses were once again equalized and matched to individually induce exactly the same precession signal. The obtained time-resolved double pump traces are presented in Fig. It is worth noting that pulse fluence significantly influences both the switching efficiency and dynamic measurements. For instance, as demonstrated in To demonstrate the repeatability of the photo-magnetic switching within a single pump pulse in a picosecond time scale, we captured a series of single-shot time-resolved images using the setup described in detail in Ref. The exemplary stack of time-resolved differential images is presented in Fig. In order to demonstrate a resetting scenario we utilize two pump pulses polarized orthogonally to each other. Using the same approach and settings, we performed analogous measurements, only changing the polarization plane of the pump pulse B. The obtained measurements are provided in the same manner, with the exemplar stack of differential images of domain pattern presented in Fig. With pump A polarized along the [100] axis and pump B polarized along the [010] axis, the generated torque has opposite signs. Therefore, for ‫ݐ߂‬ = 0 ps, precessional signals being in counter phases interfere destructively, resulting in no magnetization precession and therefore do not provide any switching. In contrast to previous results on the YIG:Co miscut sample, this confirms the existence of pure cubic symmetry and energetically equivalence of direction of magnetization during forward and backward switching. However, by increasing ‫ݐ߂‬ , a characteristic region between ‫ݐ߂‬ = 30 -80 ps in which switching is obtainable occurs. Once again, to understand this behavior, insight into dynamics is required. As it may be noticed, when precession traces are delayed, the interference changes its character and starts to provide precession similar to the one obtained by a single pump. Further increase of ‫ݐ߂‬ indeed increases the amplitude of precession to the saturated level, however, after about a quarter of the precession period ܶ/4, the second pump pulse B is able to overcome switching. It results once again in switching with pulse A and magnetization reversal with pulse B. These results underline that the photo-magnetic back-switching regime with the precessional motion of magnetization opens a plethora of possibilities for writing and erasing magnetic bits using only a sequence of the ultrashort laser pulses. In this regime, the lifetime of photoinduced anisotropy is limited to approximately 20 ps and is independent of the initial state of magnetization with a fixed laser polarization state. Therefore the magnetization state can be toggled for laser pulses with control of the delay time between pulses, achieving a switching frequency of up to 50 GHz. The toggle switching regime can also be successfully used to perform basic logical operations, such as XOR, AND, or inverting operations equivalent to the NOT operation. In fact, the utilization of only a set of connectives AND and NOT provides functional completeness, giving access to any other logical operation, as every switching function can be expressed by means of operations within it. Supporting and controlling magnetization switching, for example, both laser and electric pulses, could provide an additional degree of freedom in the modification of extrinsic contribution to magnetic anisotropy in the photo-magnetic garnets. This potential advancement could find utility in emerging fields such as opto-spintronics or opto-magnonics, utilizing the multi-states character of cubic garnet systems and offering opportunities for logical operations.