The mechanical behaviour of many materials, including polymers or natural materials, significantly depends on the rate of deformation. As a consequence, a rate-dependent ductile-to-brittle fracture transition may be observed. For toffee-like caramel, this effect is particularly pronounced. At room temperature, this confectionery may be extensively deformed at low strain rates, while it can behave highly brittle when the rate of deformation is raised. Likewise, the material behaviour does significantly depend on temperature, and even a slight cooling may cause a significant embrittlement. In this work, a thorough experimental investigation of the rate-dependent deformation and fracture behaviour is presented. In addition, the influence of temperature on the material response is studied. The experimental results form the basis for a phase-field modelling of fracture. In order to derive the governing equations of the model, an incremental variational principle is introduced. By means of the validated model, an analysis of the experimentally observed ductile-to-brittle fracture transition is performed. In particular, the coupling between the highly dissipative deformation behaviour of the bulk material and the rate-dependent fracture resistance is discussed. For optimising processes in food production and packaging, a predictive model that adequately describes the mechanical behaviour of the respective material can essentially facilitate procedures, which are often realised in purely empirical manner, so far. For instance, it may be a non-trivial question to determine the optimal cutting speed for foods or candies such as toffee within an industrial process. Whereas slow cutting is economically undesirable, choosing a too high speed might result in rough surfaces or even splintering, cf. In the food engineering community, several publications address the rate-dependency of deformation of natural materials and the determination of fracture mechanics properties of foods, see e.g. In the mechanics community, the phase-field approach has become a well-established concept for the modelling of fracture phenomena. Different from classical finite element approaches (FE), it enables to simulate crack growth without the need for remeshing and crack patterns that are not a priori known can be simulated in a straightforward manner, which makes the concept attractive compared to alternative approaches such as CZE The phase-field modelling of rate-dependent fracture phenomena also is a subject of current research and an overview is provided in the authors' previous contributions The present contribution aims at the investigation of the ductile-to-brittle fracture transition as it can be observed for toffee-like caramel. To this end, an extensive experimental study on the rate-dependency of the mechanical behaviour is performed, for which a toffee type caramel confectionery is produced under lab conditions. Furthermore, the influence of temperature on the material response is studied. For the description and model-based analysis of the rate-dependent fracture phenomena, the phase-field approach is pursued. In order to introduce the governing equations of the model, an incremental variational principle is presented, which is based on a time-continuous pseudo-potential of rate type, cf. This contribution proceeds as follows. In Sect. 2, the key assumptions of the model are presented and governing equations are derived. For this purpose, an incremental variational principle is introduced. Furthermore, thermodynamic consistency is proven and key aspects of the finite element implementation are addressed. Subsequently, in Sect. 3, information on the toffee-like material that is considered in the scope of this paper is presented. Then, in Sect. 4, an analysis of its deformation and fracture behaviour at room temperature is performed, and subsequently, in Sect. 5, the influence of temperature on the mechanical behaviour is studied. The paper closes with a conclusion and an outlook regarding future works in Sect. 6. In the previous works of the authors In the following, one specification of the unified approach considered in the authors' previous contributions will be applied to the toffee-like confectionery. Extending the previous work, the model is formulated in the framework of an incremental variational principle, which serves for the derivation of the governing differential equations. The starting point for the present model of rate-dependent fracture phenomena is the diffuse approximation of crack topology by means of the fracture phase-field variable that continuously varies from the intact (d = 0) to the fully broken (d = 1) material state, wherein X ∈ Ω 0 denotes the coordinate of a material point in the reference configuration and t the time. This concept, which goes back to the fundamental work of Bourdin can be defined, in which the length scale parameter l c controls the characteristic width of the diffuse crack. Therein, the Nabla operator with respect to the reference coordinate X is given by with e K denoting the K-th basis vector of the Cartesian reference coordinate frame. Based on this functional and conceptionally similar to the hypothesis of Griffith which refers to a volume element of the reference or undeformed configuration Ω 0 ⊂ R N of the N-dimensional domain under consideration. In Φ fr , the parameter G c > 0 quantifies the resistance of the material against fracture. In analogy to the proportionality constant of classical fracture mechanics, G c is referred to as fracture toughness in this contribution. This is in line with the authors' previous works is defined, cf. cf. Diffuse representation of a crack within a domain that undergoes finite deformation and in which a small residual k is included in order to enhance numerical stability. By means of g(d), the degraded reference free energy density can be written as with the virtually undamaged density of free energy, i.e. the amount of free energy that would be stored in the material in the absence of damage, denoted by ψ. For the description of the rate-dependent deformation behaviour, the approach of finite viscoelasticity in the sense of The displacement of a material point is denoted by wherein χ( X, t) : is the motion function, which can be assumed to be bijective and continuous in space and time. The deformation gradient F and its determinant J are then given by ψ st,eq = 0 For the description of toffee, a Generalised Maxwell element that consists of two non-equilibrium branches has shown to be suitable, see Sects. 4 and 5. For each of these over-stress branches, Ξ ∈ {1, 2}, the deformation gradient is multiplicatively decomposed into an elastic and a viscous part, i.e.3 Following Flory Furthermore, for each of the non-equilibrium branches, the elastic stretch tensors are defined, where the tilde symbol • is introduced to mark quantities which refer to a fictitious inelastic intermediate configuration defined by Ξ F vi . From the spectral decomposition of these quantities, the elastic principal stretches Ξ λ el β as well as their isochoric counterparts β can be identified, where the number of pair-wise different elastic principal stretches is given by Ξ N el λ for the corresponding non-equilibrium branch. The according second-order projection tensors, or eigenvalue-base tensors, are obtained from in which I designates the second-order identity tensor, and the Kronecker delta δ kl is given by and similar relations for Ξ Pel β is introduced. It refers to the respective intermediate configuration defined by Ξ F vi . Here, it is assumed that the inelastic deformation is purely translational, i.e. the inelastic spin is defined to zero, which is a common definition for isotropic materials, see e.g. with its counterpart transformed to the reference configuration given by The rate of viscous deformation can also be written in terms of the Lie derivative of the elastic stretch L Ξ b el , where the Lie derivative is given as cf. 3It has to be noted that the Einstein summation convention does not apply for the index of the non-equilibrium branch Ξ in ( The density of free energy Ψ is assumed to be given by the strain energy which can be associated to the springs of the two non-equilibrium branches of the rheological model shown in Fig. is defined for the density of free energy with respect to a volume element in the reference configuration.5 For the virtually undamaged strain energy of the individual over-stress branches, functions of compressible Ogden type wherein Ξ λel σ = Ξ J el -1/3 Ξ λ el σ are the isochoric elastic principal stretches following from can be derived. The density of rate of viscous dissipation Φ vi can be expressed by means of a quadratic form for each non-equilibrium branch in which Ξ V denote fourth-order positive definite viscosity tensors, cf. is defined, accordingly. Therein, I D is the symmetric fourth-order deviator projection tensor with its coordinates given by Moreover, iso Ξ η, vol Ξ η > 0 are constant viscosities with respect to the isochoric and volumetric portion of deformation, respectively. Here, these are identified from the relaxation times 4It seems worth mentioning that in the previous work Based on the previous assumptions on the densities of stored energy and dissipation power, a rate type pseudo-potential can be defined,6 in which the power of external forces is given by with p denoting the Piola traction vector prescribed on ∂Ω 0, p ⊂ ∂Ω 0 .7 Furthermore, in Π l c , making use of the definition The governing equations of the present model can be derived as necessary conditions for stationarity of the pseudo-potential Π l c with respect to u, Ξ F vi and d, which can be referred to as a rate type or incremental variational principle where N denotes the outward-pointing unit normal vector on ∂Ω 0 , and in which the First Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor P and its virtually undamaged counterpart 0 P, can be identified. The stress may be additively decomposed into the contributions arising from the individual over-stress branches, Likewise, from (34) 3 , the evolution of viscous deformation is obtained as which is a classical Biot type evolution equation as considered in the framework of generalised standard materials 6For the scope of the present study, inertia terms are neglected. 7In this work, no volume forces are considered. Furthermore, the external loads are assumed not to depend on the field variables. 8In the literature, the denomination incremental variational principle is used for both time-continuous formulations of rate type as well as time-discrete approaches, see e.g. the overview of which is similar to the original definition of finite viscoelasticity by Reese and Govindjee Finally, (34) 4 can be rewritten in a form similar to and the Ginzburg-Landau type phase-field equation and the respective boundary conditions are obtained. Here, two non-variational extensions of the phase-field evolution equation (42) 1 are adopted. Firstly, in order to enable the model to capture more complex material responses, a rate-dependent fracture resistance G c is introduced. Specifically, G c is allowed to depend on which serves as a scalar measure of the rate of deformation. In line with is adopted as shown in Fig. is introduced, which comprises the maximum of fracture driving force that has occurred.9 Inserting these definitions, the phase-field equation 9By means of H, d ≥ 0 is exactly fulfilled in the absence of gradients, i.e. ∇ X d = 0 In order to ensure compatibility of the model with the second law of thermodynamics, following Coleman and Gurtin with the viscous dissipation given by and the fracture dissipation Since ψ ≥ 0 and due to (7) 4 , D fr ≥ 0 holds for d ≥ 0, which is ensured by means of the history variable approach as introduced in ( the viscous dissipation within a single over-stress branch can be rewritten as which is non-negative by definition of Φ vi according to For the implementation of the model in a standard finite element code, the total Lagrangian approach is pursued. Accordingly, the mechanical equilibrium condition With this form of the mechanical equilibrium at hand, the governing differential equations of the present model are summarised in Tab. 1. For the derivation of the weak forms of the mechanical equilibrium are defined, wherein H 1 (Ω 0 ) is the Sobolev space of square integrable functions possessing square integrable derivatives in Ω 0 , and ∂Ω 0, û = ∂Ω 0 \ ∂Ω 0, p denote the parts of the boundary where the respective components of the displacement vector u Table Preprint arXiv are prescribed. Following the method of weighted residuals with δu ∈ W u and δc ∈ W c , and making use of integration by parts and the divergence theorem yields and For spatial discretization, Galerkin's method is applied and time discrete forms are obtained by approximating the respective rates using an Euler backward scheme. In order to integrate the viscous evolution equation is approximated by means of a predictor-corrector type operator split algorithm. Based on the inelastic deformation of the previous time step t n-1 and the current deformation gradient F n , a trial value of elastic stretch is defined in the predictor step. Subsequently, a corrected value of Ξ b el n that accounts for the change in inelastic deformation is determined, for which l = 0 is set and the evolution equation ( is integrated in approximate manner by means of an exponential mapping scheme, which leads to a nonlinear algebraic system of equations that is iteratively solved for Ξ b el by means of a local Newton scheme at quadrature point level in each iteration step of the global finite element solution procedure. More details on the algorithmic treatment of viscous evolution are provided in the previous contribution The coupled problem is solved by means of a staggered approach, i.e. the mechanical equilibrium and the phase-field equation are solved in sequential manner. Multiple iterations of this decoupled solution scheme are performed until a convergence criterion is fulfilled, which is based on the update of the nodal degrees of freedom with respect to the previous staggered loop iteration. Furthermore, adaptive control of the time step size is employed based on a heuristic scheme. For this, depending on the number of global Newton iterations as well as on the number of staggered loops, the time step is either lowered or increased. In addition, if the convergence criteria are not met after a certain number of Newton iterations or staggered loops, respectively, a cut back to the last converged increment is performed and the time step size is lowered, accordingly. Generally, caramel is a class of confectionery that is made from various sugars, water, milk solids, fats, and emulsifiers. After mixing, homogenisation and heating to temperatures between 118 °C and 130 °C, food products are obtained, which feature a content of moisture typically ranging from 6 g/100 g to 12 g/100 g Within the scope of this contribution, a toffee-like caramel is considered that is produced under lab conditions with the respective procedure comprehensively described in the previous work The resulting toffee material has a content of moisture of (7.0 g ± 0.2 g)/100 g, which is verified for each lot of specimens by means of gravimetric analysis. Apart from that, it consists of 39.8 g/100 g sucrose, 36.5 g/100 g non-sucrose saccharides, 10.6 g/100 g fat, 3.9 g/100 g protein, 1.2 g/100 g lecithin, and 1.0 g/100 g mineral salts, with the mean mass fractions of these ingredients calculated from the gravimetrically-determined moisture content and the respective mass portions in the premix. While this confectionery is macroscopically homogeneous, on the micro-scale, it can be considered as a multiphase system that consists of a continuous phase and a dispersed phase of fine fat droplets, cf. For the experimental investigation of the complex rate-and temperature-dependent mechanical behaviour, a gradual approach is pursued. In this section, the case of the temperature being constant and equal to the room value θ = 25 °C is considered. Furthermore, the deformation behaviour of the bulk is studied first, for which unnotched specimens are examined. Subsequently, fracture is investigated by way of pre-notched specimens. For the experimental analysis of the deformation behaviour, dog bone specimens are considered under tension as shown in Fig. For the relaxation tests, the stretch-time data and the corresponding stress response are presented in Fig. As it is shown in Fig. The P-λ data from the monotonic experiments, Fig. In order to identify the viscous parameters of the bulk and the belonging relaxation times, the deviation between mean experimental stress data from the monotonic and the relaxation tests and the according model prediction is minimised. To this end, homogeneous uniaxial stress states are assumed and damage is not taken into account. Furthermore, since no relevant time-dependency of the transversal deformation has been observed in the relaxation tests, the Poisson's ratios are assumed to be identical for all over-stress branches and set to Ξ ν ov = 0.47, which corresponds to the mean value computed from the experimentally determined axial and transversal stretches. Then, in order to identify the Ogden parameters Ξ μ ov p and Ξ α ov p as well as the relaxation times Ξ τ, the GlobalSearch framework of Matlab R2020b together with the fmincon algorithm for 10For time synchronisation of the stretch and stress data that stem from different repetitions of the experiments, piecewise spline interpolation is used for the incremental data, cf. 11Since the stress response obviously is highly dissipative and decisively depends on rate of deformation, one reason for the stress decrease at higher stretches may be the decrease of the norm of the rate of deformation tensor | |d| | with λ given a constant λ. In addition, for larger stretches λ ≥ 1.2, damage effects in the bulk material might also play a part, which go beyond the scope of the present contribution, though. for any p. Furthermore, for the relaxation times of each over-stress branch, an interval of admissible values is defined such that the individual Ξ τ do approximately differ by one order of magnitude, where the lower bound for the smallest Ξ τ is defined based on the temporal resolution of the experimental data and the upper bound for the largest Ξ τ determined by the hold time of the relaxation experiments. To a certain extent, this approach is inspired by the window algorithm developed for the identification of relaxation spectra in the framework of linear viscoelasticity, see In order to parameterise the rate-dependent fracture resistance function G c (d), specimens of similar geometry are considered as for the investigation of the deformation behaviour, see Fig. Depending on the prescribed value of u, the experimental results differ drastically. Essentially, three phenomena can be distinguished, which are shown in Fig. For the parameterisation of the rate-dependent fracture resistance G c (d), the mean experimental F-u curves from the SENT are compared to model predictions with varied parameters of the phase-field model, while the model of deformation behaviour is a priori fixed. In doing so, the length scale parameter l c is predefined to l c = 0.25 mm, which is considerably smaller than the minimal dimension of the specimen while allowing for an acceptable number of elements required for resolving the diffuse crack topology. Moreover, the numerically motivated kinetic fracture parameter and the residual stiffness are chosen to η f = 5 • 10 -6 Ns/mm 2 and k = 10 -10 , respectively. For all the simulations presented in this paper, the pre-existing cuts within the specimens are modelled geometrically by means of notches. Since the specimens are of low thickness, plane stress conditions are assumed and two-dimensional simulations are performed, here. Due to symmetry, only one half of the specimen domain is considered. The mesh consists of quadratic triangular elements and is refined along the expected crack path. By means of a numerical comparison of different mesh sizes, h-convergence is verified. The constants G 1 c , G 2 c , c and r ref are then identified such that the mean experimental critical displacement u crit is optimally recovered in case of brittle fracture for u ≥ 1000 mm/min, while it does not come to crack propagation when u ≤ 500 mm/min. Moreover, for the transition range between brittle fracture and crack propagation-free deformation, an assumption is made. While the experimental results are somewhat ambiguous, only ductile fracture is considered at the mean u crit observed in the experiments Preprint arXiv for the parameterisation.12 The final parameters are listed in Tab. 3, and as it becomes clear from Fig. With the aim of validating the entire model, asymmetrically double-notched specimens are investigated under tension (DENT) at varied u ∈ [500, 2500] mm/min. To this end, the same dog bone-shaped specimens are considered as in the previous sections, Fig. For an analysis of the rate-dependent ductile-to-brittle fracture transition, the evolution of the relevant energetic quantities is discussed in the following. To this end, the SENT is reconsidered. In Fig. In order to investigate the temperature-dependency, the mechanical behaviour exemplarily is studied for a second constant value of temperature, and the according results are then compared to the aforementioned findings for θ = 25 °C. Here, θ = 18 °C is chosen. Similar experiments are conducted as discussed for room temperature in the previous section. Based on these data, another parameterisation of the rate-dependent model is carried out assuming isothermal conditions and following the same procedure as described above. For the analysis of the deformation behaviour of the bulk material, unnotched specimens are investigated under monotonic tension at different rates and relaxation conditions as described in Sect 4.1. The P-λ curves for monotonic tension at different λ are shown in Fig. For the number of over-stress branches, Ogden terms and the parameter identification procedure, the statements of Sect. 4.1 do likewise apply for θ = 18 °C, and the final parameters are given in Tab. For the purpose of characterising the temperature influence on the fracture resistance, the experimental procedure described in Sect. 4.2 for ambiance conditions is repeated for θ = 18 °C. Immaterial of temperature, the same three classes of crack or deformation phenomena can be observed, respectively, which are discussed above. Likewise, generally similar F-u data are obtained for θ = 18 °C as for ambiance conditions, see Figs. The parameters of the phase-field model, which are identified from the SENT similarly to Sect. 4.2, are given in Tab. 5. For these parameters, the model acceptably reproduces the experimental F-u data for both the SENT and the DENT, see Figs. The mechanical behaviour of a toffee-like caramel confectionery is investigated. An experimental study is performed, for which a food material has been produced under lab conditions. Depending on the rate of deformation, the experimental results differ drastically. Whereas specimens fail in a brittle manner when the strain rate is high, they can be significantly deformed in case of low rates. This phenomenon is referred to as rate-dependent ductile-to-brittle fracture transition. Furthermore, the temperature-dependency of the mechanical behaviour also is pronounced, and there is an analogy between an increase in rate of deformation and a decrease in temperature. For the modelling and analysis of these phenomena, a fracture phase-field approach is pursued that combines both, a rate-dependent model of bulk deformation and a rate-dependent Griffith type fracture resistance. In order to derive the governing equations of the model, an incremental variational principle is presented, which is based on a time-continuous pseudo-potential of rate type. The parameters are identified in a step-by-step procedure. Whereas the viscous deformation behaviour is characterised exploiting monotonic experiments and relaxation tests with unnotched specimens, the fracture resistance is parameterised in an inverse manner based on experimental data from pre-notched specimens, for what the viscous model of deformation is a priori fixed. The parameterised model captures the experimental observations. Moreover, the numerical analysis enables to conclude that it essentially is the complex interplay between the highly dissipative viscous deformation of the bulk material and the rate-dependent fracture resistance that is responsible for the ductile-to-brittle fracture transition. Exemplarily, the consequences of a decrease in temperature with respect to ambiance conditions are investigated in terms of both experiment and model. It is shown that there is a qualitative equivalence between a decrease in temperature and an increase in rate of deformation for both the viscous deformation behaviour and the rate-dependent fracture resistance. The present contribution deals with a food type natural material, and a significant amount of scatter in the experimental data is thus inevitable. In particular, slight deviations in the exact chemical composition and small microscopic heterogeneities or defects are inherent to toffee. In future work, the present model could be extended to take the stochasticity of the material properties into account. Moreover, the study on the influence of temperature on the mechanical behaviour could be expanded in order to verify if a quantitative time-temperature equivalence can be established. For some materials, such relations serve as a basis for time-temperature superposition principles, that are typically established considering small deformations and linear viscoelasticity, so far, though. Finally, the present work may serve as a basis for a physics-based optimisation of industrial food cutting processes. Until now, the approaches that are pursued in the industry are mainly of empirical nature. 2It has to be noted that the proposed model does not guarantee Γ-convergence against a sharp crack description. Therefore, G c can be seen as a measure of resistance against fracture that is valid within the diffuse framework, yet can not be assumed to exactly correspond to the toughness or critical energy release rate according to classical fracture mechanics, in general. Preprint arXiv