In magnetic tunnel junctions based on iron oxide nanoparticles the disorder and the oxidation state of the surface spin as well as the nanoparticles functionalization play a crucial role in the magnetotransport properties. In this work, we report a systematic study of the effects of vacuum annealing on the structural, magnetic and transport properties of self-assembled ∼10 nm Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles. The high temperature treatment (from 573 K to 873 K) decomposes the organic coating into amorphous carbon, reducing the electrical resistivity of the assemblies by 4 orders of magnitude. At the same time, the 3.Fe 2+ /(Fe 3+ +Fe 2+ ) ratio is reduced from 1.11 to 0.13 when the annealing temperature of the sample increases from 573 K to 873 K, indicating an important surface oxidation. Although the 2 nm physical gap remains unchanged with the thermal treatment, a monotonous decrease of tunnel barrier width was obtained from the electron transport measurements when the annealing temperature increases, indicating an increment in the number of defects and hot-spots in the gap between the nanoparticles. This is reflected in the reduction of the spin dependent tunneling, which reduces the interparticle magnetoresistance. This work shows new insights about influence of the nanoparticle interfacial composition, as well their the spatial arrangement, on the tunnel transport of self-assemblies, and evidence the importance of optimizing the nanostructure fabrication for increasing the tunneling current without degrading the spin polarized current. a) ffabris@ifi.unicamp.br The spin-dependent transport has been extensively studied in different nanostructures for exploiting the possibilities of controlling spin injection. Since the discovery of giant magnetoresistance 1,2 new nanotechnologies have been developed based on magnetic tunnel junction as magnetic recording is one of the more attractive materials due to its half-metallic properties, high spin polarization at room temperature value is much lower than the theoretically predicted for half-metallic compounds, where a fully spin polarized, P = 100%, is expected. This reduction is ascribed to the diminution of spin polarization due to surface oxidation, surface spin disorder, and/or electron-electron correlations. In this context, we are interested in finding the conditions that optimize and simplify the fabrication of nanoparticles assemblies in order to enhance the electrical conductivity of the films preserving their spin polarization. With this aim we report a detailed study of the effects of vacuum thermal annealing on the structural, magnetic and magnetotransport properties of self-assemblies of ∼10 nm Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles coated with oleic acid. The structural study shows that the size of nanoparticles and their arrangement do not change appreciably with the annealing up to 873 K. However, a substantial increase of surface Fe 3+ /Fe 2+ -ratio occurs, due to the oxidation of the nanoparticle surface by the decomposition of the oleic acid. Although the partial elimination of the organic barrier reduces the electrical resistance of the system, the surface oxidation decreases the spin polarization and partially suppresses the TMR. Therefore, we show that the annealing conditions must be carefully optimized for the fabrication of functional nanoparticle self-assemblies, in order to obtain an efficient control on the tunneling current and the spin polarization by means of the spatial arrangement and the surface composition. The Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles were synthesized by thermal decomposition of organo-metallic precursors at high temperature following the procedure described in previous references. The self-assembly of Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles was made by the liquid-air interface method following the procedure reported in Refs. μl of the solution of nanoparticles in hexane was drop casted onto the surface of triethylene glycol in a 1.5×1.5×1.0 cm 3 Teflon container. A self-assembled film is formed after complete evaporation of hexane (after 10-15 min). After that, the triethylene glycol is removed very slowly using a syringe to gently deposit the assembled film on the glass substrate strategically positioned within the Teflon container. Finally, the self-assemblies were annealed at a constant temperature in a range between 573 K and 873 K by 30 minutes under mechanical vacuum (≈ 10 -3 Torr). The samples were labeled as SX, where X corresponds to the annealing temperature in Kelvin. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were taken in a Philips CM200 microscope equipped with an Ultra-Twin lens operating at 200 kV and in a field emission FEI Tecnai G2 F30 microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV. In order to perform the TEM analysis the Fe 3 O 4 self-assemblies were transferred from the triethylene glycol surface to commercial silicon nitride TEM grids followed by the corresponding thermal annealing. The diameter distribution f (D) was obtained by measuring ∼ 400 particles assuming spherical shape. The histograms were fitted with a lognormal function , from which mean diameter ⟨D⟩ and standard deviation σ was obtained. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed with a hemispherical electrostatic energy analyzer (r = 10 cm) using Al K α radiation (hν = 1486.6 eV). The binding-energy (BE) scale was calibrated with the position of the C1s peak corresponding to the residual carbon coating or adsorbed carbon. Magnetic measurements of the self-assemblies were performed in a SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design, MPMS3) with the magnetic field applied in the plane of the substrate. The magnetization as a function of temperature (M(T)) was measured with an applied field of 100 Oe by using the Zero-field-cooling (ZFC) and Field-cooling (FC) protocols. The magnetotransport measurements were performed using a Keithley 4200 source-measure unit in a two-probe configuration, with a maximum applied field of ±12 kOe. For these measurements the self-assembled nanoparticles were deposited on commercial substrates of Si/SiO 2 (200 nm thick) patterned with interdigitated Au electrodes (separated from 2.5 to 10 μm and total effective length from 6 to 10 mm) followed by the thermal annealing. ticles annealed at 573 K, 723 K and 873 K, respectively. Notice that from this annealing condition, it is not generated significant size or morphological changes in the particles, see figure The electron diffraction pattern of the sample S573 and S873 shown in the figure , where r is the distance measured on the autocorrelation profile, r c the phase difference, A the amplitude, ξ the correlation length and ω = a/2 is related to the center to center particles distance a. The tunnel transport can be strongly affected by the surface composition, changing not only the height of the barrier but also the spin polarization; therefore, a careful chemical analysis of the nanoparticles surface is demanded. Figure where I is expressed in A, a in cm 2 , φ in V and l in Å. For the fitting we used the device contact area of each sample considering the electrode length (6-10 mm) and self-assembly film thickness (20 nm ≈ two particles thickness) A monotonous decrease of the resistivity with the temperature is observed for all samples (see the figure This behavior is consistent with the reduction of the barrier height and width with the annealing temperature discussed before. Figure In granular systems, the M R can be related to the macroscopic magnetization by the spin- The M R curve calculated from this model reproduces well the measurement of sample S573, but it does not have the high field dependence of the other samples, as observed in the figure This behavior is usually present in granular systems, where a high-field linear dependence of M R is observed. where 