Elastic metamaterials are man-made structures with properties that transcend naturally occurring materials. One predominant feature of elastic metamaterials is locally resonant bandgaps, i.e., frequency ranges at which wave propagation is blocked. Locally resonant bandgaps appear at relatively low frequency and arise from the existence of periodically placed mechanical local resonators. Typically, elastic metamaterials exhibit both locally resonant and Bragg-scattering bandgaps, which can generally be different in width and frequency ranges. This paper proposes two designs of active elastic metamaterials that only exhibit locally resonant bandgaps, which are infinite in number, evenly spaced in the frequency spectrum, and identical in width. The mathematical model is established using the transfer matrix method and synthesis of locally resonant bandgaps is achieved via an active elastic support with carefully designed frequency-dependent stiffness. A single unit cell of each proposed metamaterials is thoroughly studied, and its dispersion relation is derived analytically, along with the periodically repeating bandgap limits and widths. Following the dispersion analysis and bandgap parametric studies, finite arrays of the proposed metamaterials are considered, and their frequency response is calculated to verify the analytical predictions from dispersion analyses. Since their inception in the early 2000s A common configuration of EMMs is built via a host elastic structure with periodically placed (and identical) mechanical local resonators of relatively low stand-alone natural frequencies to enable sub-wavelength locally resonant bandgaps. Furthermore, EMMs may be equipped with different resonator properties along the host elastic structure, advantageous for attenuating waves with multi-frequency harmonics In this paper, two designs of active EEMs are introduced, with the capability of exhibiting an infinite number of locally resonant bandgaps that are identical in width, equidistant, and periodically repeating. The unique characteristics of the proposed designs are achieved via an elastic continuum rod with periodically placed elastic supports of Elastic Metamaterial frequency-dependent stiffness, designed specifically to realize the desired functionality. To engineer the bandgap patterns and dispersion behaviors, the dispersion relations are derived analytically using the transfer matrix method. A single unit cell of the active EMMs is thoroughly studied, and the periodic bandgap limits and widths are derived analytically. Finally, the analytical dispersion predictions are verified using the frequency response of the proposed active EMMs with a finite number of unit cells. To demonstrate the design methodology of the proposed active EMMs, it is essential to first revisit the dispersion relations of the discrete model of EMM and a diatomic lattice. Figure where q is the non-dimensional wavenumber, ω is the excitation frequency, and the parameter α is defined in Table The functions Φ n and Φ d for the diatomic lattice and the discrete EMM are listed in Table Consider a continuum elastic rod, with a unit-cell length of l, a cross-sectional area of A, and a sonic speed of c = E/ρ, where E and ρ are Young's modulus and density of the rod, respectively. Considering longitudinal waves, the dispersion relation is linear, and it can be written in the following non-dimensional form: where Ω = ωl/c is a normalized version of the excitation frequency ω. Equation ( where γ is a tuning parameter for the bandgaps' limits. Having the term sin(Ω) in the denominator Φ d means that evenly spaced (and infinite in number) local resonances emerge at Ω = nπ, where n ∈ N 0 and N 0 denotes all natural numbers including zero. Equivalently, the free-wave dispersion branches can be derived by rearranging the terms in Equation ( From the solutions of Equation ( ) As inferred from the structure of the bandgap limits formulae in Equation ( To achieve the dispersion relation in Equation ( where z i is the unit-cell's state vector at one end of the ith unit cell. To establish the transfer matrix for the unit cell in Figure which is presented here in terms of the non-dimensional frequency Ω, with k = EA/l being the effective stiffness of the rod segment. For a grounded spring, on the other hand, the following transfer matrix is applied to account for its effect, which, in this case, is identical in form to that of a transfer matrix of a typical local resonator Thus, the transfer matrix of the entire unit cell is derived by multiplying the individual transfer matrices defined in Equations ( Following the development in Ref. As such, the function k d (Ω) is derived via combining cos(q) = tr(T)/2 and Equations ( For the dynamic stiffness k d function in the first active EMM design in Equation ( The function in the argument of cosine inverse in Equation ( for integer values of n ≥ 1. This second design of EMM results in solely resonant bandgaps having lower and upper limits of (for n ∈ N 0 ): with an identical bandgap width of: Following an identical procedure to that presented earlier for Equation ( The band structures for both active EMM designs are depicted in Figure The observations made regarding bandgap limits can be further confirmed by plotting them and their corresponding bandgap width as a function of γ, as seen in Figure The predictions of the dispersion relations are further verified using the frequency response of a finite structure of twenty unit cells (γ = 1, 2 are used as examples) for both EMM designs. The numerical computation is carried out using MATLAB, and the frequency response function is computed using the finite element method with two-node linear rod elements compactly expressed in frequency domain using the following matrix form: where M and K are the mass and stiffness matrices from the finite element method, while u is the displacement vector. The frequency-dependent stiffness matrix K(ω) incorporates the frequency-dependent elastic foundation stiffness based on Equations ( Two designs of active elastic metamaterials (EMM) are proposed, which exhibit an infinite number of locally resonant bandgaps that are evenly spaced and identical in width (except for zero-frequency bandgaps in the first design). Both designs are achieved via a grounded elastic element with a frequency-dependent stiffness. With the aid of the transfer matrix method, the function describing the stiffness element is carefully designed based on an engineered dispersion relation with an infinite number of local-resonance frequencies. The dispersion analyses and bandgap predictions are verified using a finite-element-based frequency response function of a finite array of the active EMMs, showing excellent agreement. One limitation of the proposed designs is the challenge of experimentally realizing the frequency-dependent stiffness of the elastic support, especially if a specific frequency function is desired. Nonetheless, the proposed design methodology could be further utilized to engineer new dispersion behaviors in the future.