This guide provides a detailed step-by-step procedure for the dispersion of (6,5) single-walled carbon nanotubes by shear force mixing with the conjugated polymer PFO-BPy in organic solvents. All processes presented here were developed in the Zaumseil group at Heidelberg University since 2015 and represent best practices to the best of our knowledge. In addition to the detailed instructions, we discuss potential pitfalls and problems, that we have encountered over eight years of operation and show how to solve them. This also includes a detailed description of how to maintain and service a shear force mixer to ensure long operation lifetime. Finally, we show how to expand our process to the dispersion other nanotube chiralities in electronic-grade quality and how to treat dispersions for subsequent processing (e.g., thin film deposition or functionalization). The optical and electronic properties (metallic or semiconducting, bandgap) of single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) are determined by their chiral indices (n,m) (see Figure Commercial growth methods such as CoMoCAT®, HiPco® or the Plasma Torch process always yield a mixture of different nanotube chiralities with different diameter distributions and metallic nanotube content. Selective dispersions of nanotubes with suitable conjugated polymers in organic solvents provides a direct route to certain nanotube types (semiconducting) and even single chiralities. Fluorene-based polymers and copolymers show especially high selectivities. Figure Figure The quality of a nanotube dispersion (i.e., the defectiveness and length of the contained nanotubes) is strongly influenced by the applied dispersion method. Structural defects and open tube ends will act as quenching sites for excitons (strongly bound electron-hole pairs that are highly mobile on carbon nanotubes), thus decreasing their emission efficiency. Sonication with a bath or tip sonicator damages and shortens nanotubes due to highly localized friction and pressure, created by sonication-induced cavitation. Shear force mixing was previously shown to be a mild dispersion method for 2D materials (e.g., graphene, MoS2) The workflow for Shear Force Mixing is shown in Figure In the following we present a step-by-step protocol for the monochiral dispersion of (6,5) SWNTs via Shear Force Mixing. While the dispersion protocol is similar for other chiralities, there are some important differences. The experimental variations are explained in the Supporting Information (Appendix I for (7,5) and Appendix II for Plasma Torch SWNTs). In case excess polymer is problematic (e.g., for functionalization or thin film deposition experiments), you can remove the polymer either by filtration or ultracentrifugation. We added an explanation for both processes in Appendix III. Here we list the materials, consumables and the equipment that is necessary for the dispersion of (6,5) SWNTs with PFO-BPy in toluene. For other chiralities see the Supporting Information. Specific companies or brands are named to describe our process as detailed as possible and do not represent any endorsement and recommendation.  Shear Force Mixer (L2/Air, Silverson Machines Ltd.) depicted in Figure Here we describe the standard shear force mixing process for the dispersion of 125 mg of CoMoCAT® raw material (SG65i) with 125 mg of PFO-BPy in 250 mL toluene to obtain a nearly monochiral (6,5) SWNT dispersion. You can scale down the process to a volume of 125 mL by simply halving the amount of raw materials and using a smaller Erlenmeyer flask. The process stays the same. ▲CRITICAL The CoMoCAT® raw material should be stored in a dry environment, such as a glovebox or dry box, to minimize the influence of humidity on the dispersion process. ▲CRITICAL Use dehumidifiers in the labs (if not air-conditioned and humidity-controlled) where you handle and disperse nanotubes, as high humidity can decrease the dispersion yield and quality. ! CAUTION Dry nanotube raw material can be electrostatically charged and forms particle aerosols that pose a respiratory hazard. Always ensure to work in a fume hood and avoid spills. Clean the equipment that was in touch with nanotube raw material (spatulas, tweezers, fume hood) with IPA-wetted Kimtech wipes until no more black particles can be seen on the wipes. 1 Clean the fume hood in which you will weigh the nanotubes thoroughly by wiping it down with a Kimtech wipe and IPA. 2 Line the fume hood with Kimtech wipes and wet them with IPA. Ensure that the wipes stay wet as long as you work with the nanotubes, so spilled nanotube raw material sticks to the wet wipes. ! CAUTION Ensure to remove any ignition sources (e.g. hotplates) from the fume hood where you are working. Cut six stripes of Kapton tape (length ~4-5 cm) and stick them to a surface but ensure they can be removed from it later. You only need four stripes of tape, two are just for backup. Place a snap-cap vial, the container with CoMoCAT® raw material and a long-sleeve glove (will act as a trash can) on the IPA-wetted Kimtech wipes. Place a spatula, tweezers and a PTFE filter on a dry spot in the fume hood. Put on a lab coat, the particle mask and a pair of nitrile gloves. Wear a pair of longsleeve gloves over the nitrile gloves. Put on a last pair of nitrile gloves on top of the long-sleeve gloves. ▲CRITICAL Try to weigh in 125 mg, but anything from 120-130 mg is fine. Do not start to remove nanotubes from the vial again, as it will create more nanoparticle aerosol. Use tweezers to place the PTFE filter membrane on the snap-cap vial (Figure ■ PAUSE POINT The CoMoCAT® raw material can be dried for up to 3 days without causing any damage to the SWNTs. Thoroughly wipe down the fume hood with IPA and Kimtech wipes until you see no more black particles. Dirty Kimtech wipes, as well as your outer nitrile gloves and the long-sleeve gloves should go into the long-sleeve glove acting as a trash can. When you are finished press out residual air and tie a knot into the long-sleeve glove. This will seal the waste that is contaminated with nanoparticles ( solid waste container). ▲CRITICAL The polymer should be stored in a dry environment, such as a glovebox or dry box, to minimize the influence of humidity on the dispersion process. ▲CRITICAL Use dehumidifiers in rooms where you handle and disperse nanotubes, as high humidity can decrease the dispersion yield and quality. ▲CRITICAL The polymer solution must cool down to room temperature again before you add the dried nanotubes. Remove the nanotubes from the hotplate, so they can cool down to room temperature. 12 Put on your personal protective equipment (safety glasses, lab coat, gloves, particle mask). ! CAUTION Dry nanotube raw material can be electrostatically charged and forms particle aerosols that pose a respiratory hazard. If any nanotube spills happen, thoroughly clean the fume hood with IPA and wipes. Assemble the Shear Force Mixer as shown in Figure ▲CRITICAL After assembling the shear force mixer, it must be levelled using a spirit level. ! CAUTION Ensure that the shear force mixer is running in a well-ventilated space. In our case, the soundproof box is connected to an exhaust. You can also place the SFM in a fume hood. Then attach the splash protection (lid of centrifuge tube with hole in it) to the Erlenmeyer flask using aluminum foil and parafilm (see Figure ! CAUTION If the SFM makes loud noises or the whining noise is not uniform, immediately close the valve to the pressurized air. ? TROUBLESHOOTING Bring the cooling beaker up to a position in which the water covers around 2/3 of the height of the Erlenmeyer flask. Turn on the chiller, set the temperature to 20 °C and cover the beaker with aluminum foil to minimize evaporation of cooling water. ▲CRITICAL As shown by Gomulya et al., temperature is an important parameter that affects dispersion quality and yield, if not controlled precisely. Close the soundproof box and fully open the valve to the pressurized air. Let the shear force mixer run for the desired time. impacts the yield (see Figure ▲CRITICAL Use dehumidifiers in rooms where you handle and disperse nanotubes, as high humidity can decrease the dispersion yield and quality. ▲CRITICAL As soon as the dispersion process is stopped, work as quickly as possible. Even well dispersed (6,5) SWNTs will start aggregating after a few hours if the dispersion is not mixed anymore which leads to sedimentation during the centrifugation process. Close the valve to the pressurized air to stop the shear force mixer. Remove the Erlenmeyer flask from the shear force mixer. The pelletized material can be reused for subsequent dispersion steps. ►REFER TO Recycling (steps 36-41). Centrifuge the supernatant of the first centrifugation step again at 60,000 g for another 45 min. This should pelletize any remaining unexfoliated material Carefully remove the centrifuge tubes from the rotor and place them in a tube rack. ▲CRITICAL Try to move the tubes as little as possible, as any movement might stir up the pelletized, unexfoliated material. Use a syringe to take off the supernatant and fill it into a storage container. For nicely dispersed nanotubes, you can use a syringe filter to remove any remaining particles. This is, however, not necessary if you worked carefully and can decrease the yield, if the dispersed nanotubes already started to aggregate. ▲CRITICAL Despite being polymer-wrapped, exfoliated SWNTs will start to reaggregate eventually; especially when dispersions have a high nanotube concentration. Before using them, sonicate the dispersion for 10 minutes, using a bath sonicator to break up any formed bundles. As reported by Schneider et al., you can also use 1,10-phenantroline to stabilize your dispersions. Cleaning the Shear Force Mixer • TIMING 30 min ! CAUTION Wear gloves when handling parts of the Shear Force Mixer that were in direct contact with the nanotube dispersion After the SFM has stopped, remove the metal aglet that connects rotor and stator by pushing it out with a suitable rod-shaped object. The rotor should now fall out. Disassemble the rest of the SFM. You will notice black stains on the parts of stator and rotor that were immersed in the nanotube dispersion. Try to remove them with IPA-wetted wipes. This works very well for the rotor and the outside of the stator. ? TROUBLESHOOTING Clean the inside of the stator with IPA and a test tube brush of suitable thickness. Immerse the stator in a measuring cylinder and fill it with toluene until all nanotube stains are covered. Place the measuring cylinder in an ultrasonication bath and sonicate for 15 mins Remove the stator from the measuring cylinder and discard the dirty toluene. Rinse both, stator and measuring cylinder, with toluene. After letting stator and rotor dry, reassemble the Shear Force Mixer as shown in Figure ▲CRITICAL If any IPA is left and gets into the next dispersion, it will cause severe aggregation problems. Recycling of pelletized material • TIMING 30 min ▲CRITICAL Running the shear force mixing procedure once does not exfoliate all the (6,5) SWNTs contained in the CoMoCAT® raw material. The pellets will still contain lots of (6,5) SWNTs and can usually be recycled 3-4 times before you have to use fresh SWNT material. The pellet will contain some polymer but new polymer should be added. The extinction coefficient of PFO-BPy for the band at 363 nm is 96.4 ± 0.2 mL(mg cm) -1 (see Figure ►REFER TO Characterization (step 42) The amount of to-be-added polymer is now calculated with: ▲CRITICAL As PFO-BPy is very selective towards (6,5) SWNTs and small variations of concentration won't influence your selectivity, you can roughly estimate Vdispersion. Add the calculated amount of PFO-BPy to the Erlenmeyer flask that contains the pellets. Fill it with toluene until you have a total volume of ~200 mL in the flask. From here on, follow steps 14-35. Instead of directly recycling the pelletized material, the pellets can be dried for use at a later point. The remaining supernatant should be removed and the centrifuge tubes with the pellets should be left open for drying for ~3 days. Remove the dried pellets from the centrifuge tubes with a spatula and put them in a container. For longer storage times, store them in a dry environment. ■ PAUSE POINT You can store the pellets for several months before reusing them. To recycle the dried pellets, calculate the amount of polymer you need to add as explained in step 37 and 38. Add the dried pellets, the polymer and ~200 mL of toluene to an Erlenmeyer flask. Follow steps 14-35 from here. ▲CRITICAL UV-vis-NIR absorption and resonant Raman spectroscopy are used to check whether the selective dispersion of (6,5) SWNTs was successful without dispersing any other semiconducting or metallic nanotube species. Measure an absorption spectrum of the dispersion in the range between 300-1600 nm. It should look as shown in Figure For Raman measurements, drop-cast the dispersion onto a coverslip coated with aluminum foil to form a film (Note: aluminum-foil shows no Raman signal at all). The film should have a visible purple colour to obtain sufficient signal without too much integration. To avoid a background from excess PFO-BPy, you can remove it by carefully rinsing the film with toluene or THF. To check for other SWNT chiralities, especially metallic nanotubes, the region between 200-320 cm ? TROUBLESHOOTING The pitch of the noise that the motor produces is not uniform. The noise is produced by moving parts inside the motor. The airdriven motor of the shear force mixer has five vanes (D), that grind down against the motor housing (C). Over time, a significant amount of debris builds up inside of the SFM (Figure The shear force mixer does not move at all or gets stuck regularly although you can hear air flushing through it. Most likely origin: The air-driven motor of the shear force mixer has five vanes, that grind down against the motor housing. After several months of continuous usage, the vanes are significantly smaller than in the beginning (see Figure When the vanes are worn-down, you have to exchange them. A repair kit, that includes 5 vanes, gaskets and ball bearings can be ordered from Atlas Copco. In case of worn-down metal parts, a new motor unit must be ordered from Silverson. There are "scratching" noises. Most likely origin: The rotor grinds against the stator. The PTFE bush (Figure The supernatant does not show any colour. Most likely origin: There are no nanotubes dispersed or the dispersion was not stable. This can have several causes:  High humidity during dispersion  Too little polymer  Temperature was not controlled sufficiently Solution: Check that your chiller works sufficiently and that you regularly empty the dehumidifiers. In case of very humid conditions, even the dehumidifiers might fail. For possible recycling runs, consider adding more polymer. There still is unexfoliated, non-pelletized material floating in the dispersion. Most likely origin: The centrifugation process is not yet complete. Solution: Try to centrifuge for another 15 min. Make sure that you move the centrifuge tubes as little as possible when removing them from the centrifuge. The supernatant is purple but also shows a greyish colour. Most likely origin: This indicates either a non-complete sedimentation (see above) or exfoliation of metallic SWNTs. Solution: Reduce the amount of polymer in the next (recycling) run. There are additional peaks in the nIR-region of the absorption spectrum. Most likely origin: Additional semiconducting chiralities were dispersed. You will usually disperse very little other chiralities (e.g., (7,5) SWNTs) which will be visible in Raman but should not appear in absorption spectra Solution: Reduce the amount of polymer in the next SFM run. ? Over a longer period of time (>3 years), a decrease in yield is observed. Most likely origin: During years of continuous usage, the rotor can grind against the stator and thus enlarges the distance between them. This, in turn, leads to a decrease in shear force and thus a lower dispersion efficiency. We saw a substantial decrease after ~4 years of heavy usage (see Figure I Q