Sorbents are promising materials for applications in atmospheric water harvesting, thermal energy storage, and passive cooling, thereby addressing central challenges related to water scarcity and the global energy transition. Recently, hygroscopic hydrogel composites have emerged as high-performance sorbents. However, many of these systems are fabricated with unsustainable and costly sorbent materials, which hinders their wide deployment. Here, the synthesis of high-performance, cost-efficient polyacrylamide hydrogels loaded with unprecedented amounts of calcium chloride is demonstrated. To this end, the swelling procedure of polyacrylamide hydrogels in aqueous calcium chloride solutions is optimized. The achievable salt loading in the hydrogel is characterized as a function of temperature, calcium chloride concentration in the swelling solution, and the hydrogel preparation conditions. The obtained hydrogel-salt composites are shown to be stable under repeated sorption-desorption cycling and enable water uptakes of 0.92 and 2.38 grams of water per gram of dry materials at 30% and 70% relative humidity, respectively. The resulting cost-performance ratio substantially exceeds lithium chloride-based systems. Further, the mechanistic insights on hydrogel salt interactions can guide the design of sustainable and low-cost sorbent materials for future applications in water and energy. As our society transitions towards a more sustainable economy, there is a critical need for energy conversion technologies and water treatment solutions that are both economical and environmentally friendly. Functional materials are at the heart of such technologies. To be a good candidate, these materials must be low-cost, eco-friendly, and abundant. However, many crucial components in the contemporary landscape of energy transition technologies depend on raw materials that fail to meet these criteria, such as lithium and cobalt in batteries for electric vehicles, rare earth metals for wind turbine generators, and copper and silver for photovoltaics. A technology that is particularly important in the global energy transition is sorption, especially in the context of water and heat. With an associated change in enthalpy during the absorption or adsorption of liquid, sorbents are used in various kinds applications such as long-term thermal energy storage, Currently, there are a few sorbent systems that incorporate CaCl2, which include CaCl2 in a sodium alginate hydrogel, In Figure In the remainder of Figure After swelling the hydrogels in the five different CaCl2 solutions, the increased mass of the swollen hydrogels consisted of a combination of both water and salt. In terms of the sorbent performance of the CaCl2 PAM system, it is important to characterize the amount of CaCl2 that was loaded in the hydrogel, see Figure We can compare the salt loading in our hydrogel system to other CaCl2-based sorbent systems in the literature in Figure From the previous analysis, we see that both the kinetics and equilibrium swelling ratio depend on the concentration of the CaCl2 solution. In Figure where k is Boltzmann's constant, and T is the temperature (here ~298 K), and ν is Poisson's ratio (here assumed to be 0.5). At the upper and lower bounds of our experimentally determined elastic moduli of 18.9 kPa and 4.9 kPa, we therefore obtain an equilibrium mesh size between 8.7 nm and 29.3 nm. As discussed below, this is especially important for hydrogels swelling in highly concentrated aqueous CaCl2 solutions. Aside from the mechanical testing, we also performed hydrogel swelling experiments in additional CaCl2 solutions. We swelled hydrogels in 55%sat, 60%sat, 65%sat, and 70%sat CaCl2 solutions, in addition to the five solutions tested in Figure In Figure In Figure Evidence for this proposed mechanism can be obtained by comparing the size of the ions with the pore size of the hydrogel. The size of the first hydration shell of solvated Ca 2+ ions in water is around 0.25 nm, with 7 to 8 coordinated water molecules. For comparison, we can estimate the pore size within the hydrogels. First, we can make an estimate from the equilibrium mesh size computed above with equation (1). We can divide the mesh size values in half to estimate the radius of the pores to be between 4.4 nm and 14.7 nm. Second, we can estimate the radius of the pores starting from the literature. For PAM hydrogels, the reported pore sizes range between 20 and 200 nm, depending on the synthesis and the amount of crosslinker. In contrast, in Figure In Figure Altogether, we have demonstrated an effective and scalable sorption system based on the sustainable salt of CaCl2. To fully understand the added benefit of using CaCl2 for a sorption system, we want to estimate the cost-performance ratio of our material and compare it to our recent lithium chloridebased sorbent. In addition to swelling the hydrogel at room temperature, we also conducted swelling experiments at an elevated temperature of 60 °C. Previous work has shown that increasing the swelling temperature can enhance the swelling kinetics and the equilibrium swelling ratio, which would be important in increasing the salt loading and ultimate performance of the system. In this work, we performed swelling experiments of PAM hydrogels in aqueous CaCl2 solutions. We varied the salt concentrations in the swelling solutions to determine the optimal synthesis conditions for highperformance hydrogel-salt composites. We achieved an unprecedented amount of CaCl2 salt loading in a hydrogel of more than 17 g CaCl2 per gram of polymer, which is four times more than previous studies had shown. Based on systematic swelling experiments at room temperature, we provided critical mechanistic insights for the interaction between hydrogels, CaCl2, and water, and also demonstrated the importance of the initial conditions of the hydrogel at the start of swelling in determining the final uptake of water and salt. The cyclic stability of the CaCl2 PAM composites was tested by repeated sorption-desorption cycling. The water uptake was measured via dynamic vapor sorption to be 0.92 gH2O gdry -1 , 1.66 gH2O gdry -1 and 2.38 gH2O gdry -1 , at relative humidities of 30%, 50%, and 70%, respectively. Due to its high hygroscopicity obtained exclusively with abundant, low-cost materials, we found that our sorbent provides an outstanding cost-performance ratio, which is more than three orders of magnitude larger than other synthesized sorbents relying on the less cost-effective lithium chloride. Besides the room temperature experiments, we conducted systematic swelling experiments at an elevated temperature of 60 °C. At a higher temperature, we found that the hydrogels underwent hydrolysis and showed syneresis via an over-crosslinking mechanism when in contact with calcium ions in solution. Overall, this work provides a significant step towards understanding the swelling kinetics and final salt loading of hydrogel sorbents, which is of critical importance to various applications ranging from atmospheric water harvesting to thermal energy storage, and passive cooling. Materials. Acrylamide (≥ 98.5% pure) and calcium chloride (> 93% pure and anhydrous) were purchased from Thermo Scientific. N,N'-methylenediacrylamide (Bis-acrylamide), ammonium persulfate (APS, ACS reagent, ≥ 98.0% pure) and N,N,N',N'-tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED) were purchased from Merck/Sigma Aldrich. HPLC water (≤ 1μS cm -1 ) and demineralized water (≤ 1.5 μS cm -1 ) were purchased from VWR chemicals. All chemicals were used without further purification. Hydrogel synthesis. Neutral PAM hydrogels were synthesized by the polymerization of acrylamide monomers with bis-acrylamide crosslinker based on the one-pot synthesis procedure described in Graeber, et al. 2023 Swelling experiments. CaCl2 solutions were prepared based on percentages of the saturation concentration at a reference temperature of 20 °C for a standard aqueous solution of the salt. At 20 °C, saturation occurs at 72.8 g of CaCl2 per 100 g of water. Thermogravimetric analysis. Analysis was performed in Pyris 1 Thermogravimetric Analyzer by PerkinElmer where the content of salt in the hydrogels was validated. Samples of salt solution at 50%sat, salt-free hydrogels without initial swelling (as cured), and hydrogels swollen at ambient temperature in the above solutions were placed in an inert pan. The sample size was typically between 10 mg and 40 mg depending the volume of the sample. All tests were carried out under a current of Argon gas (20 mL min -1 ). The procedure for each sample comprised of three steps: (1) the samples were stabilized for 3 minutes at 30 °C, (2) the samples were heated from 30 °C to 800 °C at a constant rate of 10 K min -1 , and (3) the samples were held at 800 °C for 5 minutes at the end of the experiment. Dynamic vapor sorption experiments. All the measurements were performed in a DVS RESOLUTION Vapor Gravimetric Sorption Analyzer from Surface Measurements Systems. The method of dynamic vapor sorption (DVS) is applied to determine how much aqueous solution is contained within a solid sample at a constant temperature. Before the measurements, the samples were dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C for 5 hours. Afterwards, each sample was placed in a chamber at 25 °C under vacuum for 3 hours. During the measurements, the samples are exposed to a controlled relative humidity (RH) atmosphere and the weight is recorded until equilibrium. The time to reach equilibrium may take minutes up to hours for each step. Equilibrium is established when the change in the sample weight did not change by more than 0.005 % min -1 . During this process, the sample is gravimetrically monitored as a function of the RH. The studied RH ranged from 10% to 90%. Cycling experiment. To test the cyclic hydrogel performance between dry and humid conditions, an oven and a desiccator were used. The desiccator contained a fully saturated NaCl solution at room temperature, which created an environment with a RH of 74%. 