The locally self-consistent multiple scattering (LSMS) method can perform efficient firstprinciples calculations of systems with large number of atoms. In this work, we combine the Kubo-Greenwood equation with LSMS, enabling us to calculate first-principles residual resistivity of large systems. This has been implemented in the open-source code lsms. We apply this method to selected pure elements and binary random alloys. The results compare well with experiment, and with values obtained from a first-principles effective medium technique (KKR-CPA). We discuss future applications of this method to complex systems where other methods are not applicable. Disordered systems show interesting physical and chemical properties Quasicrystals possess high thermal and electrical resistivity, low adhesion, and have been used as coating for non-stick cookware The locally self-consistent multiple scattering (LSMS) method LSMS scales linearly with the system size, making it a practical computational tool for disorder studies. The KKR Green's function method can be combined with the Kubo-Greenwood linear response formula The next section provides some theoretical background on the LSMS method and the Kubo-Greenwood equation. We then introduce our LSMS resistivity approach and provide a heuristic derivation for the conductivity as a function of the LIZ radius. We test our method by applying it to selected pure elements with a variety of structural and electronic characteristics (Ag, Al, Li and V) and binary alloys (Al x V 1-x and Fe-9 wt%Si). We compare the results with experimental data and computational values obtained from KKR-CPA. Finally, we conclude by discussing areas of improvements for the method and potential future applications. The Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) approach to density functional theory solves for the Green's function of the Kohn-Sham equation which is then used to calculate a new Hamiltonian. Using multiple scattering theory, we express the Green's function in the vicinity of atomic site n as where Z n and J n are the regular and irregular solutions to the single-atom Schrödinger equation for the atom at site n. L and L ′ are angular momentum indices (e.g. L ≡ (lm)). The multiple scattering path matrix τ can be expressed in terms of the single-site scattering t-matrix and the free electron propagator g as Here m and n refer to atomic sites. Formally, τ obeys a Dyson expansion Calculating the matrix inverse in Equation 3 is the most computationally intensive step in the KKR method. This operation scales as the cube of the number of atoms in the system. In LSMS, we define a local interaction zone (LIZ) for each atom, beyond which scattering is neglected (Figure For a given system, it is important to test multiple LIZ radii to ensure convergence. where μ and ν refer to Cartesian directions, j μ and j ν are current operators, N is the number of atoms, and Ω is the atomic volume. The angular brackets represent an ensemble average over different random configurations. We express this equation in terms of multiple scattering matrices as where J is the matrix element of the current operator. Since the sum over m generates a volume average, we replace the ensemble average with a single, sufficiently large and representative, random structure. Additionally, for each atom m, we only consider atoms n within the LIZ of m. Within the LSMS formalism, Combining equations 10 and 7 yields the LSMS electrical conductivity tensor for a given LIZ size, which is then inverted to obtain the resistivity. Because our LIZ sizes are limited by available computing resources, we wish to model the convergence of conductivity with increasing LIZ size. Here we derive this dependence heuristically. Consider a perfectly periodic crystal for which the electron mean free path is infinite. Assuming weak scattering, and truncating the Dyson expansion Eq. ( where κ = 2m e z/h 2 . Replacing the sums in Eq. ( where κ 1,2 = 2m e z 1,2 /h 2 , r c is the nearest neighbor separation and r LIZ is the LIZ radius. We can integrate this to obtain the four terms needed for conductivity where ε +-= ε F ±iδ, κ + = 2m e ε + /h 2 and we have taken the limit δ → 0. The conductivity is given by The conductivity shows a combination of linear and oscillatory behavior. The oscillations occur at frequency 2k F with k F the Fermi wavenumber. At large r LIZ the linear term dominates, the conductivity diverges and the resistivity vanishes, as expected for perfectly crystalline systems. In particular, the resistivity vanishes linearly as a function of the inverse LIZ radius. In order for the conductivity to converge, the τ -matrix must decay faster than 1/r. To model systems with finite conductivity, consider the following ansatz where α is a decay parameter determined by the inverse of the mean free path. For weak disorder, α → 0 and we recover the linear conductivity expression. For disordered systems, α > 0 and the conductivity component σ becomes resulting in Note the combination of oscillating and exponentially decaying terms. The conductivity approaches a finite limit as where The resistivity is now finite, and its dependence on the inverse LIZ size is non-linear. To recover the limit of weak disorder, with the linear variation of resistivity, take αr LIZ ≪ 1. In this case we can write Inserting this in the conductivity expression Eq. ( To see the linearity of resistivity, invert σ to obtain In the small α regime, the resistivity varies linearly with the inverse of the LIZ radius, with the intercept being the converged value. For r LIZ → ∞, the above expression 31 breaks down as αr LIZ increases. But as α → 0, the LIZ radius range over which we see linearity will increase. As a result, using the linear expression in lieu of the full non-linear form might result in smaller errors. We will explore this idea further in the next section when we discuss the resistivity of binary random alloys. We apply the LSMS resistivity method (as implemented in the open source code lsms) to a 20x20x20 supercell (16,000 atoms) for BCC structures and a 16x16x16 supercell For the pure elements and Al x V 1-x binaries, we perform self-consistent LSMS calculations to obtain a converged potential. For FeSi, we obtain converged atomic potentials for Fe and Si from a KKR-CPA calculation. We employ the von Barth-Hedin local density approximation Li, the transport behavior is dominated by the valence s-electrons, while V has d-electron valence and Al has both s and p-electron valence. Due to finite memory, extrapolation is necessary to obtain the resistivity at the asymptotic limit (1/r LIZ -→ 0). Based on the heuristic expressions derived in the previous section, we apply a linear extrapolation to obtain the resistivity at infinite LIZ radius. For most of the pure elements, this matches the trends observed in Figure For random alloys, we expect the resistivity to decay exponentially to a non-zero value, in accordance with the heuristic derived in the previous section Figure the last data point. We choose 2α max = 0.15 Å-1 (corresponding to a mean free path of 6-7 Å), producing the upper bound function In the weak scattering limit, the mean free path is very large and α min → 0, resulting in a linear lower bound function which is similar to 31, with r c → 0. The resistivity as a function of the LIZ radius can be bounded between the upper and lower bound functions We also calculate the resistivity of BCC Fe-9wt% Si alloy (Figure In this work, we introduce the LSMS-Kubo-Greenwood technique, which combines the Kubo-Greenwood equation with first principles LSMS theory. This allows efficient calculation of electrical resistivity for very large systems. We implement this method in the high performance open source code lsms. Using a heuristic approach, we demonstrated that the conductivity should be linear and diverging for pure elements, and non-linear and convergent for alloys. The convergence is controlled by the parameter α, which is dependent on the mean free path. In the small α limit, a convergent linear expression was obtained. We test the method by applying it to pure elements, where a linear trend were observed and extrapolated to obtain very low resistivity. We also apply this method to binary random alloys Al x V 1-x and Fe-9wt% Si. A linear trend was also observed in these systems which was fitted to an upper bound and lower bound functional form, determined from extremum values of α. The experimental resistivities were found to lie between the two bounds, with the lower bound extrapolated values comparing well with experimental and KKR-CPA values. This demonstrates the validity of our approach. There are areas of improvement in the theory and implementation of LSMS conductivity. While we are able to efficiently calculate resistivity for large unit cells and LIZ size of upto 1000 atoms, it should be possible to improve the code to allow for even larger LIZ sizes. The heuristic approach is very useful to understand the general trend and obtain upper and lower bounds. However a more precise functional form for the resistivity could be derived without introducing any ad-hoc parameters. Both these improvements are highly complicated and we are currently determining how they can be achieved. The ability to deal with a large number of atoms opens the door for several novel and exciting applications. LSMS can be used to calculate the resistivity as a function of short range ordering in high entropy alloys. We can study the effect of stacking faults, dislocations and other defects on the electrical resistivity. We can also use LSMS to calculate the transport properties of non-crystalline systems like quasicrystals and metallic glasses. These applications are the subject of future work.