Superconducting materials exhibit unique physical properties and hold great scientific value and vast industrial application prospects. However, due to limitations such as critical temperature (TC) and critical current density (JC), the large-scale application of superconducting materials remains challenging. Chemical doping has been a commonly used method to enhance the superconductivity of B(P)SCCO. However, satisfactory enhancement results have been difficult to achieve. In this study, we introduced green light GaN p-n junction particles as inhomogeneous phases into B(P)SCCO polycrystalline particles to form a smart meta-superconductors (SMSCs) structure. Based on the electroluminescence properties of the p-n junction, the Cooper pairs were stimulated and strengthened to enhance the superconductivity of B(P)SCCO. Experimental results demonstrate that the introduction of inhomogeneous phases can indeed enhance the critical temperature TC, critical current density JC, and complete diamagnetism (Meissner effect) of B(P)SCCO superconductors. Moreover, When the particle size of raw material of B(P)SCCO is reduced from 30μm to 5μm, the grain size of the sintered samples also decreases, and the optimal doping concentration of the inhomogeneous phases increases from 0.15 wt.% to 0.2 wt.%, further improving the enhancement of superconductivity. Superconducting materials have attracted widespread attention in the scientific community due to their unique physical properties, such as zero electrical resistance In recent years, researchers have also discovered some emerging superconducting materials. Such as high-pressure superconductors Although progress in increasing the critical temperature (TC) of superconducting materials has been slow, we still haven't achieved low-cost superconductors. However, with the development of science and technology, superconducting materials are playing an increasingly important role in fields such as electric grids BSCCO superconductor is a typical copper oxide superconductor, consisting of three coexisting superconducting phases: Bi-2201 phase (TC=20K), Bi-2212 phase (TC =87K), and Bi-2223 phase (TC =110K), all of which have a cubic crystal structure Metamaterial is a kind of composite material with an artificial structure, allowing for the realization of unique or even non-existent "anomalous" material properties in nature The successful incorporation of red AlGaInP p-n junctions as inhomogeneous phases into conventional superconductor MgB2 to form smart meta-superconductors raises the question of whether it is equally effective for high-temperature superconductors. In this paper, we investigate the doping of green GaN p-n junction particles as inhomogeneous phases into high-temperature superconductor B(P)SCCO, forming smart material superconductors. The study demonstrates that the doping of p-n junction nanostructures ensures the stability of material performance and effectively enhances the critical temperature TC, critical current density JC, and complete diamagnetism (Meissner effect) of B(P)SCCO superconductors. Furthermore, as the particle size of the B(P)SCCO polycrystalline particles decreases with the reduction of raw material particle size, the doping content of the p-n junction inhomogeneous phase increases, further amplifying the enhancement effect on the superconducting properties. Figure The raw material used is commercial green light LED epitaxial wafer (Xiamen Qianzhao Optoelectronics Co., Ltd.), with GaN as the main component and an emission wavelength of 458nm. It was grown on a sapphire substrate using metal-organic chemical vapor deposition method, with the activation temperature of the p-type layer exceeding 1300°C. The p-n junction luminescent structure was detached from the Al2O3 substrate and mechanically ground to obtain p-n junction luminescent particles measuring 2μm × 2μm × 1.7μm as shown in the SEM diagram in Figure A certain amount of Bi2O3 (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%), PbO (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%), SrCO3 (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%), CaCO3 (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%), and CuO (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%) powders were weighed according to the molar ratio of 1.6:0.4:2:2:3. The mixed raw powders were placed in a 50 ml ball milling jar with anhydrous ethanol as the grinding aid, and the ball milling machine was set at a speed of 500 rpm for 20 or 80 hours. The raw materials milled for 20 hours were dried and sieved through a 500mesh stainless steel sieve to obtain the raw material S1 with a particle size of about 30μm. The raw materials milled for 80 hours were filtered and dried using a G4 funnel, and then obtained the raw material S2 with a particle size of about 5μm. The raw materials S1 and S2 were separately placed in a tube furnace and annealed at 840°C in air for 50 hours + 50 hours. After the intermediate grinding, two different-sized black B(P)SCCO precursor powders were obtained. A certain amount of B(P)SCCO precursor powder was weighed and placed in a mold. The powder was pressed under a pressure of 12 MPa for 10 minutes to form a circular disk with a diameter of 12 mm and a thickness of 1 mm. The disk was then placed in a ceramic boat. The ceramic boat was transferred to a tube furnace and annealed at a temperature of 840°C for 30 hours. After cooling to room temperature, the disk was removed from the ceramic boat and thoroughly ground into powder. The ground B(P)SCCO powder and the corresponding inhomogeneous phase p-n junction particles with different mass fractions were placed in separate beakers and mixed with anhydrous ethanol to form a solution. The two solutions were then transferred to an ultrasonic cleaner and sonicated for 20 minutes. After sonication, the solutions were placed on a magnetic stirrer. During the stirring process, the inhomogeneous phase solution was added dropwise to the B(P)SCCO solution using a pipette. After completion, the mixture was stirred for 10 minutes and sonicated for 20 minutes. The mixed solution was then transferred to a petri dish and placed in a vacuum drying oven. The sample was dried at 65°C under vacuum for 5 hours to obtain a black powder. The dried B(P)SCCO black powder was placed in a mold and pressed under a pressure of 12 MPa for 10 minutes to form a circular disk with a diameter of 12 mm and a thickness of 1 mm. The disk was then placed in a ceramic boat. The ceramic boat was transferred to a tube furnace and annealed at a temperature of 840°C in an air atmosphere for 120 hours. After cooling to room temperature, the corresponding sample was obtained. In the experiment, we obtained raw material S1 with a particle size of 30μm by ball milling for 20 hours and raw material S2 with a particle size of 5μm by ball milling for 80 hours. Samples made using raw material S1 are referred to as the A series, while samples made using raw material S2 are referred to as the B series. The sample numbers and doping concentrations of the A series and B series samples are shown in Table Measurement of current-voltage (I-V) characteristics under zero magnetic field conditions was also performed using the four-probe method. The sample was connected to the leads using indium wire, and a certain value of current was applied to the sample through the outermost two leads, while the voltage was measured using a Keithley digital nanovoltmeter connected to the middle two leads. When the current flowing through the sample, denoted as I, exceeded a certain threshold, the superconducting state of the sample was disrupted and transitioned to the normal state. This critical current is known as the critical transport current of the superconductor. Typically, the critical transport current density (JC) in a superconducting system is determined by measuring the I-V characteristics at different temperatures (below the onset transition temperature, TC, on), with a voltage criterion of 1μV/cm. During the testing process, the shape and size of all samples, as well as the distances between the current and voltage leads, were kept constant. Subsequently, DC magnetization testing was performed on the prepared samples. The samples were slowly cooled in a 2.5mT magnetic field parallel to the plane, and data were collected during the subsequent warming process. All samples exhibited complete diamagnetism. Figure From Table Figures we introduced green light emitting GaN p-n junction particles as inhomogeneous phase inclusions into B(P)SCCO superconductors, forming smart metasuperconductors (SMSCs). We investigated the effect of the doping content of the p-n junction luminescent particles on the superconducting properties of B(P)SCCO superconductors with different matrix sizes. The following points need further elaboration: 5.1. The enhancement effect of green light p-n junction luminescent particle doping. Compared to pure B(P)SCCO samples, the doping of GaN p-n junction particles can indeed enhance the critical transition temperature (TC), critical current (JC), and perfect diamagnetism (Meissner effect) of B(P)SCCO superconductors, and the enhancement effect varies with the content of non-uniform phase doping in a domeshaped manner. In the A series samples, the doping of inhomogeneous phase increased the zero-resistance transition temperature TC,0 of the samples by 2K and increased the critical current JC by 25%; in the B series samples, the doping of inhomogeneous phase increased the zero-resistance transition temperature TC, on by 3K, increased the starting transition temperature TC,0 by 2K, and increased the critical current JC by 35%. 5.2. Adjusting the matrix size of B(P)SCCO superconductors can regulate the enhancement ef-fect of superconducting properties. Comparing the A and B series samples, the smaller the particle size of the raw material, the smaller the size of the generated B(P)SCCO polycrystalline particles, and the more grain boundaries, resulting in lower critical temperature (TC) and critical current (JC) for the B series samples compared to the A series samples. In addition, for the A series samples prepared from raw materials with a particle size of 30μm, the optimal content of inhomogeneous phase doping is 0.15 wt.%, while for the B series samples prepared from raw materials with a particle size of 5μm, the optimal content is 0.2 wt.%, further enhancing the superconducting properties of B(P)SCCO superconductors. This indicates that in our designed B(P)SCCO smart meatsuperconductor structure, the smaller the particle size of the B(P)SCCO matrix, the more inhomogeneous phase content it can accommodate, resulting in better performance enhancement. Chemical doping is a commonly used method to enhance superconducting properties. In previous studies, some researchers attempted to enhance the superconducting properties of BSCCO superconductors through element substitution. The most successful method so far is the substitution of Pb 2+ for Bi 3+ to enhance the stability of the Bi-2223 high-temperature phase and increase its content, but it cannot increase the critical temperature (TC). Other elements such as Al, Cs, and Ce can only effectively increase the critical current density (JC). Another group of researchers used compound doping, such as Al2O3, SnO2, ZrO2, MgO, etc. Studies have shown that compound doping can also only increase the critical current density (JC). In this study, we introduced GaN p-n junction luminescent particles as inhomogeneous phase inclusions B(P)SCCO superconductors. Through experiments, we found that inhomogeneous phase doping simultaneously enhanced the critical temperature (TC), critical current density (JC), and complete diamagnetism of B(P)SCCO superconductors. Compared to chemical doping, which only increases the critical current density (JC), this method has significant advantages. This method of enhancing superconductivity through the electroluminescence effect of luminescent particles provides a new approach to explore superconductor modification. In previous experiments, our team introduced Y2O3:Eu 3+ +Ag electroluminescent particles as inhomogeneous phase dopants into B(P)SCCO high-temperature superconductors to enhance their superconducting properties. The optimal doping content of Y2O3:Eu 3+ +Ag electroluminescent particles was found to be 0.2 wt.%, which increased the zero-resistance transition temperature (TC,0) by 1K and the onset transition temperature (TC, on) by 1.1K compared to the same batch of pure B(P)SCCO superconductors We also introduced red AlGaInP p-n junction particles as inhomogeneous phase dopants into MgB2 conventional superconductors, increasing the critical temperature to 39K and ΔTC, on to 0.8K Through experiments, we observed that both Y2O3:Eu 3+ +Ag rare earth oxide luminescent particles and p-n junction luminescent particles, as inhomogeneous phase dopants in superconductors, can enhance the superconductivity to varying degrees. However, there is currently no theoretical model that can well explain this phenomenon in accordance with experimental results. Therefore, based on years of experimental research, we propose the idea that the coupling between the evanescent waves generated by electroluminescence and the superconducting electrons enhances the critical transition temperature (TC) of the superconductor. By introducing p-n junction luminescent inhomogeneous phases, the photons generated by electroluminescent particles interact with some superconducting electrons, resulting in the formation of surface plasmas. These evanescent waves promote the smooth transmission of superconducting electrons with the same energy, thereby facilitating electron interactions in the surface plasma system. The injection of energy improves the formation of electron pairs, enhances the superconducting behavior of the material, increases the critical transition temperature, and leads to the formation of the superconductivity enhancement effect. At the same time, inhomogeneous phase doping can also cause impurity effects, which compete with electroluminescence effects. With the increase in inhomogeneous phase content, the impurity effect is enhanced, and the enhancement of superconductivity shows a dome-shaped variation. Therefore, under the co-evolution of electroluminescence effects and impurity effects, the smart metasuperconductivity of electroluminescent inhomogeneous phase-doped superconductors is formed. In this paper, we constructed B(P)SCCO smart meta-superconductors (SMSCs) by introducing green light GaN p-n junction particles as inhomogeneous phases into B(P)SCCO superconducting particles. Two different series of samples were prepared using solid-state sintering method with two different particle size raw materials. The critical temperature (TC), critical current (JC), and complete diamagnetism (Meissner effect) of the samples were measured using four-probe method, I-V curve measurement, and DC magnetization measurement. The influence of introducing green light GaN pn junction inhomogeneous phases on the superconducting properties of B(P)SCCO samples was investigated. The experimental results showed that by optimizing the doping of luminescent inhomogeneous phases, the critical transition temperature (TC) can be increased by 3K, the critical current density (JC) can be increased by 35%, and the complete diamagnetism (Meissner effect) can be significantly enhanced. Through systematic studies, we found that the combination of electroluminescence effect and impurity effect caused by traditional inhomogeneous doping phase can change the superconducting properties of superconductors. The stronger the electroluminescence effect of luminescent inhomogeneous phases, the better the enhancement of superconducting properties. This study provides valuable insights and guidance for the optimization design and application of superconducting materials. Future research can further explore suitable doping materials with excellent performance and investigate the physical mechanisms of enhancing superconducting properties, thus further promoting the exploration and application of superconducting materials. sample concentration(wt.%) TC,0/K TC,on/K ΔTC,0/K ΔTC,on/K Transition Width