The present work offers a comprehensive description of the acid-induced gelation of carboxymethylcellulose (CMC), a water-soluble derivative of cellulose broadly used in numerous applications ranging from food packaging to biomedical engineering. Linear viscoelastic properties measured at various pH and CMC contents allow us to build a sol-gel phase diagram, and show that CMC gels exhibit broad power-law viscoelastic spectra that can be rescaled onto a master curve following a time-composition superposition principle. These results demonstrate the microstructural self-similarity of CMC gels, and inspire a meanfield model based on hydrophobic inter-chain association that accounts for the sol-gel boundary over the entire range of CMC content under study. Neutron scattering experiments further confirm this picture and suggest that CMC gels comprise a fibrous network crosslinked by aggregates. Finally, low-field NMR measurements offer an original signature of acid-induced gelation from the solvent perspective. Altogether, these results open avenues for precise manipulation and control of CMC-based hydrogels. The sodium salt of carboxymethylcellulose (NaCMC) is a water-soluble derivative of cellulose, the most abundant polymer on earth, which is broadly used for industrial applications such as food, pharmaceuticals, paints, etc., and serves as a thickener and water retention agent when dispersed in a solvent. gregates. Here, combining complementary techniques, we perform an in-depth characterization of the acid-induced sol-gel transition in aqueous solutions of weakly substituted NaCMC. Rheological measurements allow us to identify the gelation point and build a phase diagram over a broad range of pH and CMC content. Moreover, the scattered intensity measured by smallangle neutron scattering (SANS) shows an abrupt change at the sol-gel transition, suggesting the presence of a heterogeneous percolated network of disordered fibrils formed through a microphase separation. Building upon this scenario, we devise a simple model based on physical crosslinks at the locus of hydrophobic patches along the polymer chain, which yields an equation for the sol-gel boundary in excellent agreement with the phase diagram. Vis-coelastic spectra measured in the gel phase at different pH exhibit similar features. Following a time-composition superposition principle, these spectra can be rescaled onto a remarkable master curve, which hints at a self-similar microstructure in which the CMC chains follow a Rouse-like dynamics. Finally, low-field NMR spectroscopy reveals that the sol-gel transition is associated with a decrease in the proton transverse relaxation time T 2 , whose temperature dependence remains Arrhenius-like across the transition. Yet, the corresponding energy scale reveals a sharp drop by more than 60% at the transition, showing that the aqueous solvent is affected in the bulk by the sol-gel transition, echoing the excellent water retention capacity of CMC-based gels. Moreover, in the gel state, the loss factor always displays a power-law regime at low frequency, followed by a high-frequency plateau [see Fig. Finally, we examine the sol-gel transition from the solvent perspective using molecular probes. Low-field NMR experiments allow us to assess the dynamics of the water molecules 33 for different pH. We observe that irrespective of the sample pH, the spin relaxation following a 90 • pulse (see Experimental section) is a decreasing function of time [see inset in Fig. Put together, our observations offer a comprehensive picture of the acid-induced sol-gel transition. Upon acidification, CMC assemble into fringed micelles that serve as precursors for the formation of a percolated network made of CMC fibers, as evidenced by SANS measurements and strongly reminiscent of the fibrous microstructure reported for heat-induced methylcellulose gels. Samples are prepared by dispersing sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (Sigma Aldrich, M w = 250 kg.mol -1 and DS = 0.9) in deionized water. DS was independently confirmed by highfield NMR spectroscopy (see SI), while M w was determined to be 242.2 kg.mol -1 in Ref. [44]. Stock solutions up to 5% wt. are prepared and stirred at room temperature for 48 h until homogeneous, before diluting them with a hydrochloric acid solution (Sigma Aldrich). Samples are then placed on a bottle roller for 7 days before being tested at 10 days to limit the impact of ageing (see SI). Final CMC solutions concentrations span from 1 % to 4.5 %. We used a 1 M HCl solution for all the dilutions except for the most concentrated CMC solutions (i.e., 4 and 4.5 %) for which we used a 12 M HCl solution. We checked there is no impact of the HCl solution concentration for a sample at c CMC = 1% and pH = 1. The pH of the samples is measured with a pH-meter (Mettler Toledo SevenCompact) and spans between 0 and 7. The rheological properties of NaCMC aqueous solutions are determined with a cone-and-plate geometry (angle 2 • , radius 20 mm and truncation 46 μm) connected to a strain-controlled rheometer (ARES-G2, TA Instruments). The cone and plate are both sandblasted and display a surface roughness of about 1 μm to prevent wall slip. Samples are loaded in the shear cell and maintained at constant temperature T = 22 • C during the duration of the test, thanks to a Peltier modulus placed under the bottom plate. The rheological protocol applied to all the samples is divided into three consecutive steps: (i) a preshear at γ = 50 s -1 for 3 min to erase the loading history, and rejuvenate the sample; (ii) a 20 min recovery during which we monitor the sample linear viscoelastic properties by applying small amplitude oscillations γ = 1% at 1 Hz, and which allows us to conclude that a steady state is reached typically beyond 100 s; (iii) a frequency sweep performed at γ = 1% to determine the linear viscoelastic spectrum of the sample over four decades in frequency. Small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) experiments were performed on the beamline D22 at Institut Laue Langevin (Grenoble, France). Samples were loaded into 1 mm thick Hellma cells made of quartz and measured at room temperature. Two configurations were used to maximize the accessible q range. The wavelength was set either to λ = 6 Å or λ = 11.5 Å, and the sample-detector distance was fixed at 17.6 m for the back detector and 1.4 m for the front detector. Samples were systematically measured in heavy water (D 2 O) to optimize the contrast between CMC and its background. The scattering length density of CMC is ca. ρ CMC = 1.0 × 10 10 cm -2 (assuming a density of 1.6 g.cm -3 ) while that of D 2 O is ca. ρ D 2 O = 6.4 × 10 10 cm -2 . Data were appropriately corrected by the transmission, empty cell, background, and thickness to obtain absolute units (cm -1 ) thanks to a direct beam measurement. Measurements of T 2 transverse relaxation time were performed on CMC solutions using a lowfield NMR pulsed spectrometer (Bruker Minispec mq20), at a 20 MHz proton resonance frequency. Samples were placed into tube with a diameter of 1 cm, and filled up to a height of ca. 3 mm, to avoid spatial heterogeneities of the magnetic field. The temperature was increased from 283 K up to 343 K with a BVT 3000 heater working with nitrogen gas. Prior to each experiment, the temperature was stabilized for 10 min. The measurements followed a Car-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill (CPMG) echo train procedure enabling access to the long transverse relaxation time of the protons present in water (the signal coming from the polymer protons was neither measurable nor investigated). The echo time was set to 1 ms, and the signal at short time was systematically adjusted to be between 60% and 100% intensity, ensuring optimal statistics without any risk of saturation. F. Liénard, and P.D. Olmsted for fruitful discussions, as well as C.G. Lopez for pointing out relevant references. This work was supported by the LABEX iMUST of the University of Lyon (ANR-10-LABX-0064), created within the "Plan France 2030" set up by the French government and managed by the French National Research Agency (ANR). All the authors acknowledge the Laue Langevin Institute (ILL) for the provision of the neutron beam facilities and the assistance in using beamline D22. Corresponding data are available at the following 10.5291/ILL-DATA.9-12-702. This work benefited from the use of the SasView application, originally developed under NSF award DMR-0520547. SasView contains code developed with funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the SINE2020 project, grant agreement No 654000. Supporting information includes (i) the determination of DS by high-field NMR spectroscopy, (ii) the rheological properties of chemically degraded samples, (iii) a characterization of the aging dynamics of gel samples, (iv) a model for the sol-gel boundary in Fig. The degraded CMC solutions are translucent, and their viscosity drops by several orders of magnitude compared to gels and non-degraded viscoelastic liquid-like samples. The viscosity of the degraded samples does not depend on the applied shear rate, i.e., these samples display a Newtonian behaviour. We used Newtonian behaviour as a criterion to classify these samples as degraded. While degraded samples do not show any time-dependent rheological properties such as thixotropy, they display irreversible aging, i.e., their viscosity decreases with increasing sample age on a typical timescale of one or two days following their preparation, as illustrated in Fig. Figure We tested the time dependence of the rheological properties of CMC samples in the gel phase. The linear viscoelastic properties of a prototypical gel, i.e., a 3% CMC sample at pH=2.4 are reported in Figure Figure Here, we explicit the assumptions of the model used to describe the sol-gel boundary of the phase diagram and reported as a red curve in Fig. • First assumption. The sol-gel transition occurs when the total concentration of hydrophobic patches, i.e., the number n of patches per unit volume, exceeds a given threshold n crit . As the CMC solution is in the semi-dilute entangled regime, we assume that n crit , which corresponds to a given average functionality of the patches, neither depends on the CMC content nor on the pH. In other words, we neglect the changes in the interaction energies associated with a change in polymer or HCl concentrations. Moreover, we define f OFF (= 1 -f ON ) as the probability for a hydrophobic patch to be disconnected from the elastically active network (e.g., patches connected within the same polymer or patches that are isolated). This fraction is dictated by the conformation of the polymer and, in particular, by its degree of coiling. Therefore, f OFF should mainly depend on the pH, and presumably much less on the CMC concentration c CMC . Finally, the hydrophobic crosslinks have a finite lifetime, i.e., on average, there is a fraction f τ of patches that are effectively connected at a given time. In that framework, the sol-gel transition occurs when • Second assumption. For the sake of simplicity, we consider that the probability for a hydrophobic patch to be active is constant, i.e., f ON = cst. This assumption is supported by the fact that (i) the weight fraction of CMC in the gels does not exceed 4 wt.%, so that the system remains in the semi-dilute regime, and (ii) we focus on the vicinity of the sol-gel transition so that the coiling of the polymer should be quite similar regardless of the CMC concentration or the pH. Furthermore, we consider that the active hydrophobic patches are active most of the time, i.e., f τ ≃ 1. The typical values for f ON and f τ are actually not important, as they are considered constant, which is equivalent to consider an effective n eff crit = n crit /(f ON f τ ), and set f ON = f τ = 1 thereafter. For clarity, we shall still keep f ON and f τ explicitly below. • Third assumption. We now express the concentration of hydrophobic patches n as a function of c CMC and pH to compute the equation of the sol-gel boundary. We propose the following form, introducing c COOH the concentration of substituted groups that are in their acidic form: where A and B are positive prefactors. Both concentrations c CMC and c COOH are expressed in mol.L -1 (proportional to the number of entities per unit volume). The prefactor A corresponds to the number of patches introduced by the CMC itself without altering the pH of the solution; A depends mostly on the degree of substitution (DS) of the CMC, and on the molecular weight M w of the CMC. In contrast, B denotes the additional number of hydrophobic patches when a COO -group is protonated. Hence, B should depend not only on DS and M w , but also on the patch density along the polymer chain, if many COOH groups are formed in a dense environment of patches, they might increase the length of already existing patches rather than creating a new one. • Fourth assumption. We consider A and B to be constant, independent of c CMC and pH. c COOH is linked to the pH through the following two equations that capture respectively the atom conservation (when a mole of CMC is introduced, it introduces ξ = N × DS moles of COOH or COO -, with N the number of monomers, proportional to M w ), and the acido-basic chemistry with an acidity constant K A : Combined with Eq. ( Combining Eqs. ( • Fifth assumption. n crit is related to the critical CMC concentration below which no gel can be obtained, irrespective of the pH. Here, we observe experimentally that c crit ≃ 1 %. In Eq. ( Based on this estimate, we can express the equation of the sol-gel boundary as follows: with α = A/(A + Bξ) < 1. Finally, we use Eq. (10) to fit the boundary of the sol-gel phase diagram reported in Fig. Figure The empirical Guinier-Porod fit function used in Fig. Moroever, to ensure continuity of I(q), the prefactors G and D in the low-q and high-q, respectively, are related to each other through: . (8) Liebert, T. F.; Heinze, T. J. Exploitation of reactivity and selectivity in cellulose functionalization using unconventional media for the design of products showing new superstructures. (18) Xiao, Y.; Meshitsuka, G. Development of high-retention water absorbent from cellulosic materials: Water absorbent from bleached kraft pulp. J. Wood Sci. 2001, 47, 394-399 .