Although fabrication capabilities of Silicon Dangling Bonds have rapidly advanced from manual labor-driven laboratory work to automated manufacturing in just recent years, sub-nanometer substrate defects still pose a hindrance to production due to the need for atomic precision. In essence, unpassivated or missing surface atoms, contaminants, and structural deformations disturb the fabricated logic or prevent its realization altogether. Moreover, design automation techniques in this domain have not yet adopted any defect-aware behavior to circumvent the present obstacles. In this paper, we derive a surface defect model for design automation from experimentally verified defect types that we apply to identify sensitivities in an established gate library in an effort to generate more robust designs. Furthermore, we present an automatic placement and routing algorithm that considers scanning tunneling microscope data obtained from physical experiments to lay out dot-accurate circuitry that is resilient against the presence of atomic surface defects. This culminates in a holistic evaluation on surface data of varying defect rates that enables us to quantify the severity of such defects. We project that fabrication capabilities must achieve defect rates of around 0.1 %, if charged defects can be completely eliminated, or < 0.1 %, otherwise. This realization sets the pace for future efforts to scale up this promising circuit technology. With the decline of Moore's Law, research has turned to alternative circuit technologies in the search for promising post-CMOS candidates. A relatively new contestant in this domain are Silicon Dangling Bonds (SiDBs) that act as atomically-sized quantum dots and that have seen tremendous fabrication advancements in the recent years Motivated by this, the research community has already taken interest in the SiDB platform for logic design; an effort that resulted in the creation of various physical simulators However, SiDB fabrication requires atomic precision and, thus, is prone to substrate defects at the sub-nanometer level. These defects naturally occur during the substrate preparation, i. e., in the process of preparing a pure hydrogen-passivated silicon (H-Si(100)-2×1) surface for SiDB fabrication. They are generally classified as any atomic structure that does not follow the H-Si(100)-2×1 surface reconstruction, in which each surface silicon atom is bonded to a neighboring silicon atom creating a dimer pair, a hydrogen atom from the passivation, and two silicon atoms in the bulk of the crystal Current fabrication of SiDB logic necessitates the scanning for defect-free regions that are large enough to host the intended layout on the substrate at hand Accordingly, the electrostatic effects of such surface defects have been closely examined-providing insights into how they might limit SiDB fabrication and the operation of fabricated SiDB devices In this regard, the paper at hand proposes the following contributions: 1) the derivation of an atomic defect model by the establishment of equivalence classes among 13 experimentally verified H-Si(100)-2×1 defect types to guide design automation methodologies, 2) a case study of applying said defect model to the established Bestagon gate library The remainder of this manuscript is structured as follows: in an effort to establish this paper as a stand-alone work, Section II reviews related material on SiDB fabrication and their logic platform to constitute the foundation upon which this paper is built. Afterward, Section III introduces atomic defects on the H-Si(100)-2×1 surface and discusses their effects on SiDB systems. Based on that, Section IV presents the proposed defect-aware physical design methodology by first establishing a surface defect model and, then, discussing algorithmic details. An experimental evaluation of the approach is conducted in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and gives an outlook on future work in the domain. As an implementation of the FCN paradigm The most commonly used surface phase for SiDB creation is H-Si(100)-2×1 whose atomic structure is illustrated in Fig. The resulting SiDBs may possess 0, 1, or 2 electrons, corresponding to positive, neutral, and negative charge states, respectively. These electronic properties enable the realization of BDL wire structures as well as a sub 30 nm 2 logic OR gate The recent physical accomplishments and the upcoming commercialization Despite the relative cleanliness of H-Si(100)-2×1 compared to other crystal faces of silicon As an example, Fig. The black frames with alphabetical labels indicate different atomic defects. Fig. To the best of the authors' knowledge, no related work on SiDB logic and design automation has considered the impact atomic defects have on their proposed layouts. This disregard of physical effects leaves most approaches conflicting with existing fabrication capabilities. In the following section, we are addressing this shortcoming by proposing a physical design methodology that is aware of atomic defects. Consequently, the layouts automatically generated by the proposed approach avoid defective surface positions. In this section, we introduce a solution that addresses the shortcomings of existing physical design methods for SiDB logic discussed above. To this end, we first propose an abstract surface defect model for automatic design that is based on the physical properties of the identified atomic surface defects. Afterward, we propose a defect-aware physical design method that, utilizing the proposed model, is able to realize SiDB logic that behaves as intended on an otherwise defective surface. Before being able to apply any defect-aware design methodology, the atomic structure of the specific surface at hand must be analyzed and defects identified. In this instance, defects are autonomously classified using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) similar to that developed in These residual negative charges (as observed in dangling bond and silicon vacancy defects) are able to exert screened Coulombic effects on the charge state of nearby SiDBs as demonstrated by experiments in the literature The latter applies foremost to the half-adder tile which can however be decomposed into, e. g., an XOR and an AND tile. The de-facto standard for physical design in the FCN domain is that of a tile-based abstraction Surface tilings come in manifold forms with the most common one being the Cartesian grid where each tile is a rectangle This work, thus, also relies on tile-based design. In the following, we assume a hexagonal tiling together with established SiDB gates Instead of imagining a perfect, idealized surface, we consider a realistic STM surface scan as input to our algorithm. We overlay a tiling and match each gate and wire of a given gate library in every rotation against each tile and analyze the effects of defects in the proximity of each dot that make up the gate/wire tile. This procedure yields a blacklist of gate-tile pairs, i. e., a listing of SiDB structures that cannot operate properly on certain tiles of the surface. We pass this blacklist as a set of placement and routing constraints to a satisfiability-based algorithm that avoids placing those gates/wires on the specified tiles in the specified rotation. The result is a dot-accurate layout that avoids all defects on the surface and, thus, preserves functionality in the presence of disturbances. The following example shall illustrate this process. Assume the STM surface scan depicted in Fig. In Fig. For any given circuit specification, the resulting placement and routing problem with the blacklist is encoded as a satisfiability instance as successfully demonstrated in In this section, we present and discuss the results of an experimental evaluation of the proposed defect-aware physical design approach. To this end, we applied the algorithm to automatically generate SiDB layouts on defective H-Si(100)-2×1 surfaces, both real and simulated. The following Section V-A goes over our experimental setups while Section V-B discusses the results and their implications. A. Experimental Setups 1) Fabrication: Of the surfaces used in this evaluation, two were experimentally fabricated in a lab and measured with an STM, the others were simulated based on experimental findings. The STM measurements were performed using an Omicron LT-STM system operating at 4.5 K and ultra-high vacuum (3 × 10 -11 Torr). The STM tips were electrochemically etched from tungsten wire and sharpened using a field ion microscope The image acquisition was done using a Nanonis SPM controller with respective software. All images were taken in constant height mode with an imaging bias of 1.3 V and a current setpoint of 50 pA. 2) Programming: The architecture and training of the neural network used for defect identification in STM scans is modeled after The STM scans of the fabricated H-Si(100)-2×1 surfaces span a total of 830 × 652 and 740 × 1090 hydrogen sites, respectively, of which 8.57 % and 6.26 % are defective. 6 We applied the proposed atomic defect-aware physical design algorithm to generate the same set of benchmark circuits used in The results for these cases are listed in Table To this end, we strive for quantifying their impact by evaluating simulated surfaces of comparable size with variable defect rates of 1 %, 0.5 %, and 0.1 %, once with both charged and neutral atomic defects, and once with only neutral defects, using the same benchmark set. The obtained results can be found in the same table under the caption SIMULATED W/ CHARGED DEFECTS for surfaces including charged defects, and under SIMULATED W/O CHARGED DEFECTS for surfaces with purely neutral defects. In both cases, defect types were automatically distributed in accordance with experimental findings. In the former case, charged ones make up 5 % of all defects. Three core findings can be obtained from these results: 1) defect avoidance directly correlates with significantly larger overall area consumption, 2) high defect rates, and particularly charged defects, have a tremendous impact on layout generation to the degree where circuits cannot be realized in their vicinity at all, and 3) fabrication capabilities must achieve a defect rate of around 0.1 % in the absence of charged defects or < 0.1 % with charged defects present to enable sophisticated layout manufacturing. Fabrication capabilities of Silicon Dangling Bonds (SiDBs) have advanced to the automated manufacturing stage. Nevertheless, atomic substrate defects are currently preventing technology scaling as they disturb gate functionalities or prevent logic realization altogether. In this work, we presented a surface defect model to guide physical design that we obtained by investigating 13 experimentally verified H-Si(100)-2×1 defect types. Furthermore, we proposed modifications to an established SiDB gate library to increase its robustness against substrate defects. Finally, we proposed a defect-aware placement and routing algorithm that considers STM surface scans obtained from experimentation as well as simulated surface data and designs functioning SiDB circuit layouts in the presence of atomic defects. An experimental evaluation on real fabricated surfaces demonstrated its functioning but also highlighted the limitations of current fabrication capabilities. We demonstrated the critical impact that charged defects have on the creation of circuit layouts and determined a defect rate of around 0.1 %, if charged defects can be completely eliminated, or < 0.1 %, otherwise, to be required for the future of large-scale SiDB logic manufacturing. Herewith, this work represents an amalgamation of fabrication and design automation that provides the basis for largescale defect-aware physical design of SiDB circuitry. Note that, in the following only negative or neutral dangling bonds are of interest. Positively charged ones are not relevant for gate configurations A more detailed discussion of these and other commonly occurring defects can be found in Publicly available at https://github.com/cda-tum/fiction. Not counting stray DB defects, as they can be erased from the surface prior to the fabrication of circuitry