Many ionic surfactants, such as sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) crystallize out of solution if the temperature falls below the crystallization boundary. The crystallization temperature is impacted by solution properties, and can be decreased with the addition of salt. We have studied SDS crystallization at the liquid/vapor interfaces from solutions at high ionic strength (sodium chloride). We show that the surfactant crystals at the surface grow from adsorbed SDS molecules, as evidenced by the preferential orientation of the crystals identified using grazing incidence X-ray diffraction. We find a unique timescale for the crystal growth from the evolution of structure, surface tension, and visual inspection, which can be controlled through varying the SDS or NaCl concentrations. Many surfactants crystallize out of solution at low temperatures or in the presence of salts Solid particles have been used to create highly stable foams, through the practically irreversible adsorption of particles at the liquid/vapor interfaces (given suitable particle size and wetting conditions) Although the crystal structure, size of crystals and the rate of crystallization have been identified as important parameters in the capacity of the crystals to stabilize foams, there are few studies of SDS crystallization at liquid/vapor surfaces. In the bulk the crystallization of SDS has been studied, and it is known that a number of crystal structures can be formed, depending on the degree of hydration The crystallization of surfactants is different from the surface freezing phenomenon. Long-chain alkanes have been shown to undergo a surface freezing transition, where at temperatures above bulk freezing they form a nanometric crystal-layer at alkane/water interfaces In order to study SDS crystallization at liquid/vapor surfaces, we have used varying concentrations of NaCl to modulate the temperature of crystallization and hence the kinetics of crystal formation. The addition of salt screens the electrostatic repulsion between the surfactant headgroups and promotes precipitation. This increases the crystallization temperature, so that crystals form at room temperature. We measure the crystal structure at the surface using grazing incidence X-ray scattering, and follow the kinetics of crystallization with surface tension and imaging methods. The surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, purity ≥ 99.0%) and the salt sodium chloride (NaCl, purity ≥ 99.0%) are purchased from Sigma. The SDS powder is used as received and the NaCl powder is roasted in an oven at 650-700 • C for 16-20 hours to remove any possible organic impurities. Solutions are prepared in the concentration range 0.5-6.0 mM for SDS and 350-600 mM for NaCl volumetrically at 20 • C. These concentrations were chosen to observe crystallization on reasonable timescales. Required amounts of SDS and NaCl powders are transferred into a 500 mL or 1 L flask and diluted with ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ•cm). The precipitate forming in the solutions during preparation is solubilized by increasing the temperature to 25-30 • C (depending on the NaCl concentration) in a water bath (Memmert WNE 10 equipped with a cooling Peltier). The temperature is then gradually decreased back to 20 • C, which requires 30-40 minutes. All prepared solutions were homogeneous and transparent prior to the start of the experiments, and are analyzed immediately after preparation. The Krafft boundary is determined for solutions with [SDS] = 1, 5, 10 and 100 mM and [NaCl] from 50 to 1000 mM. The mixtures with different surfactant/salt concentrations are prepared from stock solutions of SDS and NaCl in 20 mL glass bottles. The mixtures are heated at approximately 40 • C until the precipitate is solubilized to ensure homogeneity and placed in a fridge at 4 • C overnight. The bottles are then gradually heated in a water bath (VWR 1137-1P circulating water bath) starting from 4 • C with the rate 1 • C per 2 hours. The Krafft boundary is considered as the lowest temperature at which all precipitate appears dissolved by visual inspection. We estimate the uncertainty of the melting temperature measurement in ±1 • C. The measured temperatures are shown in Supporting Information Figure The kinetics of crystallization at the interface of saltsurfactant mixtures is characterized using a polytetrafluoroethylene Langmuir trough (Kibron microtrough) 80 mm × 206 mm equipped with two polyoxymethylene barriers (width 20 mm) that are immobile during the measurement. The surface area of the trough is therefore 132.8 cm 2 . The trough is equipped with a balance holding a sensor -the DyneProbe, made of a metal alloy with a hydrophilic oxide, ensuring negligible contact angle with the solution. The trough operates in an acrylic cover box preventing perturbations during measurements. The temperature in the trough is regulated with a water bath at 20 • C. The sensor is cleaned from organic residues by heating with a flame torch and calibrated with 100 mL of ultrapure water at 20 °C before each measurement. Then 100 mL of freshly prepared SDS + NaCl solution at 20 • C is poured into the trough and the time evolution of the surface tension is recorded. The surface tension is initially stable and is followed by a sharp drop after crystallization at the interface. For each measurement, we determined the characteristic time of the surface tension drop τ γ as the inflection point between the plateau and the slope. To correlate the percolation of crystals at the interface with the surface tension measurements, crystallization kinetics for solutions with 500 mM NaCl was also followed by taking photographs of the solution interface in a glass Petri dish (diameter: 11 cm, surface area 95 cm 2 ) placed in the Kibron trough. The Petri dish was colored with black paint on the outside for easier observation of the crystallization process. The trough was filled with water at 20 °C that surrounded the bottom of the dish for temperature regulation. The DyneProbe, cleaned with a flame torch, was calibrated with 100 mL of ultrapure water poured into the dish that was then substituted with 100 mL of the SDS + NaCl solutions prepared as described above. The surface tension was measured as function of time and grayscale photographs of the solution interface were taken every minute with a Basler acA3800-14uc USB 3.0 camera placed at approximately 45°angle with the liquid interface. The percolation time τ perc is determined from the movies by eye as the time at which the movement at the interface stopped due to its complete coating with crystals. We estimate the uncertainty of the values to be ±10 min. We verified with image analysis in MATLAB that the values determined by the eye correspond to the time to reach the plateau of total pixel intensity at the water interface (the result is not shown). To obtain colorful images of the evolution of the crystal growth, we filmed solutions (100 mL) in an open Petri dish (diameter: 11 cm), colored black from the outside, in a lab with air temperature control (20 °C). The images were taken every minute with a USB 2.0 camera (uEye UI-1495LE-C-HQ). X-ray scattering experiments are carried out at the SIR-IUS beamline at SOLEIL Synchrotron (Saint-Aubin, France). Details of the beamline optics can be found in the literature GIXD experiments For Grazing Incidence X-ray Diffraction (GIXD) experiments, the water surface is illuminated at an incident angle of 2 mrad below the critical angle (2.7 mrad) of total external reflection on the air/water interface so that the incident wave is almost totally reflected. In this regime, the refracted wave is evanescent, probing the interface with a penetration depth of a few nanometers. The diffracted X-ray beam intensity is recorded by a Pilatus3 1M 2D detector (Dectris, Switzerland) as a function of the horizontal in-plane scattering angle 2θ between the incident beam and the scattered beam. The in-plane resolution (∆2θ = 0.06 o ) is defined by a Soller-Collimator (JJ X-ray, Denmark) located in front of the Pilatus3 1M detector. A home-made Langmuir trough of total area 800 cm 2 and with 400 mL volume is used for these surface crystallization experiment combined with X-ray measurements. It is enclosed in a temperature-controlled sealed chamber and flushed with helium gas during data collection in order to lower scattering and sample damage. The helium is saturated with water before entering the trough enclosure in order to avoid water evaporation during the measurements. The surface pressure is measured in this trough by the Wilhelmy plate method, using a filter paper plate and a Riegler and Kirstein Gmbh (Berlin, Germany) surface pressure sensor. Diffraction in the vertical plane of incidence Out-of-plane diffraction (i.e. in the plane containing the incident beam and its specular reflection) measurements were performed in an original geometry initially developed for X-ray reflectivity at liquid-air interfaces. In this setup, the incidence angle on the last deflecting mirror of the SIRIUS beamline is varied to scan the incidence angle on the water surface between 0 and 2 • . The upper limit of 2 • on the water surface is determined by the critical angle of total external reflection of the mirror of approximately 0.5 • , given by its external coating of 80 nm platinum. When the incidence angle on the mirror exceeds this threshold, the intensity of the reflected Xrays decreases significantly, with almost no X-rays being reflected for angles greater than 1 • on the mirror, equivalent to 2 • on the water surface. The intensity of the incident beam I 0 is monitored by an ionization chamber (IC PLUS 50, FMB Oxford, England) placed right before the liquid surface for proper normalization of the reflected beam. In this particular geometry, as the incident angle increases, it becomes necessary to lower the liquid surface to follow the incident beam. This adjustment is achieved by vertically translating the sample stage of the diffractometer, which has a wide range of motion (150 mm) and an excellent repeatability (1 μm). The signal reflected by the interface is measured by the Pilatus3 1M detector, which is moved vertically to ensure that the reflected spot remains at the same position on the detector. For every data point of the experimental curve, the signal is measured by summing the intensity of each pixel within a Region Of Interest (ROI) that is centered around the reflected beam. Background subtraction is then performed by calculating the average signal from the ROIs located immediately on the left and on the right of the ROI containing the reflected beam. Finally, the signal is divided by a measurement of the direct beam on the detector, along with a proper normalization by the I 0 intensity. We observe the evolution of solutions of SDS in Petri dishes. At the SDS concentrations studied, and at room temperature, the surfactant will not precipitate without the addition of salt. The addition of 500 mM NaCl will decrease the solubility of SDS and the critical micelle concentration (CMC) falls to around 0.5 mM For the sample with 0.6 mM SDS (Figure Increasing the concentration of SDS to 1.0 mM (Figure In both cases, the surfaces are very mobile during the growth of the crystals, due to convection, however, once the surface density of crystals becomes sufficiently high all motion arrests and the surfaces become jammed. This is not the end of the evolution, and the thickness of the layers continues to increase. The impact of the SDS concentration can also be seen in photographs of a smaller region of the surfaces, as shown in Figure In order to determine the structure and, eventually, the nature of the crystals that form at the surface of SDS solution in presence of high concentration of NaCl, we performed GIXD and diffraction in the vertical plane of incidence. Figure In order to determine the vertical structure and the distance between lamellae we performed X-ray diffraction in the vertical plane of incidence using the same experimental geometry as X-ray reflectivity measurement (XRR). The main feature of the diffraction spectra in the vertical plane is the presence of two Bragg peaks as shown in Figure Apart from anhydrous SDS crystals, several hydrates have been identified in the water / SDS phase diagram in the literature: One possible explanation could be sample degradation, as the crystals at the interface undergo percolation and the two-dimensional diffusion is halted, resulting in continuous irradiation of the same crystals. This phenomenon may induce irradiation damage, causing a decrease in peak intensities. However, typically, this would also result in an increase in peak width, which is not observed in this case. Furthermore, the subsequent increase in intensity over longer times does not support this explanation. An alternative explanation could arise from the observation that at the percolation time, the surface is relatively flat, and the crystals align well with the solution's surface. This ideal scenario facilitates the measurement of diffraction from a two-dimensional, surface-oriented powder. However, after percolation, the roughness of the surface increases, and crystals may become misaligned, resulting in a smaller diffraction signal. The evolution of the reflected intensity is mirrored in the response of the surface tension measurements. Initially, the surface tension is about 31.5 mN•m -1 far below the surface tension of ultrapure water (72 mN • m -1 at 20 • C). At a given time τ γ ≈ 3 h, a decrease followed by a sharper drop of the surface tension occurs concomitantly with the end of the crystal expansion at the surface as illustrated in Figure In addition, the diffraction measurements indicate an absence of the (001) peak just after the sample preparation, supporting the absence of crystals at the interface. Then, the peak intensity increases with the growth of crystals and reaches a maximum correlated with the decrease of the surface tension. After this time, no drastic change of the intensity is measured. Even if visual observations evidence a thickening of the crystalline layer, GIXD cannot measure it due to the limited penetration of X-rays for thick layers, only the diffraction in the vertical plane of incidence is still sensitive at long time. The temporal evolution of the intensity is typical for all the samples with different SDS concentrations. They show the appearance of an intense diffraction peak at percolation. The peak intensity decreases just after, fol- lowed by a slow increase at longer times. The characteristic time-scales linked to structural evolution and surface tension measurements are in close agreement (Figure Then, we focus on the effect of salt and surfactant concentrations on the crystal growth kinetics. In Figure We have studied the crystallization of SDS at the vapor/water interface as we precipitate the surfactant from salt solution (NaCl). We measure the structure of the surface layers using a combination of GIXD and diffraction in the vertical plane of incidence, to access both the in-plane and out-of-plane structure. We show that crystals are formed from adsorbed SDS molecules, and that they are oriented parallel to the surface. We can match the crystal structure to that of a poorly hydrated SDS (SDS : 1/8 H 2 O hydrate), despite the dilute conditions and contact with a water bath. This is because the presence of salt changes the equilibrium bulk crystal structure to a less hydrated form. We analyze the kinetics of crystal growth by combining the structural evolution with surface tension measurements and visual observations. We show that a single characteristic time defines the evolution of the crystals. The visual percolation of the surface is accompanied by a sudden decrease of the measured surface tension, and an increase of the (001) peak intensity. The characteristic time for the precipitation of SDS is long compared to the characteristic timescales linked to foam stability (hours compared to tens of minutes). This is probably why the use of NaCl to precipitate SDS for the generation of stable foams is less frequent, and potassium or magnesium chlorides are much more efficient 