In this work, the electronic and optical properties of Si 1-x Ge x O 2 at equilibrium and nonequilibrium condition were calculated using a full potential linear augmented plane wave plus local orbital method. The effect of Si and Ge on electronic and optical properties of Si 1-x Ge x O 2 is investigated. It was found that Si 1-x Ge x O 2 compounds could be used as a high-K in electronics devices. High dielectric constant materials are expected to replace conventional SiO 2 gate oxide to continue the scaling down of silicon based semiconductor devices. Using them for gate oxide allows us to make tunnel oxide with reducing leakage current. Although the amorphous oxide does not have grain boundaries and is isotropic, polycrystalline oxide with more abrupt interfaces allows us to scale down There are numerous oxides with extremely dielectric constants or "high K", but suitable candidates have not been identified. Ouang and Ching have reported a new pure phase of SiO 2 in inverse Ag 2 O structure, which is called i phase. This new phase has an unusually high dielectric constant In this work, we investigated the electronic and optical properties of Si 1-x Ge x O 2 alloys to find the other high-k and to see the effect of Si and Ge concentration on their properties. The self-consistent calculations were carried out using WIEN2k The supercell approach was adopted to model the Si 1-x Ge x O 2 alloys. A 12 atoms Si 4-n Ge n O 8 supercell was used. The supercell structure is shown in Fig. It has a simple cubic structure with m Pn3 space group. We have Si 0.75 Ge 0.25 O 2 , Si 0.5 Ge 0.5 O 2 and Si 0.25 Ge 0.75 O 2 for n=1, 2, 3 respectively. Different atomic sites for Si and Ge have been tested and different electronic properties were observed. The structure with minimum energy was selected for other calculations. The theoretical equilibrium total energy, lattice parameter a o , and bulk modulus B are determined by fitting the total energy as a function of volume for all of the crystals to the Murnaghan's equation of state Optical calculation needs a dens k-mesh. 64 k-point seems to be sufficient for the supercells (n=1, 3). The scissors operator, which is the difference between the calculated and measured energy gape, was considered 1.0ev. This value was chosen approximately since there was not any experimental data. The imaginary and real parts of the dielectric function for all of the compounds are shown in Fig. Optical dielectric constant (   To conclude, a more detailed first-principles calculation was carried out to study the electronic structure and optical properties of the Si 1-x Ge x O 2 using the FPLAPW method. The ground state properties like equilibrium lattice constants, bulk modulus obtained. It was found that increasing Ge concentration and decreasing the Si concentration decrease the band gap and increase the optical dielectric constant. The Si 0.25 Ge 0.75 O 2 has the biggest optical dielectric constant and the smallest band gap. This band gap (about 2.39ev) is not small, so it can be used as a substrate for Si 1-x Ge x since it has a small band gap for some concentration of Ge 