Material science methods aim at developing efficient computational schemes for describing complex many-body effects and how they are revealed in experimentally measurable properties. Bethe-Salpeter equation in the self-consistent Hartree-Fock basis is often used for this purpose, and in this paper we employ the real-frequency diagrammatic Monte Carlo framework for solving the laddertype Bethe-Salpeter equation for the 3-point vertex function (and, ultimately, for the system's polarization) to study the effect of electron-hole Coulomb scattering on Landau damping in the homogeneous electron gas. We establish how this damping mechanism depends on the Coulomb parameter rs and changes with temperature between the correlated liquid and thermal gas regimes. In a broader context of dielectric response in metals, we also present the full polarization and the typical dependence of the exchange-correlation kernel on frequency at finite momentum and temperature within the same computational framework. Landau damping (LD) was originally introduced to describe decay of charge oscillations in plasma The standard way of characterizing energy losses in the homogeneous electron gas (HEG) due to interactions between the charges is through the imaginary part of the inverse dielectric function ε -1 (Q, Ω), or, equivalently, the system's polarization Π(Q, Ω); the two quantities are straightforwardly related by ε = 1 -V Π, where V (Q) = 4πe 2 /Q 2 is the Coulomb potential. In what follows we define the LD coefficient as the quantity controlling the slope of the linear low-frequency dependence of ImΠ Here v F = k F /m and ε F = k 2 F /2m are the Fermi velocity and Fermi energy of the ideal gas, respectively, and m is the electron mass. In the non-interacting system at zero temperature the LD coefficient is proportional to the Fermi surface density of states, γ LD = (π/2)ρ (0) F , with ρ (0) F = mk F /π 2 . For convenience, below we measure momenta in units of k F and energies in units of ε F . By Luttinger theorem, the electron number density is given by n = k 3 F /3π 2 . The HEG model describes electrons interacting via the long-range Coulomb force on a positively charged neutralizing background. The corresponding Hamiltonian is defined by The strength of many-body correlations is characterized by the Coulomb parameter r s = (4πa 3 B n/3) -1/3 , which measures inter-particle distance in terms of the Bohr radius a B = 1/me 2 .  F : : The ideal gas zero-temperature expression for γ LD immediately follows from the widely used random phase approximation (RPA) when the polarization is estimated from the lowest order contribution, Π (0) , shown by the diagram (a) in Fig. Summation of ladder diagrams for the polarization must be supplemented by simultaneous renormalization of the electron Green's function, G, by considering noncrossing diagrams for the proper self-energy, Σ = Σ F , which is equivalent to the self-consistent Hartree-Fock (HF) approximation when , see Fig. In this work we apply the above field-theoretical setup (abbreviated as HF-BSE) to compute the system's polarization in a wide range of temperatures at metallic values of the Coulomb parameter r s and extract the LD coefficient from its imaginary part at small frequencies. This allows us to quantify the effects of pair scattering on top of the Fermi surface and reveal finite temperature effects as the system evolves from the correlated liquid state to the non-degenerate gas regime at T ≫ ε F . Finally, by extending simulations to arbitrary frequency and comparing to results obtained within a high-order diagrammatic scheme, we quantify the role of "beyond HF-BSE" diagrams and establish the typical functional form of the exchange correlation kernel at non-zero momentum and temperature within the HF-BSE approach, which is important for modeling of material dynamics within the time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT), see, for instance, Ref. Most finite-temperature many-body calculations for correlation functions proceed by first solving the problem in the Matsubara representation The key observation made in Refs. An explicit procedure of taking the η → 0 limit and eliminating singular statistical contributions from simple poles was proposed in Ref. In all previous AMI simulations of the HEG the diagrammatic series were formulated in terms of the Yukawa potential with some screening momentum κ (expansion in terms of the bare Coulomb potential is ill-defined) and κ-counterterms. This is an exact procedure within the general shifted-action approach where Π RP A is the polarization of the ideal gas (the so-called Lindhard function). All our calculations were done using this form of W (k). Finally, we note that the self-consistent HF solution for the Green's function amounts to replacing the parabolic dispersion relation ε (0) (k) = k 2 /2m -μ (counting energies from the chemical potential) with the HF expression, ε(k) = k 2 /2m + Σ F (k) -μ F , which preserves the simple pole structure of G. The chemical potential μ F is self-consistently adjusted to keep the electron density fixed. Monte-Carlo simulations of the HF-BSE scheme described above are numerically exact and do not introduce any bias beyond the diagrammatic approximations. Our results for LD coefficient are summarized in Fig. To answer this question we also show results based on the Π (0) contribution, which is equivalent to the RPA in the HF basis (HF-RPA), see the lowest two curves in Fig. Non-zero temperature effects on γ LD become visible at T /ε F > 0.1, and around T /ε F ∼ 1 we observe smooth crossover to the classical gas behavior. After significant drop from the T = 0 values, all curves for different values of r s collapse at T /ε F > 2 on the asymptotic ideal-gas high-temperature expression γ LD = a(ε F /T ) 3/2 with a = (2 F . To gauge the role of other diagram topologies on γ LD , we also show in Fig. Finally, we would like to note that ladder-diagram series for γ LD are well converged. In Fig. In the absence of precise data for frequency dependence of the HEG polarization, one of the most promising attempts to include effects of interactions on dynamics in comparison with the RPA solution is the exchangecorrelation kernel approach. The kernel is formally defined by and this framework is used to suggest various functional dependencies of K xc constrained by exact sum rules and ground state energy dependence on density, see Ref. However, since K xc is defined as the difference between the Π -1 functions, even tiny variations between Π and Π RPA are magnified by orders of magnitude in regions where either function is small (note that ReΠ changes sign at Ω slightly below v F Q). It is thus not surprising that HF-BSE and AMI results of Ref. The HF-BSE exchange-correlation kernel has the same key properties established in Ref. Clearly, accurate calculations of K xc are much more demanding than calculations of Π or the charge response function χ = Π/ε, especially at frequencies where either Π, or Π RPA , or both functions are getting very small. The latter situation takes place at high frequency when both functions go to zero while the difference between the two is approaching zero even faster. This is why observing the plateau in K xc = (Π -Π RPA )/(Π Π RPA ) is challenging numerically and requires a theoretical scheme where vertex corrections and self-energy renormalization of G are properly balanced. Using recently developed real-frequency Diagrammatic Monte Carlo technique Within the same theoretical framework we also studied the frequency dependence of the exchange-correlation kernel and found that it features a highly non-monotonic behavior around Ω ∼ v F Q and lacks casuality at Ω < v F Q, in agreement with previous results based on the full (but relatively low order) diagrammatic expansion and non-zero parameter for regularization of poles. These results demonstrate that starting from expansion in terms of the static screened interaction, solving the selfconsistent Hartree-Fock equations, and performing summation of ladder-diagram series for the polarization we have an efficient computational scheme that captures most of physics right despite dealing with a limited set of diagrams. Future work should explore the possibility of upgrading the scheme to the expansion in terms of dynamically screened interaction when self-consistent Hartree-Fock is replaced with the self-consistent GW 0 approximation.