We present a comparative investigation of singlet ground state induced magnetism for singlet, doublet and triplet excited CEF states of non-Kramers f-electrons relevant primarily for Pr-and Ubased compounds. This type of magnetic order is of intrinsic quantum nature because it requires the superposition of singlet ground state with excited states due to non-diagonal matrix elements of the effective intersite exchange to generate local moments. In contrast to conventional magnets the local moments and their ordering appear simultaneously at the transition temperature. It is finite only if the control parameter proportional to the ratio of exchange strength to level splitting exceeds a critical value marking the quantum critical point of the models. We determine the dependence of transition temperature, saturation moment, renormalised level splitting, specific heat jumps and low-temperature susceptibility as function of control parameter. Furthermore the temperature dependence of these quantities is calculated for control parameters above and below the quantum critical point and the distinction to conventional magnetism is discussed. In addition we investigate the dynamical properties of the three models, deriving the magnetic exciton dispersion and their critical behaviour. In particular the conditions for true and arrested soft-mode behaviour at the ordering wave vector are identified. The majority of magnets with local moments can be understood within the context of semiclassical approach sufficiently below the ordering temperature T m There is, however a class of magnetic materials with non-Kramers 4f-or 5f ions (with integer total angular momentum J) where the quasi-classical picture of ordering is per se invalid. This is the case when the crystalline electric field (CEF) splits the (2J + 1)-fold degenerate J-multiplet into a series of CEF multiplets such that the ground state |0⟩ is a singlet which has no magnetic moment, i.e. ⟨0|J|0⟩ = 0. In this situation the appearance of magnetic order is a true quantum effect, it can only happen if at least one of the J components has non-diagonal matrix elements with nearby excited multiplets. Then a sufficiently strong intersite exchange may lead to the creation of an ordered moment by spontaneous formation of a new ground state which is a superposition of singlet ground state and first excited multiplet state at an energy ∆. If we assume an ideal situation where the latter is separated from other much higher lying CEF levels and the transition temperature T m is small then in an intermediate temperature range T m < T < ∆ there will be no paramagnetic moment (just vanVleck terms) in the susceptibility. The moment then appears at T m as a collective ordered moment selfconsistently determined by the singlet-singlet mixing in the ordered phase which cannot be viewed quasiclassically as alignment of preexisting paramagnetic moments. The condition for the necessary strength of the intersite coupling is determined by a dimensionless control parameter composed of coupling strength, level splitting and the nondiagonal matrix elements (Eq. ( The thermodynamic signatures, as expressed by behaviour of critical temperature, saturation moment, specific heat anomalies and susceptibility are quite distinct from the quasi-classical magnets. Furthermore the dynamical characteristics show pronounced differences. In the latter coherent propagating magnons; i.e. quasi-classical precessing moments naturally can only appear in the ordered phase; requesting the presence of arXiv:2311.18416v2 [cond-mat.str-el] 8 Mar 2024 a molecular field. On the other hand in the induced moment magnets collective 'magnetic exciton' modes are present already in the paramagnetic phase due to the possibility of dispersive inelastic CEF excitations between singlet ground state and excited multiplet. The dispersion of magnetic excitons is strongly temperature dependent controlled by the thermal population difference of CEF levels. Under suitable conditions it may turn into a soft mode at the incipient ordering wave vector as a precursor to spontaneous induced order. However, it is frequently arrested at a finite energy at the ordering temperature. Below the ordering temperature it reemerges as a strongly renormalised magnonic mode (possibly split into several branches) where the induced order parameter together with the molecular-field renormalised CEF level splitting determine the dispersion. This type of induced moment quantum magnetism, different from the common semiclassical variety has been known for some time but its possibility and distinction to quasi-classical magnetism is not commonly appreciated. It appears primarly in compounds with J=4 4f or 5f ions such as PrSb Another highly interesting aspect of induced moment magnetism is the possible influence of nuclear hyperfine coupling on the magnetic transition and order. The effects of hyperfine coupling and level splitting in thermodynamic properties of 4f systems appear in the 10 2 mK regime Although the above mentioned compounds are known to have a singlet CEF ground state the type of the first excited state whether singlet, doublet or triplet (in cubic site symmetry only) is not always known with certainty, in particular in the U-compounds. However the quantitative and even qualitative aspects of induced moment magnetic order will be different in these three cases. Although they have been considered before in the references above there is no systematic comparison concerning their thermodynamic (specific heat, susceptibility etc.) or dynamic properties like distinct magnetic exciton dispersion and differences in temperature dependence and soft mode behaviour. In this work we undertake this effort to improve understanding of these physical properties of singlet ground state quantum magnets and give a better foundation for possible judgement of experimentally observed properties. We will do this for three generally applicable models: The singlet-singlet, doublet or triplet models (SSM, SDM and STM respectively) which may be commonly realised in uniaxial (the two former) or cubic symmetry (the latter), see also Appendix A. Our approach is analytical based on molecular field (MFA) and random phase (RPA) approximations as far as it can be carried out. We emphasise as a unifying concept the central role of the control parameter of the three models defining the QCP and separating paramagnetic and magnetic phases. All physical properties will be expressed in terms of these control parameters. It has the further advantage that one can continuously approach the common magnetic order with (quasi-) degenerate ground state by tuning the control parameter to large values far away from the QCP. In particular we shall focus on the temperature behaviour of susceptibility and specific heat in the ordered phase and on the concomitant control parameter dependence of ordered moment, ordering temperature and specific heat anomalies which show a clear distinction between the induced order quantum regime and the (asymptotic) quasi-classical regime. Furthermore we calculate the magnetic excitation spectrum of the three models across the disordered and induced order regimes and demonstrate their striking differences. In particular we give an explicit demonstration how the simple soft mode picture is modified in the STM model leading to an arrested soft mode at the true transition temperature which is also of more general significance. This investigation is not focused on a specific material but rather on the comparative analysis of generally important singlet ground state CEF models. To keep the results from the three models distinct and avoid confusion we dedicate separate sections to them. This entails some redundancy but supports clarity of presented results. We consider three types of singlet-ground state level systems. The first two are a singlet-singlet model (SSM) and a singlet-doublet model (SDM) frequently appropriate for uniaxial symmetry and a singlet-triplet model (STM) only possible for cubic symmetry. They correspond to simplified low energy CEF schemes consisting of just two levels whose splitting is considerably smaller than the excitation energies to the higher lying CEF states. Such systems are encountered for even-numbered f-electron shells with integer total angular momentum like Pr, U (J=4) , Tm, Tb (J=6) and Ho (J=8) with examples given above. For the theoretical treatment of magnetic order and excitations it is a prerequisite to know the matrix structure of the angular momentum operators in the reduced SSM, SDM and STM level schemes. For uniaxial symmetries there are two possibilities, corresponding to Ising-type where only one operator, by convention J z , or xy-type where two operators (J x , J y ) have nonzero matrix elements between the ground and excited CEF states of the reduced level scheme. Which one is realised depends on the Stevens parameters B m n of the CEF potential and consequently the type of irreducible representations of low lying CEF states. Here we consider the Ising-type SSM, the xy-type SDM and the cubic STM cases. The CEF singlet ground state is denoted by |0⟩. In the SSM the excited singlet is denoted by |1⟩ and in the SDM the doublet states by |1σ⟩ , σ = ±, for STM see below. In all cases the CEF splitting energy is ∆ (Fig. Ising-type SSM: where J-operators refer to the free |JM ⟩ states and S are the pseudo-spin operators in the reduced subspace of CEF states. Likewise in the singlet-doublet xy-type model the general form of J operators is given by (in |0⟩, |1+⟩, |1-⟩ sequence): xy-type SDM: Here we defined m s , m d in such a way that S x , S y correspond to the canonical (pseudo-) spin matrices for S = 1 2 , 1, respectively (with reordered sequence of states for the latter). The numerical values of m s , m d are to be obtained from the diagonalisation of the full CEF Steven's Hamiltonian in a concrete case. For the cubic STM we take as a model the most important Γ 1 -Γ 4 level scheme of J = 4 whose states are fully determined by symmetry and therefore do not depend on the CEF potential parameters. Since the cubic axes are equivalent we restrict to the J z matrix where indices n = 0, 1 -3 correspond to the singlet Γ 1 ground state |ψ 0 ⟩ and triplet Γ 4 excited states |ψ 1-3 ⟩, respectively. It is given by cubic-type STM: where σ x and τ z are Pauli matrices in the (0, 2) and (1, 3) subspaces, respectively. For J = 4 we have The effective intersite exchange interactions (mediated, e.g. by conduction electrons) together with the CEF potential is described by the Hamiltonian where Γ = 0, 1 or 0, (1+, 1-) or 0, (1, 2, 3) labels the CEF states of the three models, respectively and i, j denote the lattice sites. We restrict to only nearest neighbour ⟨n.n.⟩ exchange interaction J ij = I 0 for in-plane bonds and J ij = κI 0 for out-of plane bonds (along c-axis), thus κ controls the real-space anisotropy of the model and may be tuned continuously. We disregard possible spin-space anisotropies of the exchange term to limit the number of parameters. The two CEF energy levels are given by ε 0 = 0 and ε 1 , ε (1+,1-) or ε (1-3) = ∆, respectively. Frequently it will be convenient to use the more symmetrical shifted energy levels ε Γ -∆/2 (without introducing a new symbol). For simplicity we consider the localised f electrons and CEF states on a simple tetragonal lattice. The corresponding (normalised) Fourier transformed n.n. exchange function is then given by (wave vectors in units of π/a or π/c) where Î(q) = I(q)/I e and the effective exchange coupling strength is given by I e = z 3 |I 0 |(2 + κ) with z = 6 denoting the n.n. coordination. According to the sign of the exchange part in Eq. ( Instead of the individual model parameters contained in the Hamiltonian of Eq. (4) it will turn out that in each of the three models one has only a single dimensionless control parameter given by characterising the relative strength of effective intersite exchange I e and local CEF splitting ∆. The slightly different definition of ξ d is due to two facts: In the SDM two excited states are connected to the ground states and the prefactor of the matrix is chosen differently to comply with pseudospin conventions for S = 1. As it will turn out the above definition of the control parameters leads to identical quantum critical point ξ c s,d,t = 1 for all three models within the molecular field -RPA approach. This may possibly change when considering the influence of interacting exciton modes beyond RPA on the QCP position. We will commonly suppress the s, d, t indices when we talk about generic properties of all three models. We will strive to express all relevant calculated quantities in terms of ξ that controls the quantum phase transition from paramagnetic to induced moment phase. The conventional quasi-classical magnetism in 3D is approached when ξ ≫ 1 and the CEF splitting becomes very small as compared to the exchange energy scale so that the first term in Eq. ( The molecular field (MF) treatment of Eq. (4) delivers the basic quantities of induced order parameter, transition temperature and level splitting and state superposition in the induced moment phase. Assuming that we either have possible ferromagnetic (FM) or antiferromagnetic (AFM) induced order (the only two possibilities for n.n. exchange) the effective molecular fields are given by h λ e = I e ⟨J α ⟩λ (α = z for Ising-SSM and STM) and we choose the moment direction for the xy-SDM along α = x. Furthermore λ = A, B; λ = B, A is the sublattice index such that h λ e = h e for FM and h A e = -h B e = h e for AFM cases. Then, e.g. for the SDM the molecular field Hamiltonian for each sublattice is given by After determination of the MF eigenvectors, energy eigenvalues and their thermal occupations the induced moments ⟨J α ⟩ may be computed selfconsistently in the following. The basic mechanism of induced order in singlet ground state systems is in contrast to the quasi-classical case with (Kramers) degenerate ground state as outlined in the Introduction. In the three singlet models there are no preformed ground state moments, therefore magnetic order is only possible due to a nondiagonal quantum mixture of singlet ground state with the excited multiplet states due to inter-site exchange. This is a distinctly quantum mechanical origin of magnetic order caused by the superposition of nonmagnetic ground and excited states forming spontaneously a new magnetic ground state below T m . It is natural for this mechanism to work that the intersite exchange driving the moment formation from the split states must be sufficiently large to overcome the CEF splitting stabilising the nonmagnetic state as controlled by the dimensionless parameters defined in Eq, In the SSM the MF Hamiltonian of Eq. ( leading to a renormalised (dimensionless) singlet-singlet splitting in the ordered state according to which depends on temperature T through the order parameter ⟨J z ⟩ as shown in Fig. where tan 2θ λ = γ⟨J z ⟩ λ with θ λ = θ; ⟨J z ⟩ λ = ⟨J z ⟩ for FM and θ A,B = ±θ; ⟨J z ⟩ A,B = ±⟨J z ⟩ for AFM. The mixing of singlets is the essential mechanism to create a selfconsistent ground state induced moment out of the singlet states due to the nondiagonal dipolar matrix element m s . This means that the mixing angle θ λ and ⟨J z ⟩ λ can only be simultaneously nonzero. From Eq. ( The matrix elements for J z are determined by cos 2θ = Here ∆ 0 = ξ s ∆ = m 2 s I e /2 is the zero temperature splitting and ∆T ≡ ∆ T /∆ = ξ s f s (T ) the normalised Tdependent splitting. It is determined by the difference of thermal level occupations f s (T ) for T ≤ T m as obtained from the solution of the second equation for a given ξ s . In the paramagnetic regime (T > T m ) we simply have ξs , leading to where the asymptotic limits are given to the right, the upper one corresponding to closeness to the QCP, the lower one approaching the conventional degenerate ground state magnetism. This means for a finite T m for induced quantum magnetic order one must have a control parameter ξ s > 1, i.e. according to Eq. ( , Transition temperature and induced moment are shown in Fig. Close to the QCP (upper limit) this ratio decreases steeply to zero In the paramagnetic phase the internal energy of the SSM is simply U (T ) = -∆ 2 tanh ∆ 2T leading to a Schottky specific heat (second line in Eq. ( where the first part contains the MF energy levels of Eq. ( Then U (0) = -∆ 4 (ξ s + 1 ξs ) at zero temperature. For ξ s → 1 + this approaches the paramagnetic ground state energy The specific heat C V (T ) = (∂U (T )/∂T ) V may now be calculated using Eq. ( T > T m (18) for magnetic and paramagnetic phases, respectively. where C 0 V (T ) is the background of the Schottky anomaly for a two-level system (N=1 in Appendix B). Since the specific heat for T ≤ T m contains the effects of the order parameter slope ∂ ∆(T )/∂T which is discontinuous at T m (zero above and finite below) there is a jump From the above equations we get where we used cosh 2 ∆ 2Tm = ξ 2 s /(ξ 2 s -1) and ∆ 2Tm = tanh -1 1 ξs from Eq. ( (20) On approaching the QCP from above (ξ s → 1 + ) both paramagnetic (Schottky) value C + V and jump value δC V vanish and their ratio also vanishes δC V /C + V → 0. For large ξ s , approaching conventional magnetism the ratio increases ∼ 3 2 ξ 2 s because the Schottky value vanishes due to ∆/T m → 0. This means the absolute jump value approaches δC V → 3 2 in this limit which agrees with the value known from conventional magnets with twofold degenerate ground state It is particularly instructive to consider the temperature dependence of the susceptibility, i.e. the response function of magnetic moments m = g J μ B J across the induced order phase transition both in the paramagnetic and induced order (FM or AFM) phases with field applied parallel to the moment direction ⟨J z ⟩. The general expression for the normalised single-ion susceptibility χ0 αα = χ 0 αα /(g J μ B ) 2 (α = x, y, z) for split singlets only is given by where the first part is the vanVleck term (VV) and the second a pseudo-Curie (C) term active at temperatures comparable to the CEF splitting due to diagonal matrix elements. These may already be present in the paramagnetic state as in STM or they may be induced in the ordered phase by the rotation to new eigenvectors as in SSM and SDM. In any case the second contribution vanishes, however, exponentially for low temperatures. The collective (RPA) susceptibilities are then obtained via with Here the upper (lower) sign correspond to FM (I 0 > 0) or AFM (I 0 < 0) cases, respectively. For the evaluation of susceptibilities in the ordered phase we need the forms of J z in Eq. (1) in the eigenvector basis according to Eqs. In the induced moment phase we obtain for the zz component, using the abbreviation f s = f s (T ) and recalling that ∆ 0 = ξ s ∆ and (∆ 0 /2T m ) = ξ s tanh -1 1 ξs : The complicated algebraic structure in this case is mostly due to the second pseudo-Curie term. As f s (0) = 1 and f s (T m ) = 1/ξ s we notice that it vanishes both for T = 0 and T = T m but is nonzero in between. The total susceptibility χzz (0) is also non-vanishing for T=0 because the induced saturation moment ⟨J z ⟩ 0 (Eq. ( The SDM model consisting of a singlet ground state |0⟩ with ε 0 = 0 and a doublet |1±⟩ at ε 1± = ∆ is defined by the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( where the matrix elements expressed by the mixing angles θ i are given by (i=1,3) From the structure of U we can see that |ε 2 ⟩ is just the antisymmetric combination of the original degenerate excited doublet components with unchanged ε 2 = ∆ whereas |ε 1,3 ⟩ have components of all states mixed together and their energies ε 1,3 repel symmetrically leading to three singlets in the ordered state (Fig. For deriving the selfconsistency equation for induced moment ⟨J x ⟩ and later the susceptibilities χαα we need again the J α matrices in the eigenvector basis given by U , i.e. we have to transform J α → U † J α U . After some algebra this results in SDM: where the transformed matrix elements are combinations of the sines and cosines of mixing angles θ 1,3 in U. They may be transformed to the simple expressions where ∆T = ξ d f d (T ) is defined below. They fulfil the sum rules 2 ) = 1. Note that J x matrix elements are nonzero where those of J y vanish and vice versa. Using Eq. ( with fd (T ) = the expression would become formally identical to that of the SSM case in Eq. ( In the paramagnetic regime we simply have to replace As for the SSM the critical temperature for the induced moment ⟨J x ⟩ to appear is given by f d (T m ) = 1 ξ d with the solution that depends in a different manner on the control parameter ξ d as compared to the singlet model (Eq. ( , The internal energy of the paramagnetic SDM model is , which results in a correspondingly modified SDM Schottky-type specific heat (see N=2 case in Appendix B) For the magnetically ordered case it is determined by an expression corresponding to Eq. ( (35) The first part is like SSM case and the second one corrects for the additional doublet level. For zero temperature we again have Due to the population effect of the additional level analytical derivation and discussion of C V (T ) = (∂U (T )/∂T ) V is no longer reasonably feasible, considering the complicated MF equation Eq. ( The basic expressions for single-ion and collective susceptibilities in Eqs. Obviously the values for T = 0, T m are equivalent to the SSM case but the T-dependence in between is modified by the presence of the (1 + fd ) -1 terms due to the lower doublet state. For the transverse (yy) component the Curie terms are absent since J y is unchanged in the eigenvector basis and therefore has no diagonal matrix elements. And then we get the simple result In the FM case the (yy) component diverges for all T < T m because there is no in-plane exchange anisotropy and the ordered moment direction can be rotated from x to any other direction by arbitrary small field. This is connected with the existence of a Goldstone mode for the whole ordered region (Sec. IV A). In the AFM phase the two sublattice moments tilt in addition to their rotation (⊥ to the field) leading to the finite susceptibility which is constant throughout the ordered phase as in conventional magnets. The transverse (yy) susceptibility is then simply a constant χyy = 1/2I e for the AF case. The comparison of susceptibilities for all models is presented in Fig. In the STM model the three cubic axes are equivalent and for convenience we choose ⟨J z ⟩ direction for the induced magnetic moment. The corresponding molecular field Hamiltonian with symmetric shifted CEF Γ 1 , Γ 4 levels at (-∆ 2 , ∆ 2 ) may be written as Here P 1,4 are projectors to Γ 1 singlet and Γ 4 triplet subspaces spanned by |ψ 0 ⟩ and |ψ 1,2,3 ⟩ states, respectively and h λ e = I e ⟨J z ⟩ is the molecular field. Using Eq. ( where γ = m t I e /∆ = 2 mt ξ t . The symmetric normalised splittings of Γ 1 -Γ 4 |ψ 0,2 ⟩ and Γ 4 |ψ 1,3 ⟩ states and their temperature dependence are then given by ∆T = (1 + γ 2 ⟨J z ⟩ 2 ) 1 2 and δT = δ T /∆ = I e ⟨J z ⟩/∆, respectively (Fig. with tan 2θ λ = γ⟨J z ⟩ λ . The wave functions of split ε 1,3 triplet levels are unchanged. In the ordered phase the moment operator is then given by The order parameter is determined by the thermal trace of the diagonal elements and all states will contribute to ⟨J z ⟩, but only the elements ∼ sin θ are induced by the order itself, whereas the constant diagonal elements are regular but thermally activated contributions. Using the diagonal elements of J z for the eigenstates and the split level energies the MF equation for the order parameter ⟨J z ⟩ is given by with the contributions resulting from the induced moment (a) and splitting of the excited triplet (b), respectively. Here P a , P b the differences of the thermal level populations p i (T ) = Z -1 exp(-ε i /T ) (i = ±, 1, 3) with the partition function given by ). ( Then we obtain, with the expressions to the right of the arrows corresponding to the paramagnetic state ( δT = 0, ∆ T = ∆): ). ( The latter encodes the influence of occupation and splitting of the two ε 1,3 triplet levels that have no matrix elements with the singlet ground state but contribute to the moment formation for finite temperature below T m . For the numerical determination of the induced moment we write, similar as for SSM and SDM ∆T = ξ t f t (T ). From Eq. ( The solution for f t (T ) leads to ∆T and likewise to the induced moment with saturation value . The latter is similar to SSM and SDM because at T = 0 the Γ 4 contribution in the STM vanishes. Letting ⟨J z ⟩ → 0 in Eq. ( If we neglect the contribution of the thermally excited ε 1,3 levels justified for Ie ∆ = γ mt = 2ξt m 2 t = 0.075ξ t ≪ 1 then we arrive at the simple expression which is formally similar to Eqs. This is the upward shift of the transition temperature due to the effect of diagonal matrix elements in Eq. ( The internal energy of the STM in the paramagnetic phase is U (T ) = -∆ 2 /(2 tanh ∆ 2T -1)/(2 -tanh ∆ 2T ) leading to a paramagnetic specific heat (corresponding to N = 3 in Appendix B): In the ordered phase the internal energy can be calculated as previously using a similar expression as Eq. ( (50) For zero temperature this leads to the ground state energy in the universal form U (0) = -∆ 4 (ξ t + 1 ξt ) and the specific heat C V (T ) has to be obtained from U (T ) by numerical differentiation as in the SDM case. The static susceptibility may be calculated as before from Eq. ( (51) Note that at zero temperature with ∆0 = ξ t and g(0) = 0 only the first van Vleck term survives whereas the Curie contributions from thermally excited split triplet states vanishes. In the paramagnetic regime (T > T m ) with ∆T = 1 this reduces to the explicit expression χ0 zz (T ) = . (52) Finally the homogeneous longitudinal MF-RPA susceptibility is again obtained from χzz (T ) = χ0 zz (T )/(1 ∓ I e χ0 zz (T )) with upper and lower signs corresponding to FM or AF exchange, respectively. In the T = 0 limit this recovers χzz (0) = (1/I e )(ξ 2 t ∓ 1) -1 which is identical to the longitudinal susceptibility in both SSM and STM because in this limit there is no contribution from depopulated excited states. In the large ξ t (quasi-degenerate) case that approaches the conventional magnet the longitudinal susceptibility vanishes because the saturation moment approaches the maximum value and no further polarisation by external field is possible (Fig. In the two-level SSM, SDM and STM the dynamics is described by collective modes termed 'magnetic excitons'. They correspond to propagating CEF excitations which develop a dispersion due to effective intersite exchange. Their dispersion is strongly temperature dependent controlled by the thermal population difference of singlet ground state and excited multiplet. Within RPA approach they may exhibit, as a precursor phenomenon, a complete softening at the magnetic ordering wave vector when T m is approached from above. Such magnetic exciton softening to varying degree has been found in quite a number of singlet ground state CEF systems, in particular Pr compounds Before, however, we give a simple intuitive picture (restricting to SSM) of these paramagnetic exciton modes to distinguish them from the quasiclassical long wave length magnons which correspond to precession of ordered moments around the moment direction. In the present case we rather have to start from a local singlet-singlet excitation |0⟩ i → |1⟩ i in the paramagnetic phase. Then the exchange coupling terms J ij J z (i)J z (j) between sites R i and R j allow a process where a de-excitation |1⟩ i → |0⟩ i at site R i is followed by another excitation |0⟩ j → |1⟩ j at the neighbouring site. Thus the singlet-singlet excitation has propagated by one lattice site due to the intersite exchange. Considering this process in translational invariant way leads directly to the dispersive CEF modes whose energy is centerd around the local singlet-singlet excitation energy ∆. The magnetic exciton modes may be calculated by the RPA dynamic response function technique and the RPA cartesian susceptibility tensor is then obtained as In practice we will need only the diagonal components for SSM and SDM as the nondiagonal ones vanish. For the STM models there are nondiagonal transverse xy components in the ordered phase with induced moment ⟨J z ⟩. However we will consider only the longitudinal modes in this case which are obtained from the diagonal response function χzz only. The poles of these response functions determine the temperature-dependent magnetic exciton modes. This formulation is valid both in the paramagnetic and magnetic regimes provided the proper split level energies and matrix elements for the three models are used. In the magnetic phase we will restrict to FM case (I e > 0) because for two -sublattice AFM order the dimension of the susceptibility matrix is doubled to four, making it more involved for analytical treatment. The AFM case has been considered before for the Ising-type SSM The only method capable of investigating magnetic exciton dispersions experimentally is inelastic neutron scattering (INS) where the scattering cross section is propor- The normalised intensity R(q) is represented by the dashdotted lines, showing the diverging intensity (in units (∆/Ie)) of the soft mode. Here and in the following dispersion plots ω(q) is given in units of ∆ and we use κ = 1. tional to the imaginary part of the above response functions and exhibits peaks at its poles that depend on momentum transfer which allow determination of the mode dispersion. Since the energies involved may be quite low in the few meV range (in particular for the most interesting incipient soft modes) the more recent resonant x-ray scattering techniques used for investigation of high energy magnons have not yet been applied in the present context. Firstly we consider the SSM case, the calculation of the zz component of the single ion dynamical susceptibility according to Eq. ( where ∆ T = ∆ξ s f s (T ) = ∆ ∆T is the renormalised CEF splitting and cos 2θ = 1/[ξ s f s (T )]. As described in Sec. II for simplicity we use the intersite exchange Î(q) for the simple tetragonal lattice with lattice constants a, c set to unity and the corresponding real-space exchange anisotropy defined by κ (Eq. ( For T > T m the singlet mixing angle θ vanishes and we obtain the well known SSM paramagnetic exciton dispersion where Î(q) = I(q)/I(0) or Î(q) = I(q)/I(q m ) is the exchange Fourier transform normalised to the maximum value for FM (q m = 0) or AFM (q m = (111)) wave vectors, respectively. We note that the SSM exciton mode at the FM or AFM wave vector for I 0 > 0 or I 0 < 0 decreases continuously on approaching T m as a precursor of the ordering and becomes soft at the transition (Fig. Therefore at the ordering wave vector with Î(q m ) = 1 the paramagnetic exciton mode becomes soft at T m and re-hardens below it since ξ s > 1. The INS intensity R(q, T ) of a dispersive exciton mode is not constant but varies with momentum and temperature (without the Bose prefactor) according to R(q, , ω, T ) = 1 π Im χzz (q, iω n ) = R(q, T )δ(ω -ω q ), (59) with the weight function given in the ordered phase by (f s = f s (T )): (60) and in the paramagnetic phase we obtain At the transition temperature with 2 which diverges at the soft mode wave vector (Γ point). The behaviour of R(q, T ) in the magnetic phase showing the singularity is plotted in Fig. The calculation of exciton dispersion in the induced moment state of this extended model is more involved. Firstly there is also a CEF excitation from the thermally populated ε 2 level that has to be taken into account in principle, although it becomes insignificant at FIG. 2 are given in Eq. ( The diagonal RPA susceptibility matrix elements are then simply given by (α = x, y) Their poles lead to three magnetic exciton branches, one for xx and two for yy polarisation. We obtain (64) This result corresponds formally to the Ising-type SSM (Eqs. (56,57)). because the J x dipolar operator in Eq. ( On the other hand for the yy response function two more modes appear originating from ground state to ε 2 excited level and from this to the upper level ε 3 . The latter is a thermally activated mode which looses its intensity for low temperature. We obtain: ; (65) where ± correspond to the high energy mode and thermally excited low energy mode with maximum or vanishing intensity at zero temperature, respectively. The auxiliary quantities B,C are the coefficients for the linear and constant term in the quadratic equation for the exciton frequency. (a) Hybridisation behaviour between transverse ω ± y (q) modes as function of temperature in the induced moment phase. Here qcr = |qcr| (in units of π, (a, c = 1)) is the wave vector of mode crossing along (111) with respect to Γ point and ∆ h the hybridisation gap that opens at the crossing point, see also Fig. We now discuss a few important special cases. At T = T m with ∆ = 1 this reduces to C(q, T ) = 0 and Then we simply get Therefore in the paramagnetic case the x and y+ modes are degenerate and become soft at T m (Fig. ) the doublet is split and both y-modes have nonzero energy given by This holds for |q| < |q cr |, for larger |q| the ± mode labels are interchanged. Here 2 ) is the wave vector where the two modes are crossing for T = 0 along (111) or ΓA direction and hybridising for finite temperature (see Fig. (68) This frequency starts at zero for T m and below increases to the maximum value ∆ 2 (ξ d -1) at T = 0 (Eq. ( The dynamical longitudinal single ion susceptibility χ 0 zz (q, iω n ) has only contributions from the transition between ε ± states but no others, even in the magnetic phase as can be seen from the J z matrix in Eq. ( Using this expression and inserting into Eq. ( Here again Î(q) = I(q)/I e is the exchange normalised to that at the ordering vector q m for FM (q m = 0) or AFM (q m = (π, π, π) for which then Î(q m ) = 1. Using the lower paramagnetic expression and P 0 a (T ) from Eq. (44) we see that at the ordering vector the mode energy becomes soft with ω(q m , T 0 m ) = 0 at the approximate transition temperature T 0 m of Eq. (47) which is lower than the real T m obtained from Eqs. (46). In reverse this means that the mode energy will be arrested at a finite value at T m > T 0 m and the softening is incomplete. Using the first iterative approximation for T m from Eq. (46) this finite value is given by approximately by where the second expression is the asymptotic form close to the QCP (ξ t = 1 + δ; δ ≪ 1). Therefore ω(q m , T m ) is directly proportional to the ratio m ′ t : m t = 1/m t of diagonal (responsible for the shift of T m ) and non-diagonal (responsible for induced order) matrix elements in the J z matrix of Eq. ( In the following discussion we will focus on the most typical results for the three models that show the characteristic distinction of induced moment magnetism as compared to common quasi-classical magnetic order. Therefore we will not present and discuss figures for all physical quantities for all three models that can be obtained from the previous analysis. As a prerequisite we depict the CEF level splittings in Fig. For the same control parameter ξ the T m of the three models are quantitatively different. However, if we scale temperature with each individual T m it turns out that the temperature dependence of their order parameters is quite similar as shown in Fig. A most characteristic feature of induced moment magnetism is the behaviour of the specific heat C V (T ) and in particular its jump at T m . It is presented in Fig. On approaching the QCP from above while T m shifts to lower value the specific heat jump moves with it and becomes progressively smaller. This dependence is also seen directly in Fig. (Eq. ( A similar important feature of distinction to quasiclassical AF magnets is seen in Fig. We now turn to the dynamical properties of the three models as evidenced by the magnetic exciton dispersions, their relation to the induced moments and their critical behaviour. As mentioned before we treat only the FM case in order to avoid the complications with the unit cell doubling in AF case. The SSM case is presented in Fig. The SDM model displays a more intricate behaviour of excitation spectrum presented in Fig. The hybridisation of excitations from the ground state with thermally excited transitions is a fundamental feature of the dynamics of singlet induced moment systems. The evidence for the importance of the latter may also be seen in the non-monotonic temperature dependence of the hybridisation gap ∆ h (T ) = ω + y (q r ) -ω - y (q r ) between the two modes with q r (T ) denoting the crossing wave vector as plotted in Fig. Finally in the STM case we encounter another interesting and important feature of the dynamics in singlet ground state magnetism. In this model we discuss only the longitudinal modes (in the cubic case the moment may be oriented along any axis chosen as z here). Its temperature dependent dispersion is presented in Fig. If we extrapolate the paramagnetic mode energy beyond T m it would indeed become soft at the approximate transition temperature T 0 m < T m that does not contain the effect of the Curie type contributions from the excited triplet with matrix element m ′ t = 1. Because of their presence the actual transition occurs at a higher temperature T m where the mode has not yet become soft. And below T m it re-hardens immediately due to the effect of the molecular field on the singlet-triplet splitting. This behaviour is presented in more detail in Fig. The aspect of the influence of hyperfine coupling on induced order has not been included in our discussion. As mentioned in the Introduction where we have cited related references to it this becomes particularly important close to the quantum critical point (below as well as above ξ c = 1). In this restricted region it may indeed be highly interesting how the thermodynamic properties are modified, e.g. the nuclear contributions to the specific heat jump close to critical condition and also how the combined nuclear moments and 4f excitation spectrum evolves, in particular for the SDM model with its peculiar hybridised soft mode structure. We have undertaken a comparative investigation of quantum critical and thermodynamic properties as well as magnetic excitations in the most typical singlet ground state quantum magnets. These models are realised approximately in various non-Kramers f-electron compounds containing frequently Pr or U whose f-shells have total angular momentum J = 4 or other integer values split into CEF multiplets with a nonmagnetic singlet ground state. In this case the conventional quasiclassical magnetic order of Kramers degenerate ground state compounds is not possible. The order can only appear via spontaneous superposition with excited CEF states belonging to singlet, doublet or triplet caused by intersite exchange and facilitated by a nondiagonal matrix element of angular momentum operators between ground and excited states. In this mechanism the moment and its ordering appear simultaneously. This type of quantum magnetism is governed by a control parameter characterising the relative strength of intersite exchange to CEF splitting. Below a critical value for this parameter the ground state is paramagnetic and a spontaneous induced moment appears when the control parameter crosses the quantum critical point. The behaviour of the induced moment and the transition temperature near the QCP show a logarithmic singularity meaning a rather sudden appearance of the moment and a finite ordering temperature. There are several distinctions in the thermodynamic properties of singlet ground state magnets as compared to the quasi-classical ones with degenerate ground state: Firstly, in the latter the specific heat discontinuity at the ordering temperature is an interaction independent constant while in the former it strongly depends on the control parameter characterising the interaction strength to splitting ratio. Therefore the size of the specific heat jump tends to zero when approaching the QCP from above, concomitant with the vanishing size of the ordered induced saturation moment. Secondly for control parameter moderately above the critical one the induced moment will still be much less than the paramagnetic high temperature effective moment. Furthermore the saturation moment and transition temperature in the vicinity of the QCP vary steeply with the control parameter which may be identified by application of pressure that modifies the distance to the QCP. Thirdly in the ordered state of quasi-classical magnets the longitudinal susceptibility tends to zero at low temperatures while in the singlet ground state quantum magnets it has generally a nonzero value that depends on the control parameter and reaches zero only for very large values corresponding to a quasi-degenerate CEF level system. These major differences should be helpful criteria in distinguishing singlet ground state quantum magnetism from quasi-classical magnetism. The thermodynamic properties are qualitatively similar, though quantitatively different, for the three singlet ground state models investigated, In particular this applies to the size of specific heat jumps relative to the underlying Schottky-type anomaly in the three models because of the considerable difference in entropy release for the various excited multiplet degeneracies. The distinction is even more pronounced for the dynamical properties as evidenced by the dispersion of magnetic exciton modes and its dependence on temperature and control parameter. As opposed to magnons in the quasiclassical case the magnetic excitons of singlet ground state magnets appear already in the paramagnetic phase as dispersive collective CEF excitations but change their quantitative appearance below the ordering temperature. The main mode characteristics and their distinction for the three models may be summarised in the following way: Firstly in the SSM with only one branch there is a soft mode at the incipient ordering vector at the transition temperature which then re-hardens again due to the Ising-character of the model. Secondly for the SDM several modes appear which become nondegenerate below the ordering temperature, one of the transverse modes turns into a Goldstone mode for all temperatures below T m while the other two (longitudinal and transverse) modes show again a typical re-hardening from the soft mode below the transition. Finally in the the STM an important effect of the quasi-Curie type contributions to the static susceptibility originating from the triplet states can be identified: Their influence on the ordering temperature leads to an arrested, only partial exciton mode softening at the true transition temperature with a further re-hardening of the mode energy below it. Such partial softening is commonly observed in real singlet ground state compounds because of the influence of higher lying multiplets not contained in the two-multiplet simplified models analysed here. with the mode dispersions ω x (q, T ) and ω ± y (q, T ) given in Eqs. 