The recent discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in the Ruddlesden-Popper phase La3Ni2O7 under high pressure marks a significant breakthrough in the field of 3d transition-metal oxide superconductors. For an emerging novel class of high-Tc superconductors, it is crucial to find more analogous superconducting materials with a dedicated effort toward broadening the scope of nickelate superconductors. Here, we report on the observation of high-Tc superconductivity in the high-pressure tetragonal I4/mmm phase of La2PrNi2O7-δ above ~10 GPa, which is distinct from the reported orthorhombic Fmmm phase of La3Ni2O7 above 14 GPa. For La2PrNi2O7-δ, the onset and the zero-resistance temperatures of superconductivity reach Tc onset = 78.2 K and Tc zero = 40 K at 15 GPa. This superconducting phase shares the similar structural symmetry as many cuprate superconductors, providing a fresh platform to investigate underlying mechanisms of nickelate superconductors. Following the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in cuprates As an emerging novel class of high-Tc superconductors, it is highly desirable to find more analog superconducting materials with similar structural units in order to broaden the scope of nickelate superconductors. One of the common approaches is to replace La 3+ with isovalent smaller-size rare-earth R 3+ ions or substitute it with heterovalent cations. Recent theoretical investigations on the R3Ni2O7 (R = rare earth) presented distinct viewpoints regarding the influence of chemical precompression induced by the substitution of R 3+ with smaller ionic radius In this work, we synthesized a series of La3-xPrxNi2O7 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.3, 1) polycrystalline samples using the sol-gel method, and systematically investigated the evolution of their structure, magnetic, and electrical transport properties as a function of doping level at ambient pressure. Our results confirm that all these samples maintain the orthorhombic structure with the space group Amam (No.63) at ambient conditions. In addition, we observe a consistent negative correlation between the lattice parameters and the doping level (x) in La3-xPrxNi2O7, following well with the Vegard's law. Then we selected the sample La2PrNi2O7-δ with the highest doping level, and performed detailed highpressure measurements on the crystal structural and electrical transport properties. Interestingly, we find that the chemically precompressed La2PrNi2O7-δ transforms from the orthorhombic Amam space group to the tetragonal I4/mmm space group at about 10-11 GPa, accompanied by the appearance of high-temperature superconductivity. The onset and the zero-resistance temperatures of superconductivity reach Tc onset = 78.2 K and Tc zero = 40 K at 15 GPa. Different from the orthorhombic Fmmm phase observed in La3Ni2O7 Sample synthesis. La3-xPrxNi2O7 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.3, 1) samples were synthesized with the sol-gel method as described in previous studies The crystal structure of La3-xPrxNi2O7 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.3, 1) at ambient pressure was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) collected through PANalytical X'Pert PRO with Cu Kα radiation. Temperature-dependent resistivity (T) and magnetic susceptibility (T) were measured by using the Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) and Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS), respectively. High-pressure measurements. The high-pressure synchrotron XRD (HP-SXRD) of La2PrNi2O7-δ was measured at the 4W2 beamline at the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF) with a wavelength of λ = 0.6199 Å. Rietveld analysis of HP-SXRD data was performed with GSAS-II suite DFT structures calculation. We employ the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) code At first, we performed detailed characterizations on the structure, electrical transport, and magnetic properties of the series of La3-xPrxNi2O7-δ (x = 0, 0.1, 0.3, 1) samples at ambient pressure. Figure The temperature dependencies of (T) and (T) displayed in Fig. For La3Ni2O7-δ, the emergence of superconductivity under high pressure is closely associated with the structure phase transition from orthorhombic Amam (No.63) to orthorhombic Fmmm (No. 69) in the range of 10-15 GPa. It is thus highly interesting to examine whether the structural phase transition and high-temperature superconductivity would also appear at a lower pressure in the chemically precompressed La3-xPrxNi2O7-δ samples. To this end, we chose to study the pressure effect on the La2PrNi2O7-δ sample with the highest Pr content and proceeded to perform in situ HP-SXRD measurements. Figure As can be seen, the lattice parameters decrease continuously with increasing pressure, but exhibit anisotropic compression behaviors. In the lower pressure range, lattice parameter b decreases faster than a and merges together with a at 11.1 GPa, which is well consistent with the results seen from the HP-SXRD patterns. As the crystal structure transforms into a more symmetrical tetragonal structure, lattice parameter a contracts by a factor of √ , leading to a 0.5 times reduction in the unit cell volume, V. The collected pressure-volume data in the whole pressure range can be fitted to the the third-order Birch-Murnaghan equation The above in situ high-pressure structural analysis surprisingly reveals that the chemically precompressed La2PrNi2O7-δ sample exhibits a different, higher symmetry phase at pressures above 10-11 GPa compared to La3Ni2O7 Upon further increasing pressure, the superconducting transition temperature Tc zero increases rapidly from 4.4 K at 12 GPa to 40 K at 15 GP and the onset temperature Tc onset reaches 78.2 K at 15 GPa. The occurrence of resistance anomaly in the La2PrNi2O7-δ under high pressure is closely associated with its phase transition pressure which is similar to that observed in un-doped La3Ni2O7 To further clarify the observed resistance drop is indeed associated with a superconducting transition, we performed (T) measurements at 15 GPa under different external magnetic fields. As displayed in Fig. To elucidate the electronic structure of the high-pressure tetragonal phase of La2PrNi2O7-δ and to better understand the observed high-temperature superconductivity, we conducted DFT band calculations for La3Ni2O7 and La2PrNi2O7-δ at selected pressures. Note that the Pr 3+ has the same valance as the La 3+ and the Ni-O octahedra is elongated which is also the same as the situation of La3Ni2O7. Consequently, the local crystal field environment is expected to be identical to La3Ni2O7, with a d 7.5 filling of Ni and the splitting of two dz2 orbitals due to the shared apical oxygen. The results of DFT band calculations are depicted in Fig. Figure In summary, a series of La3-xPrxNi2O7-δ (x=0, 0.1, 0.3, 1) polycrystalline samples were synthesized using the sol-gel method, and the evolution of their structure, magnetic and electrical transport properties as a function of doping concentration were investigated at ambient pressure. Our results show that all these obtained La3-xPrxNi2O7-δ (0.0≤x≤ 1.0) samples maintain the same orthorhombic Amam structure as undoped La3Ni2O7 at ambient conditions. In addition, the lattice parameters display a negative correlation with the Pr-doping concentration, confirming the successful introduction of chemical pressure. In situ high-pressure structural analysis reveals that the chemically precompressed La2PrNi2O7-δ sample undergoes a structure transition from the orthorhombic Amam space group to the tetragonal I4/mmm space group under high pressure at 10-11 GPa, which is different with that observed in undoped La3Ni2O7. Remarkably, the high-pressure tetragonal phase of La2PrNi2O7-δ shares the same symmetry as many cuprate superconductors and was surprisingly found to show hightemperature superconductivity with a stronger pressure coefficient of dTc/dP in comparison with that of undoped La3Ni2O7. The discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in the high-pressure tetragonal phase of La2PrNi2O7-δ broadens the nickelate superconducting family and provides a new platform to investigate underlying mechanisms. 