The chemical stability of nonfullerene acceptor (NFA) is the Achilles' heel of the research on state-of-the-art organic solar cells (OSC). The fragility of the NFA is essentially due to the weak bond that links the central donor core of the molecules with their acceptor moieties at the edges. Here we proposed the replacement of thiophene at the outer-core position of traditional NFAs for tellurophene, a hitherto unexplored modification. Since tellurium is a distinctive element among chalcogens, the basic features of Te compounds cannot be deduced straightforwardly from the properties of their lighter analogues, S and Se. The modeled Te-based NFAs presented interesting features like stronger intra-and intermolecular interactions induced by a distinctive secondary bond effect between the end acceptor moiety and the outer chalcogen atom. This design strategy resulted in stiffer molecules with redshifted absorption spectra and less susceptible to degradation verified through stress tests and vibrational spectra analysis. Besides that, a weakened exciton binding energy has been found, opening the possibility of blends with a lower driving force. Our results shed light on several aspects of selenation and telluration of traditional NFAs, providing valuable insights into the possible consequences for OSCs applications. Nonfullerene acceptors (NFAs) are under intense research in recent years, leading to significant improvements in the performance of organic solar cells (OSCs). Possibly due to the scarcity of tellurium, Significant differences related to the substitution of S by Se or Te can be evidenced by density functional theory (DFT) Since DBTe is the fundamental unit for large tellurium-containing aromatics, one can anticipate an increasing interest in the use of Te-based materials for optoelectronic applications. Yet the properties of larger π-extended tellurium-containing conjugated systems are still poorly understood, The chemical structures of the studied acceptor molecules are shown in Figure The calculated energies of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) are presented in Figure Important structural variations resulting from selenation and telluration of Y6 and ITIC are outlined in Figure For all considered molecules, the restrained electrostatic potential (RESP) Raman spectroscopy (RS) is a very useful technique to characterize materials. It has been previously applied to study the stability of organic photovoltaic materials, yielding valuable insights about photo-induced chemical variations and their origins. Simulated Raman spectra for Y6 and ITIC in Figure For both kind of molecules, the thiophene bands such as at 1425 cm -1 presents lower intensities as Se and Te are included. This effect can be associated to the addition of selenophene and tellurophene rings, respectively, thereby decreasing the intensity of the thiophene bands. For ITIC the band in the region around 1475 cm -1 presents a red shift for both structures as S is substitute by Se and Te. It can be associated to the lower availability of thiophene groups and also a higher delocalization of π-electrons across selenophene and tellurophene units in the conjugated chains. Bands in low-frequency regions (e.g., lower than 600 cm -1 ) are characteristics of molecules with heavier atoms. This explains the appearance and increase of bands in the low-frequency interval of the spectrum as Se and Te substitutes S in the NFAs. For example: the band at 565 cm -1 is associated to C-Te-C, Besides the detection of new low-frequency bands, the presence of selenophene and tellurophene also produces a small blueshift in some peaks observed for the unsubstituted molecules. Observing the peaks of thiophene C=C in the region between 1150 and 1225 cm -1 in ITIC spectra it is clearly observed this shift to higher frequencies as the heavier atoms are placed in the molecule structure. The same is observed in the region between 1300 and 1350 cm -1 that is one of the regions associated to the C1-C2 bond expressed in figure Figure Figure Considering that the S1→T2 ISC transition can be more favorable than the S1→T1 transition due to a lower ΔES1T2 gap, the population of T2 states pumped from the S1 can quickly relax to the T1 state by internal conversion. This mechanism can help to increase the density of triplet states of NFAs submitted to illumination. Molecular dimers were simulated to investigate the packing distance (d), the interaction energy between two species (named binding energy, Ebind) and electronic coupling of LUMO orbitals (β) which are responsible for electron transport. Because the ITIC-based acceptors have four central side groups perpendicular to the main chain, these molecules interact with each other through the end-groups mainly forming J-type dimers. Comparing β between the two dimers type, the difference is even greater, evidencing the consequences resulting from the two forms of molecular packing. Regarding the effects of heavy chalcogenophenes, it is possible to highlight from the dimers of Figure The main conclusion of this work is that Telluration applied at outer-core positions Finally, we recognize that tellurium is a scarce chalcogen which can rise objections about the industrial viability of using tellurophene rings to increase the performance and stability of OSC. Yet the very tailored kind of Te incorporation proposed here does not significantly alter the carbon content to a level that compromises the low cost and processability of these new acceptor materials. Hence, the design modification suggested in this work might be a promising technological leap necessary to overcome the commercial barrier imposed by the intrinsic instability of NFA-OSCs. , it can be observed that the C1-C2 bonding energy ( E bond C 1-C 2 ) is increased (indicated by a deeper potential well) 56 Considering that the van der Waals radii of O, S, Se and Te are 1.55, 1.8, 1.9, and 2.1 Å, 62 respectively, the X•••O distances of Table 1 fulfills this criterion. Moreover, secondary bonds are also called σ-hole interactions