Single NV -centres in diamond have a spin ground state that can be polarised and read optically and these properties have led to many applications. Ensembles of NV -centres in bulk diamond have similar properties and are likewise being adopted for applications. However, in bulk diamond there is a degrading of the properties of NV -compared to single centres. This is known and occasionally mentioned in the literature but the processes that give rise to the less desirable properties have not been presented in any detail. Here NVdiamonds containing a concentration of nitrogen from 1 ppm to 600 ppm are investigated and indeed found the higher the nitrogen concentration the more is the degrading. The emission contrast (between polarised and not polarised) in both the visible and infrared decreases with nitrogen concentration. The lifetimes shorten with nitrogen concentration and in addition there is a change of the amplitude of the the NV charge state via two mechanisms, change of the optical cycle, and there are some optical transitions that do not conserve spin. Each of factor will be illustrated and discussed. There is considerable interest in the NV -defect centre in diamond as it has a spin ground state that can be initialised and readout optically There are publications reporting on the significance of nitrogen in diamond such as the review by Ashfold et al. The variation of the properties with the nitrogen concentration are reported for concentration of 1 ppm to 600 ppm nitrogen. It would be desirable to model the behavior in each case although it is recognized that the properties of each NV within an ensemble depends on its local environment. For example there is a dependence on the distance to nearest nitrogen donor and this can vary with optical excitation Before dealing with the specifics of change of charge state it is appropriate to introduce the energy levels of NV systems. The properties of vacancy-related defects in diamond are frequently treated in relation to one electron states that occur in the gap between the valence and conduction band. In T d symmetry (the carbon vacancy) the molecular orbitals that can be formed from the four carbon dangling bonds give two states: one of a 1 symmetry and one three-fold degenerate of t 2 symmetry. When one of the carbon atoms is replaced with a nitrogen atom to give the NV centre the symmetry is lowered to C 3v and the t 2 states splits into a second non-degenerate a 1 state and a two-fold degenerate e state. There are two a 1 states but one is always occupied lying in the valence band and can be neglected. Hence for NV there are one a 1 state and a degenerate e state within the band gap between valence and conduction band. A more complete treatment of the molecular orbital treatment is given in reference The energy of these latter one-electron states can be drawn in relation to the valence and conduction bands. However, when these states are occupied by the three electrons for 2.9 eV Figure NV 0 or four for NV -it can be misleading to include the energy levels of the multi-electron states in relation to the one-electron valence and conduction band states. However, when the one electron states are filled they give the NV 0 and NV -energies as given in Fig Both charge states can exist or co-exist in a diamond crystal. There can also be charge transfer between the two states and the one-photon transitions that change the charge are given in Fig 1 . To gain an electron as required for NV 0 → NV -an electron is excited out of the valence band to a molecular orbital state and subsequently there is a relaxation to fill the hole in the valence band (Fig ). There can be other transitions that change charge but these occur from other that the ground state and involve two-photon excitation. One photon to populate the excited state followed by the charge transfer transition which again must involve the valence or conduction bands. Therefore, for single centres the specific charge transfer transition always creates an electron in the conduction band (given by C) or a hole in the valence band (given by V). The conduction electron or the valence hole will subsequently relax leaving the centre with the altered charge state. When there is a concentration of nitrogen in the diamond the charge transfer is different from that described above for single centres. In Fig 0.9 eV The figure indicates the situation when there is significant concentration of nitrogen in the diamond with some of the nitrogen atoms adjacent to the NV centre. From the energies in Fig Measurements have been made of samples that contain a concentration of substitutional nitrogen impurities. The crystals, mainly HPHT, were acquired over years from various sources. The samples were electron irradiated and annealed to produce the NV defects. Details are not given as the topic has been covered by others including a discussion in reference The assertion is that the properties vary as a consequence of the local environment and in particular the distribution of nitrogen. It should not depend to first order as to how the crystals are grown only as preparation techniques may vary the local environment. Of course the growth and subsequent treatment of the diamonds incorporating NV centres is essential and there are many reports covering this important topic A large number ( > 30) of samples have been investigated exhibiting distinct trends with nitrogen concentrations and these trends are illustrated experimentally using a smaller number of representative samples. For example, emission for seven samples using low excitation (at least an order of magnitude lower than that giving any change of charge state) are shown in Fig 3 . For high nitrogen concentrations the emission is entirely that of NV -whereas there is an increasing NV 0 contribution as the nitrogen concentration is reduced. This particular trend is not new, reported by many and is described by Collins There is a second transition involving a charge transfer from NV 0 to NV -(NV 0 -N to NV --N + ) in this case from the excited state 2 A 2 of NV 0 to NV -as given by the blue dashed arrow K in Fig 2 . By exciting the zero-phonon line of NV 0 at 575 nm there is an increase in the NV -intensity with an electron from an adjacent N. Plotting the intensity of NV 0 versus this excitation it is found the increase is linear Fig There is a very significant reverse transfer from NV -to NV 0 that can occur with excitation of NV -. With a laser at wavelengths between the zero-phonon line of NV -at 637 nm and that of NV 0 at 575 nm the only excitation is that of the 3 A 2 -3 E transition of NV -. Excitation at 620 nm is used as an example and with this excitation it is found that the intensity of NV 0 created is linearly dependent on the intensity of the excitation laser. The situation regarding charge state is monitored using a weak probe at higher energy of 532 nm that by itself does not create any NV 0 (Fig 5 The NV spectra with increasing excitation intensity are shown in . At low intensities as described above the process is due to the tunnelling mechanism J. With the higher intensities a second process can also be involves and this will be discussed later. The situation is the same for all samples as shown in Fig 7 . For the lower nitrogen concentrations towards the top of the figure there is a significant NV 0 emission whereas there is only small NV 0 fraction for the very high nitrogen concentration towards the bottom of With increasing intensity there is a second mechanism that affects the charge transfer, and the mechanism varies with wavelength as well as intensity. The situation is best studied and illustrated using magnetic fields and examples are shown in Fig An off axis magnetic field mixes the spin states and effectively quenches spin polari- 1. NV 0 created by 632 nm excitation and detected using weak 532 nm. 2. NV 0 created and monitored using 532 nm excitation. is created and can be detected using the weak 532 nm probe. Filters eliminate response > 600 nm. (c) This NV 0 response is a linear function of the 620 nm excitation intensity shown for 0 to 600 mW. 2. When 532 nm is used to excite NV -and create NV 0 and also to detect the NV 0 emission both excitation and detection are linear. The result is that the response will be quadratic, and this is the situation at low intensities 0 -0.5 W/mm as shown in (b). There is no obvious change towards higher intensities in (c) but functional form is not conclusive sation. Magnetic field studies are treated more fully later but here the significance is the application of the field quenches spin polarisation and reduces the excited state population (left diagram in The extra charge transfer mechanism is attributed to the ionisation of the bath nitrogen. Single substitutional nitrogen lies 1.7 eV below the conduction band and so there can be ionised with energies > 1.7 eV although require energies > 2.2 eV to be significant (Fig The difference with a magnetic field observed here is useful as it provides a straightforward means of determining the dominant mechanism; Matching NV 0 /NV-contrast indicates transition J whereas no contrast indicates the second mechanism of nitrogen ionisation. In this way it is found that in the measurements earlier in Another factor that can be deduced from the magnetic field measurements associated with transition J and observation of the matching contrast of NV 0 of NV -. This is that the decay is dependent on the total excited state population and indicates that the charge transfer is independent of spin projection. Accepted that there will be a larger transfer from m s = 0 states than from m s = ±1 states but only because with spin polarisation the m s = 0 population is larger and not because of different spin-dependent rates. The presence of NV 0 is monitored using a separate very weak 532 nm probe with emission detected at 600 nm. The time scales in the diagrams are similar and the intention is to illustrate the changes of response with nitrogen concentration -fast for high concentrations (response time restricted by use of mechanical chopping) and slow for low concentrations. In each case with switching on the laser the rate will be largely determined by transition J and when switched off the rate will be set by transition L in Fig Figure This section first summarises the energy level scheme and defines the transitions for the NV -useful for interpreting experimental data. This is followed by measurements of six samples of various nitrogen concentrations (Fig For NV centres it is the intersystem crossing that sets both the lifetimes and the spin polarisation. The basic optical cycle is same for single and ensemble and a summary diagram is given in Fig The application of off-axis magnetic fields to quench spin polarisation have often been used in the above way. Chapman and Plakhotnik The spectra for Fig 12 are taken for weak excitation (10 -5 of saturation factor) such that there is only small changes to the population in the ground state and only minor population in the singlet levels. There is no change to this situation with the application of the magnetic field. The laser excitation is the same with and without magnetic field and hence the population transferred to the excited state will not be altered by the magnetic field. The excitation is constant and with no change of population in other states it follows the total decay for field and no-field will be constant. The increase of the visible emission will be matched by the decrease of decay via the singlets. It is recognised that the infrared emission is just a small part of the total decay via the singlets ('the peak of the iceberg') but the fraction, radiative to non-radiative, will not be altered by the magnetic field. The change of the infrared emission indicates the change of decay via the singlets just with a scale factor. The fractional change from the unpolarised responses is given adjacent to each trace -increase in the case of the visible and decrease for the infrared. Knowing the fraction of the infrared decay in relation to visible enables the total singlet decay to be determined and this is the value given in brackets in Fig There is overall consistency in the trends of the change of the upper inter-system crossing but the detailed values (a+2B)/3 obtained using the two different approaches are not in agreement. For example, values calculated from lifetimes are of order of 1.5 higher than the above experimental approach. Also, the change with nitrogen concentration from low (5 pm) to high (181 pm) varies by over a factor 2.1 using lifetimes and only 1.55 from experiment. The difference in the two approaches suggest that there may be a non-radiative decay not observed with optical detection. However, there is concern with the very different techniques and the measurements involving changes of the optics, illumination of area on samples and detectors. Clearly there needs to be further investigation of this difference. All of the above involve studies are of the upper inter-system crossing. Possible changes of the lower intersystem crossing were also considered and for this the singlet level 1 E lifetime was measured. The measurement involves the recovery of emission from the case where population is transferred and stored momentarily in the 1 E state. Such measurements have been reported by The conclusion is that whereas there is no change to the lower crossing (2c +D) there is a clear change of the upper intersystem crossing (a+2B) by near a factor of 2 between low to high nitrogen concentrations. There has not been a determination whether a or B or both change. Further information on the changes to a and B can be determined form the lifetimes and this is the focus of the next section. The lifetimes were measured using 488 nm and/or a 635 nm pico-second laser and emission responses were detected with a Si avalanche photo diode. To avoid including the detection of NV 0 response the emission was restricted to long wavelengths > 750 nm. The measurements were made at room temperature with no spin polarisation and equal population in each of the three ground state spin levels. The traces were, therefore, fitted with two exponentials of equal weight. With this functional form it was possible to obtain satisfactory agreement with experiment as shown in In Fig The lifetimes indicate an increase of intersystem crossing with nitrogen, but the origin of this increase is not clear. The increase is unlikely to be due to the electric fields associated with adjacent N + donors as there is no change when the fields are increased when moving the donors closer by illuminating with red light as shown in reference There is an interest in the increase of the crossing rates as it is the rates that determine the spin polarisation. An improvement in polarisation requires changes to the a/B ratio but here both a and B increase with nitrogen with the ratio near constant. As far as the authors are aware the origin of the m s = 0 rates (a-parameter) are not so well established as that for m s = ±1. (B-parameter). As in the previous paragraph the reason for the increases are not understood. The near fixed a/B ratio indicate there might be a mixing of the spin state but the cause of any such mixing is likewise not known. It does leave the intriguing possibility that it may be possible to change the ratio and improve spin polarisation. The contribution from charge transfer must be the same for both spin states as the process is shown to be spin independent. Therefore, the approximate magnitude of the contribution due to charge transfer is indicated (but not quantitative) by the orange arrows as it must be less than 12 MHz. In early hole-burning measurements of the NV centre gave transitions where spin was not conserved. Transitions were observed at frequency shifts of 2.88 GHz as shown in The sample was a 1b with nitrogen and the splitting arises from the electric fields from N + donors Where experiments involve this situation calculation for low temperatures need only include additional transition about 5 percent, of the conserving transition strengths to allow for these spin-flip transitions. The situation for single centres at low (4K) is different to that given above. The 3 E energy levels of single centres are dependent on strain and electric field but the large splittings as above do not occur. The spin levels can be much closer and as a result give larger mixing. The most significant case is where there is avoided crossing of the levels and almost 'total' mixing. The spin flip transitions can then be observed in absorption The conclusion is that for ensembles containing nitrogen involving large splitting (>100 GHz) of the orbital doublet the state averaging results in negligible spin mixing above 100 K making ensembles suitable for most application including magnetometry above this temperature. Surprisingly this is not the case for single sites but largely because of small splitting of the excited state. The m s =0 and m s = ±1 spin levels are always close (< 10GHz) and spin-mixing is more prevalent. This is particularly the case when magnetic fields are involved as there are situations where particular fields can be precisely at the value giving an avoided crossing of the spin levels and very large mixing. Consequently, there are temperatures and fields where there is only weak spin polarisation and the emission change with microwaves can be very small. The single sites enable great spactial resolution but at the low temperatures (≪ 100 K) the response for magnetometry as just described is irregular. There will be ways round this problem but regardless the situation is totally changed above 150 K as the state averaging eliminates all the complications of excited state level crossing and there is excellent magnetic sensitivity as well as great spatial resolution as reported by many. give plausible correspondence with the spectra. Parameters are largely determined from lifetimes with contribution from inter-system rates (a and B) and smaller contribution from charge transfer (J). The excitation in all cases is low and there is no ionisation of the nitrogen. The three parameters a, B and J are increased marginally for increasing nitrogen concentration. The laser does excite NV 0 and so transition K (Fig This paper starts by highlighting that the fact that for the NV -centre involving diamonds containing nitrogen the properties are different from those of single centres in high purity diamond. It is questionable as to how broadly this difference is recognised but there certainly seem to be confusion with charge transfer. With nitrogen in the lattice there is charge transfer due to electron tunnelling between nitrogen and the NV centre and this does not occur with single site. This phenomenon has been reported previously but the treatment here is more extensive. As well as giving significant changes to the lifetime the different intersystem crossing also increases the infrared emission and the decay via the singlets making the visible emission 'less bright'. When allowing for both the modification of the intersystem crossing and the tunneling rates a simple five level rate equation gives reasonable correspondence with the observed trends of optical contrast, infrared contrast and lifetimes. The correspondence between experiment and theoretical model is encouraging in that the major process and the systematic variation that effect the degrading of the NV properties have been identified. No attempt is made at a first order calculation of the magnitude of the changes, and this is left as an outstanding issue. Aspects of charge transfer via tunneling determines the approach for many ensemble experiments. For example, it might be possible to use a red laser to excite NV -centre as this would result in spin polarisation but the complication is that if only 3 A 2 → 3 E is excited there is a continuous loss of signal. The loss is a due to the NV -→ NV 0 tunneling, here termed transition L. To avoid this loss the convention is to use 532 nm (2.33 eV or higher energy) as the laser then also excites NV 0 and introduces the reverse NV 0 → NV - tunneling, termed J, that stabilises the emission. However, there is still a difficulty as at this wavelength the laser can ionise the nitrogen bath and lead to an alternative but equivalent NV -→ NV 0 charge transfer. There is a loss of NV -concentration and with cycling loss of spin polarisation. Furthermore, if NV 0 emission is included in the detection the overall contrast would be reduced and so emission of NV 0 has to be excluded. This involves restricting the optical band to > 700 nm) and results in a further loss of signal. By using 575 nm excitation some of the latter difficulties can be avoided and this is illustrated using a dye laser at this wavelength. The laser excites NV -to created spin polarisation and emission. It also excites NV 0 and again give the NV 0 to NV -charge transfer to stabilise the emission. However, at this energy of 2.15 eV the ionisation of nitrogen is almost negligible and there is not the loss of NV -via one of the NV -→ NV 0 charge transfer mechanisms. There is still some charge transfer but only from J tunnelling and in this case, the NV 0 created has the same spin contrast as NV -. Consequently, with same contrast there is no need to reduce the optical detection bandwidth. Both NV 0 and NV -emission can be detected giving a second clear advantage of using 575 nm rather than 532 nm. In short with 575 nm there is no nitrogen ionisation and all emission can be detected. Of course, to date there is no simple commercial laser at this wavelength, but this might change. In summary the aim of the work has been to highlight the main processes that degrade the properties of NV when there is nitrogen in the sample and this aim has been largely achieved. Repeating the degrading processes are the changes to charge transfer, changes to the intersystem crossing and for green laser excitation ionisation of the nitrogen bath. It is also reminded that spin-flip or non-spin-conserving transitions do occur and are of indetermined magnitude between 0 K and 77 K but very small at liquid nitrogen temperature and zero at room temperature.