Achieving robust and electrically controlled valley polarization in monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides (ML-TMDs) is a frontier challenge for realistic valleytronic applications. Theoretical investigations show that integration of 2D materials with ferroelectrics is a promising strategy; however, its experimental demonstration has remained elusive. Here, we fabricate ferroelectric field-effect transistors using a ML-WSe2 channel and a AlScN ferroelectric dielectric, and experimentally demonstrate efficient tuning as well as non-volatile control of valley polarization. We measured a large array of transistors and obtained a maximum valley polarization of ~27% at 80 K with stable retention up to 5400 secs. The enhancement in the valley polarization was ascribed to the efficient exciton-to-trion (X-T) conversion and its coupling with an out-of-plane electric field, viz. the quantum-confined Stark effect. This changes the valley depolarization pathway from strong exchange interactions to slow spin-flip intervalley scattering. Our research demonstrates a promising approach for achieving non-volatile control over valley polarization and suggests new design principles for practical valleytronic devices. Valleytronics is an emerging field whereby, the electron's valley degree of freedom (DoF), rather than its charge, is exploited to store and process binary information. In valleytronic devices that rely upon optical manipulation of valleys, the degree of valley polarization and the lifetime of the valley polarized states are critical measures. The valley lifetime of excitons in monolayer TMDs (ML-TMDs) is typically quite low, owing to strong electron-hole exchange interactions, leading to fast valley depolarization. Electrical control of valley DoF is highly desired for large-scale integration and energyefficient tuning. The electrical control of valley pseudospin in ML-TMDs has not been well studied. Few reports use electrostatic gating in standard field effect transistors (FETs) to control valley polarization. Ferroelectric materials possess a spontaneous polarization, originating from their noncentrosymmetric structure, which remains robust even when the gate voltage is removed. Herein, we demonstrate ferroelectric field effect transistors (FeFETs) using mechanically exfoliated as well as CVD-grown WSe2 monolayers transferred on top of an AlScN dielectric that exhibit tunable, non-volatile, valley-polarized emission. AlScN is a recently discovered ferroelectric material displaying out-of-plane electrical polarization and superior ferroelectric properties, including very high remnant polarization (> 115 μC/cm 2 ) and coercive fields (2-6 MV/cm), compared to other commonly utilized ferroelectric materials. The prototypical FeFET in this study consists of monolayer WSe2 as a semiconductor channel on top of 45 nm thick AlScN ferroelectric dielectric film grown on Pt(111)/Ti/SiO2/Si substrate as . A schematic is shown as Figure As a result, the energy band alignment between AlScN and WSe2 is tuned by the presence of the applied electric field. The conduction band of WSe2 is bent below the Fermi level (EF), resulting in the accumulation of mobile electrons in the WSe2 channel (Figure The presence of external charge carriers can strongly influence the PL characteristics of ML-TMDs: the photoexcited electrons and holes can combine with the extra charge carriers to form negatively or positively charged trions, even at room temperature. To determine the effect of ferroelectric polarization switching on the excitonic characteristics of WSe2, we performed PL spectroscopy measurements on the devices when subjected to differently polarized states (Figure Nevertheless, these fascinating excitonic characteristics, including both bright and dark trions, can have an important impact on the valley polarization dynamics in WSe2. It has been reported that the formation of trions can significantly influence valley polarization properties. This is because they exhibit (i) ultralong valley lifetimes compared to the neutral excitons and (ii) reduced intervalley scattering, since trions involve an extra charge (i.e., an electron-hole pair and an excess charge carrier) for simultaneous large momentum transfer and spin flip. characteristics, especially in monolayer TMDs. To our knowledge, ferroelectric tuning has never been reported. Thus, it is difficult to make a direct comparison. Nevertheless, we compare the tunability performance of our device with other tuning approaches, such as electrostatic gating and magnetic field tuning in Figure To get more insight into the mechanism of valley polarization with ferroelectric gating mediated exciton to trion conversion (X-T). The following valley resolved rate equations are utilized: 46 Where դ o is the initial DVP for excitons which is assumed to be 100 %, Г X ia & Г T ia stands for the intravalley decay rate of excitons and trions, and Г X ir & Г T ir denote the intervalley decay rate of excitons and trions, respectively. During the process of X-T conversion, the effective intravalley decay rate for excitons and trions can be described as follows: and, As, the probability of trion to exciton conversion reduces at low temperatures, the term Г TX is neglected in eqn. 3.2. For excitons, a fast decay of valley polarization is ascribed to the faster intravalley recombination, as well as the intervalley scattering rate, which is on the order of few ps. It is noteworthy that in our devices, positively and negatively charged trions exhibit an asymmetric valley polarization behaviour whereby negatively charged trions exhibit an enhanced valley polarization compared to the positively charged trions (Figure This phenomenon can be attributed to three reasons. First, the valley lifetime of negatively charged trions is longer than positively charged trions (see supporting information Figure In summary, we demonstrate a novel approach that uses ferroelectric materials to control valley polarization in monolayer TMDs. We show that the anticipated non-volatile electrical control of valley polarization could be realized experimentally by coupling a WSe2 monolayer to a high Pr ferroelectric such as AlScN. Enhanced, non-volatile valley polarization, robust even at room temperature, was demonstrated by controlling the polarization state of the AlScN. This approach will allow the control and manipulation of excited state and valley polarized phenomena in 2D and other quantum materials using ground-state ferroelectric polarization control. In principle, this largely unexplored aspect within heterostructure systems has the potential to pave the way for future ferro-valleytronic devices and sensors. WSe2. WSe2 monolayers were mechanically exfoliated from commercial bulk crystals (purchased from hq graphene Inc.) and transferred onto AlScN by the dry-transfer method. The sample preparation process was carried out inside the glove box to avoid any sample degradation. Large area mechanical exfoliation and transfer of monolayer WSe2. Large area WSe2 were exfoliated using gold tapes by following procedures in a previous study. Synthesis of WSe2 monolayer by MOCVD. The growth of monolayer WSe2 on 2" diameter cplane sapphire was carried out in a metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) system equipped with a cold-wall horizontal reactor with an inductively heated graphite susceptor with gas-foil wafer rotation The W(CO)6 powder was maintained at 30 °C and 400 Torr in a stainless-steel bubbler. The synthesis of monolayer WSe2 is based on a multi-step process, consisting of nucleation, ripening, and lateral growth steps, which was described previously Characterizations. Electrical measurement of the WSe2/AlScN FE-FET. Electrical measurements were performed using the Lakeshore probe station using a Keithley 4200A semiconductor characterization system in air at room temperature. The SMU connection was used to obtain the DC I-V characteristics. The drain current was recorded with a 0.2 V step. For the polarization switching of the AlScN, the gate voltage of +10 or -10 V was applied while source is grounded. From literature precedent it can be concluded that there are mainly two plausible mechanisms for valley depolarization i.e., (i) electron-hole exchange interactions and (ii) intervalley scattering rate. ⁄