We study the distinctive features of the phase pumping effect in Josephson transport through a three-layered ferromagnet F1/F/F2 with non-coplanar magnetization. Using Gor'kov and Bogoliubov-de Gennes formalisms we go beyond the quasiclassical approximation and analyze the dependence of the spontaneous Josephson phase ψ on the exchange field h in the F layer and details of magnetization profile. The pumping of the Josephson phase can be generated by the mutual rotation of magnetizations in F1 and F2 layers resulting in the nontrivial phase gain at the rotation period (Berry phase). The increase in h is shown to cause changes in the topology of the phase evolution: the gain of the Josephson phase at the pumping period switches from 0 to 2π. We study the scenario of these switchings originating from the interplay between several competing local minima of the free energy of the junction versus the superconducting phase difference. Our analysis provides the basis for the search of experimental setup realizing the phase pumping phenomenon. FIG. 1. Schematic picture of the parameter space for S/F1/F/F2/S Josephson junctions with non-coplanar magnetization. Here ψ is the spontaneous Josephson phase and χ is the angle between projections of the exchange fields in F1 and F2 to the plane perpendicular to the exchange field in F. Red (black) line shows a nontrivial (trivial) trajectory characterized by the nontrivial (trivial) gain of the superconducting phase at the rotation period. The phenomenon of quantum pumping in different mesoscopic systems attracts the interest of both experimentalists and theoreticians for several decades (see, for example, The continuous tuning of the spontaneous phase can be realized in the Josephson junction with a weak link consisting of half-metal (HM) In the present paper we fill these gaps and develop a theory of the anomalous Josephson effect in S/F 1 /F/F 2 /S junctions beyond the quasiclassical approximation. For such structures we demonstrate the possibility to create ψ junction in which the Josephson phase can be tuned by varying the direction of magnetization in F 1 or F 2 layer, e.g., under the effect of external magnetic field. To highlight the main qualitative features of the ψ junctions we first consider a models of atomically thin SF/HM/SF Josephson junction, (see Fig. We then consider clean three-dimensional S/F 1 /F/F 2 /S junctions with a finite thickness of the central layer and non-coplanar magnetization distribution. For simplicity, the effects of the finite thickness of the side ferromagnets F 1 and F 2 are neglected. Correspondingly, their role in the Josephson transport is reduced to the spin-active boundary conditions for the quasiparticle wave function. Several properties of similar hybrid structures were addressed in Refs. The paper has the following structure. In Sec. II using the exact solution of Gor'kov equations we analyze the current-phase relation of the atomically thin SF/HM/SF junction. Sec. III is devoted to the analysis of the behavior of the ground-state superconducting phase difference and the phase pumping phenomenon for clean S/F 1 /F/F 2 /S Josephson junctions with a finite thickness of the central layer. In Sec. IV we summarize our results. In this section we analyze the current-phase relation of the Josephson junction based on the SF 1 /HM/SF 2 structure of atomic thickness. Our goal here is to find the exact solutions of the Gor'kov equations beyond the quasiclassical approximation and establish the generic conditions required for the formation of the Josephson ψ junction. The system geometry is schematically shown in Fig. where the operator (2) describes the electron motion in the isolated layers (α and β are the spin indexes), the contribution stands for the s-wave superconducting coupling inside the junction electrodes, the operator reflects the coherent electron tunneling between the layers, and the matrices Â(j) and P are defined as The appearance of the spontaneous ground-state Josephson phase ψ and its direct relation to the relative orientation of the exchange fields in SF 1 and SF 2 layers (namely, ψ = χ 2χ 1 ) straightly follows from the form of the Hamiltonian The generic phase transformation of all annihilation operators reads φ α = φα e iκα , ζ α = ζα e iμα , η α = ηα e iνα , where κ α , μ α and ν α are certain constants. Since we assume the full spin polarization of electrons inside the half-metal the spin-down component of the corresponding annihilation operator ζ ↓ = 0 and, thus, the part Ĥt of the Hamiltonian does not change, if we take κ 1 = μ 1 and μ 1 = ν 1 . Moreover, if in addition we choose κ 2κ 1 = χ 1 and ν 2ν 1 = χ 2 the part Ĥ0 remains the same as in Eq. ( Since the exchange field lying in the xz plane does not affect the Josephson phase, we find: Arg( ∆1 ) -Arg( ∆2 ) = φ + χ 2χ 1 . From this expression one sees that even for φ = 0 the superconducting leads effectively acquire the announced phase difference which corresponds to the current-phase relation Note that in the case when the exchange field in the central layer is comparable or less than Fermi energy (instead of half metal we have a conventional ferromagnet) one cannot perform the above procedure. Indeed, since in this case ζ ↓ = 0, one should also put Thus, the formation of the ψ junction with the spontaneous ground state phase defined only by the mutual orientation of magnetic moments in ferromagnetic layers requires the material with the full spin polarization. The emergence of the spontaneous phase in S/F 1 /F/F 2 /S systems where the spin polarization in the central ferromagnetic layer is not full is treated in detail in Sec. III. After establishing the appearance of the spontaneous Josephson phase we now turn to the analysis of the critical current I c for the SF/HM/SF junction. The value I c depends on the angle θ between the magnetizations in the SF layers and the spin quantization axis in half-metal (without loss of generality we assume θ 1 = θ 2 = θ) and is nonzero for θ = 0, π. To show this, let us calculate this current. The above analysis shows that I c for the Josephson junction under consideration is the same as the critical current for SF/HM/SF structure with the exchange fields of the SF layers both lying in the xz plane and forming the angle θ with z-axis. To calculate the Josephson energy of the later junction we consider the infinite multilayered structure consisting of alternating atomically thin SF (the exchange field is h = h cos θẑ + h sin θx) and HM (the spin quantization axis coincides with the z axis) layers and the gap varying from one unit cell to another as ∆ n = ∆ 0 e ikn (see Fig. where τ = (T -T c0 )/T c0 , T c0 is the critical temperature in the absence of the proximity effect (t = 0) and the exchange field (h = 0), N (0) is the electron density of states at the Fermi level, N is the number of superconducting layers. From Eq.( Thus, we drive to the expression for the critical current: The coupling parameter T entering Eq. ( The Hamiltonian of the SF/HM superlattice has the form where the three operators describe the electron motion in the plane of the layers, superconducting pairing in the superconducting layers and tunneling between the layers, respectively: Since the multilayered system is periodic in space, we can introduce the Fourier components of the annihilation operators and write down the Hamiltonian ( ĤBCS = ∆ 0 q,p φ k-q,-p,↓ φ q,p,↑ + ∆φ † q,p,↑ φ † k-q,-p,↓ , q,p,β={↑,↓} (T (q)φ † q,p,β ζ q,p,β + T * (q)ζ † q,p,β φ q,p,β ), (20) where T (q) = 2te iq/2 cos(q/2). Next we introduce the set of imaginary-time Green functions: ) . The resulting system of the matrix Gor'kov equations in the frequency representation takes the following form: where ω n = πT (2n + 1) are the fermion Matsubara frequencies and Î = iσ y . Solving the system of equations ( The critical temperature T c can be expressed via F † ↑↓ using the self-consistency equation: ln where T c0 is the critical temperature in the absence of proximity effect (t = 0) and the exchange field (h = 0). To simplify the further calculations, we assume t to be small and perform the power expansion of (25) over this parameter. Next we substitute this expansion into Eq.( Here ωn = π Tc0 (2n + 1), Tc0 is the critical temperature in the absence of the proximity effect (t = 0) and As a result, we can easily calculate the desired difference (T π c -T 0 c ) = 2β and the critical current As expected, we obtain I c ∝ sin 2 θ. In this section we analyze the behavior of the spontaneous ground-state phase difference in clean S/F 1 /F/F 2 /S Josephson junctions with a finite thickness of the central layer L. Using the solutions of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations, we describe the crossover from the regime of half-metallic F layer to the case when the exchange field in the F layer is small compared to the Fermi energy. To simplify the calculations we treat the F 1 and F 2 layers as spin-active interfaces between the superconducting leads and the central ferromagnet. Also we assume that these interfaces are characterized by the finite potential barrier which partially damps the electron transfer between the layers. The geometry of the system is schematically shown in Fig. where and the potential U (r) is nonzero only at the interfaces between the F layer and superconducting leads: The spin-dependent part of the single-particle Hamiltonian has the following form with and the unit vector n j = (sin θ j cos χ j , sin θ j sin χ j , cos θ j ) stands for the superconducting paring inside the superconducting layers. In the above expressions ψ † α (ψ α ) is the fermionic creation (annihilation) operator, α, β =↑, ↓ denote spin degrees of freedom (summation over repeated spin indices is implied), σi (i = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices acting in the spin space, m(r) is the effective mass profile, and μ(r) denotes the difference between the chemical potential and the bottom of the electron energy band. To derive the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations, we perform the standard Bogoliubov transformation , where γ † n (γ n ) is the quasiparticle creation (annihilation) operator, u nα (r) and v nα (r) are the electron and hole components of the quasiparticle wave function. The resulting equations take the form where Ψ(r) = [u ↑ (r), u ↓ (r), v ↓ (r), -v ↑ (r)] T and τi (i = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices acting in the electron-hole space. For the calculations of the Josephson transport we follow the approach used in Ref. Below we list the appropriate solutions of Eqs. ( A + e -iφ/2 a + A + Here p || is the conserved in-plane momentum, , m s is the effective mass for the electrons in superconducting leads, and μ s is the difference between the chemical potential and the bottom of the electron energy band in the S layers. In the central ferromagnet (-L/2 < z < L/2) the solution of BdG equations can be written as follows: where p↑,↓ (iω n , h) = p ↑,↓ (-iω n , -h), m f denotes the effective mass for the electrons in the central ferromagnet, and μ f is the difference between the chemical potential and the bottom of the electron energy band in the central layer at h = 0. For a finite h the bottom of the lower and higher spin-split subband in the F layer is located at -(μ f + h) and -(μ fh), respectively. Finally, in the right superconductor (z > L/2) the quasiparticle wave function has the form: +e -ips(z-L/2) C - e iφ/2 a + C - . In the above solutions A ± , B ± , B± , and C ± are 2×1 column vectors in the spin space, which should be determined from the matching conditions for the quasiparticle wave function at the S/F interfaces (z = ±L/2). It is straightforward to show that the corresponding matching conditions for the considered model ( yield the following expressions for the scattering matrices, which couple the electron and hole waves in the central ferromagnet: Here Q and Ǩ are diagonal matrices with the following structure in the electron-hole space X = diag( X, X), K = (m s /m f )diag(p ↑ /p s , p ↓ /p s ), Z 0,j = 2m s U j /p s , and Z j = 2m s h j /p s . The current-phase relation I(φ) can be obtained from the determinant of the matching condition matrix where A is the cross-sectional area of the junction. We calculate the spontaneous superconducting phase difference by minimizing the free energy of the junction, which up to a phase-independent constant is given by The resulting Eqs ( Here we provide some analytical results, which clarify the behavior of the current-phase relation and the spontaneous superconducting phase difference. Note that the major challenge for obtaining a closed-form expression for the current-phase relation stems from the fact that the spin-active interfaces couple the quasiparticle states in the central ferromagnet from both spin-split subbands. Some analytical progress can be made when typical Fermi velocities in the central F layer are much smaller than the ones in the normal-metal state of the superconducting leads. In this case, one can consider the velocity ratio matrix Ǩ in Eq. ( Here The first two terms proportional to sin(φ) in the right-hand side of Eq. (47a) describe the contribution to the Josephson transport from the spinsinglet and the spin-triplet Cooper pairs with zero spin projection on the direction of the exchange field h/|h|. The remaining terms ∝ I ↑↑ and I ↓↓ contain the contributions to the supercurrent from the parallel spin-triplet pairs | ↑↑ and | ↓↓ , respectively. Equations Correspondingly, in the half-metallic regime the anomalous phase ψ is a linear function of the misorientation angle χ = χ 1χ 2 . Second, in the limit h → 0 we get I ↑↑ = I ↓↓ , which implies that the total contibution of the parallel spin-triplet Cooper pairs to the Josephson transport ∝ cos(χ) sin(φ). Within this limit and for rather strong spin-active barriers one can expect that the variations of χ should cause 0-π transitions due to contribu- ) correspond to h/μ f = 1, 0.8, and 0.6, respectively. The supercurrent is given in the units e∆0N , where N = Ak 2 F /π, A is the cross-sectional area of the junction, and kF is the Fermi momentum in the normal-metal state of the superconductors. Circles denote the superconducting phase difference at which the free energy of the junction reaches its minimal value (the anomalous phase ψ). We choose L = 0.02ξ to produce the plots, where ξ = kF /ms∆0 is the superconducting coherence length. tions of the parallel spin-triplet Cooper pairs. Note that this result is in qualitative agreement with the results of the circuit theory We proceed with the discussion of the results of numerical simulations. Our focus is on the behavior of the anomalous phase ψ as a function of the exchange field in the central ferromagnet h and the misorientation angle χ. For simplicity, we consider the case of equal barrier strength parameters Z 0,1 = Z 0,2 = Z 0 , Z 1 = Z 2 = Z and take θ 1 = θ 2 = π/2. Our numerical results are obtained for the following parameter set: T = 0.1∆ 0 , μ s /∆ 0 = 10 3 , μ f /∆ 0 = 5 × 10 2 , m s = m f , Z 0 = 0, and Z = 0.5. Typical current-phase relations I s (φ) along with the corresponding F (φ) curves for χ = 0, π/4, π/2, 3π/4, π and several exchange fields h/μ f = 1, 0.8, and 0.6 are shown in Fig 5 . Circles in Fig. Let us now discuss the tunability of the ground-state superconducting phase difference as a function of the hybrid structure parameters. We show several ψ(χ) plots for h/μ f = 1, 0.8, 0.6, 0.4 and 0.2 in Fig. As it has been explained previously, such behavior originates from the fact that the supercurrent is carried only by the parallel spin-triplet Cooper pairs from the lower spin-split subband in the central ferromagnet. It is interesting to note that the tunability of the anomalous phase can persist up to rather small values of the exchange field h. Moreover, Fig. Typical behavior of the ground-state superconducting phase difference within the full range of the exchange fields for χ = π/4, π/2, and 3π/4 are shown in Fig. where k f is the Fermi momentum in the central layer at h = 0. Indeed, for our choice of the hybrid structure parameters N f ∼ 10, which allows us to associate the oscillations of the anomalous phase with the size quanti- zation effects in the central F layer. The results for longer junctions L/ξ = 0.05 and 0.1 [Figs. 7(b) and 7(c)] reveal the increase in the number of oscillations upon the increase in the junction length. One can see that the number of oscillations of the anomalous phase in Figs. Finally, we analyze the features of the phase pumping phenomenon for different exchange fields h in the central ferromagnet. For this purpose we perform the calculations of the superconducting phase difference corresponding to both global and local minima of the free energy. The results presented in Fig. To sum up, we have studied the anomalous Josephson effect in S/F 1 /F/F 2 /S systems with non-coplanar magnetic moments in ferromagnetic layers with arbitrary ratio between the exchange field in the F layer and the Fermi energy. As a first step, considering SF 1 /half-metal/SF 2 Josephson junctions of atomic thickness in the frames of Gor'kov formalism we have demonstrate that the spontaneous ground-state phase difference ψ arising in such systems coincides with the angle between projections of magnetic moments in the SF 1 and SF 2 layers to the plane perpendicular to the spin quantization axis in half-metal. Interestingly, this feature of ψ junctions gives rise to the Berry phase effects. Indeed, the rotation of magnetic moment, e.g., in the SF 1 layer should produce the accumulation of the ground-state phase 2π after the full precession period which may results in the interesting possibility of magnetic flux pumping in superconducting loop in SF 1 and SF 2 layers. Then we analyzed the behavior of the ground-state superconducting phase difference and the features of the phase pumping effect in S/F 1 /F/F 2 /S junctions upon the decrease in the exchange field in the F layer from the values comparable with the Fermi energy (the limit of half-metal) down to the ones of the order of the critical temperature of the superconducting phase transition. To do this we have performed calculations of the Josephson transport for clean S/F 1 /F/F 2 /S systems with the finite F layer thickness. For a half-metallic central layer it has been shown that the spontaneous phase is a linear function of the misorientation angle ψ = π-χ. As the exchange field decreases we have found that the considered Josephson systems are characterized by a nonlinear ψ(χ) dependence and can feature two competing local minima in the free energy of the junction vs the superconducting phase difference. This competition leads to a bistable behavior of the system, which manifests itself through the jump-wise changes of the spontaneous phase upon the variation in the misorientation angle accompanied with the hysteresis phenomena. We have demonstrated that further decrease in h can induce several changes in the topology of the phase evolution: the gain of the Josephson phase at the rotation period switches between 0 to 2π. Also we have found that the spontaneous phase can exhibit oscillating and/or the jump-wise behavior as a function of the exchange field. The ψ junctions incorporated into superconducting circuits provide a possibility to switch between the superconducting states with different vorticities without the application of external magnetic field 