In this work, we synthesized single crystal of EuCd2As2, which exhibits A-type antiferromagnetic (AFM) order with in-plane spin orientation below TN = 9.5 K. Optical spectroscopy and transport measurements suggest its topological insulator (TI) nature with an insulating gap around 0.1 eV. Remarkably, a dual topological Hall resistivity that exhibits same magnitude but opposite signs in the positive to negative and negative to positive magnetic field hysteresis branches emerges below 20 K. With magnetic force microscopy (MFM) images and numerical simulations, we attribute the dual topological Hall effect to the Néel-type skyrmions stabilized by the interactions between topological surface states and magnetism, and the sign reversal in different hysteresis branches indicates potential coexistence of skyrmions and antiskyrmions. Our work uncovers a unique twodimensional (2D) magnetism on the surface of intrinsic AFM TI, providing a promising platform for novel topological quantum states and AFM spintronic applications. The entanglement between topology and magnetism can generate various novel quantum phenomena such as quantum anomalous Hall effect, axion insulator states, and skyrmions, among which the skyrmions, for their small size, low energy consumption, and high mobility with low current densities, are regarded as promising candidates for next-generation data storage and computing devices Recently, the van der Waals magnets [MnBi 2 Te 4 ][Bi 2 Te 3 ] n family were discovered as an intrinsic AFM TI Firstly, the magnetic measurements reveled its A-type AFM order with in-plane spin configuration below T N = 9.5 K (inset of Fig. Besides the negative MR, remarkable positive MRs were also observed for in-and out-of-plane fields below 0.1 T, resulting in a sharp dip centered at 0 T (Figs. 1d and e, Figs. S5 and S6 in SM [29]), corresponding to obvious cusp-like structures in the magnetoconductance (MC) below T N (Figs. , where l φ is the phase coherent length, φ is the digamma function, and α is the weak anti-localization (WAL) coefficient, for which topological surface state will give the value around -0.5 To gain direct evidence of the skyrmions, we measured the spatial-resolved spin texture through MFM imaging on EuCd 2 As 2 's freshly cleaved (001) surface Let us now delve into the origin of skyrmions in AFM TI EuCd 2 As 2 . Previously, skyrmions have predominantly been observed in systems with broken inversion symmetry, which allows for finite DM interactions In metallic EuCd 2 As 2 , NHR varies synergistically with negative MR and bulk magnetization, indicating their intimate relations Then, we conduct a numerical simulation based on a toy model with bilayer Eu atoms and Dirac surface state (Fig. Finally, it is noteworthy that the sign reversal of NHR in increasing and decreasing field procedures (Fig. In summary, we synthesized the single crystal of EuCd 2 As 2 , which shows A-type AFM order with in-plane spin orientation below T N =9.5 K. With optical spectroscopy and transport measurements, we identified its TI nature with the band gap around 0.1 eV . Unexpectedly, a unusual dual topological Hall effect develops below 20 K and exhibits different signs in the positive to negative and negative to positive magnetic field hysteresis branches. Utilizing MFM measurements and theoretical simulations, this anomalous NHR is attributed to the Néel-type skyrmions induced by the interplay between topological surface states and magnetism, and the sign reversal of NHR indicates the coexistence of skyrmion and antiskyrmion. Therefore, our findings have unveiled an exotic 2D magnetism that manifests exclusively on the surface of a bulk AFM TI without the affection from the bulk bands. In contrast to TI/magnet heterostructures, this unique magnetic system provides a new avenue to realize 2D quantum phenomena without complex 2D fabrications, greatly facilitating their application in AFM spintronics. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS