2D materials are emerging as promising nanomaterials for applications in energy storage and catalysis. In the wet chemical synthesis of MXenes, these 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides are terminated with a variety of functional groups, and cations such as Li + are often used to intercalate into the structure to obtain exfoliated nanosheets. Given the various elements involved in their synthesis, it is crucial to determine the detailed chemical composition of the final product, in order to better assess and understand the relationships between composition and properties of these materials. To facilitate atom probe tomography analysis of these materials, a revised specimen preparation method is presented in this study. A colloidal Ti 3 C 2 T z MXene solution was processed into an additive-free free-standing film and specimens were prepared using a dual beam scanning electron microscope / focused ion beam. To mechanically stabilize the fragile specimens, they were coated using an in situ sputtering technique. As various 2D material inks can be processed into such free-standing films, the presented approach is pivotal for enabling atom probe analysis of other 2D materials. Since the groundbreaking experimental observation of graphene MXenes, 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides, have also been the subject of intense research since their discovery by the Barsoum and Gogotsi groups The obtained properties are significantly influenced by the detailed synthesis parameters Atom Probe Tomography (APT) is an analytical characterization technique with sensitivity to both light and heavy elements and sufficient spatial resolution to address these unanswered questions A critical step towards the APT analysis of nanostructures, including nanoparticles, nanosheets and nanowires, was the development of appropriate specimen preparation approaches, as these materials, unlike bulk materials, do not allow straightforward traditional protocols to prepare needle-shaped specimens Despite the wide range of compositions available, and the increasing intensity of research on nanostructures, 2D materials such as MXenes have rarely been investigated using APT. Although graphene is occasionally used to coat biological or liquid APT specimens Here, APT analysis is performed by taking advantage of the possibility to process MXenes into free-standing films, i.e. a macroscopic stack of nanosheets with the same orientation held together by weak intermolecular forces such as van der Waals forces or hydrogen bonds. APT specimens of a free-standing Ti 3 C 2 T z MXene film were prepared by FIB lift-out. Following sharpening, APT specimens were coated in situ by ion milling a Cr lamella as sputter target Ti 3 AlC 2 MAX phase was synthesized by solid-liquid reaction. Briefly, TiC (99.5 %, Alfa Aesar), Ti (99.7 %, Strem) and Al (99.7 %, Strem) powders were ball milled at 1800 rpm for a duration of 5 min. The resulting powder mixture was cold pressed and then heat treated in a furnace at 1500 • C for a period of 120 min under a protective Ar environment. Finally, the sintered Ti 3 AlC 2 MAX phase was ball milled at 1800 rpm for 5 min to a fine powder, ready for MXene synthesis. For Ti 3 C 2 T z MXene synthesis, 0.5 g LiF (99 %, Strem) was dissolved in 5 mL 10.2 mol L -1 concentrated HCl (32 %, Bio-Lab) in a high density polyethylene vial, to prepare the etchant for selective etching of the Al layer from the previous sintered Ti 3 AlC 2 MAX phase. Etching was done by slowly adding 0.5 g of the MAX phase powder to the solution under constant stirring with a magnetic stirrer at 45 • C degrees for 24 h. After etching, the complete solution was transferred to a 50 mL centrifuge tube and filled with deionized water (conductivity 0.055 μS cm -1 ). The solution was shaken thoroughly and then centrifuged at 3500 rpm for a duration of 2 min. The supernatant was decanted, and the remaining sediment was replenished with deionized water, shaken and centrifuged again. Washing was repeated several times until the solution reached a near-neutral pH value, i.e. greater than 6. After washing, the tube containing the sediment was refilled with deionized water and the solution was sonicated in an ice bath for 60 min to prevent heating. To remove unetched residues of the MAX phase, the solution was centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 30 min and the black colloidal supernatant containing single layer MXenes was collected. Finally, the colloidal solution with a yield of about 7 g L -1 was stored at 5 • C. The free-standing MXene film was prepared by vacuum filtration. 5 mL of the colloidal solution was poured into a vacuum filtration system using a Celgard ® 3501 membrane. After filtration, the film was removed from the membrane. Figure A first batch of needle-shaped APT specimens was prepared from the free-standing MXene film according to the lift-out and sharpening protocol introduced by APT analyses were performed using either a 5000XS (straight flight path) or a 5000XR (reflectron-fitted) local electrode atom probe (Cameca Instruments), operating in ultraviolet (λ = 355 nm) laser-pulsing mode. Parameters were set to a base temperature of 50 K, a laser pulse energy varied between 50 pJ and 75 pJ, a laser pulsing rate of 125 kHz, and a target detection rate of 5 to 10 ions per 1000 pulses on average. Data reconstruction and analysis was done with AP Suite 6.3 by Cameca Instruments following the default voltage-based reconstruction algorithm. Initial attempts to analyze APT specimens of the free-standing MXene film, prepared as described in Figure In addition, there may also be nanovoids between the nanosheets, as visible in the cross-sectional view of the free-standing film in Figure Li was normally only used in the wet chemical synthesis for exfoliation. However, here up to 90 at.% Li was measured in the analyzed specimens. In the reconstructed 3D atom map in Figure During APT analysis, the intense electrostatic field can cause preferential migration of Li atoms In summary, it was not possible to perform a reliable APT analysis on specimens of the free-standing 2D material film prepared using the common FIB lift-out and sharpening protocols. On the one hand, the specimens lack mechanical stability, and on the other hand, preferential migration of Li atoms prevents detailed compositional analysis. In order to overcome both the mechanical instability and in situ delithiation issue that hinder successful APT analysis of the free-standing Ti 3 C 2 T z MXene film, specimens were prepared according to the workflow described in Figure Compared to previous work, where exfoliated Ti 3 C 2 T z MXenes were electrodeposited into Co Besides Cr, other materials may also be considered as sputter targets in the future. Although it has been shown that specimens can be easily coated with Cr using the in situ sputtering technique, it has some disadvantages for this particular case. During the sputtering process, the clean Cr layer is constantly passivated with an oxide layer Despite the great interest in understanding the functional properties of nanomaterials by characterizing their detailed composition, 2D materials have rarely been studied using APT. Using Ti 3 C 2 T z MXenes as an example, the common SEM-FIB specimen preparation has been revised utilizing an in situ sputtering technique to facilitate the APT analysis of 2D materials. By processing the colloidal MXene solution into an additive-free free-standing film to enable a common lift-out and sharpening procedure, and by coating the APT specimen, it was possible to acquire relatively large volumes of the 2D material with high data quality. The coating stabilizes the fragile specimen, but also prevents the in situ delithiation of Li, which was incorporated into the material during synthesis. As materials other than MXenes can also be processed into free-standing films 