Spring-driven jumping robots use an energised spring for propulsion, while the onboard motor only serves as a springcharging source. A common mechanism in designing these robots is the rhomboidal linkage, which has been combined with linear springs (spring-linkage) to create a nonlinear spring, thereby increasing elastic energy storage and jump height for a given motor force. The effectiveness of this spring-linkage has been examined for individual designs, but a generalised design theory of this class of system remains absent. This paper presents an energetics analysis of the spring-linkage and provides insight into designing an ideal constant force spring, which stores the maximum energy for a given motor force. A quasi-static analysis shows that the force-displacement relationship of the spring-linkage changes with the orientation and type of the spring, but is independent of the linkage scale. Combining different types and orientations of springs within the linkage enables higher elastic energy storage than using single springs. Placing two translational springs at the diagonals of the rhomboidal linkage creates an ideal spring that could increase the jump height of prior robots by 50-160%. The mechanical performance of motor-driven jumping robots is limited by the motor maximum power and velocity Spring-driven jumping robots have been developed with various structures and arrangements of elastic elements Ideal mechanical-elastic efficiency is obtained theoretically using a constant force spring, where the applied force is independent of the displacement. The maximum elastic potential energy stored in the idealised system is the peak force multiplied by the spring length (the areas PE1, PE2 and PE3 in Fig. A conceptually simple approach to increasing the energy stored in a linear spring system for a given charging force is to pre-stress the spring. This involves using a linear spring with a natural length longer than the system characteristic length. The spring is pre-stressed by an external force before placing it into the jumping drivetrain. (fii) (fiii) (fiv) (fv) (fvi) (fi) Fig. The pre-stressing phase shifts the force-displacement curve of the linear spring upward in Fig. Nonlinear springs have been made previously by combining a planar closed-chained four-bar linkage mechanism with a linear spring The prismatic linear spring system in Fig. Fig. While simple to comprehend, the example in Fig. The closed-chained four-bar linkage mechanism is modelled as four bars of lengths L, connected by four revolute joints -A, B, D, and F, and is hereafter defined as rhomboidal linkage. The linkage model has only a single degree of freedom and is considered to have a single point contact with the ground at F; in practice, a finite base of support is required to avoid toppling and maintain the single translational degree of freedom, however this does not influence the mechanical-elastic conversion efficiency and so is neglected here. The characteristic length of the rhomboidal linkage is given as, which is also the maximum displacement between joints B and F. Note that if the bars have different lengths, joint B cannot be displaced to joint F in order to maximise the mechanical work of the spring-charging force. Joints B and F are referred to hereafter as the body and foot respectively. Revolute joints A and D are referred to as the knee joints; the knee angle, θ, is the angle between the two segments. If the spring mass is assumed negligible, the translational and rotational springs can be placed at any arbitrary position within the rhomboidal linkage, including the revolute joints, as shown in Fig. To charge the spring-linkage, the spring charging process begins with the system in a standing posture, where the spring is at its natural length. The system is in contact with the ground via its foot (joint F); the standing knee angle is defined as the initial standing angle θ ini (Fig. The work done by the charging force in displacing the spring is stored as elastic potential energy in the spring. The charging process will stop either when the spring restoring force reaches the peak charging force, F max , or when the linkage mechanism has been fully depressed (where θ = 0 • and links BA and BD have rotated to become parallel with links FA and FD, respectively); in both cases the system is classified as being charged. When charged the knee angle is defined as θ end (Fig. For reference, an ideal constant force system produces a constant spring restoring force equal to the peak force and independent of the spring displacement. Its elastic potential energy storage is PE max = F max d. Section 3 will examine the four spring-linkage models (Fig. The elastic potential energy that can be stored within a spring-linkage system is determined by the locations at which the spring(s) is connected to the linkage, the natural spring length and stiffness, and also the peak spring charging force. Fig. To charge a translational spring that is connected to a rhomboidal linkage the ends of the spring must be connected to two different links. The three possible combinations of the pairs of links that the spring can connect to are: (1) BA and FD (Fig. The spring positioning ratios, γ i , are length ratios that define the orientation of the spring (Fig. is the length of link BA, L FD is the length of link FD, L DB is the length of link DB and L AF is the length of link AF. The angle between the spring and link BA is donated as φ i , which can be expressed as a function of γ i and the spring length, L c : If the spring end points are translated along their respective links while retaining the same spring orientation, the force-length profile and elastic energy remain unchanged. For example, in Fig. The first model (Fig. where ∆L c is the spring deflection from its natural length and can be expressed as a function of the knee angle and γ 1 , The elastic potential energy storage of the spring is given as EPE = F c dy = F k dL c .Note that this model includes two particular spring arrangements that have been used in previous jumping robots: vertical springs (γ 1 = 0, L BK1 = L FK2 = 0) and horizontal springs (γ 1 = 1, L BK1 = L FK2 = d/2), which are discussed in Section 3.1.1 and Section 3.1.2. The vertical spring linkage is a linear translational spring with its spring axis aligned with the spring charging force, and its ends. An example is a spring with its ends connected to joints H and F of the rhomboidal linkage. The spring-charging force is, The elastic potential energy stored in the spring is A quasi-static model of this system behaves identically to a linear spring system with a prismatic linkage; it has a linear force-length profile (Fig. The horizontal spring linkage is a linear translational spring placed in a rhomboidal linkage with its spring axis is perpendicular to the spring charging force vector. In practice this configuration can be created by connecting an extension spring between the knee joints of the rhomboidal linkage mechanism, and has been demonstrated in various jumping robots Note that there is a singularity in Eq. ( The knee angle at which the peak charging force is required, θ ES ,P , can be solved analytically by differentiating Eq. ( The elastic potential energy stored in the spring is EPE = The horizontal spring has to be charged at 152 • so to obtain the maximum energy. During the spring-charging phase the force increases when the linkage is compressed before reaching a peak at the knee angle of 103 • (Fig. In the second model (Fig. (a) Fig. where ∆L c is the change of the spring length from its natural length expressed as, when γ 2 = 0.5, the system is representative of the horizontal spring system. The third model (Fig. where ∆L c is the change of the spring length from its natural length expressed as, when γ 3 = 0.5, the system is representative of the vertical spring system. In the fourth model, a linear rotational spring is placed at joint A (Fig. where k r is the rotational spring stiffness. As with the horizontal spring, there is a singularity in Eq. ( The rhomboidal linkage with rotational springs can store up to 78% of the elastic potential energy of the idealised system when θ ini → π and θ end = 0, as shown in Fig. A physical experiment was conducted to validate the quasi-static models. The experiment measured the forcedisplacement relationship of a rhomboidal linkage with rotational springs and horizontal springs. The experimental model is a closed-chained linkage mechanism formed by four links, two knee joints, a body and a foot (Fig. Two experiments were conducted with different springs. The first experiment used a linear translational spring in the horizontal spring linkage arrangement. The spring has a natural length of 8cm and stiffness of 200Nm -1 The second experiment used a pair of rotational springs attached to the knee joints. Each spring has a spring stiffness of 0.7Nmrad -1 and a natural angle of 178 • The linkage was mounted on a 1m long Igus T linear guide rail, with the translational degree of freedom perpendicular to gravity, measured using a sprit level. A supporting structure was made using extruded aluminium profile beams (Fig. Error bars of measured displacements were calculated by dividing the standard deviation by the square root of the mean of the measurements using the inbuilt function, errorbar(), in Matlab. During the experiments there were no observable deformations of the structure of the linkage or the rig, and so measurements of the system deflections under load were assumed to be due to deflections of the spring alone. The normalised elastic energy stored in the analytical models in Section 3 will be presented in Section 6.2 to show the influence of the spring orientation and number of springs on the energy storage. The elastic energy was computed by the numerical integration of the spring charging force (Eq. ( A second numerical multibody dynamics model was developed using the Matlab Simulink (Simscape Multibody toolbox library ) to verify the analytical models in Section 3. This toolbox simulates the system dynamics under inertial-, applied external-, and spring-forces and moments. By default this toolbox simulates system dynamics, including inertial effects. Here, a quasi-static solution was obtained by incorporating a PD controller to apply a charging force based on a setpoint of required system displacement. The derivate term ensured that the system velocity and acceleration tended to zero for the given setpoint, and hence inertial effects could be neglected, making the model equivalent to the analytical models. The geometry of the system was defined as being equal to that of the experiment. The link masses are each set as 0.00001kg, so as to be negligible for consistency with the analytical model. The modelling parameters for translational spring are k = 200Nm -1 , θ ini = 164 • and θ end = 0.01 • , and for the rotational spring, k r = 0.7Nmrad -1 , θ ini = 170 • and θ end = 0.01 • . Simulations are computed using a fixed timestep step solver (ODE3) with a timestep of 0.0001s; further reduction in timestep yielded less than 0.1% change in all results. This section will show the influence of the spring numbers and locations on the energy storage capacity of the spring-linkage system. It will firstly present the experiments and numerical models to validate the analytical models of the rhomboidal linkage with the horizontal spring or rotational springs. The remainder of the results will show that the addition of a single translational spring creates a nonlinear spring that can store up to 65% energy of an idealised constant force spring system. This is 13% lower than that achieved with rotational springs (see Section 3). Two example ideal constant force springs will be illustrated by combining the rhomboidal linkage and multiple springs. The experimental data in Fig. For the rotational spring (Fig. Fig. The maximum elastic potential energy storage of the rhomboidal linkage is realised as the spring orientation tends to be parallel with any link in the mechanism (e.g. E1 in Fig. It should be noted that the spring stiffness would also influence its mass, which is not taken into consideration here. It is plausible that using a stiffer spring would increase the system mass, and potentially require additional mass for spring housings Changing the spring in position, or the links to which it connects, while retaining its orientation does not change the elastic potential energy storage of the system. This is because the required spring stiffness will vary to compensate for the change in the available spring displacement of each spring placement. The caveat in this argument for realworld springs (e.g. helical spring) is that they have finite minimum lengths, which limits the extent to which spring length and stiffness can be traded off. Increasing the number of springs of a given orientation does not change the energy storage capacity of a system. This is shown in V3 and H3 in Fig. The key to changing the energy storage capacity of a spring-linkage is to use multiple springs with different spring orientations, or to use different spring types. By doing so, the resultant force-length profile of the multi-springlinkage mechanism is the superposition of force-length profiles of the individual spring-linkages, as shown in Fig. Fig. A key finding is that the present analysis can utilize a simple mechanics model to capture the overall energetics trends seen in previous jumping robots, which have a range of intricate structures (e.g. The previous sections explored the influence of the spring numbers and orientations on the elastic energy storage of spring-linkage models. This section aims to bridge the theoretical discussion with practical implications by showcasing the real-world effect of the theories developed in this paper. Hence, this section will compare the energy storage between the previous spring-driven jumping robots Fig. As a general overview, the jump height and the elastic energy storage of the robots are lower than the theoretical boundary set by the ideal spring, which has the greatest elastic energy storage for a given spring charging force (Section 3). Among the robots, the hybrid spring-linkage, which currently holds the record for jump height, stores up to 64% elastic energy of the ideal spring and jumps up to 110 times its characteristic length The data in Fig. In the pursuit of 100% mechanical-elastic energy conversion efficiency of the existing spring-linkage designs, this work presented a potential route by combining a rhomboidal linkage with the vertical and horizontal springs to form an ideal spring (Section 6.2). Fig. This paper presented an energetics analysis of nonlinear springs formed by combining rhomboidal linkage and linear springs. The knowledge can be applied to the design of spring-driven jumping robots, as one of the common goals of this class of jumper is to maximise the stored elastic energy in a spring, in order to increase mechanicalkinetic energy conversion efficiency. Jumping performance (e.g. jump height, power) is not dependent on elastic energy storage alone, but is also determined by the conversion of the elastic energy to kinetic energy. However, to make this problem tractable the present paper tackled the first stage of the energy conversion from mechanical work to elastic energy, and A rhomboidal linkage with a translational spring orientated nearly parallel with any one of the links stores around 65% of the energy of an ideal spring. This provides higher elastic energy storage compared to other translational spring arrangements. Also, aligning a spring nearly parallel to a link offers a compact structural package that protects the spring from being exposed to the dangers of the environment. A caveat with this finding is that as the spring orientation tends to being parallel with a link, the spring displacement reduces and the required spring stiffness increases. This may in turn reduce the overall elastic-kinetic conversion efficiency after inertial effects are considered. In terms of overall compactness, the rotational spring also stands out as a viable design option, and is shown here to be capable of storing around 78% of the elastic energy of the ideal spring. The analysis also showed that rotational springs can be applied at any joint, offering the ability to adjust the mass distribution of a jumping system, which is known to be a critical factor in elastic-kinetic energy conversion 