Tuning magnetic properties of magnetic topological materials is of interest to realize elusive physical phenomena such as quantum anomalous hall effect (QAHE) at higher temperatures and design topological spintronic devices. However, current topological materials exhibit Curie temperature (TC) values far below room temperature. In recent years, significant progress has been made to control and optimize TC, particularly through defect engineering of these structures. Most recently we showed evidence of TC values up to 80K for (MnSb2Te4)x(Sb2Te3)1-x, where 0.7 ≤ x ≤ 0.85, by controlling the compositions and Mn content in these structures. Here we show further enhancement of the TC, as high as 100K, by maintaining high Mn content and reducing the growth rate from 0.9 nm/min to 0.5 nm/min. Derivative curves reveal the presence of two TC components contributing to the overall value and propose TC1 and TC2 have distinct origins: excess Mn in SLs and Mn in Sb2-yMnyTe3QLs alloys, respectively. In pursuit of elucidating the mechanisms promoting higher Curie temperature values in this system, we show evidence of structural disorder where Mn is occupying not only Sb sites but also Te sites, providing evidence of significant excess Mn and a new crystal structure:(Mn1+ySb2-yTe4)x(Sb2-yMnyTe3)1-x. Our work shows progress in understanding how to control magnetic defects to enhance desired magnetic properties and the mechanism promoting these high TC in magnetic topological materials such as (Mn1+ySb2-yTe4)x(Sb2-yMnyTe3)1-x . Three dimensional (3D) topological insulators (TIs) continue to gain attention for their unique properties, which are advantageous for novel electronic applications, including quantum computing For MnBi2Te4, separating FM SLs with non-magnetic QLs not only demonstrated QAHE but also resulted in a material with a Curie temperature (TC) of about 15K. In this work we report on (MnSb2Te4)x(Sb2Te3)1-x structures with exceptionally high TC values of more than 100K by further tuning the growth parameters, in particular by reducing the growth rate. These values are by far the highest TC observed for this materials system. Temperature dependent Hall resistance (Rxy) and magnetization measurements both reveal the high TC. Other characterization techniques such as X-ray diffraction rocking curves and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) were used to investigate the structural properties. We observed that samples grown at slow growth rates have more disorder, in the form of excess Mn, possibly occupying both Sb and Te sites. We propose that, for high Mn content samples, the Mn is incorporated in both in the SLs and the QLs and propose the formation of a new composite material: (Mn1+ySb2-yTe4)x(Sb2-yMnyTe3)1-x that gives rise to the exceedingly high TC values. All (MnSb2Te4)x(Sb2Te3)1-x structures were grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on (0001) c-plane sapphire substrates in a Riber 2300P system under ultra-high vacuum conditions (3-5x10 -10 Torr). The MBE is equipped with reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) to monitor surface quality of the samples as they grow. Before growth of (MnSb2Te4)x(Sb2Te3)1-x, the epi-ready sapphire substrates are baked at 670oC for 1 hour to remove any impurities on the sapphire surface. Fluxes for 6 N antimony (Sb) with a Riber double zone cell, and single zone Knudsen cells for 6N tellurium (Te) and 5N8 manganese (Mn) were measured by the beam equivalent pressure (BEP) obtained by a gauge placed in the substrate position. The samples were grown with varying Mn BEP ratios, defined as BEPMn/(BEPMn + BEPSb), to control the (MnSb2Te4)x(Sb2Te3)1-x composition (i.e, the value of x) and under excess Te, with a Sb:Te ratio of 1:20. Two growth rate ranges were used: fast growth rate of 0.9 -1.0 nm/min and slow growth rate of ~ 0.4 -0.5 nm/min. The two growth rates were obtained by adjusting the Sb flux. Most of the slow growth rate samples were grown with a Mn BEP ratio of 0.09, which led to the highest TC values for the fast growth rate samples. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) measurements were made in a Zeiss Supra 40 with a compact 30mm Bruker detector. Previous work by our group showed that the highest Curie temperature values for these materials, as high as 80K, were achieved in (MnSb2Te4)x(Sb2Te3)1-x, for values of x between 0.7 and 0.85 (70 -85% SLs). Typical growth rates for those materials were 0.9-1.0 nm/min, referred to in the remainder of this paper as 'fast growth rates'. Details of the growth can be found in the Supplementary Information of Ref. 27. In this work we will show that reducing the growth rate to ~0.4 -0.5 nm/min ('slow growth rates') the Curie temperature has increased further to values above 100K. We first examine the structural and magnetic properties of these new slow growth rate materials to better understand the reason for the high TC values in these structures. During the growth by molecular beam epitaxy, the surface was monitored in-situ using reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) where the observed patterns indicate the crystalline and surface quality of the material as it grows. As in the case of the fast growth rate samples reported in Ref. 22, we observed streaky RHEED patterns for the slow growth rate samples, signifying good crystallinity and smooth surfaces. AFM images of the surfaces also indicate smooth surfaces, typical of the Sb2Te3 based materials, and their quality is unchanged with the changing growth rates. (See Supplementary Information, Figs. Field dependent Hall resistance was measured at 10 K for all the samples grown at slow growth rates. As was the case for the fast growth rate samples, Ferromagnetic behavior was also observed in magnetization measurements made using a SQUID magnetometer. (See Supplementary Information, Fig. To clearly establish the value of the TC, derivative curves were plotted for both the Hall resistance (Rxy) and magnetization (M) data. In our earlier work, we showed that the derivative curves of the temperature dependent Rxy gave evidence of two Curie temperatures, a low TC of about 20K and a high TC of 80K for the fast growth samples. Similarly, two distinct TC components could also be seen from the derivative plots of the slow growth rate samples shown here: a low TC, TC1, at ~20K and a second higher TC, TC2, with a broad, weaker signal reaching a value greater than 100K; this is shown in Figure We also investigated samples with composition x > 0.85, which we had previously identified as Region 3 in Ref. 22. At the fast growth rates To understand the type of magnetic interactions that may be operating in these materials it would be useful to investigate the relationship between the carrier density and the TC. In Figure Excess Mn has been previously identified as a likely factor in determining the TC value of these MTIs. To explore this, we investigated the effects of growth rate on the elemental concentration of the (MnSb2Te4) x(Sb2Te3)1-x samples using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The elemental contributions of Mn, Sb and Te were plotted as a function of composition (x) in the structure for a set of samples grown with fast and slow growth rates. The results are plotted in Figures The EDS results show that the reduced growth rate enhances the incorporation of Mn into the crystal structure. This can be understood if we consider that at the typical MBE growth temperatures, Sb desorption (and possibly some Te desorption), and its subsequent substitution by Mn, may be favored when growth takes place more slowly. Our magnetic investigations also showed that there are likely two different phenomena giving rise to the two different TC values. Thus, to explain these observations and the exceedingly high TC values that we observe, we propose that the excess Mn is incorporating in both the SL and the QL, allowing the formation of Sb2-yMnyTe3 alloy QLs, as well as Mn-rich MnSb2Te4 SLs. Mn-rich SLs have previously been shown Other studies have also predicted high TC in Sb2-yTMyTe3 alloys for TM = Cr, V, Mn, but the predictions have not been experimentally demonstrated for Mn due to a low Mn incorporation into Sb2Te3 under typical equilibrium crystal growth conditions. Figure We have shown that by reducing the growth rate during MBE growth, the highest TC value for (MnSb2Te4)x(Sb2Te3)1-x structures reported to date, as high as 100K, was achieved. These values are much higher than those values reported by others, 