The lattice thermal conductivity (LTC) of Ga 2 O 3 is an important property due to the challenge in the thermal management of high-power devices. We develop machine-learned neuroevolution potentials for singlecrystalline β-Ga 2 O 3 and κ-Ga 2 O 3 , and apply them to perform homogeneous nonequilibrium molecular dynamics simulations to predict their LTCs. The LTC of β-Ga 2 O 3 was determined to be 10.3 ± 0.2 W/(m K), 19.9 ± 0.2 W/(m K), and 12.6 ± 0.2 W/(m K) along [100], [010], and [001], respectively, aligning with previous experimental measurements. For the first time, we predict the LTC of κ-Ga 2 O 3 along [100], [010], and [001] to be 4.5 W/(m K), 3.9 W/(m K), and 4.0 ± 0.1 W/(m K), respectively, showing a nearly isotropic thermal transport property. The reduced LTC of κ-Ga 2 O 3 versus β-Ga 2 O 3 stems from its restricted low-frequency phonons up to 5 THz. Furthermore, we find that the β phase exhibits a typical temperature dependence slightly stronger than ∼ T -1 , whereas the κ phase shows a weaker temperature dependence, ranging from ∼ T -0.5 to ∼ T -0.7 . Ultra-wide bandgap semiconductors, such as Ga 2 O 3 , diamond, AlN, etc., have also become the focus of attention materials for next-generation electronics and optoelectronics. Owing to a bandgap of about 5 eV, exceptional breakdown electrical field, and cost-effective production, Ga 2 O 3 offers considerable promise for ultra-high power devices applications. The Ga 2 O 3 crystal actually exists in five distinct phases: α, β, γ, σ, and ε (sometimes referred to as κ). Of these, the β phase (space group C2/m) is the most stable one, which has been extensively explored for applications in deep-ultraviolet transparent conductive electrodes, 4 solar blind detectors, Currently, growing large-scale single-crystalline κ-Ga 2 O 3 is a challenging endeavor experimentally, and assessing its LTC is anticipated to be even more demanding. From a computational perspective, its LTC can be predicted using atomistic simulation techniques, such as molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and the combination of Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) with the anharmonic lattice dynamics (ALD) method. While atomic interactions can be derived from either empirical potentials or quantum mechanical density functional theory (DFT) calculations, intricate crystals like κ-Ga 2 O 3 , which possess 40 atoms in their primitive cell, introduce substantial hurdles -accuracy concerns for empirical potentials and computational overhead for DFT. Recently, machine-learned potentials (MLPs)-based largescale MD simulations have been demonstrated to be a reliable approach to calculate the LTC of complex crystals including amorphous silicon In this work, we apply the neuroevolution potential (NEP) framework All DFT calculations were performed using projected augmented wave method 27 with Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functional of generalized gradient approximation Meanwhile, according to widely used conventions, we have optimized the corresponding conventional unit cell as the initial cell for the MD simulation. The κ-Ga 2 O 3 lattice structure remains unchanged, but the number of atoms in the conventional unit cell of β-Ga 2 O 3 is higher than that in the primitive cell. The calculated lattice constants of β-Ga We used the identical method to construct the reference data sets for the β and κ phases of Ga 2 O 3 . The reference structures were obtained by ab initio molecu- lar dynamics (AIMD) simulations and random perturbations. For each phase, the AIMD simulations were run under an isothermal ensemble with temperature increasing linearly from 10 K to 1000 K for 10,000 steps and a time step of 1 fs. We uniformly extracted 1,000 structures from AIMD simulations for each case. For random perturbations, 200 structures were generated with random cell deformations ranging from -4% to 4% and atomic displacements less than 0.1 Å, all based on optimized structures. For both phases, our total data set has 1,200 structures including energy, atomic forces, and virials obtained from DFT calculations as outlined in section II A. We randomly divided the total data set into a training set of 1,000 structures and a test set of 200 structures. After obtaining the training set and test set, we applied the third generation of the NEP framework We performed MD simulation using the GPUMD package (version 3.5) where κ μν is the thermal conductivity tensor, T is the system temperature and V is the system volume. The non-equilibrium heat current ⟨J ⟩ ne is induced by the external driving force F ext i related to a driving-force parameter F e with the dimension of inverse length 38 Here, W i is the virial tensor of atom i. The magnitude F e of the driving-force parameter we used for both phases at different temperatures are small enough to keep the system within the linear-response regime. All MD simulations were conducted at the target temperature using the Nose-Hoover chain method To assess the reliability of our NEP models in capturing the phonon transport properties of β-Ga 2 O 3 and κ-Ga 2 O 3 , we compare the calculated phonon dispersions using both NEP and DFT methods, as shown in Figure After confirming the accuracy of the NEP models, we apply them to calculate LTCs using the HNEMD method. Figure Based on the polar coordinates as shown in Figure To our knowledge, the LTC of κ-Ga 2 O 3 has not been investigated before. Here, we predict the LTC for κ-Ga 2 O 3 to be 4.5 W/(m K), 3.9 W/(m K), and 4.0 ± 0.1 W/(m K) along the [100], [010], and [001] directions, respectively. These values are about one-fifth to half of those of β-Ga 2 O 3 . While the β phase displays a significant LTC anisotropy with an anisotropy index of 1.94 (the maximum-to-minimum ratio of the LTC, see spatial distribution in Figure To elucidate the disparities in the LTC observed between the two phases, we decomposed the LTC as a function of phonon frequency: 37 Here K(t) = i ⟨W i (0) • v i (t)⟩ is the virial-velocity correlation function In summary, we have developed machine-learned NEP models trained against quantum-mechanical DFT data for the β and κ phases of Ga 2 O 3 , which have been demonstrated to be accurate and efficient in predicting energy, atomic forces, virial, and phonon dispersions in both phases. Based on large-scale HNEMD simulations, we reached a consistent prediction with previous experimental measurements for the β phase, and predicted the LTC of the κ phase for the first time. We found that the κ phase has a much lower LTC than the β phase, due to its phonon frequency contributions being limited to below 5 THz compared to the 0 THz to 10 THz range of the β phase. Furthermore, the κ phase exhibits an almost isotropic spatial distribution with an anisotropy index of 1.15 at 300 K, in contrast to the pronounced anisotropy index of 1.94 for the β phase. We also examined the temperature dependence of the LTC in the two phases, and found that the LTC of the β phase follows a temperature dependence slightly stronger than ∼ T -1 , whereas the κ phase shows a weaker temperature dependence from ∼ T -0.5 to ∼ T -0.7 , indicating a significant effect of high-order anharmonicity distinct as in low-LTC materials. Our wok demonstrates that the machine-learned NEP-driven HNEMD simulations can reliably and effectively characterize phonon thermal transport properties for complex crystals such as κ-Ga 2 O 3 , and thus we expect that this approach can be used to explore the LTCs of other phases of Ga 2 O 3 as well. LTC of β and κ phases of Ga2O3 as a function of temperature T along three directions. All the LTCs are normalized by their values at 300 K, respectively.