Defects in atomically thin materials can drive new functionalities and expand applications to multifunctional systems that are monolithically integrated. An ability to control formation of defects during the synthesis process is an important capability to create practical deployment opportunities. Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), a two-dimensional (2D) semiconducting material harbors intrinsic defects that can be harnessed to achieve tuneable electronic, optoelectronic, and electrochemical devices. However, achieving precise control over defect formation within monolayer MoS2, while maintaining the structural integrity of the crystals remains a notable challenge. Here, we present a one-step, in-situ defect engineering approach for monolayer MoS2 using a pressure dependent chemical vapour deposition (CVD) process. Monolayer MoS2 grown in low-pressure CVD conditions (LP-MoS2) produces sulfur vacancy (Vs) induced defect rich crystals primarily attributed to the kinetics of the growth conditions. Conversely, atmospheric pressure CVD grown MoS2 (AP-MoS2) passivates these Vs defects with oxygen. This disparity in defect profiles profoundly impacts crucial functional properties and device performance. AP-MoS2 shows a drastically enhanced photoluminescence, which is significantly quenched in LP-MoS2 attributed to in-gap electron donor states induced by the Vs defects. However, the n-doping induced by the Vs defects in LP-MoS2 generates enhanced photoresponsivity and detectivity in our fabricated photodetectors compared to the AP-MoS2 based devices. Defect-rich LP-MoS2 outperforms AP-MoS2 as channel layers of field-effect transistors (FETs), as well as electrocatalytic material for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). This work presents a single-step CVD approach for in-situ defect engineering in monolayer MoS2 and presents a pathway to control defects in other monolayer material systems. The next-generation of multifunctional, monolithic semiconducting technology integration relies on the ability to readily tune the properties of 2D semiconductors. Achieving reliable and scalable defect engineering in monolayer MoS2 poses significant challenges. Various chemical and physical approaches have been reported to manipulate defects within the 2D lattice including electron/ion beam and UV photon irradiation, In this work, we demonstrate a simple, effective and scalable strategy to inherently regulate the formation and/or the passivation of Vs defects on demand within monolayer MoS2, by tuning the pressure during CVD growth. Our investigation reveals that MoS2 monolayers grown by low-pressure CVD (LP-MoS2) exhibit a higher density of Vs defects, due to the fast kinetics achieved during the growth process. While MoS2 monolayers grown using atmospheric pressure CVD (AP-MoS2) contain fewer Vs defects, owing to oxygen passivation driven by the residual oxygen present in ambient conditions. We show that these controlled and deliberate defect variations can be used to modulate optical, electronic and electrocatalytic properties of as-grown MoS2 monolayers. AP-MoS2 demonstrates two orders of magnitude higher photoluminescence (PL) as compared to LP-MoS2, originating from the passivation of Vs defects which act as photogenerated carrier traps. To further reveal the significant differences in key properties, we fabricated a series of MoS2 based devices (photodetectors, FETs, and water splitting). LP-MoS2 based photodetectors exhibits one order of magnitude higher photoresponsivity and detectivity compared to AP-MoS2 devices, which correlate to the ndoping induced by Vs defects. Similarly, higher carrier density and a lower contact resistance induced by Vs defects accumulatively contributed to an enhanced on-state current, and superior electron mobility in LP-MoS2 FETs. Moreover, the defect rich basal plane of LP-MoS2 leads to an enhanced catalytic activity for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) across the whole surface, and not just on the edges. Therefore, our work provides a simple, one-step CVD approach to readily control the intrinsic atomic defects in monolayer MoS2, leading to a reliable modulation of critical electronic, optoelectronic and catalytic characteristics that can be easily adapted based on specific applications. This strategy can be adapted to enable precise defect engineered monolayer TMDs, with customizable properties for targeted applications in atomically thin optoelectronics, electronics neuromorphic, and catalytic devices. It also opens new avenues for monolithic integration of multifunctional devices based on monolayer MoS2. Figure The line shape of the two spectra (Figure We now demonstrate the role of these defects by fabricating and testing devices based on AP and LP-MoS2 as functionally active elements in photodetectors, FETs and HER. Figure Remarkably, our simple strategy of manipulating the defects in monolayer MoS2 provides a control over the photoresponse behaviour of the devices, which can be leveraged to customize optoelectronic devices. For instance, LP-MoS2 devices are well tailored for emulating biological synaptic activities such as optoelectronic synaptic devices feasible for neuromorphic computation owing to the presence of persistent photoconductivity (PPC). Furthermore, we also investigated defect engineered MoS2 via this approach can be used to tune the FET properties, as presented in Figure FETs shifts towards positive voltages (~ 27 V). This difference in VT between LP-MoS2 and AP-MoS2 devices can also be attributed to the Fermi-level shift owing to defect modulation in MoS2, The output current-voltage characteristics (IDS-VDS) of LP-MoS2 FETs measured at room temperature, shown in Figure This indicates a relatively reduced contact resistance and a smaller Schottky barrier height (SBH) for LP-MoS2 transistors with Ni/Au contact, The SBH is determined by Schottky-Mott rule, but here the Fermi level pinning effect could play a dominant role, FETs demonstrate an average field-effect electron mobility of > 8 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , which is significantly higher than AP-MoS2 FETs (~ 1.3 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ), and is comparable to previously reported values for a typical CVD MoS2 FETs. Finally, we have demonstrated that our proposed approach of in-situ defect engineering could be an effective strategy to tailor the activity of the basal planes of MoS2 and other TMDs toward electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). We employed scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM), which is a powerful technique to measure and visualize electrochemical activity with high spatiotemporal resolution. are not readily accessible. Additionally, given that sulfur deficient active sites are atomic in scale, each individual spot measurement with SECCM will not only include multiple sulfur vacancies but also a large response from the relatively inactive pristine basal plane of MoS2. The combination of LSV measurements in a grid provides a spatially-resolved electrochemical 'map', through which the activity of AP-MoS2 and LP-MoS2, can be compared as shown in Figure These electrochemical maps clearly shows that the LP-MoS2 possesses a higher overall HER activity, presenting with highly active catalytic sites distributed across the surface, compared to the relatively uniform and lower activity of AP-MoS2 (Figure In conclusion we report a novel single step approach to engineer defects in monolayer MoS2 which can be further implemented across other TMDs. This method allows for selective defect passivation and enrichment within individual crystals without compromising on the material integrity. The pressure dependent growth-related defect formation/passivation is confirmed using physical, chemical and optical characterisations and theoretical calculations. We have demonstrated the effectiveness of our in-situ defect engineering strategy for customizing MoS2 crystals, showcasing its applicability for specific purposes such as photodetectors, field-effect transistors (FETs), and electrochemical devices. The potential use of Vs defect rich LP-MoS2 for electronic, neuromorphic and catalytic devices is demonstrated through proof-of-concept devices. Whereas the use of defect passivated AP-MoS2 is showcased for photoluminescence and fast photodetection applications. Hence, this study provides an effective pathway for engineering structure-property relationship of 2D layered TMDs during scalable CVD growth for integration across a wide array of applications. A two-temperature zone tube furnace was used for CVD growth, in which the growth pressure was modulated by two configurations. For AP-MoS2 growth, atmospheric-pressure conditions (760 torr), was maintained by allowing the downstream gas outlet to naturally vent through an exhaust. In contrast, for LP-MoS2 growth, low-pressure conditions (~1 Torr) were maintained by controlling the gas outlet with a rotary vacuum pump. 300 nm SiO2/Si substrates were ultrasonically cleaned by acetone, IPA and water followed by N2 blow drying. An aqueous solution of ammonium molybdate tetrahydrate was prepared and was drop-casted (5μl droplet) onto the cleaned SiO2/Si substrates. After that the substrates were baked at 110 °C for 5 minutes and then loaded into zone-2 of the tube furnace, under the constant flow of 500 sccm Ar for 10 minutes. For both the growth conditions, 200 mg of sulfur (S) powder was placed in zone-1, and heated to 180 °C to create S vapours, which were carried downstream by 70 sccm Ar flow to the growth zone-2, which was maintained at 750 °C during growth of 20 minutes. Two terminal lateral devices were fabricated on as grown MoS2 crystals onto 300 nm SiO2/Si substrate, employing standard photolithography procedures, AZ5214E photoresist (MicroChemicals GmbH) is spin coated, followed by the source/drain electrodes patterning with a maskless aligner (MLA150-Heidelberg Instruments), and developing. 100 nm Au/10 nm Ni metal contacts were deposited via electron beam deposition (PVD75-Kurt J. Lesker) with base pressure of <5 × 10-7 Torr, followed by lift-off process in acetone. A Leica microscope was used to capture the optical images of the as-grown monolayer MoS2 and the MoS2 based devices. Thickness of the different variations of the grown MoS2 crystal was determined using Bruker Dimension Icon AFM with ScanAsyst-air tip. JEOL JEM-F200 CFEG TEM with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV was utilised for physical characterisations i.e. TEM, HRTEM images and SAED patterns. XPS data was acquired for the analysis of elemental composition of the defect enriched and passivated MoS2 using Kratos AXIS Supra XPS spectrometer with 1486.7 eV (Al Kα) X-ray source. The UV-vis characteristics of the different variations of MoS2 was acquired using Microspectrophometer-CRAIC. Raman and PL analysis of the different variations of MoS2 was done using HORIBA LabRAM Raman spectrometer with a 532 nm laser source. Optoelectronic measurements were done using a Keysight 2912A source measurement unit on a probe station (Signatone) at ambient conditions (in air at room temperature). The devices were excited with uncollimated monochromatic LEDs (Thorlabs Inc., emitter size: 1-2.5 mm) of two different wavelengths (565 and 660nm) at a power intensity of 3 mW/cm 2 (calibrated with a commercial photodetector, Newport Corporation) to measure its photodetection capabilities. For the FETs characterization, back-gate device configuration was used, while transferring the as-grown LP-MoS2 and AP-MoS2 samples onto 285 nm SiO2/Si (p ++ ) substrates using polymer assisted transfer method. The FET characteristics were evaluated using Keithley 4200A-SCS Parameter Analyzer on an Everbeing probe station. Hybrid Density Functional Theory (H-DFT) calculations were performed using Gaussian basis set ab-initio package CRYSTAL17 with a HSE hybrid exchange-correlation functional and a double zeta basis set. The Brillouin Zone was sampled using a 9x9x9 Monkhorst-Pack k-pt mesh for the bulk and an 9x9x1 k-pt mesh for the slab calculations. For the DFT calculations a supercell of bulk MoS2 was constructed using the crystallographic information for MoS2 found in the Crystallography Open Database COD ID file 9007660. Grimme D3 corrections were used to account for the dispersion contributions to the energy. After the bulk supercell was geometry optimised, a 5x5 monolayer surface slab of MoS2 was cut from the bulk and structure was geometry optimised again. The monolayer structure was also doped with oxygen and sulfur vacancies were created. Total and atom projected electronic density of states plots for the (i) undoped, (ii) O-doped and (iii)S-point vacancy monolayer structures were taken calculated from the geometry optimised structures. Details on the SECCM setup, environmental control, experimental protocol and post scan data processing are available elsewhere. Ltd., Australia) using conductive silver paint (Microscopy Solutions Pyt. Ltd., Australia) to ensure a robust electrical connection. 