In electrochemistry, reactions and charge-transfer are to a large extent determined by the atomistic structure of the solid-liquid interface. Yet due to the presence of the liquid electrolyte, many surface-science methods cannot be applied here. Hence, the exact microscopic structure that is present under operating conditions often remains unknown. Reflection anisotropy spectroscopy (RAS) is one of the few techniques that allow for an in operando investigation of the structure of solid-liquid interfaces. However, an interpretation of RAS data on the atomistic scale can only be obtained by comparison to computational spectroscopy. While the number of computational RAS studies related to electrochemical systems is currently still limited, those studies so far have not taken into account the dynamic nature of the solid-liquid interface. In this work, we investigate the temporal evolution of the spectroscopic response of the Au(110) missing row reconstruction in contact with water by combining ab initio molecular dynamics with computational spectroscopy. Our results show significant changes in the time evolution of the RA spectra, in particular providing an explanation for the typically observed differences in intensity when comparing theory and experiment. Moreover, these findings point to the importance of structural surface/interface variability while at the same time emphasising the potential of RAS for probing these dynamic interfaces. Solid-liquid interfaces are crucial for many technologically relevant processes, ranging from energy storage in batteries to hydrogen production via water splitting RAS measures the difference in reflectivity for two orthogonal polarisation directions, thus yielding information on the anisotropy of the investigated surface. This anisotropy can originate (almost) exclusively from the investigated crystal surface, as is for instance the case for the (110) surface of fcc metals or the (100) surface of III-V semiconductors in the zincblende structure. The combination of structural and temporal resolution of RAS has made it a popular tool to follow and control epitaxial growth processes While RA spectroscopy allows to monitor changes on surfaces and interfaces, the interpretation of such changes in terms of the underlying atomic structure is non-trivial. In fact, such an interpretation can only be obtained by comparison between experimental and computational spectra or the tight correlation with complementary experimental methods. While the latter is often challenging or not possible at all for electrochemical systems, the former requires a rather evolved computational effort, depending on the level of theory. Before density functional theory (DFT) calculations of large supercells became affordable, early studies used perturbative approaches In this paper, we therefore address the question on how structural dynamics at the solidliquid interface impact reflection anisotropy spectroscopy. As established model system, we investigate the missing row reconstruction of the Au(110) surface in contact with water. We find significant fluctuations of spectral features over the time of the molecular dynamics trajectory which should be taken into account to realistically model electrochemical interfaces for comparison with experiment. In experimental RA spectroscopy, linearly polarised light at near-normal incidence is used to investigate the surface/interface of interest. The difference in reflectivity along two orthogonal crystal directions in the surface plane is measured and analyzed as a function of the energy of the incoming photons. The observed reflectivity difference is normalised by the overall reflectivity, thus resulting in the following expression: Here, it has to be noted that the typically determined quantity in experiment, ∆r/r, refers to the reflectivity, which can be related to the reflectance via Re(∆r/r) ≈ 1/2(∆R/R) In the case of optically isotropic bulk materials, the signal originates exclusively from the (near) surface region. Especially then, RAS is a highly surface-/interface-sensitive probe that allows to identify subtle structural changes, for instance during an electrochemical process. From a theoretical perspective, the optical properties of a given system are determined by its dielectric function, such that accessing RA spectra by computational approaches necessitates the determination of the surface dielectric function, as described in the following equation with ∆ε ′′ s and ∆ε ′ s corresponding to real and imaginary part of the surface dielectric anisotropy, respectively, d to the layer thickness, and λ to the photon wavelength. Finally, A and B are related to real and imaginary part of the complex bulk dielectric function, and These quantities need to be computed starting from a ground-state electronic structure which is typically provided on a DFT-level of theory. The Au(110) surface and its interaction with water was modelled by periodic density functional theory using the CP2K code package Before constructing the Au surface, the unit cell of bulk Au was optimised to determine the lattice parameter. Then, a 2 × 4 Au(110) surface with 6 layers was constructed and a row of Au atoms in the top layer was removed to create the missing row -reconstruction (see Fig. To obtain the corresponding minimum energy configuration, the geometry of the Au-water system was optimised as well. This configuration was then used as starting structure for subsequent ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations. For this purpose a canonical ensemble with a temperature of 300 K, controlled by a Nosé-Hoover thermostat, was set up. The AIMD simulations were run for 5000 steps with a timestep of 0.5 fs to equilibrate the system. From the following 5000 steps, 20 configurations (i.e. every 250 steps) were extracted and selected for excited state calculation. To determine the corresponding RA spectra, the RAS module as implemented in the Yambo code Yambo requires a highly accurate calculation of the electronic ground state of the system and is directly interfaced with Quantum Espresso (QE) Finally, Yambo calculations were performed to obtain the RA spectrum in an energy range of 0 to 5 eV. A real-space cutoff was selected such that only the topmost four layers of the Au slab (including the reconstructed top-layer) contributed to the RA spectrum. As evident from eqn. ( It has to be pointed out that RAS calculation for the here presented system sizes be-came only possible by using a current Yambo code version with enhanced parallelisation. We therefore ported an optimised RAS module to the public development branch of the latest Yambo version (Yambo 5.1) [30]. This module currently features the random phase approximation without local field effects (IP-RPA) to calculate dielectric functions. In the IP-RPA method, the imaginary part of the dielectric function of a slab can be computed as where P x vk,ck are transition matrix elements, ω the angular frequency of the light, while A and L correspond to area and height of the cell. These matrix elements consist of the momentum operator p and the commutator containing the non-local elements of the pseudopotentials V nl , i.e., p + i[V nl , r]. To calculate the RA spectrum stemming from a specific surface structure on a slab, rather than including the whole slab, a so-called real-space cutoff can be introduced and we can rewrite Eq. ( This updated implementation, allowing for a significant speedup and larger system sizes, will become part of one of the next Yambo releases. For a typical RAS experiment with a commercial spectrometer, the measured spectrum corresponds to the anisotropy signal averaged over a macroscopic surface area (several mm squared) and integrated over a time of at least 10 ms. To investigate how the dynamics of the solid-liquid interface of a nm-sized supercell impact the spectroscopic response, we first computed RA spectra along a 2.5 ps-long part of an MD trajectory of the Au surface in contact with water. The spectral response corresponding to the different MD snapshots and the resulting average are depicted in Figure Here, the MD trajectory of the plain Au(110) missing-row reconstruction was also analyzed with respect to the time evolution of the RA spectra (see Fig. This emphasises that computational RA spectra from single arbitrary snapshots of an MD trajectory will typically not give the A comparison of MD-averaged spectra with and without water indicates rather small differences, which are most pronounced in the intermediate energy range from about 2.5 to 3.5 eV (see Fig. - Re ( r/r)x10 3 Frame 7750 Frame 8000 Frame 8250 Frame 8500 Frame 8750 Re ( r/r)x10 3 Frame 9000 Frame 9250 Frame 9500 Frame 9750 A comparison to the RA spectrum of the relaxed, water-free equilibrium structure of the Au(110) missing row reconstruction in vacuum with both average spectra shows significant differences. Overall, the intensity of the averaged RA spectra amounts to only about 1/4 of the intensity obtained for the geometry-optimised, minimum energy surface displayed in Fig. The observed intensity decrease for the MD-averaged spectra can be understood as a consequence of the surface dynamics, which makes the originally present anisotropy less pronounced, thus resulting in a reduced RA signal. This is an important finding, as differences between experimental and calculated spectra are often interpreted as stemming from not fully-covered areas on the surface. Our findings, however, strongly indicate that such differences may also be a consequence of neglecting the surface dynamics: While the geometry-optimised surface structure at 0 K represents ideally the absolute minimum energy configuration of the energy hypersurface with respect to the atomic coördinates, the kinetic energy in the MD simulation will drive the system out of this minimum and can therefore reduce anisotropies of the structure. A remaining question is now the origin of the differences between the averaged RA spectra of the Au surface with and without water. These may either be due to a direct contribution of the water molecules to the RA spectra or due to an indirect impact via a water-induced alteration of the Au surface, i.e. via changes in structure and dynamics of the interface. To resolve this issue, the RA spectra of the water containing structure were recalculated by applying the real space cutoff such that potential contributions of water molecules were excluded. Note that the RA spectra are rescaled to match the intensity of the main peak of the water-free MD average for better comparability. As can be inferred from Fig. In this paper, we investigated the impact of structural variability in the time-domain on reflection anisotropy spectroscopy by computing RA spectra along an MD trajectory of the Au(110) surface, featuring the frequently observed missing-row reconstruction with and without considering the presence of water. In both cases the dynamically changing structure of the Au surface is found to result in a significant reduction of the observed optical anisotropy, while at the same time the main RAS peak becomes more pronounced. This finding indicates that surface and interface dynamics are important when RA spectra are analysed with respect to computational data. Indeed, differences in overall signal intensity between experimental and computed RA spectra are frequently attributed to macroscopic properties of the surface, whereas a microscopic origin in terms of surface/interface variability was so far not considered. Furthermore, the observed differences in the RA spectra between the plain surface and the water-containing setup show that the presence of water molecules changes the surface/interface structure in a well-ordered manner. This points to the high sensitivity of RAS with respect to the solid-liquid or solid-electrolyte interface (SEI), while at the same time it becomes evident that for the interpretation of such interfaces, static calculations that only consider the geometry-optimised, minimum energy structure will not necessarily give the full picture. Finally, we want to emphasise the potential of RAS as a method to study long-standing problems in applied electrochemistry, such as the SEI growth in batteries. When single-crystalline model systems can be prepared, RAS is capable of deciphering the processes that are determininig the initial state of the SEI growth, which are still not well understood in many battery systems. With the more complex electrolytes including large molecules, however, this will be a challenging undertaking. Yet, also for aqueous electrochemistry, a closer approximation of real electrochemical systems will require the analysis of MD trajectories that include both ions and applied potentials [31] C. Hogan, R. Del Sole, and G. Onida, Phys. Rev. B 68, 035405 (2003).