Pinpointing the origin of inefficiency can expedite the process of optimizing the efficiency of perovskite photovoltaics. However, it is challenging to discern and quantify the different loss pathways in a complete perovskite photovoltaic device under operational conditions. To address this challenge, we propose a modified diode model that can quantify bulk/interface defect-assisted recombination and series/shunt resistive losses. By adopting drift-diffusion simulation as the benchmark, we explore the physical meanings of the modified diode model parameters and evaluate the performance of the model for simulation parameters spanning many orders of magnitude. Our evaluation shows that, in most practical cases, the proposed model can accurately quantify all the aforementioned losses, and in some special cases, it is possible to identify the predominant loss pathway. Moreover, we apply the modified diode model to our lab-produced devices (based on Cs0.05FA0.95PbI3 perovskites), demonstrating its effectiveness in quantifying entangled losses in practice. Finally, we provide a set of guidelines for applying the modified diode model and interpreting the results. Source code available at https://github.com/WPT-Lab124/Modified-Diode-Model. With over ten years of development, perovskite photovoltaics have shown tremendous improvement in both efficiency [1] and stability [2] . The record efficiency of single-junction perovskite photovoltaics has reached 25.8%, rivaling that of crystalline silicon photovoltaics The losses in photovoltaics fall into three categories-optical loss, recombination loss, and resistive loss Under 1-Sun irradiance, the performance of perovskite photovoltaics is predominantly limited by the defect-assisted recombination either in the perovskite bulk or at the perovskite/transport layer interfaces, while under higher irradiances or in devices with comparatively large areas, resistive loss can predominate Generally, drift-diffusion (DD) simulations Aiming at both accurate loss modeling and clear physical meaning, in this study, we introduce and analyze the modified diode (MD) model, applied in such a way that it can discern and quantify the following losses: 1) Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination loss occurred in the perovskite bulk; 2) SRH recombination loss occurred at the perovskite/transport layer interfaces; 3) series resistance loss that usually results from the lateral conduction in the transparent electrode and the geometry of the device The MD model draws certain characteristics from both the detailed balance model and the circuit models for photovoltaics, providing a way to discern recombination and resistive losses in practical devices. In the detailed balance model, ideal contacts and infinitely high carrier mobilities are assumed for the limiting case so that the quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) equals qV-the product of the elementary charge, q, and the applied voltage, V. In this way, the radiative recombination current can be described in terms of the QFLS (as a function of V), connecting the external applied voltage with the internal carrier kinetics. To utilize similar relations and to incorporate resistances as with circuit models, in the MD model, we attribute the resistive losses produced by lateral conduction in the transparent electrode and geometry effects where J is the output current density. With this generalization and to account for non-radiative recombination losses, the current density-voltage (JV) relation is given by where J "# is the photocurrent density, J $ is the radiative recombination current density, J %$ is the non-radiative recombination current density, and R !# is the shunt resistance, representing the defects and voids-induced current leakage Of greater interest in practical devices is the non-radiative recombination, which is comprised of several components representing different recombination pathways. In perovskite photovoltaics, recombination losses are predominantly due to the Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination either in the perovskite bulk or at the perovskite/transport layer interfaces Second-order radiative recombination and third-order Auger recombination may predominate with higher carrier concentrations. However, as assessed by an extraction-dependent rate equation model, radiative and Auger recombination prevail only when the illumination irradiance is over several hundreds of Suns where γ )*+, is the bulk SRH recombination rate, L is the active layer thickness, n -is the intrinsic carrier density of the active layer material, U -/ is the interface SRH recombination rate, and n -0 -/ is the ideality factor for interface SRH recombination. The detailed derivation of these equations is given in Supplementary Note 1, along with the necessary assumptions. Later sections of this paper discuss the justification of these assumptions in more detail. Besides, one reason why we fix the value of the ideality factor for bulk SRH recombination is that if the ideality factors for both recombination pathways are allowed to vary, then interpreting bulk SRH recombination current as interface SRH recombination current or vice versa is of no difference in terms of curve fitting, which can lead to questionable uniqueness of the retrieved parameters. To explore the accuracy of the MD model, we use DD simulation results as the benchmarks, assessing how well Eq. ( 1) First, the well-established DD simulator, SCAPS-1D 2) Then we retrieve the unknown parameters in the MD model such that the reproduced JV curves (data points) have minimum residuals with respect to the simulation results. This is essentially a curve-fitting problem. Since R ! and n -0 -/ are in the exponential terms, we leverage the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithm 3) Finally, we use the retrieved parameters to solve the recombination currents, Eq. (2-3), for comparison with the DD simulation results. To begin with, we consider the pin-type device consisting of indium tin oxide (ITO, 150 nm)/PTAA (8 nm)/perovskite (700 nm)/C60 (30 nm)/Ag (100 nm). The parameter values for DD simulations are mostly adopted from the literature At the first attempt, we allow all the five unknown parameters in the MD model (γ )*+, , U -/ , n -0 -/ , R ! , R !# ) to vary within a broad range (from 0 to 10 31 ) in the course of curve fitting. Figure where τ )*+, is the SRH recombination lifetime. This lifetime is an input parameter in the DD simulations, and in practical devices, can be measured by TRPL experiments We can therefore confirm that R !# in the MD model takes on an additional role in describing the recombination currents in the low-voltage region, which increases non-exponentially with applied voltage. Using the retrieved parameters, we can quantitatively evaluate the electrical losses due to different recombination pathways and resistances. However, the impact of each loss pathway is not independent of the others. For example, compared to smaller series resistance, a larger one not only produces a higher resistive loss, but can also build up larger QFLS inside the device, which inevitably leads to higher recombination losses. Thus, simply calculating each loss in terms of power consumption (e.g., at maximum power point) cannot provide useful information. To separate the impact of each loss mechanism, we evaluate the power conversion efficiency (PCE) gains by excluding one specific loss pathway at a time. Figure There is one more parameter in the MD model, n -0 -/ , which requires further scrutiny. Normally, the ideality factor of a photovoltaic device is determined by the Suns-V 45 method rather than curve fitting where J $65 denotes the recombination current density of any type, J 4 is the dark current density, and n -0 is the ideality factor. Though such perception is not accurate in the low voltage region where the carrier concentration is not predominated by voltage injection, the fitting results in Fig. The detailed derivation is given in Supplementary Note 4. With Eq. ( In In simulations, numerous parameters can be varied to produce JV curves that exhibit different features. Out of these parameters, we mostly care about those that are directly related to recombination and resistances; therefore, we modify bulk SRH recombination lifetime, interface SRH recombination velocity, series resistance, and shunt resistance to evaluate the MD model via the cost function. To clearly visualize the cost function, we vary two simulation parameters simultaneously, avoiding high dimensional data. We perform the evaluation procedures as follows. First, starting from the device analyzed in the previous sections, simulation parameters are modified in broad ranges that cover most of the practical cases. For example, the bulk SRH recombination lifetime varies from nanoseconds to microseconds, corresponding to the bad and good bulk layers that can be possibly made in practice. Besides, parameters are varied in a nested way such that the interactive impact of both parameters on the cost function can be assessed. Second, each JV curve simulated in the first step is then analyzed by the MD model, retrieving the values for lumped circuit parameters. Finally, using the retrieved parameters, we can calculate cost functions for each combination of simulation parameters. Figure The device parameters are consistent with those in Table For the same reasons, similar trends can be observed for the same device under 50 Suns irradiance, as shown in Fig. Next, we study the impact of resistances on the cost function. suggesting that a randomized set of initial guesses can be used in order to avoid the local minimum and achieve good fitting. This feature can be easily incorporated into the model via several times of fitting with randomized initial guesses, in which the fitting result with the least residual can be selected as the final result. Furthermore, since irradiance may affect the accuracy of fitting, we can use the parameters retrieved from a specific irradiance that is accurate as the initial guess for fitting under other irradiances. We adopt this strategy by using the series resistance retrieved under 1 Sun as the initial guess for fitting under 50 Suns. The result is shown in Fig. In sum, the MD model can discern and quantify different loss pathways in most of the practical cases, whose accuracy is associated with both interface and bulk SRH recombination. Two special cases, where fitting results can be erroneous, require further interpretation. First, in the case where bulk SRH recombination lifetime is on the order of several nanoseconds or worse, the fitting errors can be significant, and we should directly conclude from the TRPL results that the bulk of the absorption layer needs to be optimized first. Second, when interface SRH recombination is severe, with a good bulk layer and negligible current leakage, a large fitting error in the low-voltage region may be introduced because the usage of a fixed R !# that in part takes on the role of describing recombination currents. In this case, we should attribute the loss due to shunt resistance in the MD model to interface SRH recombination so that the loss analysis can be more accurate. With the knowledge gained from the above analysis, in the following section, we apply the MD model to our lab-produced devices and quantify the corresponding losses in each case. The results give us useful information on the losses in our devices, which in turn validates the effectiveness of this approach. Before analyzing our experimental results, it is necessary to discuss the ion migration that gives rise to hysteresis in many perovskite devices. The mobile ions in the perovskite absorber can lead to an extra complication in interpreting the results obtained by the MD model. Although the well-established DD simulator (SCAPS-1D) is widely used in the literature to study perovskite photovoltaics To explore the capability of the MD model in practice, we apply it to two types of devices that both use Cs0.05FA0.95PbI3 as the active layer composition, but are made in different conditions. The perovskite layer of Device 1 was prepared in ambient air with a humidity of 60%, while Device 2 was made in the N2 glove box with standard procedure. Both devices are of pin type shown in Fig. Next, to evaluate the high irradiance performance of the MD model, we measure the JV curves for Device 2 under irradiances up to 5 W/cm 1 (50 Suns), and apply the MD model to these JV curves. The light source is a 760 nm diode laser, whose power is measured by an integrating sphere photodiode power sensor (Thorlabs S142C), and the sampling rate is still fixed at 5 NPLCs. The fitting results are shown in Fig. As discussed previously, such consistency indicates the accuracy of the fitting results. 2) Fitting errors at short circuit are slightly growing with increasing irradiance. In line with the simulation results shown in Fig. levels. The losses due to interface SRH recombination and series resistance are the two major competing loss pathways in this device. Below 2 W/cm 1 (20 Suns), the interface SRH recombination is the predominant loss; with increasing irradiance, the series resistance gradually becomes predominant. This is consistent with the results in the simulation study shown in Fig. To sum up, in this section, the experimental study demonstrates that the MD model is capable of discerning and quantifying electrical losses in perovskite devices, for both 1 Sun and high irradiance applications. Notably, the details of fitting results are consistent with those in the simulation studies, which further validates the effectiveness of this approach. For reference, we summarize the procedures that we use to analyze the devices in this paper as a set of guidelines. With the following steps, one can use the MD model to quantify and analyze the losses in perovskite photovoltaics: 1) Measure the JV curve of the device. The MD model is expected to be performant when applied to steady-state JV curves even in the presence of mobile ions. Thus, the scanning rate during measurement should be low enough for the completion of ionic motions, or a set of stabilized currents at fixed voltages (SCFV) can be measured to directly produce the steady-state JV curve 2) Measure the necessary parameters for describing bulk SRH recombination. To properly describe the bulk SRH recombination current in Eq. ( Step 1 with the parameters measured in Step 2. For convenience, one can directly use our MATLAB implementation to apply the MD model, which is open-source online 4) Quantify the losses in terms of normalized PCE gain. The effect of a loss mechanism in a complete device under operational conditions can be quantified by a specific indicator such as the normalized PCE gain proposed in this paper. One can also devise other indicators, so long as the dependence among different losses is taken into account. After pinpointing the predominant loss pathway, one can refer to Table There are several cases that can cause a large fitting error. First, if the bulk SRH recombination lifetime is on the order of several nanoseconds or worse, the fitting error may be large; in this case, we should conclude from the TRPL results that the bulk of the absorption layer needs to be optimized first. Second, in the case of severe interface SRH recombination or high irradiance, with a good bulk layer and negligible current leakage, a large fitting error in the low-voltage region may be introduced because the usage of a fixed R !# that in part takes on the role of describing recombination currents; despite the error, the fitting results in the exponential region are accurate (as in Fig. As a circuit model that can accurately quantify electrical losses, the MD model can be generalized or included in a larger framework, in order to solve different problems. Here, we list three potential research topics where the MD model can play an important role: 1) The MD model can be coupled with an optical model such as the transfer matrix method to extend the analysis that includes optical loss. Since the MD model can accurately quantify electrical losses, the accuracy of the overall loss analysis can be improved. 2) The MD model itself can be generalized to other photovoltaic technologies where two competing recombination processes are entangled, so long as the characteristic of one process can be identified by experimental techniques. 3) The MD model can be applied as the elementary component in a distributed circuit model In this work, the MD is proposed to quantify bulk/interface defect-assisted recombination and series/shunt resistive losses. Combined simulation and experimental studies show that in most practical cases, the MD model can accurately quantify all the aforementioned losses, and in some special cases including severe bulk or interface SRH recombination, it is possible to pinpoint the predominant loss pathway. Moreover, at higher irradiances, the MD model also demonstrates good performance with high accuracy in both simulation and experimental studies, which makes it feasible for evaluating photovoltaics in applications such as concentrators and optical wireless power transfer. Finally, we provide a set of guidelines for applying the MD model and interpreting the results. We make the source code freely available online, which will hopefully facilitate the design of efficiency-targeted optimization strategies for researchers in this field. Likewise, the interface SRH recombination at the transport layer/perovskite interface can be described by the SRH formulation as where the superscripts of ± denote quantities evaluated at either the transport layer or perovskite side of the interfaces, and S % , S " are electron and hole recombination velocities However, at the interfaces, there is no simple relation between electron and hole densities that can be captured for simplifying Eq. (S4); hence, we use Eq. ( To study the performance of the modified diode (MD) model, we use drift-diffusion (DD) simulation results as the benchmarks for comparison. We use the well-established DD simulator, SCAPS To investigate the impact of ions on the steady-state performance of perovskite photovoltaics, SolarDesign The details of modeling methods are described as follows. The governing equations of the drift-diffusion model without regarding to mobile ions are: where J % = -qμ % n∇ψ + qD % ∇n and J " = -qμ " p∇ψ -qD " ∇p are the electron and hole current densities, respectively. The electron (hole) diffusion coefficient satisfies the Einstein relation D %(") = μ %(") k . T/q and μ %(") is the electron (hole) mobility. Furthermore, G = G "# + G 0?$, is the total generation rate, where G "# is the photon generation and G 0?$, is the dark generation at thermal equilibrium. Similarly, R = R $?0 + R %4%$?0 is the recombination rate at non-equilibrium states where R $?0 is the radiative recombination rate and R %4%$?0 is the non-radiative recombination rate. In perovskite photovoltaics, the non-radiative recombination is mainly due to the following defect-assisted Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination. The bulk SRH recombination rate is given by where τ % and τ " are the lifetimes of excess electrons and holes, respectively. The trap level E @ in the bandgap is used to compute the densities of electrons and holes with respect to the trap level, i.e., n @ = N A exp[(E @ -E A )/k . T] and p @ = N B exp[(E B -E @ )/k at the interfaces are given by where the superscripts ± denote quantifies evaluated at either the left-or right-hand side of the perovskite/transport layer interfaces, respectively. To account for mobile ions in the perovskite layer, in Eq. (S10), Poisson's equation needs to be modified to include the immobile cation vacancies N E and halide ion vacancy density P; also, a continuous equation for ions needs to be added. where F F = D G ∇P + μ G P∇ψ is the flux of ion vacancy density, and D G and μ G are the ionic diffusion coefficient and mobility, respectively. To study the impact of each loss pathway on the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of photovoltaics, we introduce an approach to calculating the normalized PCE gains. As discussed in Section 2.2, the influences of each loss are coupled in such a way that reducing one loss can give rise to a decrease in the others. We choose the maximum power point (MPP) of the device, where the PCE is evaluated, as the point of interest for comparison. Based on the device involving all losses at hand, in the DD simulation or the MD model, we exclude each loss pathway one at a time and calculate the PCE gains with respect to each loss. In the DD simulation, we exclude the loss pathway by making the corresponding simulation parameter inactive, while in the MD model, we do this by deleting the corresponding term in Eq. ( This indicator can be viewed as a quantity that describes the influence of a loss pathway in percentage, which demonstrates their relative importance in a complete device. Taking series resistance into account, the recombination current is given by Assuming that the ideality factor, n -0 , and the series resistance, R ! , are independent of applied voltage (this is consistent with the parameter retrieval process of curve fitting that produces voltage-independent parameters), we can find an expression for n -0 by differentiating the above Using Eq. (S9), the calculated n -0 varies with voltage, and the retrieved value lies in the exponential region, close to the minimum differential ideality factor, as shown in Fig. The devices in this paper were made from commercially available products. C60, FAI, PbI2, Note: The parameter values are adopted from the references general cases, perovskite photovoltaics can have various parameters, different material compositions, and even distinct device structures such as nip type. In order to evaluate the performance of the MD model applied to general cases, we introduce a cost function that adds up a particular form of residuals, predominate in the cases we consider, the errors introduced by these currents, |J 88 $65 -J 98. $65 |, should be taken into account, and other recombination currents are neglected. Third, the errors are weighted to the photocurrent, J "# , such that the cost is normalized with respect to the irradiance. With these considerations, the cost function weighs the evaluation metric of major concern, i.e., how accurate the MD model describes the SRH recombination currents and output current in comparison to DD simulations: the smaller the cost function, the better the MD model performs. equation with respect to V, i.e., This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722