Optical switches based on phase change materials (PCMs) hold great promise for various photonic applications such as telecommunications, data communication, optical interconnects, and signal processing. Their non-volatile nature as well as rapid switching speeds make them highly desirable for developing advanced and energy-efficient optical communication technologies. Ongoing research efforts in exploring new PCMs, optimizing device designs, and overcoming existing challenges are driving the development of innovative and high-performance optical switches for the next generation of photonics applications. In this study, we design and experimentally demonstrate a novel optical amplitude switch design incorporating PCM antimony trisulfide (Sb2S3) based on the Brewster angle phenomenon. Recent advancements in nanofabrication have led to significant technological breakthroughs in devices that rely on the interaction between light and nanostructured materials. Sb2S3 films were deposited by chemical bath deposition (CBD) at 15°C using antimony chloride (SbCl3) and sodium thiosulfate (Na2S2O3) as precursors. At that temperature, SbCl3 was dissolved in 2.5 g of acetone and 16.2 g of Na2S2O3 was dissolved in 100 mL of deionized (DI) water. These two solutions were mixed, and then DI water was added to obtain a total volume of 178 ml of the liquid phase. The final mixture was vigorously stirred for 15 minutes. The glass substrates were cleaned in 5% NaOH at 90°C followed by 1N HCl, and absolute ethanol. After rinsing in DI water, the glass slides were dried at 80°C and then immersed in a vertical position in a beaker. The most important aspect for controlling the thickness in CBD is the deposition time. The duration the substrate is immersed in the deposition bath directly impacts the thickness. Longer deposition times generally result in thicker films, while shorter times produce thinner ones. Timing is essential for achieving the desired thickness. The Sb2S3 deposition time was between 2 -4 h to have a film thickness in the range 100 nm to 1 μm. The optical properties of Sb2S3 thin films, namely the pseudodielectric function ε = ε1 i ε2 = ( n i k ) 2 , being n and k the refractive index and extinction coefficient respectively, were measured from 0.75 (1650 nm) to 6.00 eV (205 nm) at room temperature using spectroscopic ellipsometry (Woollam 2000) operating at an angle of incidence varying from 55 to 75°. Annealing of the as-deposited Sb2S3 was performed inside an enclosed heating cell for ellipsometry (Linkam THMSEL600). Films, both as deposited and after an annealing cycle, were structurally characterized by Raman spectroscopy. The characterization was performed with a Horiba LabRam Aramis VIS 100 microscope objective (NA = 0.90) and excitation wavelength of λ = 532 nm. Raman spectroscopy measurements were performed to address the crystallinity of the CBD Sb2S3 before and after annealing. The optical system used for the spectral reflectance measurements is composed of a motorized Nikon Eclipse (ME600D) microscope with a 10 objective (NA = 0.30), an Ocrean Optics USB200 spectrograph, and a spectral source OSL2 Fiber Illuminator. The reflectance spectra were processed and analyzed using in-house software fixing an integration time of 300 ms and an average scan of 30 cycles. For the angular reflectance measurements, the sample was placed on a rotating platform. The incident beam, coming from a polarized Helium-neon laser (λ = 633 nm), was reflected on the sample and then collected in a photodetector (NewPort-MODEL 818) connected to an optical power meter (NewPort-MODEL 1830-C). The reflectance of multilayer structures was calculated using the Transfer Matrix Method (TMM). Figure Figure In order to test the accuracy of the proposed theoretical model based in the TMM, reflectance measurements on the fabricated a-Sb2S3 and c-Sb2S3 films on SiO2 were performed at normal incidence with unpolarized light and compared with equivalent simulated values. Figures show the reflectance of the a-Sb2S3 and c-Sb2S3 films respectively. The black line represents the mean reflectivity, while the shadowed indicates the standard deviation. Individual reflectance measurements are displayed in Figure shows a main dip at 625 nm that, upon amorphous to crystalline phase-change, shifts to higher wavelengths ( 675 nm, see Fig. The calculated reflectance for the a-Sb2S3 and c-Sb2S3 films on SiO2 using the model described above are shown in Figs. where nPCM and nair are the refractive index of the phase change material and air, respectively. The Brewster phenomenon on Sb2S3 films was investigated through reflectance measurements for fixed wavelength λ = 633 nm using p-polarized light and modifying the angle of incidence. Figures The calculated reflectance for a-Sb2S3 and c-Sb2S3 is shown in Figs. Experimental and simulated values are in good agreement. The angle at which the reflectance reaches its minimum corresponds to the Brewster angle. Figure The Brewster angle for a-Sb2S3 cannot be directly obtained from the experimental data because of the absence of a well defined minimum in the reflectance curve (see Fig. Another consideration relies in the fact that the Brewster phenomenon is observed at interfaces between non-absorbing materials (i.e., extinction coefficient k = 0). This condition is met when the photon energy of the incident beam lies below the absorption onset of both materials forming the interface. In contrast, if the one or both materials exhibit absorption (i.e., extinction coefficient k ≠ 0), a similar effect can be observed know as pseudo-Brewster. In the reflectance values of Figs. Therefore, for this specific angle incidence, C present three maximum values as shown Fig. For a practical implementation of the present proposed optical switch, a light guide should be designed on top of the PCM in such a way that the light entering the switching system hits the surface separation guide-PCM, at the Brewster condition for one of the PCM phases (OFF state) and not for the other (ON state). The reflected energy is in turn symmetrically collected to continue its propagation along the guide. Under this configuration, the switching condition can be even improved by using a symmetrical arrangement in such a way that the guide and the substrate are manufactured with the same material. It is important to highlight that the reflected electromagnetic energy for the ON state is low, of the order of 1% of the incident one, but this is not a serious drawback for the switching purposes given the high values of C obtained. Different PCMs are suitable for this application. The choice of PCM is directly linked to the specific region of the spectrum in which the optical switch operates. As previously mentioned, it's important to highlight that the Brewster phenomenon exclusively emerges when the material presents no losses, precisely when it falls within the optical transparency window of the PCM. For completeness and as an example, Figs.4(e,f) shows the simulated optical contrast in dBs, considering p-polarization, as a function of angle of incidence and wavelength for amorphous and crystalline samples while maintaining an equal thickness for both phases (255 nm and 290 nm, respectively). Ensuring equal film thickness in both phases upon phase-change promotes C. For instance, at an angle of incidence of 55°, the maximum value of C experimentally measured of 22 dB at 1080 nm and theoretically predicted to be C = 33 dBs at 1045 nm, is increased to C = 38 dBs at 930 and 1050 nm by keeping the thickness of the layer to either 255 nm or 290 nm respectively. for p-polarization, as a function as a function of the angle of incidence and wavelength amorphous and crystalline samples with equal thickness of (e) 255 nm and (f) 290 nm for both phases. In conclusion, we conducted optical and structural characterizations on both amorphous and crystalline samples of Sb2S3 with the aim of investigating the feasibility of designing an amplitude optical switch based on the Brewster angle phenomenon working on the reflectance configuration. The designed optical switch consist of a simple stack of PCM Sb2S3 film on a SiO2 substrate. Under this configuration, we successfully experimentally demonstrated an optical contrast of 22 dB upon amorphous-to-crystalline phase change of the Sb2S3 film. To implement this configuration in an optical circuit, a light guide should be designed on top of the PCM in such a way that the light entering the switching system hits the surface separation, guide-PCM, under the Brewster condition for one of the PCM phases (OFF state) and not for the other (ON state). The contrast between both states can be even improved by using a symmetrical arrangement: guide and substrate made of the same material. These findings demonstrate the potential of leveraging the Brewster angle effect in the development of efficient optical switch devices, paving the way for novel advancements in the field of optoelectronics and nanophotonics for communications and optical memories applications. Acknowledgments. The authors acknowledge Pedro Valle for reflectance measurements and helpful discussion. Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.