CrI3, as a soft van der Waals layered magnetic material, has been widely concerned and explored for its magnetic complexity and tunability. In this work, high quality and large size thin CrI3, V and Mn doped single crystals were prepared by chemical vapor transfer method. A remarkable irreversible Barkhausen effect was observed in CrI3 and CrMn0.06I3, which can be attributed to the low dislocation density that facilitates movement of the domain walls. In addition, the introduction of the doping element Mn allows higher saturation magnetization intensity. Cr0.5V0.5I3 exhibits substantially increased coercivity force and larger magnetocrystalline anisotropy compared to CrI3, while kept similar Curie temperature and good environmental stability. The first principles calculations suggest direct and narrowed band gaps in Cr0.5V0.5I3 and VI3 comparing to CrI3. The smaller band gaps and good hard magnetic property make Cr0.5V0.5I3 an alternative choice to future research of spintronic devices. Two-dimensional (2D) layered ferromagnetic (FM) materials have been the subject of extensive research due to their highly tunable physical properties that show great potential in fundamental physics and next generation spintronics In recent years, in addition to the studies on layer control of CrI3, great efforts have been made to modify its magnetic behavior, such as hydrostatic pressure In this work, a high-quality and large-size CrI3 single crystal was prepared in a relative short time with the method of chemical vapor transport (CVT). By comprehensive study of its structure and physical properties, a significant Barkhausen effect was observed during a period of increasing magnetic field. Mn and V ions are successfully introduced to the matrix CrI3 phase by similar method. It is found that V doped sample (Cr0.5V0.5I3) reveals larger magnetocrystalline anisotropy and higher coercivity force (Hc) compared to CrI3, while Mn doping can possibly affect the structure of CrI3 and enhance the average magnetic moment of Cr ion, leading to the higher saturation magnetization. Our results could possibly provide better choices when constructing spintronic devices based on CrI3. Thin CrI3 were synthesized by chemical vapor transfer reaction, using chromium powder and anhydrous iodine beads as raw materials in a molar ratio of 1:3, sealed in a vacuumed quartz tube. The length, inner diameter and wall thickness of the quartz tubes were 19.5 cm, 16 mm and 2 mm, respectively. The quartz tube was placed in a dual-temperature zone tube furnace with one side was set at 923 K, where a total mass of 0.5 g of raw material was put, and the other side where the crystal would grow was kept at a temperature of 623 K. This temperature gradient was maintained for 3 days and then the tube was cooled to room temperature. Finally, a large-size of CrI3 single crystal (about 9 mm in dimension) was formed, as seen in Fig. Thin CrI3 as a layered van der Waals (vdW) material exhibits a monoclinic phase with space group C2/m at room temperature and a rhombohedral phase with space group R3 _ at low temperature, and the corresponding phase transition temperature is reported to be about 210-220 K In the monoclinic phase, each layer of Cr 3+ is coordinated by six nonmagnetic I -to form an octahedron, which further shares edges to build a honeycomb network. In the rhombohedral phase, the structure consists of three layers of I-Cr-I stacked along the c*-axis, and the three adjacent layers are bonded by weak vdW forces to form a honeycomb lattice The V and Mn doped samples were both obtained by similar method, only the atomic ratio and low temperature end changes to Cr:V/Mn:I of 0.5:0.5:4 and 723 K, respectively. After scanning their composition by EDS, it is noted that despite the obtained V doped CrI3 has the designed proportion, the atomic ratio of Mn is only 0.06 (generally below 0.1). By repeated measurements, the existence of Mn atom is confirmed, and the ratio varies between 0.04-0.08. The low solubility of Mn in CrI3 may be originated from that there is no isostructural phase of MnI3 to CrI3, hence the extra Mn is assumed to occupy the interstitial sites, like the vdW gaps. But for V doping, as VI3 has the same structure to CrI3, they are supposed to substitute each other more easily. The size of the doped samples was reduced to a maximum lateral size of about 4-8 mm or even smaller, but the sample thickness was almost unchanged. For VI3, the growing temperatures in the high and low temperature regions were changed to 673 K and 493 K, respectively. The maximum dimension of VI3 single crystal can reach to 1 cm, but it has lower stability and easier to dissolve in air. The surface morphology of the samples was observed using a Carl Zeiss optical microscope (Axio Vert. A1). The X-ray powder diffraction (Bruker-AXS D8 Advance) was applied to analyze the phase purity and structure of the samples. The composition and elemental composition were examined using energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) in a scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI Quanta 250F). The magnetic properties are characterized using the Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design), which measures temperature and magnetic field in the range of 10-300 K and -4-+4 T, respectively. First principles calculations were performed with the projector augmented wave (PAW) method, as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Fig. A simple schematic diagram about the domain wall displacement is shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have successfully synthesized large-size and high-quality CrI3, VI3, Cr0.5V0.5I3 and CrMn0.06I3 single crystals by optimization of the preparation process and investigated their structural and magnetic properties. Remarkable irreversible Barkhausen jump was observed in the M-H curves of thin CrI3 crystal. The low dislocation density could possibly account for it. The large Barkhausen signal in layered CrI3 can offer a good platform to investigate the mechanism of this effect. Besides, the specific domain motion could be interesting due to the layered structure and is worth to be investigated in more detail by future in-situ domain observation or micro-magnetic simulations. By small doping of Mn into CrI3, the saturation magnetization can substantially enhance, while the magnetization process is almost maintained. For V doping, both the magnetocrystalline anisotropy and coercivity significantly grows, making Cr0.5V0.5I3 a good hard magnet, while keeping similar Tc and good environmental-stability as CrI3. By analyzing their electronic structures with first principles calculations, it is found that the indirect band gap in CrI3 turns to direct ones in Cr0.5V0.5I3 and VI3, which also exhibit smaller gap magnitude. Moreover, the V contained sample exhibit large electron correlation effect, indicating great modulation possibility of their transport properties.