We analytically study friction and dissipation of a driven bead in a 1D harmonic chain, and analyze the role of internal damping mechanism as well as chain length. Specifically, we investigate Dissipative Particle Dynamics and Langevin Dynamics, as paradigmatic examples that do and do not display translational symmetry, with distinct results: For identical parameters, the friction forces can differ by many orders of magnitude. For slow driving, a Goldstone mode traverses the entire system, resulting in friction of the driven bead that grows arbitrarily large (Langevin) or gets arbitrarily small (Dissipative Particle Dynamics) with system size. For a long chain, the friction for DPD is shown to be bound, while it shows a singularity (i.e. can be arbitrarily large) for Langevin damping. For long underdamped chains, a radiation mode is recovered in either case, with friction independent of damping mechanism. For medium length chains, the chain shows the expected resonant behavior. At the resonance, friction is non-analytic in damping parameter γ, depending on it as γ -1 . Generally, no zero frequency bulk friction coefficient can be determined, as the limits of small frequency and infinite chain length do not commute, and we discuss the regimes where "simple" macroscopic friction occurs. Dissipation in matter is an ubiquitous phenomenon and is a key ingredient in understanding material behaviour in presence of external forces. Tailoring dissipation in solids is essential for low-friction technologies such as lubricants Recent works investigate the dependence of friction on the thickness of the involved substrate or coating A fundamental theoretical question concerns the appearance of friction and dissipation from integration of degrees of freedom In this paper, we analyze the simple textbook system of a driven one-dimensional (1D) harmonic chain. It allows analytical treatment and yields a plethora of insights for the friction of the driven bead, which, to our knowledge, have not been reported. We study the role of microscopic damping as well as chain length, by computing the dissipated power and frequency dependent friction coefficient of the periodically driven end bead of the chain. We demonstrate that the macroscopic friction coefficient is highly sensitive to the microscopic damping mechanism. We observe the following phenomena. i) For both Langevin and DPD cases, the limits of zero frequency and infinite chain lengths do not commute, as they correspond to fundamentally different modes. It is thus not immediately obvious, how a simple small frequency result may emerge. ii) For short chains, friction results from a systemspanning Goldstone mode. This mode yields a friction coefficient that grows arbitrarily large (small) with system size for Langevin (DPD) cases. We discuss the (partly possible) mapping of these cases to the center of mass diffusion of a Rouse polymer iii) For long chains, the friction for DPD is bound (Eq. ( The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the model of a harmonic 1D chain along with its equations of motions, the boundary conditions and the damping schemes. We also present the resulting displacement profile in presence of external driving. We introduce the macroscopic friction coefficient Γ in Section III. In Sec. IV and Sec. V, we derive and analyze the resulting frequency dependent friction coefficient and analyze it in different regimes of driving frequency, damping coefficient, and chain lengths in presence of DPD damping and Langevin, respectively. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI by discussing our results along with possible experimental implications and future research directions. FIG. We consider a 1D harmonic chain as shown in Fig. ( The displacements {u n } can be Fourier transformed in space and time by introducing a lattice spacing a, yielding ũq (ω) = N n=0 e i(qna-ωt) u n (t)dt. Eq. (1) thus yields the familiar dispersion relation We use Ω 0 later as the main unit for frequency. Next we introduce microscopic damping and consider two paradigmatic types: Langevin and DPD damping, as shown in Fig. In presence of Langevin damping (see Fig. Note that γ L carries units of frequency, which allows for easy comparison to inertial contributions. The dispersion relation is obtained to be, where we note that comparing ω and γ L yields over-and underdamped cases, as will be discussed below. We introduced dimensionless frequency and damping, ω ≡ ω Ω0 and γL ≡ γ L Ω0 . For later reference, we explicitly give the complex wavenumber q L by solving Eq. ( The displacement profile is u n (ω) = C 1 (ω)e iq L (ω)na + C 2 (ω)e -iq L (ω)na , with the constants C 1 and C 2 determined from the boundary conditions introduced in subsection II C below. The real and imaginary parts of the wave number in Eq. ( Re qL , and the decay length l L a ≡ lL = 1 Im qL . Notably, this model is mathematically similar to the Rouse model for a polymer chain In presence of DPD damping (see Fig. The damping coefficient γ D carries, as γ L , units of frequency, and we use γD ≡ γ D Ω0 , dimensionless. The dispersion relation for the case of DPD damping is, which shows that, comparing ωγ D to unity distinguishes over-and underdamped limits. Solving explicitly for q D (ω), Naturally, also here, the real and imaginary parts of the wave number in Eq. ( We introduce so called strain-controlled driving, where the displacement of the bead n = 0 is prescribed to be with ω 0 the driving frequency and U 0 the strain amplitude. The other end of the chain is held fixed, i.e., anchored so that For the monochromatic driving of Eq. ( which introduces the Fourier amplitude u n (ω 0 ) of bead n with 0 ≤ n ≤ N , u n (ω 0 )/U 0 ≡ ũn (ω 0 ). For the given boundary conditions, it is given by For the Langevin case, this is explicitly, and for DPD, A. Dissipated Power The dissipated power P dis is defined as the rate of work done when driving the top bead n = 0. It takes the general form as an average over the driving period 2π ω0 , u0 (t) = -ω 0 U 0 sin(ω 0 t) is the prescribed velocity of the end bead n = 0 according to Eq. ( The quantity of interest is the friction coefficient Γ(ω 0 ) of the bead n = 0. We will also refer to it as the macroscopic friction coefficient to distinguish from microscopic damping γ. Using the above definitions of Fourier amplitudes, it can be extracted as the ratio i.e., it is proportional to the component of F in phase with the velocity of the driven bead. Comparing Eq. ( We will in the following exclusively discuss the behavior of Γ, from which P dis may be extracted via Eq. ( We start by investigating the case of DPD damping. The expression for the force acting on the driven bead in presence of DPD damping is given by It is expressed in terms of the difference of displacements of bead 0 and bead 1, and contains a contribution from both the potential (spring) as well as the damping (dashpot) connecting these particles in Fig. We will in the following consider several regimes of chain length compared to wavelength and decay length. For a short chain, N ≪ λD , lD , we expand the sinus in Eq. ( Notably, to leading orders, u is purely real: The imaginary part is of order ω 3 0 , i.e., an imaginary term of order ω 0 is missing: It cancels between numerator and denominator in Eq. ( Eq. ( Fig. For a long chain, we use the exponential representation of sin(x) = 1 2i (e ix -e -ix ). If the chain is long compared to the decay length l D , N ≫ lD , we can neglect the term e iN aq D . The dependence on N cancels in Eq. ( The long chain thus shows the expected behavior of an exponentially damped profile, with the meanings of lD and λD becoming explicit. This is inserted in Eq. lim Eq. This shows that Γ is determined from { lD , λD }, or from {ω 0 , γD }. The mixed form of Eq. ( The friction of the long DPD chain is thus bound by lim Regarding in more detail we start with the underdamped limit, γD ω0 ≪ 1, for which generally the first term in Eq. ( which, for allowed values of λD ≥ 2 within the Brillouin zone varies between 0 and 1. This result is notably independent of the damping coefficient γD , and corresponds to radiation of waves, i.e., in this case, energy is transported away, and dissipated far away from the source. Taking the continuum limit of λD ≫ 1, Notably, in this limit, Γ is independent of ω0 , i.e., it corresponds to the limit where a simple macroscopic result for friction is found. The connection to radiation is easily seen, as P dis = 1 2 M Ω 0 ω 2 0 U 2 0 , i.e., it is kinetic energy of a bead, 1 2 M ω 2 0 U 2 0 , which is excited at rate Ω 0 , i.e., via a wave traveling with the speed of sound. Such radiation was also found for a small probe in a 3D system in At the end of the Brillouin zone, i.e., as λD → 2, this term vanishes. It corresponds to ω → 2 from below. Of course, λD cannot be smaller than 2 This is the friction coefficient of a chain where only the driven bead moves, and the rest of the chain is at rest. This case, where no wave is emitted, is reminiscent of evanescent waves In the overdamped limit, γD ω0 ≫ 1, the second term in Eq. ( In this limit, the friction coefficient behaves as √ ω0 , i.e., in the overdamped limit, there is no obvious regime of simple frequency independent macroscopic friction coefficient. Interestingly, Γ in Eq. ( As a side note, we remark again that the overdamped limit can be mapped on a viscous fluid. Indeed, the result of (32) corresponds to the (shear) friction felt by a wall moving laterally in an incompressible fluid with shear viscosity γD If, in the overdamped limit, we reach the end of the Brillouin zone at ω ≈ γD , we find which is again the friction of the bead when the second bead is not moving. The crossover between Eq. (32) and Eq. ( The different friction scaling regimes are further elucidated in Fig. Eqs. ( The amplitude ũn (ω 0 ) in Eq. ( This yields for the friction coefficient, for both Langevin and DPD damping, in this limit, This relation shows that the friction coefficient Γ, for a given finite N , can grow to arbitrary large values. Notably, it diverges with Im[q] → 0, providing the counter intuitive observation that smaller damping can lead larger friction. This originates from the fact that as the radiated waves are reflected a large number of times, each damping unit (bond) encounters multiple radiation waves and consequently leads to larger damping. On the contrary, for (N -1) Re[q] = pπ with integer p, the numerator of ũ1 (ω 0 ) gets small, so that, for underdamped chains Γ shows minima there. This situation has been termed anti-resonance Specifically, for DPD, regarding Eq. ( In presence of Langevin damping, the Fourier amplitude of the force F 0 acting on the driven particle is given by This force has two components, it results from the interaction with the second particle (position u 1 ) as well as the trivial part, i.e., the Langevin damping of the driven bead (via coefficient γ L ), the second term in Eq. The contribution of the first term to friction is found by inserting the expressions for u 0 (ω 0 ) and u 1 (ω 0 ) from Eq. ( As for the DPD case, we start with the limit of small ω0 , as this corresponds to large wave-and decay lengths. In this limit The real part is to leading order, as expected, identical to the DPD case. In contrast to that, here a term linear in ω0 exists, and it will yield the bead's friction coefficient. For the force amplitude, we obtain, Again, the real part is the anticipated Goldstone result, vanishing as 1/N for large N . In contrast, the Goldstone mode here leads to an imaginary part which grows with N . Following Eq. ( As already mentioned, this result if fundamentally different from the DPD result, Eq. ( The numerically exact result for Γ, as a function of N , is plotted in Fig. Finally, we remark that the friction of Eq. ( If the chain is long, N ≫ lL , we repeat the steps of subsection IV C, and expand the sinus for large imaginary argument, This is inserted in Eq. ( lim Let us be reminded that the first term in Eq. ( showing that Γ is fully determined from either lD and λD , or from ω0 and γD . Before discussing specific limits, let us ask whether Γ is bound as for the DPD case in Eq. As for DPD, we start with the underdamped case, which is here given for ω0 ≫ γL . Using formally lL ≫ 1, we have which also agrees with the DPD case, Eq. ( This result, corresponding to the radiation mode, is also identical to the result from DPD damping in the underdamped limit (up to the trivial term). As the second term in Eq. ( The end of the Brillouin zone, i.e., λL = 2 is reached for ω0 ≈ 2. At this point, the second term in Eq. ( The overdamped limit corresponds to ω0 ≪ γL . In the continuum limit, λL /(2π) = lL = 2/γ L ω0 , and we have, mentioned pole is approached. As long as lD ≪ N , Γ grows with lL , as the number of particles contributing to dissipation grows (second equality in Eq. ( We remark that the result of Eq. ( In the overdamped limit, the end of Billouin zone is reached for ω0 γL ≈ 8 , and the second term in Eq. ( which, as for the DPD chain, is dominated by the bare friction of the driven bead. Figure The different regimes are summarized in Fig. The discussion of resonant damping in Sec. IV D is analogous here, i.e., Eqs. ( The resonant behaviour requires γL ≪ ω0 ≈ π/N , i.e., a sufficiently small value of γL . Fig. Interestingly, in contrast, for DPD, occurrence of (anti-)resonances requires γD ω ≪ 1 and ω0 ≈ π/N , i.e., they can be observed for any value of damping parameter γ D , for sufficiently large chain length N and small driving frequency ω0 . We have presented exact results for the dissipation of a simple 1D harmonic chain under oscillatory driving, for two distinct types of dissipation mechanisms: Langevin damping and Dissipative Particle Dynamics (DPD) damping. What have we learned? As a main insight, the results from DPD and Langevin damping drastically differ. They differ quantitatively, by orders of magnitude, and qualitatively, via different scaling behaviors. This insight manifests the importance of momentum conservation for non-equilibrium phenomena like friction. This insight is also important for modeling friction analytically and in computer simulations, in the desire to compare to experiments. For DPD damping, a short chain shows a small friction coefficient, Γ = γD N , since relative atomic motion is small. A chain that is long compared to absorption length obeys a bound, Γ ≤ 1 + 2γ D . The long chain further shows the universal result of Γ = 1 in the underdamped continuum limit, which is reached for small frequencies. For increasing driving frequency ω0 , this behavior is cut off by the end of the Brillouin zone, where Γ = γD is approached. For γD > 1, an intermittent overdamped regime exists with γD ∼ √ ω 0 . Intermediate size chains show resonances where Γ ∼ γ-1 D grows arbitrarily large. For Langevin damping, the short chain shows Γ = N γL 3 , i.e., the Goldstone mode yields a friction growing with system size. A long, underdamped, continuum chain shows similarities to the DPD case. As it is bound from below, Γ ≥ γL , the universal value of unity from phonon radiation can only be seen for γL ≪ 1. For small ω 0 , the long chain becomes overdamped, and shows γD ∼ 1/ √ ω 0 , in contrast to the universal small frequency behavior of the long DPD chain. Resonances for intermediate chain lengths only occur for very small values of γL . Where are regimes of simple, frequency-independent friction? For both damping cases, these occur for short chains, where, however, friction depends on system size. For long chains, frequency-and system size independent friction plateaus are found. In realistic situations one may expect a spectrum of frequencies to be excited, which for the mentioned plateaus yields a simple superposition. For DPD, long chains generally approach the simple universal friction for small frequency. For the Langevin case, the small frequency limit does not show simple friction, which is thus harder to find in that case. In realistic solids, wavelength and decay length typically exceed meters for frequencies in the range of a few kilohertz (see Ref. Future work can investigate other geometries The authors declare no conflict of interest. The datasets generated and analysed during the current study are available from the authors on request. 2ω 0 = 1 2 γL lL .(47)Γ in Eq.