Recently, a new type of unconventional superconductivity with a field-induced transition between two different superconducting (SC) states was discovered in the heavy fermion system CeRh2As2. This unusual SC state was proposed to be based on specific symmetries of the underlying structure, i.e., a globally centrosymmetric layered structure, but where the Ce-layers themselves lack inversion symmetry. This new type of SC state has attracted strong interest, prompting the search for further heavy fermion systems crystallizing in structures with appropriate symmetries. We report the discovery and the study of a new Ce-based heavy fermion system with a globally centrosymmetric structure but without inversion symmetry on the Ce-site, Ce2Ir3Ga5. A single crystal X-ray diffraction study revealed an orthorhombic U2Co3Si5 type structure. Resistivity, specific heat, and magnetization measurements indicate a moderate-heavy fermion behavior with a Kondo energy scale of the order of 40 K. Most experimental results suggest the absence of magnetic order, but a tiny anomaly in the specific heat opens the possibility for a very weak, itinerant type of ordering. In the past 20 years, the absence of inversion symmetry (IS) has emerged as an effective parameter to induce unusual superconducting properties and unconventional superconducting states An obvious question is whether similar unconventional and intriguing properties can be found in other heavy fermion systems with a global inversion symmetric structure but without IS on the Ce site. There are several Ce compounds with appropriate structures, but only some are appropriate for the search for unconventional superconductivity. For a Ce compound to be a promising candidate, its strength of the interaction between the 4f and conduction electrons, i.e., the f -c hybridization, has to be fine-tuned to put the system close to the so-called quantum critical point (QCP), where the f -c hybridization is just sufficiently strong to destroy the magnetic order, resulting in a transition to a paramagnetic ground state. Heavy Fermion behavior and unconventional superconductivity are only expected and observed in the vicinity of such a QCP. Ce, Yb, or U-compounds with suitable structural properties and appropriate strength of the f -c hybridization are very scarce In a search for appropriate systems, we explored the ternary Ce-Ir-Ga phase diagram. Combining the Ir and Ga ligands seemed to be a promising approach since Ir promotes a quite strong f -c hybridization, while Ga induces a comparatively weak one. This search leads to the discovery of a yet unknown compound, Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 . X-ray diffraction demonstrated that it crystallizes in the U 2 Co 3 Si 5 structure type, which is globally centrosymmetric, but where the (crystallographic unique) Ce site lacks inversion symmetry. Electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, and specific heat measurements evidenced a sizeable f -c hybridization, resulting in a corresponding Kondo energy scale of the order of 40 K. Further properties suggest that Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 is on the paramagnetic side of the QCP and presents a heavy Fermi liquid ground state. However, a weak anomaly in the specific heat could be an indication of a very weak magnetic order of itinerant 4f electrons. We could not yet observe superconductivity, which could be due to a too-large residual resistivity. For the synthesis of Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 samples we started from the constituent elements Ce (99.99%), Ir (99.99%) and Ga (99.999%). Ce and Ir were taken in the stoichiometric ratio, while for Ga, we added 1% extra to compensate for evaporation losses. A differential thermal analysis (DTA) study indicated a congruent melting at 1340 • C. Accordingly, we tried two different methods for the preparation of this compound. The first method involves melting the elements in an arc furnace under an argon atmosphere. The resulting ingot was flipped over and remelted, and the same procedure was repeated four to five times to ensure homogeneity. In the second method, we used the pre-reacted ingot obtained by arc melting, crushed it into small pieces, and transferred it into a carbon crucible enclosed in a tantalum cylinder. The tantalum cylinder was then closed using an arc furnace under an argon atmosphere of 800 mbar. The whole crucible was then put in a resistance furnace, and the following heat treatment was applied: ramped up to 1380 • C, dwelled for 15 minutes, and then slowly cooled to room temperature. Both methods lead to a phase pure Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 sample. Since, to the best of our knowledge, this compound has not been reported before, its crystallographic structure was determined using both single-crystal and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD). Single-crystal XRD data was obtained from a Rigaku AFC7 diffractometer system (MoK α radiation, λ = 0.71073 Å), whereas powder XRD pattern was collected using Stoe-Stadi-MP powder diffractometer in transmission mode equipped with CuK α1 radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å), curved germanium (111) Johann-type monochromator, and DECTRIS MYTHEN2 1K silicon strip detector. The phase purity of the Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 samples was confirmed by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS). Magnetization measurements were carried out using Quantum design SQUID in the temperature range 1.8 K -300 K and up to 7 T external field. AC transport and specific heat measurements were performed in a physical property measurement system (PPMS) equipped with a 3 He probe (0.5 K). Four-probe and two-tau relaxation methods were employed for AC transport and specific heat experiments, respectively. Single-crystal XRD experiment was performed for crystal structure solution and refinement. A crystal of regular shape was fixed with glue at the top of a glass needle for X-ray diffraction intensity data collection. According to reflection conditions and isotypism to U 2 Co 3 Si 5 type Magnetization measurements have been performed in the zero-field cooled mode. The temperature dependence of the inverse of susceptibility χ -1 (T) in 1 T external magnetic field is shown in Fig. , where χ 0 is a temperature independent contribution to the susceptibility, C is the Curie constant and θ p is the Curie-Weiss temperature. The fit yields a small χ 0 = 0.00038 emu/mol, C = 0.78(1) emumol Ce /Oe, and θ p = -184 (1) K. The effective moment deduced from C is μ ef f = 2.5μ B , which is close to the expected free ion value (2.54μ B ) for Ce 3+ . Non-linearity for T < 100 K is caused by crystal electric field (CEF) effects, i.e., a depopulation of excited CEF levels. There is no clear anomaly in the T dependence of the susceptibility, indicating the absence of a well-defined magnetic order. At small fields, there is a tiny kink in χ(T) at around 10 K. Because this anomaly is quite small, visible only at low fields, and there is no corresponding anomaly in other properties like resistivity or specific heat, we suspect this kink might originate from a tiny amount of disordered ferromagnetic foreign phase, which remained undetected in the EDXS measurements. While at low fields below 2 T, χ(T) continuously increases down to the lowest investigated temperatures, application of higher fields results in the appearance of a maximum in χ(T) at around 4 K (Upper inset of Fig. lattice systems located slightly on the non-magnetic side of the QCP, like, e.g., CeRu 2 Si 2 The temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity ρ(T) of both Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 and its non-f analog La 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 are shown in Fig. The upper inset in Fig. = 306 K, also a quite typical value for such a compound. There N = 5, the number of atoms per formula unit according to per La mol, and R is the gas constant. The parameter β 5 accounts for the deviation of the phonon spectra from simple Debye spectra. The specific heat of La 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 did not exhibit a superconducting transition to the lowest measured temperature (0.53 K), in contrast to ρ(T) data. We suspect that the low T limit achieved in specific heat measurement, T = 0.53 K, was not sufficiently low since usually the onset of the SC transition in C(T) is only seen at the offset (ρ = 0) of the transition in ρ(T). In comparison, the specific heat of Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 is larger than that of La 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 in the whole T range. The difference C 4f (T) = C Ce (T) -C La (T) can be attributed to the effect of the 4f electrons. At first glance, it results in C 4f (T)/T being only weakly T dependent in the investigated T range, reminiscent of a Fermi liquid behavior. This indicates that the 4f electrons do not behave as localized magnetic moments but instead hybridize strongly with the conduction electrons, forming heavy quasi-particles. Below 10 K, the C/T values are of the order of 150 mJ(mol Ce ) -1 K -2 , thus enhanced by a factor of 20 compared to the non-4f analog La 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 . It provides evidence that Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 is a moderately heavy fermion system with strong f-c hybridization. By integrating C 4f (T)/T we estimated the entropy S 4f (T) connected with the 4f electrons (lower inset in Fig. A closer look at the specific heat data at low T reveals a small kink in C(T)/T at T 0 ≃ 2.7 K, below which C(T)/T decreases with T, suggesting the presence of a phase transition at T 0 . The obvious question is whether this small anomaly is an intrinsic property of Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 , or due to a tiny amount of undetected foreign phase. The small size of this anomaly and the very small amount of entropy connected with this transition, only about 4% Rln2, favors the latter scenario. However, an analysis of the field dependence of C/T provides arguments in favor of the intrinsic nature of this transition. Application of a magnetic field H > 3 T weakens this anomaly, seemingly without shifting T 0 to lower T, and at 7 T, it can no longer be resolved (main part of Fig. We explored the Ce-Ir-Ga ternary system, in the search for a new cerium-based system that presents a locally non-centrosymmetric environment with preserved global inversion symmetry and has an appropriate strength of f -c hybridization so that an unconventional superconducting state like CeRh 2 As 2 can be realized. There, the combination of Ir and Ga can provide the fine-tuned hybridization strength. This search leads to the discovery of a new compound Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 . Structural characterization revealed an orthorhombic U 2 Co 3 Si 5 structure type with space group: Ibam, No. 72. Magnetization measurements suggest a localized Ce 3+ valence state at high-temperatures but no clear sign of magnetic ordering down to the lowest temperature. In AC transport measurements, ρ(T) displays a typical Kondo behavior with a logarithmic increase in resistivity at high temperatures and a pronounced decrease below T coh ≃ 30 K. Below 10 K, ρ(T) follows a T 2 dependence, consistent with a Fermi liquid picture. Specific heat measurements evidence an enhanced electronic contribution with an almost constant C/T value, γ = 150 mJ(molCe) -1 K -2 in the range 3 K < 30 K. This indicates strongly renormalized quasi-particles induced by a sizeable f-c hybridization. From the T dependence of the entropy, we estimated a Kondo scale of the order of 42 K, which is in agreement with the temperature of the maximum in ρ(T). Thus, resistivity and specific heat measurements indicate Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 as a moderately heavy Fermion system with a reasonably large Kondo scale. Susceptibility and resistivity measurements do not present any anomaly related to a transition, suggesting a paramagnetic heavy Fermi liquid ground state. However, specific heat data reveal a small anomaly at T 0 = 2.7 K. At first glance, one would suspect this anomaly is due to a foreign phase. However, a more detailed analysis suggests that it could also be due to an intrinsic itinerant type of order. Therefore, at present, we cannot conclude whether Ce 2 Ir 3 Ga 5 is on the magnetically ordered or the non-ordered side of the quantum critical point. Further studies such as μSR and NMR experiments are needed. In addition, it will be interesting to observe whether further improvements in the sample quality result in the onset of unconventional superconductivity. 