Nanoscale ferroelectrics that can be integrated into microelectronic fabrication processes are highly desirable for low-power computing and non-volatile memory devices. However, scalable novel ferroelectric materials, such as hafnium oxide (HfO2), remain in a state of development, and a clear understanding of the effects of relevant compositional and processing parameters to control their ferroelectric properties and the actual polarization switching mechanisms are still under investigation. One key fundamental knowledge gap is the polarization switching pathway in ferroelectric hafnia. To further our fundamental understanding of domain nucleation and switching, we have studied polarization switching pathways in HfO2-x thin films in real-time at the atomic scale using transmission electron microscopy. We employed differential phase contrast imaging that allows for the acquisition of both hafnium and oxygen atomic column signals and facilitates the observation of relative movement of atomic columns between both sublattices. Our results demonstrate that the switching pathway involves a transient tetragonal-like local structure, as oxygen ions shift in locations and remain within their parent hafnium polyhedra. Since the discovery of ferroelectricity in HfO2-based thin films From this theory, it is important to note that the polarization , both sign and magnitude, can change depending on the switching pathways or the centrosymmetric phase used for the calculation of the polarization, as shown in Figure In traditionally studied perovskite ferroelectrics, such ambiguity does not exist. The switching pathways have been explicitly identified, mainly because the ion responsible for switching the polarization is only minimally displaced within the polyhedra defined by the surrounding cations The switching pathways in fluorite structured HfO2, HZO, and ZrO2 have been studied theoretically and have been shown to be complex and depend on the strain state of the films, vacancies, type of dopants, etc. Several pathways for polarization inversion have been proposed by first-principles calculation and nudged elastic band simulations In this report, we induce polarization switching in oxygen-deficient HfO2-x films in which both polar and antipolar arrangements (e.g. collocated Pca21 and Pbca phases) coexist. The polarization event is triggered by electron irradiation of the sample demonstrating the existence of one of the switching pathways previously calculated in the literature. show annular dark field (ADF) and differentiated differential phase contrast (dDPC) images obtained simultaneously in one grain. ADF images do not provide information about the oxygen sublattice position and, hence, cannot distinguish polarization direction in a grain. However, using dDPC, it is possible to observe O and Hf atomic columns, allowing for the identification of the spontaneous polarization, when observed along the [100] zone axis of the Pca21 polar phase. Although along this projection, the O2 atomic columns (see Figure Using STEM imaging, we generate a polarization inversion event in undoped hafnium oxide (HfO2-x A 20 nm HfO2-x film was deposited on 85 nm thick TaN bottom electrodes on (001) silicon substrates by reactive High-power impulse magnetron sputtering (HiPIMS) with a Starfire Impulse HiPIMS power module in conjunction with a dc power supply to deliver square voltage pulses with a duration of 110 μs, a frequency of 200 Hz, and a magnitude of -700 V. These parameters represent a duty cycle of 2.0 % and per-pulse peak plasma power density of 600 W/cm 2 . Following each negative high-power pulse, a +100 V positive pulse of length 200 μs was applied to the target. Argon was used as the sputter gas, and O2 gas was used as the reactive gas. A gas flow of 15.00 sccm of argon with 1.23 sccm of O2 was controlled by electronic mass flow controllers, and the total process pressure was controlled by a conductance flow valve located in front of the turbomolecular pump, reaching oxygen concentrations in the background gas of 7.6%. The substrate was grounded, continuously rotated, and not intentionally heated during deposition. Following deposition, the film was annealed in a pure argon atmosphere (99.999% purity) in a rapid thermal processor, Allwin 21, Heatwave 610, at 750 °C for 30 s. Additional material properties are provided in Jaszewski, et al. The images reported were averaged every 20 frames to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. Differentiated differential phase contract (dDPC) images were obtained as the gradient of the DPC images The projected polarization was calculated by assuming two different centrosymmetric phases, namely tetragonal P42/nmc and orthorhombic Pbcm. The displacement of oxygen anions and hafnium cations with respect to the tetragonal or orthorhombic Pbcm reference unit cells was input into eq. 1, which is based on the modern theory of polarization ∆P is the change in polarization, e is the positive electronic charge, Ω is the unit cell volume, Z* is the Born effective charge 