The interplay of electron correlations and topological phases gives rise to various exotic phenomena including fractionalization, excitonic instability, and axionic excitation. Recently-discovered transition-metal pentatellurides can reach the ultra-quantum limit in low magnetic fields and serve as good candidates for achieving such a combination. Here, we report evidences of density wave and metal-insulator transition in HfTe5 induced by intense magnetic fields. Using the nonlinear transport technique, we detect a distinct nonlinear conduction behavior in the longitudinal resistivity within the a-c plane, corresponding to the formation of a density wave induced by magnetic fields. In high fields, the onset of the nonlinear conduction in the Hall resistivity indicates an impurity-pinned magnetic freeze-out as the possible origin of the insulating behavior. These frozen electrons can be gradually re-activated into mobile states above a threshold electric field. These experimental evidences call for further investigations into the underlying mechanism for the bulk quantum Hall effect and field-induced phase transtions in pentatellurides. Topological phases of matter represent a wide range of electronic systems with nontrivial band topology. New quasiparticles, such as Dirac and Weyl fermions, forming by band crossing points in these topological matters, have been discovered in experiments Layered transition-metal pentatellurides ZrTe5 and HfTe5 are recently found to be close to an accidental Dirac semimetal phase in the boundary between strong and weak topological insulators, sensitively affected by the lattice constant In this study, by combining linear and nonlinear quantum transport, we present evidences of field-induced DW and insulating states in HfTe5, which can be further modulated by an electrical field bias. Single crystals of HfTe5 were produced by the iodineassisted chemical vapor transport (CVT) as described in Section I of Supplemental Materials. HfTe5 has a carrier density of 2.7×10 17 cm -3 at 2 K, one order of magnitude lower than that of ZrTe5 (2.5×10 18 cm -3 ) grown by the same method We further investigate the transport properties of HfTe5 in higher magnetic fields. Figures Strong nonlinear transport of HfTe5 is observed in magnetic fields. We started by applying a series of direct currents (DC) (0~1 mA) with a superimposed alternating current (AC) of 50 μA to the sample and detected the AC resistance using the standard lock-in technique. As presented in Figs. 2 e and f, the curves overlap for IDC=0 and 0.25 mA. As IDC exceeds 0.5 mA, the suppression of ρxy at high fields is gradually eliminated and ρxx decreases as well in the same regime. The bias-dependent resistivity indicates that the insulating phase of HfTe5 at high fields is suppressed upon large biases. To track the evolution of the nonlinear behavior, we investigated the biasdependent DC differential resistivity. In Figs. 3 a and b, the differential resistivity (ρxx and ρxy) is plotted as a function of the biased electric field Eb above -15 T. Under small biases, the system remains in the linear transport regime with differential resistivity values fixed at different biases. Sharp transitions from linear to nonlinear regimes occur above a threshold electric field, ET. In the range of -15~-31 T, ρxx (ρxy) shows a prominent dip (peak) at ET followed by a linear decrease (increase) upon the increase of Eb. In contrast, in the range of -5~-10 T, ρxx increases with Eb beyond the threshold, while ρxy becomes nearly independent of Eb except for a slight variation near ET. It is in stark contrast to the conventional joule heating effect induced by large currents. The suppression of in-plane transport is gradually relieved by increasing Eb and the carriers become mobile again. The sharp transition near the onset of the nonlinearity will smear out as the temperature increases but the nonlinear transport persists (Fig. In Figs. 4 a-b, we extract the threshold electric field ET and the relative resistivity change Δρ/ρ near the transition as a function of magnetic fields. The relative resistivity change quantifies the effect on the transport property. The difference in nonlinear conduction of diagonal and off-diagonal components in resistivity tensors separates the phase diagram of HfTe5 under magnetic fields into two regimes. In Regime I, HfTe5 remains metallic and only diagonal resistivity from longitudinal transport is affected by bias fields (down-left inset in Fig. In a previous study Based on these observations, we propose a possible scenario for the phase diagram of HfTe5 in magnetic fields. The gap size of HfTe5 decreases with temperature, resulting in the low-temperature phase close to an accidental Dirac semimetal. One interesting feature is that ρxx only changes by less than 40% at different biases while ρxy is suppressed to nearly zero in the high-field localized states. In Fig. The observations of in-plane nonlinear conduction and possible magnetic freeze-out state indicate a complicated phase diagram of HfTe5 in magnetic fields. Thermodynamic properties and the ac transport of sliding DW may be investigated to further identify the nature of these phase transitions. And experimental methods sensitive to spin-polarization can be applied to settle down whether it is a charge or spin DW. Meanwhile, the unique electromagnetic response (axion electrodynamics) in topological systems allows for the fluctuation of topological θ-term in the presence of the DW order, which behaves like the axion and gives rise to novel topologically protected transport properties. High-quality single crystals of HfTe5 were grown via chemical vapor transport with iodine as the transport agent, similar to ZrTe5 20 . Stoichiometric Hafnium flakes (99.98%, Aladdin) and Tellurium powder (99.999%, Alfa Aesar) were ground together and sealed in an evacuated quartz tube with iodine flakes (99.995%, Alfa Aesar). A temperature gradient of 60 °C between 490 and 430 °C in a two-zone furnace was used for crystal growth. The typical as-grown sample has a long ribbon-like shape along a-axis. The sample crystalline quality and stoichiometry were checked by the X-ray diffraction and the energy dispersive spectrum. The magneto-transport measurements were performed in a Physical Property Measurement System (Quantum Design) for the low fields and in resistive magnets in Tallahassee, US and Hefei, China for the high fields with the standard lock-in technique. The differential resistivity measurements were carried out using the corresponding in-build mode of Keithley 6221 and 2182 models. The bias electric field is extracted as E b = IR/L with I, R and L being the applied current, four-terminal resistance value, and the channel length between two inner voltage-sensing electrodes, respectively. 