Shape-morphing capabilities are crucial for enabling multifunctionality in both biological and artificial systems. Various strategies for shape morphing have been proposed for applications in metamaterials and robotics. However, few of these approaches have achieved the ability to seamlessly transform into a multitude of volumetric shapes post-fabrication using a relatively simple actuation and control mechanism. Taking inspiration from thick origami and hierarchies in nature, we present a new hierarchical construction method based on polyhedrons to create an extensive library of compact origami metastructures. We show that a single hierarchical origami structure can autonomously adapt to over 10 3 versatile architectural configurations, achieved with the utilization of fewer than 3 actuation degrees of freedom and employing simple transition kinematics. We uncover the fundamental principles governing theses shape transformation through theoretical models. Furthermore, we also demonstrate the wide-ranging potential applications of these transformable hierarchical structures. These include their uses as untethered and autonomous robotic transformers capable of various gait-shifting and multidirectional locomotion, as well as rapidly self-deployable and self-reconfigurable architecture, exemplifying its scalability up to the meter scale. Lastly, we introduce the concept of multitask reconfigurable and deployable space robots and habitats, showcasing the adaptability and versatility of these metastructures. Versatile shape-morphing capability is crucial for enabling multifunctionality in both biological and artificial systems, allowing them to adapt to diverse environments and applications Conventional rigid mechanism-based origami structures, constrained by their folding interconnections, are limited to morphing between their original and compact states due to one single DOF. This limitation simplifies actuation and deployment but sacrifices the potential for achieving a variety of shapes For example, recent studies demonstrated that a single unit cell consisting of six extruded cubes could transform into four different configurations using four distributed pneumatic actuators to control folding angles When assembled into a 5×5 array, they theoretically offer over 10,000 mobilities through bifurcation Drawing inspiration from planar thick-panel origami 1e-1f, Supplementary Note 2). We demonstrate the unprecedented properties of the metastructures arising from their hierarchical architecture of spatial closed-loop mechanisms. We find that hierarchical closed-loop mechanisms naturally introduce intricate geometric constraints that significantly reduce the number of active DOFs required for shape morphing, even when involving a large number of structural elements (Figs. Hierarchical origami-based shape-morphing structures with combinatorial design capability The connectivity between the cubes, namely the placement of the joints, dictates the spatial folding patterns of the structure (Supplementary Figs. closed-loop mechanisms For two adjacent cube faces, four potential edge locations exist to accommodate hinge joints (Fig. Depending on the chosen connectivity, level-1 structures composed of n cubes exhibit an initial maximum number of 2 (n=4), 3 (n=6) and 5 (n=8) DOFs (Fig. The sequence from left to right corresponds to the structural motifs used from lower-level structure to higher-level structure. The associated level-2 structure is depicted in Fig. Moreover, the design space of hierarchical structures can be significantly expanded by combinatorically (1) adjusting the connectivity at higher-level bars (Fig. Compared to state-of-the-art 2D Thirdly, this fundamental design principle establishes a versatile structural platform that can be applied to various shaped building blocks, overcoming the limitations in our previous ad-hoc designs Within this extensive design space, designs of particular interest are those that exhibit high reconfiguration capabilities via frustration-free (collision-free) kinematic paths involving only a few active structural DOF during shape-changing processes. Such designs enable rich shapemorphing capability with simple and reliable control. After comparison (Supplementary Note 2), we identified an optimal category composed of four identical <8R> type of level-1 structures (see Category 1 in Fig. Fig. Additionally, for all combinatorial designs (Supplementary Fig. In comparison to previous designs Given that each reconfigured shape in Fig. Remarkably, despite the level-2 structure's total of 36 joints, only a small number of them are needed to drive the shape-morphing process, referred to as active reconfiguration DOF (Fig. The transition kinematics describe the quantitative relationship among the folding angles during the shape morphing of hierarchical structures. In Fig. Given the unveiled simple transition kinematics of hierarchical structure and the low number of active DOFs during shape morphing, next, we explore and demonstrate their potential applications such as autonomous robotic transformers with adaptive locomotion, rapidly deployable self-reconfigurable architectures, and multifunctional space robots. crawling mode (Fig. Notably, during the self-deployment from a compact planar structure to a complex multi-story open structure in Fig. As proof of concept, we demonstrate that these spatial hierarchical mechanism designs can be up-scaled to meter-sized buildings by assembling heavy-duty cardboard packing boxes (box side length 0.6 m). Starting from flat-packed cardboards with minimal space requirements, they can be rapidly assembled for easy deployment and reconfiguration into various structurally stable meterscale tunnels, shelters, and multi-story open structures (Fig. Remarkably, the total volume occupied by the deployed multi-story open architecture is 200 times larger than the initial volume of the flat-packed cardboards (Supplementary Fig. Fig. The hierarchical and combinatorial designs in both the links and joints at multiple levels of hierarchical structures provide an extensive design space for creating various spatial looped Considering these multi-capabilities in conjunction with scalability, modularity, and disassemblability, we envision diverse applications in robotics, architecture, and even in space. Fig. Nevertheless, viable solutions can be devised for ground-based actuation as well. These solutions might involve manual adjustments to the reconfigured structural states, thereby preventing collisions with the ground surface and ensuring a seamless shape transformation. To demonstrate the shape morphing in cube-based origami structures, we used two ways to fabricate and assemble the hollow cubes. One is for quick shape-morphing demonstration by directly 3D printing individual cubes (Stratasys Convex Objet-250 with stiff materials of Vero PureWhite) and connecting them with adhesive plastic tapes (Scotch Magic Tape, 6122) as freerotation hinges (Supplementary Figs. 5, 8, 11-13). The other is for easy assembly and disassembly demonstration by 3D printing Lego-like pieces of thin rigid plates (Fig. The cubes were 3D-printed with ABS printing materials (QIDI Tech X-Max 3D printer). To ensure the compact contacts between the 3D printed cube components, we created open areas at the joints positions and use the U-shaped bracket to hold electronic elements (Fig. Mathematically, we can thus determine the new positions of the rotated cubes as follows: where vn_local and vn_new represent the body center vectors of cube #n before and after shape morphing, respectively, in the local and fixed global coordinate systems. tn is a general functional form including all directional rotations of cube #n (Supplementary Figs. We validate the theoretical framework by modelling the shape-morphing process of reconfiguration loop 1, i.e., from the initial shape MA to shape MF, passing through shapes MB, MC, MD and ME. The shape matrix of the initial shape is determined first in the fixed global coordinate system. Based on Eqs. (1-2), we rationally derive the new positions of the rotated cubes in new shapes accordingly. Specifically, we analyze the process from morphing from shape MD to shape ME, where a total of 24 cubes are involved. To provide a representative example, we select cube #20 and theoretically derive its new spatial positions. Subsequently, we compare these derived solutions with experimental results to validate our proposed theoretical framework. Starting from the initial shape MA, we derive the shape matrix of MD, as expressed in Eq. (3). Consequently, in the fixed global coordinate system, we obtain the explicit spatial vector for cube #20 . The theoretical model is in excellent agreement with the experimental result. In order to derive the shape matrices of shapes MD and ME in reconfiguration loop 1, we need firstly determine the shape matrix of the initial shape MA, which is presented with explicit components as Reconfiguration kinematics in Fig. First is to build a database for the configuration library. Each cube can be treated as a spatial voxelated pixel with its geometrical center represented by a vector. Then, we can use a matrix to characterize a morphed shape, where the spatial positions of composed cubes are described by their corresponding vectors. For example, for all the combinatorically designed level-2 structures shown in fig. where Mkn represent the mathematically expressed forms of the n th reconfigured shapes in the transition tree for the k th combinatorically designed level-2 structures. Second is to compose all the combinatorically designed level-2 structures into the database matrix D in the form of These combinatorial hierarchical mechanisms is generalizable and can be applied to construct similar reconfigurable hierarchical metastructures composed of any shape-morphing spatial closed-loop mechanism for easy actuation and control yet rich shape morphing. For example, the cube units can be replaced by other composed geometrical shapes, such as thick plates with substantially reduced thickness dimension, tetrahedrons, and triangular-shaped prisms, or extended to genuine volumetric 3D structures (examples are provided in Supplementary Figs.