A molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is used to quantitatively analyze the induced membrane potential for an applied external field varied between 0.4 V/nm to 2.0 V/nm. The change in the electrostatic potential in the DPPC is directly correlated to the membrane permeability. The effect of the decrease in external conductivity on the DPPC is also evaluated and the analytical results are compared with the simulation. The correlation between the electrostatic potential of the DPPC and the total dipole are compared, and a positive correlation is identified until saturation. This is because the membrane permeability factor plays a dominant role to control reversible and irreversible electroporation. The obtained dipole parameters through simulation for various electric field allows for an accurate determination of the quantitative changes in the membrane and external conductivity during the process of electroporation. Electroporation is a physical process of structural rearrangement of the membrane due to application of high magnitude electric pulses Reversible electroporation has the advantage of transient pore formation with active resealing occurring in milli-second (to upto a few seconds) range thereby preventing osmotic imbalance The electro chemotherapeutic drug was bleomycin (BLM) to treat subcutaneous sarcoma tumor in a mice specimen. Almost 38% tumor was cured reflecting good anti-tumor effect within 22 days. However, clinical trial with electrochemotherapy was performed by The electroporation parameters were 1.3 kV/cm (or 0.00013 V/nm), 0.1 ns with 4 to 8 pulses. The therapeutic drug was hydrophylic bleomycin that was used to treat 8 patients with 40 permeation nodules of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas Irreversible electroporation is a monotherapy used for cell ablation and has therefore potential application in malignant cell treatment The discrepancy of electric field parameters depending on the cell nature requires an in-depth understanding of the process. Further in vivo studies require better understanding through both molecular dynamics simulation and numerical analysis on the dependence of influential parameters governing electroporation. Understanding the theoretical and computational model of reversible electroporation can allow comprehensive understanding on determining the threshold for therapeutic treatments like the synergistic effect of shock impulse and electric pulse application Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations can be an effective methodology to analyze the changes in the cell membrane permeability under the influence of an external electric field. They allow modeling the trajectories of atoms by integrating Newton's equation of motion for any defined system. This generated simulation has the advantage of providing the time dependent response to the electric field perturbation technique. This modeling method will provide the necessary mathematical information regarding the conformational atomic and molecular arrangement when influenced by the electric field. The advantages of opting for MD simulation include: (i) detailed atomic/molecular level information (ii) ability to control a single influencing factor and thereby analyze its interatomic conformation (iii) alternative to study rapid perturbation techniques such as electric pulses in pico-second range and obtain quantitative data at atomic level resolution. It was realized that for ns pulses the pores were hydrophilic and for ms pulses it was hydrophobic. Similarly, the electroporation threshold increased linearly with cholesterol content for ns pulses. The focus of our model is to investigate the electroporation threshold using a Dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine (DPPC) bilayer to replicate a cell membrane model. The changes in the hydrophobic nature of the DPPC is analyzed to determine the electroporation threshold, Uthreshold. Similarly, the pore permeabilization is analyzed to determine its reversible nature. It is also compared with parameters particularly, the electrostatic potential variation along the DPPC region and information is obtained about the changes in the total dipole of the model along the transverse applied field direction. For simulating our model, leapfrog algorithm was used to integrate the equation of motion. The simulation time was set to 2 fs and the total simulation period was 100 ps to analyze the intermolecular/interatomic conformation. DPPC has been used in previous literature Understanding the process or the parametric factors that influence the process of electroporation will allow scope for in vivo applications The cell membrane has a double layer of lipids and proteins The application of an external field facilitates lateral charge mobility and redistribution across the plasma membrane. This process is called perimembrane electrophoresis where Q is the degree of polarization, m is the electrophoretic mobility, V is the steady state voltage drop across the cell and D is the diffusion constant. Hence for a polarizability of 0.1, the corresponding steady state voltage drop is 0.8 mV. For a higher polarizability, if the distribution of particles across the membrane surface is increased to half proportion polarized, the magnitude of steady state voltage drops increases of 4 mV. Hence if the surface particles were all concentrated at one pole of the membrane, V increases to 7.8 mV. However, the duration of this equilibrium theory is applicable for prolonged field duration of approximately 2.7 hours. The steady state transmembrane potential of a cell is between -40 to -70 mV and hence the corresponding ratio of diffusion constant and electrophoretic mobility is expected at 23.3x10 -3 with the assumption that the molecules in the plasma membrane are half polarized. During the process of electroporation, which involves the application of external electric field (indifferent from the bioelectric fields of the charged components in the cell); there is a transient increase in the membrane permeability. The resting transmembrane potential (measured in tens of milli volts) on cell surface is due to the distribution of ion pumps and the gated channels of the system Pauly and Schwan (1959) described the increase in induced membrane potential according to equation ( where E is the external electric field, R is the radius of the cell (approximately 10μm), θ is the degree angle of the applied field measured from the center of the cell, t is transient time and τ m is the charging constant of membrane (discussed briefly in Section-Modelling the Cell Membrane ).The above equation has an upper threshold frequency of 1MHz and pulse duration of 1 μs The equation by where C is the membrane capacitance/area (approximately 10 -2 F/m 2 ), a is membrane resistance ρ i is the resistivity of the interior of the cell and ρ e is the resistivity of the electrolyte (approximately The application of high frequency pulses affects the intracellular structure of cell and actuate cytochrome c release, which facilitates intracellular calcium level Other possible explanations include the layer of glycocalyx, surrounding the cell (which has fixed charges) is more likely to attract ions and influence membrane potential. Grosse and Schwan (1992) derived an expression for membrane conductance, equation 4, that includes the component of surface conductance, Gs where σ m is the membrane conductivity, σ i intrinsic conductivity of cytoplasm and v is calculated 3 , d=membrane thickness and R is the radius of the cell. Hence, by comparing equation ( The contribution on the lipid bilayer permeability during interaction of applied electric field was simulated based on atomistic MD simulation. The simulated cell was of the following dimension: 6.902 x 7.405 x 9.504 nm. The DPPC membrane was built with 128 DPPC layer surrounded by 3655 water molecules. The time step was set to 2fs and the total simulation period was 100ps. The simulation was performed using GROMACS v.4.6.7 software package and was carried in NPT (isothermal-isobaric) ensemble at pressure=10 atm and temperature= 320K. Temperature and pressure coupling were performed using Parrinello-Rahman coupling method. The MD simulation Parameters Magnitude Physiological condition σ e 0.5 S/m [63] 0.158 S/m [68,69] Both normal condition σ i 0.5 S/m [63] Both normal and under electric field influence σ m 2x10 -4 S/m [37], [63] During electroporation σ m 10 -5 S/m [63] No field R 10 μm Both normal and under electric field influence d 5 nm Both normal and under electric field influence was performed using leapfrog algorithm to numerically update the position and velocities of the particles in the system.. A cut off distance for Lennard -Jones interaction was set to 1nm and particle-mesh Ewald method was used for the electrostatic interaction with a cut off distance of 1nm. Periodic boundary condition was applied along x, y and z direction. GROMACS was used for the quantitative study of the field induced membrane effect in association with VMD for the visual data of the study. The effect of different magnitude of electric field on the membrane permeability can be determined with its application along the z direction. The electric field was applied perpendicular to the membrane as shown in the schematic in Fig. Electric pulses of field intensities 0.2 V/nm and 1.2 V/nm with pulse duration of the order in microsecond was analyzed to determine the membrane potential change. It is assumed that the cell membrane has a resistive-capacitive electrical equivalent model and the electroporation in the cell leads to increased ionic conductivity and pore formation when the membrane potential exceeds a critical threshold magnitude. Short microsecond pulses have the advantage over millisecond pulses because of the fast-rising pulses would create a 'window' period showing a large non-equilibrium transient membrane potential change This is an important parameter as the change in membrane potential is more likely to be influenced by cell nature and its electrical parameter τ. The angular dependence of the field is kept at zero to calculate the maximum change in the approximate membrane potential. The graph in Fig. The membrane conductivity depends on parameter, K which is calculated from external and internal conductivity Fig. From Fig. The analysis of electric potential across DPPC reflects the force or stress imbalance across the model simulation where, r is the distance from the charge for which the potential is evaluated, and k is a constant =9.0x10 9 N.m 2 /C 2 . From Fig. The electrostatic potential of DPPC is slightly less than 2V for an applied field of 0.4 V/nm. However, higher field strengths account for a greater change in transmembrane potential across DPPC allowing the hydrophobic region to create temporary defects. The results are in close approximation with literature where the measured transmembrane potential is approximately 3V to create a pore size of 10 nm This paper highlights on the analysis of transmembrane potential change and conductivity of an isolated cell under external electric field perturbation. Secondly, a MD simulation is performed to obtain a time dependent function change in permeability for a varied range of electric field. The critical characteristic threshold is determined for the model and an attempt is made to correlate with two parameters: (i) change in electrostatic potential of DPPC (ii) dipole of the system. The primary "resting" reference potential for our simulated model was 500 mV. Upon application of the external field, the electrostatic potential of DPPC simultaneously increased until a critical value of induced potential is obtained after which it attains saturation. This is explained because a further escalation of electro induced potential difference is limited by a decrease in the membrane permeability factor. Hence, the membrane permeability factor is an important parameter that forms the "boundary" between reversible and irreversible electroporation. This can account for a more accurate analytical calculation of the effective conductivity and induced transmembrane potential. Magnetoelectric smart composites such as cobalt ferrite-barium titanate (CFO-BTO) has shown potential to influence the membrane permeability due to nanoparticle-cell interaction 