We measured the magneto-reflectivity spectra (4 -90 meV, 0 -16 T) of the triple-point semimetal GdPtBi and found them to demonstrate two unusual broad features emerging in field. The electronic bands of GdPtBi are expected to experience large exchange-mediated shifts, which lends itself to a description via effective Zeeman splittings with a large g factor. Based on this approach, along with an ab initio band structure analysis, we propose a model Hamiltonian that describes our observations well and allows us to estimate the effective g factor, g * = 95. We conclude that we directly observe the exchange-induced Γ8 band inversion in GdPtBi by means of infrared spectroscopy. Introduction. Half-Heusler compounds are a family of ternary cubic crystals that provide a large variability in their band structures and hence in their material properties. These materials can host inverted band gaps, leading to topologically non-trivial electronic states When GdPtBi is subjected to a magnetic field, the Γ 8 bands are believed to substantially split in a Zeeman-like fashion Methods. GdPtBi single crystals were grown by the solution method from a Bi flux. Freshly polished pieces of Gd, Pt, and Bi, each of purity larger than 99.99%, in the ratio Gd:Pt:Bi = 1:1:9 were placed in a tantalum crucible and sealed in a dry quartz ampoule under 3 mbar partial pressure of argon. The filled ampoule was heated at a rate of 100 K/hr up to 1200 • C, followed by 12 hours of soaking at this temperature. For crystal growth, the temperature was slowly reduced by 2 K/hr to 600 • C. Extra Bi flux was removed by decanting it from the ampoule at 600 • C. Overall, the crystal-growth procedure closely followed the one described in Refs. The magneto-optical data were collected in reflectivity mode from a (111)-oriented facet with the area of roughly 2 by 1.1 mm 2 (same sample as used for the broadband optical measurements without a magnetic field The density-functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed with the WIEN2K code Results and discussion. The experimental results are presented in Fig. By looking at the raw spectra, one can immediately note that they are uncharacteristic for inter-Landaulevel transitions, which typically manifest themselves as a rich series of rather narrow absorption lines in R B /R 0 ("Landau fans"), as reported in numerous studies of different (topological) semimetals performed by our and other groups The cyclotron resonance (CR) due to free carriers might manifest itself in R B /R 0 , but is not expected to provide a dominating contribution to the spectra of our GdPtBi sample, as it has low carrier concentration, low plasma frequency, and low electron scattering rate at T < 100 K As pointed out previously, the antiferromagnetic ordering of Gd spins in GdPtBi is soft and smoothly transitions into a collinear alignment when a magnetic field is applied To illustrate how the exchange-shifted bands can give rise to the observed features, we first discuss a model Hamiltonian. We adopt the notion of effective Zeeman terms, proportional to spin- 3 2 matrices, employed in the k • p model of Ref. It comprises two pairs of parabolic bands on the diagonal, describing electrons and holes with effective masses m e and m h . As usual, q = (q x , q y , q z ), q i = k i /a with a the lattice constant (recall that GdPtBi has a cubic symmetry), i = {x, y, z}, and k i ∈ [-π, π). The terms μ ms B provide the Zeeman-like splitting of the degenerate bands (μ ms = m s g * μ B , where m s = ± 3 2 , ± 1 2 , g * is an effective g factor, and μ B is the Bohr magneton). Due to this splitting, one electron band intersects with both hole bands, forming nodal lines. The off-diagonal terms Y ± provide coupling between the bands. The Y + term is radially symmetric and introduces a gap between the electron and hole bands. A new nodal line emerges between the two hole bands. The Y -term couples these hole bands with one another, splitting the new nodal line with the exception of four points. It also couples the electron and hole bands to form the protruding flanks, qualitatively emulating the protrusions in the DFT band structure of GdPtBi; see Fig. A cut through the energy spectrum of Eq. ( The relative reflectivity spectra calculated from Eq. ( major features of the experimental R B /R 0 spectra and their B-field evolution: the low-frequency peak grows in intensity with increasing B and remains roughly at a fixed frequency; the second peak shifts to higher frequency and broadens with field, centered around 70 meV at 16 T. Furthermore, the heights of both peaks in the calculated spectra are well comparable to the experiment. Strictly speaking, the Hamiltonian should contain linear terms, or even cubic terms, to introduce inversion asymmetry. These are not included to keep the number of parameters limited. Further, including the linear terms would strongly skew the bands. Cano et al. In the model, we used m e = 3 2 m 0 , m h = -1 4 m 0 , which is in accord with previous measurements: estimates for the effective masses obtained from Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations range between 0.23 m 0 The values of the magnetic moments, μ ± 1 2 , 3 2 , obtained within our model, lead to a large effective g factor, g * = 95. As pointed out in the Introduction, such large values of g * have been anticipated for GdPtBi Conclusions. We experimentally studied the magnetooptical reflectivity of the triple-point semimetal GdPtBi and found two broad maxima emerging in an applied magnetic field. We proposed a four-band model Hamiltonian, which mimics the low-energy DFT band structure and allows field-dependent calculations of the magneto-optical response. The model describes the field evolution of the bands near the Fermi level: the bands, degenerate at the Γ point, split in a Zeemanlike fashion in applied fields due to the exchange interaction. The resulting gaps increase as the Gd 4f 7 electrons align paramagnetically with field. The match between the experimental and computed magnetooptical spectra evidence the validity of the exchange mechanism proposed in Refs. Purely interband contribution to R B /R 0 . The interband optical conductivity was calculated from the model Hamiltonian using the Kubo formula where γ is the broadening parameter, f m,n are the Fermi-Dirac functions, and vα,β are the velocity operators (α, β ∈ {x, y}). We used T = 0 K, the Fermi energy at 0, and γ = 2.0 meV. The calculations were performed summing over all three k-space directions with a k x × k y × k z grid of 200 × 200 × 40, for 200 steps in energy and 32 steps in magnetic field. The reflectivity was calculated from the complex conductivity in a standard way 