It is well known that there are two types of magnetic bubbles in uniaxial magnets. Here, using Lorentz-transimission electronic microscopy magnetic imaging, we report the direct experimental observation of 3D type-III hybrid bubbles, which comprise Néel-twisted skyrmion bubbles with topological charge Q = -1 in near-surface layers and type-II bubbles with Q = 0 in interior layers, in Fe3Sn2 nanodisks. Using the tilted magnetic field, we further show the controlled topological magnetic transformations of three types of bubbles in a confined ferromagnetic nanodisk. Our observations are well reproduced using micromagnetic simulations based on measured magnetic parameters. Our results advance fundamental classification and understanding of magnetic bubbles, which could propel the applications of threedimensional magnetism. Magnetic bubbles are cylinder domains that have recalled much attention recently because of their similarity to skyrmions According to the rotation sense of magnetic bubbles, two types of bubbles have been widely established: type-I bubbles with clockwise or counter-clockwise rotations and type-II bubbles with domain-wall orientations lying toward the in-plane field orientations Here, in combination with 3D micromagnetic simulation based on measured magnetic parameters, we experimentally demonstrate the stabilization of type-III bubbles in confined Fe3Sn2 nanodisks. The controlled creations of type-III bubbles are also illustrated using tilted magnetic fields. Our results show the diversity of magnetic bubble structures by extended 3D magnetism, which could provide a chance to develop bubble-based spintronics. Preparation of bulk Fe3Sn2 crystal: The Fe3Sn2 bulk crystal is a lamella, whose out-of-plane orentation is the [001] axis determined by X-ray diffraction . Fabrication of Fe3Sn2 disks: The 150-nm thick Fe3Sn2 nanostructured disks with diameters of 510 nm were fabricated from a bulk single crystal using a standard liftout method, with a focused ion beam and scanning electron microscopy dual beam system (Helios Nanolab 600i, FEI). The ion-sputtered carbon encircled disk was transferred onto a copper grid using a micromanipulator, which was suitable for TEM magnetic imaging. The out-of-plane orientation of the [001] axis of the disk was aligned with that of the bulk Fe3Sn2 lamella. For detailed information on the nanodisc fabrication process, refer to previous reports TEM measurements: We used in-situ Fresnel imaging in Lorentz-TEM (Talos F200X, FEI) with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV to investigate magnetic domains in the Fe3Sn2 disk. The DPC microscope was operated at low magnification in scanning TEM (STEM) mode using a split quadrant detector. The zero-temperature micromagnetic simulations were performed using MuMax3. We demonstrate the observation of a type-III bubble in a typical bubble-hosting material Fe3Sn2. Based on the measured magnetic parameters of Fe3Sn2, we simulated the 3D magnetic configurations in Fe3Sn2 nanodisks. The weak quality factor (~0.22) of Fe3Sn2 contributes to depth-modulated spin twisting of the bubble tube, as shown in Figure At B = 250 mT with a tilted field angle of 12°, our simulation reveals that the two types of bubbles can both stabilize in a 510-nm-diameter Fe3Sn2 nanodisk. Using the nudged elastic band (NEB) method The simulated field angle dependence magnetic evolutions at B =250 mT is also studied (Figure Moreover, the inclination effect is experimentally identified through the elliptical shape of the effective region in the Fresnel images, as depicted in Figure Figure The stabilization of type-III bubbles results from the balance between three contributions: the magnetic dipole-dipole interaction in confined nanodisks, the Zeeman energy, and the topological and discrete structural freedom of the magnetic structure. The dipole-dipole interaction primarily contributes to the stabilization of Néel-twisted bubbles with Q = -1 in surface layers. At a tilted field condition, the Zeeman energy contributes to the stabilization of bubbles with Q = 0 in the interior layers. The discrete structure freedom allows for the topological reversals of type-III bubbles along the depth orientation at an intermediate tilted angle. The dipole-dipole interaction, which can be tuned by thickness, plays an important role in stabilizing type-III bubbles in Fe3Sn2. Our simulations (Supplemental Figure In summary, in combination with 3D micromagnetic simulations, we have demonstrated the experimental observation of type-III bubbles (i.e., hybrid skyrmion bubbles) with topological reversals along the third dimension of depth. The residual Bloch-skyrmion-like configurations in the center contributed by the near-surface magnetizations can be applied for the experimental distinction of these 3D hybrid skyrmion bubble configurations. Our results should represent an advance in the fundamental classification of magnetic bubbles and the diversity in 3D bubble configurations. Considering the similar topology of the type-I bubble with chiral skyrmions 