The cross-plane (across-layers) phonon thermal transport of five diverse, layered semiconductors is investigated by accounting for higher-order four-phonon scattering, phonon renormalization, and multi-channel thermal transport. For materials having relatively large cross-plane thermal conductivity (AlB6, MoS2, and MoSi2N4), phonons contributing to cross-plane conductivity have an order of magnitude larger mean free path than that for the basal-plane thermal transport, whereas the opposite effect is observed for materials with low thermal conductivity (MoO3 and KCuSe). The contribution from the wave-like coherent transport channel is less than 5% in all considered materials. Our work unravels the contrasting role of nano-structuring on the basal-vs. cross-plane thermal conductivity of low and high thermal conductivity layered materials. The tunable optoelectronic 1 , thermal 2 , and electrical In this work, we investigate cross-plane thermal transport in five diverse, layered materials spanning hexagonal/orthorhombic, binary/ternary, intercalated/multilayered structures using the state-of-the-art ab-initio calculations. We start by benchmarking vdW functionals for the study of thermal transport in layered materials and investigate phonon thermal transport by accounting for three-and four-phonon scatterings, phonon renormalization, and multi-channel thermal transport We obtain the phonon thermal conductivity, k, of considered semiconducitng materials as where the summation is over all the phonon modes in the Brillouin zone enumerated by i ≡ (q, ν), where q and ν are phonon wavevector and mode index, and c ph,i , v α , and τ α i represent phonon specific heat, group velocity (α-component), and transport lifetime respectively. The transport lifetimes are obtained by considering phononphonon scattering via three-and four-phonon scattering processes. The phonon-boundary scattering is included as τ bdry = L bdry /|v|, where L bdry is the characteristic length scale (chosen as 1 μm for all materials). The details regarding c ph , v α , and τ calculations via phonon renormalization, temperature-dependent sampling of the potential energy surface, and multi-channel thermal transport are available elsewhere in Refs The computation of phonon mode properties (heat capacity, group velocity, three-phonon, and four-phonon scattering rates) requires harmonic, cubic, and quartic interatomic force constants The crystal structures of considered layered materials are presented in Fig. We start by first validating the choice of employed vdW functional to describe weak interlayer interactions in layered materials. For this, we employed a similar methodology as we used in our previous work for studying thermal transport in MoS 2 For mono-layer materials, the computationally predicted basal-plane lattice constant, the phonon heatcapacity weighted group velocity, and Grüneissen parameter are reported in Table The phonon dispersions of considered materials are reported in Fig. Because of large thermal displacements of atoms in KCuSe, the potential energy surface experienced by atoms at non-zero temperatures is different from that at 0 K, which results in a strong phonon renormalization. The phonon dispersions of considered materials obtained by phonon renormalization at 300 K are reported as dashed lines in Fig. The predicted basal-plane (zigzag direction) and crossplane thermal conductivities of considered materials obtained by considering three-phonon scattering only are reported in Fig. The inclusion of four-phonon scattering reduces phonon lifetimes, thus reducing thermal conductivity. Fig. For basal-plane thermal transport, the four-phonon scattering has a small effect on the thermal conductivity, and the maximum obtained reduction in thermal conductivity is 21% for KCuSe with strongly anharmonic bonds. For cross-plane thermal transport, while the effect is more pronounced and the thermal conductivity is reduced by 13% for MoO 3 and 34% for KCuSe, the effect is significant only for strongly anharmonic materials (MoO 3 and KCuSe). For AlB 6 , MoS 2 , and MoSi 2 N 4 with strongly bonded atoms, the thermal conductivity remains unchanged (change is less than 5%) with the inclusion of four-phonon scattering. For MoS 2 , our predicted basal-plane thermal conductivity obtained by iteratively solving the Boltzmann transport equation is 111 W/m-K (95 using the RTA solution of the BTE) for 1 μm sample, directly comparable with the experimentally measured values of 85-110 W/m-K reported by Liu et al. While all considered materials have similar thermal conductivity trends, we found that the phonon modes that contribute to basal-and cross-plane transport have different behavior in low-and high-thermal materials [Fig. The obtained cross-plane thermal conductivities of MoO 3 and KCuSe are lower than 1 W/m-K at room temperature. For such low thermal conductivity materials, other than the contribution from a particle-like transport channel, an additional contribution originating from the wave-like coherent channel can also be significant for thermal transport In summary, we investigated cross-plane thermal transport in five diverse, layered materials using ab-initiodriven density functional theory calculations. We find that four-phonon scattering is only needed to correctly describe the cross-plane thermal transport in strongly anharmonic layered materials, even though cross-plane interactions are weak in all considered materials. The cross-plane thermal conductivity spans more than an order of magnitude, and the thermal transport is only through the particle-like single channel. Further, we find that the thermal transport in the cross-plane direction is majorly dominated by acoustic phonons and is more sensitive to material thickness owing to longer mean free paths of contributing phonons in high thermal conduc-tivity materials, while for low thermal conductivity materials, the mean free paths of heat-carrying phonons in the basal-plane direction are comparable with phonons in the cross-plane direction. Our study highlights the different roles of nanostructuring on the cross-and basal-plane thermal transport in low-vs. high-thermal conductivity layered materials. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Supercomputing Mission, Government of India (Grant Number: DST/NSM/R&D-HPC-Applications/2021/10) and Core Research Grant, Science & Engineering Research Board, India (Grant Number: CRG/2021/000010). The calculations are carried out on the SpaceTime-II supercomputing facility of IIT Bombay and the PARAM Sanganak supercomputing facility of IIT Kanpur. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings are available on a reasonable request via email. . vdW Functional Benchmarking. The effect of selected vdW functionals on the predicted structural, harmonic, and anharmonic properties of monolayers of considered layered materials. The reported lattice constants (a) are for basal-plane, and the reported group velocity (|v|) and Grüneissen parameter (γ) are heat capacity weighted averages of all phonon modes.