Surface acoustic waves (SAWs) are excited by femtosecond extreme ultraviolet (EUV) transient gratings (TGs) in a room-temperature ferrimagnetic DyCo 5 alloy. TGs are generated by crossing a pair of EUV pulses from a free electron laser (FEL) with the wavelength of 20.8 nm matching the Co M -edge, resulting in a SAW wavelength of Λ = 44 nm. Using the pump-probe transient grating scheme in a reflection geometry the excited SAWs could be followed in the time range of -10 to 100 ps in the thin film. Coherent generation of TGs by ultrafast EUV pulses allows to excite SAW in any material and to investigate their couplings to other dynamics such as spin waves and orbital dynamics. In contrast, we encountered challenges in detecting electronic and magnetic signals, potentially due to the dominance of the larger SAW signal and the weakened reflection signal from underlying layers. A potential solution for the latter challenge involves employing soft X-ray probes, albeit introducing additional complexities associated with the required grazing incidence geometry. In recent years, significant advancements have been made in transient grating (TG) spectroscopy techniques, leveraging the capabilities of extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and x-rays delivered by free-electron lasers (FELs) In EUV TG, coherent FEL beams intersecting at the sample surface give rise to spatially periodic excitation patterns with periods in the 10s of nm range and time duration on the order of tens of femtoseconds EUV TGs can be used for studying nanoscale magnetic dynamics, provided that the probe is tuned to a magnetic edge, as recently demonstrated in a Gd-Co alloy at the Co M -edge a) Electronic mail: victor.ukleev@helmholtz-berlin.de b) Electronic mail: urs.staub@psi.ch The binary intermetallic DyCo 5 alloy belongs to the family of binary rare-earth (RE) -transition metal (TM) compounds, renowned for their magnetic properties that find applications in permanent magnet technologies The 20 nm-thick DyCo 5 film was grown onto a Si substrate with a 5 nm-thick Ta buffer by means of magnetron sputtering at room temperature under Ar atmosphere of 1.5 • 10 -3 mbar (with a base pressure of 10 -8 mbar) using the MAGSSY chamber at the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin (HZB, Germany). The correct stoichiometry of the alloy was achieved by varying the deposition rate of Co and Dy targets in the co-evaporation scheme. The film was capped by 2 nm of Pt to prevent surface oxidation. More details of the sample growth are given in Ref. 31. Due to the limited penetration depth of EUV radiation in the material, experiments were performed in reflection geometry, which demands a high-quality (uniform and low roughness) surface of the sample. To assess the surface quality, a characterization of the DyCo 5 film was performed using x-ray reflectometry (XRR) (Figure Oscillations in the XRR curve, known as Kiessig fringes, were observed up to a high 2θ angle of 12 • , indicative of the high quality of the film 33 (Figure The magnetic moment of the sample was probed utilizing soft x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) in the total electron yield (TEY) detection mode. The probing depth of the TEY method extends to a few nanometers from the surface The absence of multiplet features in the XAS spectra indicate the metallic nature of the DyCo 5 film and the absence of surface oxidation. The XMCD signal was observed at both L 2,3 edges (bottom panel in Figure The TG experiments were conducted at the EIS-TIMER beamline at the FERMI FEL, Trieste, Italy 2,36 . The experimental configuration is described in Refs. 5 and 36 and schematically illustrated in Figure Two circularly polarized pump pulses, designated as Pump A and Pump B in Figure The probe beam, back-diffracted from the TG, was then reflected by the multilayer mirror onto an in-vacuum two-dimensional charge-coupled device (CCD) detector, using the same setup described in Refs. The total fluence of the two pump beams at the sample was 10 mJ/cm 2 . For each time delay, 1000 FEL shots were accumulated to measure the TG intensity. To mitigate the effects of radiation damage, each time trace was acquired at a different location on the sample. By increasing the FEL fluence above 20 mJ/cm 2 , a per- manent grating was imprinted onto the film, which involves structural and magnetic changes of the sample 38 . The characteristics of the permanent grating were assessed through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) utilizing a Zeiss Merlin instrument at the Correlative Microscopy and Spectroscopy CoreLab of the HZB. The period of the grating observed in SEM, Λ = 44 ± 1 nm, closely aligns with the value calculated from the crossing angle and wavelength of the two pump beams (Figure Time-dependent EUV TG signals were acquired by scanning the delay between the EUV TG and probe beams ∆t in increments of 1 ps. Moreover, to encompass the eventual ultrafast electronic and magnetic responses, a detailed investigation of the first picosecond time window (-0.5 to 0.5 ps) was conducted, with a step size of 0.1 ps. Upon sample excitation, the application of EUV TG creates a spatially periodic temperature distribution across the surface of the DyCo 5 film, with a period Λ. This excitation triggers the rapid thermal expansion and consequent ultrafast generation of counter-propagating SAWs, as described in Ref. 40. As depicted in Figure The zero-padded Fourier transform of the time trace in the range ∆t = 20 -100 ps, where the signal exhibits more regular oscillations, reveals the presence of SAWs. These waves are characterized by two principal phonon harmonics at frequencies ν = 84 GHz and 166 GHz, as depicted in Figure The lower frequency corresponds to the SAW with a phase velocity of 3700 m/s, comparable to SAW velocities measured in TbCo multilayers Here, S th (t) describes the exponential decay of the thermal grating The absence of any magnetic appreciable response in the present EUV study is surprising, since a previous study has demonstrated ultrafast demagnetization via 40 fs infrared (IR) laser pulses with a photon energy of 1.5 eV. At incident laser fluences of a similar magnitude, i.e. 10-15 mJ/cm 2 , IR photons induced 40% and 80% demagnetization of the Co sub-lattice within the first 2 ps Assuming that the fluence level was adequate to drive a magnetization grating, the absence of a detectable signal could be due to the experimental geometry. Indeed, the observed backward-diffracted signal arises from both the spatially periodic perturbation of the material's refractive index, which modulates the EUV reflectivity, and from coherent surface displacements arising from the thermal expansion driven by the thermal grating This paper presents a study of the coherent generation of SAWs within DyCo 5 thin films through the utilization of femtosecond EUV FEL pulses in a transient grating geometry. SAWs hold significant promise for applications in spintronics, offering potential avenues for, e.g., coherent domain wall nucleation, topological structure manipulation Despite the high quality of the sample used in our study, we did not observe any electronic or magnetic signals. This could potentially be attributed to the significantly larger signal originating from SAWs and the complexities associated with reduces backscattering signal from relevant interfaces within the material. Our findings highlight the challenges encountered when employing EUV TG in reflection geometry, particularly in the context of detecting magnetic dynamics. While this setup potentially expands the applicability of the technique to a wider range of magnetic materials that may not be transparent to EUV radiation, it is essential to carefully consider these factors to ensure the reliable detection of magnetic phenomena. Addressing these challenges will be crucial for advancing our understanding of magnetic dynamics using EUV TG in reflection geometry.