Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) devices in the archetype small molecule fluorescent guest-host system tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato) aluminum (Alq3) doped with 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-julolidyl-9-enyl-4H-pyran (DCM2) displays a redshift in light-emission frequency which is extremely sensitive to the dopant concentration. This effect can be used to tune the emission frequency in this particular class of OLEDs. In this work, a model is proposed to describe this effect using a combination of density functional theory (DFT) quantum-chemical calculations and stochastic simulations of exciton diffusion via a Förster mechanism. The results show that the permanent dipole moments of the Alq3 molecules generate random electric fields that are large enough to cause a non-linear Stark shift in the band gap of neighboring DCM2 molecules. As a consequence of these non-linear shifts, a non-Gaussian probability distribution of highest-occupied molecular orbital to lowest-unoccupied molecular orbital (HOMO-LUMO) gaps for the DCM2 molecules in the Alq3 matrix is observed, with long exponential tails to the low-energy side. Surprisingly, this probability distribution of DCM2 HOMO-LUMO gaps is virtually independent of DCM2 concentration into Alq3 matrix, at least up to a fraction of 10%. This study shows that this distribution of gaps, combined with out-of-equilibrium exciton diffusion among DCM2 molecules, are sufficient to explain the experimentally observed emission redshift. Organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) are a relatively new class of devices already used for display technologies In order to overcome the latter problem, Bulović et al. Bulović et al. Other models have been suggested Regardless of whether the spectral redshift is related to aggregation or not, all previous models relied on the fact that emission spectra would vary with changes of local electric field due to high electric dipole moment and dielectric constant of DCM2, as its concentration increases from 1% to 10%. However, the detailed mechanism for this effect was not investigated at the level of quantumchemical calculations. In particular, it is puzzling the association of a strong emission redshift to an electric field acting on the DMC2 molecules, since changes in the electronic or optical gap under an electric field (Stark shifts) are typically linear to first order. Therefore a randomlyoriented field should in principle give rise to both positive and negative variations of the gap, with a nearly zero net effect. In the present work, we develop a new model to explain the redshift emission in DCM2-doped Alq 3 , supported by a combination of DFT quantum-chemical calculations and stochastic simulations of exciton diffusion and emission. Surprisingly, the energy gap distribution of DCM2 molecules under a random distribution of DCM2 and Alq 3 dipoles is rather independent of the DCM2 concentrations (for up to 10% DCM2), as just the smaller dipole moments of neighboring Alq 3 molecules are sufficient to produce the necessary gap variations in DCM2 to account for the observed redshift. Moreover, the calculated Stark shifts are highly nonlinear, producing a probability distribution of DCM2 gaps with a long tail to the low-energy side. Finally, the observed concentration dependence of redshift is explained by exciton diffusion via the FRET mechanism. The paper is organized as follows: Section II describes quantum-chemical calculations of the HOMO-LUMO gap variations of DCM2 under electric fields (Stark shift). Section III presents simulations of the local electric field on DCM2 and the determination of the gap distribution using random Alq 3 and DCM2 dipoles distribution. Section IV, describes the kinetic Monte-Carlo (kMC) simulations of exciton diffusion and emission via Föster energy transfer. Finally, Section V presents the main conclusions of the present work. Since the random distribution of dipole moments of Alq 3 and DCM2 molecules results in an effective electric field acting on the DCM2 dopant molecules, initially we established the dependence of the DCM2 HOMO-LUMO gap as a function of the intensity and orientation of this field, i.e., the Stark shift is evaluated. To establish this dependence and at the same time ensure that our approach has quantitative and predictive capabilities, the molecular geometry, dipole moment, polarizability tensor, and HOMO-LUMO gap must be calculated using ab initio methods. The quantum-chemical calculations were performed using the Gaussian03 program Once the geometry of the DCM2 molecular structure was optimized (see Fig. Based on the ab initio DFT approach described previously, we first calculate the dipole moment and the polarizability tensor of Alq 3 and DCM2 molecules. These properties will be used in Section III. As expected, DCM2 molecules are highly polar, with a ground state dipole moment of 14.4 D, as compared to the Alq 3 dipole moment of 4.4 D. These values are in good agreement with those reported in the literature Fig. Due to the nonlinear behavior shown in Fig. where E g (0) = 2.96 eV is the HOMO-LUMO gap for the ground state at zero electric field. The coefficients α i and β ij are obtained by fitting the DCM2 HOMO-LUMO gap dependence for each direction of the applied electric field shown in Fig. In this Section, the resulting electric field at each DCM2 molecule caused by a random distribution of Alq 3 and DCM2 dipole moments is calculated. Once obtained this electric field, the DCM2 gap shift is calculated using Eq. 1. With this procedure it is possible to obtain the histogram of DCM2 gap distribution for each concentration of DCM2 molecules into Alq 3 matrix. To calculate the resulting electric field in each of DCM2 molecules, we consider not only the permanent dipole moments of Alq 3 and DCM2 molecules, but also the induced dipole moment due to polarization. The electric field calculation then follows a self-consistent iterative procedure, as illustrated in Fig. In this methodology, Alq 3 and DCM2 permanent dipole moments initially are distributed in a 70×70×70 cubic lattice, with lattice constant of 8.5 Å. This lattice constant is chosen in order to reproduce the same density as amorphous Alq 3 matrix. The ratio of DCM2 and Alq 3 dipoles is selected respecting the DCM2 concentration in the Alq 3 host. All dipole moments are randomly oriented. In the second step, we calculated the electric field at each DCM2 and Alq 3 molecules due to the random distribution of dipoles. Thus the induced dipole moment on each molecule is obtained from the calculated polarizability tensor and the total dipole moment is obtained as the sum of induced and permanent moments. Then the electric fields are recalculated and the convergence criteria are analyzed. The iterative process repeats until convergence is achieved. After convergence, the DCM2 gaps are calculated using Eq. 1. The result of this procedure is shown in Fig. where A, B and C are normalization constants, E g is the DCM2 energy gap distribution and E 0 , σ, ε 1 and ε 2 are free parameters to be adjusted in order to fit the data points. Table We propose that the emission redshift in Alq 3 :DCM2 upon increasing DCM2 concentration is caused by diffusion and partial thermalization of excitons (limited by exciton lifetime In our model, the exciton dynamics occur through two steps: 1. After exciton formation on a Alq 3 molecule (either by electric or photo-excitation), the excitation is quickly transferred to the nearest DCM2 molecule. This non-radiative energy transfer by Förster mechanism is very efficient due to good spectral overlap between the donor (Alq 3 ) emission and acceptor (DCM2) absorption spectra, shown by the yellow region in Fig. 2. When excitons reach DCM2 molecules, or if they are initially formed directly on DCM2 molecules due to charge trapping, they can thermalize by hopping between DCM2 molecules also via Förster process, since there is a smaller but non-negligible overlap between DCM2 emission and absorption spectra (Fig. Due to the stochastic nature of the exciton hopping process, the exciton diffusion process is modeled by a kinetic Monte-Carlo method (kMC) based on the Förster energy transfer (FRET), within the first-reaction method (FRM) approximation. In the FRET model, the hopping time t F RET between any two sites i and j is given by: where t 0 is the exciton lifetime, R 0 the Förster radius, and f (E i , E j ) is a function accounting for energetic disorder. The exciton lifetime t 0 is 1.0 ns. The Förster radius is proportional on the overlap integral of the donor emission spectrum (Alq 3 ) with the acceptor absorption spectrum (DCM2) (see Fig 5 (a)). As there is a smaller overlap between DCM2 emission and absorption spectra (see Fig 5 (b)), in the simulations we use two distinct R 0 : One to account the jumps between Alq 3 and DCM2 (R 0 =39 Å), and another between DCM2-DCM2 molecules (R 0 =6 Å). The R 0 value for Alq 3 /DCM2 energy transfer was taken from the literature The energies E i of all Alq 3 sites are randomly assigned according to a Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation, σ, extracted from Gaussians fitted to the Alq 3 absorption spectrum as described in Scheidler et al. In the first reaction method (FRM), a random number X between 0 and 1 is selected for each process and a "jump time" is calculated: The process with lowest jump time is then selected to be next destination of the exciton. The jump times for each exciton are summed and this process happens until the total event time reaches the exciton lifetime of 1 ns. When this occurs, we assume that the exciton is annihilated by emitting a photon. Then, the gap energy at the emission site is collected in a histogram (see Fig. In conclusion, using a combination of different theoretical methods and techniques, we propose a novel mech- anism for the concentration-dependent emission redshift Alq 3 :DCM2, based on exciton dynamics. Our theoretical modeling was composed of several important ingredients, that we now summarize: (1) DCM2 molecules suffer a nonlinear Stark shift of the electronic gap upon external electric fields, with a negative curvature (tendency to smaller gaps); (2) when DCM2 molecules are placed in an Alq 3 matrix, the random dipole moments of neighboring molecules produce local electric fields that generate a distribution probability of DCM2 with a long tail towards low energies. For low DCM2 concentrations, these local fields are caused primarily by Alq 3 molecules, differently from the usual understanding. (3) Exciton hopping from Alq 3 to DCM2 and specially between DCM2 molecules allow thermalization of excitations towards lower energies and explain the redshift. For larger concentrations of DMC2, exciton mobility is larger and therefore the redshift is more substantial. Our model agrees quantitatively with experiments and we believe it describes a very general mechanism that should occur in similar systems.