Interface engineering is one of the promising strategies for the long-term stabilization of perovskite solar cells, preventing chemical decomposition induced by external agents and promoting fast charge transfer. Recently, MXenes -2D structured transition metal carbides and nitrides with various functionalization (=O, -F, -OH) demonstrated high potential for mastering the work function in halide perovskite absorbers and significantly improved the n-type charge collection in solar cells. This work demonstrates that MXenes allow for efficient stabilization of perovskite solar cells besides improving their performances. We introduce a new mixed composite bathocuproine:MXene, i.e., (BCP:MXene) interlayer at the interface between an electron-transport layer (ETL) and a metal cathode in the p-i-n device structure. Our investigation demonstrates that the use of BCP:MXene interlayer slightly increases the power conversation efficiency (PCE) for PSCs (from 16.5 for reference to 17.5%) but dramatically improves the out of Glove-Box stability. Under ISOS-L-2 light soaking stress at 63± 1.5°C, The T80 (time needed to reduce efficiency down to 80% of the initial one) period increased from 460 h to > 2300 h. Halide perovskite solar cells (PSC) are one of the most promising photovoltaic technologies (PV). We analyzed the morphology and electron diffraction patterns of Ti3C2Tx MXene with transmission electron microscopy (see Figure The thermal stability of the PSCs' PV parameters is well correlated to the concentration of MXenes used for the composite interlayer. Using a higher concentration of MXenes for the fabrication of CBF resulted in higher thermal stability and longer T80 time, as shown in Figure The chemical activity at the interfaces was considered as one of the major factors for the degradation of PSC and its output performance This work demonstrated a new strategy for long-term stabilization of p-i-n PSCs with integrating a bathocuproine:MXene composite interlayer at the metal cathode interface. A special cathode buffer layer was realized with solution processing dispersing of MXenes into a BCP solution at different concentrations. We found that the role of BCP in composite with MXenes is essential for the uniform distribution of Ti3C2Tx in the formation of a homogeneous surface layer. The use of MXenes with a concentration of 0.75 mg/ml was found to be optimal to (slightly) improve the output performance for CsFAPbI3based PSCs with a PCE increase from 16.45 % of the reference PSC to 17.46% for the BCP:MXene device. This improvement is mainly due to the higher efficiency of the electron collection and the improved conductivity of the ETL stack. However, the main contribution of the BCP:MXene interlayer was related to the stabilization of the device. The thermal stability test at 80 °C (tested with ISOS-T-1 procedure) showed a remarkable increase of T80 of the BCP:MXene device up to 1080 h with respect to the reference PSC (T80 = 330 h). This was even more emphasized in the light soaking stability at MPPT in the air (encapsulated devices), where the BCP:MXene perovskite solar cells showed a reduction of only 4% of the output power after 2300 h of continuous light soaking, whereas the reference device showed only T80 of 430 h. The analysis of dark IV curves showed that BCP:MXene composite stabilizes shunt properties and rectification in the device under stress factors. The origin of the stabilization using BCP:MXene composite occurs in rich chemistry of interaction between low-dimensional materials, small organic molecules, and ionic defects formed in perovskite. The BCP:MXene interaction with C60 and the perovskite layers results in passivation of the surface states of MXenes, which could inhibit the degradation of the whole structure in a long-term perspective. We assume that advanced surface termination between MXenes-BCP, and C60 suppresses the chemical interaction with mobile ionic defects at the cathode side of the PSCs. In addition, the enhancement of the ETL stack conductivity when BCP:MXene is used can reduce the trapped charges at the perovskite/ETL interface and consequently decrease the impact of trapped charge-driven degradation. As a final element, Auger profile analyses show, for thermally stressed device, a reduction of iodine migration for MXene:BCP with respect to pristine BCP. The Ti3C2Tx MXenes were synthesized by selective chemical etching of Al layers from a powder Ti3AlC2 MAX phase precursor (particle size < 38 μm) using a minimally intensive layer delamination (MILD) approach. Briefly, 0.5 g of the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase was continuously added in a 10 mL solution of 0.8 g of LiF dissolved in 9 M HCl under constant magnetic stirring during 24 h at RT. The obtained suspension was centrifuged at least five times at 3500 rpm for 5 min until neutral pH (6-7) of the solution was reached. The obtained solution of welldelaminated Ti3C2Tx MXenes was vacuum-filtered and dried at 80 o C at a vacuum atmosphere for 24 h. The BCP solution was prepared in 0.5 mg/ml concentration in anhydrous isopropyl alcohol (IPA), whereas MXenes were taken in five different weight concentrations: 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2.5, and 5 mg per ml of the BCP solution. The mixture was kept for 1-2 days stirred by a magnetic stirring bar on a hotplate at 50 ̊C for preliminary BCP coordination around the MXene surface. The BCP interlayer was spin-coated at 4000 RPMs (30 s) and annealed at 50 °C (1 min). Herein, the organic solvents dimethylformamide (DMF), N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), chlorobenzene (CB), 2-propanol (IPA), and methoxyethanol (MOE) were used in anhydrous, ultra-pure grade from Sigma Aldrich (Germany). The device was fabricated on In2O3:SnO2 (ITO, 10 ohm/sq) coated glass from Kaivo. We used acidified nickel chloride (NiCl2) as a precursor for the NiO hole-transporting layer (HTL). Lead Iodide (PbI2 99.9 % purity LLC Chemosynthesis (Russia)) and cesium iodide (CsI 99,9 %, Lanhit (Russia)) formamidinium iodide (FAI, 99.99 % purity from GreatcellSolar) were used to prepare the perovskite ink. Fullerene (C60 99.9 % MST, Latvia) and bathocuproine (BCP, >99.5 % sublimed grade, Osilla Inc., UK) were used as an electron-transporting layer (ETL). The p-i-n-structured solar cell with the following stack ITO/NiOx/CsFAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu was fabricated via an optimized route. Firstly, the ITO substrates were cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and IPA in an ultrasonic bath. Then the substrates were activated under UV-ozone irradiation for 30 min. The solution of nickel nitrates 0.15 M in MOE for NiO HTL was spin-coated at 4000 RPMs (30 s), dried at 120 °C (10 min), and annealed at 300 °C (1 h) in ambient atmosphere. The CsFAPbI3 film was crystallized on top of HTL with a solventengineering method. The perovskite precursor was spin-coated with the following ramp: (1s -1000 rpm, 4 sec -3000 rpm / 30 sec -5500 rpm). In details, 420 μL of CB were dropped on the substrate on the 10 th second after starting the first rotation step. Then the substrates were annealed at 70 °C (1 min) and 105°C (30 min) to form the appropriate perovskite phase. C60 was deposited with the thermal evaporation method at 10 -6 Torr vacuum level. The free BCP interlayer was spin-coated at 4000 RPMs (30 s) and annealed at 50 °C (1 min) for the reference devices. The copper cathode was also deposited with thermal evaporation through a shadow mask to form a 0.14 cm 2 active area for each pixel. All fabricated devices were encapsulated with a UV curable epoxy from Osilla Inc. and a glass coverslip. The X-ray diffraction patterns of the Ti3C2Tx MXene and Ti3C2Tx-BCP heterostructures were recorded using a Malvern Panalytical X'Pert MPD PW3040 diffractometer (Cu anode, λ = 0.15418 nm) in 10°-60° 2θ-range with steps of 0.002°. The microphotographs and electron diffraction patterns were obtained with a Transmission electron microscope JEOL JEM-1400 (Japan) for the morphology and crystal structure analysis of MXenes. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed with an electronic spectrometer Kratos AXIS Ultra DLD (Kratos Analytical Ltd, UK) for the surface chemical analysis of the termination group and the valence band position measurements in the Ti3C2Tx. Also, XPS was used to analyze the BCP/MXnene composite structure and the chemical interaction between the MXenes and C60 layers. Further characterization was provided by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using JEOL JSM-6610LV with Oxford Instruments energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) attachment: AZTEC EDS Energy Max 80) for the BCP+MXene film in the MXene morphology in the device from the ITO side (ITO/NiO/Perovskite/C60/BCP+MX) and the elemental analysis for evaluating the conductive area due to the inclusion of MXene. The system's atomic positions and lattice parameters were optimized using the Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) quasi-newton algorithm implemented in the QuantumEspresso software. [49] We employed the scalar-relativistic, Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) [50] , projector-augmented-wave (PAW) pseudo-potentials available in the QuantumEspresso library. [51] For both the MXene and the BCP/MXene systems, we set the kinetic energy cutoff of wavefunctions to 70Ry and the convergence threshold on forces to 10 - 2 Ry/Bohr. For the geometric optimization of the Ti3C2F2 MXene, we used an 8×8×2 Monkhorst-Pack kpoints grid and a convergence threshold on the total energy of 10 -4 Ry (default value). For the optimization of the BCP/MXene supercell, composed of 6×6 Ti3C2F2 unit cells (252 atoms) and a BCP molecule (48 atoms) placed in the middle between two MXene layers, we considered only the Gamma point and a convergence threshold on the total energy of 10 -3 Ry (note that this is an extensive property, like the total energy, and the total number of atoms in the supercell is more than 40 times larger than the number of atoms in the MXene unit cell). The photovoltaic (PV) parameters for the fabricated PSCs (open-circuit voltage -Voc, short circuit current density -Jsc, fill factor -FF, and power conversation efficiency -PCE) were calculated and statistically analyzed from the IV characteristics measured under standard conditions of 1.5 AM G light spectrum. We used Xenon arc-lamp based solar simulator (ABET 3000) with AAA grade of conformity to the reference Air Mass 1.5 Global spectrum of the terrestrial solar light (1.5 AM G standard -(ASTM) G-173). The standard power density of the incoming light (100 mW/cm2) was calibrated with certified Si-reference solar cell. The scan sweeps and the MPPT tuning measurements were performed with Keithley 2400 SMU. The measurements of IV curves were done with use of the aperture mask (3x3 mm 2 ). For measurements of the external quantum efficiency, we used QEX10 Quantum Efficiency System based on the broadband Xe-light source monochromator and adjustable mechanical chopper. The conformity of spectral response for the measured PSCs was calibrated with Si-solar cell and was compliant to the ASTM E 1021-06 standard. The difference between Jsc values gathered from IV and those extracted from EQE measurements is mainly related to the different performance of the certified calibration cells used for adjustments to the standard conditions of illumination for solar simulator and EQE system. The stability tests were performed with an LED light source (4000 K) equilibrated to the 1 sun conditions with alignment to Jsc values. The MPPT tests were done using an automated measurement system controlled by LABVIEW software. The algorithm for MPPT included the initial IV scan in the forward direction (from 0 V up to Voc value, sweep step of 10 mV), calculation of maximum power, tracking of the changes for Vmax, Imax, and Pmax with time (1 update per second). The cycle for MPPT was performed for 60 min and then repeated. The thermal stability of the PCSs was studied according to the ISOS-T-1 with storage of the devices in the dark oven heated at 80 ̊C (open circuit conditions) and periodical IV characterization (every 24 -48 h under standard 1.5 AM G conditions). To analyze the internal processes and elucidate the impact of CBF on the fabricated PSCs, we used electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Measurements were performed using Keysight E4980A Precision LCR-meter applying 0 V constant bias with superimposed 0.1 V AC through at 20 Hz to 2 MHz frequency band.