Artificial neural network potentials (NNPs) have emerged as effective tools for understanding atomic interactions at the atomic scale in various phenomena. Recently, we developed highly transferable NNPs for α-iron and α-iron/hydrogen binary systems (Physical Review Materials 5 (11), 113606, 2021). These potentials allowed us to investigate deformation and fracture in α-iron under the influence of hydrogen. However, the computational cost of the NNP remains relatively high compared to empirical potentials, limiting their applicability in addressing practical issues related to hydrogen embrittlement. In this work, building upon our prior research on iron-hydrogen NNP, we developed a new NNP that not only maintains the excellent transferability but also significantly improves computational efficiency (more than 40 times faster). We applied this new NNP to study the impact of hydrogen on the cracking of iron and the deformation of polycrystalline iron. We employed large-scale through-thickness {110}⟨110⟩ crack models and large-scale polycrystalline α-iron models. The results clearly show that hydrogen atoms segregated at crack tips promote brittlecleavage failure followed by crack growth. Additionally, hydrogen atoms at grain boundaries facilitate the nucleation of intergranular nanovoids and subsequent The degradation of mechanical performance in iron and steel due to hydrogen, two of the most commonly used structural materials, poses a significant challenge in various technological and industrial applications Recently, artificial neural network potential (NNP) provides an accurate tool to describe the atomic interactions In this work, following our previous work of Fe-H NNP See Table Fig. To further demonstrate the performance of deepMD Fe-H NNP, the effect of H atoms on the crack propagation of the through-thickness {110}⟨110⟩ crack was studied with a perfect α-iron crystal model. The size is X: 8 Å × Y : 600 Å × Z: 300 Å, consisting of approximately 126,000 atoms (see Fig. Constant time steps of 0.5 fs were used. 100 GCMC trials were conducted every 20 MD steps. The H-charged crack is initially deformed at ε zz = 0.03 (K I = 0.76 MPa•m 1/2 , see Fig. The aggregation of H permits brittle-cleavage failure followed by crack growth, and results in a ductile-to-brittle transition (see Figs. In addition, a three-dimensional polycrystalline iron model with dimensions of 175 Å × 175 Å × 175 Å was prepared (see Fig. In summary, we have developed and validated a new NNP in this work, building upon our previous Fe-H NNP. This new NNP, combined with GPU accelerators, demonstrates significantly improved efficiency, approximately 40 times faster than our previous n2p2 NNP, while maintaining similar accuracy to DFT calculations. To demonstrate the advantage of this NNP, we applied the NNP to investigate hydrogen embrittlement using through-thickness {110}⟨110⟩ crack models and polycrystalline α-iron models. It is revealed that the hydrogen atoms segregated at crack tip facilitate the brittle-cleavage failure of crack followed by crack growth, as well as those at GB promote the nucleation of intergranular nanovoids and thus intergranular fracture. We anticipate that this NNP will serve as a high-efficiency tool for gaining atomic-scale insights into hydrogen embrittlement. 