As a two-dimensional (2D) dielectric material, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) is in high demand for applications in photonics, nonlinear optics, and nanoelectronics. Unfortunately, the high-throughput preparation of macroscopic-scale, high-quality hBN flakes with controlled thickness is an ongoing challenge, limiting device fabrication and technological integration. Here, we present a metal thin-film exfoliation method to prepare hBN flakes with millimeter-scale dimension, near-unity yields, and tunable flake thickness distribution from 1-7 layers, a substantial improvement over scotch tape exfoliation. The single crystallinity and high quality of the exfoliated hBN are demonstrated with optical microscopy, atomic force microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and second harmonic generation. We further explore a possible mechanism for the effectiveness and selectivity based on thin-film residual stress measurements, density functional theory calculations, and transmission electron microscopy imaging of the deposited metal films. We find that the magnitude of the residual tensile stress induced by thin film deposition plays a key role in determining exfoliated flake thickness in a manner which closely resembles 3D semiconductor spalling. Lastly, we demonstrate that our exfoliated, large-area hBN flakes can be readily incorporated as encapsulating layers for other 2D monolayers. Altogether, this method brings us one step closer to the high throughput, mass production of hBN-based 2D photonic, optoelectronic, and quantum devices. Within the diverse cornucopia of two-dimensional (2D) materials, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) stands out as an atomically thin dielectric with a wide variety of applications in photonics, Here, we present a metal-assisted exfoliation technique optimized to prepare millimeter-scale hBN flakes, employing six different metals to achieve tunable flake thicknesses ranging from 1-7 layers, reaching a significantly higher selectivity compared with scotch tape exfoliation. We demonstrate the high optical and crystalline quality of the exfoliated hBN via optical microscopy, atomic force microscopy (AFM), Raman spectroscopy, and second harmonic generation (SHG). To understand the mechanism underlying the observed flake-thickness selectivity, we investigate the crystallinity, mechanical properties, and binding energies of the deposited metal thin films using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), thin film profilometry, and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Our results suggest that residual stress resulting from direct metal deposition is a dominant factor for determining flake thickness. The access to high-quality, macroscopic, and single-crystalline hBN flakes with tunable thickness provided by this technique has significant implications for the future commercialization and mass production of hBN-based 2D devices. A schematic of this metal-assisted exfoliation method is shown in Fig 1a . First, the metal of choice is deposited on the flat surface of a freshly cleaved bulk hBN crystal via electron beam evaporation. Next, a polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) protective layer is spin-coated on the metal surface to guard against contamination from the thermal release tape (TRT). The TRT is released in water at 97°C. The use of an aqueous environment facilitates PVP dissolution, allowing for an even TRT release, thereby enhancing the yield of thin layer hBN. Following additional water rinses to remove residual PVP, the metal layer is chemically etched, yielding thin layer hBN (see Methods Section). Fig. We demonstrate this metal-assisted exfoliation procedure with six different metals: gold (Au), palladium (Pd), indium (In), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), and titanium (Ti). Large-area hBN flakes with a thickness of less than 25-layers were consistently exfoliated (see Fig. To examine the optical quality of hBN flakes exfoliated with different metals, we obtained Raman spectra of the 2D, in-plane E2g phonon mode for hBN flakes exfoliated with Au, Pd, In, Ni, Ti, and Cu (Fig. Next, a ~0.2 mm large monolayer flake, exfoliated with Au, was characterized via a SHG polarization scan. The corresponding scan shown in Fig We determined the thickness-dependent distributions of hBN flakes exfoliated with each metal, using the corresponding flake areas and thicknesses measured via optical microscopy and AFM. The results are shown in Fig. Total area of thin-layer hBN Area of flat surface on parent bulk crystal × 100% (1) Fig. The flake thickness distributions for Ni and Ti exfoliation are less conclusive, and Cu is only observed to exfoliate flakes 11 layers or thicker. Cu-, Ni-, and Ti-exfoliated hBN flakes had maximum areas > 9000 μm To obtain a deeper understanding of the exfoliation mechanism underlying flake thickness selectivity, we investigate the nature of the metal-bulk hBN interfacial interactions through TEM, DFT calculations, and stress measurements. We begin by examining the alignment of the hBN and metal lattices as interfacial epitaxy is a suggested mechanism for flake thickness selectivity in similar metal-assisted exfoliations. Fig In the previous reports on exfoliation of the graphene, higher metal binding energies were found to be correlated with thicker graphene flakes. We calculate the total strain energy (U strain ) of the metal thin-films using Equation Fig. To further examine the exfoliation of thicker flakes, we employ an analytical model previously applied to explain thickness-selective spalling in 3D semiconductors, such as Ge, and 2D semiconductors, such as MoS2. Using this model, we predict the relationship between residual thin film stress and spalling depth. We calculated this for bulk crystals with thicknesses of 600 nm and 100 nm respectively, and a 100 nm thick Au thin film. These bounds reflect the approximate thickness range of bulk crystals exfoliated in this work. As demonstrated with dashed lines in Fig. Lastly, we use the metal-assisted method to directly exfoliate macroscopic scale hBN flakes on TMDC monolayers as encapsulating layers, without the need of flake finding or additional polymer stamp transfer steps (see Methods). Using this technique, we encapsulate a monolayer MoSe2 flake with a gold-exfoliated hBN flake (~7 layers thick) and examine its photoluminescence (PL) intensity under continuous 532 nm light exposure (Fig. We demonstrate the exfoliation of millimeter scale, thin layer hBN flakes with selective thickness control using various metal thin films. The exfoliated hBN flakes demonstrate high crystalline and optical quality similar to those obtained via Scotch tape exfoliation. Our investigation of the stress, binding energy, and crystallographic alignment between the metal thin films and hBN bulk crystals indicates that residual stress from metal deposition is likely the key determinant of exfoliated flake thickness. The overall trend of high residual stress corresponding to thin hBN flakes agrees well with the applied analytical spalling model, suggesting that the application of spalling methods to 2D materials may be a promising route to industrialization. However, key improvements in bulk crystal growth and a transition from manual to robotic exfoliation will be necessary. Overall, these high-quality hBN flakes with large-area and selective thickness can support a wide range of experimental applications, which have been historically limited by flake size or thickness restrictions. This includes many ultrafast spectroscopic techniques, such as time-resolved X-ray scattering, ultrafast electron diffraction, terahertz or high harmonic generation spectroscopy, where the large effective probe sizes place constraints on sample flakes. Large-area, single-crystalline hBN flakes were prepared via layer-engineer exfoliation. In this method, 100 nm of the desired metal was evaporated on the surface of a freshly cleaved bulk hBN crystal (2D Semiconductor) at a rate of 0.5 Å/s using a high vacuum e-beam evaporator (LAB18 Kurt J. Lesker). The chamber pressure was maintained between 10 -8 and 10 -6 torr. A 10 wt% solution of Polyvinyl Pyrrolidone (PVP, M.W. 40000, Fischer) in 1:1 solution of EtOH (>95%, Fischer) and acetonitrile (99.95%, Fischer) was prepared and spin-coated onto the metal/hBN surface at 400 rpm for 2 min. Next, Thermal release tape (TRT, semiconductor equipment Corp., 90 °C release temperature) was gently pressed to the PVP/metal/hBN surface and peeled upwards to exfoliate hBN. The TRT/PVP/metal/flake system was then transferred onto the desired substrate (285 nm SiO2/Si, NOVA). The system was then placed in water and heated to ~97 °C. The water environment served two key purposes. First, it promoted the dissolution of the PVP layer, helping the TRT efficiently separate from the metal surface. Second, it allowed for more even heating and therefore a more even release of the TRT and a higher overall yield of thin layer hBN. Once the TRT had been released, the samples underwent three 30 min rinses in deionized water to remove any residual PVP. The metals were then etched using the following etchants at room temperature. Pd was etched in aqua regia for 15 min. In was etched in aqua regia for 5 min. Au was etched for 8 min in a KI/I - solution prepared by dissolving 2.5g I2 (Iodine, 99.8%, Spectrum Chemical) and 10 g KI (potassium iodide, 99.5%, Baker Chemical) in 100 ml DI water. The monolayer MoSe2 was exfoliated from bulk MoSe2 crystals (HQgraphene Inc) using the macroscopic gold tape exfoliation method reported in Liu et al. A Park NX-10 atomic force microscope was used in non-contact mode to obtain line profiles of all reported hBN flakes. Once flake step heights were obtained in a topography scan, a nominal atomic layer thickness of 0.33 nm and substrate-flake spacing of 0.3 nm were used to calculate the number of layers. All Raman spectra of hBN's E2g mode were obtained using a Horiba Labram HR Evolution Raman System with a confocal geometry. Triplicate scans were collected for each location using a 532 nm with laser power of 4.92 mW and an integration time of 30 s. All PL spectra of both exposed and hBN encapsulated MoSe2 were obtained using the same Horiba Labram HR Evolution instrument as the Raman spectra. Sequential PL spectra were taken using a 532 nm laser at a power of 3.36 mW and an integration time of 15 s to observe photoinduced sample damage. For each spectrum, the PL peak at ~1.5 eV was numerically integrated and its integrated area examined as a function of time for both exposed and encapsulated MoSe2 samples. SHG polarization scans were used to verify the quality and singly crystallinity of the exfoliated hBN. The measurements were performed on a microscope (Nikon Plan Fluor 40x objective) at room temperature. The SHG pump (1030 nm) was generated from a femtosecond laser (NKT Origami Onefive 10, pulse duration < 200 fs), and reflected off a 820 nm short-pass dichroic mirror, before being focused onto the sample by the 40x objective. The SHG signal generated by the sample is then transmitted through the 820 nm short-pass dichroic mirror and a 600nm shortpass filter before being collected by an EMCCD (Andor iXon Ultra). The signal was amplified and detected with EM gain up to 300. The polarization for both the input laser and the collection path are rotated simultaneously relative to the sample, by rotating a half waveplate between the objective and the dichroic mirror, intersecting both the excitation and collection path. Therefore, the polarization response of SHG is equal to rotating the sample, giving rise to a 6-fold symmetry. All SAED patterns were obtained using an FEI Tecnai G2 S-TWIN TEM. Metal/hBN samples were exfoliated using the procedure described above and transferred onto 30 nm thick Silicon Nitride membrane window TEM grids. The TEM was operated at 200 kV using a Gatan SC200 camera. PXRD measurements under ambient conditions were performed using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer equipped with a Cu anode (Kα1 = 1.54060 Å, Kα2 = 1.54443 Å, Kα2/Kα1 = 0.50000), a divergence slit with a nickel filter, and a LYNXEYE 1D detector. Process induced stress due to direct metal deposition was characterized using a Flexus 2320 surface profilometer. All the first-principle calculations are performed using the plane-wave pseudopotential density function theory (DFT) package Quantum Espresso. 