For the most precise incorporation of single impurities in silicon, which is utilized to create quantum devices, a monolayer of adatoms on the Si(100) surface and a dopant-containing molecule are used. Here we studied the interaction of a phosphorus tribromide with a chlorine monolayer with mono-and bivacancies in a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) at 77 K. The combination of different halogens in the molecule and the adsorbate layer enabled unambiguous identification of the structures after PBr3 dissociation on Si(100)-Cl. A Cl monolayer was exposed to PBr3 in the STM chamber, which allows us to compare the same surface areas before and after PBr3 adsorption. As a result of this comparison, we detected small changes in the chlorine layer and unraveled the molecular fragments filling mono-and bivacancies. Using density functional theory, we found that the phosphorus atom occupies a bridge position after dissociation of the PBr3 molecule, which primarily bonds to silicon in Cl bivacancies. These findings provide insight into the interaction of a dopant containing molecule with an adsorbate monolayer on Si(100) and can be applied to improve the process of single impurities incorporation into silicon. One of the challenges of silicon functionalization is the atomically precise positioning of impurities in a given configuration. Such accurate impurity insertion into silicon is required for the implementation of silicon quantum computing utilizing the nuclear spin of an impurity To precisely introduce impurities into silicon, a hydrogen resist is currently utilized Phosphine is the impurity-containing molecule utilized in the fabrication of quantum devices In this work, we chose a chlorine monolayer as a resist, which, as previously demonstrated The experiments were conducted in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) setup with a base pressure of 5×10 The spin-polarized DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Figure In bivacancies we found a greater variety of structures, although some of them also remained empty. We mostly encountered object X3 (Fig. During the scanning process, we sometimes observed changes in objects. In particular, we observed the trans-formation of object X3 into objects X5 and X8 (Fig. To identify objects X1-X8, we carried out DFT modeling of various fragments of the PBr 3 molecule in monoand bivacancies (Fig. To determine the higher object X2 in a monovacancy, we calculated two structures with PBr 3 and PBr 2 in the vacancy. Unlike PBr 3 , the simulated STM image from PBr 2 (structure S2) agrees well with the experimental one. To calculate the PBr 3 adsorption energy in a monovacancy with the formation of a PBr 2 fragment, we placed the remaining Br atom on the surface in the groove between the dimers (structure LM1 in Ref. In bivacancies, we observed objects X5 and X6, consisting of one or two objects X1, which is a Br atom. Therefore, we modeled one and two Br atoms in a bivacancy (structures S3 and S4). The adsorption of two Br atoms with the removal of PBr into vacuum is energetically preferable to the adsorption of one Br atom with the removal of PBr 2 into the gas phase. We also calculated a surface structure with P and Br atoms on one Si dimer, each on top of a Si atom. In the simulated STM images, the P atom on top of the Si atom appears to be similar to the Br atom, making the STM image of such a structure looks like the STM image of structure S4. However, because the adsorption energy of such a system with the Br 2 removal into vacuum is positive, we believe that the incorporation of P and one Br atom is less likely than the incorporation of two Br atoms. Object X3 in a bivacancy is very similar to object X2 in a monovacancy, so we also modeled it as a PBr 2 fragment on a Si atom, and placed the remaining Br atom in an adjacent vacancy (structure S5). Thus, object X3 is formed as a result of the PBr 3 dissociation into PBr 2 and Br on one Si dimer. This is the most favorable configuration, having a PBr 2 fragment on a clean Si(100) surface after PBr 3 dissociation 23 . This dissociation pathway on a single Si dimer also occurs for other similar molecules, such as PH The remaining objects X4, X7, and X8 contain a protrusion in the center of the dimer, which can be modeled by a P atom since the bridge position for it is one of the most favorable, unlike halogens Object X8 has a high protrusion, so we added a Br atom on top of the P atom. As a result of optimization of structure S8, the Br and P atoms were shifted from the middle of the dimer in opposite directions. Structure S8 has one more equivalent configuration, symmetrically reflected relative to the Si dimer, in which the P atom is displaced to one side of the dimer, and the Br atom to the other. During scanning, we observed a switch from one configuration to another (Fig. To confirm the resistance of a chlorine monolayer to PBr 3 adsorption, we calculated the activation barriers to undesired molecule incorporation into a defect-free monolayer. Calculations were performed by analogy with Ref. We were able to reveal the change in the perfect chlorine layer on the PBr 3 -dosed surface because we scanned the same surface areas before and after PBr 3 adsorption. We observed only small modifications in the perfect chlorine monolayer after PBr 3 adsorption. In particular, we noticed the replacement of Cl with object X1 (Fig. We also observed a shift in the position of vacancies (arrows in Fig. Using DFT calculations, we identified two structures that were commonly found in monovacancies (X1, X2) and the six most frequently observed structures in bivacancies (X3-X8) (Fig. During scanning, we observed the transformation of object X3 into objects X5 and X8. When X3 is transformed into X5, phosphorus is desorbed as PBr, and two Br atoms remain in the bivacancy. When X3 is transformed to X8, PBr 2 also dissociates to PBr, however PBr does not desorb but instead moves to the bridge position. Object X8 is more energetically favorable than X3, so we can expect to find scanning conditions that make X3 dissociation into X8 during scanning very likely. Phosphorus can be introduced into silicon by dissociating of a phosphorus-containing fragment of the molecule by an STM pulse, as was reported for phosphine In all objects with a phosphorus atom that we were able to identify, the P atom is in the bridge position or P can shift into it during scanning. The P atom in the bridge position seems interesting for phosphorus incorporation into silicon, since it is already in the site of the next layer of the silicon crystal lattice. Therefore, P will be a substitutional impurity in silicon if the epitaxy process can be optimized so that there will be no diffusion of phosphorus. In contrast, the present approach of P placement by PH 3 adsorption requires complete dissociation of PH 3 to a single P atom in an end-bridge site in the row between Si dimers, followed by annealing to exchange the P atom with one of the neighboring Si atoms The PBr 3 adsorption on the Si(100) surface covered with a chlorine monolayer with mono-and bivacancies was investigated. Since PBr 3 was adsorbed in the STM chamber, we were able to identify the adsorption sites and observe minor changes in the chlorine layer. Fragments of PBr 3 molecules were unable to penetrate through chlorine on most of the defect-free surface area, and calculations support the chlorine layer's strong resistance to PBr 3 . We determined the positions of all the atoms of the molecule after dissociation in mono-and bivacancies. A phosphorus atom almost never forms a bond with silicon in a monovacancy. In a bivacancy, either a PBr 2 fragment is located on top of a Si atom, or PBr or P in a bridge position on the Si dimer. The pos-sibility of PBr 2 dissociation onto PBr during scanning with phosphorus transfer to the bridge position has been demonstrated. In the bridge position, phosphorus is already in place of the atom of the next layer of the silicon crystal lattice. The results provide insight on what occurs when molecules like PBr 3 adsorb onto a monolayer containing mono-and bivacancies. These findings can be used to develop atomically precise methods for introducing impurities into silicon.