The escalating global issue of plastic waste accumulation, specifically polyolefins, necessitates an urgent solution for upcycling these materials into beneficial compounds. Yet, achieving such upcycling without introducing carbon dioxide into the environment remains a formidable challenge. In this study, we demonstrate an eco-friendly approach for the photochemical conversion of ultrastrong, ultratransparent, and ultrathin polyethylene membrane into fibrous carbon nanomembrane at ambient conditions. The membrane was sputter-coated with platinum and cuprous oxide nanoparticles and exposed to simulated sunlight, resulting in a porous carbon membrane decorated with Pt nanoparticles. The new carbonized nanomembrane maintained the pristine membrane's morphology. The membrane exhibited high activity (2.11 mA/cm 2 ) for electrochemical ethanol oxidation with stability over 1000 cycles. This work holds significance for sustainable plastic waste management and the design of new polyolefin materials in a circular economy. Synthetic plastics have revolutionized our daily lives with their remarkable mechanical strength/weight ratios, exceptional chemical stability, and affordability 1 . However, these very qualities have also contributed to a global environmental crisis that affects ecosystems worldwide Plastic, fundamentally composed of carbon (C) and hydrogen (H), holds great potential as a valuable resource for the chemical industry. Consequently, the upcycling of waste plastic into useful materials, or plastic upcycling, emerges as an appealing solution to address the urgent problem of plastic waste A prospective resolution to this issue is the upcycling of plastics through carbonization, a process that has garnered substantial interest of late for its ability to convert waste into valuable carbon-based materials In this study, we report a novel approach for the low energy upcycling of polyolefin materials at ambient conditions. Specifically, we have discovered that the porous and ultrastrong ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) nanomembrane developed in our laboratory A schematic diagram illustrating of the two-step approach for the transformation of UHMWPE nanomembrane into Pt nanoparticle/fibrous carbon nanocomposite membrane is depicted in Figure To elucidate the carbonization of the PE nanomembrane, we performed transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis on the sample exfoliated from the carbonized Pt-PE membrane by ultrasonication. Interestingly, the carbonized particles also retained the fibrous structures of the pristine PE membrane as shown in Figures Besides, these TEM images show that Pt nanoparticles are quite uniform in size (~3 nm) and distributed uniformly along fiber axial direction. It is remarkable that these Pt nanoparticles did not coagulate during the intensive exfoliation process of 24 hours sonication. This implicates there exists strong attractive force at the interface between the Pt nanoparticles and the newly carbonized carbon fibers. Raman scattering spectroscopy is the most powerful tool for carbon material characterization. The Pt-PE sample before and after carbonization was tested using a 532 nm laser, and results are shown in Figure The transformation of polyethylene to carbon material is a process in which sp The Pt species demonstrated a very stable chemical status before and after carbonization. To further corroborate the carbonization process, we also conducted depth profiling analysis under Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS). The carbonized side of the sample was affixed to the Si wafer. The sample was etched by Ar clusters from the uncarbonized side as illustrated in Figure To demonstrate the functionality of the carbonized Pt/carbon nanomembrane, we characterized its catalytic performance for use as an electrocatalyst for ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR). The pristine Pt-PE sample before carbonization was also tested for comparison. The tests were conducted by a three-electrode system shown in Figure Conventional plastic carbonization upcycling methods often necessitate high temperatures and/or pressures, resulting in substantial energy consumption. Our research proposes a low-energy, ambient-condition carbonization process for upcycling UHMWPE membranes into fibrous carbon, offering a promising and sustainable solution to the pervasive issue of plastic pollution. Our method developed here, while particularly suitable for nanofibrous PE membranes, can also be extended into other polymer films. This innovative method employs a straightforward photocatalytic process to transform waste plastic into valuable carbon-based materials. Additionally, the carbonized Pt-PE samples exhibit significant potential for electrochemical ethanol oxidation, suggesting their potential applicability in fuel cell technology. This novel upcycling approach not only addresses the environmental challenges associated with plastic pollution but also holds the potential to inspire the development of new upcycling strategies in the future, leading to the development of more environmentally sustainable polymeric materials. The ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) resin (GUR 4022) with weight average molecular weight of 5 million Dalton was purchased from Celanese China Ltd. All other chemicals were purchased from Merklin without any further purification before all experiments. The supply gas used in this work was 99.999% ultra-high purity grade Argon (Ar). The deionized (DI) water was obtained using a Millipore Milli-Q system (18.2 MΩ•cm). The free-standing porous UHMWPE ultrathin membrane was prepared using a method invented in our laboratory The Pt-PE membrane was prepared by depositing 10 nm Pt with the thin film sputtering system (Explorer, Denton vacuum, LLC). The sputtering rate was controlled at 20 nm/min. Cu-Pt-PE membrane was prepared by depositing 10 nm Cu on the previous Pt-PE sample. The sputtering rate was controlled at 30 nm/min. The oxidation of the Cu-Pt-PE sample was carried out at 70°C for 48 hours with the presence of O2 to form Cu2O-Pt-PE. The prepared Cu2O-Pt-PE sample placed in a quartz petri dish and soaked in water and illuminated with a simulated sunlight system (PLS-SXE300D, Beijing Perfectlight Technology Co.,Ltd) equipped with a light homogenizer. The distance between the sample and light source was 15 cm. The light intensity illuminated on the sample was 500±20 mW/cm 2 , which was tested by a light meter. The total reaction time was 10 minutes. Then the sample was firstly washed with 1M FeCl3 solution to wash away the residue Cu species and then washed with both DI water and ethanol for three times for further characterization and electrochemical test. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) test was conducted by an X'pert Pro (PANalytical) diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.54178 Å) at a scan rate of 3°/min. The atomic force microscope (AFM) image was conducted by the Scanning Probe Microscope (Dimension ICON, Bruker) with contact mode. The scanning electron microscopy and the energy dispersive spectrometer test was conducted by the HITACHI 8320. The Raman scattering spectra was conducted by a confocal Raman microscope (inVia-Qontor, Renishaw). The Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) test was performed with IonTof M6 (IonTof). The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy test was conducted by PHI VersaProbe4 (ULVAC-PHI). The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were captured by the Talos F200C (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. The TEM sample was prepared by sonicate the carbonized Pt-PE sample for 24 hours in ethanol. The fuels electrochemical ethanol oxidation test was conducted by CHI760 electrochemical workstation. A three-electrode system was used for the whole test. A Pt clamping electrode was used as working electrode to hold the carbonized Pt-PE membrane electrode. The Ag/AgCl electrode was used as the reference electrode. A graphite electrode was used as the counter electrode. The ethanol oxidation reaction was conducted in a 0.5M H2SO4 + 1.0M ethanol solution electrolyte. Before the test, the cell was supplied with Ar gas with the rate of 10 sccm for 30 min to evacuate the O2 within the system. The scan rate was 50 mV/s. The stability test was conducted with the same method for 1000 cycles continuously. The modeling of the surface plasmonic effect of the photocatalyst was performed by COMSOL Multiphysics (version 5.6). The electromagnetic field was simulated by the optical module. The model was surrounded by the perfectly matched layer in three directions. A normal incident light with a wavelength of 500nm radiated from the top side. We used 30-nm Pt nanoparticles string to simulate the Pt-PE sample. The gaps between the nanoparticles were 10 nm, 5 nm and 0 nm. The refractive index of Pt was calculated from the Drude model: where n Pt is the refractive index of Pt, ε m is the relative permittivity of metal, μ m is the relative permeability of metal, ω is the frequency of the incident light, ω p is the plasma frequency and ω c is the collision frequency. For Pt, μ m = 1.000265, ω p = 7.8 × 10 15 rad/s and ω c = 1.05 × 10 14 rad/s 