The p-type surface conductivity of H-terminated diamond (HD) has opened new path ways to develop diamond based electronic devices, photo-catalysts, chemical and biosensors. Herein, we report on the room temperature H2S detection behaviour of pristine HD and the surface modified HD films with partial O-termination (OHD) through ozonation. The response of the pristine HD and partial OHD devices that are ozonated for 30, 60 and 90 s, is found to be ~ 55, 1420, 810 and 95 % respectively, for exposing 900 ppb of H2S under ambient atmosphere at room temperature. Here, the optimally partial OHD sensor displays an enhanced sensitivity by about an order of magnitude due to the catalytic activity of the sparsely populated O-functional groups on HD surface. Moreover, the gas sensor response is found to be higher in wet background atmospheres such as N2 and synthetic air as compared to their respective dry atmospheres. Also, the response curve of these sensors exhibits a peculiar decrease in resistance immediately after exposure to H2S under wet background atmosphere while such oxidative behaviour is absent under dry atmospheres. Based on these observations, the plausible sensing mechanism of these H-diamond based sensors is proposed with the concept of humidity induced H2S hydrolyzation. Diamond is one of the promising wide bandgap semiconductors with a lot of attractive properties such as high thermal conductivity, high carrier mobility, high electric breakdown field, chemical inertness, biocompatibility and wide potential window for electrochemical analysis Alternatively, H-terminated diamond (H-diamond, HD) behaves as p-type semiconductor with high surface conductivity (SC) which occurs through surface charge transfer doping mechanism Metal oxide (MOX) based gas sensors are the popular choice for detecting trace level toxic gases because of their fast response, portability, reproducibility and cost effectiveness In this report, the study is focused on to understand the room temperature gas sensing mechanism of H-diamond for H2S in the ambient condition. Further, we have enhanced the sensitivity of the H-diamond sensors by tuning the surface electronic properties through the substitution of catalytic O-functional groups at H-site. Here, the catalytic O-centres are introduced in an effective and scalable way on H-diamond surface through partial oxidation using ozonation process. In addition, we have also studied to elucidate the humidity effect on this adsorbate mediated H2S gas sensing of pristine and partially O-terminated HD films. The microcrystalline diamond films were deposited on SiO2/Si using ultrahigh pure CH4 and H2 in the ratio of 1: 100 by hot filament chemical vapour deposition, as reported elsewhere For sensor device fabrication, inter-digitated electrodes with Ohmic contacts were prepared by depositing Pd (20 nm) layer on these H-diamond films by shadow masking method using thermal evaporation. An additional coating of 100 nm Ag layer is provided on the Pd electrode to make thicker electrode with low contact resistance for electrical measurements. The Ohmic contacts were ensured through I-V characteristics. The area, width and inter-electrode distance of the inter-digitated electrode are ~ 8 x 8 mm 2 , 400 and 300 μm, respectively. All the gas sensor measurements were performed in static mode at 23 0 C and near atmospheric pressure of ~ 960 mbar, unless otherwise mentioned specifically. The schematic of the sensor setup, electrode configuration and the concentration of H2S as a function of time are shown in Fig. The sensor response ( R ) was calculated using the equation, R (%) = (Rg-Ro)*100/Ro ........... Fig. However, this hydrophobic nature transforms into hydrophilic nature, when oxygen functional groups are substituted at H-site on the surface. The polar nature of the oxygen functional groups makes the surface interactive with the polar medium (water). As depicted in Fig. However, the partially ozonated HD for 30 s (OHD-30s) displays the highest response of ~ 1420 % and the OHD-60s displays a response of ~ 810 % at 0.9 ppm of H2S. The pristine and OHD-90s display the lowest response of ~ 55 and 95 % respectively, for the same H2S concentration. The Figs. 6a and 6b show the gas sensor response of the H-diamond based devices to the cumulative exposure pulses of H2S under dry ( RH < 5 %) N2 and synthetic air atmospheres, respectively. As similar to ambient air atmosphere, the resistance of these sensors increases upon exposure to H2S in both dry N2 and synthetic air. However, unlike in the ambient air background, the sensors do not exhibit any decrease in resistance upon immediate exposure to H2S. Thus, these sensors show a proper integrator like gas response behaviour towards H2S exposure pulses under dry N2 and synthetic air atmospheres. As can be seen from Figs. The sensor response of the H-diamond based devices to the cumulative exposure pulses of H2S under wet N2 and synthetic air medium is shown in Figs. 7c and 7d. As noticed in ambient atmosphere, the OHD-30s shows the highest response of ~ 1120 and 845 % in wet synthetic air and wet N2, respectively. Moreover, these sensor's response is higher in wet atmosphere as compared to that of dry atmosphere. This implies that the humidity plays a significant role on increasing the sensor response. one month. The base resistance of the devices changes slightly over time. However, the response of the devices does not vary significantly with respect to time delay of a month. Based on the above mentioned observations, it is noted that these sensors show an increase in resistance for exposing to H2S in a similar trend under different background atmospheres such as ambient air, both dry and wet N2 and synthetic air. Further, the partial ozonated HD sensors (30 and 60 s) display much higher sensitivity as compared to pristine and ozonated for slightly higher duration of ~ 90 s. Moreover, an unusual decrease in resistance is observed for all the four sensors when the RH was ~ 50 % in the gas chamber irrespective of the background atmosphere. Overall, it is obvious to think that the reducing gas H2S donates electrons to the p-type HD surface when they interact with each other. Such interaction will lead to increase in resistance of the sensors, as this concept is well established in MOX based sensors. However, a slight change in the surface configuration, i.e. the partial substitution of O at H site, enhances the response about an order which cannot be simply explained by the redox reaction at the surface. In order to understand the sensing behaviour of HD, first we need to understand the origin of SC and how it is affected by partial Otermination and the humidity. Widely accepted model to explain the SC of HD is surface transfer doping mechanism. When the diamond surface is terminated with H-atoms, the surface C-H bonds create a dipole layer, due to the difference in electronegativity between C and H atoms, that pushes the vacuum energy level to be ~ 1.3 eV below the conduction band minimum Also, the chemical potential (μe) of the adsorbate layer is ~ 4.8 eV which lies below the valence band maximum of the H-diamond. Hence, the spontaneous electron transfer takes place from the diamond valance band to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the adsorbate molecules through electrochemical redox reactions until surface Fermi level coincide with the chemical potential of the adsorbate layer. This electron transfer induces the accumulation of 2D hole gas with upward band bending at diamond surface. Thus, the SC increases enormously due to the induced 2D hole gas at diamond surface Basically, the gas molecules which are capable to dissolve and undergo acid-base reactions in the adsorbate layer could change the SC of diamond. Assuming that the adsorbate layer is neutral and pure, it might contain small and equal densities of H3O + and OH -ions by following water auto-ionization 2H2O  H3O + + OH - ................. When the impurity molecules undergo electrolytic dissociation in the adsorbate layer, the local pH and ionic conductivity of the adsorbate layer change depending on the acid-base reaction taking place Suppose the acid forming molecules dissolve in the adsorbate layer, pH of the adsorbate layer decreases that increases the electron transfer from valence band maximum of the diamond to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the adsorbate molecules. It causes more hole accumulation which further increases the SC of diamond surface. Alternatively, if the base forming molecules are dissolved in the adsorbate layer, the pH increases that promotes the electron transfer from adsorbate layer to diamond surface in the opposite direction. Thus, the hole concentration of the diamond surface decreases that eventually decrease SC. Hence any changes in the chemical nature of the adsorbate layer can alter the surface conductivity of diamond. When H-diamond surface is exposed to H2S gas molecules, these H2S molecules are stored into the adsorbate layer in a quasi-permanent manner. The sensing mechanism of HD sensor towards H2S may be described based on chemical reactions at the air/adlayer and adlayer/diamond interfaces as depicted in Fig. The reaction of H2S with H2O molecules would lead to the formation of HS -, OH -and H + . When these produced H + ions are getting adsorbed on the adsorbate layer, its pH decreases and ionic conductivity increases and they promote further electron transfer from diamond surface to adsorbate layer. This immediate oxidation process leads to increase in surface conductivity of diamond. In addition, the H2S molecules which are not interacted with gaseous H2O molecules would also react with the adsorbate layer in a similar manner like in the case of dry condition as indicated in equation 3. It is noteworthy that the reactions described in both the equations 3 and 6 contribute to decrease the surface conductivity under humid condition. Thus, the sensing response of the H-diamond samples are comparatively higher in the wet condition as compared to the dry condition of the same atmosphere. Thus, the ambient humidity also plays a vital role in the enhancement of sensing properties of the surface conducting diamond films to H2S at room temperature due to the humidity-induced H2S hydrolyzation. One of the important observations in this study is the enhancement of sensor response for the partial O-terminated HD films. In the partial OHD films, a considerable amount of Ofunctional groups are present, as evidenced by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, as reported elsewhere and OHD-60s. Nevertheless, such an electron transfer is not possible on fully H-terminated diamond surface. That is the reason for a low response for the pristine HD film. At the same time, the presence of a few O-atoms on the HD surface does not affect the NEA of the surface significantly and hence, the surface charge transfer doping is intact. On the other hand, when the O-atoms on the HD surface is beyond a certain critical limit, the local positive EA sites on HD surface increases significantly that affects the global NEA of the surface and hence, the decrease in the surface carrier density. In addition, the surface conducting areas are isolated by the insulating boundaries of oxygen terminated diamond surface. Hence, the sensor response is very poor for the OHD-90s film. Thus, an optimum concentration of Ofunctional groups on the diamond surface is essential to enhance the response of H-diamond based sensors. In summary, the high surface conductivity in microcrystalline diamond films that are grown by hot filament chemical vapour deposition is achieved by in-situ post growth Htermination. The surface conductivity and carrier density of the H-terminated diamond (HD) films were tuned through partial O-surface functionalization. In addition, the surface catalytic activity of the H-terminated diamond (HD) is also increased through O-termination of the pristine HD. Both the pristine and partially O-terminated HD sensors could measure H2S down to ~ 0.22 ppm in near ambient condition. However, the sensitivity of the optimally partial O-terminated HD is found to be high due to the catalytic behaviour of the additional Interaction of H 2 S with H 2 O HS -+ 5OH - SO 2 + 3H 2 O + 6e - H 2 S + 6OH - SO 2 + 4H 2 O + 6e - Adsorption of H + ions H