Comparative evaporation rate testing in the absence of solar irradiation is a widely adopted method for establishing and characterizing a reduced vaporization enthalpy of water within an interfacial solar evaporator. However, the assumption of equal energy input between cases is not generally valid, and renders this characterization method misleading. Larger evaporation rates result from interfacial evaporators in dark conditions, mostly due to expanded surface areas. This causes greater evaporation rates, more evaporative cooling, and larger temperature differentials with the environment. We provide theoretical and experimental evidence to prove that the observed temperature differences are sufficient to cause large differences in environmental energy input, such that an equal energy input cannot be assumed. Evaluation of our experimental data within a transient analytical model enables quantification of these energy input differences and calculation of the vaporization enthalpy. These results show that differences in evaporation rate correspond to differences in energy input, and that vaporization enthalpy is not reduced below the theoretical value. The magnitude of increased energy input also agrees well with the increase of dark environment evaporation rates typically reported for interfacial evaporators, providing an alternative explanation to vaporization enthalpy reduction for previous literature results. Further, we exemplify that the results of this characterization method contradict differential scanning calorimetry results, which are often used to make conclusions about vaporization enthalpy reduction and water state modification within evaporator materials. Thus, we conclude that this method should not be used to make conclusions about vaporization enthalpy reductions within interfacial evaporator materials. These results emphasize that the current understanding of vaporization enthalpy reduction within evaporator materials requires re-evaluation. With the global water crisis becoming increasingly pervasive, research into effective mitigation methods has become very popular in recent years. Within this field, a boom of publications has emerged in the sub-field of interfacial solar evaporation, whereby solar irradiance can produce clean water with high efficiency via thermal evaporation To enhance water yield, it is highly desirable to maximize the efficiency of the evaporation process, typically by reducing parasitic energy losses to the environment. For an interfacial evaporator under solar irradiance, the steady-state evaporative heat flux can be described by q evap = ṁh f g = ηq sol , (1) where ṁ, h f g , η, and q sol are the evaporation rate, water phase change enthalpy, evaporation efficiency, and incident solar power, respectively. The evaporation efficiency describes the amount of incident solar irradiance used for the evaporation process, which may be reduced below 100% by parasitic heat losses from convection, radiation, and conduction In an ideal case under 1 sun (1000 W m -2 ) irradiance, the maximum theoretically achievable evaporation rate is approximately 1.5 kg m -2 h -1 . Despite this, many researchers have obtained evaporation rates far above this limit, even without fully isolating the evaporation system from parasitic heat losses The typical explanation for this phenomena, introduced by Prof. Guihua Yu and colleagues in 2018, is that the vaporization enthalpy of water within the interfacial evaporators is reduced, thereby reducing the energy required to vaporize a given mass of water and allowing evaporation rates in excess of the theoretical limit A variety of characterization methods were employed to defend this hypothesis, many of which are frequently used in contemporary studies to justify evaporation rates above the theoretical limit and prove that the vaporization enthalpy of water has been reduced. One of the most commonly-used methods involves evaluating evaporation rates in the absence of solar irradiance (i.e., in a dark environment). In the dark environment evaporation test, the mass loss of identical water-filled beakers -one of pure water, and one with the interfacial evaporator placed on top -is monitored over an extended duration. With the assumption Fig. that the energy input from the environment (which facilitates pseudo-steady evaporation over the test period) is equal between the two beakers during the process, one can conclude that ( ṁh f g ) H2O = ( ṁh f g ) evap . (2) Thus, if the evaporation rate of the interfacial evaporator is higher than that of pure water in these conditions, this method offers a simple indicator that the vaporization enthalpy of water within the evaporator must be reduced However, deeper investigation reveals that this method produces misleading results that should not be used to justify a reduced vaporization enthalpy, due to the invalidity of the equal energy input assumption. In this work, we show both theoretically and experimentally that differences in the dark environment evaporation rate are primarily due to differences in evaporation surface area, which invalidates the assumption of equal energy input (Fig. Left at rest in ambient conditions, water in a beaker will spontaneously evaporate as liquid molecules at the interface gain enough energy to overcome surface binding energy. In doing so, energy exits the water system through the latent heat of the exiting water vapor. This energy output manifests as a sensible heat reduction in the remaining liquid water, cooling the water. As the water temperature falls below the ambient temperature via evaporative cooling, the water will begin to receive energy from the environment due to the temperature differential, compensating for evaporative energy losses. Pseudo-steady evaporation is achieved when the net energy input from the environment is equal to the energy output due to evaporation It is well known that evaporation rates are heavily dependent on the interfacial area, and that enlarging the evaporation surface will accelerate mass transfer. Many interfacial evaporators possess significantly enlarged surface areas, typically obtained via an internal porous structure, which intrinsically enhances the natural evaporation rate However, these evaporation-enhancing factors have not been shown to inherently reduce the total energy requirement of evaporation. Under steady evaporation conditions, evaporative cooling must be balanced by energy from the environment via radiation, convection, and conduction. Energy input from any of these mechanisms is proportional to the temperature difference between the ambient environment and the surface(s) of the evaporation system. Therefore, for a fixed ambient temperature, an evaporation system with lower temperatures at steady state will receive a greater energy input from the environment. In the context of a typical comparative dark environment test, the enhanced natural evaporation of the interfacial evaporator will induce greater cooling, which in turn induces a greater environmental energy input. This temperature difference may appear smalloften less than 1 °C between the water and evaporator systems -yet as will be shown, can cause appreciable discrepancies between the energy input of the two systems. As a result, the interfacial evaporation device receives significantly more energy input, and can sustain enhanced evaporation rates in comparison to water without relying on the hypothesis of reduced vaporization enthalpy. In short, enhanced evaporation resulting from the properties of the interfacial evaporator produces a greater evaporative cooling effect, which enables greater environmental heat fluxes that can maintain larger evaporation rates (Fig. To prove that the temperature differences which result from disparate evaporation rates are not negligible in a comparative dark environment evaporation test, theoretical calculations are performed. Consider a beaker of diameter d and height H filled with water, placed on a thick piece of insulating foam. In general, convective and radiative transfer between a surface of the beaker and the environment can be described by the following equations In these equations, the subscript i is used to designate the appropriate surface of the beaker. A is the area of the surface, h is the convection coefficient, T ∞ is the ambient temperature, T is the beaker surface temperature, ε is the emissivity of the surface, and σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. The Nusselt number is used to calculate natural convection coefficient for the horizontal top surface and vertical walls of the beaker, respectively, as and ] Air properties are evaluated at the average temperature between the ambient and the surface. The wall of the beaker is assumed to have negligible thermal resistance due to its low thickness. The beaker is also assumed to be insulated on the side and/or bottom surfaces (depending on the case). For simplicity, steady state is assumed, such that changes in sensible heat can be neglected. The accuracy of these assumptions will be revisited in later sections with respect to the experimental results. The emissivities of the water, beaker, and evaporator are taken as 0.96, 0.95, and 0.93, respectively. The diameter and height of the beaker are 41 and 40 mm, respectively, and the Stefan-Boltzmann constant is taken as 5.67×10 -8 W m -2 K -4 . When the side walls of the beaker are considered, the side wall temperature is assumed to be 0.3 °C above the evaporation surface temperature for the water and 1.1 °C for the evaporator, based on our experimental observations and previous results in the literature. The calculation also limits the wall temperatures from exceeding the ambient temperature and limits the evaporator wall from exceeding the water wall temperature, as either case is not likely to occur in a practical scenario. Using these methods, the environmental energy input for a beaker undergoing steady evaporation is quantified. By modeling and comparing beakers with different surface temperatures in the same ambient conditions, the energy impact of these temperature differentials is quantified. In this way, an input energy enhancement factor, which describes the excess energy input brought on by lower system temperatures (as may result due to the enhanced evaporation of an interfacial evaporator), can be defined as where U in,evap and U in,H2O represent the net input energy from the environment to the interfacial evaporator and water system, respectively. Thus, the energy enhancement factor provides a reasonable estimate for the energy input differences between the water and evaporator systems during a comparative dark environment evaporation test. The results of these theoretical analyses are shown in Fig. The interfacial evaporator beaker is designated with a temperature difference from 0 to 3 °C below that of the pure water (x-axis). From Fig. The energy input to the evaporator system can exceed 1.5 times that of the water system even with a temperature differential less than 1 °C. At greater differentials, the evaporator system can easily obtain 2-3 times as much energy from the environment as the pure water system. As expected, the energy input enhancement factor f in,evap is heavily dependent on the chosen temperature differential between the water and evaporator systems, as all heat transfer components are directly proportional to this quantity. In addition, if the chosen water temperature is closer to the ambient temperature, the relative energy gain from the corresponding evaporator case is larger. This is because the ratio of the evaporator-ambient temperature difference and the water-ambient temperature difference becomes quite large in these cases. When the sides of the beaker are not insulated (i.e., convective and radiative heat transfer from the sides is considered), the evaporator generally receives less heat transfer for a given surface temperature differential, as seen in Fig. The most important takeaway of the analytical results concerns the magnitude of the differences in energy input. The model indicates that temperature differences in the range of 0 -3 °C may provide the evaporator with far more energy than the water system, more than doubling its energy input in many cases. Thus, this enhanced energy input would explain evaporation rates of interfacial evaporators which exceed those of water by similar factors without necessitating claims of reduced vaporization enthalpy. To further support these claims, the comparative dark environment test is performed (Fig. The experimental results confirm our key hypothesis: the interfacial evaporator system maintains notably lower temperatures than the DI water system throughout the entirety of the test. While both systems display a fairly consistent temperature differential with the ambient after an initial transient period, the MF sponge maintains a temperature nearly 1.1 °C below that of the DI water surface under identical ambient conditions, as shown in Fig. As expected, the use of the interfacial evaporator yields an enhanced evaporation rate, as shown in Fig. To support these conclusions, transient analyses are performed on the experimental temperature data. The energy balance for the entire beaker during the test can be expressed as where q cond and q sens represent conductive and sensible heat contributions. This equation is consistent with earlier theoretical descriptions of the evaporation process, where energy loss from evaporation is balanced by cooling of the water itself and environmental energy inputs. This relationship enables quantification of the energy transfer components and estimation of the vaporization enthalpy of each beaker, which will further illustrate that the assumption of equal energy input is invalid, and that there is no reduction in vaporization enthalpy. A transient, axisymmetric heat transfer model is run for each beaker using the Matlab PDE toolbox Based on these inputs, the temperature distribution inside the beaker is calculated at each time step over the 24 h test period. The solution is nonlinear, as conductive and sensible heat inputs are determined based on the resulting temperature field. Transient convective and radiative inputs at the evaporation surface are determined using Eqs. 3 -5. The ambient air temperature is used for the convection calculation, while the enclosure wall temperature is used for the radiative calculation. Thus, all contributing energy input components are determined for the experimental test. Figure The cumulative energy input from each heat transfer mechanism is shown in Fig. By combining these results with Eq. 8, the vaporization enthalpy of each beaker can be calculated, shown in Fig. Finally, the MF evaporator is characterized using DSC to further support these conclusions. DSC data is used to characterize transition enthalpies, and features of the heat flow curves can be analyzed for further information In Fig. The DSC can also be used at low temperatures to gain information about the bonding state of water. Typically, for a modified water state as is commonly seen in hydrogels, the melting onset will shift well below 0 °C, and the melting enthalpy often decreases Together, these low and high temperature DSC results clearly show that neither the vaporization enthalpy nor the hydrogen bonding state of water within the MF sponge are modified with respect to those of bulk water. Despite this, the dark environment test on its own would indicate a reduced vaporization enthalpy if the assumption of equal energy input were used. We note that discrepancies between reduced enthalpy values characterized via dark environment or DSC methods are common, and are usually attributed to differences in the degree of dehydration experienced by the evaporator within each test The data and analyses reported herein clearly illustrate that comparative dark environment evaporation tests are not suitable for characterizing the reduced vaporization enthalpy of an interfacial evaporator. Enlarged evaporation surface areas or other evaporator characteristics may increase the evaporation rate in a dark environment, but this does not inherently modify the energy requirement of evaporation. Rather, increased evaporative cooling allows the evaporator system to reach a lower steady state temperature, enabling it to harvest more environmental energy due to a greater temperature differential. Crucially, theoretical and experimental results show that the magnitude of this enhanced energy input is proportional to the enhanced evaporation observed in a dark environment. Furthermore, DSC results, which are commonly used to corroborate claims of reduced vaporization enthalpy in interfacial evaporators, are inconsistent with the dark environment results presented. Thus, it is concluded that comparative dark environment tests are not a valid method for establishing or quantifying a reduced vaporization enthalpy in an interfacial evaporator system, as the key assumption of equal energy input is not accurate. To thoroughly and accurately demonstrate this concept, well-controlled experiments and detailed analytical models have been employed. However, the utility of simple theoretical Table h f g,evap (J g -1 ) f ṁevap Carbon cloth Previous accounts of reduced enthalpy from dark environment evaporation tests are widespread in the literature. Table Looking back at the model results of Fig. With the context of these experimental results, it is important to comment on the controversial role of the dark environment evaporation rate in the analysis of a solar-driven evaporation system Finally, recent discussions in the literature call into question our current understanding of reduced enthalpy of evaporation during continuous interfacial solar evaporation processes. A modification of the water state clearly manifests in many materials (most notably hydrogels), and produces a reduced value of the DSC-measured enthalpy along with solardriven evaporation rates above the theoretical limit In this work, a critical assessment of reduced enthalpy characterization through dark environment evaporation testing is performed. The assumption of equal energy input between a water system and an interfacial evaporator system is analyzed both theoretically and experimentally. In both cases, the environmental energy input to the interfacial evaporation system is shown to significantly exceed that of the water system. The excess energy input within the experimental test is calculated using a transient analytical model, and it is found that the enhancement in evaporation for the interfacial evaporator agrees with the enhancement of energy input due to lower evaporator temperatures. This data illustrates that the assumption of equal energy input is not valid, and that reduced values of enthalpy obtained using this characterization method are not accurate. Recent uses of the dark environment characterization method in the literature are analyzed with respect to these results, and it is found that the magnitude of previously reported dark environment data matches well with our explanation of excess energy input. Discrepancies between differential scanning calorimetry methods are also discussed, emphasizing that the current understanding of vaporization enthalpy reduction in interfacial evaporation systems requires clarification and deeper investigation. Commercially-available melamine foam sponges are obtained from South Street Designs Company (UPC: 089902974060). The sponge is rinsed 3 times with DI water and ethanol before use. It is cut to a 41 mm diameter to fit within the test beaker during evaporation tests. Evaporation tests were performed over a test period of 24 h in a closed darkroom environment. Two polypropylene beakers containing DI water were placed side-by-side, undisturbed during the entire test period. The MF sponge is placed on the water surface of the evaporator beaker, in direct contact with the DI water. It is pushed into the beaker until its top surface is in line with the mouth of the beaker. The beakers were surrounded on the sides by 42 mm of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) insulation foam (measured thermal conductivity of 0.065 W m -1 K -1 ). The beakers were placed on top of 38 mm of polystyrene (PS) insulation foam (measured thermal conductivity of 0.047 W m -1 K -1 ) and another 12.7 mm of PVC insulation foam. Insulation boards were firmly secured to one another to diminish contact resistance. Temperatures were monitored using the FLIR A655C thermal camera with a resolution of 640 × 480 using a 25°lens. Temperatures for evaporator system surfaces were taken as the average over each respective surface. Transparent acrylic sheets were positioned around the setup to reduce the impact of ambient temperature and wind fluctuations during the test. This enclosure is not air-tight, so that evaporating water vapor will not accumulate locally. Ambient temperature was monitored using a thermocouple positioned inside of the wind-covered area. An additional thermocouple was secured to the inside of one acrylic sheet to monitor the temperature of the walls inside the enclosure. The enclosure wall temperature was used as the surrounding temperature for the radiative transfer calculation. Agreement between thermocouple and IR temperatures within ± 0.05 °C is confirmed prior to testing. The mass of each water-filled test beaker (plus evaporator, when applicable) was weighed before and after each test period using the RADWAG PS 1000 electronic scale. Masses were not continuously monitored by the scale to avoid excess heat input from the scale, and to allow the two beakers to remain sufficiently close to one another to achieve identical ambient conditions. As the evaporation surface temperature drops very rapidly once the beakers are prepared during setup, the initial temperature of the bulk water used to fill each beaker is measured via thermocouple prior to each test, within 5 min of the start time. This temperature is used as the initial domain temperature in the analysis. Humidity was monitored during each test using the WS-2000 weather station with the WH32B sensor. The humidity during the comparative test was 18.6 ± 2.1%. Differential scanning calorimetry curves were performed on the TA Instruments Q2000 DSC under Argon flow (50 ml min -1 ) using a ramp rate of 5 °C min -1 . Thermal conductivity is characterized using the HotDisk TPS 2500s. SEM images were obtained from the Supra 25 SEM using an acceleration voltage of 5 kV. IR camera images, which show a symmetric temperature distribution on the evaporation surface. For these reasons, the conductive heat flux on the boundary of the cylinder is set as where the outer temperature of the insulation is assumed to be equal to the ambient temperature. For the bottom surface of the beaker, the standard plane wall conduction equation is used due to the parallel geometry where L is the bottom insulation layer thickness. The sensible heat contribution q sens is expressed as The water density, specific heat, and beaker volume are given by ρ, c p , and V , respectively. ∆T mean is the difference in the bulk mean temperature of water over the corresponding time step ∆t. A time step of 1 min is used, which is verified as sufficiently small to achieve convergence. The boundary condition at the top surface for each time step is set as the experimentally measured surface temperature of the evaporation surface. For the rest of the domain, the initial temperature is set as the bulk water temperature of water used to fill the beakers, measured just before the start of the experiment. The side and bottom walls are designated with conductive heat flux boundary conditions based on Eqs. 3 and 4, respectively. Insulation thermal conductivity and thickness are set based on the experimentally measured values of the surrounding insulation, as given in Experimental Methods, and temporal data is used for the ambient temperature. Water properties k, c p , and ρ are set as 0.6 W m -1 K -1 , 4182 J kg -1 K -1 , and 999 kg m -3 , respectively 