We present a study by Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, supported by ab initio calculations, of the interaction between graphene and monolayer (semiconducting) PtSe2 as a function of the twist angle θ between the two layers. We analyze the PtSe2 contribution to the hybrid interface states that develop within the bandgap of the semiconductor to probe the interaction. The experimental data indicate that the interlayer coupling increases markedly with the value of θ, which is confirmed by ab initio calculations. The moiré patterns observed within the gap are consistent with a momentum conservation rule between hybridized states, and the strength of the hybridization can be qualitatively described by a perturbative model. Proximity effect allows transferring some electronic properties at the interface between two materials without dramatically affecting their individual structure. This phenomenon is thought to be especially relevant for few layers thick materials where even short range interactions can impact the properties of the whole sample In this work, we have investigated the basic mechanisms underlying the interaction between graphene and a SC 2D transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) layer by means of scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS), complemented by ab initio simulations. Our approach consists in analyzing the electronic states that appear within the SC bandgap on the TMD side of the heterostructure as a consequence of the interfacial coupling. We thus probe the component in the PtSe2 layer of the states formed within the TMD bandgap by hybridization with the low energy states of graphene. This includes the states close to the Dirac point (DP) of (bilayer) graphene, that is located around 0.3 eV below the Fermi level in the samples we use As a SC TMD we have chosen monolayer (1L) PtSe2, which has a bandgap of about 2 eV. 1T-PtSe2 actually shows a comparatively large interlayer interaction in the TMD family The PtSe2 layer was grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on a graphene bilayer substrate (BLG) grown on SiC Fig. Ab initio band structure calculations confirm the existence of such hybridized states at the BLG-1L PtSe2 bilayer, as shown in Fig. In Ref. 50 (section SI4) we show that the period (P) of the triangular superstructures observed inside the 1L-PtSe2 islands is related to the rotation angle θ between the crystallographic directions of the 1L PtSe2 and of the BLG substrate. The value of θ can be evaluated directly from images with atomic resolution on the bare BLG and on the TMD islands (Fig. Our experimental data therefore suggest the following picture for the electronic structure of the interface. Graphene (BLG) π states located within the bandgap of the TMD interact with the TMD potential, which gives rise to hybrid states having a partial PtSe2 character. This "in-gap" PtSe2 contribution, as probed by the STM tip, (i) shows ubiquitous spatial modulations related to the socalled MP2 moiré pattern and (ii) depends on the rotation angle between the TMD and BLG substrate, being larger for large rotation angles. Actually, these observations are consistent with the scenario proposed for the interlayer interaction at an (arbitrary) incommensurate interface Moreover, considering that a graphene state located within the bandgap can be rather far (a fraction of an eV) from the band edges of the TMD, the related hybrid state can be obtained from perturbation theory ), the DP of BLG is 0.4 eV below the CBM, this is close to EF in Fig. In summary, our experimental study of the 1L PtSe2-BLG junction, supported by ab initio calculations, has revealed the saliant features of the interlayer interaction between the states in this twisted van der Waals heterostructure. This was achieved by analyzing the electronic states appearing inside the TMD bandgap as a result of hybridization at the interface . The momentum conservation rule gives rise to a specific Moiré pattern observed in the whole range of rotation angles. The angular dependence of the coupling strength between the layers gives rise to variations in the tunneling current measured in the TMD bandgap. Beyond the case of the 1L PtSe2-BLG system, our work supports theoretical Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) has been used to prepare the sample studied in this work The epitaxial BLG on SIC substrate was first outgassed under UHV at 800°C during 30 minutes and maintained at 280°C during the growth The as-grown layer was capped at room temperature with amorphous selenium in the MBE chamber to protect the sample from oxidation during transfer in air to the STM setup. The coating layer was then removed in-vacuum by a soft annealing (around 200°C), and the sample was eventually cooled down for the STM/STS measurements. All the STM/STS experiments were performed at 8.5 K with PtIr tips, using a set-up developed in the group. Local tunneling spectroscopy was achieved at fixed tip-surface separation, while maintaining the feedback-loop open. A 4 mV rms modulation with frequency 473 Hz was added to the sample bias, and the conductance was detected with the lock-in amplifier technique. The STM/STS data were processed using the WSXM software Our first-principles calculations are based on the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method It is important to note that performing beyond standard DFT with generalized gradient approximation functionals like PBE ones, we underestimate the bandgap of monolayer PtSe2 by about 0.5 eV compared to the experimental value. However, Guan et al. In this section, we show: -In Figure In this section, we present: -In Figure Figure Such interfacial hybridization of graphene based in-gap states is not specific to the 1L PtSe2/BLG system considered here. For instance, in the case of the interface between semiconducting Cr2Ge2Te6 (CGT) and graphene, the admixture of CGT states in the in-gap states of the coupled system has been evaluated to about 2% close to the Dirac point Notice that this "amplification" of the tunneling current between the tip and the BLG substrate by the 1L PtSe2 layer (or the occurrence of an hybridization between BLG and 1L PtSe2 states at the interface) also leads to the finite height of the 1L PtSe2 islands measured in constant current images acquired à -0.80V sample bias. For instance, the apparent height of the island shown in Fig. SI4 : Origin of the triangular superstructures (Moiré patterns) at the 1L-PtSe2/BLG interface . In this section, we present data, which show that the triangular superstructures (with period P) observed inside the 1L PtSe2 domains are related to the rotation angle θ between the crystallographic directions of the lattices of the TMD and of the BLG. We also show that the TMD band onsets at the 1L-PtSe2/BLG interface do not depend on θ (i. e. on the value of P). We present here measurements revealing the existence of rotational domains at the interface between 1L-PtSe2 and BLG, and we illustrate the method we have used to measure directly the rotation angle θ. Although many of the islands correspond to θ≈0° as in Fig. The tunneling spectra of Figure As quoted before, it appears that the position of the CBM/VBM is essentially independent of the value of P (or θ). This indicates that the position of the Dirac point (DP) of the BLG substrate is also independent on θ. Indeed, a shift of the DP of the BLG (relative to the Fermi level) should induce a shift (with comparable amplitude) of the CBM of the 1L PtSe2 layer owing to the absence of Fermi level pinning at the interface (see In this section, we show: -In Figure Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut NEEL, 38000 Grenoble, France Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, CNRS, Grenoble INP, IRIG-SPINTEC, Grenoble, France