Turbulent flows have been used for millennia to mix solutes Being able to efficiently mix solutes in disordered threedimensional (3D) porous media is critical to a broad range of key energy, environmental, and industrial processes. For example, it controls the rate at which chemical compounds react in porous flow reactors Moreover, the Péclet number quantifying the ratio of the reactant transport rates by advection to diffusion Pe ≡ Ud p /D is frequently ≫ 1. Under these conditions, "laminar chaotic advection" (LCA) A similar challenge arises in many biogeochemical and environmental processes Here, we introduce a way to overcome these limitations by harnessing an elastic flow instability (EI) generated by polymers added to the fluid. Studies in a range of simplified geometries have shown that the buildup of polymer elastic stresses during transport can generate chaotic flow fields reminiscent of those observed in inertial turbulence, despite the small Reynolds number To characterize solute mixing, we inject two parallel co-flowing streams of fluid into the porous medium at the same imposed volumetric flow rate Q/2. The mean flow velocity is then U ≡ Q/(φA), where φ and A are the porosity and crosssectional area of the porous medium, respectively. As shown in Figure tion, such that c = 1 and c = -1 correspond to the fully dyed and undyed streams and c = 0 represents complete mixing. Quantifying the increase in the extent of mixing with x then yields a direct measure of the mixing length l mix Adding dilute polymer to the fluid dramatically changes this behavior. In this case, the flow in some pores becomes unstable, with chaotic spatiotemporal fluctuations, at a critical value of U = U c,min = 170 μm/s (Supplementary Figure In this fully-unstable case, the EI-generated flow fluctuations greatly enhance solute mixing, as shown in Figs. Having established that EI can greatly enhance solute mixing in a porous medium, we next ask: What exact features of the unstable flow field generated by EI give rise to this enhanced mixing? And how can this link between fluid flow and solute mixing in a porous medium be described quantitatively? Close inspection of Figs. To more quantitatively characterize this phenomenon, we simultaneously image the fluid velocity and solute concentration fields, u (x, t) and c (x, t), respectively, and thereby determine the root mean square fluctuations in the magnitudes of these quantities (indicated by ′ rms ), in individual pores. A representative example is shown in Fig. These velocity fluctuations drive fluctuations in solute concentration, which are therefore also chaotic (Supplementary Figure Motivated by these observations, we hypothesize that enhanced mixing arises from the combination of two different processes operating at different length and time scales in tandem: laminar chaotic advection (LCA) that stretches and folds solute lamellae at a rate Γ LCA ≈ U/ 270d p where τ -1 mix ≡ U/l mix , f represents the fraction of pores in which the solute is mixed by EI (Supplementary Figure Can this enhanced mixing be harnessed to improve the kinetics and yield of chemical reactions in porous media? To explore this possibility, we introduce a phenolic reactant, HSf, in stream A at a concentration [HSf] 0 (magenta in Fig. In the polymer-free case, laminar chaotic advection only provides slight mixing between the solvent streams, and the reaction proceeds only along the midplane of the medium, shown by the top row in Fig. Our model of enhanced mixing by successive stretching and folding of solute lamellae both across multiple pores as well as in individual pores, schematized in Fig. where the angle brackets indicate an average over the transverse direction y (denoted by the subscript ⊥), the Damköhler number Da ≡ θτ mix /τ k compares the time scales of reactant mixing and reaction, θ ≈ 0.14 is a constant scaling factor to account for reaction initiation before fluid is fully mixed, and τ k = 11 ± 1 s, consistent with independent measurements Discussion. In many energy, environmental, and industrial processes, solute mixing and chemical reaction kinetics are limited by slow diffusion during laminar flow in a porous medium. Here, we established that elastic instabilities (EI) can be harnessed to overcome this limitation. This new capability simply relies on the addition of dilute, flexible polymers to the fluid, and is therefore straightforward to implement in diverse settings and across a wide range of geometries. It therefore complements other approaches to overcoming the diffusive limitations of typically-laminar flows, which rely on changing the geometry of the boundaries surrounding the fluid instead Our in situ imaging revealed that enhanced mixing arises from the successive stretching and folding of solute lamellae by the EI-generated chaotic flow within individual pores, in addition to their stretching and folding as lamellae traverse multiple tortuous pores, in a manner reminiscent of inertial turbulence. As a result, the considerable decrease in the length of medium required to mix solute, increase in the solute transverse dispersivity, and increase in chemical reaction yield imparted by EI can all be predicted using well-established ideas from studies of turbulent flows. We anticipate that the quantitative principles we thereby developed will provide a way to predict and control EI-enhanced mixing and reaction kinetics in applications ranging from large-scale chemical production to environmental remediation Indeed, while here we focused on a simple first-order chemical reaction as a proof of principle, our approach could be adapted to enhance the progression of other types of chemical reactions, such as reactions of other orders, reversible reactions, and solid surface-mediated reactions Porous media preparation and characterization. We prepare disordered 3D porous media following our previous work Before each experiment, we infiltrate the porous medium with isopropyl alcohol (IPA) to prevent trapping of air and then displace the IPA by flushing with water. We then displace the water with the miscible test fluid-either the polymer solution or the polymer-free solvent. We inject our test fluids through both inlets equally at a constant total volumetric flow rate Q ranging from 0.5 to 25 mL/hr using a Harvard Apparatus PHD 2000 syringe pump, maintaining a constant Q for each flow rate tested over 2.5 hours, corresponding to over 1000 pore volumes t PV ≡ φAL/Q, before any micrographs are collected, to ensure an equilibrated state. At the conclusion of the experiment, we inject rhodamine-dyed polymer-free solvent for 6 hours to fully saturate the pore space with dye, and use confocal microscopy to image the pore space; the binarized images isolate the solid matrix of the porous medium, which we omit from all subsequent image analyses. Fluid preparation and characterization. All of our test fluids are comprised of a viscous solvent composed of 6 wt.% ultrapure milliPore water, 82.6 wt.% glycerol (Sigma Aldrich), 10.4 wt.% dimethylsulfoxide (Sigma Aldrich), 1 wt.% NaCl, and < 0.1% additional solutes (specified further below). This formulation precisely matches the fluid refractive index to that of the glass beads n = 1.479, thus rendering each porous medium transparent when saturated. We characterize the fluid rheology using steady shear measurements in an Anton Paar MCR301 rheometer, equipped with a 1°5 cm-diameter conical geometry set at a 50 μm gap over a range of imposed constant shear rates γ = 0.01 to 10 s -1 . The polymer-free solvent is Newtonian, with a constant dynamic viscosity μ s = 230 mPa • s. The polymer solution has 300 ppm of 18 MDa partially hydrolyzed polyacrylamide (Polysciences) added. As detailed previously Moreover, we describe the solution using a single polymer relaxation time λ ≈ lim γ→0 N 1 2( η-η s ) γ 2 = 480 ± 30 ms Macroscopic imaging of solute mixing. We use Rhodamine Red-X Succinimidyl Ester 5-isomer dye (Invitrogen) as a passive solute introduced into stream A at a dilute concentration c A = 500 ppb; stream B is dye-free and hence c B = 0. The solute diffusivity is given by D ≈ 1.2 × 10 -8 cm 2 /s, obtained by extending previous measurements To determine l mix , we measure the time-averaged fraction of fluid pixels along y for which | c| < 0.5 at each position x. This fraction of well-mixed fluid increases with position as 1exp (-x/l mix ); fitting this relation to our data then yields the values of l mix presented in Fig. To determine D ∇ ⊥ , we use the micrographs to determine a map of the solute concentration gradient |∇ c|, as shown in Supplementary Figure We estimate the characteristic rate of stretching of solute lamellae by directly computing the forward finite-time Lyapunov exponent Γ ftle (x, t) from the measured velocity field for the example pore in Fig. In situ characterization of chemical reaction kinetics. As a model chemical reaction, we choose the irreversible reduction of the fluorescent dye 5(6)-carboxy-SNARF-1 (Fischer Scientific) from its phenolic form HSf introduced in stream A at a concentration [HSf] 0 = 5 μM to phenolate form Sf -in the presence of excess base NaOH introduced in stream B at a concentration [OH -] 0 = 100 mM: HSf + OH -→ Sf -+ H 2 O. The reactant and product are fluorescent with distinct emission spectra Theoretical model for macroscopic conversion of reactant to product. For a well-mixed differential parcel of fluid (denoted by the subscript WM), the reaction proceeds according to first-order reaction kinetics , where [OH -] ≈ [OH -] 0 since it is in great excess. Thus, the kinetic reaction time scale τ k = (k [OH -] 0 ) -1 . Stoichiometric mass conservation gives [HSf] = [HSf] 0 -[Sf -], and substituting the fraction of reactant that has been converted into product in this well-mixed differential parcel of fluid, X W M ≡ [Sf -]/[HSf] 0 , yields X W M = 1exp (-t/τ k ). However, this reaction can only begin to proceed in a parcel once it becomes sufficiently mixed at some time t ′ . The fraction of the pore space that is sufficientlymixed is then given by f mix ≈ 1exp (-t/(θτ mix )), where 0 < θ ≤ 1 is a constant scaling factor to account for reaction initiation before fluid is fully mixed. Thus, integrating over all well-mixed parcels of fluid gives the macro-scale conversion 