We show that spin-orbit coupling at the interface between a superconducting film of the finite lateral size and the underlying ferromagnetic insulator with in-plane exchange field gives rise to a series of non-reciprocal effects provided the superconducting pairing is enhanced near the boundaries of the superconductor due to, e.g., variation of the film thickness or of the interlayer electron transparency. Specifically, the critical temperature and the critical depairing current are shown to depend on the relative orientation between the exchange field in the ferromagnet and the superconducting film boundaries. The discovered anisotropy of the superconducting properties is promising for the design of diode-type elements in superconducting spintronics. Interplay between strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and ferromagnetic (F) ordering of electron spins in superconducting (S) systems has attracted much attention because it appeared to induce a variety of fascinating phenomena including the appearance of Majorana edge states In systems with the lack of inversion symmetry along a certain direction characterized by the vector n the electron free energy contains a term ∝ (σ × n) • p which couples the electron momentum p with its spin σ. If such system is put in electric contact with a ferromagnetic material characterized by the exchange field vector h (or is placed into external magnetic field) the electron spins become polarized making the states with two opposite momentum directions along the vector (h × n) non-equivalent. As a result, in superconducting media the Cooper pair wave function Ψ in the ground state acquires the spontaneous momentum p 0 ∝ (h × n) taking the form of the plane wave ψ ∝ e ip0r (so-called "helical" state) Despite the comprehensibility of the above physical picture, the consequences of the helical states formation in superconducting systems appeared to be extremely sensitive to the origin of the magnetic ordering and the specific geometry of the system. In particular, for the bulk superconductor placed into the uniform magnetic field an appropriate phase transformation Ψ ′ = Ψe -ip0r * alputilov@ipmras.ru applied to the superconducting order parameter Ψ completely eliminates the effect of SOC on the system free energy so that no meaningful phenomena appears In addition, the finite S layer thickness in S/F bilayers with strong SOC is responsible for the appearance of non-reciprocal effects in the superconducting transport, namely, anisotropy of the critical depairing current in the plane of S/F interface From the theoretical standpoint, the non-reciprocal superconducting transport in systems with the simultaneous spinpolarization and SOC can be explained, e.g., by accounting the high-order gradients terms in the Ginzburg-Landau theory due to the SOC In the present paper we show that the finite lateral sizes of the superconducting film placed on top of the ferromagnetic insulator are responsible for a series of peculiar non-reciprocal effects including the dependence of the superconducting transition critical temperature on the relative orientation between the exchange field in the ferromagnet and the S film boundaries as well as the diode effect in the critical current. We focus on the case when the superconducting transition temperature is locally enhanced near the boundaries of the superconducting film caused by the possible relaxation of the interatomic distances at atomic scale or variations of the S layer thickness due to peculiarities of the sample fab-rication process. Similarly to the phenomenon of the twinning-plane superconductivity Recently, it was experimentally demonstrated that the critical temperature and the critical current of the thin elongated superconducting stripe made of Aluminum and placed on top of dielectric ferromagnet -yttrium iron garnet (YIG) with in-plane magnetization depend on the mutual orientation between the current flow and ferromagnet magnetization The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe the geometry of the S/F system under consideration and introduce the theoretical model based on the Ginzburg-Landau approach. In Sec. III we analyze the dependence of the system critical temperature on the orientation between the exchange field in the F layer and the S layer boundary. In Sec. IV we describe the diode effect in the critical current. Finally, in Sec. V we summarize our results. In this section we describe the theoretical approach based on the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau formalism which we apply to calculate the critical temperature and the critical depairing current of the finite-size S/F system with SOC. The system geometry is sketched in Fig. In the vicinity of the critical temperature the emergence of superconductivity and the transport properties of the system can be described in the frames of the Ginzburg-Landau theory. For simplicity we neglect the inverse proximity effect assuming that Cooper pairs do not penetrate into the ferromagnetic insulator. Then the system free energy is determined only by the profile of the order parameter inside the superconductor and the free energy density takes the form where ∇ is a gradient operator in the xy plane, α(T ) = α 0 (T c0 -T )/T c0 and β are the standard Ginzburg-Landau parameters, T c0 is the critical temperature of the isolated bulk superconductor, n is the unit vector perpendicular to the S/F interface, h is the exchange field directed in the plane of the ferromagnet boundary and the last term proportional to [h 0 ×n] describes the effects of SOC where w = ε[h 0 ×n]/γ 0 , and g = γ 1 [h 0 ×n]/κ. Note that the vectors w and g lie in the plane of the S film and are perpendicular to the exchange field h 0 . The obtained functional allows the further calculation of the system critical temperature and depairing current. The local enhancement of the critical temperature near the superconductor boundary described by the constant γ 0 gives rise to the surface superconductivity, i.e. formation of the localized superconducting state at temperatures above the critical temperature of the bulk superconductor. In this section we calculate the critical temperature of localized superconductivity (emerging above the bulk critical temperature T c0 ) in finite-size superconducting film and demonstrate its dependence on the mutual orientation between the exchange field in the underlying ferromagnetic insulator with SOC and the the film boundary. To obtain the system critical temperature one can neglect the terms ∝ |ψ| 4 in the free energy functional (2). Varying Eq. ( The corresponding free energy per unit length along the S film boundary as a function of the parameters reads: +(2s) -1 (-α + κ(s 2 + p 2 + q 2 ) -γ 0 w x p -γ 0 w y q . (4) The transition from normal to superconducting state occurs when the free energy F becomes negative for nonzero order parameter amplitude ψ 0 . The maximal value of the constant α m which enables F = 0 for ψ 0 = 0 defines the critical temperature T c of the corresponding phase transition: Using Eq. ( . (6) In the absence of the SOC the problem is formally equivalent to the one previously analyzed in the context of the twinning plane superconductivity (see Eqs. ( In this section we analyze the diode effect and show that if the in-plane exchange field in the ferromagnetic insulator has a component perpendicular to the S film boundary the critical depairing current of the quasi-onedimensional superconducting channel formed near this boundary above T c0 depends on the current direction. The key ingredient required for the diode effect in superconducting systems with SOC is the impossibility to exclude the odd-degree terms over the Cooper pairs momentum by a certain phase transformation. Such impossibility may originate from the third-order gradients terms in the GL equation, non-uniform Meissner screening currents or, e.g., non-uniform SOC strength. In this paper we will focus on the latter situation assuming the SOC constant to be varying near the S film boundary (γ 1 = 0). We also assume that the critical temperature is enhanced near the boundary x = 0 which corresponds to γ 0 > 0. Let us introduce the dimensionless units, namely, the dimensionless coordinates x = xγ 0 /κ and ỹ = yγ 0 /κ as well as the order parameter ψ = γ 0 φ(x) exp(iq ỹ)/( √ βκ) with the real amplitude φ(x) and the wave vector q = qκ/γ 0 . For simplicity we assume that the exchange field has only the x component (h 0 = h 0 x 0 , w = wy 0 , g = gy 0 ) so that the free energy density takes the form The variational derivative of the corresponding free energy functional with respect to φ gives the following equation for the order parameter: ) It is convenient, first, to solve this equation in the region x > 0 where the delta-function is equal to zero so that -φ xxκαγ -2 0 φ + φ 3 + q2 -wq φ = 0 which can be obtained directly from Eq. ( where τ (q) = -καγ -2 0 -qw + q2 . The critical temperature T c of the system is defined by Eq. ( The density of the superconducting current corresponding to the certain wave vector q is equal to a variational derivative j = (c/Φ 0 )∂f /∂q and takes the form [see Eq. ( Note that similarly to the result of The factor (1+qg -√ τ ) in this expression is proportional to the Cooper pair density in the localized channel while the factor [2q -w -g(1 + qg + √ τ )] is proportional to the superconducting velocity. For the further analysis it is convenient to introduce the dimensionless parameter η characterizing the system temperature T : Then the superconducting current becomes the function of the wave vector q and the parameter η, i.e. I = I(q, η) and the critical current I c at a fixed temperature is defined as the maximal value of this function over q: The typical dependencies I(q) are shown in Fig. First, we calculate the wave vector q * (η) corresponding to the absence of the superconducting current in the localized channel at the fixed temperature characterized by the parameter η [obviously, q * (0) = q 0 , see Eq. ( The corresponding value of the parameter τ = τ * which defines the width of the superconducting channel reads Substitution of Eqs. ( where s = 1 -g 2 , p = (2 + gh) -1 , and inside the brackets we have neglected the terms of the order of O(η 2 , q ′4 , ηq ′2 ). The corresponding dependence I(q ′ ) for two sets of parameters are shown in Fig. In Eq. ( This temperature dependence qualitatively coincides with the one relevant to the 2D superconducting films if the higher-order gradients of the order parameter V. CONCLUSION Thus, we have shown that local increase of the critical temperature and the subsequent variation of the SOC strength near the boundary of the superconducting film on top of ferromagnetic insulator gives rise to the formation of quasi-one-demensional superconducting channel with non-reciprocal transport properties. The critical temperature T c of such channel is shown to depend on the orientation of the exchange field in the ferromagnet relative to the superconducting film boundary. The maximum of T c is realized when the exchange field is perpendicular to the film boundary which corresponds to the emergence of the spontaneous currents flowing along the boundary. Moreover, for this orientation of the exchange field we have calculated the depairing critical current of the localized superconducting channel and showed that it depends on the current orientation which is a manifestation of the diode effect. The difference |I + -I -| between two critical current values becomes stronger as the temperature T decreases down from T c and the relative magnitude of the diode effect is (I + -I -)/(I + + I -) ∝ √ T c -T . Note that the recent transport measurements performed for the elongated Al stripe on top of the YIG substrate Note also that the non-reciprocal phenomena discussed in this paper are not specific to the case when the critical temperature and the strength of the SOC are modified near the sample edge. For example, similar phenomena should arise in superconducting film placed underneath the ferromagnetic film of the finite lateral size with the in-plane exchange field directed perpendicular to the film edge. In this case the effective exchange field acting on electron spins reveals a jump inside the S film which should give rise to the localized quasi-onedimensional superconducting states with non-reciprocal transport properties. Also we expect the diode-type behavior for the S/F systems where the magnetic configuration inside the thick ferromagnet corresponds to the so-called closure domains (see, e.g., In summary, our results show that the combination of the restricted geometry and spin-orbit coupling in superconductor/ferromagnet systems may lead to the new interesting effects with possible implementations in superconducting devices.