Cooper pairs formed by two electrons with different effective mass are common in multiband superconductors, pair density wave states and other superconducting systems with multi-degrees of freedom. In this work, we show that there are paramagnetic contributions to the superfluid stiffness in superconductors with different-mass Cooper pairs. This paramagnetic response is owing to the relative motion between two electrons with different mass.Additionally, we identify a particle-hole dichotomy effect related to this mass difference. We investigate the paramagnetic contributions based on the linear response theory in two-band superconductors with interband pairings and in pair density wave states respectively. Our results offer a new perspective to the electromagnetic superfluid stiffness in unconventional superconductors beyond traditional BCS response. Superconductors (SCs) are defined by zero resistance and Meissner effect with perfect diamagnetism On the other hand, Cooper pairs are formed by two electrons. Since effective mass of electrons can vary dramatically in a solid state system, there are superconducting pairing systems with Cooper pairs formed by two electrons with different effective mass, namely the different-mass Copper pair systems. The different-mass Copper pair systems are common in superconductors. For example, in multiband systems To investigate the electromagnetic response of SC with different-mass Cooper pairs, we start from how a system with two different-mass electrons couples to the electromagnetic gauge field A from a Cooper problem Using the center-of-mass (COM) coordinate R = r 1 +r 2 2 , the relative coordinate r = r 1 -r 2 and their corresponding mass From Eq. 1, we can see the first term describing the energy of COM coupled to the gauge field A, which contains both the paramagnetic and diamagnetic contribution. Note that we approximate the vector potential as A(R ± r/2) ≈ A(R), due to the slowly varying field. The second term (-i∇ r) 2 /2M - describes the kinetic energy of the relative motion without coupling to the gauge field because the relative motion is a charge-less process. The last term 1 2M --i ∇ R 2 -eA(R), -i∇ r describes the coupling between the COM motion and relative motion, which plays an important role in linking the relative motion to the gauge field. The current is obtained with two contribution from COM and relative motions as J = -∂H c /∂A = J R + J r , as schematically plotted in Fig. To illustrate above ideas, we first study the response of multiband SCs with interband pairing. The multiband effect in superconductivity is a long-term topic where α, β = 1, 2 label two separated bands. These two bands host the dispersion ξ α (k) = k 2 2m α -μ with mass m α and chemical potential μ, as the red and blue parabolic bands illustrated in Fig. ,-k↓ } T , the BdG Hamiltonian can be written as where The Hamiltonian is composed of two decoupled blocks. Thus, we can focus on the H 1 block for convenience as The eigenvalue of Note that the system is fully gapped only when shows the band dispersion of H 1 block in the fullygapped region. The color of the band represents the weight of the two band in Fig. Interestingly, this relative motion can lead to a particle-hole dichotomy effect in the tunneling DOS as shown in Fig. Next, we want to find the superfluid stiffness. Within linear response theory, the response current to the vector potential of electromagnetic field can be obtained via J μ (q, Ω) = ν K μν (q, Ω)A ν (q, Ω). Here K μν is the electromagnetic response tensor with two part of contributions, paramagnetic response from current-current correlation function Π μν and diamagnetic response from charge density n m as K μν = -e 2 (Π μν + n m ). According to London equation,the superfluid stiffness can be defined via ρ s = 2 4e 2 Re K μμ (ω = 0, q -→ 0). Notice that the paramagnetic current obtained from Eq.4 can be decomposed into two components as discussed above: the COM motion and the relative motion, Then the current-current correlation function can be calculated by , where G is the Green's function for H 1 . More details of calculations can be found in Supplemental Material (SM) At zero temperature, considering the complete model given in Eq.3, the paramagnetic contribution of the superfluid response of this system with interband pairing is where N γ + is the DOS of the energy dispersion ǫ k , which is proportional to 1 γ 1 +γ 2 . This nonzero paramagnetic contribution is the key finding in this work. We can also calculate the diamagnetic contribution n m = 2(γ 1 + γ 2 )n c , where n c is the number of carriers in either band. The paramagnetic contrition Re Π μν (Ω = 0, q → 0) vanishes if γ 1 = γ 2 , which corresponds to the Cooper pairs composed of the equal mass electrons. This is consistent with the conventional BCS theory, where the Π μν contribution is strictly zero owing to the SC gap as discussed above Actually the above results can be understood from the optical perspective. In the optical response, the optical conductivity σ(ω) follow a sum rule 2m n To further demonstrate above analytical results, we can numerically calculate the paramagnetic response using lattice models. Here we consider two band model on square lattice with the energy dispersion ξ 1,2 = -2t 1,2 cos k x + cos k y -μ, where t 1,2 is the nearest-neighbor hopping parameter for band 1,2 respectively. We set t 1 = 1 as an energy scale. The ratio of the effective mass, defined by The paramagnetic responses Re Π xx (Ω = 0, q → 0) as a function of interband pairing order parameter ∆ 1 for different value of t 2 are plotted in in Fig. From Fig. In more realistic multiband SC cases such as iron based SCs, the intraband pairing is always the leading instability, which always dominates in comparison to the interband pairing Pair density wave is another important example for different-mass Copper pairs where ξ k = -2t cos k x + cos k y -4t ′ cos k x cos k y -μ. In the calculation we set t = 1, t ′ = -0.3 and μ = -1. Fig. where The single particle excitation spectrum is shown in Fig. In summary, we carry out a systematic study of electromagnetic property in superconductors with different-mass Cooper pairs. We find that the different-mass Cooper pairing can result in new paramagnetic contributions in superfluid stiffness. This paramagnetic response directly links to the relative motion between two different mass electrons inside each Cooper pair. Using the two-band model with interband pairing, the paramagnetic responses are calculated based on the linear-response theory from both continuum model and lattice model. This paramagnetic response is finite only at m 1 m 2 . Additionally, this mass difference induces a particle-hole dichotomy effect in the tunneling DOS. Furthermore, this reduced superfluid stiffness can be understood from the optical sum rule. Besides the interband pairing in multiband systems, this paramagnetic response also exists in PDW system and other different-mass Cooper pair SCs. Finally, we want to point out this paramagnetic contribution is common both in different-mass Cooper pair systems and multi-body pairing superconducting systems where u = u k , v = v k , E ± = E ± k , ũ = u k+q , ṽ = v k+q and Ẽ± = E ± k+q . In the long wavelength limit q → 0, we have ũ → u, ṽ → v and Ẽ± → E ± and obviously χ 00 = χ 30 = 0 and then where N γ 1 +γ 2 is the DOS of the 2D free electron gas with energy dispersion (γ 1 + γ 2 )k 2 , which is proportional to 1 γ 1 +γ 2 . If γ 1 = γ 2 , the paramagnetic contrition vanishes which is just the single band case. This result suggests that the nonzero paramagnetic contribution stems from interband pairing. Then we shall consider the diamagnetic contribution. The diamagnetic current is defined as The matrix form is Thus the diamagnetic contribution of superfluid stiffness can be obtained by calculating where n c is the number of carriers in either band. Below we shall calculate the optical conductance and check the optical sum rule Using the property of δ-function δ g(ǫ Unlike intraband pairing, in our interband pairing model, the system is gapless at small ∆ 1 values due to the presence of a BFS. The energy spectrum only fully gapped when ∆ 1 exceeds a critical value ∆ c . Fig. In our main text, the two different-mass bands have a degeneracy at the band bottom, resulting in separated Fermi surfaces. Consequently, the interband pairing order parameter needs to exceed a critical value for the system to be fully gapped. Actually, the bottom of the two bands may not be degenerate, allowing their Fermi surfaces to coincide. That means the two bands hosts the dispersion with different Fermi energy ξ α (k) = k 2 2m α -μ α . By tuning μ 1 /μ 2 = γ 1 /γ 2 , we can get this case as shown in Fig. It is a little different from the case in the main text, but the result of superfuild response is the same. We plot the quasiparticle band of the Q = (π, π) PDW in Fig. Following the paper T can be written as J P (k, q) = 2k + q 2m τ 0 σ 0 (S27) where τ and σ are Pauli matrix in particle-hole and orbital space respectively. The single particle Green's function has the form Then the current-current correlation function can be calculated via Eq.S10 and the result at zero temperature are Re Π μμ (iΩ n = 0, q → 0) = ǫ F N(ǫ F ) 6m (S29) Im Π μμ (Ω, q → 0) = πǫ F N(ǫ F ) 3m Thus, the superfluid density is obtained as where ρ = 2ǫ F ) 3m , the real part of the optical conductance is Re σ μμ (q → 0, Ω > 0) = Im Π μν (Ω, q → 0) It's straightforward to check that the optical sum rule is satisfied.