Photoluminescence Quenching Simulator (PLQ-Sim) is a user-friendly software to study the photoexcited state dynamics at the interface between two organic semiconductors forming a blend: an electron donor (D), and an electron acceptor (A). Its main function is to provide substantial information on the photophysical processes relevant to organic photovoltaic and photothermal devices, such as charge transfer state formation and subsequent free charge generation or exciton recombination. From input parameters provided by the user, the program calculates the transfer rates of the D/A blend and employs a kinetic model that provides the photoluminescence quenching efficiency for initial excitation in the donor or acceptor. When calculating the rates, the user can choose to use disorder parameters to better describe the system. In addition, the program was developed to address energy transfer phenomena that are commonly present in organic blends. The time evolution of state populations is also calculated providing relevant information for the user. In this article, we present the theory behind the kinetic model, along with suggestions for methods to obtain the input parameters. A detailed demonstration of the program, its applicability, and an analysis of the outputs are also presented. PLQ-Sim is license free software that can be run via dedicated webserver nanocalc.org or downloading the program executables (for Unix, Windows, and macOS) from the PLQ-Sim repository on GitHub. Over the years, the charge transfer (CT) process between electron donor (D) and electron acceptor (A) materials has been widely studied by photoluminescence (PL) measurements If the excitation wavelength corresponds to acceptor's main absorption band Figure In bulk heterojunction systems where the D and A materials are mixed, achieving this goal is relatively straightforward. It is essential to control the size of the materials domains to ensure that a significant proportion of excitons encounter the D/A interface. In this context, the domain size should be roughly equivalent to the exciton diffusion length. Conversely, in bilayer heterojunctions, where the donor and acceptor are in separate layers, ensuring that most excitons reach the D/A interface requires careful consideration of layer thickness. To maximize the chances of excitons reaching the D/A interface, the thickness of the layers should be on the order of the exciton diffusion length. In summary, domain size control is pivotal in bulk het- erojunctions, while layer thickness control plays a crucial role in bilayer heterojunctions. These considerations are fundamental to understand and optimize PLQ measurements. The measurement of PLQ D(A) is a powerful tool to investigate photoluminescence quenching in D/A blends. However, the application of this experimental method does not allow to study the details of the processes that contribute to the quenching. Deeper knowledge of the excited state dynamics at D/A interfaces by kinetic modeling is fundamental to tailor the properties of the blend aiming at different applications Our group developed a theory to calculate PLQ D and PLQ A based on a kinetic model that considers all possible processes involved in exciton dynamics at the D/A interface Electron dynamics Hole dynamics for the class of material studied can be used. After running the simulation, the rates of the physical processes involved in the charge dynamics at the D/A interface (like the charge transfer or charge recombination rates, for instance) are provided as output. This information is crucial to characterize the photophysical process as a whole and to propose ideas for system optimizations. Therefore, our program aims to help the experimentalist to fine-tune fabrication process to maximize the PL quenching. PLQ-Sim is a free license program compatible with Windows, Unix, and macOS operating systems developed in Python programming language. The model describes, using a simple one-electron picture, the electron and hole kinetics at the D/A interface. In addition to charge transfer, it also takes into account Fluorescence (or Förster) resonance energy transfer (FRET) We start the description of the model assuming that there is on averaged N excited donor molecules near an acceptor. In an interval dt, n 1 of those N donors can transfer an electron to the acceptor to form a CT state (group 1). Alternatively, besides the electron transfer, n 2 of those donors have the additional possibility of performing an energy transfer by FRET to a nearby acceptor (group 2). From the above assumptions n 1 + n 2 = N. Thus, for group 1 molecules, the time derivative of singlet exciton concentration, P S D , is where, P CT is the concentration of CT states and I is the exciton generation rate in the donor at the D/A interface. This rate involves the excitons produced by direct photon absorption or resulting from the net flux of excitations transferred by FRET from (to) other donors. Using the above assumptions, time evolution of singlet state concentration for the group 2 of donors is given by where the term k F DA P S D was added to Eq. (3) from Eq. ( In writing Eq. ( Substituting Eq. ( where (11) After the D-A-FRET, the exciton at the acceptor can either recombine emitting a photon or be transferred to the CT state. Hence, the population of excitons in the acceptor also influences PLQ D even for selective illumination of donor. Following the same reasoning used to derive Eq. where In Eq. ( In the absence of acceptors (hence assuming only donor molecules), the time derivative of singlet state concentration P ′ S D at the same position considered in Eq. ( where I' is the rate of exciton generation in a donor-only material. Again assuming steady-state conditions, Eq. ( or Since the selective illumination of the donor can generate photoluminescence of the acceptor due to FRET, we define the donor's PL quenching as where we use Eq. To completely assess the quenching dynamics described by Eq. ( In the case of p F DA ≈ 0 the formula for PLQ D in Eq. ( Finally, considering the selective excitation of the acceptor, we can repeat the same reasoning described above to calculate PLQ A . Taking into account the absence of FRET from acceptor to the donor (k F AD ), one can use a similar expression to Eq. ( See that from the kinetic model it is possible to obtain PLQ D and PLQ A using the transfer rates involved in the process. The Marcus/Hush equation where k B , T , λ, and β are respectively the Boltzmann constant, temperature, reorganization energy, and electronic coupling (transfer integral). The activation energy for charge transfer, ∆G ‡ , is given by where ∆G is the Gibbs free energy (driving force) of the charge transfer reaction, approximated here as the energy difference between final and initial states. As it will be demonstrated later, the reorganization energy, electronic coupling and energy levels are input parameters to the program. Specifically, the Marcus/Hush equation is used to obtain the frequency of the following rates: k ET , k EB , k ES , k HT , k HB , k HS and k R . Figure The FRET rates between donors (k F DD ) and between donor and acceptor (k F DA ) are additional program inputs that must be provided by the user. Their quantification can be easily performed by a free program developed by our group called FRET-Calc To better describe the charge transfer dynamics at the D/A interface, the program also consider effects of diagonal disorder (energy levels fluctuations) and off-diagonal disorder (electronic coupling fluctuations between adjacent molecules due to random orientations) For the calculations of off-diagonal effects, the user must define the maximum value for electronic coupling, β max , as an initial input. The program will then use the equation β = β max cos (φ) in the calculations to determine an specific value of the electronic coupling. The angle φ will be randomly chosen between 0 • and a user-defined maximum value (φ max ) in the range 0 • -90 • . For example, if the user chooses φ max = 90 • , adjacent molecules will be considered randomly between the face-on configuration (φ min = 0 • and β = β max ) and edge-on configuration (φ max = 90 • and β = 0). When disorder is considered, the transfer rates, PLQ D and PLQ A become unique for each realization of parameters. It is then necessary to calculate average quantities to characterize the charge dynamics for a particular D/A system. To obtain numerical averages with sufficient precision, it is recommended that the values of PLQ D and PLQ A are averaged over at least 10 4 runs of parameters' realization (defined in the input) of the simulation The formalism described above was developed to quantify the photoluminescence quenching when the sample is submitted to a continuous excitation represented by the rate I. However, in many situations a more complete characterization of the excited state dynamics can be obtained from time-resolved PL measurements. This motivated us to extend our model in order to broaden the applicability of the program. Hence, besides the steady state PL quenching, the program can also calculate the time evolution of state population using the frequency rates specified above. In essence, this feature of our code can be applied to study experiments in which the sample is fully excited during a very short interval of time. The excited state decay kinetics is then obtained from the evolution of properties such as the intensity of emission response, for instance. Modeling of this kind of experiment is done by generalizing the previous model to explicitly consider the evolution of molecule populations in the ground and charge separated states. This generalization is done by writing a set of coupled differential equations that describes the inter-dependent charge kinetics in the donor and in the acceptor. Basically these equations are derived from the general expression where P i( j) (t) is the i ( j) state population at time t. The appropriated solution of Eq. 24 is found by assuming that only singlet excited states are initially populated by a very short light pulse. Then, it follows that the P i( j) (t) decay obeys a multiexponential kinetics, with various effective rates. For a local acceptor excitation there are four coupled differential equations where the initial condition is P S A = 1. Including the FRET process, six coupled differential equations are then needed to describe the kinetics derived from the donor local excitation where the initial condition is P S D = 1. In Eq. ( Although the model outlined above is efficient for simulating exciton dynamics at the D/A interface, it has some limitations that are pointed out below. 1) The simulations implicitly assume that there are well-defined donor and acceptor domains and that all generated excitons reach the D/A interface. There is no need to define the heterojunction type before the simulation. Therefore, it is advisable to compare theoretical outcomes with experimental data wherein the predominant fraction of excitons does indeed reach the D/A interface. 2) Photophysical processes occurring far from the D/A interface region cannot be studied because the model only simulates the exciton dynamics in this region. 3) The model only considers singlet excitons, assuming that the dynamics of triplet excitons do not affect the PL quenching efficiency. It is meaningless to study with the model systems in which the flow of triplet excitons to the D/A interface is relevant. 4) As the simulation approach is based on hopping model, whose intermolecular electronic coupling is much smaller than intramolecular charge reorganisation energy, tunneling effects that can assist the electron transfer are not considered. Therefore, systems with high electronic delocalization will not be well described by the model. In this way, we are assuming that the decoherence factor due to interaction with the vibrational degrees of freedom completely destroys the excitonic coherence, which leads to localization of the exciton. 5) The model was developed to simulate D/A systems that are not exposed to an external electric field. Therefore, it is not possible to reproduce PLQ D(A) measurements under the influence of an external electric field. In this section we will briefly describe some popular methods found in the literature to obtain the input parameters nec-essary to run the PLQ-Sim program. We emphasize that the methods presented below are just suggestions (it does not have the intention to be a complete summary of available experimental/theoretical methods). Due to the extensive literature in the area, it is likely that there are other approach to obtain the same parameters. The ionization potential (IP) and electron affinity (EA) are essential materials properties to calculate the driving forces for electron (hole) transfer. In principle, they can be determined by a combination of ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and inverse photoemission spectroscopy (IPES) The energy of charge transfer state (E CT ) can be obtained from the blend's electroluminescence spectra The singlet exciton recombination lifetime of pristine materials can be accessed using time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy The relative dielectric constant (ε r ) of each material is also required as input. There are two common ways to obtain ε r from experiments. The first is by performing capacitance measurements using impedance spectroscopy The reorganization energy for charge transfer is generally calculated using the adiabatic potential energy surfaces of the neutral and charged molecules The electronic coupling (transfer integral) between each pair of molecular orbitals involved in the electron and hole transfer can be obtained from simulations by applying the fragment orbital method The energy difference between the fundamental (or transport) band gap (E f und ) and optical band gap (E opt ) provides the exciton binding energy: E b = E f und -E opt . The fundamental band gap is the energy of free charge carriers (electron/hole): E f und = IP -EA. The optical band gap is the energy of the lowest excited state of the semiconductor and can be extracted from the absorption onset in the UV-vis spectrum DFT and time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) calculations can also be used to obtain the gas-phase exciton binding energy (E b,gas ). The first step is to apply DFT to obtain the ground-state geometry of isolated materials. Then, from single point calculations, the total energies of the cationic (E + ), anionic (E -), and neutral (E 0 ) states can be determined. From these energies it is possible to calculate IP = E + -E 0 and EA = E 0 -E -. The optical gap can be obtained from TD-DFT calculations and it corresponds to the energy of the lowest energy electronic transition excited by a single photon absorption. This procedure has been widely used in the literature It is often assumed that the strong dielectric stabilization of the charge transfer (CT) state compensates the coulomb binding of a Frenkel exciton in the solid state, making E b,A ≈ E b,CT We emphasize that due to the number of parameters involved in the model calculations, the theoretical estimates of PLQ D and PLQ A must always be confronted with experimental results. From this comparison, some input parameters, which may vary from material to material, can be fine-tuned to produce a better correlation between theory and experiment. Finally, we also emphasize that the theoretical model presented here has already been properly tested for several combinations of donor and acceptor materials showing good correlation with experiments and providing valuable insights about the physics behind exciton dissociation in systems under consideration PLQ-Sim is a free-license program. The binary files of this code (for Windows, Unix and macOS operational system) are available for download at PLQ-Sim repository on GitHub or can be run via dedicated webserver nanocalc.org. The program is implemented in Python 3 (v. 3.6) In this section, we will provide a practical example of how to perform a calculation using PLQ-Sim. When the program starts, a graphical user interface is loaded. In order to utilize the interface, an input file must be provided as shown in Figure A modifiable input file will be included with the program as an illustrative example (see Figure Relevant data are printed in the Results Donor.dat and Results Acceptor.dat files. These data, such as transfer rates and quenching efficiency, are obtained by averaging over all specific information that are explicitly listed in the Results Donor Steps.dat and Results Acceptor Steps.dat files for each simulation step. In addition, two graphs that illustrate the The energy levels diagram and the schematic kinetics among excitons, CT states, and free charge carriers depicted in Figure In addition, k HS and k HB in Figure An additional output shows the time evolution of each state population. This tool is exemplified in Figure An interesting way to inspect the program is by varying the input parameters and checking their effect on the calculated quantities. Below we change some selected input parameters as examples of exploratory strategies to test the software's capabilities. Let's begin by varying the relative dielectric constant of donor (ε D ). One consequence of increasing ε D is the reduction of the exciton binding energy, a feature that is evident in Figure Discussion about the role played by disorder to determine some key properties of organic semiconductors has been the subject of a long debate in the literature The influence of the maximum angle between adjacent molecules (φ max ) on PLQ D is shown in Figure Another parameter that has a great impact on PLQ D is the binding energy of the CT state. In Figure In summary, the theoretical background, a detailed demonstration, the applicability, and usefulness of the PLQ-Sim program were described in detail. The program can be a powerful auxiliary tool to study the photoexcited state dynamics in D/A blends through a user-friendly interface. In addition, the PLQ-Sim program can be easily updated to implement new features suggested by the users due to its modular characteristics. We are confident that the various features offered by the PLQ-Sim code will contribute significantly to the widespread adoption of this tool as a valuable instrument in researching more efficient organic devices based on D/A blends. D -(k EB + k ES + k R ) P CT .