Achieving spatiotemporal control of light at high-speeds presents immense possibilities for various applications in communication, computation, metrology, and sensing. The integration of subwavelength metasurfaces and optical waveguides offers a promising approach to manipulate light across multiple degrees of freedom at highspeed in compact photonic integrated circuit (PICs) devices. Here, we demonstrate a gigahertz-rate-switchable wavefront shaping by integrating metasurface, lithium niobite on insulator (LNOI) photonic waveguide and electrodes within a PIC device. As proofs of concept, we showcase the generation of a focus beam with reconfigurable arbitrary polarizations, switchable focusing with lateral focal positions and focal length, orbital angular momentum light beams (OAMs) as well as Bessel beams. Our measurements indicate modulation speeds of up to gigahertz rate. This integrated platform offers a versatile and efficient means of controlling light field at high-speed within a compact system, paving the way for potential applications in optical communication, computation, sensing, and imaging. The remarkable multiple degrees of freedom (DOFs) possessed by light, including large bandwidth and high-speed transmission capabilities, make photonic technology an extremely promising platform for high-speed communication and high-performance computing in information science On the other hand, photonic integrated circuits (PICs) represent an alternative to traditional electronic technologies by utilizing light. Diverse applications have been demonstrated with PICs, including high-speed optical communication, signal processing, computing, and emerging technologies in quantum, biomedicine, and sensing A variety of applications have been reported with the guided-wave-driven metasurfaces, such as mode conversion In this work, we propose and demonstrate a gigahertz-rate-switchable wavefront shaping by integrating metasurfaces with LNOI PICs. An arbitrary polarized light could be generated by combing a waveguide with two orthogonally propagated modes and nanoscatters at the specific positions This approach provides a versatile and efficient means of controlling light propagation in a compact and integrated system with simple electrical wiring and low power consumption, and promises important advantages in scenarios such as optical communication, computation, sensing, and imaging. Where A, B, φ x and φ x represent the amplitudes and initial phase of the two guided waves, respectively. β x , β y are the propagation constants of the guided waves in slab waveguide. The near orthogonal nature of the two transverse components of the electric field enables the synthesis of a wide range of polarization states across the entire surface of the Poincaré sphere. This synthesis is achieved by manipulating the amplitudes and phase lags (∆φ = φ x + x n β x -φ y -y n β y ) of the two components. To enable high-speed modulation, an electrically controlled Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) and a phase shifter are utilized to modulate the amplitude and phase of the two components. Subsequently, guided-wave-driven silicon metasurfaces are strategically positioned on the slab waveguide, with specific uniform polarizations, to generate variety electrically controlled functionalities. These functionalities can be manipulated at high speeds, offering enhanced control and versatility. The device is designed and fabricated on a X-cut LNOI platform to provide the best electrooptical performance. Considering of the anisotropy of X-cut LN, both TE0 modes are specifically designed to propagate at a 45° angle to the short optical axis of LN. This arrangement ensures that the wave-vectors βx=βy and maintains a symmetric polarization distribution, as shown in Fig. To precisely get the polarization distribution on the waveguide, we perform a finite-difference time domain (FDTD) simulation to get the amplitude and phase evolution over the slab waveguide at the experiment wavelength of 1550 nm as shown in the supplementary materials (SM) Fig. Directional couplers (DC) are employed to achieve the tunable splitting function of the MZI, having a center-to-center spacing of 4.5μm and a length of 300μm. Meanwhile, ground-signalground (G-S-G) electrodes are used in the inner and outer phase shifters of MZI to induce phase shifts in a single-drive push-pull configuration, so that the electric field induce phase shifts in both arms with equal magnitude but opposite sign. The simulated optical field profile of the TE0 mode in the LN ridge waveguide together with the static electric field between the electrodes are shown in Fig. The PIC-driven metasurface is initially investigated to showcase a functionality with arbitrary reconfigurable polarization. In order to demonstrate the feasibility of this approach, a focusing beam achieved with silicon nano-cylinder metasurface is investigated. The Jones matrix of isotropic silicon nano-cylinders are given by e iα ( 1 0 0 1 ), where α is the propagation phase of the nano-cylinders. The electromagnetic wave extracted to free space by silicon cylinders can be expressed as: Thus, the phase profile of free space electromagnetic wave is depended on location of the silicon cylinders. On the other hand, to generate a focused beam in free space, the phase of light scattered from the metasurface has a distribution described below where f is the distance between the device plane and the focal plane, that is, the focal length. Then, the metasurface is constructed by arranging this set of silicon cylinders on top of the slab waveguide to extracted the desired polaritons state with the phase profile for focusing. Here, the focal length is designed to be f= 50 μm. The silicon cylinders have the identical dimensions, with radius of R=100 nm and height of H=1000 nm. The detailed design process of the metasurface array and the fabrication process are described in Supplementary Material Sections 2 and 7, respectively. Figure To accurately assess the modulation performance, we integrated the recorded focal intensities in Fig. The high-speed switchable wavefront shaping technique holds immense potential for various applications such as optical communications, imaging, optical computation, sensing, and more. Particularly, the generation of optical orbital angular momentum (OAM) with a large modulation bandwidth is of significant importance in the realm of optical communication Meanwhile, the scattering efficiency of the nanostructures on the waveguide exhibits a strong dependence on their size, and this behavior differs significantly from the transmission characteristics of metasurfaces in the free-space configuration. Here, we present the successful engineering and dynamic switching of wavefront in arbitrary polarization states with the metasurface on PIC device. When a birefringent nanostructure scatters the waveguide mode with an arbitrary local polarization of Ψ1, the scattered light can be decomposed into a pair of orthogonal polarization states Ψ2 + and Ψ2 -, respectively. The two decomposed components can be expressed as: Where 2   represent the projection operators for the polarization states of Ψ2 + andΨ2 -, respectively. O ± and φ ± are the amplitude and phase of the scattered light after the projection operation, respectively. Considering the physical characteristics of linear birefringent metasurfaces and their ability to consistently convert input polarization states into output polarization states with arbitrary phase delays, it is necessary for the input and output polarization states to be a pair of orthogonal polarization states. On the other hand, the required Jones matrix To design the nanostructure with desired Jones matrix, we built a phase-amplitude response library with regard to the rectangular nanostructure dimensions on slab waveguide using full-wave simulations (SM section 5). Here, the width and the length of the nanostructure are varied between 100 nm to 500 nm and the height is 1000 nm as above structures. The amplitude and the phase of the scattering upon different dimensions are shown in Fig. A genetic algorithm is employed to retrieve the required dimensions for the desired Jones matrix with near uniform scattering intensity. Finally, arbitrary phase profiles in the independent polarization channels could be realized by spatially arranging the retrieved nanostructures. these adjustments align with the calculation results displayed in Fig. We have demonstrated the capability of wavefront shaping and switching upon any orthogonal polarization states. Indeed, this high-speed switchable scheme could also be extended to nonorthogonal polarization states as well. By incorporating complex unit cell, interleave design, as well as artificial intelligence, the traditional limitation of two independent orthogonal channel could be broken, enabling the realization of more polarization-determined and switchable channels In summary, we have proposed and demonstrated an integrated electro-optical platform with PIC-driven metasurface on LNOI. By integrating an electrically controlled Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) and a phase shifter, we construct a focusing beam with high-speed adjustable polarizations across almost the entire surface of the Poincaré sphere. Based on the reconfigurable polarizations across the waveguide, switchable focusing beams with lateral focal positions and focal lengths, OAM beams and Bessel beams are demonstrated. Our approach opens up possibilities for achieving more switchable functionalities with complex polarizations. The modulation bandwidth is measured to be 1.4 GHz and it is potential to be improved to hundreds of gigahertz based on the electro-optical effect of LN. The demonstrated high-speed switchable PIC-driven metasurface provides a promising platform for a variety of applications in highcapacity optical communication, fast optical computation, imaging and sensing. This integrated platform offers significant opportunities for advancing these fields and enabling a wide range of practical applications. an arc-shaped phase profile. Fitting results indicate that the center of the arc corresponds to the starting point of the taper. Although the arcs have very large radii of curvature, they can be approximated as near planar waves within a limited area. Based on the simulation result, the precise polarization states distribution, which formed by the superposition of the two orthogonally propagated waveguide modes, could be retrieved. The functionalities in the main text are also designed based on the simulated amplitude and phase evolution, taking into account the non-planar nature of the waveguide modes. The slab waveguide mode will travel a relatively long distance within the device before it reaches the boundary of the waveguide after passing through the metasurface. Meanwhile, the waveguide mode in the slab gradually expands after passing through the tapers as illustrated in Figure Once we obtain the amplitude and phase evolution in the planar waveguide for the two orthogonally propagated channels, we can extract the actual distribution of identical polarizations ψ on the waveguide. These distributions appear as a series of lines, similar to the dashed lines shown in Fig. Without loss of generality, here we take LCP state as the reference design polarization as an example. By considering the phase evolution, we can also identify a series of arcs with the same phase (as shown in Fig. When the polarization of the lines is adjusted to be LCP, only beam 1 can be formed, while only beam 2 can be formed when the polarization is adjusted to be RCP. It is worth noting that the choice of the reference design polarization can be arbitrary, as discussed in the main text. Different from the simulation method for the unit cell of metasurface in free space, the periodic boundary condition cannot be directly applied to the guided-wave-driven metasurface. In order to accurately evaluate the scattering performance of the nanostructure, we employed a 5x5 metasurface array arranged on a waveguide for convenient simulation. It is observed that the amplitude and phase of the scattered light do not exhibit significant variations in larger arrays. The period of the array is chosen to match the effective wavelength of the waveguide mode, allowing for near-plane scattering. The waveguide width is set to 10μm to create a mode spot area large enough to accommodate the TE fundamental mode. This ensures that the entire array operates within a region of uniform amplitude. By varying the length and width of the nanostructures within the range of 100nm to 500nm, we obtained the intensity and phase of the scattered light associated with the corresponding nanostructures interacting with the waveguide mode. Figure The scattered light from the metasurface is collected by an objective lens and then imaged with a CCD camera. The objective lens is mounted on a high-precision translation stage for z-direction displacement. By gradually adjusting the translation stage along z-direction, the images are captured at different heights and subsequently overlapped to reconstruct a three-dimensional stereoscopic image. Meanwhile, this setup can be utilized for polarization state characterization. For this purpose, an polarization analyzing system is employed before the CCD camera. To characterize the of polarization reconfigurable performance of the device at high speed, the CCD camera is replaced with a high-speed Avalanche Photodiode (Thorlabs, APD430C/M, DC -400 MHz). By adjusting the quarter waveplate and polarizer, precise derivation of the Stokes parameters is achieved [1]. In addition, the polarization state is characterized using a commercial polarization analyzer (PA) (Thorlabs PAX1000IR2/M) for lower modulation speeds and longer measurement durations. In order to assess the performance of the polarization reconfiguring with our device, two triangle wave signals with frequencies of 1 KHz and 100 KHz are applied to the electrodes of the Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) and phase shifter, respectively. In this scenario, the optical electrical field of the two guided waves can be expressed as follows [2]: ideal 1:1 splitting ratio in the directional couplers. However, the splitting ratio of the directional couplers is difficult to reach 1:1 due to the fabrication imperfections. Additionally, the waveguides here support higher order modes, which could be excited with the fiber lenses in the waveguide mode coupling process. These higher order modes will impact the reconfigurated polarizations of the focal spot, though their intensities are much weaker than the fundamental mode. (c,d). Further development will be addressed in the future work to improve the performance. An additional electrically controlled interferometer can be introduced to improve the splitting ratio and make the reconfigured polarization state fully cover the Poincaré sphere. Meanwhile, stratagems to filter out high-order modes can be involved to reduce the impact of high order modes. The out-of-plane extraction efficiency of the integrated metasurface is quantified as the ratio of the optical power carried by the generated beams to the optical power within the input guided waves. Under these prescribed conditions, we conducted numerical simulations to the metasurfaces depicted in The results indicate efficiencies of 0.2%, 6%, and 11% respectively. In experimental endeavors, the overall efficiency is contingent upon the coupling efficiency between the fiber lens and the waveguide mode, the propagation loss of LN waveguide, and the out-of-plane extraction efficiency of the metasurface. Specifically, the coupling efficiency between the fiber lens and the waveguide mode was quantified at about -7dB. The propagation loss within the LN waveguide is of a magnitude low enough to be negligibly significant. As a result, the overall efficiency of the devices is estimated to be approximately 0.04%,1.2% and 2.2% Our device is fabricated on a 4-inch X-cut LNOI wafer. It is composed of a 500 nm-thick LN layer bonded to a buried silica (SiO2) layer on a silicon support substrate with a thickness of 500 μm. The fabrication process involved the utilization of Photolithography Assisted Chemo-Mechanical Etching (PLACE) technology for photonic integrated circuits (PICs) [3].