Exciton-exciton annihilation is a ubiquitous nonlinear dynamical phenomenon in materials hosting Frenkel excitons. In this work, we investigate the nonlinear exciton dynamics of an electron push-pull conjugated polymer by fluence-dependent transient absorption and excitation-correlation photoluminescence spectroscopy, where we can quantitatively show the latter to be a more selective probe of the nonlinear dynamics. Simulations based on a time-independent exciton annihilation model show a decreasing trend for the extracted annihilation rates with excitation fluence. Further investigation of the fluence-dependent transients suggests that the exciton-exciton annihilation bimolecular rates are not constant in time, displaying a t -1/2 time dependence, which we rationalize as reflective of one-dimensional exciton diffusion, with a length estimated to be 9 ± 2 nm. In addition, exciton annihilation gives rise to a long-lived species that recombines on a nanosecond timescale. Our conclusions shed broad light onto nonlinear exciton dynamics in push-pull conjugated polymers. Frenkel excitons are the primary photoexcitations in conjugated polymers. Following the vertical transitions, excitons experience ultrafast electronic and conformational relaxation to the local minima of the exciton band. Previously, two mechanisms have been proposed to explain the annihilation process: one is that the annihilation is achieved through Förster-type long-range Coulombic interaction. We focus on a push-pull conjugated polymer, DPP-DTT (Fig. To account for the exciton decay trace, a simple bimolecular exciton-exciton annihilation decay equation reads as, where α is the monomolecular exciton decay constant, while β denotes the EEA rate constant. It is worth noticing that Eq. 1 assumes that the natural exciton decay and time-independent EEA process are the only two primary pathways for exciton decay, which contribute to the final PL signals, where secondary dynamic processes and excited species could also contribute in reality. Eq.2 can be further linearized into, 19,42 the initial excitation density is given as n 0 upon excitation. A quick examination of Eq. 3 shows that the inverse of the excitation density should have a negative intercept. To extract the bimolecular annihilation rate, β in the form of Eq. The annihilation rates acquired from TA measurements can be further compared to those of their ECPL counterparts. Prior to that, we resort to deriving an annihilation-based model in describing the ECPL signal profiles. Previous work revealed that with samples prepared from higher concentration solutions, polymer interchain excitonic interaction increases, as well as the chain backbone planarity. on lock-in detection, which essentially gives rise to a time-integrated signal, where γ is a unitless parameter defined as, γ ≡ n 0 β α . Considering the monoexponential decay is constant, the product of the initial excitation density and annihilation rate, thus γ, is a measure of the strength of the EEA process. On the other hand, the nonlinear signal demodulated at the sum of the chopping frequencies can be toggled through the delay time between the two beams. The varying delay times impact the nonlinear signal in the way that excitons generated from the first pulse will decay until the second pulse comes in. Thereafter, the total amount of excitons should be given as the sum of the residual from the first decay and the newly-generated amount, Eventually, the experimentally meaningful equation can be given as, One extreme scenario can be readily inspected: when the time delay τ approaches infinity, Eq. 6 will give 0, indicating null nonlinear PL, which is expected as the long intervals between the two pulses prohibit the generation of the cross term. As indicated earlier, ECPL should be more selective in separating nonlinear signals than TA. This can be readily seen if we assume no annihilation, suggesting that the excitation should be completely monoexponential. It then can be shown that PL sum is simply double PL ind which is n 0 α . Therefore, Eq. 6 will yield 0, which rigorously shows that linear dynamics alone would not give ECPL signals. The complete simulation results are shown in Fig. Furthermore, simulations based on Eq. 6 yield annihilation rates on the order of magnitude of 10 -9 cm -3 s -1 (Fig. where k ≡ β(t) × √ t so that the newly-defined annihilation rate, k, can now be simply described as a time-independent term and erf is the error function. For a better comparison, all simulations based on monoexponential, time-independent, and time-dependent models are shown in both the lowest and highest TA decay traces in Fig. Another distinct feature is the drastic offset between all simulations and the experimental decay trace beyond 50 ps at the highest fluence (Fig. where the y-intercept is set as 0 since no excited species should exist without a pump laser. The long-lived excited species likely originate from the polaron pair, and the quadratic dependence suggests the EEA as the source. In this work, we integrate and compare the parameters acquired from both the TA and ECPL measurements based on the exciton-exciton annihilation model. As mentioned earlier, exciton-exciton annihilation can possibly be achieved by two different mechanisms, either through diffusion-limited exciton collision or direct long-range Coulombic interaction. There exists the possibility of EEA suffered from long-range Coulombic interaction, assuming that the time dependence of the EEA rates originates from a spatial ensemble average of exciton interaction. However, in previous work, we showed that the exciton becomes more delocalized with increasing precursors' concentration. It is worth mentioning that long-lived tails have been widely observed in conjugated polymers with a variety of possibilities for their origins. Using the one-dimensional diffusion model, the diffusion coefficients, D, can be calculated based on their relation to k, where the annihilation radius, R, in the diffusion limit, is normally estimated as the lamellar layer distance, d 100 , as extracted from the in-plane profile of grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering. a,b n 0,l , n 0,h denote initial excitation density at lowest and highest pump fluence, respectively. c value obtained for the second highest excitation density as shown in Figure diffusion. It can be simply understood as the length of one-dimensional chain will be significantly reduced when 'simulating' it into the radius of a three-dimensional sphere, considering the same volume. In addition, the diffusion lengths derived from the same time-independent EEA model differ by one time, comparing the ECPL and TA measurements. The slight difference could be due to the incorporation of the long-lived emission in ECPL measurements as discussed earlier. Last but not least, the diffusion lengths acquired for the sample of 6 and 8 g/L are higher than those of lower concentration samples, as the diffusion is aided by the short-range interaction supported by the enhanced chain backbone order. It is worth mentioning that in our current ECPL analysis, we igonred the contribution from stimulated emission and/or excited state reabsorption from the prompt PL followed by the first pump. Although it can be easily compensated for by loosing the constraint on the monoexponential decay constant, α, but its contribution should be investigated rigorously which is outside the scope of this work. In addition, the complicated Eq. 7 obviously prohibits us from getting a simple analytical model for ECPL measurement as was possible with its time-independent counterpart. However, numerical methods such as Genetic Algorithm might be one of the options for achieving a universally applicable model for extracting both monomolecular and annihilation rate constants, which can be further employed in other systems with even more complicated dynamics. Transient absorption measurements were conducted using an ultrafast laser system, specifically the Pharos Model PH1-20-02-10 by Light Conversion. Tunable wavelengths were achieved by utilizing a laser fundamental with a wavelength of 1030 nm at a repetition rate of 100 kHz. The integrated transient absorption was assessed within a commercial setup, the Light Conversion Hera system. For the pump, wavelengths spanning from 360 to 2600 nm could be adjusted by directing the 10W laser output into a commercial optical parametric amplifier known as Orpheus (manufactured by Light Conversion, Lithuania). On the other hand, the probe beam was generated by sending 2W of power through a sapphire crystal to produce a single-filament white-light continuum within the spectral range of 490-1060 nm. Following this, the probe beam, after passing through the sample, was collected using an imaging spectrograph (Shamrock 193i, Andor Technology Ltd., U.K.) combined with a multichannel detector boasting 256 pixels and covering a wavelength range from 200 to 1100 nm. The pump was selected at 730 nm while the decay traces were monitored at 750 nm. All the samples were measured in a homemade vacuum chamber at ambient temperature. The transient absorption measurements pumped from low to high fluences for the thin film prepared from 8 g/L precursor solutions are shown in Fig. The temporal decays at varying fluences observed at 750 nm are shown in Fig. A pump at a wavelength of 730 nm was generated using the previously mentioned Orpheus system. Subsequently, the beam was directed to a 50/50 beam splitter cube, where one of the beams was directed towards a motorized linear stage (LTS300, Thorlabs), enabling precise control over the time delay between the two pulses. Each pulse was modulated using a chopper at frequencies of 372 and 199 Hz, respectively, before being focused onto the sample using a 100 mm focal length lens. Both the total integrated response and the nonlinear component were simultaneously obtained by demodulating both the fundamental and the sum of the modulation frequencies. For photoluminescence detection (ECPL), the emitted PL underwent filtration with a 750 nm long-pass filter to eliminate the pump light, after which it was focused into a photoreceiver (New Focus 2031 PR) connected to a lock-in amplifier (HF2LI, Zurich Instruments). All the measurements are performed within a home-built vacuum chamber at ambient temperature. The ECPL profiles probed for samples prepared from precursors solutions of 4, 6 and 8 g/L and their associated fits, based on Eq. 6 in the main article, are shown in Fig. 