Many typical nanoscale structures consist of dielectric nanoparticles with an inevitable oxide-generated coating around them. Depending on the fabrication techniques, these coatings may not be homogeneous, and their distortion can cause problems in the applications of such systems. Based on finite element simulations, inhomogeneous core-shell nanoparticle systems are numerically studied when illuminated with two counter-propagating plane waves in the optical range. It is found that the electromagnetic field distortions caused by the inhomogeneous system under Mie resonance conditions allow the system to exhibit controllable one-directional impulsion and rotation, which mainly depends on the offset between the core and shell. The overall geometry and composition of the system also dictate the type of resonance being excited. Overall, this "photonic thruster" effect consisting of an accelerating and spinning projectile would provide stability to particle movement and additionally establish a method to distinguish inhomogeneous from homogeneous particles. The method can be scaled to a wide range of nanoscale dielectric particles. Thus, the results are useful for detecting defects in nanosystems with a simple concept and may open avenues for improving nanoparticle synthesis methods. The ability to manipulate matter with light is nowadays an accessible tool since many applications have proven to be extremely useful, like microscopy In particular, the use of all-dielectric core-shell nanoparticles can represent specific advantages over their counterparts due to simple reasons However, although many core-shell nanoparticle types are on demand In this regard, efficient separation or sorting methods are essential for the development of manipulation of nanoscale devices required for high demand manufacturing purposes. Many classes of procedures have been established for particle sorting, a few involving complex physical-chemical processes In this work, a method to sort core-shell nanoparticles is presented based on the resonant properties of all-dielectric systems and the symmetry breaking that occurs when there are defects in the particles, like inhomogenous shells. As the illumination is composed of two counter-propagating optical waves with equal circular polarization, the scattered fields of the system turn out very sensitive to any rupture of the illumination symmetry. This numerical study focuses on the example with a silicon core and silica shell as the latter can exist as a byproduct of the oxidation of the core Figure Where Q abs and Q sca are the optical efficiencies for the particle in vacuum, V p [S p ] is the particle volume [surface], and A p is the area of the particle transversal to the illumination. n ̆ is the versor normal to the surface S p . The total time-averaged force 〈F ̅ 〉 and torque 〈N ̅ 〉 exerted on the particle can be calculated using the surface integrals, where 〈T ̿ 〉 is the time-averaged Maxwell stress tensor, whose form for time-harmonic fields is given explicitly by where ⨂ is the outer product and I ̿ is the unit tensor. In this way, all the corresponding dimensionless variables are defined in a way similar to that for Ref. The discussion centres around a main illustrative example for a 300 nm particle with a 100 nm core and then briefly extends to other ranges in the nanoscale. The characteristic spectra of optical efficiencies are discussed in As the two optical modes labeled E+M and M proved to be more sensitive to the offset's variation, Figure Note that both mechanical reactions occur simultaneously and in a preferential direction since the offset is assumed in the positive z-axis. This "thruster" phenomenon provides the particle with both propulsion and spin, therefore selfstabilizing its movement as in a rocket system. Remarkably, this effect represents a potential detection mechanism for identifying inconsistencies in particle fabrication. The particle itself will be compelled to move and spin in the same direction as anomalous particles, akin to how they behave in a velocitymass selector. . Following the study, a natural question arises: How will the particle move if it is arbitrarily oriented with its anomaly in a direction different from the illumination's? This is the subject of the next subsection. In other words, each arrow begins at the exact location of the CM of the particle and is appropriately scaled. The arrows in Figure In general, all the maps show mirror symmetry around a plane of high symmetry, i.e., z = 0. As can be seen in the arrow maps, Figures The effect becomes more complex as some rotations are induced simultaneously (panels b in Figures Figure There is another phenomenon that is worth mentioning in Figure Study of the size dependence. Finally, with the aim to complete a parametric study, let's vary the size of the system beyond the example 100-300 nm when the offset is kept again along the z-axis. For conciseness, the results correspond to a set of particles with geometric similarity, as follows. If the minimum distance δ between core and shell is defined as δ = R b -R a -d, where R a , R b are respectively the core and shell radii, the scales δ 2R a ⁄ and δ 2R b ⁄ are kept constant while varying the particle's size. The line shown in Figure Note that no resonance appears below the value δ = 10 nm, provided that such a small core cannot support Mie resonances of volume type as to continue the trend of geometric-similar systems. In any case, smaller values of δ would result in unrealistic since non-local corrections to the constitutive parameters are likely to appear due to quantum effects. A method of detection of particle anomalies/particle sorting is proposed from a simple optical illumination by taking profit of the resonant properties of all-dielectric core-shell nanoparticles. In a broad range of nanoparticle sizes, the lowest-energy volumetric Mie resonances induce strong anisotropic mechanical inductions on the whole particle, such as unbalanced radiation pressure and particle rotations. These results are based on the symmetry breaking produced by inhomogeneous shells under symmetric illumination. The symmetry breaking induces anisotropic forces from the electromagnetic interaction between the core and the shell of the systems. In particular, the mechanical variables carry the information of that interaction through their dependence on the near fields. Remarkably, the relatively strong dipolar magnetic resonance (lowest-energy mode) sets an acceptable linear dependence of the optomechanics on the size of the particles, which allows for complete particle discrimination from inhomogeneous to homogenous shells. As the forces induced also grow with increasing offset values for a fixed size, the concept is capable in principle to distinguish degrees of anomalies in a range of values for the eccentricity. The fact that torques also arise from the induction would also matter in other applications different from particle selectors such, for instance, nanoprinting, nanoscale measurements of viscosity, and light sail propulsion, among others. partial support by the DYNAMO project (101046489), funded by the European Union, but the views and opinions expressed are, however, those of the authors only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Innovation Council. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.