We present a novel formalism to characterize elastic heterogeneities in amorphous solids. In particular, we derive high-order strain-energy expansions for pairwise energies under athermal quasistatic dynamics. We then use the presented formalism to study the statistical properties of pairwise expansion coefficients and their link with the statistics of soft, quasilocalized modes, for a wide range of formation histories in both two-and three-dimensional systems. We further exploit the presented framework to access local yield stress maps by performing a non-linear stress-strain expansion within a cavity embedded in a frozen matrix. We show that our "bond micromechanics" compare well with the original "frozen matrix" method, with the caveat of overestimating large stress activations. We additionally show how local yield rules can be used as input for a scalar elasto-plastic model (EPM) to predict the stress response of materials ranging from ductile to brittle. Finally, we highlight some of the limits of simple mesoscale models in capturing the aging dynamics of post-yielding systems. Intriguingly, we observe subdiffusive and diffusive shearband growths for particle-based simulations and EPMs, respectively. Unlike in crystalline materials, where plasticity emanates from dislocations that are well defined topological defects, dissipation in amorphous solids stems from local shear transformation zones (STZs) that lack a clear geometrical signature At the mesoscopic scale, one popular class of models that have been extensively developed are elasto-plastic models (EPMs) At the microscopic scale, a considerable effort has been made to develop computational methods that are able to measure the degree of "mechanical disorder" in computer glasses, as well as to estimate local yield stresses that, in turn, feed the formulation of mesoscopic models of plasticity Cavity methods, such as the original "frozen matrix" methodology, have also demonstrated that it is possible to extract from a glassy configuration a local yield stress distribution This paper is organized as follows; we first provide in Sec. II our new non-linear formalism and derived expressions for local strain derivatives of pairwise energies and stresses. In Sec. III, we show the statistics of strain expansion coefficients as a function of material preparation in both 2D and 3D solids. We derive their asymptotic scaling and relation with the underlying population of non-phononic quasilocalized soft modes. We then present in Sec. IV how this formalism can be used to estimate local yield stresses and compare its limit with the original "frozen matrix" method. Next, a local yield stress distribution is used as an input for a scalar elasto-plastic model to predict stress-strain response for a wide range of glass stability in Sec. V A. We highlight some of the limitations of simple scalar lattice models to capture the correct dynamics of shearband growth during the postyielding phase. Finally, in Sec. VI we discuss future work and possible improvements of our framework. Our main goal is to predict how a scalar or tensorial quantities change under an imposed deformation in the athermal, quasistatic limit, where the strain γ serves as the key external control parameter In this work, we consider a system of N particles with potential energy U , in a box of size L, and volume V = L d, with d standing for the spatial dimension. Tensors are denoted with a boldface font, and contractions over particle indices and/or Cartesian components are denoted by dots, e.g. Q :: vuwz denotes a quadruple contraction between the tensor Q and the vectors v, u, w and z. We consider an observable O(x) which depends on coordinates x, and that observable's expansion in terms of a strain parameter, denoted γ. The latter controls the imposed (affine) transformation D(γ), such that coordinates transform as x → D(γ) • x. As an example, the transformation corresponding to simple shear along the x-axis (in 2D) reads In the so-called athermal quasistatic deformation protocol, imposed affine deformations are typically followed by a potential-energy minimization that restores mechanical equilibrium, i.e. particles undergo additional, nonaffine displacements that result in a force-balanced state where ẋ denotes the (still unspecified) nonaffine displacements (sometimes referred to as the nonaffine velocities, and see further discussion below), and we define A ≡ ∂D/∂γ for the sake of brevity. With the total variation of coordinates -as spelled out in Eq. (2) -at hand, the total derivative of a general observable O reads Within the athermal, quasistatic limit, we require that net forces on particles F remain unchanged under the imposed deformation, namely dF /dγ = 0. Employing Eq. (3) above, leads to We identify the Hessian tensor ∂F /∂x ≡ -H and rearrange the above equation in favor of the nonaffine displacements ẋ, to obtain where ∂F /∂γ = H • (∂x/∂γ) is the affine shear force. Solving the above equation and plugging ẋ into Eq. 3 allows one to compute the linear strain dynamics of any observable O(γ) ≃ O 0 + C γ γ, with C γ = dO/dγ| 0 evaluated at the reference coordinates. We will now generalize this formalism to derive higher-order strain coefficients. We aim to go up to the cubic term ∼ γ 3 in order to probe non-linear asymmetries for between forward and backward deformations. The general expansion of O with respect to γ from a reference coordinate x 0 takes the form with , where | 0 indicates that derivatives are evaluated on the undeformed coordinates x 0 . In addition we define total coordinates derivatives as d n = d n x/dγ n , where we have already shown that The second and third coefficients naturally follow as and Now, we are missing partial derivatives of a given observable with respect to particle coordinates x as well as d 2 and d 3 . We iteratively take total derivative d/dγ on d 1 and d 2 to arrive at and Two unknowns are left in order to evaluate d 2 and d 3 , namely the non-affine acceleration ẍ = d ẋ/dγ and jerk ... x = d ẍ/dγ. The terms acceleration and jerk are chosen in analogy with time derivatives as ẋ is often called in the community the non-affine velocity. Taking total derives d/dγ on Eq. 5 one arrives at two new linear equations to solve in favor of ẍ and ... x that read Here, T = ∂ 3 U/∂x∂x∂x and M = ∂ 4 U/∂x∂x∂x∂x are the third and fourth derivative of the potential energy with respect to coordinates x, respectively. Contractions of the different tensors H, T , and M with vectors are provided in the Appendix for pairwise potentials. In order to numerically test our expressions and highlight key features of our framework, we prepare glassy samples in both two-and three-dimensions (2D and 3D, respectively) that are composed of a polydisperse mixture of particles interacting via a modified inverse power law repulsive potential Having at hand expressions for displacement fields d n , we are now left with derivatives of O with respect to x. In the following, we give two examples with both a scalar and a tensorial quantity, namely the total potential energy U (x) and the stress tensor σ(x). We consider particles interacting solely with pairwise interactions as often employed in model glass formers. The potential energy reads U (x) = ι φ ι (x ι ), where the subscript ι labels a pair of particles i and j with energy φ ι separated by a distance Eq. 7 and Eq. 8, the strain expansion for U can be written in a compact form as where J = ∂U/∂x = -F . As both energies and stresses are additive quantities, expressions derived above and in what follows are valid both at the system level and at the pairwise (bond) level. For example the first coefficient can be computed as where φ ′ ι is the first derivative of φ ι with respect to the pairwise distance r ι . However, one important difference between coefficients U γ and φ γ has to be highlighted. As we consider systems in mechanical equilibrium, terms like J • ẋ present in J •d n will be equal to zero when summed over the whole system. As such, divergence entering in ẋ due to the gapless nature of the non-phononic density of states will be absent, it is the reason why the macroscopic energy and stress are not singular quantities. In contrast, at the bond level singularities of non-affine fields will be present in φ γ , φ γγ , ..., which as we will show later in Sec. III can be used to measure the density of soft defects and predict regions at the onset of a plastic instability. We now turn to the stress tensor σ, which can be written as where B ≡ α β is a null tensor where only the αβ component is equal to unity. Note that for shear deformations, the volume is conserved V (γ) = V 0 and thus the stress dynamics can be expressed solely through the strain expansion of the observable O = J • (B • x). Expressions for derivatives and contractions of O are provided in the Appendix, plugged into Eq. 7 and Eq. 8 allow us to compute the shear dynamics of the shear stress up to γ 3 , as and where σ 0 is the stress component of the undeformed solid. In this expression, the loading geometry is encoded in A (embodied in d n , cf. for example Eq. 9), whereas B controls which of the stress tensor components is being considered. As an example, one can follow the evolution of the pressure for an imposed shear deformation and vice versa. Note however that for deformations where the volume is not conserved dV /dγ ̸ = 0, one needs to incorporate extra terms if a solid is prestressed We can connect the first coefficient σ γ to the linear elastic properties of the sample, namely the shear modulus μ and bulk modulus K. For a system in mechanical equilibrium, the term J • (Bd 1 ) in σ γ is zero and one can directly recall the microscopic expression for the shear modulus μ as where B = A = xŷ is a null tensor with only one shear component equal to unity, e.g. the xy component for the deformation tensor defined above. From the first and second term, one can easily identify the affine and nonaffine part of the modulus, respectively. For the bulk modulus K, this connection is not as straightforward. Let us first define the deformation tensor for a dilation with true strain η = ln(V /V 0 )/ d. In 2D, the deformation tensor reads Next recall that K can be expressed through the derivatives of the pressure with respect to the volume as K = -V dP/dV , where P = -Tr σ/ d. Using chain rules and the definition of the true strain gives us When evaluating d Tr σ/dη, one needs to remember that the volume is no longer conserved, and therefore, one also needs to take into account the affine dynamics of V with respect to η. Doing so, we finally arrive at Together, our formalism allows us to extract the linear and non-linear elasticity at both the system and pairwise bond level. Here, we provide a discussion and scaling relations that connect properties of strain expansion coefficients at the bond level with the presence of low-frequency non-phononic excitations coined quasi-localized modes (QLMs). The later show a peculiar low-frequency nonphononic density of states D(ω) ∼ ω 4 where the subscript nγ stands for the nth order coefficient in Eq. 13 or Eq. 16. In Fig. One advantage of our formalism is that measuring all pairwise strain expansion coefficients only require iteratively solving linear equations. Thus, once can quickly visualize pairwise bond field in systems composed of a few million of particles. Moreover, we now have access to both the first and second derivatives of pairwise energy φ γ and φ γγ , respectively. In Ref. In this section, we propose to use our non-linear formalism to extract estimates for local stress activation thresholds. Here, we will borrow the same idea as in the "frozen matrix" method We can now apply this method to compute the local yield stress σ Y for any given deformation. In what follows, we select equally spaced particles by 3 diameters d = ρ -1/ d, with the number density ρ = N/V . For each particle, we perform our bond micromechanics within a radius R = 5d and extract the forward yield stress, denoted in what follows by σ Y . In the "frozen matrix" method, the system will always eventually yield for sufficiently large strains, meaning that we can always define σ Y for any trial. In contrast, in the "bond micromechanics" framework, there are rare events where the imposed rigid matrix stabilizes the region. For example, this can happen when the rigid interface is placed directly at the core of a plastic instability. As a result, non-linear stress terms can be all positive, translating into a diverging stress function. Those trials are being discarded and particles always receive the lowest σ Y value of all attempts that have been performed in their vicinity. We have checked that with our particle spacing and cavity radius, one always recovers a yield stress value for every particle. As an illustration, we propose to apply our methods to glasses exhibiting a wide range of mechanical stability utilizing the same SWAP MC as mentioned and used in Sec. III. In Fig. Next, we quantitatively compare yield stresses obtained with both our "bond micromechanics" and the "frozen matrix". For both methods, we coarse grain our map on a length scale ξ = 5d, and compute the probability distribution P (σ Y ). ξ is set according to the typical core size of a shear deformation as demonstrated in Refs. One of the main advantages of our approach and the "frozen matrix" method compared with other indicators is to provide stress activation thresholds as input for mesoscopic models of plasticity. Here, we propose to compare how the different yield stress distributions extracted in Sec. IV perform as inputs for EPMs in order to predict the stress-strain response of a material. To compare the sole effect of P (σ Y ) on results, we keep our EPM as simple as possible. We adopt a scalar quasistatic EPM with synchronous dynamics that have been previously employed in Refs. for q ̸ = 0, with 2D wave vector q = {q x , q y } and square norm q 2 = q 2 x + q 2 y . Our only adjustable parameter will be the plastic eigenstrain ε pl . We consider two distributions P init and P renewal that describe the initial and renewal yield stress distribution, respectively. P init corresponds P (σ Y , T p ) at the parent temperature T p where the system has been prepared, whereas P renewal is set to the yield stress distribution of a sample quenched from a high temperature (here P (σ Y , T p = 0.7)). In other words, our assumption is that once a block fails it directly rejuvenates in the statistics of a poorly annealed glass with a lower average yield stress In this model, ε pl is the only adjustable parameter and is tuned in order to recover the steady state stress σ s of a poorly annealed sample. In what follows, we have set ε pl ≃ 0.065 and have have kept it fixed for all sample preparations. Note that in realistic systems, ε pl fluctuates from one STZ to another, see detailed discussions in Refs. We are now in position to see the influence of P init on the material response and compare our "bond micromechanics" and the "frozen matrix" method on the same footprint. In Fig. As the size of our EPM is calibrated to match the size of our atomistic box, we can fairly compare the cumulative plastic activity across the yield transition as a function of T p , see Fig. As a last comparison, we propose to follow the postyielding dynamics of shearband for different material preparation. We define the plastic activity P as the number of shear event that a particle or a EPM block have experienced. Having located the position of the SB, we can then track the plastic profile P (x), with x being the position along the transverse direction of the SB. Here, we consider only the case of a single shearband that nucleates along the horizontal direction, avoiding the turnover of a vertical SB during large deformations, see detailed discussion in Ref. In EPM, the SB dynamics share some similarity and significant differences. We report the activity profile P (x) in In Fig. In this paper, we have developed a new method to probe mechanical heterogeneities in amorphous solids. We have derived expressions for the non-linear micromechanics of local pairwise potential energy and stresses that include both the affine and non-affine deformation. Firstly, we have measured the statistics for the coefficients of a non-linear strain expansion of the energy in glasses featuring a wide range of mechanical disorders in both 2D and 3D. We have highlighted the presence of anomalously large values of pairwise strain derivatives that we have linked to the presence of soft quasilocalized modes that promote large non-affinities. We have derived their expected asymptotic scaling based on the universal quartic law of the non-phononic density of states D(ω) ∼ ω 4 . Furthermore, we have shown that the distri-bution of pairwise derivatives allows one to extract the range of the depletion of soft modes as a function of our control parameter, here the parent temperature T p from which our glasses were first equilibrated before a final quench to zero temperature. As our formalism only requires solving linear equations, our method can be used to check glass stability in an efficient manner for both 2D and 3D glasses. In a second part, we have shown that our formalism can be applied in the same spirit as the "frozen matrix" to extract stress activation threshold. We have highlighted the role of the preparation protocol on the depletion of regions having a small local yield stress. Moreover, we have quantitatively compared the yield stress distribution P (σ Y ) obtained by our bond micromechanics and the original "frozen matrix". We have found that our method allows one to extract a good estimate of the average yield stress of a material solely from the as-cast configuration. However, the bond micromechanics overestimate large stress activation leading to a large variance of P (σ Y ) compared with the "frozen matrix" method. In the future, we could improve local yield values by incorporating a semi-rigid matrix in our implementation, such as recently proposed in Refs. Next, we have used local yield rules to parameterize a simple 2D scalar elasto-plastic model (EPM). We have shown that one can well predict the stress-strain response of materials exhibiting a wide range of glass stability that covers both a continuous homogeneous ductile flow and a discontinuous yielding transition with the formation of a shearband. Here, our only fit parameter was to set a fixed amplitude for the eigenstrain ε pl of a local shear transformation. We have shown that our mesoscopic model can recover the stress-strain response of material exhibiting a wide range of initial mechanical disorder, as well as size dependence stress fluctuations in the steady state. One possible improvement in the future will be to directly extract estimates of ε pl using the detection of non-linear modes Finally, we highlighted some differences between our atomistic simulations and our EPM. In particular, we have monitored the aging dynamics of shearband and have found a subdiffusive and diffusive growth for particle based simulations and our elasto-plastic models, respectively. This confirms some earlier observations in 3D simulations Appendix D: Shearband nucleation: finite size study Here, we provide additional data that quantify finite size effect in the plastic profile associated with the nucleating shearband post yielding. In Fig. 