By means of density functional theory plus dynamical mean-field theory (DFT+DMFT), we investigate the correlated electronic structures of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under high pressure. Our calculations show that La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is a multi-orbital Hund metal. Both the 3d z 2 and 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals of Ni are close to be half filled and contribute the bands across the Fermi level. Band renormalization and orbital selective electronic correlation are observed. Through imaginary-time correlation functions, the discovery of high-spin configuration, spin-frozen phase, and spin-orbital separation shows that the system is in a frozen moment phase at high temperatures above 290 K and is a Fermi liquid at low temperatures, which is further comfirmed by the calculated spin, orbital, and charge susceptibilities under high temperatures. Our study uncovers Hundness in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under high pressure. It is well-known that a proper description of the electronic correlation effect is the key to understanding unconventional high-temperature (high-T c ) superconductors. Since the discovery of cuprate superconductors Many efforts have been attempted to search other transition metal compounds analogous to cuprates. As a neighbor of Cu in the periodic table, Ni element was once expected as a potential candidate to reproduce the high-T c superconductivity. However, no superconductivity trace was observed in hole-doped nickelates La 2-x Sr x NiO 4 Very recently, the superconductivity was discovered in Ruddlesden-Popper bilayer perovskite nickelate La 3 Ni 2 O 7 with a maximum T c of about 80 K under pressure In this work, we investigated the electronic structures and correlation of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 by means of density functional theory plus dynamical mean-field theory (DFT+DMFT). We performed the calculations under different finite temperatures. Our results show that La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is a multi-orbital Hund metal with orbital selective electronic correlation. The high spin states and spin-orbital separation revealed by our calculations suggest Hundness rather than Mottness in the system. And the calculated spin, orbital, and charge susceptibilities under high temperatures confirm that the electronic correlation in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is attributed to Hund's physics. Our work discovers Hundness in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under high pressure and provides an understanding to the origin of its electronic correlation. We performed DFT+DMFT calculations to study the electronic correlation of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 under different finite temperatures. The DFT parts were done by WIEN2K code and the full-potential linearized augmented plane-wave (FP-LAPW) method was implemented The strong band renormalization suggests electronic correlation in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . It is natural to wonder whether the origin of electronic correlation belongs to Mottness or Hundness. In order to study this problem, in Fig. In order to further characterize the orbital selective electronic correlation in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . Then, we list the orbital mass enhancement in Table Z is the renormalization factor, which can be estimated from self-energy functions at the Matsubara axis. We find a mass enhancement difference of 2.5 and 2.0 for the 3d z 2 and 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals at T = 290 K, respectively. Such a difference becomes more significant when temperature is lower, with a stronger mass enhancement of 3.4 for 3d z 2 and weaker mass enhancement of 2.5 for 3d x 2 -y 2 at T = 80 K. The mass enhancement confirms the strong renormalization of band structures in Fig. Here, we survey the local spin multiplets to demonstrate the Hund correlation in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 . In those strong correlated materials that exhibit Hundness, the high-spin states are usually favored T . Below T cmp these susceptibilities become constant, which is known as the Pauli behavior. In a Mottness system, the screening of orbitals and spins begins almost simultaneously, as well as the completion (T onset orbital ∼ T onset spin ). In contrast, a Hundness system possesses a smaller value of U and a larger value of J H , which causes the screening of orbitals has started before the spin screening at a much higher temperature (T onset orbital ≫ T onset spin ). This is the so-called spin-orbital separation. Usually, such a behavior in a Hundness system features a broad temperature window than in a Mottness system. And in such a spin-orbital separation phase, the completely screened orbital degrees of freedom shows a Pauli behavior while χ spin devi- ates from a Curie behavior. Meanwhile, a non-Fermi liquid behavior is observed in this phase till both the spin and orbital screenings complete. This is a key signature to identify the Hund electronic correlation in correlated materials. In Fig. where is the orbital occupancy difference, N is the total occupancy of the two e g orbitals. From a very high temperature of T = 10000 K, we find that χ orbital are almost unchanged when lowering the temperature. The unchanged χ orbital strongly suggests that the screening of or- bitals has completed at an extremely higher temperature than T = 10000 K. However, χ spin and χ orbital show obviously dif- ferent behaviors when changing temperature. As the temperature decreases, χ spin generally shows an increasing trend, while χ orbital remains constant. We then display the T χ spin and T χ orbital curves versus temperature in Fig. In summary, we have studied the electronic structures and correlation of La 3 Ni 2 O 7 via DFT+DMFT calculations. The momentum-resolved spectral functions A(k, ω) show that La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is a multi-orbital metal. The 3d z 2 and 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals of Ni contribute those bands across the Fermi level. The electronic correlation leads to a strong band renormalization, where the band width of bonding state band at the M point is reduced remarkably. The orbital-resolved spectral functions A(ω) show sharp quasiparticle coherence peaks around the Fermi level. The mass enhancement m * /m derived from the self-energy functions at the Matsubara axis reveals the orbital selective electronic correlation. The electronic correlation of the 3d z 2 orbital is stronger than that of the 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital. At T = 80 K, the mass enhancements of the 3d z 2 and 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals are about 3.4 and 2.5, respectively. A higher percentage of high-spin state suggests the existence of inter-orbital Hund electronic correlation within the e g orbitals of Ni. Moreover, the calculated spin-spin and orbital-orbital correlation functions show spin-orbital separation and frozen moments at high temperatures. The scaling behavior of the spin-spin correlation functions indicates that La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is in a spin-frozen phase at high temperatures (T > 290 K) or in a Fermi liquid phase at low temperatures. The calculated static local spin, orbital, and charge susceptibilities under high temperatures also show signatures of Hundness. All these results show that La 3 Ni 2 O 7 is a multi-orbital Hund's metal. Our DFT+DMFT calculations uncover the Hund electronic correlation in La 3 Ni 2 O 7 and provide a new perspective to understand the origin of electronic correlation in correlated materials. D. Hundness from imaginary-time correlation