Electric propulsion requires exhaustive ground test campaigns to obtain an accurate characterization of the propulsion devices, or thrusters, used by the spacecraft. Among the many plasma parameters, accurately measured during the tests, that of the ion velocity is key, and can be measured using non-intrusive tools such as Laser-Induced Fluorescence (LIF) diagnostics. The ion velocity is inferred by Doppler shift measurements that presupposes a precise and accurate knowledge of the wavelength of excitation of the ions at rest. Today electric propulsion is moving towards the use of Krypton as a propellant, due to the dramatic increase in cost of the more advantageous Xenon gas propellant, commonly used until now. In this work the 4d 4 D 7/2 →5p 4 P • 5/2 transition of Kr II is used for LIF diagnostic in hollow cathode discharge. Traditionally, Xenon has been the favorite propellant gas for electric propulsion applications as it provides an optimal compromise between performance and ease of handling. Although Xenon has numerous technical advantages, its relative scarcity and resulting increase in price are now posing considerable budgetary constraints for its use, especially for deep space exploration Like Xenon, Krypton is a noble gas and can be integrated easily into existing spacecraft propellant management systems with minimal modifications. As this gas has similar ionization potential it should not dramatically affect thruster efficiency, and the lower atomic mass could possibly produce a 25% increase in specific impulse due to the increased propellant exit velocity of lighter ions The characterization and qualification of ion thrusters require extensive, long-duration test campaigns in space simulators. A valuable tool for characterizing thruster performance and comparing this with already-developed models is Light-Induced Fluorescence (LIF) spectroscopy, which measures the velocity of ions employing the Doppler effect. Many excellent ) is used for LIF diagnostics by the majority of the electric propulsion research community. As to Kr ion, such favoured transitions are at 820 nm (the 4d 4 F 7/2 →5p 2 D • 5/2 transition) LIF diagnostic has been previously applied for characterization of ions emitted from a hollow cathode in the plume region (see for example The air wavelength of the Kr II 4d 4 D 7/2 →5p 4 P • 5/2 transition has been previously measured to be 728.982 nm with an accuracy of 0.7 pm (about 400 MHz) The LIF is a particularly powerful optical-diagnostic tool providing valuable, species selective information with excellent spatial resolution. A highly coherent, single-frequency, laser source that can be tuned over a broad spectral interval permits to establish a versatile laser-plasma interaction tool. Given its remote detection nature, LIF diagnostic is minimally invasive. The plasma is interrogated locally with an electromagnetic tool: all the optical devices used to illuminate the plasma and to detect its fluorescence are placed far from the interaction point, can have dimensions in the mm scale, and the interaction volume can have sizes as small as few millimeters. The ion velocity distribution function (IVDF) can be measured along different directions with excellent spatial and time resolution. The measurement procedure is based on detecting the intensity of the fluorescence emitted by the plasma in the interaction point, in response to the illumination by means of narrow-band radiation characterized by an accurately and precisely known frequency that can be scanned within an opportune interval. The measurements shown in this work are conducted in a non-magnetic stainless steel vacuum chamber. Vacuum is obtained by a single stage cryogenic panel. The base pressure of the vacuum chamber is as low as 10 -7 mbar and increases up to about 10 -5 mbar during the cathode operation. The hollow cathode is operated in diode regime (see Fig. The light source used to excite the 4d 4 D 7/2 →5p 4 P • 5/2 Kr II transition is a tunable diode laser in a primary-and-secondary configuration (the primary laser is an extended-cavity diode laser and the secondary laser is a tapered amplifier) with a linewidth better than 1 MHz. A schematic of the LIF set-up is given in Fig. The detection region is near to the cathode exit plane at the cathode tip center, where the laser beam and the fluorescence collection objective (FCO) view regions are crossing (see Fig. The view spot of the FCO is about 2.5 mm in diameter at the region of detection. The fluorescence signal at air wavelength of 473.9 nm (corresponding to the transition 5p 4 P • 5/2 →5s 4 P 5/2 ) is selected using a grating monochromator. Subsequently, the signal at 473.9 nm is detected using a photo-multiplier tube (PMT). The LIF signal demodulation is performed by a lock-in amplifier, whose input is the PMT current, converted to voltage by a trans-impedance amplifier. The poor signal-to-noise ratio of the LIF spectra is counteracted by using a long lock-in integration time, implying a slow scan of the laser wavelength and averaging over many measurements. Indeed, the lock-in amplifier integration time is 300 ms, which with a third order low-pass filter at the output determines a bandwidth of about 0.3 Hz . The laser vacuum wavelength is locked and scanned by the wavelength meter using a PID control (the schematics of the set-up are shown in Fig. The wavelength meter used in this work is temperature and pressure stabilized. A variation less than 50 MHz is expected for temperature variations of about 10 • C, which are well compensated for rates lower than 2 • C /hour that is higher than the typical temperature excursion in the laboratory. In this analysis the Kr isotopes with concentration higher than 0.3% are considered and listed in Table Only one isotope ( 83 Kr) has a non zero nuclear spin (I=9/2) and thus its hyperfine structure should be included in the lineshape analysis. The hyperfine constants of both the states of the 83 Kr II transition have been measured previously As can be seen from Fig. Fig. where the δ i is the relative shift for each spectral component (given in Table II and III), B i are the relative intensities (B i =α i × β i ), k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the ion temperature, m is the ion mass, A is a scaling factor, c is the speed of light, and D accounts for possible data offset (see Fig. Figure The ν 0 value is temperature dependent through the hyperfine and isotope structure contribution. A negative systematic error in the determination of ν 0 is introduced at different Doppler widths (ion temperatures). The calculated shift is given in Fig. Considering a coverage factor of 2, for a confidence level of approximately 95%, the measured central wavelength λ 0 and frequency ν 0 are given in Table The fitted ion temperature results in the range from 3300 K to 3500 K and can be related to the cathode wall temperature, which is about 1.5 times lower. FIG. LIF diagnostic is performed in the plasma of a hollow cathode using the the Kr II 4d 4 D 7/2 →5p 4 P • 5/2 transition. By performing long-lasting measurements an improved signal to noise is obtained as to make the residual noise contribute negligibly to the error of the measurements. The theoretical spectrum of the transition is calculated and used to fit the experimental data. Both the frequency and the vacuum/air wavelength centers are given. Further investigation is necessary to verify whether a null drift velocity can be expected in the orifice region of a hollow cathode operating in diode mode. In fact, work is in progress to evaluate a possible non-zero av- erage Kr ion velocity by applying a counter-propagating laser excitation scheme in a proper Kr ion source. The systematic error due to the presence of hyperfine and isotope structure in determination of the line centre is calculated and taken into account as well as its variation with the ion temperature.