Scaling down the GaN channel in a double heterostructure AlGaN/GaN/AlGaN High Electron Mobility Transistor (HEMT) to the thicknesses on the order of or even smaller than the Bohr radius confines electrons in the quantum well even at low sheet carrier densities. In contrast to the conventional designs, this Quantum Channel (QC) confinement is controlled by epilayer design and the polarization field and not by the electron sheet density. As a result, the breakdown field at low sheet carrier densities increases by approximately 36% or even more because the quantization leads to an effective increase in the energy gap. In addition, better confinement increases the electron mobility at low sheet carrier densities by approximately 50%. Another advantage is the possibility of increasing the aluminum molar fraction in the barrier layer because a very thin layer prevents material relaxation and the development of dislocation arrays. This makes the QC especially suitable for high-voltage, high-frequency, high-temperature, and radiation-hard applications. Ever since their emergence in the early 1990s [ 1, 2 ] GaN High Electron Mobility Transistors have demonstrated superior performance for high voltage [ 3, 4 ], high frequency [ 5,6 ], high temperature [ 7,8 ] operation, and excellent radiation hard potential [ 9,10 ]. The prime reasons for their superiority for operation in extreme environments are a wide energy gap leading to a high breakdown voltage and polarization doping [ 11, 12 ] supporting large sheet electron densities in the HEMT channels. A high polar optical phonon energy in GaN (91.2 meV [ 13 ] compared to 35 meV for GaAs [ 14 ]) and screening of impurity scattering by a large electron density ensure a high field effect mobility, especially in the on-state and lead to a low on-resistance for long [ 15-17 ] and short channel devices.[ 18 ] In this letter, we show that these advantages could be dramatically enhanced using the Quantum Channel HEMT (QCHEMT) design (see Fig. bottom wide bandgap barriers. Fig. where nq is the quantum number (nq = 0 for the ground state), and Feff is the effective electric field in the channel. Our simulations show that, just like for Si MOSFETs 24 , the effective electric field in the conventional HEMT is approximately Here Fi is the electric field at the barrier-channel interface, ns is the sheet electron density in the channel, εο is the dielectric permittivity of vacuum, and ε =8.9 is the GaN dielectric constant. Factor 2 in the denominator accounts for the band bending. [ 23 ] For the QC HEMT FF eeeeee ≈ FF ss + FF ii , where Fs is the polarization field that depends on the molar fractions of the cladding layers and the QC thickness. We used a self-consistent solution of the Schrodinger-Poisson equation to estimate Fs = 10 8 V/m. Fig. (1-3). We have also found the ground energy states for QC HEMT using a 1D Poisson simulator by G. Shnider [ 25 ] and obtained very close results. As seen, the position of the lowest quantum state E0 in the quantum channel device remains practically constant even at ns at the gate voltage close to the threshold. This is equivalent to the effective increase in the energy gap by E0. Note that for the breakdown field consideration, the device parameters at the gate voltage close to the threshold are particularly important. The analysis presented in reference [ 26 ] shows that the breakdown field, FBR, is approximately proportional to As seen, strong electron confinement leads to a significant fraction of electrons penetrating the top barrier. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that at a high electric field, a large fraction of the channel would experience quantum transfer to the top barrier. Since the top barrier is made of material with a larger bandgap (in our example, it is AlGaN with 65% Al), a further significant increase in the effective breakdown field FBR is expected. This effect requires further theoretical and experimental studies. Strong electric confinement in QC HEMT leads to a smaller 2DEG effective ∆d thickness than it is for a conventional HEMT. The ∆d could be estimated as the ratio of the ground state energy over the electric field at the heterointerface: Hence, bulk (volume) electron density for the same ns value is higher in QC HEMT as compared to conventional HEMT. Fig. Experimental confirmation of mobility increase due to better confinement in double heterostructure (DH) HEMTs has been obtained earlier in [ 21 ]. This data is shown in Fig. In conclusion, the QC AlGaN/GaN/AlGaN HEMT design should considerably improve the breakdown voltage, field-effect mobility, and, therefore, transconductance at low electron sheet densities and support a large maximum electron sheet density and a larger maximum current. A thinner quantum well made of lower bandgap material should also lead to better radiation hardness of QC HEMT. The proposed QC HEMT concept can be applied to other material compositions, e.g., to AlGaN channel HEMT which will lead to even higher breakdown voltages without sacrificing electron mobility. 