Field-effect transistors coupled to integrated antennas (TeraFETs) are photodetectors being actively developed for the THz frequency range (∼100 GHz -10 THz). Among them, Graphene TeraFETs (G-TeraFETs) have demonstrated distinctive photoresponse features compared to those made from elementary semiconductors. For instance, previous studies have shown that G-TeraFETs exhibit a THz response that comprises two components: the resistive self-mixing (RSM) and photothermoelectric effect (PTE). The RSM and PTE arise from carrier density oscillations and carrier heating, respectively. In this work, we confirm that the photoresponse can be considered a combination of RSM and PTE, with PTE being the dominant rectification mechanism at higher frequencies. For our CVD G-TeraFETs with asymmetric antenna coupling, the PTE response dominates over the RSM at frequencies above 100 GHz. We find that relative contribution of RSM and PTE to the photoresponse is strongly frequency dependent. Electromagnetic wave simulations show that this behavior is due to the relative change in the total dissipated power between the gated and ungated channel regions of the G-TeraFET as the frequency increases. The simulations also indicate that the channel length over which the PTE contributes to the photoresponse below the gate electrode is approximately the same as the electronic cooling length. Finally, we identify a PTE contribution that can be attributed to the contact doping effect in graphene close to the metal contacts. Our detectors achieve a minimum optical noise-equivalent power of 101 (114) pW/ Hz for asymmetric (symmetric) THz antenna coupling conditions at 400 GHz. This work demonstrates how the PTE response can be used to optimize the THz responsivity of G-TeraFETs. Device physics and technologies in the THz frequency range (roughly defined as 100 GHz to 10 THz) have attracted a considerable research interest over the last decades. The technological exploitation of this frequency range is primarily driven by a variety of applications Over the last fifteen years, TeraFETs based have been developed and studied, initially focusing on classical semiconductor material systems such as Si The underlying THz detection mechanism of TeraFETs made from classical semiconductor materials is typically resistive self-mixing (RSM), which is induced in the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) of the FET channel Interestingly, already during the first realization and characterization of G-TeraFETs, it became clear that, besides RSM, the so-called photothermoelectric effect (PTE) contributes significantly as a second rectification mechanism Since G-TeraFETs can in principle benefit from two rectification mechanisms being active simultaneously, it is necessary to understand their respective frequency-dependent contributions to the THz detector signal in order to design and Terahertz detection with graphene FETs: photothermoelectric and resistive self-mixing contributions to the detector response A PREPRINT realize the next generation high-performance G-TeraFET sensors. In this Work, we address this issue and present a THz characterization of CVD G-TeraFETs by using a methodology that reveals RSM and PTE response contributions independently. This is achieved by comparing photoresponses obtained with symmetric antenna coupling (SAC) and asymmetric antenna coupling (AAC) schemes. Our graphene devices were fabricated by a wafer-scale process of Ref. To distinguish the PTE and the RSM contributions in the photoresponse of G-TeraFETs, we designed and fabricated detectors with two different antenna coupling schemes, AAC (Fig. The SAC device is shown in Fig. with L g,SAC = 1.15 μm. We fabricated additional AAC-type devices with different values of L ug (L ug = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 μm) in order to study the influence of the ungated segments of the channel (for results see Fig. In the following, the two rectification phenomena are discussed in more detail for each detector design, first PTE and then RSM. Electromagnetic wave (EM) simulations with CST Studio Suite identify the regions, where the THz field drives a high-frequency current and thus heats the carrier ensemble in the graphene sheet. The inhomogeneity of the THz field leads to spatial gradients in the carrier temperature T C as indicated by the red (hot, T C > T L ) to blue (cold, T C = T L ) color-coded overlay on the plots of the graphene sheet in Fig. where Here, the heated ungated region and the remaining part of the transistor channel are considered as two lumped elements. S g (U GS ), the Seebeck coefficient (thermopower) of the gated graphene channel, can be controlled by the TG voltage U GS , while the Seebeck coefficient of the ungated segment of the graphene channel has a fixed value S ug ≈ S g (0 V ). It is important to note, that the Seebeck coefficients and thus U P T E also depend on the back gate (BG) voltage U BG , which is not explicitly expressed in the equation. The same is true for the conductivity and the Fermi energy in the following equations. The Seebeck coefficient S g (U GS ) can be calculated from the semiclassical Mott formula for degenerate semiconductors according to where e is the elementary charge, σ(U GS ) the electrical conductivity of the channel, and E F the Fermi energy in the gated region of the graphene sheet. It is difficult to accurately determine σ(U GS ) for a given device. We obtain an approximate U GS -dependent value from the measured drain-to-source resistance R DS (U GS ) via σ(U GS ) = (R DS (U GS )) -1 • (W/L). R DS includes the resistance contribution of the ungated regions and the contact resistances. Terahertz detection with graphene FETs: photothermoelectric and resistive self-mixing contributions to the detector response V of G-TeraFETs with symmetric antenna coupling (SAC, left panel, red) and asymmetric antenna coupling (AAC, right panel, green). The calculated photoresponse for resistive self-mixing (RSM, dotted lines, calculated with Eq. ( E F in Eq. ( Here, v F is the SLG Fermi velocity and U Dirac the Dirac voltage. C ox,T G denotes the capacitance per unit area of the TG. In the SAC case a pair of thermocouples is formed, i.e., a thermopile with two segments, one on each side of the graphene channel. On the right side (TG 1 and D), one thermocouple consists of the heated junction between the central ungated graphene and the cold junction at the D contact side TG1-graphene-D, similar to the AAC case. The second thermocouple, on the left side (TG 2 and S) of the graphene channel, is formed between the cold junction of S-graphene-TG2 and the heated junction between TG 2 and the central ungated graphene. The two thermocouples are oriented opposite to each other. One gets a net diffusion current and U P T E ̸ = 0 V only when TG 1 and TG 2 are differently biased. Under unequal TG bias conditions, the resulting thermovoltage of the SAC thermopile is given by where S T G2 and S T G1 represent the TG voltage dependent Seebeck coefficients in each gated graphene region (TG 2 and TG 1). If TG 2 is set to ground potential (S T G2 = S ug ), thus cancelling the thermoelement on the left (S) side, one retrieves the AAC case with U T G1 P T E ≈ ∆T C • S hot ug -S T G1 . Consequently, when TG 1 is set to ground potential, the expected thermovoltage of the SAC photodetector can be calculated from U T G2 P T E ≈ ∆T C • S T G2 -S hot ug . We now turn to the RSM effect. It is present in a single-split bow-tie geometry of the AAC layout because the THz radiation is asymmetrically coupled to the transistor channel. Under such conditions, rectification occurs by resistive Terahertz detection with graphene FETs: photothermoelectric and resistive self-mixing contributions to the detector response A PREPRINT mixing at any frequency of the THz wave -at sufficiently high frequency influenced by a plasma wave which is excited in the channel as shown in Fig. where U el T Hz is the voltage amplitude of the THz signal between S and TG. Eq. ( In Fig. , where C ox,T G and C ox,BG represent the TG-and BG-to-channel capacitances per unit area, respectively. All devices on the wafer exhibit similar electrical transport characteristics -Dirac voltages U Dirac close to -0.8 V, peak channel resistances around 7 kΩ -for both device designs (AAC and SAC). We attribute this to the high homogeneity and reproducibility of the wafer-scale fabrication process including the global transfer of CVD graphene to the entire wafer. The field-effect mobilities μ F E,e and μ F E,h for electrons and holes, the contact resistance R C and the residual carrier concentration n 0 of the AAC device can be obtained from the measured R DS (U GS ) curve using Eq. ( Following the DC electrical characterization, each TeraFET was characterized in the THz frequency range 0.1-1.2 THz. The optical voltage responsivity R op V = ∆U DS /P op T Hz was determined from the rectified voltage ∆U DS and the total THz beam power P op T Hz measured in steps of 100 GHz as a function of the bias voltage applied to the respective gate. Results are shown in Fig. Fermi level of graphene is tuned differently by a BG depending on whether there is an additional metal layer on top of the graphene or not Terahertz detection with graphene FETs: photothermoelectric and resistive self-mixing contributions to the detector response where the frequency-dependent, but voltage-independent fit parameters X RSM (ω) and X P T E (ω) are obtained by least-mean-square fits to the measured photoresponse. The prefactors ∆T C,0 and (U el T Hz,0 ) 2 of U RSM and U P T E are those of Fig. where we introduced the intrinsic calculated responsivities of the RSM and the PTE rectification processes via We observe a near-quantitative agreement between the RSM+PTE curves and the measured photoresponses for both detector layouts, and clearly a significantly better agreement than is obtained with each rectification effect alone in Fig. We have repeated this kind of analysis for a number of frequencies (from 0.1 to 1.2 THz in steps of 100 GHz) and for several devices including AAC-type devices with various values of the ungated channel length L ug (L ug = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 μm). Results for several AAC and SAC photodetectors are shown in Fig. , which yields a value of 2.5 for L ug = 0.3 μm, 3.2 for 0.2 μm and of 3.8 for 0.1 μm. Interestingly, we also observe such a roll-off with frequency for the BG measurement, which we attribute to the contact doping effect We have found further experimental evidence that the Seebeck coefficient of the ungated channel region S hot ug in our AAC-type detectors is partially influenced by this contact doping effect. For further details we refer the reader to the Supporting Information (sections S4 and S8). For the SAC-type device, the ratio R op V,RSM (ω)/ R op V,P T E (ω) is always close to zero, as expected. In the SAC layout, the RSM contribution, compared with the PTE one, is significantly reduced by design, as discussed above. Note that for higher frequencies, the extracted responsivity ratio turns to negative values due to negative values of X RSM at these frequencies. Here, the least-mean-square fit routine suggest a negative RSM contribution to the detected signal of SAC, which may arise whenever the net RSM signal between TG 1 and TG 2 is of opposite sign with regard to the PTE signal. We now investigate the frequency dependence of the rectified voltages of the two mechanisms, and how they scale with the frequency dependence of the power of the radiation source used. The frequency dependence of the RSM contribution to the rectified voltage is contained in the product (U el T Hz ) 2 = X RSM • (U el T Hz,0 ) 2 , while that of the PTE contribution is in the product ∆T C = X P T E • ∆T C,0 . Fig. In order to better understand the origin of the observed roll-off of the R op V,RSM / R op V,P T E ratio of the AAC-type devices, we performed EM wave simulations (CST Studio Suite) of the full antenna structure with S, D and G electrodes and a graphene layer buried under a 20-nm-thick Al 2 O 3 insulator layer. Next, we determined the power dissipated in the graphene layer at the respective channel position using the surface loss density (SLD) function of CST (for further details, see Methods section). In Fig. We now utilize the information about P D (x, ω) to estimate how strong the rectification by PTE should be relative to that by RSM. In order to do so, we assume that the rectified voltage scales with the total power dissipated in the respective spatial regions where the rectification occurs. In case of the RSM mechanism, this is the gated part of the channel. With regard to PTE, rectification occurs in the ungated channel region and in the gated part of the channel down to an unknown effective length ∆L. In what follows, we furthermore assume ∆L to be independent of ω. Based on these suppositions, we first integrate the SLD along the gated channel region, and then divide the resulting quantity by the integral over the SLD from x = 0 to x = L ug + ∆L. The resultant ratio should be directly proportional to the measured R op V,RSM / R op V,P T E ratio if the assumption stated above is correct. In Fig. Building on these computational findings, we want to add two observations here, which help to roughly estimate the relative importance of PTE, when inspecting a gate-voltage-dependent responsivity curve. Fig. To reduce the THz losses through the substrate and maximize the detector performance the same detectors were manufactured on a high resistivity Si substrate with the specific resistance >10 kΩcm, compared to previously used Si substrate with the specific resistance of 10-20 Ωcm which facilitate the BG functionality. The results of the extensive characterization measurements performed on the SAC-type detector (L g,SAC = 1.2 μm, L ug = 0.1 μm) are shown in Fig. In the color map of Fig. Terahertz detection with graphene FETs: photothermoelectric and resistive self-mixing contributions to the detector response A PREPRINT The observed discrepancy between the calculation and measurement can be attributed to several aspects: First, to the simplified in which we calculated the Seebeck response, without considering the contribution from the ungated region between TG 1 and TG 2. Second, the cancellation of the RSM responses of the two gated regions is not complete for unequal TG 1 and TG 2 voltages and is therefore embeeded in Fig. Detector sensitivity can be described by the noise-equivalent-power NEP op V = V N /|R op V | specifying the input power at which the detector has a unity signal-to-noise ratio limited by (voltage) noise source V N (in 1 Hz measurement bandwidth). It has been shown that typically the dominant noise source of TeraFETs, because they are operated without drain-to-source bias voltage, is Johnson-Nyquist noise V N = √ 4k B T R DS . Terahertz detection with graphene FETs: photothermoelectric and resistive self-mixing contributions to the detector response A PREPRINT of the TG voltage for an AAC-type and a SAC-type device at 400 GHz. Additionally, curves calculated with the RSM+PTE model are displayed. For both devices, the minimum values of NEP op V are obtained in the hole-conduction branch, where the RSM and PTE signals have the same sign (add constructively). For the AAC-type device, the gate voltage, where we measured the minimal NEP op V value, is U GS = -1.5 V (marked as vertical green dashed line), for the SAC-type device, it is U GS = -1.25 V (marked as vertical red dashed line), both positions are on the left side from U Dirac = -0.8 V. For the same two devices -together with two other AAC devices with different ungated channel lengths L ug = 0.1 and 0.3 μm -, we plot in Fig. Hz for AAC and 642 pW/ √ Hz for SAC), which we can attribute to improved power coupling by a smaller difference in impedance between the antenna and the channel. Clearly, the lowest NEP op V values are obtained at 400 GHz, close to the maximum magnitude of the antenna impedances, where the best power coupling is achieved. It is worth noting that close to this frequency, also the field enhancement factor E || (∼1500 at 400 GHz) of the two antenna layouts peaks (see Supporting Information, Fig. Hz with an AAC-type device (open green star) and of 114 pW/ √ Hz with an SAC-type one (open red star), both at 400 GHz. For the latter, the best operational point was extracted from the 2D TG 1/TG 2-biasing map of NEP op V presented in Fig. To put our results more into perspective with the state-of-the-art of THz photodetectors regarding their NEP values, we provide in Table In the column entitled "Comment", we distinguish between two types of measurement and evaluation approaches. The comment "Si lens (w.n.)" stands for the determination of true optical responsivity and NEP values, where the power P op T Hz in the expression of the responsivity is the total as-measured beam power. The radiation was coupled onto the detector through a Si substrate lens. No further data processing was made ("w.n." standing for "without normalization"). On the other hand, "normalized to diffraction-limited area" stands for the determination of a cross-sectional responsivity, respectively NEP value (see footnote 1). Here, only a part of the beam power contributes to the measured rectified signal (for example because no substrate lens could be used). Various approaches are used to determine this part by experiment or simulations. Often it is assumed that the beam which has been focused by a lens or mirror, has a diffraction-limited Terahertz detection with graphene FETs: photothermoelectric and resistive self-mixing contributions to the detector response The central information of Table In summary, it has been demonstrated that the detector response of G-TeraFET is a combination of resistive self-mixing (RSM) and thermoelectric (PTE) rectification. We have also shown that in case of G-TeraFETs fabricated with lowmobility CVD-grown graphene the RSM-to-PTE ratio varies strongly with the frequency of the incident THz-field and that the PTE is the dominant rectification mechanism at higher frequencies. For our CVD G-TeraFETs with asymmetric antenna coupling, the PTE already dominates over the RSM above 100 GHz. With EM simulations we showed that the observed frequency dependence is a direct consequence of the relative change in the total dissipated THz power (the surface loss density) between the gated and ungated graphene channel regions. From the simulations we also found that the channel length over which the PTE contributes to the photoresponse below the gate electrode corresponds approximately to the electronic cooling length. In addition, a second, weaker PTE was identified that can be attributed to the contact doping effect in graphene near the metal electrodes. At 400 GHz our detectors achieve a minimum optical noise-equivalent power of 114 pW/ Hz for symmetric and 101 pW/ √ Hz for asymmetric antenna coupling. This work demonstrates the potential of harnessing the PTE response in G-TeraFETs and paves the way for the next generation high performance graphene THz detectors. Terahertz detection with graphene FETs: photothermoelectric and resistive self-mixing contributions to the detector response A PREPRINT The CVD G-TeraFETs were fabricated either on 6" p-doped Si wafers (350 μm thick, 10-20 Ωcm) with 90-nm-thick, thermally grown SiO 2 layer, or on 6" highly resistive Si wafers (350 μm thick, >10 kΩcm) with a 300-nm-thick thermally grown SiO 2 layer. The wafers were patterned with lithography markers and contact pads and the commercially available CVD graphene from Graphenea was transferred onto the substrate. To encapsulate the graphene for protection against contamination by the liquid chemicals used throughout the rest of the fabrication process, a seed layer of Al was deposited onto the graphene surface and oxidized to Al 2 O 3 . Next, the Ohmic source and the drain contacts were patterned via electron-beam lithography, the protective dielectric at the contact areas was etched, and the top contacts were evaporated with Cr 5 nm/Au 100 nm stack. The evaporation chamber was pumped overnight to reach pressure below 10 -7 bar and the evaporation rate of 1 Å/s was used. Next, the devices were covered by a 18-nm-thick ALDgrown Al 2 O 3 gate dielectric, the TG was patterned via electron beam lithography and Ti 5nm /Au 100 nm stack was evaporated. The whole process was performed on full wafers, as shown in Fig. In this work, we adapted the fit procedure presented in Kim et al. where n 2D,α = (n 0 2 + [n α (U GS )] 2 ) 1/2 and R DS (0 V) is the measured resistance at zero gate bias. The gate voltage dependent carrier density in the graphene layer n α (U GS ) can be estimated from where Θ(...) denotes the Heaviside function and n q = π(ħv F C ox,T G ) 2 /(2e 4 ) accounts for the quantum capacitance effect. U Dirac is set as a fixed parameter here and determined from the gate voltage point of maximum resistance. Note that the above model can be employed for BG operation if C ox,T G is replaced by the BG capacitance C ox,BG . We provide here details of the EM wave simulations (with CST) of the THz power dissipation in the graphene channel of AAC-type devices. The surface conductivity/surface impedance of the graphene was calculated by means of the Kubo formalism where, R s denotes the surface resistance of the graphene sheet determined from the real part of surface impedance and H(x, y, 0, ω) is the in-plane magnetic field amplitude at the position z=0 of SLG surface. In order to estimate the relative amount of power dissipated in the gated and ungated channel regions we use the SLD extracted at SLG channel center (y=W/2,P D (x, W/2, 0, ω) = P D (x, ω)). The DC electrical characterization was performed using the Keysight B2900 precision source/measure unit. The drain-to-source voltage U DS needed for the read-out of the drain-to-source current I DS was fixed at 10 mV, S electrode was grounded. For the determination of the THz responsivity R op V of the TeraFETs, we employed a commercial CW spectroscopy system (Toptica TeraScan 1550) which has a tunable fiber-coupled InGaAs photomixer as the radiation source, and replaced the photomixer detector of that system by our TeraFET. All measurements were performed at room temperature and under ambient conditions. As shown in Fig. Supporting Information. Contents: PTE power dependency, absorption losses in the lightly p-doped Si substrate, frequency dependence of the gate voltage of minimal NEP, back gate responsivity measurements, carrier mobility dependence on the RSM-to-PTE responsivity ratio, frequency dependence of the extracted RSM and PTE responsivity, Terahertz detection with graphene FETs: photothermoelectric and resistive self-mixing contributions to the detector response A PREPRINT an extensive antenna analysis including the field enhancement factor, the effect of back gate voltage on the AAC detector performance and estimation of the prefactors for RSM and PTE. Terahertz detection with graphene FETs: photothermoelectric and resistive self-mixing contributions to the detector response [86], a more appropriate way to model the graphene channel in contact with the Source metal electrode under BG voltage tuning would be to treat it as partially (indicated by the ′ symbol) BG voltage dependent (S ug (U ′ BG )). In their work the authors modeled the dipole layer between graphene the contact metal as a very thin insulator with a metal-to-SLG equilibrium distance in the orders of 2-4 Therefore the latter functionality for E F (U ′ BG ) implies exact knowledge several electrical parameters of the Source metal, e.g. the metal workfunction, the metal-to-SLG equilibrium distance as well as the potential drop in the dipole layer between SLG and the metal. In Fig. One distinguishes between optical and cross-sectional responsivity and NEP