Space-division multiplexing (SDM) is one of the key enabling technologies to increase the capacity of fiber communication systems. However, implementing SDM-based systems using multimode fiber has been challenging with the need for compact, low-cost, and scalable mode de/multiplexer (DE/MUX). Here we present a novel integrated mode MUX for few-mode fibers (FMFs) which can launch up to eight spatial and polarization channels. The new design is composed of a two-dimensional multimode grating coupler (MMGC), highly compact mode size converters (MSCs), and adiabatic directional couplers (ADCs). Eight data lanes in FMFs can be selectively launched with integrated optical phase shifters. Experimental results reveal efficient chip-to-fiber coupling with peak efficiencies of -3.8 dB, -5.5 dB, -3.6 dB, and -4.1 dB for LP 01 , LP 11a , LP 11b , and LP 21b modes, respectively. Meanwhile, the proposed design can efficiently couple all the degenerate LP modes in a two-mode FMF, allowing signal descrambling in the demultiplexer. Thanks to the use of integrated subwavelength Mikaelian lens for mode-independent field size conversion with loss ≤ 0.25 dB , the total footprint of the MMGC and MSCs is only 35×35 μm 2 . The proposed design shows great potential for densely integrated photonic circuits in future SDM applications. The rapid expansion of new applications including cloud computing, virtual reality, and generative artificial intelligence technologies such as ChatGPT, has maintained the trajectory of exponential growth in datacenter traffic, and present new challenges for data center communication networks to meet the market demand. Spacedivision multiplexing (SDM) has been widely investigated for optical fiber communications To enable combination or separation of independent data streams in a FMF, mode multiplexers (MUXs) or demultiplexer (DEMUX) are essential to convert between single-mode signals and different mode patterns in the FMF. One of the key challenges in MDM-based communication systems is the monolithic integration of the mode DE/MUX interfaced with FMF, as opposed to the bulk optics technology used in MPLC demonstrations Thanks to the high-refractive-index contrast, silicon photonics can provide compact solutions for light field manipulation While photonic integration approach has significant potential benefits, a reliable, efficient, and integrated multichannel mode DE/MUX solution is still lacking. To tackle this problem, in this work, we present a novel integrated multichannel mode MUX for FMFs. The proposed design can launch up to 8 spatial channels in a FMF including all the degenerate modes in LP 01 , LP 11 , and two degenerate modes in the LP 21 mode group. In the experiment, the integrated mode MUX shows a minimum chip-to-fiber coupling loss of -3.8 dB, -5.5 dB, -3.6 dB, -4.1 dB for LP 01 , LP 11a , LP 11b , and LP 21b modes, respectively. Selective excitation is achieved for the four LP modes in the two orthogonal polarizations with integrated phase shifters. The reported design also maintains good fiber-to-chip efficiency for all degenerate modes in a 2-mode FMF, allowing mode descrambling such as MIMO processing for the DEMUX. Moreover, the 2D multimode grating coupler (MMGC) and mode size converters (MSCs) fabricated in this study are extremely compact showing a total footprint of only 35×35 μm 2 , which is mainly attributed to the mode-independent field size conversion enabled by the subwavelength Mikaelian lens. The proposed design demonstrates the potential of photonic integrated solutions for many SDM applications, such as data transmissions The proposed design works for two-mode FMF and four-mode FMF provided by OFS. The two-mode FMF is capable of supporting LP 01 and LP 11 modes, while the four-mode FMF is designed to accommodate LP 01 , LP 02 , LP 11 , and LP 21 modes (see Figure The proposed integrated mode DE/MUX for FMF is composed of a 2D multimode grating coupler (MMGC), four mode-size converters (MSCs), and four tapered adiabatic directional couplers (ADCs) as depicted in Fig- The selective mode launching of LP modes is depicted in Figure The same design configuration can also be used as a mode DEMUX in the future. Selective decoupling only occurs when the fiber LP modes are of high modal purity and polarizations are precisely aligned. However, in practical scenarios, mode evolution of the LP modes and polarization rotation cannot be avoided in a circular-core FMF. As a result, unpredictable field patterns are generated at the fiber-to-chip coupling end The proposed multimode grating is efficient for both TE 0 and TE 1 modes due to their comparable effective indices in the wide slab waveguide, which has a width exceeding 10 μm. Our design utilizes a completely verti- cal coupling approach to decrease spatial dependent loss and eliminate angled fiber polishing. To make sure that the performance is consistent for all modes coming from the four slab waveguides in various directions, the design utilizes a symmetrical structure. As presented in Figure It is known that grating couplers usually have a small coupling angle with respect to the chip surface normal to avoid second-order Bragg reflection into the waveguides. As a result, advanced designs such as chirped gratings To solve this problem, effective medium theory (EMT) was used to simplify the modelling into a 2D finite element simulation. While 2D simulations cannot accurately evaluate the coupling efficiencies for all fiber modes in the two orthogonal polarizations, they can easily obtain the coupling performance of the fundamental TE mode, which is sufficient for evaluating the FOM during the optimization process. Essentially, the MMGC is wide and symmetric for the two orthogonal polarizations, thus all the TE 0 and TE 1 modes in the orthogonal polarizations should exhibit similar or equivalent effective indices. Assuming good mode size matching, the coupling performance of the higher order fiber modes should be directly proportional to the results of the fundamental mode in 2D simulations. As a result of this, the computing resources needed to evaluate the FOM can be greatly reduced, making it possible for more sophisticated optimization algorithms, such as genetic algorithm in this work, to search the best design parameters. The second order EMT can be found in Supporting Information S2. Figure Because of the arbitrary LP mode evolution from the coherent sum of the vectorial fiber modes and polarization rotation in a circular-core FMF, the field pattern arriving at the FMF end is always uncertain. Therefore, the received field pattern by grating coupler cannot be assumed as a pure LP mode with a perfectly aligned polarization. Nevertheless, our proposed MMGC can convert all the vectorial fiber modes in a two-mode FMF including HE 11-x , HE 11-y , TM 01 , TE 01 , HE 21-even , HE 21-odd into TE 0 and TE 1 mode on chip. Hence, optical pattern generated by the linear superposition of those vectorial modes at the fiber end can always be coupled and collected using the eight on-chip single-mode waveguides for signal descrambling. Such unique property is confirmed in 3D-FDTD simulation by launching various vectorial mode patterns in a 2-mode FMF and summing the received power on chip (see Supporting Information S3), the obtained coupling efficiencies agree well with the prior chip-to-fiber simulation performance. The large refractive index contrast of the SOI platform allows for effective confinement of optical modes within the silicon waveguides, enabling an extremely high level of integration density. Nevertheless, the mode field size also varies considerably between optical fibers and silicon channel waveguides. The highly confined waveguide modes with a typical mode field diameter of < 1 μm is not matched with fiber mode with a typical mode field diameter of ∼ 10 μm. A long adiabatic linear taper is typically required for mode size conversion. In our case, a linear waveguide taper with a length of 350 μm is necessary to minimize the transition loss for both the TE 0 and TE 1 modes. The taper length cannot be shortened without violating the adiabatic transition condition. The use of four linearly tapered MSCs for the proposed DE/MUX would cause a large device footprint and waste a lot of valuable chip area. A compact and mode-independent mode size converter is thus a key step to improve the integration density. Mikaelian lens developed from Maxwell's fish-eye lens using conformal transformation optics, is inherently free of spherical aberrations. Such unique property enables both paraxial and nonparaxial light to be focused at the same point using a single lens, making it perfectly suitable for mode-independent field size conversion. A compact integrated Mikaelian lens on photonic chip can be realized by using the subwavelength grating structures, which have already been widely exploited for many integrated photonic components The schematic of subwavelength Mikaelian lens is depicted in Figure The subwavelength Mikaelian lens is designed to have a width of 13 μm to match with the mode field diameter of the graded-index FMF. The maximum effective index n max is 3.0158 in the center of the subwavelength gratings while the minimum effective index n min is 2.2560 at the edge. The subwavelength grating pitch is set as 240 nm while the duty cycle varies continuously from 0.3 to 0.7. To map the effective index profile efficiently, the second order EMT is applied (see Supporting Information S2). Figure Figure The proposed integrated multimode DE/MUX is fabricated on SOI wafer with a 220 nm thick top silicon layer. The buried-oxide layer has a thickness of 2 μm. Electro-beam lithography is used to define the device patterns, followed by dry reactive-ion etching process with a shallow etch depth of 70 nm and a full etch. Silicon dioxide (SiO 2 ) with a thickness of 1.2 μm is used as the top cladding to protect the passive photonic circuits. Metallization is performed using high-resistance titanium-tungsten alloy (TiW) for local heat generation and aluminum for electrical signal routing. A 300-nm thick SiO 2 passivation layer is used and selectively etched later to create windows over the aluminum pads for probing. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the fabricated MMGC and MSCs are presented in Figure The coupling loss of the fabricated MMGC was characterized by measuring the fiber-chip-fiber transmission using a tunable continuous-wave laser source and a power meter. A SMF with single-mode grating coupler is used at the input side. The polarization of the input mode was aligned by a three-paddle mechanical polarization controller so that all the transmission for x-polarization is maximized. An integrated Y-branch is used as the 50:50 power splitter, followed by 150-μm long waveguide heaters for phase tuning. The optical signals are sent to the ADCs, MSCs and MMGC with a 4-mode FMF at the output to collect optical power. The heater injection current of the TE 0 mode can be tuned to maximize the transmission at 1550 nm or 1570 nm, to selectively launch LP 01 or LP 11b , respectively. Similarly, LP 11 and LP 21b can be selectively excited using the TE 1 mode by the same approach. Figure The insertion loss and crosstalk of the integrated subwavelength Mikaelian lens are also characterized by measuring the fiber-chip-fiber transmission. Due to the low insertion loss of the proposed MSC, four Mikaelian lens connected back-to-back (see Figure To confirm the selective excitation of 8 spatial channels in FMF as illustrated in Figure Table To summarize, an ultra-compact and efficient integrated multichannel mode multiplexer in silicon for fewmode fibers is demonstrated. Selectively launching of 8 spatial channels with a minimum coupling loss of -3.8 dB, -5.5 dB, -3.6 dB, -4.1 dB for LP 01 , LP 11a , LP 11b , and LP 21b modes are demonstrated in experiment. Since a low coupling loss can be maintained for all the degenerate modes regardless of the mode or polarization change during transmission in a two-mode FMF, the proposed design can also work in a DEMUX where signal descrambling is required to eliminate modal crosstalk. More than that, the demonstrated design is very compact by using the subwavelength Mikaelian lens for mode independent field size conversion. The total footprint of the MMGC and MSCs can be shrunk by more than 400-fold to only Rectangular core 4 TE00-TE30: <-5.5 dB < 2.5 dB - Supporting Information: Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author. perfectly vertical optical fiber. IEEE Photonics Technology 