. Frustrated magnets remains in the focus of magnetism during recent decades Kagomé lattice constructed from the corner-sharing triangles with hexagonal voids is one of the archetypical models of geometric frustration, which is studied since being introduced in 1951 by I.Syôzi Extension of the kagomé model, called square kagomé lattice (SKL), was proposed in 2001 In the present study we focus on the nabokoite family compounds ACu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl (A=Na, K, Rb, Cs). These compounds were reported recently as a spin-liquid state candidates Magnetic ordering in nabokoites is of separate interest. Only Na-and K-nabokoites were reported to order at low temperatures Here we report results on the high-frequency (9-14 GHz) dielectric anomalies sought in all members of nabokoite family ACu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl (A=Na, K, Rb, Cs). We have found that K and Na compounds demonstrate strong dielectric anomalies in both real and imaginary parts of dielectric permittivity at approximately 25 and 100 K, correspondingly, while Rb and Cs compounds do not demonstrate any anomaly of the similar strength from 1.7 to 300 K. Nevertheless, much weaker dielectric response was observed in all members of nabokoite family at different temperatures around 5 K. We argue that lattice deformations accompanying observed dielectric anomaly can be the key to understanding of the magnetic ordering in nabokoites. We used polycrystalline samples of ACu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl from the same growth parties as were used in the earlier structural, thermodynamic and magnetic resonance studies Samples were conditioned for the high-frequency experiment as follows (see also Figure We used resonator technique to measure highfrequency dielectric properties of the sample (see Figure The microwave cavity was surrounded by a hermetically sealed shell filled with a small amount of heat exchange helium gas. The shell was submerged into liquid helium or liquid nitrogen to reach low temperatures. Liquid helium bath cryostat was used at 1.7-100 K temperature range, liquid nitrogen bath cryostat was used at 77-300 K temperature range. The cavity temperature change during the experiment (cavity temperature is the same as the sample temperature) causes some change of its' eigenfrequency and bandwidth due to the effects of thermal contraction and to the temperaturedependent cavity walls resistance. These effect were accounted for by performing reference experiments with the empty sample-holder. The real part of sample's dielectric permittivity ε ′ ̸ = 1 causes shift of the cavity eigenfrequency at the given temperature: (here and further on indices (s) and (e) denote measurements with the sample-loaded resonator and with the empty sample-holder, correspondingly), while the dielectric losses described by ε ′′ affect cavity Q-factor (here ∆ω is the cavity bandwidth, full width at half maximum amplitude). Quantities ω 0 (T ) and ∆ω(T ) are obtained from Lorentzian fits of the cavity transmission curve measured via frequency modulation of microwave generator. Typical variation of the cavity eigenfrequency over the full temperature range (1.7...300 K) was about 40-50 MHz, typical bandwidth was 3-10 MHz at different eigenmodes (Q ≃ 1000...4000). We have had no technical means to measure absolute value of the microwave frequency with the accuracy better than 1 MHz to compare directly ω 0 (T ) results for the sample-loaded cavity and for the empty sample-holder. Frequency modulation technique, on the contrary, allows to follow variation of the cavity eigenfrequency in the given experiment with sufficient accuracy. Thus, we have measured variation of the cavity eigenfrequency compared to its lowest temperature value and contrast v (s) (T ) vs. v (e) (T ). We have found, that (i) v(T ) dependence is reproducible for the given sample and (ii) v(300 K) is the same within the error margin for all samples and for empty sample-holder. This allows to calculate frequency shift δω introduced above as the difference of v(T ) curves measured with the sample-loaded resonator and with the empty sample-holder: This approach ignores possible temperature-independent part of the high-frequency dielectric permittivity allowing to determine only the "anomalous" part. The real part of dielectric permittivity (its "anomalous" part) ε ′ can be found from the cavity eigenfrequency shift δω: and the imaginary part ε ′′ can be determined from the change of the cavity Q-factor: here V (s) and V (res) are the volumes of the sample and that of the resonator, correspondingly, sample volume was determined from its mass using density computed from the structural data Our main experimental results are (i) qualitative detection of the high-frequency dielectric anomalies in nabokoite compounds and (ii) quantitative determination of real and imaginary parts of the high-frequency dielectric permittivity for strong dielectric anomalies in K and Na nabokoites. Qualitative detection of the high-frequency dielectric anomalies is double-controlled by the measurements' reproducibility and by the observation of simultaneous response in real (ε ′ ) and imaginary (ε ′′ ) parts of the highfrequency dielelctric permittivity. Dielectric origin of the observed anomaly was confirmed by its observation only in the TE101 and TE103 modes experiments, when the sample is in the beam of the high-frequency electric field, and by the absence of similar anomaly in the experiments with TE102 mode, when the sample is in the node of the electric field. This makes qualitative observation of the dielectric anomalies a well established experimental result. Quantitative calculation of ε ′ , ε ′′ via equations ( The measurements on all four members of ACu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl (A=Na, K, Rb, Cs) nabokoite family were carried out at frequencies 9.6, 11.6 and 14.3 GHz (cavity eigenmodes TE101, TE102 and TE103, correspondingly) in the temperature range from 1.7 to 300 K. We have observed strong anomalies of dielectric origin in the case of potassium and sodium nabokoites. Temperature dependences of real (ε ′ ) and imaginary (ε ′′ ) parts of the high-frequency dielectric permittivity extracted from the observed anomalies via equations (1), (2) are shown in Figure For KCu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl the maximum of the real part of dielectric permittivity ε ′ is observed at (26.5 ± 0.5) K and the peak of imaginary part ε ′′ at (24 ± 1) K. For NaCu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl the maximum of the real part ε ′ is observed at (100±5) K and the peak of the imaginary part ε ′′ at (90 ± 10) K. Position of the peak of the imaginary part for both compounds is slightly shifted to lower temperatures. For the K-nabokoite sample it was verified that an external magnetic field up to 4 T does not affect the shape or position of the observed anomaly. Temperature of the observed high-frequency dielectric anomaly in KCu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl practically coincides with the position of static dielectric permittivity ε(T ) anomaly at 25.4 K Temperature dependences of real and imaginary parts of the dielectric permittivity measured at 9.6 GHz and at 14.3 GHz coincides within the error margin. Quali-tatively the same behavior (strong microwave absorption close to the temperature of dielectric anomaly) was earlier observed at Q-band (30 GHz range) electron spin resonance experiments on KCu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl No dielectric anomalies comparable in magnitude to those of the K-or Na-nabokoites were observed over the entire temperature range for RbCu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl and CsCu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl samples. Measured microwave cavity characteristics for the resonator loaded with the sample of Cs-or Rb-nabokoite smoothly change with temperature as shown in Figure However, accurate measurements performed with larger samples do reveal additional low-temperature features in dielectric response of nabokoites (see Figure Amplitude of the low temperature dielectric losses can be estimated via nonlinear relation between the microwave power transmitted and the microwave power absorbed be the sample Our experiments demonstrate presence of the strong high-frequency dielectric anomalies in NaCu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl and KCu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl. Static dielectric anomaly was earlier reported for K-nabokoite at approximately the same temperature T AFE = 25.4 K Quite small (two-fold) increase of the static dielectric permittivity in potassium nabokoite at this point We will focus our discussion here on the fundamental problem of magnetic ordering observed in Na-and Kcompounds at low temperatures. Magnetic subsystem of nabokoites ACu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl is a unique decorated square kagomé lattice (Figure As one can see from Table To make this discussion more quantitative we calculated bond-valence site energy iso-surfaces for the alkali ions in nabokoite family compounds using the SoftBV software package These structural details allow to suggest that, probably, the lightest alkali ions (Na and K) can either move within the oxygen cage at high temperatures or to occupy random energy-equivalent positions, while at low temperatures alkali ions order, their displacement providing the antiferroelectric pattern of cell polarizations leading to observed dielectric anomalies. Heavy alkali ions (Rb and Cs) are more tightly restricted by their surroundings which prevents ions displacement. The minute displacement of alkali ion within the (ab)plane can be the key to low-temperature magnetic ordering in Na-and K-nabokoites. Alkali ions positions in ACu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl structure are located between the layers formed by copper ions occupying 'Cu1' and 'Cu3' positions, approximately at the same level as the inter-layer copper ions taking 'Cu2' crystallographic positions (see Figure Finally, we will discuss the weak low-temperature dielectric absorption observed in Na-, Rb-and Csnabokoites at approximately 4.5 K (Figure We report results of the study of high-frequency (∼ 10 GHz) dielectric response of nabokoite-family compounds ACu 7 (TeO 4 )(SO 4 ) 5 Cl (A=Na, K, Rb, Cs), which are the example of a quasy-2D square kagomé lattice (SKL) magnet with additional "decorating" inter-layer magnetic ions. We have observed strong anomalies both in real and imaginary parts of the high-frequency dielectric permittivity for K-and Na-nabokoites at approx. 26 and 100 K, correspondingly. These anomalies are presumably related to antiferroelectric transition. Minute lattice de-formations appearing at these transitions are probably the key ingredient to the formation of antiferromagnetic long-range order at much lower temperatures observed for these compounds. Most of the family members (A=Na, Rb, Cs) demonstrate also much weaker dielectric absorption at low temperatures (4-6 K), which probably indicates complex interplay of magnetic and dielectric (lattice) degrees of freedom in nabokoites. While the physics of the decorated square kagomé lattice magnets remains enigmatic and possible magnetically ordered low-temperature phases are not well understood, nabokoite family compounds provides interesting playground open both for theoretical and experimental efforts. Imaginary part of the dielectric permittivity causes diamagnetic losses with time-averaged dissipated power Cavity Q-factor is defined as here E (stored) is the energy stored in the cavity and the total losses power W i is the sum over all dissipation channels. The difference of the inverse Q-factors directly yields contribution of dielectric losses: (A6) here Q (s) and Q (e) are Q-factors for the cavity with the sample and for the cavity with empty sample-holder. Assuming that the sample is positioned at the beam of the electric field one can calculate energy stored in the cavity for TE10k modes here factor 1/2 at the first integral is the result of the time-averaging of the oscillating fields and factor 1/4 at the last expression is the result of E 2 averaging over halfperiods of spacial oscillations along x and z directions. This yields expression for the imaginary part of dielectric permittivity