We report on the epitaxial growth, theoretical modeling, and structural as well as optical investigation of multi-layer, site-controlled quantum dots fabricated using the buried stressor method. This advanced growth technique utilizes the strain from a partially oxidized AlAs layer to induce site-selective nucleation of InGaAs quantum dots. By implementing strain-induced spectral nano-engineering, we achieve separation in emission energy by about 150 meV of positioned and non-positioned quantum dots and a local increase of the emitter density in a single layer. Furthermore, we achieve a threefold increase of the optical intensity and reduce the inhomogeneous broadening of the ensemble emission by 20% via stacking three layers of site-controlled emitters, which is particularly valuable for using the SCQDs in microlaser applications. Moreover, we obtain direct control over emission properties by adjusting the growth and fabrication parameters. Our optimization of site-controlled growth of quantum dots enables the development of photonic devices with enhanced light-matter interaction and microlasers with increased confinement factor and spontaneous emission coupling efficiency. The scalability of nanophotonic systems is key to unlocking their full potential and realizing their widespread applications in various fields, such as optoelectronics and emerging photonic quantum information technologies based on single quantum emitters As the name suggests, in our proposed growth method a stressor layer below the growth surface is used to control the nucleation site, and local number of the QDs Here, we report on the investigation of the buried stressor growth method to precisely engineer the QD gain medium for increasing the and -factors, while at the same time reducing the absorption losses due to spatially and spectrally non-positioned QDs. This paves the way to the energy-efficient operation of those devices, which is of great interest, particularly for applications requiring a large number of devices, such as photonic reservoir computing, where for usage as a nanophotonics platform hundreds of microlasers need to be pumped above threshold and optically coupled The buried stressor technique takes advantage of the strain induced by a partially oxidized AlAs layer, stemming from a lattice constant difference between AlAs (5.660 Å) and Al2O3 (4.785 Å). The resulting tensile strain at the center of the etched mesa protrudes to the surface, where it leads to the accumulation of indium atoms at the most tensile strained positions (largest lattice constant) above the aperture, which results in the site-controlled nucleation of QDs In fact, red-shifted SCQDs with respect to the emission of QDs in sample surface areas not affected by the buried stressor-induced tensile strain, are achieved for long growth interruption times in the range of 40 to 60 seconds. The spectral separation of the two types of QDs allows us to grow higher QD densities without increasing the optical absorption by spatially and spectrally detuned non-positioned QDs. To further increase the optical gain for laser applications, we stack multiple layers of SCQD (ML-SCQDs). Compared to conventional SK QDs, the SCQDs stacking leads to a higher optical gain, and a better spectral homogeneity, as well as position control of QD formation Our samples were grown using metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was employed to investigate the strain profile at the QD growth surface and to measure the QD density. The microscopic analysis is complemented by Raman spectroscopy above the aperture, which is used to monitor the strain profile by measuring the strain-induced spectral shift of the longitudinal optical phonon (LO) line of GaAs. Moreover, we applied the finite-difference method to simulate the strength and shape of induced stress and its effect on the SCQDs using continuum elasticity theory This section is structured as follows: in section A. we discuss the growth and emission properties of a single layer of SCQDs, in section B. we focus on the emission optical intensity of a stack of SCQDs, and in section C. we study the methods of strain engineering of QD emission wavelength. FIG. Figure We interpret the observed behavior by buried stressor-induced migration of the indium atoms to the most tensile strained position directly above the aperture, resulting in a higher indium concentration in the center of the mesa. This together with a higher InGaAs growth rate, hence, leads to an increase in density, size, and indium content of SCQDs compared to non-positioned QDs, thus, contributing to the observed redshift of SCQD emission. In this process, the growth interruption time enables us to achieve an equilibrium that favors more red-shifted emitters in contrast to nonpositioned QDs grown on compressively strained GaAs surface, which will be discussed in the following section. Intriguing, apart from the achieved spectral redshift, the peak intensity of the SCQDs is maintained compared to the non-positioned QDs. We attribute that to the high quality of the growth surface and low defect density compared to other methods for redshifting QD emission using a SRL or a MB. To obtain better insight into the buried stressor growth of SCQDs, the surface strain distribution at the growth surface was modeled using continuum elasticity theory. Simulations of the strain profile at the GaAs surface versus the position on the mesa for different aperture sizes are depicted in Fig. Corresponding AFM measurements in Fig. To evaluate the optical properties of the QDs we fit the spectra obtained from CL measurements, as shown in Fig. Furthermore, Fig. In addition to the improved inhomogeneous broadening of QD ensemble emission and the blue shift in the emission energy, the stacking of SCQDs results in a nearly linear increase in integrated CL intensity, as shown in Fig. That follows from the increase of QDs density due to stacking. The optical intensity increase observed in Fig. The buried stressor growth approach takes advantage of the strain engineering of the SCQDs' optical properties compared to those of non-positioned QDs to achieve higher local emitter density and higher optical gain without compromising the site control of the buried stressor method. Interestingly, it also provides an attractive opportunity to redshift the emission of SCQD, which eventually might reach the telecom O-band. For example, consider the strain magnitude or, more precisely, the shift in the GaAs LO band associated with an aperture size of 1000 nm. The corresponding Raman frequency shift is approximately 1.65 cm -1 , a value comparable to that of an In0.15Ga0.85As MB with a thickness ranging from approximately 40 nm to 50 nm Secondly, by increasing the growth interruption time, we allow for the SCQDs to accumulate more Indium atoms, resulting in bigger dots with increased Indium concentration. That can be observed from CL as a strong red shift of the emission as seen in Fig. We can see a clear red shift of the emission wavelength of about 70 nm. As described above, this is attributed to the higher tensile strain above the aperture leading to larger, more indium-containing SCQDs. Additionally, we expect the tensile strain induced by the aperture to also further red shift the emission. This is also confirmed by our exciton calculations performed using a combination of the eight-band k.p method with the configuration interaction correction (CI). Note that the surface strain obtained from continuum elasticity theory is added to the as-grown QD strain during the k.p computation , where the emission wavelength shifts from 1050 nm for an aperture size of about 500 nm to approximately 980 nm for a size of 5500 nm. In Fig. In summary, we introduced a novel approach based on the buried stressor technique, to achieve a redshift of SCQDs relative to non-positioned ones. This approach enables the deposition of high-density SCQDs within a singular layer, preserving positional control and mitigating increased absorption losses associated with higher non-positioned QD densities. This is achieved while concurrently monitoring and simulating strain distribution to gain deeper insights into the underlying mechanisms. Furthermore, we demonstrate the successful stacking of three SCQD layers, resulting in a threefold increase of optical intensity and a reduction in ensemble inhomogeneous broadening. Subsequently, we investigate the strain-induced redshift of the SCQD ensemble, granting us direct control over emission properties. Combining the buried stressor technique with strain nano-engineering of emission provides control over the site, number/density, and optical properties of both ensembles and single QDs. This achievement can potentially pave the way not only for high-β factor and low-threshold microlasers, but also for single-photon sources operating in the Oband without the need of a strain relaxing layer. Industry and Trade of the Czech Republic and by the project Quantum Materials for applications in sustainable technologies, CZ.02.01.01/00/22_008/0004572. The authors further acknowledge Kathrin Schatke, Prapaht Sonka, Lucas Rickert, Aris Koulas-Simos, and Maximilian Ries for their invaluable technical support and engaging scientific discussions, which greatly contributed to the development and success of this research. ultraviolet (UV) lithography is then performed to define arrays of square mesas with side lengths ranging between 20 and 21 μm with 63 nm step size into the photoresist, with the mesa edge aligned to the (110) crystal plane. The alignment choice depends on the desired shape of the final aperture, as the oxidation speed depends on the lattice orientation The size of the aperture is in-situ monitored with an optical microscope. The process is halted when the desired aperture size is reached by flooding the chamber with nitrogen gas (3 liters/minute) and turning off the heaters to initiate the cooling process. The final structure consists of a small, and size-controlled unoxidized AlAs aperture in the center of the mesa laterally surrounded by Al2O3, as seen in Fig. The final step of the SCQDs fabrication starts with the meticulous cleaning of the patterned sample and removal of surface oxides by immersing the sample for 30 seconds in a 75% sulfuric acid solution. Afterward, the second epitaxial step commences with a 50 nm thick GaAs layer as depicted in Fig. Then, a high-resolution map with 100 nm resolution to study the shape of the aperture and optical properties are measured. Both measurements are recorded at 200 ms integration time per pixel. Raman spectroscopy was employed to monitor the distribution of strain using a Thermo Scientific DXR3xi imaging microscope. To achieve that, a 532 nm diode-pumped solid-state laser with an excitation power of 1.7 mW was focused onto the sample through a 100x objective with an NA of 0.9. A scanning area of 6 μm x 6 μm was mapped, centered around the aperture, with a step size of 100 nm. To enhance spatial resolution, a 25 μm pinhole was introduced. A grating with a resolution of 2 cm -1 was used, and a CCD was utilized for spectrum recording. In each measurement, a Lorentzian function was employed to fit the GaAs LO line (292 cm -1 ), and the resulting Raman frequency was extracted. The strain values were subsequently calculated based on this preview works We theoretically calculated the surface biaxial strain induced by the aperture using the continuum elasticity theory, which relies on minimizing the total strain energy in the whole simulated structure. During the oxidization, the aperture layer from the sample edges changes the material composition from AlAs, which has a zinc blende crystal structure, to Al2O3 which has a triclinic structure. That complicates the continuum elasticity computation, which would either need to be redefined or atomistic methods like molecular dynamics should be used For the computation of the excitonic energy, we used a combination of eight-band k.p envelope function approximation with corrections due to the Coulomb interaction between electrons and holes by configuration interaction method (CI) with a single-particle basis of two-electron and two-hole single-particle ground states Fig. FIG. The lateral stress arising from the difference in lattice constants between the AlAs and Al2O3 layers propagates to the surface from the mesa, as illustrated in Fig. Notably, the extent of applied tensile strain is dependent on the size of the buried stressor, as indicated by the simulation results in Fig. 