Following a recently manifested guide of how to team up infrared transparency and high electrical conductivity within semimetal materials [C. Cui et al. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2023, 136, 101112], we evaluate an applicability of the calcium digermanide (CaGe 2 ) thin film electrodes for the advanced Ge-based optical devices. Rigorous growth experiments were conducted to define the optimal annealing treatment and thickness of the Ca-Ge mixture for producing stable CaGe 2 layers with high figure of merit (FOM) as transparent conducting material. Ab-initio electronic band structure calculations and optical modeling confirmed CaGe 2 semimetal nature, which is responsible for a demonstrated high FOM. To test CaGe 2 electrodes under actual conditions, a planar Ge photodetector (PD) with metal-semiconductor-metal structure was fabricated, where CaGe 2 /Ge interface acts as Schottky barrier. The resulting Ge PD with semimetal electrodes outperformed commercially available Ge devices in terms of both photoresponse magnitude and operated spectral range. Moreover, by using femtosecond-laser projection lithography, a mesh CaGe 2 electrode with the relative broadband transmittance of 90% and sheet resistance of 20 Ω /sq. was demonstrated, which further enhanced Ge PD photoresponse. Thus, obtained results suggest that CaGe 2 thin films have a great potential in numerous applications promoting the era of advanced Ge optoelectronics. The modern civil, scientific and military applications raise new grand challenges for photonic and optoelectronic devices beyond scalability, low energy consumption and high photoelectric conversion yield, which are axiomatic golden standards. Among them flexible sensors, multicolor photodetectors (PDs) and their counterpart niche of the selectively blinds ones are worthy of special mention Transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) no longer could meet all mentioned requirements, despite a comprehensive list of the available materials It is a common knowledge that Ge is a more attractive NIR optoelectronics platform in replacing Si owing to its almost twice-narrower band gap In this work, we report on successful growth of the CaGe 2 films on the transparent insulating (Al 2 O 3 ) and semiconducting (Ge) substrates. Ambient stability of the produced films depending on growth conditions was assessed by means of Raman spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) methods. Based on electrical and optical measurements accompanied by first principles electronic band structure calculations and optical modeling, CaGe 2 was comprehensively characterized as a candidate for TCMs. It turned out, that among CaGe 2 polymorph modifications A. Influence of growth conditions on ambient stability of the Ca-Ge layers We started our examinations from the attempts to grow CaGe 2 films on Al 2 O 3 (sapphire) substrate. In doing so, a solid phase epitaxy (SPE) method was chosen suggesting some similarities between CaGe 2 thin films and CaSi 2 transparent conducting layers obtained previously It is known that CaGe 2 can exist in several polymorph modifications, with hexagonal (space group #186), two trigonal (space groups #166 and #164) and monoclinic (space group #12) crystal lattices being the most frequently observed Concerning growth conditions, which lead to CaGe 2 decomposition, it can be stated that (i) thin ( < 15 nm) films show this tendency regardless annealing temperature, (ii) increase in total Ge-Ca thickness results in the presence of both h2 and hR6 phases and (iii) further increase in thickness opens a stability window for CaGe 2 in h2 modification with no hR6 traces, which suggest single-phase film growth. Too low annealing temperature results in CaGe formation (insulating phase), while too high temperature treatment does in re-evaporation of the deposited layers. To outline some intermediate results on experiments of growth stable CaGe 2 films, we illustrated it by a schematic phase diagram shown in Figure After resolving the stability issue, optical and electrical properties of the h2-CaGe 2 films can be discussed from the view of both modeling and some practical aspects toward the TCMs performance. This screening was performed by first principles calculations, while extracted information is of high value in supporting optical and electrical measurements. We started for the band structure calculations of the fully relaxed h2-CaGe 2 primitive cell and the resulting electron band diagram is shown in Figure To provide an experimental verification of the ab initio calculations, optical transparency and sheet resistance were measured for 100-nm thick CaGe 2 film on Al 2 O 3 substrate obtained under the growth conditions, which correspond to formation of a stable Ca-Ge phase (region I; Figure To test h2-CaGe 2 TCM under the real photovoltaic device operations, we grew a corresponding thin film on the Ge(111) substrate instead of Al 2 O 3 transparent one using the same optimized conditions found previously (60 nm thick CaGe 2 layer annealed at 750 o C). The deposition and annealing of the Ge-Ca bilayer was done through a tantalum mask for in situ formation of the two CaGe 2 pads. Thus, we obtained a MSM photodetector acting as two back-to-back Schottky junctions with a schematic design pictured in Figure Despite a high NIR-MIR TCM performance, the grown CaGe 2 films have low optical transparency in the visible spectral range. Fortunately, it can be tuned by making a perforated mesh electrode by direct fs-laser patterning. For this purpose, 60 nm thick CaGe 2 film was processed using a flat-top square-shape laser beam as schematically illustrated in Figure Representative optical transparency spectra of the 60nm thick CaGe 2 film before and after laser perforation are presented in Figure Finally, to confirm and highlight the advantage of fslaser projection lithography in tuning optical properties of CaGe 2 film, a vertical Ge PD was fabricated on a sapphire substrate with a perforated transparent electrode (face contact) and thin Al film acting as a back electrode. The schematic view of the resulting vertical Ge Schottky PD is shown in Figure As can be clearly seen, such phenomena as transparent conducting electrodes have rarely been addressed concerning the applications in Ge PDs except for some works focusing on graphene, ITO and MXenes integration, nothing to say about much fewer reports on Ge/semimetal or Ge/topological insulator heterojunction PDs. The current work demonstrates that low dark current, high responsivity in wide wavelength range and fast response speed is achievable by introducing semimetal CaGe 2 transparent conducting electrode into Ge optoelectronics. In particular, spectral operation range of the proposed Ge PD is the broadest than that of other photodetectors of the same type (Schottky or MSM). Concerning both photoresponsivity and operation speed, fabricated PD is obviously outperform commercially available Ge PD, while demonstrating competitive characteristics even compared to black Ge based PD. Moreover, a self-powered operation (zero bias driving voltage) is not anyhow restricted by CaGe 2 application and could be potentially achievable by the widely known symmetry breaking approach In the present work, a CaGe 2 commonly used in chemical reactions toward producing 2D Ge structures and derivatives was examined as a candidate for transparent conducting material to be applied in Ge-based optoelectronics. Obtained CaGe 2 films demonstrated electrical and optical properties quite similar to its vis-avis CaSi 2 . Semimetal topology of the electronic bands provided high both optical transparency and electrical conductivity, which were suggested to be the common features of the Ca-IV 2 (IV=Si, Ge) Zintl phases. However, experimental investigations revealed some critical differences in stability and optical performance of the CaGe 2 layers. The former is resulted in relatively narrow ranges of the growth conditions, which prevent ambient induced decomposition and promote a single-phase CaGe 2 film formation. The latter is in the redshift of the transparency window to the MIR region compared to CaSi 2 film of equal thickness. Nevertheless, after finding the optimal growth conditions, CaGe 2 layers were used to produce planar metal-semiconductor-metal photodetector with two back-to-back Ge/CaGe 2 Schottky junctions. The resulting Ge MSM PD with CaGe 2 top transparent electrodes outperformed commercial Ge PD in both absolute photoresponse value operated spectral range. Next, a low intrinsic visible transparency of the CaGe 2 film was improved by a film perforation with fslaser projection lithography. A mesh electrode with perforation ratio of 80% reaches FOM value of 0.75 Ω -1 in the wide spectral range of (400-7000) nm, which makes it competitive with other TCMs. Finally, patterned CaGe 2 thin film was used towards advanced Ge PDs developing, which demonstrated low dark current, high responsivity in wide wavelength range and fast response speed compared to state-of-the-art Ge-based optoelectronic devices. Of great importance is that we demonstrated a new application of the CaGe 2 beyond just using it as precursor material for germanane, germanene and their poly-morphs and derivatives production, while results obtained could become a great step toward mass Ge optoelectronics. All CaGe 2 thin films were grown in a turbo-pumped vacuum chamber with a base pressure of 10 -6 mbar. Solid phase epitaxy was used to form CaGe 2 layers in a way similar to CaSi 2 growth, which can be found elsewhere Phase composition and crystallinity of all samples were examined by Raman spectroscopy setup (NTEGRA SPECTRA II) and X-ray diffraction method (XRD) working in 2 Θ / ω mode with Cu K α radiation source, parallel beam optics (Rigaku SmartLab). In addition, visual control of the sample surface modification after air exposure was carried out with an optical microscopy. Combination of the four-point probe setup for sheet resistance measurements (Teslatron PV) and Fourier Transform Infrared spectrometer (Bruker Vertex V80) coupled to the IR microscope (Bruker Hyperion 2000) for optical properties evaluation were used to calculate FOM values of Ca-Ge films as TCM using the following expression: FOM = -1/[R sheet • ln(T)], where R sheet and T are sheet resistance and optical transmittance (at the selected wavelength or averaged over the specific range), respectively For a deeper insight into semimetal electronic structure of the CaGe 2 and checking its optical properties, first principles calculations and multilayer optical modeling were performed. Further particulars of the calculations are as follows. The density-functional theory (DFT) (1) where ε 0 is the vacuum dielectric constant, Ω is the volume, ν and c represents the valence and conduction bands respectively, ħω is the energy of the incident phonon, u is the vector defining the polarization of the incident electric field, u • r is the momentum operator, and Ψ c κ and Ψ ν κ are the wave functions of the conduction and valence band at the k point, respectively. The real part of dielectric tensor is obtained by the Kramers-Kronig relation: where P denotes the principle value. Obtained dielectric constants and Fresnel law were used to calculate reflecting and refracting layers response on radiation assuming a smooth and sharp interface between materials and zero scattering. For the device applications, a CaGe 2 layer of optimal thickness and thermal annealing was grown on Ge(001) and Al 2 O 3 (0001) substrates to fabricate Ge planar and vertical Schottky MSM photodetectors. The latter CaGe 2 film was delicately perforated using a fslaser projection lithography with second-harmonic (515 nm) 180 fs laser pulses generated by regeneratively amplified Yb:KGW system at 50 KHz maximal repetition rate. The output Gaussian laser beam was shaped to flat-top square-shape beam with the lateral size of 25x25 μ m 2 to perform uniform laser ablation of square-shape surface area of the films. To obtain such intensity distribution in the focal plane of the dry microscope objective with a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.42, the output laser beam was expanded, while its central part with nearly uniform intensity profile was passed through the squareshape pinhole drilled in the aluminum foil by direct laser ablation The room-temperature current-voltage (I-V) and photoresponse spectra of the resulting planar MSM PD with CaGe 2 /Ge Schottky barriers were measured in a standard manner described elsewhere 90 . To detect the response speed of the resulted Ge PD, pulsed optical signals with varied frequencies were produced by modulation (Thorlabs optical chopper) of monochromatic light with 1550 nm wavelength (Hamamatsu Xe lamp and monochromator Solar Tii, MS3504i), while the output photocurrent was recorded with an oscilloscope (DPO2012B, Tektronix). The work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation under the Grant #23-49-10044 (https://rscf.ru/project/23-49-10044/). Convergence verification in k-points density and cut-off energy for ab initio calculations were performed on HPC-cluster "Akademic V.M. Matrosov" (Irkutsk Supercomputer Center of SB RAS, https://hpc.icc.ru). Calculation of frequency-dependent dielectric constants was performed using the equipment of Shared Resource Center "Far