Bilestones are solid masses found in the gallbladder or biliary tract, which block the normal bile flow and eventually result in severe life-threatening complications. Studies have shown that bilestone formation may be related to bile flow dynamics and the concentration level of bile components. The bile flow dynamics in the biliary tract play a critical role in disclosing the mechanism of bile stasis and transportation. The concentration of bile composition is closely associated with processes such as nucleation and crystallization. Recently, microfluidic-based biosensors have been favored for multiple advantages over traditional bench-top detection assays for their less sample consumption, portability, low cost, and high sensitivity for real-time detection. Here, we reviewed the developments in bile dynamics study and microfluidics-based bile component detection methods. These studies may provide valuable insights into the bilestone formation mechanisms and better treatment, alongside our opinions on the future development of in vitro lithotriptic drug screening of bilestones and bile characterization tests. The human biliary system is essential for creating and transporting bile into the duodenum to aid the digestion of fats The formation of bilestones in the biliary system is a complex process involving physical and biological factors Bile flow dynamics has been the most widely considered factor in exploring the physical conditions of bile ducts. Bile flow dynamics refers to the bile flow velocity and pressure distribution in the biliary tract. However, direct measurement of the bile flow rate in a patient is difficult to monitor in real-time. Nowadays, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) modeling is utilized to provide detailed knowledge about the mechanisms of bile flow dynamics in the biliary tract To investigate the biological factors that can be used to anticipate the risk of bilestones formation and the prognosis after bilestones treatment, blood test of various enzymes is most commonly employed in hospitals. Nevertheless, a central laboratory and a bunch of tubes of blood are needed for different test kits in bulk equipment. To minimize sample consumption, sensitive bile component biosensors have been developed using microfluidics, which handles minute amounts of samples on a chip. The power of microfluidics in integrating sample preparation, reagent mixing, chemical reaction, and results monitoring into one device has brought the potential of lab-on-achip for medical diagnostics In this paper, we thoroughly review the literature investigating bile flow dynamics and microfluidic biosensors for bile components. Microfluidics to be used as a platform for organ-on-a-chip is also discussed for in-vitro bilestone studies with the most similar bile duct conditions in vivo. The potential future work that needs to be considered is also discussed at the end of the paper, shedding some light on further investigations of bilestone treatment. Bile is a greenish-brown, thick substance produced by the liver and stored in the gallbladder. It consists of water, bile acids, cholesterol, phospholipids, bilirubin, and electrolytes. Bile viscosity is an important determinant of local flow characteristics and is essential for studies related to bile dynamics as it affects the flow resistance in the bile ducts where η is the dynamic viscosity, L is the flow path length, and r is the radius of the duct. The resistance in the biliary tract is inversely proportional to the quadratic of the radius, rendering the radius decisive for the flow resistance of the biliary tract and, therefore the bile flow rate. The other factor that linearly affects the flow resistance is the bile viscosity. The bile's viscosity characteristics in clinical samples complicated the bile rheology. Bile rheology also depends on sex, pathology type, and shear rate. Most patients' bile samples showed it as a Newtonian fluid whose viscosity is unaffected by shear rate no matter how the flow speeds or shear rates change. However, some patients' bile demonstrated non-Newtonian fluid characteristics that the viscosity varied depending on the shear stress. Ooi et al. It has been found out that bile viscosity differs with biliary locations and between healthy people and patients. Kuchumov et al. have reported that bile in the gallbladder will be more viscous than in the hepatic duct Bile rheology was investigated using both Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluid models. When bile is considered a Newtonian fluid whose viscosity does not vary with shear rate, it is often regarded as water due to the same density and viscosity. Most bile dynamics analysis were on Newtonian fluid When the non-Newtonian model was used in bile dynamic simulation, Carreau's equation where η0 is the viscosity at zero shear rate,  is the shear rate, η∞ is the viscosity at infinite shear rate, a is the time constant, and k is the power index. The Casson's equation gives the relation between stress and shear rate where τ is the shear stress, τ0 is the yield stress, and s is the Casson's degree. The primary function of the biliary tract is to transport the bile. Obtaining the geometry structure of a patient's biliary tract may help predict the bile dynamics guiding the diagnosis of biliary disease and related surgery. For clinical determination of the biliary structure and conditions, medical imaging approaches, including computed tomography (CT), ultrasound (US), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), are often utilized MRI, unlike CT, can reliably image stones in the biliary tree. The magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) technique helps diagnose bile duct stenosis and determine the obstruction's location, extent, and severity With the imaging tools, we have learned the geometry properties of the biliary system. The bile duct is usually a hollow pipe, which consists of four layers, and from inside to outside are the epithelium layer, internal submucosal layer, external submucosal layer, and adventitia Modeling bile dynamics to obtain flow patterns and biliary stresses is vital for revealing the relationship between bile stasis and biliary diseases, such as bilestone and biliary pain. Bile dynamics predictions have been made using simplified and detailed structural models, providing non-invasive mathematical analysis to study bile dynamics facilitating our understanding of bilestone disease. Those models focus on the entire biliary system, the cystic duct, or the hepatic duct. The MRI images can be used to create patient-specific computer-aided design (CAD) biliary tract models Kuchumov et al. In the biliary system, sites of low flow velocity will provide opportunities for subsequent cholestasis. Direct modeling of the biliary system as a whole is often complex. Therefore, Kuchumov et al. algorithm. The Windkessel model was used in their work to simulate the bile flow in the gallbladder, with the bile flow in the major duodenal papilla being assumed to be peristaltic motion. The model can estimate bile flow in the biliary tree. Kuchumov et al. In the biliary tract, the gallbladder collects and discharges bile in the biliary tract through contraction and expansion. The gallbladder empties with a flow rate of about 1 ml/min, as suggested by the ultrasonic graphic imaging data The cystic duct is the duct that joins the gallbladder and the common hepatic duct, playing a critical role in a smooth bile flow. Various numerical models have been developed to investigate the flow dynamics in the cystic duct. Ooi et al. In their model, the structure of the cystic duct was simplified to a straight, circular pipe containing staggered baffles. Pressure drop in the cystic duct was predicted with the assumption that higher resistance through the duct would promote bile stasis. The study provides insights into understanding the mechanism of the gallbladder. Li et al. These 1D models can quickly estimate the pressure drop, but predicting the equivalent stress on the cystic duct is difficult. To address this issue, Al-atabi et al. For the bile flow study, fluid-structure interaction (FSI) modeling allows for simultaneous bile dynamics and biliary stress distribution prediction. It has also been utilized in the bile flow analysis in the cystic ducts and found that the mechanical stress in the bile ducts is highly correlated with biliary pain Compared with bile ducts, blood vessels are more widely investigated. The wall shear stress (WSS) in blood vessels is a crucial factor associated with thrombus formation, which is analog to bile stone formation. WSS in the biliary system is generally lower than in the vasculature, similar to thrombogenesis. We expect WSS in the biliary tract would be an excellent factor to predict bilestones formation. However, WSS values in the bile duct are less available in clinical data Besides bilestones formed in the gallbladder and cystic duct, most notorious bilestones are found in the hepaonc ducts. Especially, intrahepatic stones formed in the left or right hepatic ducts are notorious for their difficulty in treatment. Kuchumov et al. When the common bile duct (CBD) is partially obstructed with a bilestone, pressure elevation in the biliary tract will be insignificant. In complete biliary obstruction, the elasticity of the duct wall elevates the duct pressure and limits the deformation of the bile duct Tab. 1. Detail of the parameters used for the bile dynamics study. The formation of bilestones relies on the flow rheology in the presence of stent strictures etc., and bile components, including cholesterol, bile acid, and bilirubin.. Bacterial infection also plays a role in the swelling of the bile duct wall and the bilestone's formation. The concentration of bile components can be detected using a biosensor, an analytical device that converts biological signals into measurable signals. Microfluidicbased biosensor systems offer multiple advantages over traditional bench-top detection assays with less sample consumption, rapid analysis, portability, and high sensitivity for real-time detection Microfluidics-based biosensors can detect ultra-low concentrations of bioanalytics with high sensitivity and can be further utilized in the development of patient-friendly and clinically diagnostic-ready devices. Novel microfluidic devices will be powerful tools for studying the biliary system. Since bile is a "hidden secretion", sampling requires laparotomy or cystic duct cannula, making it difficult to assess the major sources of bile In this paper, we review the progress of microfluidics-based platforms for studying bilerelated components and bacterial bile duct infection within the past five years. One of the main functions of cholesterol is to participate in the biosynthesis of bile acids in the liver The commonly used microfluidic electrochemical biosensors allow simple, lowcost, and rapid detection of cholesterol in solution. The principle of electrochemical biosensors is that the chemical reaction between the immobilized biomolecule and target analyte produces or consumes ions or electrons, affecting the solution's measurable electrical properties, such as electric current or potential Electrochemical detection of cholesterol is usually based on enzymatic reactions. Therefore, cholesterol oxidase must be coated on the working electrode to achieve specific cholesterol binding. High sensitivity detection and real-time monitoring of cholesterol can be achieved by measuring the electrical signal changes in the solution. The reported materials for working electrodes are carbon nanotubes For cost-effectiveness, three-dimensional microfluidic and paper-based analytical devices (3D-μpad) have recently gained much attention. 3D-μpad was developed using the colorimetric method Baek et al. Román-Pizarro et al. Bile acids are products of cholesterol degradation and metabolism, working as biological detergents that promote intestinal digestion of lipids and fat-soluble vitamins In recent years, liquid crystal (LC) droplets combined with microfluidics have been developed to detect bile acids, but these methods usually require complex surface modification processes Bilirubin is an essential component of bile, and bilirubin is usually found in the biliary tract as unconjugated bilirubin (UCB) or conjugated bilirubin (CB) Conjugated bilirubin in the liver is water-soluble, excreted to the biliary tract and cystic duct, and then passed to the duodenum. CB may hydrolyze to unconjugated bilirubin in the presence of bacteria in the biliary tract [66] developed a simple, reagent-less quantification of total bilirubin based on microfluidic photo-treatment using a polyester chip, providing rapid results. There are also some microfluidics-based assays for UCB and CB. Bell et al. Bandara et al. Bilestones are associated with bacteria in the bile. For example, E. coli produces β-glucuronidase, phospholipase A1, and conjugated bile acid hydrolase in the biliary system that promotes the formation of free bilirubin, which eventually combines with calcium salts to form brown pigment stones Sun et al. coli and the urease were incubated with the magnetic bacteria by measuring the impedance of the catalyst, the microfluidic device allows rapid, sensitive bacteria detection, as shown in Fig. Traditional 2D monolayer cell culture systems are the simplest and most costeffective method for culturing human and animal adherent cells. However, there are many differences between the 2D model and the in vivo environment, such as mechanical, physiology, and hydrodynamic aspects Organ-on-a-chip systems are microfluidic devices for culturing living cells in micrometer chambers with continuous flow conditions to generalize the physiological functions of tissues and organs Advanced microfluidics and high-resolution microscopy make it possible to accurately simulate physiological systems and gain insight into the behavior of complex for biliary system analysis will further empower and uncover more clinical implications.