By designing a multi-channel millimeter Hall measurement configuration, we realize the carrier-density (locally) controllable measurement on the transport property in 2H MoS2. We observe a linearly increased Hall conductivity and exponentially decreased resistivity as the increase of dc current. The intrinsically large band gap does not exhibit too much effect on our measurement, as far as the magnetic field is above the critical value, which is B = 6 T for 2H-MoS2 in our experiment. Instead, the edge effect as a result of onedimensional channels can be seen. This is different from the Corbino geometry which is widely applied on semiconductors, where the edges are absent. At room temperature, we observe that the emergent quantized quantum Hall plateaus are at the same values for both the two measurements, which implies that the quantized conductivity does not depends on the non-Hermitian interactions, but the number of partially/fully filled Landau levels, and this is in consistent with the previous theoretical works Introduction The quantized Hall effect In this work, we propose and realize a Hall measurement with incompressible strip-like local transport along the direction of applied dc current (the direction that is translational invariant), which can be realized in a wide class of wide band gap materials, like semiconductors. The confinement here originates from the distinct voltage applied in bulk and edge of the two-dimensioanl material. Our measurement exhibit similar features of the incompressible strips that realized in Hall bar base on the topological insulators Due to the intrinsic large bandgap and spin-valley locking, the valley Hall effect can be observed for monolayer or few layer samples By designing a multi-channel millimeter Hall measurement configuration, we realize the carrier-density (locally) controllable measurement on the transport property in 2H MoS2. Despite being a semiconductor with high resistance (up to 10 7 -10 9 Ω for the in-plane transport, but lower for interlayer transport), our experiment configuration allows the manufacture of electron confinement as well as the controllable inequilibrium distribution of the carrier. Through the turning of magnetic field and in-plane dc current, we can realize a transition from Hermitian transport (the quantized Hall conductivity with well defined Hall plateaus where each one can be expressed as an integrable eigenstate of a nonergodic Hamiltonian, and corresponding to a restriction on the corresponding imcompressible carrier density), to the non-Hermitian transport (with stronger shart-range interacting effect and thus suppress the localization of the imcompressible carrier densities). Also, our result pave a way to studing the Hermitian to non-Hermitian (ballistic to diffusion) transition in low-dimensional materials (not just the topological insulators), and realizing the topological protection without the dependence on the device geometry. For the former, the integrability side promotes the ideal ballistic-like transport in a single-particle picture, and supply a Drude peak (zero frequency conductivity) for most metarials (expect the insulator). The key reason for the easily-realization of eletronic confinement as well as the distinct behavoir in a material is the coexistence of conducting edge (protected by the topological symmetries) and the insulating bulk. For strong enough topological effect, the edge can maintain the Hall quantization even if the bulk becomes compressible Result and discussion By measuring the interlayer Hall conductivity at the edge of 2H-MoS2, we found that when two channels of in-plane current are applied to the edge and bulk parts, respectively, the quantization of Hall conductivity becomes more significant in the high current region, compares to the case without the bulk current. In consistent with experiment in Ref. In the integrable side, the ideal conductivity is supported by the fully occupied Landau levels and the Chern number directly determining the Hall conductance. Except the turn on/off of bulk current, we apply the same edge current for the two measurements, and thus there is a pulling effect in the V -I curve, instead of a squeezing effect, i.e., the plateaus for the two measurements are at the same level of voltage, but appear at different current. A advantage of our measurement device is the large intrinsic resistance excluding the effects from traped carrier as well as the effect from original free carriers, and thus we are able to more precisely investigating the external-current-caused interlayer transport. An evidence is emergent high-resistance peak for the measurement 1 near the I = 50μA, which corresponds to (ideally) a conducting edge and insulating bulk. The high resistance here, compares to measurement 2, indicates the strongest effect from imcompressible bulk and the vanishing correlation effect which is competive with the localization. While for measurement 2, the remained conductivity at I = 50μA originates from the contribution of compressible bulk as well as the many-body interactions. Thus at this current, the effect of large intrinsic resistance overwhelming that of edge-bulk correlation. While at large current region, it is an opposite case. Also, we observe the edge burst effect from the left-side of each plateau in measurement 1, which corresponds to the minor enhancement of Rxy at the large current. At low temperature, the measurement 1 realize a quasi 1D transport as the edge-edge scattering and edge-bulk scattering are suppressed by the artifically distincted carrier densities. At high temperature for the measurement 1, as shown in Fig. At low-temperature, as shown in Fig. At room temperature, we observe the higher Hall conductivity in a semiconductor in measurement 1, where the source-drain current was applied to provide a homogeneous carrier density distribution along the direction of edge and meanwhile a current of opposite direction was applied within the bulk to realizing a electronic confinement (like the lateral confinement in quantum well with the increased mobility and lowered dimension), compares to measurement 2 (without the bulk current). This can be explained by the artifically-relaized topological effect where the bulk is relatively imcompressible compares to the edge and bulit a obstruction for the diffusion-like transport in the edge. At low-temperature limit, where the obstruction effect in measurement 1 disappear, we observed higher conductivity and stronger fluctuation in measurement 2. Our explaination is base on the non-Hermitian effect which enfore the confinement (not the coherence-type) and results in a continuously varied charge distribution from center of bulk to the edge, and the ergodic character can be seem from the experimental results at T = 2 K for different magnetic field, i.e., the narrowed conductivity steps and enhanced fluctuation between adjacent plateaus (teh changed Hall fraction factor strongly implies the emergent low-energy band built by the non-Hermitian interactions). Note that the non-Hermitian interaction here is of the short range type such that there is ergodic and entanglement characters between arbitarily two narrow channels (along the direction of current). Unlike the similar transport in thin system, the intrinsically large band gap and the absence of edge state penetration into the bulk, the larger conductivity in measurement 2 can be almostly regarded as originates from the non-Hermiticity, where the raised quasiparticle (quasi-one-dimensional) bands whose energy distributions become asymptotically Gaussian by virtue of the central limit theorem. While the measuremnet 1 with opposite current in the bulk breaks the ergodicity by generating a topological-protected edge (from the short-range scatterings) despite is cannot obstract the long-range scattering (between two edges) anymore. Similar experimental results is reported in Res. N umerics As the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) in semiconductor phase have wide gap and the available conduction bands for the Hall conductance are of high-energy, we consider only the frequency-dependence of the conductivity and ignore the momentum-dependence, which is equavalents to the multi-flat-band model. Firstly we consider the case of optical conductivity, i.e., the finite external frequencies allow the interband transition far above the fermi surface which can be written as ii U (2) where where k = 1, 2 correspond to the two subsystems in the current bipartite system. For e iHt Je -iHt exhibit entanglement among arbitary time in the evolutionary spectrum, we have UijUij = UiiUjj, while for that without the entanglement (but only the coherence), we have UijUij < UiiUjj. These are the two cases of Cauchy inequality. Only for those observables J which satisfies UijUij < UiiUjj contributes to the distinct conductance between the Hermitian σH (ω) and non-Hermitian σnH (ω). While for the case of dc conductivity at zero frequency, the conductivity can be expressed in terms of Kubo Bastin formula where the Green function reads , with η a positive infinitely small quantity. As we select the system containing finite number of (nearly flat) bands whose spectrum is restricted within [-1, 1], we only need to perform the intergral of ε over this range. Numerically, we shown in Fig. Hall conductivity, where the two tensors J1 and J2 are essential in forming the identically-distributed random Gaussian variables. which are the gredient in forming the non-Hermitian operator HnH . the numerical result shows that the steplike quantized character quickly vanishes in the zero-temperature limit, where the temperature here should be referred to the effect temperature as we mentioned above (different to the ones in experimental result in Fig. The quantized conductivity in Fig. Conclusion We observe a linearly increased Hall conductivity and exponentially decreased resistivity as the increase of dc current. The intrinsically large band gap does not exhibit too much effect on our measurement, as far as the magnetic field is above the critical value, which is B = 6 T for 2H-MoS2. Instead, the edge effect which emerge as a result of one-dimensional channels. This is different from the Corbino geometry which is widely applied on semiconductors, where the edges are absent. At room temperature, we observe that the emergent quantized quantum Hall plateaus are at the same value for both the two measurements, which implies that the quantized conductivity does not depends on the non-Hermitian interactions, but the number of partially filled Landau levels, and this is in consistent with the previous theoretical works Our study as well as the measurement setup can be further extended to the semiconductor heterostructures, where a nearly decoupled potential steps has been observed in WSe2/MoS2 multi-layers The Hall conductivity at zero frequency can be expressed in terms of Kubo Bastin formula where the Green function reads , with η a positive infinitely small quantity. As we select the system containing finite number of (nearly flat) bands whose spectrum is restricted within [-1, 1], we only need to perform the intergral of ε over this range. We use the formula thus we have by using derivative lim Considering the Hermitian contribution from the real energy ε from the Hermitian part, we have lim For the selected eigenvalue of integrable eigenstate reaches the maximal (εi = 1), the variational behavior of G ± i (εi = 1) follows the polylogarithm function, ln lim η→0 Combine with Eq.( where we note that ∂εG , where correspondingly, In the mean time, for the case of complex energy (like the non-Hermitian system), we have which leads to η = 2 ∂ ∂ε * (ε -εi). Note that the delta function containing such a complex variable satisfies , for holomorphic function f (ε). At low-temperature case if we cast the energydifference term (ε -εi) into the integral over a Heaviside step function, . For the non-Hermitian case, the Hall conductivity follows the form where For the fermi distribution at low-temperature limit, lim Since the interaction-induced non-Hermitian transport as well as the emergent entanglement entropy during the thermalization, we can consider the non-Hermitian effect as the thermal entropy base on an effective inverse temperature where Z = Tr[O] is the partition function, i.e., the trace over an non-Hermitian observable O which is a thermalized density operator. Inspired by the von Neumann entropy, we replace the β by lnβ during the analysing of thermodynamics, where we treating the effective temperature T as a complex argument and thus Z = Li1(T ). Here the effective temperature is determined by the partition function such that it can be cast into the series form with Then, since T ∂T Li1(T ) = Li0(T ) = T 1-T , we obtain where E m n = e -nln(2β-β 2 ) -1 +nlnβ is the many-body energy .Thus HnH = e -N lnβ ′ + N lnβ , and in Eq.( The robust correlation between two subsystems can be seem from the persistent particle-hole symmetry and the absence of sign-dependent asymptotic degeneracy. where J k = -1 β 0 ln(|εi⟩⟨εi|) where β0 is a complex quantity that can be identified according to the trace class restriction, i.e., Tr[|εi⟩⟨εi|] = Tr[exp[-β0J k ]] = 1, (∀i). Also, note that the powered identity matrices |εi⟩⟨εi| -1 β 0 are raised to be full-rank such that its logarithm is meanful (which is possible for a complex power). Φ is the symmetry matrix whose rows are the eigenvectors of Hermitian operator H (Φ T = Φ -1 ). Using replica trick, we have ln|εi⟩⟨εi| -1 As the |εi⟩ is the orthogonal and normalized basis of Hermitian operator H, where η(α) is a real infinitely small quantity as a function of α. Since for such a bipartite system, to guarantees the non-Hermiticity, one of the subsystem must be rank-deficient while the other one must be full-ranked. Here we always denote the rank-deficient subsystem by Ψ1 with the corresponding tensor J1, and the full-ranked subsystem by Ψ2 with the corresponding tensor J2. Then the tensor of the subsystem with full-rank can be defined as J2 = -1 iηβ ln|εi⟩⟨εi| iη . Our numerical result shows that the valid η that meets the trace restriction exhibit no much difference among different eigenvectors. As both the J2 and (J1 -J2) are full-ranked, we can, in perspective of validated thermodynamics, obtain the tensors as Tr[|εi⟩⟨εi|(J1 -J2) = ⟨εi|(J1 -J2)|εi⟩, Tr[|εi⟩⟨εi|J1 = ⟨εi|J1|εi⟩. To focus on the non-Hermitian contribution regarding the effect of identically distributed narrow channels, we donot consider the effect from electronic transport in momentum space by consider the case of nearly flat bands. By sampling randomly the Gaussian distributed eigenkets we can obtain a non-Hermitian operator whose level distribution follows GOE, and the diagonal/off-diagonal elements follow the diagonal/off-diagonal ETH ansatz. We further divide the non-Hermioan operator HnH into two subsystems, each of whose diagonal elements are uncorrelated and satisfy the diagonal ETH, while the off-diagonal elements are inevitable correlated to guarantees the vanishing long-time fluctuation for the off-diagonal part of HnH . Then as the usual treatment to the Kubo formula in calculating the conductivity is using the Luttinger-independent-electrons-approximation, i.e., ⟨vx(0)vy(ε)⟩ ≈ ⟨vx(0)⟩⟨vy(ε)⟩. This treatment ignore part of the uncommutative effects. In our system, HnH is consist of two trace-one subsystems, whose eigenvalues can find a correspondence to the diagonal elements, thus we define the effective velocities v x(y) while the inner product between eigenvectors of Hermitian operator H plays the role of effective momentum which always equals to one due to the orthonormality (spatial effect from momentum space are thus removed such that the result only depends on the size of Hilbert space).