Using the density functional theory (DFT) based first-principles investigation, the structural, mechanical, hardness, elastic anisotropy, optoelectronic, and thermal properties of cubic KB 2 H 8 have been studied within the uniform pressure range of 0 -24 GPa. The calculated structural parameters are in good agreement with the previous theoretical work. The compound KB 2 H 8 is found to be structurally and thermodynamically stable in the pressure range from 8 GPa to 24 GPa. Single crystal elastic constants C ij and bulk elastic moduli (B, G and Y) increase systematically with pressure from 8 GPa to 24 GPa. In the stable phase, KB 2 H 8 is moderately elastically anisotropic and ductile in nature. The compound is highly machinable and fracture resistant. The Debye temperature, melting temperature and thermal conductivity increases with pressure. The results of electronic band structure calculations and optical parameters at different pressures are consistent with each other. The compound is optically isotropic. The compound KB 2 H 8 has potential to be used as a very efficient solar energy reflector. The electronic energy density of states at the Fermi level decreases systematically with increasing pressure. The same trend is found for the repulsive Coulomb pseudopotential. Possible relevance of the studied properties to superconductivity has also been discussed in this paper. In 2004, N. W. Ashcroft suggested high temperature superconductivity at room temperature through chemical pressure or external pressure in hydride materials As mentioned above, the exploration of physical properties of hydride superconductors is experimentally challenging under high pressure. Phonon mediated superconductors depend primarily on two factors: (i) the strength of the electron-phonon coupling (EPC) and (ii) the characteristic energy scale of phonon excitations The rest of this work has been structured as follows. In section 2 we have briefly described the computational methodology. The results are presented and analyzed in section 3. Finally, the main conclusions of this study are summarized in section 4. For geometry optimization of the compounds of interest, plane wave pseudopotential In our work, we have calculated the cohesive energy per atom using the approach adopted in Refs. where, is total energy per formula unit of KB 2 H 8 and , and are the total energies of single K, B and H atoms in the solid state, respectively. From Table For a cubic crystal, there are three independent elastic constants: C The values of polycrystalline elastic moduli (bulk modulus, B, shear modulus G, and Young's modulus Y) are tabulated in Table Information on elastic anisotropy is essential for engineering applications of solids. The elastic anisotropy determines the direction dependent mechanical properties of solids under external stress. The elastic anisotropy reflects the anisotropy in the bonding strengths between atoms located in different directions and different planes. The shear anisotropy factors considering different crystal planes, A 1 , A 2 , and A 3 are all equal to one for an isotropic crystal, while any value different from unity is a measure of the degree of shear elastic anisotropy possessed by the crystal. The factors A 1 , A 2 , and A 3 are computed using the following equations Again, the anisotropy factors A B and A G are the percentage anisotropies in compressibility and shear, respectively. A U is the universal anisotropy index. The zero values of A B , A G and A U represent elastic isotropy of a crystal and non-zero values of these indicators represent anisotropy The computed values of A 1 , A 2 , A 3 A U , A B , and A G are listed in Table A large number of thermophysical parameters of a crystal is closely related with the sound velocities where, , and signify the transverse, longitudinal, and the mean sound velocities, respectively. The computed values of sound velocities under pressures are given in Table The longitudinal sound velocities are larger than that of transverse velocity for each direction of propagation. This is due to the fact that C 11 is greater than C 12 or C 44 for KB 2 H 8 . The directional sound velocities GPa, since at lower pressures the structure is unstable. Mechanical hardness is used to evaluate the elastic and plastic behavior of a crystal. In our study, we have calculated the hardness of the KB 2 H 8 at different pressures using the formalisms developed by Teter et al. Within the formalisms of Teter et al. Our calculated results agree with this (Tables We have calculated various thermophysical parameters in this section. The computed results are tabulated below (Table This parameter was introduced by Kleinman The computed values of ζ are displayed in Debye temperature ( D ): Debye temperature  D is closely related to many physical properties of solids such as specific heat, melting temperature, thermal conductivity, hardness of solids, elastic constants, acoustic velocity etc. Moreover, Debye temperature provides information about the electron-phonon coupling and Cooper pairing mechanism in superconductivity. At low temperatures, the vibrational excitations arise solely from acoustic vibrations. Thus the Debye temperature calculated from the elastic constants is considered to be similar as that acquired from the specific heat measurements. In this work, the Debye temperature has been calculated using the Anderson method where, h is Planck's constant, k B is the Boltzmann's constant,  is the density, N A is the Avogadro number, M is the molecular mass, and v m is the average sound velocity. The mean sound velocity can be determined from the Eqn. 4. From Table Melting temperature (T m ): The melting temperature of cubic compound is calculated with an empirical formula based on single crystal elastic constants The calculated T m is listed in Table Thermal conductivity is a measure of the ability of a system for conducting heat energy provided that there is a temperature gradient. Thermal conductivity is an important topic in that the magnitude and temperature dependence of this parameter yield valuable information about the material under study. Specifically, it sheds light on the electronic and vibrational states of the material, interactions between the different heat conducting entities within the system, and on the structural integrity of the material through which the thermal energy propagates. In general, in metallic systems, heat is transported via electrons and phonons. At high temperatures the phonon contribution dominates. In this section we have presented the results of calculations of the minimum phonon thermal conductivity, and the thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) of cubic KB 2 H 8 for pressures in the range 8 -24 GPa. The calculated values are given in Table We have also presented the pressure dependent values of fracture toughness of the compound under study in this table. Table Pressure, P (GPa) [ The TEC of a material is interconnected to many other physical properties, such as thermal conductivity, specific heat and temperature variation of the semiconducting energy band gap of materials. This parameter (α) is also important for growth of crystals. The TEC of a solid is inversely proportional to the modulus of rigidity and can be estimated using the following relation The approximate relation between thermal expansion coefficient and melting temperature is as follows ≈ 0.02 At temperatures above Debye temperature, the phonon thermal conductivity approaches a minimum value, known as minimum thermal conductivity. It is denoted by k min . According to Cahill and Clarke model minimum thermal conductivity can be calculated using the following equation It is clear that the minimum thermal conductivity depends on different sound velocities in different crystallographic directions. From our calculations it is observed that sound velocities increase (cf. Table In these equations is the Boltzmann constant, is the average sound velocity and is the cell volume per atom. For industrial use of materials, fracture toughness as well as hardness plays important roles. The fracture toughness describes the resistance of a solid to prevent the propagation of a crack produced inside. Quantitatively, it can be determined from the stress intensity factor K at which a thin crack in the material begins to spread. According to Efim Mazhnik et al. where, α = 8840, V 0 is the volume per atom, ( ) is a dimensionless function of Poisson's ratio defined as follows: Besides, Alexander G. Kvashnin et al. where, α = 1 for the cubic hydride material, V 0 is the volume per atom, G and B are the shear and bulk moduli. A material should have high fracture toughness along with high hardness for heavy duty industrial applications; consequently prediction of the fracture toughness has drawn significant engineering interest. From Table The calculated electronic band structures at equilibrium lattice constants with different pressures are drawn along high symmetry directions in the first Brillouin zone and are illustrated in Figs. We can see from these figures that there is no band gap and three distinct bands cross the Fermi level. This indicates the metallic nature of cubic KB 2 H 8 for the pressures considered. The gross features of the band structures agree quite well with previous findings Thus, the charge carrier effective mass should decrease gradually with increasing pressure. The total and partial density of states (TDOS and PDOS, respectively) are shown in Fig. In this equation, the TDOS has to be expressed considering the formula unit. It is observed from It is interesting to note from Fig. In a previous work, Gao et al. We have used the computed values of Debye temperature and Coulomb pseudopotential to estimate pressure dependent T C . The values of electron-phonon coupling parameters for different pressures have been taken from a previous study We have presented the optical characteristics of KB 2 H 8 in this section. We have found that pressure has a little effect on various frequency/energy dependent optical parameters. Therefore, the plots are selected here only for a pressure of 12 GPa. The dielectric functions are calculated with the following equations: Here,  is the photon angular frequency, e ( ) and e ( ) are the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric functions, respectively. The imaginary part of the dielectric function can be calculated from Here, e is the electronic charge,  is the unit cell volume, u is the unit vector along the polarization direction of the incident electric field and and are the wave functions for conduction and valence band electrons at a particular k, respectively. Equation 17 describes the interband optical transition of charge carriers which dominates in most of the materials. Nevertheless, due to the metallic nature of KB 2 H 8 , the intraband optical transitions also play a role at far infrared regions of electromagnetic wave spectrum, i.e., at low energy parts of the spectrum are satisfied for pressures of 4 GPa to 24 GPa. The facts that, C 11 > C 12 , and C 11 > C 44 , indicate axial bonding between nearest neighbor atoms is stronger than the non-axial bondings. On the other hand, the Cauchy pressure (CP) given by (C 12 -C 44 ), defines the ductility of a materials, because it is related to the angular character of atomic bonding in a solid Poisson's ratio (υ), Pugh's ratio (G/B) and machinability index (μ m ) of cubic KB 2 H 8 at different pressures. Figure 4: (a) Poisson's ratio and (b) Pugh's ratio of KB 2 H 8 under pressure. Grüneisen parameter (γ), Kleinman parameter (ζ), Debye temperature θ D (K) and melting temperature T m (K) of KB 2 H 8 . . It is clear from the table that the bond bending contributions dominate in the elastic properties of cubic KB 2 H 8 . The values of ζ decrease systematically with increasing pressure. * *Calculated with μ * = 0.10