Bulk-boundary correspondence is a concept for topological insulators and superconductors that determines the existence of topological boundary states within the tenfold classification table. Contrary to this belief, we demonstrate that topological domain-wall states can emerge in all forbidden 1D classes in the classification table using representative generalized Su-Schrieffer-Heeger and Kitaev models, which manifests as quantized electric dipole moments and Majorana zero modes, respectively. We first show that a zero-energy domain-wall state can possess a quantized polarization, even if the polarization of individual domains is not inherently quantized. A quantized Berry phase difference between the domains confirms the non-trivial nature of the domain-wall states, implying a general-bulk-boundary principle, further confirmed by the tight-binding, topological field, and lowenergy effective theories. Our methodology is then extended to a superconducting system, resulting in Majorana zero modes on the domain wall of a generalized Kitaev model. Finally, we suggest potential systems where our results may be realized, spanning from condensed matter to optical. The tenfold classification of the topological periodic table provides a systematic understanding of topological insulators and superconductors in the presence of time-reversal (T ), particle-hole (C), and chiral (Γ) symmetries. Circumventing the usual classifications, several studies have tried to find a method that still results in topological phases; for example, sub-symmetry-protected topological phases and quasi-symmetry-protected topological semimetal were investigated. These classifications lead to robust topological applications as well as unexpected topology beyond the usual space group classifications even in the absence of full symmetry Generally, non-trivial topological indices are determined by comparing them with the invariant in a vacuum (atomic limit). Here, even in a trivial bulk, we show that the finer classification can exist where the difference in the topological indices of the two trivial bulks is still quantized. Our result differs from the topological classification for defects potential terms H on where c † n /c n indicates the creation/annihilation operator for site n. The nearest-neighbor hopping parameter is t n+1,n = t 0 + (-1) n ∆ with t 0 and ∆ being the hopping amplitude and energy-valued dimerization, respectively. m z is the onsite energy. The corresponding Bloch Hamiltonian is given as, where σ i indicates the i-th Pauli matrix. The system is time-reversal symmetric (T = K). In particular, ∆ and m z act as order parameters indicating various ground- In the domain-wall configuration, ∆ and m z are spatially varying functions interpolating energetically degenerate groundstates [Fig. To see the robustness of the chains' zero-energy state, the energy spectra are calculated in the presence of the onsite staggered quasi-periodic disorders for the three types of domain walls [Fig. To understand the origin of the bound state, we examine the low-energy Dirac-type effective Hamiltonian for the GSSH model via the Jackiw-Rebbi method Hence, the zero-energy domain-wall solution will be ψ where N is the normalization factor, ∆ and m z are naturally x-dependent functions, and the double signs are in the same order with the upper (lower) signs for x > 0 (x < 0). Moreover, the SU(2) unitary transformation via a unitary operator σ x transforms the effective Hamiltonian into that of the SSH model: where ∆ and m z are x-dependent functions, and f = -t 0 tan -1 mz(x) term acts as a small oscillatory correc-tion term We can understand the origin of the zero-energy domainwall states and its relation to polarization by considering the generalized bulk-boundary correspondence based on the Berry/Zak phase Generalization to superconducting systems-We now focus on the minimal spinless model of the CI class as the representative model between the C and CI classes, which is denoted as the generalized Kitaev (GK) model. Unlike the conventional Kitaev model utilizing p-wave pairing potential only where c † γ,j /c γ,j indicates the creation/annihilation operator for orbital γ = α, β at site j. Here, μ, t, ∆ s , and ∆ p are the chemical potential, nearest-neighbor hopping parameter, and sand p-wave pairing gaps, respectively. Thus, the Bogliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian is given by where the Pauli matrices τ i and σ j indicate the Nambu space and orbital degrees of freedom. The system has time-reversal (T = K), particle-hole (C = τ y σ z K), and chiral (Γ = τ y σ z ) symmetries. Unlike the Kitaev model, the simplest representation of the CI class is a 4 × 4 matrix Hamiltonian due to the Fermi statistics, ∆(k) T = -∆(-k), and symmetry constraints of the CI class, CH(k)C -1 = -H(-k), which forbids the presence of sand p-wave pairings for a 1D chain within a 2 × 2 BdG Hamiltonian. We now discuss the degenerate groundstates and the domain-wall state connecting them. For simplicity, we focus on the physics near the Fermi level, where the superconducting gap opens near k = 0, similar to the Kitaev model. Moreover, we take a limit of large ∆ p where the p-wave dispersion is more dominant than the electronic dispersion 2t cos k, i.e., a degenerate limit. Then, the energy eigenvalue of Eq. ( given by E = ± μ2 + ∆ 2 s + 4∆ 2 p sin 2 k. Hence, μ = μ+2t and ∆ s act as our order parameters of the system with a fixed ∆ p [Fig. The stability of the Majorana domain-wall states is examined using a similar onsite quasi-periodic disorder used for the GSSH case Using low-energy effective Dirac-type Hamiltonian of Eq. ( T for the normalization factor N . Here, the double signs are in order, with the upper (lower) sign indicating x > 0 (x < 0). The two wavefunctions at zero energy are degenerate and form Majorana pairs in the simplified forms This form is consistent with the numerical form of the wavefunctions given in Fig. In the viewpoint of low-energy effective theory, the GK model is equivalently transformed into the BDI group and, therefore, can have zero-energy topological modes. The zero-energy Ascending from the low-energy limit and considering the full Hamiltonian, the Berry phase, and as a result, bulkboundary correspondence is used to explore the Majorana zero-energy domain-wall states further. A winding number describes the topological order of a superconducting system p sin kτ z σ y , which is grouped into subblocks according to the τ z eigenvalues. As can be seen from the electron-hole picture [Fig. The Berry phases of individual subblocks are now examined. The subblocks for the CI domain wall have a quantized Berry phase difference of π in the limit t ∆p → 0. Regarding the subblocks for the CSW domain wall, the Berry phase difference is not quantized, indicating that the topological zero-energy state is forbidden [Table Conclusion-So far, the discussion has focused on the generalized SSH and Kitaev models for the AI and CI classes. Regarding the other three classes (A, AII, C), the methodology and the results thereafter are similar to those of the AI (for A, AII) or CI (for C) classes The realization of our models is expected in various 1D electronic and superconducting systems, such as atomic nanowires 