We present theoretical study of relative stability as well as of the magnetic and electronic properties of AgF2 and CuF2, in two related structural forms: orthorhombic (ambient pressure form of AgF2) and monoclinic (ambient pressure form of CuF2), using Density Functional Theory. We show, that at P21/c à Pbca structural transition is associated with weakening of intra-sheet magnetic superexchange. This finding is consistent with the flattening of 2D layers, smaller charge-transfer energy and stronger admixing of Agd/Cud-Fp states in monoclinic structure, comparing to orthorhombic form. Consequently, monoclinic AgF2 should be targeted in experiment as it should show stronger magnetic coupling than its orthorhombic sibling. The dynamically stable P21/c form of AgF2 could be achieved via two alternative paths: by applied negative strain, or by rapid quenching silver(II) difluoride from temperatures higher than 480 K to low temperatures. The most typical structure adopted by transition metal difluorides at ambient pressure is rutile type (Fig. Polymorphism strongly affects key material properties such as e.g. magnetic and electronic ones. We note that both AgF2 and CuF2 are layered, with corrugated sheets constructed from [MF4] units (Fig. Calculations were performed within the DFT approach as implemented in VASP 5.4.4 code For AgF2 in its Pbca type, the first coordination sphere of cation, can be described as deformed rhombic prism (2+2+2+2 coordination), while for CuF2 in its parent P21/c structure, as an elongated octahedron (4+2 coordination) (Fig. Our theoretical calculations nicely reproduce experimental structural parameters of AgF2 and CuF2 in their most stable structures (Table ] PXRD, RT In the P21/c system, the coordination sphere of M 2+ is 6-fold (CN=6, Fig. Puckering of the MF2 layers is also different in both structure types. For example, for the monoclinic AgF2, the intra-layer Ag-F-Ag angle is larger by ca. 1.2 ̊ than in orthorhombic one (SCAN). For CuF2 the effect is even more pronounced (3.0 ̊). This may be related to the different metal-metal distances in both structures. In the P21/c system Ag-Ag intra-layer distance is larger by 0.3%, whereas inter-layer contact is shorter by 2.8% compared to AgF2 Pbca form. For copper difluoride, the intralayer Cu-Cu distances is by 1.3% larger, where interlayer one is by 8.0% shorter for P21/c form (all values are listed in Table. SI1-2 in ESI). All these features impact, as we will see, the magnetic and electronic properties of both polymorphs. To evaluate dynamic stability, we calculated phonon modes at Gamma point for AgF2 and CuF2 in both polymorphic forms: Pbca and P21/c (Table x ESI). Experimental (IR, RAMAN) and theoretical phonon frequencies of AgF2 (Pbca) with their symmetry and optical activity, have been previously reported by Gawraczyński, et al Analysis of phonon dispersion curves (Fig. The list of Γ-point frequencies of the AgF2 and CuF2 compounds in Pbca and P21/c structures (DFT+U+vdW). Activity of modes in parentheses. Shadowed columns correspond to the translational modes. Frequency in cm -1 . On the basis of Group Theory, for the P21/c structure (Z=2), among the 18 Γ-point optical modes 9 are IR-active (5Au + 4Bu) and 6 are Raman-active (3Ag + 3Bg). For Pbca structure Group Theory predicts that 15 modes are IR-active (5B1u + 5B2u + 5B3u), 12 are Raman-active (3Ag + 3B1g + 3B2g + 3B3g) and 6 are silent (Au). The theoretical results obtained from all theoretical methods used in this work are presented in Supplementary Information (Table The good agreement between theoretical and experimental values of the mode frequencies reflects the precision of the DFT method (Table Raman and IR spectroscopies are very powerful tools in the detection of structural transitions of compounds as they give insight into the local environment of atoms and can be easily equipped with e.g. diamond anvil cell (DAC) used in high-pressure studies. Therefore, analysis of RAMAN and IR spectra may be suitable for disclosure of possible structural transition of AgF2. To anticipate changes on the spectra during such a transition, we will now analyze IR-and RAMAN-active modes for AgF2 and, also, for CuF2 in both structural forms. We note that the evolution of RAMAN spectra of CuF2 upon pressure, has recently been employed to detect P21/c -> Pbca transition Based on Table Regarding the experimentally-related issue, transition from monoclinic to orthorhombic structure of AgF2 should be accompanied with reduction of the number of band appearing in both IR and RAMAN spectra, from 27 to 15 optically active modes. Additionally, Pbca -> P21/c transition should be reflected in the changes of the frequencies of symmetry-related modes. For instance, the sudden change of 15-18 cm -1 is expected, between symmetry-related B1g (478 cm -1 ) and B1g (475 cm -1 ) modes for Pbca and Bg (493 cm -1 ) for P21/c polymorphs. This trend of mode stiffening is more general, as the ZPE value is predicted to by higher by 7 meV/FU (Table Comparing ground state energies of binary fluorides in P21/c and Pbca systems (including zeropoint energies) and volume changes (dV) arising from their structure modification, we may estimate the relative stability of both polymorphs as well as transition pressure of P21/c -> Pbca transformation for both compounds. In doing so we follow equation p = -. -/ (1) and assume so called common tangent approximation. The results obtained with the state of the art DFT+U+vdW method are listed in Table Copper difluoride in the Pbca structure is uphill by 80 meV per FU (including ZPE) as compared to monoclinic form; this explains persistence of the latter in experiment at ambient (p,T) conditions. However, the volume of Pnma form is by 1.65-1.76 Å 3 smaller than in case of the monoclinic form, suggesting that orthorhombic form could be achieved at elevated pressure. Our computed transition pressure of 7.3 GPa is only slightly underestimated (experimental value is 1.7 GPa larger The Fig. The changes of the band gap value with structural transformation are also observed in case of CuF2. For the ambient pressure form of copper difluoride, the DFT+U+vdw method gives BG of 4.46 eV, while HSE06 predicts a somewhat smaller value of 4.14 eV. To the best of our knowledge, there is no experimental estimate of the bang gap value for CuF2. However, our theoretical results are in line with previously reported calculations by Miller and Botana The result obtained for AgF2 agree qualitatively with the Maximum Hardness Principle (MHP) by Pearson The width of Upper Hubbard Band (conduction band) is another important parameter related to possible electron doping to both compounds. As AgF2 and CuF2 are two-dimensional antiferromagnets( for AgF2 the TN = 163K Another interesting aspect is the relationship between charge transfer energy and the J2D value. For charge transfer insulators, hopping of electron from d orbital of transition metal site to another and back, engages p of nonmetal, thus J is proportional to 1/ (ΔCT) 2 In this paper, employing various theoretical methods, we investigated the structural, electronic and magnetic properties of the known, high-pressure orthorhombic form of CuF2 (Pbca) and not-yet achieved monoclinic form of AgF2 (P21/c), and compared them with those for ambient (p,T) polymorphs. Both fluorides are dynamically stable in the monoclinic structure and they exhibit higher |J2D| value, smaller charge-transfer gap and wider UHB, comparing to orthorhombic one. These findings are especially important in case of AgF2, which is perceived as analogue of cuprates. Stabilization of the monoclinic form of silver(II) difluoride (P21/c) may be crucial in order to achieving long-awaited doping of this compound. Based on our theoretical results, we claim that the desired structural transition of AgF2 to monoclinic form appears to be achievable in two possible ways (aside from partial Cu-doping JPbca/J21 -0.113 -0.105 Imaginary mode for AgF2 and CuF2, both in the P21/c structure, with minimum around Gamma point q = (-0.04, 0.04, -0.04). Frequency of minimum point: -8.387 cm -1 and -10.464 cm -1 for AgF2 and CuF2, respectively. Optimized structures are ca. -0.1 meV lower in energy from parent structures, which is v=within error bar of the DFT method, and strongly suggests that imaginary character of the phonon is artifactual. Table Table # cm -1 Symm. cm cm cm state energy (GS energy), zero-point energies (ZPE), volumes of the unit cell (V), band gap values (BG), energy difference between AgF2 in two systems (dE), volume difference of AgF2 in two systems (dV) and the equilibrium pressure (p) for two AgF2 systems -Pbca and P21/c. dE = EP21/c -EPbca [meV], dV= VPbca -VP21/c.