Heat exchangers are made of metals because of their high heat conductivity and mechanical stability. Metal surfaces are inherently hydrophilic, leading to inefficient filmwise condensation. It is still a challenge to coat these metal surfaces with a durable, robust and thin hydrophobic layer, which is required for efficient dropwise condensation. Here, we report the non-structured and ultrathin (~6 nm) polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) brushes on copper that sustain high-performing dropwise condensation in high supersaturation. Due to the flexible hydrophobic siloxane polymer chains, the coating has low resistance to drop sliding and excellent chemical stability. The PDMS brushes can sustain dropwise condensation for up to ~8 h during exposure to 111 °C saturated steam flowing at 3 m•s -1 , with a 5-7 times higher heat transfer coefficient compared to filmwise condensation. The surface is self-cleaning and can reduce bacterial attachment by 99%. This low-cost, facile, fluorine-free, and scalable method is suitable for a great variety of condensation heat transfer applications. Water vapor condensation is ubiquitous in nature and everyday life. Most heat transfer devices are manufactured from metals with high thermal conductivity, e.g. ~398 W•m -1 •K -1 for copper. However, the metals are hydrophilic and easily wetted by condensate from steam, leading to a stable liquid film covering the surface. Achieving a small coating thickness usually comes at the cost of compromised robustness. Despite the nanoscale thickness, PDMS brushes are promising alternative materials compared to superhydrophobic and lubricant-infused surfaces due to the absence of micro-or nanoscale rough surface topography, which typically is prone to damage, For example, in atmospheric water harvesting applications, PDMS brushes were prepared by a drop-casting and annealing method as described by Krumpfer & McCarthy for silicon wafers (Figure The coated surface is hydrophobic with water advancing contact angle of 111° ± 1° and a contact angle hysteresis of 10° ± 4° (Figure The thickness and grafting density of PDMS brushes were analyzed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) force spectroscopy (Figure When considering superhydrophobic surfaces, it can be challenging to repel tiny droplets because the superhydrophobicity relies on the empty space within structures. The condensation heat transfer performance of PDMS brushes was tested with a custombuilt condensation chamber under low saturation vapor pressure (30 mbar, steam temperature 24 °C) (Figure With increased subcooling, the dropwise condensation mode on PDMS brushes was maintained (Figure To test the coating durability under condensation, we focus on the PDMS brushes with a steam flow rate of 3 m•s -1 for an extended period (~8 h). The heat transfer coefficient and corresponding subcooling were continuously measured over 8 h while condensation rates were recorded at several intervals (Figure We further measured the antifouling property by immersing the substrate into solutions containing Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), respectively. Both E. coli and S. aureus are commonly found bacteria. E. coli is Gram-negative and rod-shaped, while S. aureus is Gram-positive and spherically shaped. After 1 day of culture at 37 °C, the samples are taken out and washed gently to remove the floating bacteria. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images showed a significantly reduced bacterial number on PFDTS and PDMS surfaces when compared to those on the uncoated surface (Figure We demonstrate that the low cost, flat, antifouling, and non-fluorinated PDMS brushes coating can sustain high-performing dropwise condensation at extreme conditions, e.g., high subcooling value, and high steam shear flow and temperature. The PDMS brushes consists of siloxane polymer chains, where one side is covalently grafted onto the substrate and the other side is free and flexible. The coating is thin (thickness of 6 nm) and water-repellent (advancing contact angle ~110°, contact angle hysteresis of ~10° on copper). The experimental results show that PDMS brushes on copper substrate exhibit dropwise condensation and ~3-7 times higher heat transfer coefficients compared to that of filmwise condensation formation on pristine copper substrates in the low (30 mbar) and high (1.4 bar) pressure chambers. The PDMS brushes also exhibit excellent durability in high-pressure environment, which is confirmed by the 8-hour condensation test under harsh conditions of 1.4 bar steam pressure and 3 m•s -1 steam velocity. Additionally, PDMS brushes can effectively repel 99% bacteria, e.g., E. coli and S. aureus. Therefore, PDMS brushes are promising candidates for developing low-cost, environment-friendly, and effective coating for condensation heat transfer applications. Surface preparation: PDMS brushes are prepared by drop-casting. First, the substrates (silicon, aluminum, or copper) were washed in acetone, isopropanol, and deionized water with ultrasonication for 10 min, respectively. Then they are treated with an oxygen plasma (Diener Electronic Femto, 120 W, 6 cm 3 •min -1 oxygen flow rate) for 5 min. Afterwards, several drops of PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane, 100 cSt, Thermo Scientific) are applied on the substrate, which is then covered by spontaneous wetting. After full spreading the substrates were put in the oven at 100 °C for 24 hours and washed with acetone afterward to remove any unbound residue. This preparation method is repeated twice. PFDTS surfaces are prepared via chemical vapor deposition in a vacuum desiccator. 20 μL 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrimethoxysilane is added before the desiccator is vacuumed below 20 mbar. The reaction lasts for 4 hours. Hydrophilic CuO surfaces are prepared by immersing oxide-free pristine copper in boiling water for 30 minutes. The superhydrophobic surfaces are fabricated as described before. Surface characterization: Advancing and receding contact angles are measured using a goniometer (OCA35, Dataphysics). The volume of a sessile water was gradually (1 μL•s - 1 ) increased from 5 μL to 20 μL and the decreased back to 5 μL. The contact angles were determined by fitting an ellipse to the contour images. Surface morphology was measured using Dimension Icon AFM (Bruker) in tapping mode. Reflective Aluminum Si cantilevers (OLTESPA-R3) with a spring constant of ~2 N•m -1 were used. The thickness of the brush layer was measured using an AFM (JPK Nanowizard 4) in force mapping mode. Force-distance curves were recorded with a grid of 16  16 points on an area of 1 × 1 μm 2 . For observation of condensation using environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) (Quanta 650 FEG, FEI), the samples were placed on a custom-made copper platform, which was cooled with a recirculating chiller and maintained at ~2 °C. The drop velocity and dynamic contact angles on the surface were determined by analyzing videos of drop sliding via a MATLAB program (DSAfM). The videos were recorded using a highspeed camera (FASTCAM MINI UX100, Photron with a Titan TL telecentric lens, 0.268×, 1′′ C-Mount, Edmund Optics) at a frame rate of 500 FPS. Briefly, the edge position of the drops were detected, after the drop images were corrected by subtracting the background from the original images and tilted according to the background image. The drop velocities were calculated by the displacement from each frame. Dynamic advancing and receding contact angles were determined by applying a 4th-order polynomial fit to the drop contour in each image. We used two custom-made experimental setups for the condensation tests similar to our recent work. Several temperature sensors inside the copper block were used to determine the condensation heat flux (q'') through the surface by following the equation q'' = kcAc/Ae•dT/dx. Here, kc is the thermal conductivity of the copper cooler, Ac is the crosssectional area of the cooler, Ae is the area of the exposed condensing surface, and dT/dx is the constant thermal gradient along the array. dT/dx was computed from a leastsquares linear fit of the temperatures measured with the temperature sensor array. In the low-pressure (30 mbar) chamber, the surface temperature was measured by two temperature sensors attached to the surface. Videos were recorded with a DSLR (D7500, Nikon) and a macro lens (AF Micro-Nikkor 200mm f/4D IF-ED, Nikon). In the highpressure chamber (1.42 bar), the surface temperature was estimated using a thermocouple placed inside the substrate. The videos were recorded using a high-speed camera (FASTCAM Mini UX100, 2000FPS) and the same lens. More details are in Figure Antifouling tests: To test the antifouling property, the samples (1x1 cm 2 ) are firstly sterilized by UV light (366 nm) for 15 min. Then the samples are placed in a sterile 24well plate, and each well included 2 mL of the bacteria test suspension (refer Figure for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, the coatings are gently washed 3 times with the saline solution and dehydrated with a series of ethanol (30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 95, and 99.89%, 15 min each, last step twice). Lastly, the samples are dried under vacuum at room temperature overnight prior to SEM imaging. For bacterial number counting, more than 30 images are taken at random positions by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, LEO 1530 Gemini, Zeiss). For low-pressure heat transfer measurement, we follow similar procedures to our previous work, which is referred to for details. To minimize non-condensable gases in the testing chamber, deionized water is continuously boiled at > 1.4 bar, draining the steam for 30 minutes and the condensation chamber is vacuumed to < 0.01 mbar (1 Pa) at the same time. During experiments, steam is generated at 1.4 ± 0.01 bar and its flow rate is measured by a flowmeter (FAM3255, ABB). Regulating and metering valves reduce the pressure and temperature of the steam as it enters the chamber to 30 ± 0.5 mbar and ~24 ̊C (corresponding saturation temperature). The steam is at saturation. A vacuum pump (RC 6, VACUUBRAND) maintains a continuous flow of the low-pressure saturated steam horizontally across the surface. The resulting mean steam speed in the channel is ~ 4.6 m•s -1 . The copper cooler at the back of the test surface is cooled by a recirculating chiller (WKL 2200, LAUDA), where the flow rate is monitored by a flowmeter (SITRANS FM MAG5000 and SITRANS FM MAG 1100, SIEMENS). An array of 7 RTDs is in the cooler to obtain the heat flux through it with a linear fit. In the chamber, the surface temperature is monitored continuously with two RTDs. The chamber steam temperature is similarly monitored with two RTDs. A capacitance gauge is used to monitor the chamber steam pressure. To avoid condensation before chamber steam conditions are stabilized at the said pressure and temperatures, the chiller is set to an initial coolant temperature of 25 °C, higher than the target steam temperature. Once steam is stabilized, the coolant temperature is reduced to trigger condensation at 7 set points. As the system reaches steady state at each chiller set point, the coolant flow rate is set to 180 ± 10 L•h -1 and measurements are taken over 1 minute, during which the chamber pressure has to maintain at 30 ± 0.5 mbar and the boiler pressure at 1.4 ± 0.01 bar without intervention. Then the coolant temperature is lowered to cover the remaining set points to obtain heat fluxes and heat transfer coefficients at different subcoolings. Heat transfer coefficient is defined as described in the main text. Its computation, and the uncertainty propagation procedure can be seen in our previous work. 1 During experiments, the steam pressure is kept at 1.42 bar and the mean steam speed in the channel is controlled at 3 m•s -1 or 9 m•s -1 . suspension for the test is prepared by the following procedure: a single bacteria colony inoculate into a test tube containing 5 mL LB (Luria-Bertani) medium (2.5% LB (Invitrogen) in Milli-Q water). Then the tube is shaken in a half-covered position in an orbital shaker incubator (EppendorfTM InnovaTM 44) at 37°C and 150 rpm for overnight. Then, 100 μL the overnight bacteria suspension is transferred into 50 mL fresh LB-medium and incubated under stirring, using an incubator at 37°C and 200 rpm for 5.5 hours to reach the mid-Log phase which contained 3x10 