In (M Hodapp and A Shapeev 2020 Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 1 045005), we have proposed an algorithm that fully automatically trains machine-learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) during large-scale simulations, and successfully applied it to simulate screw dislocation motion in body-centered cubic tungsten. The algorithm identifies local subregions of the large-scale simulation region where the potential extrapolates, and then constructs periodic configurations of 100-200 atoms out of these non-periodic subregions that can be efficiently computed with plane-wave Density Functional Theory (DFT) codes. In this work, we extend this algorithm to dissociated dislocations with arbitrary character angles and apply it to partial dislocations in face-centered cubic aluminum. Given the excellent agreement with available DFT reference results, we argue that our algorithm has the potential to become a universal way of simulating dissociated dislocations in face-centered cubic and possibly also other materials, such as hexagonal closed-packed magnesium, and their alloys. Moreover, it can be used to construct reliable training sets for MLIPs to be used in large-scale simulations of curved dislocations. Dislocations in metals are atomistic defects and, therefore, simulation methods that operate on the atomic scale are necessary in order to predict their behavior with the best possible accuracy. Simulating a dislocation requires configurations of at least 100-200 atoms and the currently most accurate method that allows to simulate such configurations is considered to be Kohn-Sham density functional theory (in the following also just DFT). The, to date, arguably most popular implementations of DFT use plane-wave basis sets, as implemented in codes like VASP However, none of the previous methods presently appears to be tractable to solve more complex problems that require millions of atoms, e.g., dislocations in high-entropy alloys, or long, curved dislocations. QM/MM methods using plane-wave DFT as the QM model would still require too many atoms to resolve the dislocation core; moreover, they require additional buffer and vacuum regions to be included in the DFT supercell to ensure accurate force fields in the vicinity of the dislocation core. OF-DFT methods have, to date, not been able to accurately predict the energetics of dislocations in alloys, in general (cf., e.g., In this work, we approach the problem of simulating fcc dislocations with machine-learning potentials (MLIPs) One of the success stories of MLIPs is their ability to generalize to large systems: they can be trained on sets of configurations of a few hundred atoms, yet they still make excellent predictions when simulating much larger configurations of tens of thousands of atoms (see, e.g., However, for alloy design, it is more tractable to use constitutive models for a mechanical property of interest (strength, ductility, hardness, etc.) that depend on a set of descriptors, e.g., the interaction energy of dislocation with a solute, to screen for the best possible alloy. Therefore, it is also highly desirable to develop efficient special-purpose potentials in order to keep the training set small-sized and the potential sufficiently reliable for that specific descriptor. However, it is difficult to construct such a training set because it is, as outlined above, usually not feasible to simulate extended defects, such as dislocations, with plane-wave DFT alone. To that end, we have developed an active learning algorithm for large-scale simulations of dislocations using moment tensor potentials (MTPs) In this work, we extend this algorithm to general dissociated dislocations with arbitrary character angles. The new challenge, compared to our previous work on compact dislocations, is to extract several subregions from the dislocation core and complete them to periodic configurations of 100-200 atoms. To that end, we develop a method that extracts two regions, one around each partial dislocation core, and completes them to two periodic configurations with a net partial Burgers vector of zero in which no artificial neighborhoods occur at the periodic cell boundaries that could possibly degrade the accuracy of the MTP. Using our algorithm, we train several MTPs on dislocations in fcc aluminum and compare their core structures and core energies to available DFT results from the literature. Before explaining our methodology, we fix some notation. Let {r i } i=1,...,N = {r i } be an arbitrary (possibly nonperiodic) configuration of N atoms, which represents the system at a specific step of the atomistic simulation. The neighborhood of the i-th atom is the set N = {r ij } of all relative distances r ij = r jr i between r i and atoms r j within a few lattice spacings. We assume that the total energy Π of {r i } is partitioned into per-atom contributions (1) We model the per-atom energies with Moment Tensor Potentials (MTPs) where the θ α 's are free parameters. The basis functions are built from scalar contractions of the moment tensors where the c μn 's are additional nonlinear parameters, and the f n 's are Chebysev radial basis functions that smoothly go to zero at the potential cut-off. In (3), μ and ν define the moment tensor level lev M μ,ν = 2 + 4μ + ν. An MTP with a given level lev MTP is then constructed using all basis functions that can be obtained from all scalar contractions of the M μ,ν 's that satisfy lev MTP ≥ N m i=0 lev M μ i ,ν i , where N m is the number of moment tensors included in the contraction. For example, for an MTP of level 16 there are 92 basis functions, and for an MTP of level 18 there are 163 basis functions. The parameters θ α and c μn are obtained by minimizing the MTP's predictions for energies, forces, and stresses, with respect to data coming from Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. For further details regarding the training, we refer to Appendix A. Suppose now that we are running a simulation with our MTP that has been trained on configurations from some training set T . During the simulation, we come across new neighborhoods N * not present in the training set and in order to assess whether we should better add the configuration containing those neighborhoods to our training set, we need active learning. Active learning is a method of judging whether to add N * to the training set or not based on some scalar model uncertainty γ In this work, we use the D-optimality criterion to select the training configurations, which is well-established for MTPs. Hence, we consider γ as the extrapolation grade per atom in the following. In order to compute γ, assume for a moment an MTP that has m coefficients and an active set with m neighborhoods. We then define the m × m Jacobian The extrapolation grade γ is then defined as the maximum change in the determinant of A if we would replace any N i with N * . Fortunately, we do not need to replace all N i with N * and compute all determinants individually, but can compute γ conveniently as follows In general, our training set contains many more neighborhoods than coefficients, so, A would be overdetermined. Therefore, we select those m neighborhoods that maximize linear independence between the column vectors of A using the maxvol algorithm γ ≤ 1 indicates interpolation, 1 <γ ≤ 2 indicates accurate extrapolation, 2 <γ ≤ 10 indicates still reliable extrapolation, 10 <γ indicates risky extrapolation. Then, if the maximum γ is higher than some threshold, we add this configuration to the training set. In general, we are interested in simulating atomic configurations {r i } with tens of thousands of atoms, or even more. While active learning can reliably detect extrapolative neighborhoods in such simulations, it is not trivial to construct training configurations containing those neighborhoods because we can not afford even one single-point plane-wave DFT calculation for such a large number of atoms. In fact, we are only able to simulate small subsets of {r i } with ∼ 100-200 atoms at a time. However, blindly simulating such a-generally non-periodic-subset with plane-wave DFT Figure degrades the accuracy of the MTP because the corresponding training configuration (that must be subject to periodic boundary conditions) contains artificial neighborhoods at the cell boundaries (cf., [S2] in Figure In In this work, we extend our algorithm for bcc screw dislocations to general dislocations in fcc metals that dissociate into two Shockley partial dislocations. The added difficulty is that a training configuration containing a full fcc dislocation would still require too many atoms, in particular, for materials with a large separation between the two partials. Therefore, we extend our algorithm as follows. We first train the MTP on several bulk configurations, and configurations containing a stacking fault. Then we are left with two regions around each of the partial cores, {r i } * lead , and {r i } * trail , where the MTP potentially extrapolates (cf., Figure The full algorithm is schematically depicted in Figure [S0] Define the initial atomistic configuration {r i } that contains a full fcc dislocation composed of two Shockley partial dislocations. Set the index of the first iteration to n start = 1. [S1] Run the simulation for N iterations, starting from iteration n start . In each iteration n = n start , . . . , n start + N -1, compute the highest extrapolation grades in both, {r i } * lead , and {r i } * trail . [S2] Stop the simulation after N iterations-or if an extrapolation grade exceeds some threshold γ max . If any of the extrapolation grades computed in [S1] exceeds some threshold γ min , add the corresponding configuration to the set of training candidates. [S3] If the set of training candidates is not empty, update the training set using the following query strategy: The steps [S1]-[S4] are then repeated until convergence, or until the maximum number of iterations is reached. Since we want to use plane-wave DFT as our ab initio model, we need to apply periodic boundary conditions on our training configurations. However, the extrapolative configurations containing the partial dislocations, {r i } * lead , and {r i } * trail , shown in Figure In which is fully periodic (cf., Figure spanned by the cell vectors where a 3 is the periodic lattice spacing in the direction of the dislocation line. In the case of elasticity, the displacement u is exactly periodic over the triclinic region; for a formal proof of this statement, the reader is referred to 1. First, we detect the positions of the two partial dislocations since they may move along the glide plane during energy minimization. We do this by minimizing the difference between the atomistic solution and the elastic solution with the respect to the positions of the two partial dislocations. 2. Next, we compute the displacement field around each of the partial cores and apply it to some rectangular subset of the reference configuration as shown in Figure •) Figure 3. Now, we extend the length of this region to 2L and mirror the displacements along the y-axis according to 4. In the final step, we modify the periodic cell vectors to remove the artificial neighborhoods at the top and bottom layers. Since the atomistic solution is not exactly symmetric, we compute the shift as the difference of the minima of the solutions on the top and bottom layers The cell vector v 2 is then given by where d is some additional shift that is required to match the stacking sequence and depends on the size of the cell; if u would be the elastic solution, then ∆u = -b/2, as in In each iteration, we thus create two training candidate configurations containing two dislocations that have equal and opposite partial Burgers vectors (cf., Figure We further remark that constructing training sets this way is supported by recent analysis of Ortner and Wang 3 Computational results We now validate the proposed algorithm for dislocations in fcc aluminum that dissociate into 1/6⟨112⟩ Shockley partial dislocations. We apply the training algorithm to three types of dislocations: edge dislocations, screw dislocations, and mixed dislocations with a character angle of 30 • . Our large-scale simulation region is a cylindrical configuration of atoms with radius 35b, where b is the magnitude of the Burgers vector. The simulation region contains ∼ 9 500 atoms, for the edge and the mixed dislocation, and ∼ 5 500 atoms for the screw dislocation. Outside the simulation region we use Dirichlet boundary conditions, that is, we set the displacement of the atoms to the linear elastic solution of the corresponding dislocation. As our ab inito model, we use DFT with plane-wave basis sets, as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) We perform structural relaxation using the Fast Inertial Relaxation Engine (FIRE) Upon convergence, the training sets of the three MTPs contained in total 24 configurations for the edge dislocation, 44 configurations for the screw dislocation, and 30 configurations for the mixed dislocation. Hence, training the three potentials only required 68 single-point DFT calculations in total, which underlines the efficiency of the proposed training algorithm. Moreover, the training simulations can be run in parallel; each of them required ∼ 5-10 hours on a single 128-core node on the Vienna Scientific Cluster. After training the three MTPs, we combine the training data into one big training set that now contains 68 configurations. We then train a level-18 MTP on this combined training set and rerun the simulations with active learning switched off. The training errors of this MTP are shown in Table In the following, we analyze the core structure and dislocation energies predicted by this level-18 MTP. Prior to training on DFT, we have tested our algorithm by training on Embedded Atom Method (EAM) potentials. The corresponding results are in excellent agreement with the exact solutions and can be found in Appendix C. Considering that the DFT training errors (Table In the following, we compare the core structures of the edge and screw dislocation, predicted by our MTP, with the core structures predicted by the quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) method of Woodward et al. In addition, we compare the dislocation core structures and dislocation energies, predicted by our MTP, to the orbital-free DFT (OF-DFT) method of Iyer et al. We first compare the core structures of the edge and screw dislocation, predicted by our MTP, with the core structures predicted by pure-DFT methods, namely, the quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) method of Figure Woodward et al. From Figure Using differential displacements, the agreement between MTP, QM/MM, and OF-DFT, is very good for the screw dislocation. For the edge dislocation, the MTP splitting is close to the OF-DFT splitting (up to the numerical uncertainty of ∼ a distance of atomic planes in the glide direction due to the discreteness of the problem), but is slightly larger than the QM/MM prediction. While this difference is still small, well within the range of tolerable deviation, it motivates further discussion. One possibility for the difference can be the size of the DFT region used in Figure Given that different results can be found in the literature, e.g., Lu et al. We have also computed a 30 • -mixed dislocation using our MTP. The predicted core structure and partial splitting is in agreement with the previous results for the edge and screw dislocations, i.e., the partial splitting is in between the partial splitting for the edge and screw dislocations. The corresponding results are reported in Appendix B. In order to validate whether our MTP can predict energy differences, we compute the dislocation energy ∆Π = ∆Π(R), i.e., the difference between the energy of a configuration with and without the dislocation in a cylindrical region with radius R around the dislocation. Our results for the edge and screw dislocation and those reported in For the edge dislocation, the agreement between the MTP and OF-DFT dislocation energies is very good. The small difference between 4 ≤ R/b ≤ 10 could be due to the boundary conditions used for OF-DFT that are set up with the isotropic elastic constants, which differ from the anisotropic ones (cf., Table For the screw dislocation, the MTP and OF-DFT results differ qualitatively for small R/b between 3 ≤ R/b ≥ 7. Again, this could be due to the isotropic boundary conditions used for OF-DFT. Another reason could be the smaller simulation regions used for OF-DFT; in Most importantly, in both cases, the dislocation energies for OF-DFT and MTP agree well when the OF-DFT curve enters the linear elastic regime. The asymptotic scalings predicted by the MTP and OF-DFT differ slightly since the isotropic elastic constants used to set up the boundary conditions for OF-DFT deviate ∼ 10-30 % from experiments (cf., Table DFT MTP OF-DFT Constructing a MLIP which is general and predictive is commonly referred to the problem of transferability. One successful methodology to solve the problem of transferability is active learning, but it is impractical for large-scale problems because, in this case, one cannot afford even one single-point plane-wave DFT calculation, in general. One important example for such large-scale problems are dislocations in fcc materials. The particular difficulty that arises in fcc materials is that the dislocations typically split into two Shockley partial dislocations, and, depending on the material, their separation can be so large that simulating the full dislocation with plane-wave DFT alone would be infeasible; for example, Deng et al. To overcome this limitation, we have developed an active learning algorithm for training MTPs during large-scale simulations of dislocations in fcc materials. Our active learning algorithm only extracts a small cluster of atoms around each partial core, computes the per-atom extrapolation grade of each atom, and, if one of the grades is larger than some threshold, completes the cluster to a periodic configuration of 100-200 atoms that can be conveniently computed with plane-wave DFT. We have validated our algorithm by simulating dislocations in fcc aluminum and the MTP, trained with our algorithm, was able reproduce all existing DFT results available in the literature for the core structure, the partial splitting, and the dislocation core energy. Hence, we anticipate that our algorithm can be readily used to construct reliable MLIPs for dislocations to be used for applications that can go beyond the scope of validity of existing empirical interatomic potentials, for example: • One possible application of our algorithm are dislocations in alloys. This, of course, may require larger training configurations than used here to accommodate solutes and/or impurities like hydrogen along the dislocation line, but still appears feasible. For example, our algorithm could be used to construct MLIPs for computing dislocation-solute interactions that are inputs to solute-strengthening models (cf., • Our algorithm can be readily used to construct training sets for MLIPs to be used in large-scale simulations of curved dislocations. This is supported by recent work of Wang et al. • Moreover, we anticipate that the proposed algorithm is not limited to fcc, but also to dissociated dislocations in other materials, such as, e.g., basal dislocations in hexagonal closed-packed magnesium. • Another potential application where we envision our algorithm to become valuable are magnetic materials. Including spins into the functional form of interatomic potentials doubles the size of a neighborhood and this significantly increases the complexity of constructing a good training set because the configurational space is now much larger-but active learning can come to the rescue! Recently, we approached the problem of training magnetic MTPs using a DFT method in which spins can be constrained in the same way as atomic positions Finally, we remark that, presently, our algorithm cannot be readily applied to problems for which defects cannot be sufficiently isolated, such as dislocations cutting through precipitates. For such problems, we currently recommend to first train a potential on configurations that appear to be relevant for the physical problem to be solved, e.g., bulk configurations, stacking faults, anti-phase boundaries, etc., or on an existing dataset, e.g., from materialscloud.org. Afterwards, we recommend to run several simulations of straight dislocations and add additional configurations with high uncertainties to the training set using our algorithm. When starting the actual simulation of, say, a dislocation interacting with precipitate, one may leave active learning switched-on and, if the uncertainty becomes too high in parts of the simulation region, run plane-wave DFT calculations on those parts using clusters C Validation of the training algorithm using EAM as a reference model For validation, we also ran our training algorithm using the EAM potential of Ercolessi and Adams The training errors, shown in Table The core structures predicted by the MTP and the EAM potential are visualized in Figure The corresponding dislocation energies are shown in Figure 