Initial conditions after quenching from a high-temperature paraelectric phase to a lowtemperature ferroelectric phase have a substantial impact on the temporal development and formation of stable polarization domain structures which eventually determine physical properties and the functionality of ferroelectrics. Based on the recently advanced exactly solvable model of the stochastic domain structure kinetics in a uniaxial ferroelectric [Phys. Rev. B 107, 144109 (2023)], we study the effect of the magnitude of the initial disorder, its initial correlation length and polarization correlation function on the system evolution. For different shapes of the initial correlation function, the time-dependent correlation length and the twopoint polarization correlation coefficient are calculated analytically demonstrating universal features and a good agreement with the available experimental data. Particularly, the magnitude of the charge density correlation function reveals a strong reduction of the bound charges at the nominally charged domain walls which was recently observed experimentally in uniaxial ferroelectrics. Consequently, the integrodifferential equations of evolution for the polarization correlation function and the mean polarization are numerically solved for different initial conditions. The temporal dependence of the polarization mean value and variance are evaluated demonstrating the bifurcation behavior depending on the applied electric field. The impact of the initial state properties on the coercive field deciding between the single-and multi-domain final states of the system is disclosed. Quenching from a high-temperature to a low-temperature phase has a versatile effect on different physical properties of materials. Particularly, quenching temperature and/or cooling rate have a significant effect on the formation of polarization domain structure and consequent application-related properties of ferroelectrics Additional possibilities for controlling the domain structure development are provided by cooling in the external electric or elastic field. Thus, the cooling rate effect on the formation of ferroelastic domain structures in strained ferroelectric films was observed on lead titanate (PT) Formation of polarization domain structures in ferroelectrics after quenching is a stochastic process and it was previously treated by means of stochastic theories. In the work by Kalkum et al. Recently, the authors advanced an exactly solvable model of the stochastic domain formation in uniaxial ferroelectrics which accounts self-consistently for electric interaction between emerging polarization domains In section 5, the domain formation kinetics is studied by the numerical solution of the coupled differential equations for the mean value and variance of the polarization for the three cases of the above introduced initial correlation functions. The charge density fluctuations and the implications for the charged domain walls are then studied in section 6. Finally, the physical results obtained in sections 4-6 are discussed in section 7 and concluded in section 8. Let us consider a uniaxial single-crystalline ferroelectric with the polarization along the zaxis of the Cartesian coordinate system as is shown in Fig. with the temperature dependent coefficient A = α 0 (T -T c ), α 0 > 0, T < T c , which is the temperature of the second order paraelectric-ferroelectric phase transition, and the other temperature independent coefficients B > 0 and G > 0. E denotes the local electric field, ε 0 , ε d and ε b are the permittivity of vacuum, of the dielectric layer and the background permittivity of the ferroelectric, respectively, while V f and V d denote the volumes of the ferroelectric plate and the dielectric layer, respectively. We consider evolution of the system from an initial state obtained by quenching from a high temperature paraelectric phase to a ferroelectric one at temperature T < T c . Since the initial state is a random one, all physical variables become stochastic variables too and will be treated in this model as Gauss random fields as suggested previously The polarization can be represented as π(r, τ) =  ̅(τ) + ξ(r, τ) with the dimensionless mean polarization magnitude  ̅(τ) = 〈P z (r, τ)〉/P s , depending on the dimensionless time τ, and the stochastic polarization ξ(r, τ) such that 〈ξ(r, τ)〉 = 0. Here the sign 〈... 〉 denotes statistical averaging over all possible system realizations. Then a dimensionless local electric field reads Here a uniform electric field ε a in the ferroelectric in z-direction is determined by a voltage V applied to the electrodes and the chosen sample geometry and material parameters The second term in Eq. ( while the last term the stochastic electric depolarization field due to the stochastic electric potential φ(r, τ), so that 〈∇φ〉 = 0. By variation of the energy functional (1) with respect to the polarization and the electric potential, respectively, a closed system of evolution equations for these two variables can be derived where the first one is the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau (TDGL) equation and the second one is the Poisson equation with a dimensionless susceptibility parameter η = 1/(ε 0 ε b |A|). The Gauss random variables can be completely characterized by a full set of two-point correlations functions between all variables In terms of the Fourier transforms defined as K ̃(q, τ) = ∫ d 3 s exp(-iqs)K(s, τ) this relation can be converted into an explicit algebraic expression, Thus, the problem of the time-dependent spatial correlations is reduced to the finding of the function K ̃(q, τ) and the mean polarization value  ̅(τ), for which the system of nonlinear integrodifferential equations was derived previously The knowledge of K ̃(q, τ) allows evaluation of an important characteristic of the system evolution, the correlation length L(τ), defined by the relation Another important system characteristic is the polarization dispersion, or variance, D(τ) = K(0, τ), which can be expressed as the integral of the Fourier transform (6a). The first order differential equation Eq. (8b) can be solved allowing the expression of the function K ̃(q, τ) through its initial value K ̃(q, 0) defined by correlations in the initial state after quenching where the auxiliary function μ(τ) is defined as The time behavior of both functions μ(τ) and K ̃(q, τ) is essentially determined by the variance D(τ). This makes finding of D(τ) to the central problem in the study of correlations. The variance can be found by solving the system of nonlinear differential equations with an auxiliary function In the following, this system of equations will be analyzed and solved numerically for different initial physical conditions, which may be realized in the course of quenching, and different applied field magnitudes. Some characteristics of the system, however, may be found analytically in a closed form as will be shown in the next section. We start with a derivation of some useful general relations. When considering only isotropic initial disordered states after quenching, meaning that K ̃(q, 0) = K ̃(q, 0), as it will be done in the following, the functions L(τ) and μ(τ) can be conveniently expressed in terms of an auxiliary function Then, from the definition of L(τ), Eq. ( which can be directly evaluated from the characteristics of the initial state only. This demonstrates that properties of the initial state are decisive for the subsequent evolution of the system. Now, by the integration of Eq. (12b) and using the definition of μ(τ), Eq. ( By substituting the expression for ν(τ), Eq. ( Using the definition of κ(τ), Eq. ( The properties of the initial quenched state can in principle be different and depend on various factors like quenching temperature, cooling rate, etc., as was discussed in Section 1. We will consider in the following three examples of the initial correlation function K(s, 0) and study the effect of their shape on the system evolution. One of the reasons of this comparative analysis is that the experimentally observed correlation coefficient C(s, τ) = K(s, τ)/D(τ) exhibits at small distances linear dependence on s at any times τ which could not yet be adequately described This case was treated in Ref. with the Gauss parameter r c and the magnitude K 0 = D(0) we get its Fourier transform This choice defines the auxiliary functions and as well as the correlation length The according rather formidable expressions for the longitudinal and transverse polarization correlation coefficients may be found in Ref. To be able to describe the linear spatial behavior of C(s, τ) for small distances s at least at the beginning of the system evolution we assume now the initial correlation function of the form with a characteristic length ξ. This function has the Fourier transform The corresponding auxiliary functions read and where a combined variable σ = √2τ/ξ was introduced for convenience. The correlation length follows then from Eqs. ( In the limiting case τ → 0 the characteristic length behaves as L(τ) ≅ (πξ 2 τ/2) 1/4 and, thus, vanishes at τ = 0, differently from the Gaussian function case, Eq. ( Fig. The relevant for experiments transverse correlation coefficient C(s, τ) = K(s, τ)/D(τ) for the distance s = (s ⊥ , 0) can be calculated by substituting Eqs. ( As is seen from the example evaluations of Eq. ( While the global spatial dependence is in principle captured by the formula Let us consider another case with an initial linear spatial dependence at small distances given by the complementary error function with the Fourier transform ) exp (- This results in the auxiliary functions with the combined variable σ = √2τ/ξ as above and The correlation length follows then from Eqs. ( In the limiting case τ → 0 the characteristic length behaves as L(τ) ≅ (π 2 ξ 2 τ/8) 1/4 and, thus, vanishes at τ = 0, differently from the Gaussian function case, Eq. ( The experimentally measurable transverse correlation coefficient C(s, τ) = K(s, τ)/D(τ) for the distance s = (s ⊥ , 0) can be calculated by substituting Eqs. ( ) exp (- As well as in the case of the initial exponential correlation function, the example evaluation of Eq. ( A comparison of Eq. Again, the global spatial dependence provided by the formula (34) captures, in principle, the experimental behavior including the minimum in the negative region, but the linear spatial dependence at the origin is missing in the considered time region since the spatial dependence of C ⊥ (s ⊥ , τ) quickly transforms with time to a smooth maximum as can be expected considering Fig. Following the pioneering works by the Ishibashi group In this section, we study the effect of different initial shapes of the polarization correlation function as well as the effect of the magnitude of the initial spatial scale and the initial disorder on the temporal domain structure formation at different applied electric field values. Since the polarization correlation function K(s, τ) is completely determined by its initial shape K(s, 0) via Eq. ( In order to comprehend typical behavior patterns of the variables  ̅(τ) and D(τ) we first consider example solutions of the equation system The most drastic deviations are clearly visible when fields close to the coercive value are applied to the sample (curves 3, 4 in Fig. The nonmonotonic behavior of the evolution curves is also manifested by a decrease in the variance D at the beginning of relaxation when the electric field is imposed on the sample. It might indicate both the presence of an incubation period for a nuclei of the ferroelectric domain (curves 2-5) and the suppression of the initial inhomogeneity by the large external electric field (curve 6). Starting from the state with D(0) = 0.1 all the curves go through an incubation stage with the same lower magnitude of D, as is seen in Fig. The magnitude of the initial disorder D(0), which can be experimentally controlled, for example, by the cooling rate, plays a significant role for the system evolution. Since the current model, assuming the dominance of the quenched disorder over the thermal one, applies for the substantial disorder only We consider now the solution of the equation system The magnitude of the initial disorder D(0) strongly affects the system evolution as is shown in Fig. As was established in recent experiments combined with phase-field simulations, the domain structures in uniaxial ferroelectrics PGO The charge correlation function M(s, τ) = 〈ρ b (r + s, τ)ρ b (r, τ)〉 can be easily derived from the polarization correlation function K(s, τ) noting that the bound charge density ρ b = -∇P. Particularly, the spatial charge variance may be then evaluated as 〈 ρ b (r, τ) 2 〉 = M(0, τ). For the general case of an anisotropic multiaxial ferroelectric, where the correlation function K αβ (r 1 -r 2 , τ) denotes correlations between different polarization components. For the considered here uniaxial system, the charge correlation function in terms of the above introduced dimensionless units reads Since the problem of the disappearing charges at the domain walls is hardly related to a specific initial shape of the polarization correlation function, the latter, in this section, will be taken in the Gauss form with the combined variables L = √(r c 2 + 4τ)/3 and ζ = 2ητ + s 2 /6L 2 , introduced for convenience. In the plane transverse to the polarization direction, s = (s ⊥ , 0), the charge correlation coefficient can be derived in the integral form by substituting Eqs. ( In this work, we have studied the effect of various initial conditions, formed after quenching from the high-temperature paraelectric to the low-temperature ferroelectric state, on the temporal evolution of the system and its physical properties. To this end we used the exactly solvable stochastic model of a uniaxial ferroelectric, which allows for calculation of the time dependent characteristic length and the two-point polarization correlation function Temporal dependences of the characteristic correlation length L(τ) and the polarization correlation coefficient C(s, τ) of the domain structures developing after quenching were carefully investigated experimentally in uniaxial TGS ferroelectrics over thirty years Particularly, the scaling dependence at small distances s, C(s, τ) ≅ 1 -s/2L(τ), was established in all the works All the theoretical temporal dependences of L(τ) for different initial states satisfactorily described the experimental observations by Tomita et al. Furthermore, a comparison of the correlation functions for the model stripe domain structures with zero and non-zero domain wall thicknesses in section 4.4 suggested, that the apparent linear spatial dependence of C(s, τ) might result from the way of experimental data treatment in the papers Another task of the current work was to establish the role of the initial conditions on the domain formation kinetics when subjected to the external electric field. The solutions In all cases, starting from an initial value of D(0), the system fell down to a much smaller value of the polarization variance, exhibiting a kind of homogenization, and then, after some incubation period, developed towards a single-or a multi-domain state depending on the magnitude of the applied electric field (Figs. 9-10, 13-14 and 17-18). The properties and the duration of the incubation period depending on the D(0) value are observable in Figs. 11, 15 and 19. The coercive field, deciding between the single and multi-domain state, appeared to be dependent on the initial shape of the correlation function K(s, 0) and in all cases exhibited a monotonic increase with both the disorder magnitude D(0) and its spatial scale defined by the parameters r c or ξ (see Figs. Astounding is that the temporal development of the correlation length L(τ), Eqs. of the Gaussian type, L(0) = r c /√3 and is finite. For the other two initial correlation function shapes, the correlation length vanishes at τ → 0 as L(τ) ~ (ξ 2 τ) 1/4 and is dependent on the parameter ξ. The preferred choice of K(s, 0), however, cannot be unambiguously justified by a comparison with experiments because the transient data were always reported after some time lag. The correlation coefficient C(s, τ) also exhibited universal features being independent of the applied electric field which may seem strange. However, the correlation function K(s, τ) = C(s, τ)D(τ) strongly depends on the electric field together with the polarization variance D(τ), as is seen in Figs. 10, 14 and 18, and, thus, develops distinctly at electric fields above and below the coercive field. As a by-product, the knowledge of the polarization correlation function allowed an insight into the enigmatic problem of charged domain walls in uniaxial ferroelectrics. Namely, the charge density correlations and fluctuations appeared to be substantially reduced, indicating the charge on the domain walls one order of the magnitude lower than expected for the head-tohead and tail-to tail domain walls in uniaxial ferroelectrics. Based on the exactly solvable stochastic model of the domain structure formation in uniaxial ferroelectrics dominated by the quenched polarization disorder 