We provide bulk transport evidence for twin-boundary pinning of vortices in FeSe. We measure interlayer resistance in FeSe in magnetic fields and find that, as the field is rotated in the ab plane, the flux-flow resistivity is suppressed when the field direction is parallel to twinning planes. The width of the associated dip in the resistance vs in-plane field direction curve varies as T 1/2 B -3/4 , consistent with the creation of kinked vortices near the parallel field geometry. Twin boundaries in superconductors are known to affect behavior of superconducting vortices by suppressing or enhancing superconductivity near them. A famous example is flux pinning by twin boundaries in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (YBCO) single crystals Most iron-based superconductors, unless sufficiently doped, undergo a tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural phase transition as cooled from room temperature. Accordingly, crystals are twinned below the transition temperature T s . The twin boundaries are parallel to hightemperature tetragonal (100) or (010) planes. Scanning SQUID and magnetic force microscopy studies on Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 and BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 have reported that twin boundaries enhance superfluid density and repel vortices High-quality single crystals of FeSe were grown by a chemical vapor transport method Figure Figure Figures Our observations can qualitatively be explained as follows: When B ∥ [100] t (or [010] t ), some vortices are trapped by twin boundaries. Because I ∥ c, the direction of the Lorentz force is [010] t ([100] t ), i.e., perpendicular to the boundaries. However, as long as the twin-boundary pinning force is stronger than the Lorentz force, the vortices do not move and hence do not contribute flow resistance. Because the vortex spacing l is much smaller than the twin-boundary spacing d as explained below, only a portion of vortices is trapped by the twin boundaries, and hence we observe a resistance drop, not zero resistance. The inequality l ≪ d is justified as follows: For a triangular vortex lattice in isotropic superconductors, the vortex spacing is given by a ∆ = 1.074(Φ 0 /B) 1/2 , where Φ 0 is the flux quantum. Considering the coherence length anisotropy of ξ ab /ξ c ∼ 4 As already noted at the beginning of this article, vortex pinning due to twin boundaries was previously studied in the high-transition-temperature cuprate superconductor YBCO where the interlayer resistance of YBCO in the superconducting transition region was measured as a function of in-plane field direction and resistance drops were observed for field directions parallel to the twin boundaries. Blatter et al. gave a first theoretical description of the twin-boundary pinning in YBCO where κ and Γ are the Ginzburg-Landau parameter and the mass anisotropy ratio (m c /m ab ), respectively. ε l and ∆ε l are the line tension of a vortex and its reduction when it is trapped in the twin boundary, respectively. Because ∆ε l ∝ t(1 -t) and ε l ∝ (1 -t), where t is a reduced temperature T /T c , ∆ε l /ε l ∝ T . Because l ∝ B -1/2 , the temperature and field dependence of the critical angle is given by (∆φ) * ∝ T 1/2 B -3/4 . Figure Finally, we mention a recent work We have shown from bulk transport measurements that twin boundaries in FeSe pin vortices. The width of the associated dip in R c (φ) curves vary as T 1/2 B -3/4 as expected from the Blatter theory developed for YBCO 