The present work aims at providing a systematic analysis of the current density versus momentum characteristics for a fermionic superfluid throughout the BCS-BEC crossover, even in the fully homogeneous case. At low temperatures, where pairing fluctuations are not strong enough to invalidate a quasi-particle approach, a sharp threshold for the inception of a back-flow current is found, which sets the onset of dissipation and identifies the critical momentum according to Landau. This momentum is seen to smoothly evolve from the BCS to the BEC regimes, whereby a single expression for the single-particle current density that includes pairing fluctuations enables us to incorporate on equal footing two quite distinct dissipative mechanisms, namely, pair-breaking and phonon excitations in the two sides of the BCS-BEC crossover, respectively. At finite temperature, where thermal fluctuations broaden the excitation spectrum and make the dissipative (kinetic and thermal) mechanisms intertwined with each other, an alternative criterion due to Bardeen is instead employed to signal the loss of superfluid behavior. In this way, detailed comparison with available experimental data in linear and annular geometries is significantly improved with respect to previous approaches, thereby demonstrating the crucial role played by quantum fluctuations in renormalizing the single-particle excitation spectrum. The concepts of the critical current of a superconductor The appropriate physical quantity for revealing the above features is the current response to an overall momentum imposed on the (superconducting/superfluid) system. The behavior of this physical quantity is familiar in two paradigmatic cases, namely, the weakly-attractive Fermi gas and the weakly-repulsive Bose gas. The first one can be described in terms of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of conventional superconductors With the advent of the ultra-cold atomic gases (and, specifically, of Fermi gases with attractive inter-particle interaction), these two paradigmatic (fermionic and bosonic) physical systems can be smoothly connected via Fano-Feshbach resonances, whereby these systems correspond to the limiting regimes of the so-called BCS-BEC crossover, with largely-overlapping Cooper pairs in the BCS regime smoothly evolving into tightlybound composite bosons in the BEC regime. (A recent comprehensive review on the BCS-BEC crossover can be found in Ref. Experiments with ultra-cold Fermi gases, with their detailed control on the relevant parameters associated with the degrees of freedom of the system Hamiltonian, have revived the interest in many key aspects of superconductivity (or, more generally, of fermionic superfluidity), including the Abrikosov vortex lattice In this context, the present article considers the smooth evolution of the current-vs-momentum characteristics from the BCS to the BEC limits of the BCS-BEC crossover at any temperature in the superfluid phase, resting on an approach recently developed in Ref. The results for the current-momentum response obtained by the present approach, which include the renormalization of the single-particle excitation spectrum due to pairing fluctuations, represents a definite improvement over those given by the conventional BCS-RPA (Random Phase Approximation) theory of superconductors, originally introduced by Anderson for conventional superconductors The main results obtained in this article are as follows: (i) The current-vs-momentum characteristics are obtained with the inclusion of pairing fluctuations beyond mean field for a homogeneous two-component Fermi gas with attractive inter-particle interaction, at any temperature in the superfluid phase and throughout the BCS-BEC crossover. Although, in principle, the value of the critical current obtained in this way is equivalent to that due to an applied infinitesimal perturbation, in practice the presence of a non negligible impurity (in the form of a small barrier) embedded in an otherwise homogeneous superfluid has to be taken into account when simulating realistic experimental setups. This will be done in terms of the theoretical mLPDA approach (with the acronym standing for modified Local Phase Density Approximation) that was recently developed in Ref. The article is organized as follows. In Section II the current-vs-momentum characteristics are considered for the simple cases of a weakly-attractive Fermi gas and of a weakly-repulsive Bose gas, that represent the limiting cases occurring in the BCS-BEC crossover. In Section III the inclusion of pairing fluctuations beyond mean field will allow us to obtain a continuous evolution of the current-vs-momentum characteristics for a homogeneous Fermi system that evolves from the BCS to the BEC regimes, thus making the intrinsic critical current obtained in this way to be the theoretical benchmark for interpreting microscopically experiments and theoretical simulations. A linear geometry is first considered to relate with the experimental results on the critical velocity of Ref. Finally, for the benefit of the readers Appendix A briefly summarizes previous theoretical results which are utilized for the specific purposes of the present work, while Appendix B expands on the topics dealt with in Secs. II A and III B. This Section briefly reviews the current-density response induced by an imposed momentum in two paradigmatic cases: The weakly-attractive Fermi gas treated within the BCS approximation and the weaklyrepulsive Bose gas treated within the Bogoliubov approximation. In the Bogoliubov case, the Landau critical velocity sets not only the dissipative threshold but also the onset of the dynamical instability of the gas. In the BCS case, on the other hand, the dissipative threshold does not coincide with the onset of the dynamical instability. This is due to the presence of an underlying Fermi surface which introduces a second (thermodynamic) critical velocity, that can be referred to as the Bardeen critical velocity after Bardeen who first considered it The expressions of the current density utilized here for the Fermi and Bose gases can be obtained as limiting cases of a more general expression which spans the BCS-BEC crossover between the two (BCS and BEC) limits, which will be extensively discussed in Sec. III below. In addition, for the benefit of the readers Appendix A summarizes how this more general expression for the current was originally obtained in Ref. We first consider the superfluid current density of a weakly-attractive Fermi gas as a function of an imposed velocity, which we calculate at the mean-field (BCS) level. Although this topic has already been dealt with by a number of authors At the mean-field level, the current density induced by an imposed momentum q reads where n is the (fermionic) particle density, m the fermion mass, E + (k; q) = E(k; q) + k•q m the Dopplershifted BCS quasi-particle spectrum where E(k; q) = ( k 2 2m -μ + q 2 2m ) 2 + ∆ 2 q with gap parameter ∆ q and chemical potential μ, f (ǫ) = (e ǫ k B T + 1) -1 the Fermi distribution function, and 2 the spin factor. [We set = 1 throughout.] Here, as well as in the more general expressions (7) and By symmetry consideration, the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( For small momenta q ≪ k F , the expression (1) recovers the Landau's two-fluid model whereby the back-flow term implicitly defines the normal fluid density at finite temperature where E(k) = E(k; q = 0). In this way, the standard hydrodynamic relation j(q) = n q m -ρ n (T ) q m = ρ s (T ) q m is obtained, where ρ s (T ) = n -ρ n (T ) is the superfluid density at temperature T . In the present work, we go beyond the linear regime of Eq. ( Figure which identifies the limiting (Landau) momentum q L . Past q L , zero-energy excitations are produced in the system according to the Landau criterion, with the effect of decreasing the strength of the current in a gradual way up to a second critical (Bardeen) momentum q B . At this point, the current reaches its maximum value which signals the limit of the thermodynamic stability of the system. Past q B , in fact, the dissipation becomes out of control in such a way that the thermodynamic equilibrium is lost and a new phase sets in. Accordingly, at zero temperature the onset of dynamical dissipation occurring at the Landau momentum q L can be identified when the current-vs-momentum characteristic turns from a linear to a non-linear behavior, while the thermodynamic stability is lost at a second critical momentum q B when the characteristic attains its maximum value. A rigorous definition of q B will be given after the expression (4) below when discussing the case of finite temperature. At finite temperature, on the other hand, kinetic and thermal dissipations are simultaneously present making the identification of q L from the current-vs-momentum characteristic no longer possible, since a sharp transition from a linear to a non-linear behavior is now lost (as shown in the main panel of Fig. Here, the equality corresponds to the maximum (or critical) current J B that occurs at the Bardeen momentum q B . In this case, the superfuild density is defined directly as a dynamical response of the system in the form instead of being indirectly determined in terms of the normal density In addition, at zero temperatures ρ s (q) remains constant and equal to the particle density n when j(q) is linear in q for q ≤ q L , while it decreases to zero when q L < q ≤ q B . These considerations will be further expanded in Appendix B in terms of the free energy at the mean-field level in the presence of a current. In the related context of superconductivity, the maximum current J c is an intrinsic property of a superconductor and corresponds to the de-pairing current, whose knowledge is crucial in applications of thin and narrow superconducting films, like nanowire single-photon detectors and microwave kinetic inductance detectors where k ) are BCS coherence factors. In this way, the total current density (1) can then be rewritten as follows where we have introduced the density distribution function In the simplest case of T → 0 when thermal dissipation is absent, the onset of viscous flow given by the Landau criterion implies that the position of one of the two peaks in the spectral function ( The current density response of a weakly-interacting Bose gas moving with uniform momentum q can similarly be studied Momentum dependence of the current j(q) for a weakly-repulsive Bose gas at several temperatures in the superfluid phase. At finite temperature, a maximum develops corresponding to the critical current Jc, which as T → 0 coincides with the current flowing at the sound velocity. The inset shows a comparison between the energy spectra of the Bose gas at rest and moving at the sound speed. expression similar to Eq. ( where n is the (bosonic) particle density, M the boson mass, 2 , g the coupling constant, n 0 (T, q) the condensate density as determined consistently through the density equation for each imposed momentum q, and b(ǫ) = (e ǫ k B T -1) -1 is the Bose distribution function. In Fig. Beyond this point (and depending on the nature of the excitation spectrum of the Bose gas) a number of inhomogeneous phases have been considered in the literature, ranging from the condensation of rotons In this Section, we perform a comprehensive study of the current-vs-momentum characteristics in the presence of pairing fluctuations for a fermionic superfluid spanning the BCS-BEC crossover. By following the onset of dissipation signaled by these characteristics, we will show how the Landau critical velocity can be identified for all couplings from the BCS to BEC limits. This will be done by explicitly calculating a single measurable quantity, rather than by merely identifying the branches of the single-particle and two-particle excitation spectra corresponding to the lower velocity for given coupling, as one would instead do in a BCS-RPA approach The fermionic expression Here, ω n = (2n + 1)πk B T (n integer) is a fermionic Matsubara frequency, η a positive infinitesimal, and G pf 11 the "normal" single-particle Green's function obtained in the presence of a superfluid flow with momentum q. In the following, the single-particle Green's function G pf 11 will be calculated within the t-matrix approach in the presence of a super-current as developed in Ref. Figure T/T c FIG. the single-particle excitation branch of the spectrum is suitably renormalized by pairing fluctuations. Similarly to the mean-field case of Sec. II A, at any temperature the current density is seen to saturate at a maximum value, labelled in Fig. Note also from Fig. Quite generally, (quantum and thermal) pairing fluctuations are expected to give rise to a finite lifetime in the energy excitations, making the quasi-particle approximation much less reliable than in the mean-field case of Sec. II A. Nevertheless, by analyzing in detail the singleand two-particle excitation spectra in the presence of pairing fluctuations throughout the BCS-BEC crossover, in Ref. v c = q c /m throughout the BCS-BEC crossover at low temperature, with q c obtained from different approximations. All curves contain an "ascending" branch associated with pair-breaking excitations in the BCS side of the crossover and a "descending" branch associated with phonon excitations in the BEC side of the crossover Initially, a BCS-RPA approach In this respect, the red solid line represents the value of the Landau critical velocity v L = q L /m obtained at a low (but non-zero) temperature (T=0.1T c ) from the threshold of the non-linear behavior as identified in Fig. By taking advantage of the analytic considerations reported in Sec. II A, the single-particle excitations at low temperature can be interpreted throughout the crossover in terms of a quasi-particle approximation with an effective BCS-like single-particle spectral function. Accordingly, following Ref. Physically, the dotted line of Fig. In this respect, it may be instructive to consider the BEC regime of Eqs. ( where ξ(k) = k 2 /(2m) -μ, Ω ν = 2πνk B T (ν integer) is a bosonic Matsubara frequency, and Γ 11 (Q, Ω ν ; q) is the diagonal element of the particle-particle ladder in the presence of a super-current where E B + (Q) is given after Eq. ( A direct comparison can be made at this point with the available experimental data for the Landau critical velocity v L obtained with an ultra-cold trapped Fermi gas, initially at unitarity in Ref. The results of the extended GMB approach for the critical Landau velocity at low temperature in the homogeneous case are shown by the blue solid line of Fig. To offer a direct comparison with the experimental results, Fig. A quite good agreement is found between the experimental data and the extended GMB approach for the ascending (pair-breaking) branch, at least for coupling values up to about +0.2 before the descending (phononic) branch prevails and the maximum occurs, with a slight (yet favorable) improvement on the BCS side of the crossover over and above the results of the t-matrix approach. It turns out, however, that the behavior of v L about and past this (intermediate) coupling regime is sensible to the presence even of the small barrier considered in the experiment of Ref. Here, the presence of this barrier is dealt with the mLPDA approach of Ref. The difference between these values stems from the experimental uncertainty in the number of atoms It is evident from Fig. Yet, in Fig. The residual discrepancy between theory and experiment, as far as the bosonic side of the descending branch in Fig. We return, finally, to the values of the Fermi momentum mentioned above and utilized to normalize the theoretical results. In Ref. The considerations made so far for the intrinsic critical current (or critical velocity) have naturally direct applications to physical systems which are either homogeneous or slightly deviate from a homogeneous condition. In this Section we apply the concept of critical current to the case of the Josephson effect for a fermionic superfluid flowing across a barrier of width larger than or comparable with the healing length of the bulk superfluid. This condition is satisfied by most experiments with ultra-cold Fermi atomic gases, for which the healing length is of the order of the inter-particle spacing k -1 F in the relevant coupling range -0.5 < (k F a F ) -1 < 1 probed by the experiments, while the width of the barrier cannot be made as small In the Josephson effect, the maximum (critical) current that can flow across a barrier depends on the shape (height and width) of the barrier, besides coupling and temperature. In Ref. Here, we analyze the case examined in Figs. 2 and 3 of Ref. This behavior is shown in Fig. A topic for which the concept of intrinsic critical current discussed above is especially relevant is that of the persistence of a super-current induced in a superfluid with a closed (annular) geometry and of the associated decay mechanisms, which are the hallmark of superfluidity in the first place. In principle, a persistent current will continue indefinitely as long as the medium is superfluid. In practice, persistent currents in superconducting materials (like, for instance, NbZr alloys) were estimated to flow over more than hundreds of years Typically, along a circle of radius R the velocity field v = ∇φ(r)/(2m) of the fermionic superfluid (where φ(r) is the phase of the local gap parameter ∆(r) = |∆(r)|e iφ(r) and m is the fermion mass) has a quantized circulation given by πw/m where w is an integer. Correspondingly, the magnitude of v takes the quantized values v = w/(2mR). The integer w is referred to as a winding number just because it counts the number of oscillations of the phase of the order parameter along the circulation. It can be measured by interferometric techniques. After an initial overall phase difference 2πw 0 has been imprinted on the superfluid, the system is observed to stabilize for a time of the order of tenths of a second and its final (mean) winding number w F is measured. Experimentally, mean winding numbers (both for w 0 and w F ) are considered because the same imprinting procedure is repeated several times, such that the ensuing results are suitably averaged out. Figure We first unfold the ring into a linear tube of the same length and supplement it with periodic boundary conditions at its edges. We then adopt a strategy similar to that recently utilized in Ref. With this calibration procedure at hand, we may now restrict ourselves to considering the tubular filament that corresponds to the innermost part of the original ring with the smallest distance R in from its center where the critical flow is reached first. This is a consequence of the facts that all filaments must have the same winding number and that the quantization for the velocity obtained above reads q = w/(2R) in terms of the linear momentum q = v/m at a distance R from the ring center. In this way, the intrinsic current density j(q 0 ) is computed for several momenta q 0 = w 0 /(2R in ) along the lines of Sec. III A, and the final winding number w F is obtained from the relations q F /m = j(q 0 )/n(R in ) and q F = w F /(2R in ) where n(R in ) is the local particle density at position R in . The results of this calculation are then reported in Fig. Note from this figure that, as long as the momentum q 0 is below the critical momentum corresponding to the Landau dissipative threshold, the initial w 0 and final w F winding numbers coincide with each other as expected. Conversely, above this critical momentum (identified by the end point of the linear increase in Fig. In this article, we have performed a systematic investigation of the current-vs-momentum characteristics for a fermionic superfluid spanning the BCS-BEC crossover, for which the inclusion of pairing fluctuations beyond mean field plays a crucial role. To this end, we have initially considered a fully homogeneous superfluid system, for which the above characteristics have allowed us to identify the intrinsic upper value of the super-current flowing through the system, in terms of a single expression of the super-current which is intrinsically limited by two different dissipative mechanisms (pair-breaking and phonon excitations) on the two BCS and BEC sides of the crossover, respectively. In this context, we have considered both the Landau In our analysis, we have not explicitly investigated the fate of the homogeneous superfluid once passed the Landau or Bardeen thresholds, when one expects patterns of inhomogeneous fluctuations to be built from pair-breaking (on the BCS side) and sound (on the BEC side) elementary excitations, giving rise to spatially nonuniform configurations with a strong local suppression of the gap parameter. Typically, these configurations are expected to be precursors for the formation of vortices. This topic, although interesting in itself both theoretically and experimentally, exceeds the purposes of the present article. In this respect, one may envisage that an appropriate theoretical method should possibly be based on a time-dependent approach, that would include pairing fluctuations and spatially inhomogeneous configurations on the same footing over a wide range of tempera-ture and coupling throughout the BCS-BEC crossover. in a particle-hole rung. This effect was shown to introduce a correction by a factor of (4e) 1/3 to the BCS values of both the critical temperature and the pairing gap In Ref. This Appendix expands on two topics dealt with in Secs. II A and III B, regarding respectively: (i) The free energy of a weakly-attractive Fermi gas treated at the mean-field level, thus illustrating in more detail the Bardeen criterion for the supercritical flow (given by Eq. (4) of Sec. II A) in terms of an analytically solvable approximation; (ii) The crossing between ascending and descending branches of two-particle excitations, which is shown to occur on the BEC side of unitarity for a coupling at which the underlying Fermi surface has not yet collapsed. The free energy density F s (q) of a weakly-attractive Fermi gas treated at the mean-field level can be computed in the superfluid phase at the mean-field level by following Ref. obtains the following expression with the notation (A9) (cf. also Eq. ( which represents the free energy density of an ideal Fermi gas. This panel shows also the quantity F s (q = 0) + q 2 2m (brown dashed line), which benchmarks the superfluid non-dissipative state and thus coincides with F s (q) up to the Landau critical value q L (vertical green dasheddotted line) at which dissipation sets in. Also shown is the Bardeen critical value q B (vertical blue dashed line) in correspondence with the inset of Fig. In the lower panel of Fig. One may wonder whether there exists a connection, between the coupling at which the crossover from pairbreaking to phonon excitations occurs (which determines the maximum current in Figs. In our calculation, the maximum of the Landau velocity equals 0.33v F obtained for the coupling (k F a F ) -1 = +0.36 (cf. the red full line in Fig. BA mode (k F a F ) -1 =0.36 (k F a F ) -1 =0.10 pair-breaking (k F a F ) -1 =0. coupling (k F a F ) -1 = +0.10 (blue curves), where the solid lines correspond to the sound mode and the dashed lines to the onset of the pair-breaking spectrum. The latter quantity is obtained like in Ref. Regarding instead the coupling at which the collapse of the underlying Fermi surface takes place upon approaching the BEC side of the BCS-BEC crossover, this coupling refers to a property of the single-particle excitation spectrum of the Fermi system and has been identified as the coupling at which the so-called Luttinger wave vector k L mentioned above vanishes. In particular, this quantity was determined at the critical temperature T c by including pairing fluctuations beyond mean field within the t-matrix approximation, either when comparing with the available experimental data in ultra-cold Fermi gases 