We investigate the low-frequency electrodynamics in the vortex state of two type-II superconducting films, namely, a moderate-to-strongly pinned Niobium Nitride (NbN) and a very weakly pinned amorphous Molybdenum Germanium (a-MoGe). We employ a two-coil mutual inductance technique to extract the complex penetration depth, λ ̃. The sample response is studied through the temperature variation of λ ̃ in the mixed state, where we employ a model developed by Coffey and Clem (CC model) to extract the different vortex lattice (VL) parameters such as the restoring pinning force constant (Labusch parameter), VL drag coefficient and pinning potential barrier. We observe that a consistent description of the inductive and dissipative part of the response is only possible when we take the viscous drag on the vortices to be several orders of magnitudes larger than viscous drag estimated from the Bardeen-Stephen model. When a type II superconductor is subjected to a magnetic field greater than its lower critical field H c1 , the field penetrates the superconductor in the form of quantised flux tubes each carrying a flux of, φ 0 = h/2e Wb, called vortices In recent years, there is a renewed interest in the study of superconducting thin films owing to their technological applications. Compared to bulk superconductors, the 2D vortex lattice in thin films is much more fragile and susceptible to perturbations Recently, a variety of vortex liquid states where true dissipationless transport is not seen even at vanishingly low currents have indeed been reported In this paper, we investigate the low frequency (tens of kHz) vortex dynamics of superconducting thin films of two different materials: NbN and amorphous Mo0.7Ge0.3 (a-MoGe). In terms of pinning these two films are in two opposite extremes; a-MoGe is a very weakly pinned superconductor, whereas NbN is moderate-to-strongly pinned. While several groups have studied the vortex state in superconducting thin films at microwave frequencies The dynamics of vortices under the influence of small oscillatory excitation is governed by three forces: (i) the viscous drag force, (ii) the restoring force due to the combined effect of pinning and inter-vortex interaction and (iii) the Lorentz force due to the current. One of the early models was proposed by Gittleman and Rosenblum 38 (GR) who considered the scenario for a single vortex, neglecting vortex mass term and thermal effects. Under these approximations the equation of motion of the vortex is given by: J ac is the ac drive current density, n ̂ is the unit vector along the vortex, η is the viscous drag coefficient on the vortices in absence of pinning and flux creep, and α L is the restoring force constant (Labusch parameter The pinning parameters, α L and η in this model are interpreted in a mean-field sense Assuming harmonic solution (∼ e iωt ) of the equation of motion (1), we get u = φ 0 J ac ×n (α . Substituting this value in the London equation Here, eqn. (2) assumes a form similar to the usual London equation, where the London penetration depth captures the effect of the pinning force and viscous drag, and in the low frequency limit, ω ≪ α L /η, reduces to the square of the well-known Campbell penetration depth . It is often useful to rewrite λ ̃2 in terms of the complex vortex resistivity, ρ v : where τ 0 = η/α L is the vortex relaxation time and ρ v is expressed in terms of dc flux flow resistivity (ρ ff ) as where τ is the relaxation rate and ε is a dimensionless parameter which is a measure of the weight of the flux creep phenomenon. The expressions for τ and ε are somewhat different in the two models. Here, we take the CC expression: where ν = × (πξ 2 d) (7) where H c is the thermodynamic critical field, ξ is the coherence length and d is the thickness of the sample. On the other hand, α L can be estimated by equating the total condensation energy in the displaced core with the stored elastic energy: α L ξ 2 d, which gives Using the known empirical dependences Earlier works suggest that replacing the zero field Tc in the expression of t with Tc (H) The final form of the CC equation that we have used in our analysis is: It can be seen that in absence of creep (where U 0 → ∞) the CC model reduces to the GR model (eqn. 3). The samples under investigation are a 5 nm thick superconducting NbN thin film and a 20 nm thick superconducting a-MoGe thin film both grown on (100) MgO substrates using d.c. magnetron sputtering and pulsed laser deposition respectively. Details of sample growth and characterisation can be found in references [58], [59] and [57]. In terms of pinning strength these two samples lie on two ends of the spectrum: the NbN film is strongly pinned while the pinning in a-MoGe thin film is extremely weak. The contrasting pinning properties of the two samples can be seen from fig. H typical of a type II superconductor. However, while for NbN the hysteresis loop is slightly To study the vortex dynamics, we measure the a.c. shielding response of the superconductor using the two coil mutual inductance technique. This method has been widely used to measure the London penetration of depth from M, we numerically solve the coupled Maxwell and London equations for the geometry of the coils and our sample using finite element analysis For analyzing the data using the CC model we need to ensure that the system is in the harmonic regime such that the oscillation of the vortices can be A/m 2 in the field range 200 Oe to 50 kOe, while the maximum J s ac ranges from 10 6 -10 5 A/m 2 . Thus, for both the samples we apply a subcritical drive, ensuring that we are well in the harmonic regime. We summarize the screening response of the two superconductors as a function of temperature at various magnetic fields. Fig. We first analyse the data at the lowest temperature of our measurements. Here thermal creep is negligible so we can use the GR model to extract the Labusch parameter (α L ) and the viscosity Ns/m 2 . We observe that η obtained from Im(λ v ̃-2 ) is nearly 5 orders of magnitude higher than the BS viscosity. We now attempt to fit the temperature variation of λ ̃-2 . Here we use the CC model which incorporates the effect of flux creep. For U 0 and α L we use the phenomenological temperature variations in eqn. (9) and eqn. (10) with the additional smearing factor discussed in sec. 2: α L ~ α L0 (1 -t 2 ) 2 e -T/T 0 , U ~ U 0 (1 -t 2 )(1 + t 2 )e -T/T 0 , where t = T T c (H) is the scaled temperature For η we use the phenomenological temperature variation in eqn. (11), 1+t 2 ). We treat U 0 and T 0 as adjustable parameters and fix α L0 and η 0 in such a way, that their value at 2 K are as close as possible to the value extracted from the GR model. While fitting with eqn. (12), we tried to obtain the best fit for λ -2 ≡ Re(λ ̃-2 ) and then simulate δ -2 ≡ Im(λ ̃-2 ) with the same set of parameters. The fitting procedure employed is discussed in details in the appendix. The fit is not perfect, which is unsurprising since the precise temperature dependence of various parameters is very difficult to predict, but the important point is that even within our approximations, the temperature variation of both λ -2 and δ -2 are qualitatively very well captured. Fig. ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) is predicted for collective pinning in a strongly disordered vortex lattice We now focus on the 20 nm a-MoGe film. Similar to NbN, we analyse the data at 2 K where the effect of thermal creep is negligible and compute α L and η using the GR model. Fig. Table is the scaled temperature. Treating U 0 and T 0 as adjustable parameters, we fix α L0 and η 0 in such a way, that their value at 2 K are as close as possible to the value extracted from the GR model. With the above temperature variations, we see that although the fit to temperature variation of λ -2 is well captured, however, the decrease in the measured value of δ -2 with increasing temperature is faster than the simulated value. The agreement becomes much better, if we incorporate the fluctuation factor (e -T/T 0 ), in the expression of η, i.e. η ~ η 0 ( 1-t 2 1+t 2 ) e -T/T 0 . Fig. We now extend this procedure to fit the data for magnetic fields ranging from 200 Oe to 50 kOe (fig. ) ) calculations. While we can improve the fit the by fine tuning the temperature dependences this introduces additional parameters and does not provide any significant physical understanding. ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) In fig. The central finding is this work is that when the vortices are subjected to a sub-critical lowfrequency a.c. drive, η is 2-5 orders of magnitude larger than the BS estimate which lies in the range ~ 10 -7 to 10 -8 Ns/m 2 for a majority of superconductors In BS model The Magnus force arises due to the relative motion between the vortex core and the superelectrons and acts perpendicular to the motion of the vortices. The coefficient of the Magnus drag, which is the hall viscosity To understand our results, we note that the low excitation frequency in our experiments affect the vortex dynamics in two different ways. First, at microwave frequencies, vortices get an extremely small time to traverse during every single half-cycle of the ac drive, which gives them very little room for thermal hopping. On the other hand, thermally activated motion across pinning sites becomes more significant over the large time-period at kHz frequencies. Secondly, for an overdamped harmonic oscillator (such as in eqn. ( of the vortex as γ(v)~v -1/2 [100]. At present there is no good theoretical estimate of the magnitude of γ(v); it is expected to have a temperature dependence of the form γ ∝ e U/k B T ; consequently, this factor can become very large when the vortex velocity is small, particularly at low temperatures. The second effect is the viscosity arising from the shear deformation of the vortex lattice under an ac drive. Carruzzo et al. where c66 is the shear modulus of the vortex lattice and Vc is the volume change due to shoving and rearrangement of vortices. Both these effects can lead to several orders of magnitude enhancement in η over the BS value, even though it is difficult to distinguish the relative contribution of these two effects. Both these effects provide plausible explanation for the large viscosity observed in our experiments. However, we would like to note that we do not observe the activated temperature dependence of η predicted in these theories. However, the activated form for the temperature dependence which implies a diverging η as T→0 is likely to be a first approximation and phenomenological modifications to this form have also been proposed in literature 104 . Therefore, further theoretical studies are needed to understand the temperature dependence of η. We have investigated the complex screening response at kHz frequencies in the mixed state of two superconducting films that are in two extremes in terms of pinning strength: strongly pinned NbN thin film and very weakly pinned a-MoGe thin film. Our results show that in both systems the low frequency vortex response is characterised by a vortex viscosity that exceed the BS estimate by several orders of magnitude. While vortex-pin and vortex-vortex interactions could account for such an enhancement at present our data is not consistent with the temperature dependence proposed for these effects. We have also shown that using phenomenological temperature dependence of pinning parameters we can reasonably capture the temperature dependence of the shielding response in the vortex state. This calls for further theoretical studies to obtain a complete description of the low frequency vortex response in superconducting thin films. This work was financially supported by Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India. characteristic time scale of vortex hop. This effect becomes particularly important when measurements are done at low frequencies. Different models have been proposed to account for TAFF. Brandt 46 proposed a phenomenological model where α L was multiplied by an exponential relaxation such that, α L → α L (t) = α L0 exp(-), U being the effective pinning potential barrier and kB is the Boltzmann constant. A more sophisticated model was proposed by Coffey and Clem 47 (CC) who added a random U and