We use a surface acoustic wave (SAW) cavity resonator to study the coupling of acoustic magnons in a synthetic antiferromagnet (SAF) and the phonons carried by SAWs. The SAF is composed of a CoFeB/Ru/CoFeB trilayer and the scattering matrix of the SAW resonator is studied to assess the coupling. We find that the spectral linewidth of the SAW resonator is modulated when the frequency of the excited magnons approaches the SAW resonance frequency. Moreover, the linewidth modulation varies with the magnitude and orientation of the external magnetic field. Such change in the spectral linewidth can be well reproduced using macrospin-like model calculations. From the model analyses, we estimate the magnon-phonon coupling strength to be ∼15.6 MHz at a SAW resonance frequency of 1.8 GHz: the corresponding magnomechanical cooperativity is ∼0.66. As the spectral shape hardly changes in a CoFeB single layer reference sample under the same experimental condition, these results show that SAF provides an ideal platform to study magnon-phonon coupling in a SAW cavity resonator. The interaction between phonons and magnons in magnetic systems is increasingly attracting interest not only for advancing understanding on the coupling mechanism Surface acoustic waves (SAWs) are acoustic phonons that propagate on the surface of piezoelectric substrate. SAWs can be excited simply by applying a microwave electric field to an interdigital transducer (IDT) patterned on the substrate. The simple device structure is attracting interest as it allows fabrication of on-chip phononic devices Coherent excitation of magnons using SAWs in a ferromagnetic thin film has been reported since the pioneering work from Weiler et al. To overcome this problem, one may use synthetic antiferromagnets (SAF) composed of two antiferromagnetically coupled ferromagnetic layers that are separated by a non-magnetic spacer layer Here we study the magnon-phonon coupling in a SAF composed of a CoFeB/Ru/CoFeB trilayer Concept of this study and a schematic illustration of the device structure (SAW cavity with a trilayer SAF) are shown in Fig. The IDTs are connected to a vector network analyzer (VNA), which is used to carry out scattering matrix measurements of the device. S ij with i ̸ = j (i = j) represents the signal transmission (reflection) amplitude from port j to port i of the VNA (i, j = 1, 2). An in-plane external magnetic field is applied during the scattering matrix measurements to change the magnetization direction of the CoFeB layer. The relative angle between the magnetic field and the x-axis (parallel to the SAW propagation direction) is defined as φ H , as shown in the Fig. Figure where a runs over all the peaks observed in the |S 21 | spectrum. We define the quality factor of each peak as Q = ωa 2κa . As shown in Fig. We next show the change in the shape of the |S 21 | spectrum under application of external magnetic field for the single CoFeB layer film and the SAF. We have varied the magnetic field angle φ H and obtained similar contour plots as shown in Fig. We estimate the strength of the magnon-phonon coupling using the change in κ a with H ext . The coupled equations of motion of magnetization and the longitudinal stress associated with the SAW are linearized and Fourier transformed, from which we obtain the longitudinal stress amplitude E xx : where F 0 is the excitation amplitude of the SAW, ω and ω 0 a are the SAW excitation and resonance angular fre-quency, κ 0 a is the SAW decay rate. Note that ω 0 a and κ 0 a represent quantities without the influence of magnonphonon coupling. χ am is defined as where g is the the magnon-phonon coupling constant, ω m and κ m are the resonance angular frequency and damping constant of the magnetization. Equation The peak position and the linewidth of the Lorentzian in Eq. ( where we have substituted ω ≈ ω 0 a after the nearly equal symbol, the condition set in experiments. We note that Eq. ( To determine g, we study the difference in the linewidth κ a when the magnon frequency ω m /(2π), defined by H ext , is either set close to the SAW resonance frequency ω a /(2π) or set far from it. The linewidth of the former is defined as κ res a while that for the latter is equal to κ 0 a . From the magnetic field dependence of κ a shown in Fig. where C is the cooperativity defined as Equation ( The magnetic field orientation dependence of the cooperativity C is shown in Fig. Finally, we determine the magnon-phonon coupling constant g using the maximum C found in Fig. Here we discuss the difference in the coupling constant g for a single layer film and a SAF. In Fig. In contrast, the resonance frequency of acoustic magnons of SAF is reduced compared to the single layer film: see Fig. In summary, we have studied the magnon-phonon coupling in a CoFeB/Ru/CoFeB tri-layer SAF and a CoFeB single layer film using a surface acoustic wave cavity resonator. The cavity resonator exhibits a quality factor that exceeds ∼ 10 3 , providing strong confinement of the SAWs. The SAW transmission spectra are measured under application of an in-plane magnetic field. For the SAF, the SAW spectrum of the cavity eigenmodes exhibits reduction in amplitude as well as frequency shift and linewidth broadening at the resonance field of the acoustic magnons. Interestingly, such changes in the SAW spectra are hardly found for a CoFeB single layer film. We infer the difference is due to the difference in the magnon resonance field. The resonance field is close to zero for the single layer film, where multidomain structures can form to impede excitation of coherent magnons. In contrast, the resonance field for the SAF is sufficiently large to allow efficient coupling of SAW and the acoustic magnons. From the change in the linewidth of the SAW transmission peak, we estimate the coupling constant g of the acoustic magnons and the SAW phonons to be ∼15.6 MHz. The corresponding magnomechanical cooperativity parameter C is ∼0.66. These results thus show that SAF can be used as an effective media for magnon-phonon coupling and provide a playground for on-chip cavity magnomechanics.