In this work a stochastic model of gaseous transfer in polymer/CNT nanocomposites is presented. The model takes into account interfacial areas, i.e. polymer depletion regions. The local regime of transport is controlled by the density of the polymer. In a dense polymer, this regime corresponds to the ordinary diffusion, while in free volume regions it corresponds to the ballistic transport. The introduction of a free volume and/or a depleted polymer layer near to a CNT wall, leads to the emergence of anomalous diffusion. We have demonstrated how the anomalous diffusion regime changes in the presence of nanotubes for different distributions of polymer density. The presented approach allows us to describe the threshold effect in the diffusion coefficient as a function of CNTs density in polymer/CNT nanocomposites. The study of particle transfer processes in heterogeneous systems of complex geometry is an importance problem in various fields such as nanoelectronics, chemical and membrane technologies, geology, aerospace, and medical fields. Examples of such systems are heterogeneous geological formations, oxide films growing on metal surfaces in aggressive media, cell membranes, and various composite materials, including polymer-based composites. Polymers are widely used promising materials. They are robust, light, and resistant to various chemical phenomena, which led to their ubiquitous use today. However, as has been repeatedly demonstrated experimentally, the properties of polymers (including transport properties) can be significantly improved. This can be achieved by adding carbon nanofillers to the polymer, for example, carbon nanotubes (CNTs). Transfer processes in polymer/CNT systems are directly related to their structure. As experimental and theoretical studies show, changes in the geometry of such systems are often expressed in a nonlinear increase/decrease in the coefficients of electrical conductivity, diffusion, permeability, etc One of the practically important areas, where polymer/CNTs are applied is the field of membrane technologies. Here, so-called mixed matrix membranes, designed for the separation and purification of light gases, are used. In this work, we limited ourselves to considering specific systems -PVTMS (polyvinyl trimethyl silane)/CNTs experiments The transport properties of such systems depend on many factors: the type of polymer, the density of the carbon fillers, the type of CNTs, and their distribution within the polymer. Dependence on a large number of parameters leads to the fact that the transport properties vary over a very wide range. Under these conditions, experimental studies aimed at arXiv:2311.04576v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 8 Nov 2023 finding nanocomposites with optimal properties can be very time-consuming and expensive. As a result, there is a need to develop an model for quantitative and qualitative prediction of the characteristics of nanocomposites. In this article, we consider the process of diffusion transfer in polymeric CNT composites, namely, the transfer of light gases (H 2 , N 2 , CH 4 , C 3 H 8 , CO 2 , etc). It is known that there are three ways of transfer of gas particles: through the polymer matrix, through open CNTs (internal channel), and through interfacial regions resulting from poor adhesion between the polymer matrix and CNTs The incorporation of CNTs into a polymer, as noted above, is accompanied by an increase in the free volume due to poor adhesion between the polymer matrix and CNTs. This makes these volume elements easily permeable to gas particles. This assumption will be valid if the mean free path of a particle in a polymer is much smaller than the characteristic size of such a region The complexity of developing a gas transfer model is mainly due to the spatial heterogeneity of the system: under conditions of a strongly inhomogeneous medium, problems arise in the correct formulation and solution of transport equations.Methods such as Existing theoretical models for various heterogeneous media In the present study, we have developed a mathematical model with a complex particle transfer mechanism, which is a further development of the experience of the previous works In our previous work on particle transport in polymer/CNT systems where v -particle velocity, γ -attenuation coefficient, inversely proportional to the characteristic decay time, W -Wiener process and σ = const is the dispersion; the function χ takes the value of one for the polymer and smoothly but sharply goes to values close to zero for the free volume. A size of a transfered gaseous molecule is included into the parameter σ. The function χ regulates the change of transfer regime. At χ = 0, this is the ballistic transfer, χ = 1 corresponds to the usual diffusion. With this formulation of the problem, the anomalous diffusion was observed. The generalization of the system (1) to the multidimensional case is quite obvious. However, to describe a real system, CNTs and elastic collisions of particles with their walls must be added to the model (see also where χ(r) is the function corresponding to the polymer density, and W are the independent Wiener processes. Here and below we consider a two-dimensional problem in Cartesian coordinates (x, y). The SDEs (2) describe the complex transfer mechanism of a particle in a heterogeneous polymer/CNT system, taking into account the reflection of a particle from the outer surface of a tube. The transition regions of polymer depletion are also considered: as a particle approaches a CNT wall from polymer, the rate of its velocity change decreases. Thus, the transfer regime is related to the definition of the spatial function χ. In contrast to In this work, superellipses were chosen for the geometric representation of CNTs. The choice of the superellipses (instead of rectangles) is connected with the need of defining a smooth contour function. It allows us to define the normal vector field correctly. Firstly, we defined the contour function f (x, y, x 0 , y 0 , θ 0 ) for any tube: where (x 0 , y 0 ) -a geometrical center of a tube, θ 0 -a tilt angle, a -half-length of a tube and b -its half-width, m is an integer number characterizing the roundness of the tube corners. The relation f = 1 with fixed x 0 , y 0 , θ 0 , m determines a superellipse. Next, we introduced an auxiliary function which is a smooth approximation of the Heaviside step function: where k -a coefficient that characterizes its sharpness. The function Ξ takes the maximum value equal to one inside a tube and zero outside. The χ function from (2) should be defined in such a way that regions of polymer depletion appear near the outer surface of a nanotube. The χ function should be designed so that χ = 0 at a CNT boundary and 0 < χ ≤ 1 outside a tube (see Fig. where N -number of CNTs, k χ is a sharpness parameter specific of χ. In the limiting case of large values of k χ , χ is a step function and changes from 0 to 1 at a CNT boundary. Physically, this case corresponds to the absence of a free volume or to the strong adhesion of the polymer to a CNT. By varying the parameter k χ , one can introduce a transition region corresponding to a smooth change of the polymer density from the value equal 0 to 1 as one moves away from a CNT. We can also shift the transition region in such a way that voids remain near the walls (χ = 0), and at some distance from the wall, χ approaches to 1. To solve SDEs (2), it is necessary to define a normal vector field n. For each tube, we defined a normal field as follows: where parameter k norm is responsible for the distance from the CNT boundary on which the normal field acts. To get the cumulative normal field n, it is necessary to take the sum of n i over all CNTs (see Fig. Given the details described above, we solved (2) using the Monte Carlo method. In the presented approach, a particle moves in a heterogeneous system: CNT/transition region/polymer and its mechanism of motion changes in accordance with its spatial position, as it is shown above. To solve SDEs (2), we used dimensionless quantities l and τ which are the characteristic parameters of the length and time, respectively. Dimensionless space parameters were chosen in accordance with the work Calculations were performed on a square system with the linear dimension L = 15 with periodic boundary conditions. Firstly, the system is randomly filled with superellipses uniformly distributed in 2D space. All superellipses have an impermeable solid core with dimensions a = 0.5, b = 0.025 and parameter m = 7 (see 3). The CNTs density may be defined as η = S se • N/L 2 , where L -the size of system, N is the number of objects and S se is area of superellipse, which can be expressed via the gamma function Γ: For each density we have generated 100 random input configurations of nanotubes, where superellipses density was varied in the range of 0 -0.324. For a given configuration, the following trajectory implementation scheme was used. Initially, a particle is located at (L/2, L/2). If this point is inside a CNT, then the algorithm searches for a point near the starting point that does not belong to the CNT. Then the particle moves according to the system of equations ( At the output we get an offset vector from the starting point (x-x start , y-y start ), by which we build a two-dimensional distribution. The random process described by the system of equations ( The obtained distribution was fitted as a stable one, which has the following characteristic function where -∞ < δ < ∞, c ≥ 0, 0 < α ≤ 2 and -1 ≤ β ≤ 1 are the distribution parameters. The characteristic exponent α determines the form of the distribution function, location parameter δ is the position of the maximum of the distribution, scale parameter c is the width of the distribution, and the skewness parameter β determines the distribution asymmetry. Further, we analyzed the distribution fitting parameters for different types of the transition functions χ to estimate the influence of the local regime in near-wall areas and their size on the overall transfer regime. Since we consider a symmetric random process, the fitting of the obtained distributions shows that both parameters of skewness β and location δ are about zero. The scale parameter c does not influence on the form of a distribution. Therefore the most interesting parameter is α, which is responsible for a difference of transfer regime from the ordinary diffusion. Thus, to investigate the influence of the polymer depleted regions on the transfer regime, we have calculated α as a function of the CNTs density η for three different functions χ. In the first case (case A), we considered a sharp form of χ with a shift. It was defined to be zero on the distance about three CNT diameters from a tube wall. Then it becomes unity, which corresponds to a huge value of k χ . In this case, for high densities η almost all the space which is not occupied by CNTs has χ = 0. Hence, the transfer regime is mostly determined by collisions with the walls and ballistics. It is similar to a billiard ball moving in the geometry of random corridors. Then a particle should fly through these free volume corridors for distances much greater than those it would pass in the ordinary diffusion. This leads to the strongly pronounced anomalous diffusion and a decreasing α with η increasing, which is a consequence of ⟨r 2 ⟩ growth. At low densities, transfer regime is limited to the normal diffusion due to the lack of free volume changing the local regime. This can be clearly seen in Fig. In the case B we decreased the size of the near-wall area, setting χ to be zero at one CNT diameter. As can be seen from Fig. In contrast to the first two cases, in the case C, a smooth transition from diffusion to ballistics regimes (smooth χ) was considered. Here the free volume areas are absent, instead of them there are sparse regions whose density smoothly changes (see Eq. 5). It reduces the effect of anomalous transfer for fixed density of tubes compared to the above cases. We deliberately defined the density of the tubes in terms of "hard cores" without a permeable shell, as it is done in many percolation problems. It allowed us to estimate the effect of the size of the permeable region on transfer for identical structures. It is important to note that, as can be seen from Fig. , where D 1 -diffusion coefficient in polymer and D 2 -diffusion coefficient in free volume. The Einstein's relation is usually used to define the diffusion coefficient from experiments, ⟨r 2 ⟩ ∼ 2nD eff t where n is the space dimension (n = 2 in our case). However, for anomalous transfer, diffusion coefficient must be defined in another way. For example, in This result is quite expected. Of all the cases we considered, it is case B, in which agreement with experiment was obtained, that best reflects the structure of the sample More accurate quantitative results may be obtained by considering a 3D problem and choosing σ appropriately. Also, the μ exponent in 3D should differ from a 2D case. According to our preliminary estimates, when moving from 2D to a 3D model, the resulting effect should become less pronounced. However, this estimation must be tested in detail. However, even using the two-dimensional model, we can claim a rough quantitative assessment of the transport characteristics. The use of the two-dimensional model in this work is associated with two aspects. Firstly, in the work We have investigated the diffusion of gases in a heterogeneous environment, which reflects the transport properties of a polymer/CNT nanocomposites. Transfer regime of a particle is related to the complex geometry of the system and controlled by the CNTs density η and a spatial function χ. This function determines the density of the polymer and makes it possible to introduce a transition layer at the CNT interface and, therefore, take into account free volume regions (see Fig. The influence of the three different shapes of function χ was analyzed. The results show the nonlinear dependence of the parameter α on CNTs density, which characterizes the deviation of transfer regime from ordinary diffusion. The change of this regime is most pronounced for case A, where the free volume regions have a size about three CNT diameters. For case B, when the size of free volume area is about one CNT diameter, this effect of transfer change is less than in the case A. Free volume regions were not considered in the case C. Here, the near-wall regions are represented by a soft transition of polymer density at the CNT boundaries, due to which α drop occurs at higher CNT densities (see Fig. The presented approach allows us to explain the threshold effect in diffusion coefficient as a function of CNTs density (see bottom of Sect. 4) and agrees well with experimental data 