Solitons have garnered significant attention across various fields, yet a contentious debate persists regarding the precise structure of solitons on indium chains. Currently, multiple forms of solitons in one-dimensional atomic chains have been reported. STM provides an effective means to study the precise atomic structure of solitons, particularly their dynamics and interactions. However, limited research has been conducted on soliton interactions and soliton-chain interactions, despite their profound impact on relative soliton motions and the overall physical properties of the system. In this work, we characterized the structures of the soliton dimer and trimer, observed the displacements induced by the soliton entity and statisticized the dynamic behaviors of soliton dimers over time evolution or temperature. To reveal the soliton mechanism, we further utilized STM to investigate the CDWs between two solitons when two monomers were encountered. Additionally, we achieved the manipulation of the monomer on the indium chain by the STM tip. Our work serves as an important approach to elucidate interactions in correlated electronic systems and advance the development of potential topological soliton computers. One-dimensional (1D) materials have aroused intensive interest because of their exotic physical properties and potential applications in nanoelectronics. The interactions significantly enhanced between spin, charge, and lattice in 1D electronic systems can result in singular ground states and excited states In this work, we characterized the structures of the soliton dimer and trimer, observed the displacements induced by the soliton entity and statisticized the dynamic behaviors of soliton dimers over time evolution or temperature. To reveal the soliton mechanism, we further utilized STM to investigate the CDWs between two solitons when two monomers were encountered. Additionally, we achieved the manipulation of the monomer on the indium chain by the STM tip. Our experiments were performed in an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) system equipped with an Omicron low temperature (LT) STM, with a base pressure below 1 × 10 -10 mbar. The Si(111) substrates (As doped, n type, ∼0.001 Ω•cm) were cleaned by means of the standard "flashing" recipe until the 7 × 7 reconstruction was established at the surface. Then, we prepared the Si(111)-(4 × 1)-In atomic chain structure by evaporating approximately one monolayer of In onto the cleaned Si(111) surface at 700 K, followed by a post annealing process at the same temperature for 30 minutes. Topological soliton monomers exist on the surface, as evidenced by two 4 × 2 chains with alternating hexagon orientations, producing a domain boundary The structures of the dimer and trimer are measured. The indium hexagonal length of one soliton is determined to be 3a and 2a (a is the projection of atomic spacing between vertical chains) at two neighboring indium chains. In the experiment, when two solitons get closer and form a dimer, the distance between the outermost two indium hexagonal lengths becomes 5a. At this time, the central distance between two solitons is 2.5a, as shown in figure Soliton monomers and dimers are statisticized to explore the soliton system's dynamic equilibrium. The detailed statistical method is similar to the previously reported method for counting soliton monomers In addition, the temperature-dependent soliton density, including monomers, dimers and trimers, was investigated to explore the thermal properties. As the temperature increased, the number of dimers and trimers increased correspondingly, and the number of single solitons decreased. To clarify this phenomenon, we hold the opinion that as the temperature climbs, the soliton system is affected by a larger thermal perturbation, making it easier for single solitons to combine with each other and form dimers and pushing the thermal equilibrium between dimer formation and breaking toward dimer formation. To verify the assumption that the soliton aggregation is a temperature-dependent relationship, we decreased the sample temperature to 77 K and then the probability of soliton dimers and trimers decomposed. Notably, when the temperature decreased to lower than 60 K (below the generation energy temperature), we did not observe any monomers, dimers or trimers. When it was heated back to the original temperature, we could hardly observe soliton monomers. The reason why it is difficult to find soliton monomers on the surface at high temperature is explained below. As solitons are only found at the 8 × 2 phase To understand the relationship between the soliton dynamic behavior and its CDW, we characterized two encountering solitons with STM. In the experiment, initially, two solitons at the same indium zigzag chain stay far away from each other and then they begin to get closer to each other. When the distance between them is lower than 10a, the wavelength of the charge density waves between two solitons will start to change, as shown in figure We also witnessed the phase inversion of the CDW between two encountering solitons. When the distance between two solitons becomes longer than 12a, the interaction weakens, and the periodic CDW switches back to the normal case. Figure In addition to soliton aggregation, dimers and trimers can also be dissolved to form monomers. The electric field from the STM tip will induce Peierls instability on the chain segment and lead to soliton movement, which will promote soliton dimer and trimer formation and breaking. However, the aggregation of solitons to form stable dimer and trimer structures is effectively weakened. Compared to traditional systems, statistically, the number of solitons attracted to each other is more than the number of solitons repulsed to each other. On account of the dimer's slow motion and its transparent dependence on temperature, the soliton monomer eventually becomes a dimer to stabilize the whole indium chain system. Moreover, to compensate for such changes, the system needs to generate or annihilate new solitons to maintain the balance of the total number during the process of generation and annihilation. However, as the temperature increases, the formation energy of solitons increases, and the area of the 8 × 2 region decreases, which increases the interaction between solitons. The increased interaction will also be balanced by the generation of dimers. Because the stable dimer reduces the system's energy, the whole system tends to be stable. For a further understanding of the interaction between the soliton and the indium chain, we manipulated the soliton displacement by applying a voltage pulse onto the chain. Figure In conclusion, we observed soliton monomers, dimers and trimers in the one-dimensional indium chain on the Si(111) surface with STM. The soliton dimer and trimer are mainly composed of soliton monomers aggregated in different chains. We statisticized the monomer and dimer densities and investigated the whole process of dimer formation with its CDW segment, concluding that soliton aggregation to form a stable dimer structure will effectively reduce the whole system's energy. Moreover, by applying an electric field between the STM tip and the surface, we achieved atomic manipulation of single solitons. Our research exhibits a new atomic perspective for charge density waves, serves as an important approach to elucidate interactions in correlated electronic systems and may provide a platform for potential topo-logical soliton computers.