A practical quantitative model is presented to account for the I-V characteristics of pin diodes based on epitaxial Ge-like materials. The model can be used to quantify how the different material properties and recombination mechanisms affect the diode performance. The importance of dislocations, non-passivated defects, and residual intrinsic layer doping in determining the qualitative shape of the I-V curves is discussed in detail. Examples are shown covering literature diodes as well as diodes fabricated with the purpose of validating the theoretical effort. Intense efforts have been devoted since the 1990's to develop technologies that enable the growth of low-defect Ge on Si. (Refs. 1-3). These advances were followed by the growth and characterization of several generations of devices. The basic component of most of the above devices are Geon-Si pn or pin diodes. The optical and electrical characterization of these devices provide important clues about the material quality and the potential of the technology to contribute to the general area of silicon photonics. Activation energy studies from measurements of the temperature dependence of the I-V curves are also quite common. This methodology is not ideal because it is very hard to relate empirical parameters to microscopic properties, and because the interpretation of the data is based on assumptions that are difficult to confirm without explicit modeling. On the other hand, the limited use of TCAD tools to fit experimental data reveals the need for alternatives that allow the user to easily match experimental and theoretical I-V curves, even if these alternatives are more limited in scope compared to those included in commercial packages. In this paper, we present a model for the I-V characteristics of Ge-on-Si diodes that is rigorous enough to allow fitting of experimental data but can be implemented using software and hardware resources commonly available to experimentalists for routine analysis and visualization of experimental data. The model relies on a full numerical solution of the standard semiconductor transport equations. The inherent slowness of this approach is mitigated by the fact that the computation of an I-V curve lends itself naturally to multithreading, and therefore we can produce enough I-V data points very fast. Furthermore, since different material properties affect the experimental data in characteristic ways, the adjustment of the calculated I-V curves to experimental data is greatly facilitated. In this first introduction of the model, we restrict ourselves to homostructure Ge-on-Si pin diodes. In subsequent publications we will discuss extensions to GeSn alloys and to general heterostructure diodes. We will also show how the model can be combined with optical codes to generate realistic predictions of diode responsivities. The numerical solution of the semiconductor equations allows us to assess the validity of simplified approaches. In some cases, such as the use of activation energies to identify recombination-generation mechanisms, we find that the conclusions can be erroneous if the temperature dependence of the band structure and electrical properties are not properly accounted for. In this respect, the model is useful to identify the fundamental electronic and transport properties that still need further research to feed accurate models of Geon-Si diodes. Our model also demonstrates that in Ge-on-Si pin diodes any residual doping in the nominally intrinsic layer interacts with Trap Assisted Tunneling (TAT) mechanisms to affect the voltage-dependence of the reverse bias current. Simulations under these conditions require an accurate knowledge of the electric field in the structure, which cannot be easily obtained from analytical approximations and requires a numerical solution of Poisson's equation. We show that a relatively simple description of dislocation-related recombination, consisting of a mid-gap and a shallow Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination center, is sufficient to reproduce the I-V characteristics of Ge-on-Si diodes grown by different methods, including the standard two-step (low temperature/high temperature) approach for Ge on Si, We will consider a one-dimensional model of a pin diode for a two-band semiconductor. We place the origin of the coordinate system at the center of the intrinsic layer, which extends from z = -d 2 ⁄ to z = d 2 ⁄ . We assume an acceptor density N a (z) over a length W p on one side of the intrinsic layer and a donor density N d (z) over a length W n on the other side. In most cases, the acceptor and donor concentrations can be approximated as simple box-like distributions with constant values N a and N d . The Poisson and current continuity equations for this system are 18 where n(z) and p(z) the electron and hole carrier densities, j n (z) and j p (z) the electron and hole current densities, V (z) the electric potential, ε(z) the dielectric constant, and R(z), the recombination-generation rate. The current densities are the sum of a drift and a diffusion component, where μ n and D n are the electron mobility and diffusivity, and μ p and D p the hole mobility and diffusivity. These quantities are related by the generalized Einstein relations as in Eq. ( The recombination-generation rate is assumed to be given by R = R SRH + R bim , where R SRH is given by a sum of Shockley-Read-Hall terms: Here τ nt and τ pt are the electron and hole recombination lifetime parameters for trap t, n i the intrinsic carrier concentration, and the quantities n t and p t are defined as 18 and where N c (T ) and P v (T ) are the thermal densities of electrons and holes, respectively, E c the conduction band edge, E v the valence band edge, and E t the trap level energy. From these definitions n t and p t can be viewed as the electron and hole concentrations in the conduction and valence bands if the quasi-Fermi levels were at the same energy as the trap level ε t . According to Eqs. ( where B bim is the bimolecular recombination coefficient. It is also quite straightforward to include Auger recombination and band to band tunneling (BTBT), From Eqs. (1)-( where F is the equilibrium Fermi level and F i the intrinsic Fermi level, k B Boltzmann's constant and T the temperature. We can then write the carrier concentrations as where n i is the intrinsic carrier concentration. With these definitions, Eqs. ( The function set {u n (z), u p (z), v(z)} are the so called Slotboom variables and turn out to be convenient for numerical work.(Ref. 21) Their physical meaning becomes apparent if we write Then, by comparing with the standard quasi-equilibrium analytical expressions for n(z) and p(z), it is easy to see that F n (z) and F p (z) can be identified with the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels. Eqs ( Ge diodes with highly-doped quasi-neutral regions are a challenging system for numerical simulations because two very different length scales coexist. One of them is the Debye length l, relevant in the depletion layer, and the other one is the diffusion length L D , relevant in the quasi-neutral regions. For n,p ~ 10 19 cm -3 , typical values of the Debye length are l=1.5 nm, whereas L D > 3000 nm. With such a severe mismatch, the need for a non-uniform discretization grid is apparent. The separation between two successive points is denoted as h j = z j+1 -z j . In terms of these quantities, it can be shown that the discrete version of Eqs. ( and where for any function of position, f j+ 1 2 = f(z j + 1 2 h j ), and we introduce the Bernoulli generation function This function appears following a method introduced by Scharfetter and Gummel 22 to avoid unphysical negative carrier concentrations that may arise because the discretization approximation n j+ 1 2 = 1 2 (n j+1 + n j ) is not sufficiently good near the edge of depletion layers, where the carrier concentrations change exponentially. Each of the three equations ( where η is a generic symbol for either v, u n or u p The three equations can be solved iteratively using a method proposed by Mayergoyz and coworkers. where the superscript K indicates the order of the iteration. The first equation is a nonlinear equation in η j K+1 , which is solved itself iteratively, using for example the Newton method. This implies two iteration loops, one for K and one to solve the nonlinear equation. However, it makes no sense to spend computer time to solve the nonlinear equation "exactly" if we are only finding an approximate solution for loop K. Therefore, we limit ourselves to the first iteration of the inner loop, For the derivatives of G, the potential case is straightforward: For the current continuity equations, on the other hand, the derivatives are complex because r j is itself a function of u n,j and u p,j . We then use the so called Seidman's modification The final modification prior to numerical evaluation is to introduce normalized quantities. We define and a length This allows us to introduce a dimensionless coordinate x and dimensionless quantities ε′, h′, and D′ such that z = lx (32) Similarly, we can define dimensionless recombinationgeneration coefficients as A table with the coefficients in Eq. ( To explain the boundary conditions, we assume for concreteness that the p-layer is on the left of the diode and extends from z -= -W p -d 2 ⁄ to z + = W n + d 2 ⁄ , with ohmic contacts at both ends. Accordingly, equilibrium conditions and charge neutrality must prevail at both ends. If no external voltage is applied, equilibrium implies, according to Eq (14), Then the charge neutrality condition on the left side is N a + n -p = 0, so that Eq. ( Similarly, we obtain Let us now consider the case when a voltage v app is applied between the diode terminals. In that case, the boundary conditions for the potential are and But since the carrier concentrations at the contacts are independent of the voltage at those points, then Because the solution method used here is globally convergent, We assume the diode to be embedded in a circuit as depicted in Fig. The measured current is To find the diode current I d we must solve the nonlinear equation For an ideal diode, the solution is provided by the Lambert W-function, but in our case we need a numerical solution in which, for every iteration of the root-finding method, we must solve the semiconductor differential equations. The serial resistance can almost never be neglected, and in some cases it may be increased intentionally to measure properties such as responsivity. Thus, accounting for its effect on the I-V curves is by far the most time-consuming aspect of the calculation, but it is essential to match experimental curves. We incorporate the differential equation solver into a root finding algorithm using Brent's method, Even with these complications, the time needed to compute a full I-V curve can be as short as a minute in a fast personal computer. As indicated above, we assume that all defect-related recombination-generation processes can be described in terms of SRH terms. To account for trap-assisted tunneling, we follow the work of Hurkx Here the recombination enhancement functions Γ nt (z) and Γ pt (z) account for trap assisted tunneling (TAT) and the Poole-Frenkel effect, as described below. Trap-assisted-tunneling refers to carrier tunneling through the approximately triangular potential barrier in the presence of the electric field. We model the TAT contribution using the expressions derived by Hurkx: 29 with Where |E| is the magnitude of the electric field, m ∥ is the effective mass in the direction of transport, and ħ the reduced Planck constant. The quantities ΔE n and ΔE p are the tunneling barriers and they are defined as (if we take E v = 0, E c = E g ): and These barriers may be lowered by the Poole-Frenkel effect, caused by the presence of an electric field of magnitude |E|. We can write this as For a Coulombic trap, one can show that β PF = √4 e 3 ε ⁄ , The barriers in Eqs. (45) and (46) are modified to new values, written as ΔE n,p ′ , which for a donor trap are given as Similarly, for an acceptor trap we obtain The diode model presented so far predicts that diodes that are identical except for their areas should have identical j-V curves. This is hardly ever observed in real life, the main reason being the presence of side wall recombinationgeneration that is not proportional to the area but to the diodes' perimeter. Good passivation can mitigate the effect, but not to the extent that perimetral recombination can be ignored if we seek a quantitative reproduction of the experimental I-V curves. Unfortunately, incorporating side wall recombination in a rigorous way requires a three-dimensional diode model. This, as indicated above, is incompatible with our stated goal of developing a fast, quantitative diode model that can be used to fit experimental curves. Therefore, we account for perimetral recombination-generation by developing a onedimensional effective model. Starting from the fully threedimensional semiconductor equations, we define average quantities by integrating over the diode area. These average quantities are only functions of the coordinate z and satisfy the one-dimensional equations ( Here D is the device's diameter and we introduce perimetral recombination velocities v n,per = δr τ n,per ⁄ ,v p,per = δr τ p,per ⁄ . Our model contains one SRH term for each trap present. Unfortunately, a full independent identification of all such traps and their microscopic structure is not available. Therefore, our philosophy will be to use a model containing the smallest possible set of traps that is compatible with all available diode experimental data. We find that that this requires four trap levels. One trap is assumed to be the same one that appears in bulk Ge and represents the dominant recombination mechanism in Ge solar cells on Ge substrates. A second trap is associated with the above perimetral recombination. The corresponding trap level is assumed to be located in middle of the band gap E g , at an energy E g /2 above the valence band edge, simply because these is the trap energy that maximizes SRH recombination. In addition to these traps, we find that for Ge-on-Si we need to include two additional dislocation-related traps. One of these traps is assumed to be at the same mid-gap location as the above traps, the other one at an energy E g /4 above the valence band edge. There are several defect studies in Ge-on-Si as well as GeSn-on-Si which provide evidence for shallow defects above the valence band edge at energies close to E g /4 , 11, 13, 30-32 and we will show below that the presence of one such level is important for fitting the shape of the forward-bias I-V curves. For each of the above traps, we need the electron-and hole recombination lifetimes {τ nt , τ pt } (or the surface recombination velocities {v n,per , v p,per } in the case of perimetral recombination) to compute the corresponding R SRH term. For bulk Ge recombination there are some lifetime data in the literature, and we use those values, as discussed in Appendix A. Much less is known about dislocation-related recombination. We assume that electronand hole-recombination lifetimes are the same and inversely proportional to the dislocation density ρ D : A discussion of this choice is given in Appendix A. We also assume that the shallow level recombination parameters are Where r md is a number that we expect to be approximately constant among different Ge-on-Si samples if our defect model is physically valid. In fact, we find that the choice r md =75 leads to good agreement with experiment in most cases. Using the final assumption v n,per = v p,per , we then end up with essentially a two-parameter recombination model in which the main adjustable parameters are the dislocation density and the surface recombination velocity. It is apparent that some of the assumptions made in our trap models are crude and ad hoc, but more realistic accounts require very detailed defect studies that are simply not available at this time. Before attempting to fit real experimental data, we show some model predictions that illustrate the perils of "naïve" studies based on analytical approximations, as described in the introduction, and show how the different model parameters affect the predicted I-V curves. Figure An important aspect of the experimental I-V curves in Geon-Si diodes is the relatively strong voltage dependence of the reverse-bias current. Fig. Figure Figure While there are numerous publications reporting I-V curves for Ge-on-Si diodes, many of those articles fail to report these curves in sufficient detail and to provide the essential sample parameters that are needed for a simulation with our model. These parameters include layer thicknesses and doping levels. Strain also modifies the band structure and affects the I-V curves. Our model accounts for some of those effects (See Appendix A) Similarly, I-V curves from diodes of different sizes are critical to separate the perimetral from bulk contributions to the defect currents. Furthermore, as we will demonstrate below, measurements as a function of temperature are important to accurately fit the parallel resistances in Fig. Perhaps the most popular approach to grow low-defect Ge on Si consists in a two-step approach in which an initiation Ge layer is deposited at relatively low temperatures around 400 °C followed by a growth temperature ramp up to about 670 °C. Son and coworkers The most important qualitative difference between the high-and low dislocation diodes is the observation of a much stronger voltage dependence of the reverse bias current in the former. We reproduce this behavior by assuming some residual doping in the intrinsic layer of the highly dislocated materials; the best fit being obtained using p = 1.5×10 17 cm -3 . On the other hand, in the low-dislocation diodes there is a significant increase in the current for reverse biases beyond 2 eV. This behavior is not reproduced by our model at this point and may be due to BTBT effects. As to the temperature dependence, an Arrhenius plot of the experimental reverse bias current at -1 V gives for the highdislocation samples an activation energy E a = 0.35 eV, while our simulations give E a = 0.38 eV, in very good agreement with experiment. On the other hand, for the lowdislocation diodes our model predicts slightly lower activation energies of E a = 0.34-0.35 eV, but the Arrhenius plots of the experimental data have a significant non linear component. Kouvetakis and coworkers have introduced several lowtemperature advanced precursors for the growth of Ge-on-Si that eliminate the need for a two-step process and are compatible with several doping precursors, making it possible to grow in situ complete diode structures with boxlike doping profiles. While good fits are obtained assuming infinite parallel resistances-attributing all the observed diameter dependence to perimetral recombination, as we did in Figs. 9 and 10-it is difficult as a practical matter to rule out the presence of a finite parallel resistance that is proportional to 1 D ⁄ , as discussed in Sect. IIE2. Furthermore, even if one accepts that the diameter dependence is fully accounted for by perimetral recombination, the presence of a finite, diameter independent parallel resistance would affect the slope of the reverse bias curve in a way that is hard to disentangle from the effect of residual intrinsic layer doping combined with TAT processes, as discussed in Section IIIB. For an unambiguous identification of the possible parallel resistance contributions, a study of the temperature dependence of the I-V curve is very useful, as we show next. Fig. The diode in Fig. We have a presented a practical yet realistic model for the I-V characteristics of Ge-on-Si pin diodes. The model can reproduce I-V curves in the literature from a variety of sources by adjusting a very limited number of parameters, and should therefore be useful for systematic studies aimed at improving the performance of such diodes. Extensions to GeSn and SiGeSn materials are straightforward and only require new sets of material parameters instead of those Fig. While the agreement between calculated and experimental I-V curves is excellent, mixed results are obtained for the temperature dependence of these curves. There are some obvious reasons why the predicted temperature dependences may disagree with experiment. For example, we assume the trap levels to track the temperature dependence of the band gap. Different results are obtained in the opposite limit in which the trap level is assumed to lie at a fixed energy relative to one of the band edges. Furthermore, we take the recombination lifetimes for the dislocation-related traps to be temperature-independent for lack of any direct measurement, although there is ample evidence that other recombination lifetimes in the system have their own temperature dependence. From this perspective, a failure to reproduce the temperature dependence of the I-V curves would not necessarily imply that there is a fundamental flaw in our model, but simply reflect our incomplete knowledge of the fundamental physics associated with recombinationgeneration processes. On the other hand, the excellent agreement between modeled and experimental temperature dependence for some of the modeled diodes (for example Fig. This work was supported by the US National Science Foundation under grant DMR-2119583 and by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under grant FA9550-23-1-0285. The codes developed under this support run in the Igor Pro platform (Wavemetrics Inc.) and are available upon request for non-commercial purposes. The temperature dependence of the lattice parameters of both Si and Ge are needed to compute thermal stresses on epitaxial films and to evaluate the temperature dependence of the momentum matrix elements, as discussed below. Experimentally, the temperature-dependent lattice parameter can be computed from thermal expansivity measurements. In Ref. 50 we present a physically motivated model that reproduces these experimental data for Si, Ge, and α-Sn. However, since the expressions derived require numerical integrations to obtain the desired lattice parameter, we take a more practical route here. In the case of Si, we fit the experimental thermal expansion data from Ibach, with α 1 =3.77292×10 -7 K -1 , α 2 =-2.42169×10 -8 K -2 , α 3 =1.84159×10 -10 K -3 , α 4 =1.75244×10 -13 K -4 , α 5 =-3.33374×10 -15 K -5 , α 6 =8.74587×10 -18 K -6 , α 7 =-9.35695×10 -21 K -7 , α 8 =3.66327×10 -24 K -8 . We also chose a 0 =5.4297 Å to match our measurements of bulk Si wafers at room temperature. For Ge, the available thermal expansion data only reaches 300 K, but ab initio calculations that extend beyond this temperature and agree with the experimental data are available. The fit parameters are A =6.5741×10 -3 K, and Θ =355.14 K. The zero-temperature value was chosen as a 0,Ge =5.645 Å to match literature values at room temperature. With these parameters, we obtain a good agreement with the theoretical predictions above 300 K. The most important parameter is the fundamental indirect gap, for which we use with E g (0) =0.7440 eV, α = 4.956×10 -4 eV/K, and β = 216.8 K, as discussed in Ref. 19. For the direct band gap we use Eq. ( The valley with minimum at the L-point of the Brillouin zone where electron carriers reside in Ge is characterized by a longitudinal mass m l (corresponding to the <111> directions) and a transverse mass m t . The longitudinal mass is taken as m l = 1.58m 0 , where m 0 is the free electron mass. It is assumed to be independent of temperature. At the Γ-minimum of the conduction band the dispersion is assumed to be isotropic, so there is no distinction between directions, and the effective mass is given by m where E 0 is the direct band gap and Δ 0 the valence band spin-orbit splitting at the Γ-point. The quantity P is the momentum matrix element at the Γ-point. Using a 30-band k•p code, For TAT calculations we need dispersion masses along the [001] direction. These are given by for heavy-holes and by m 0 m c,lh = -A -B for light holes. This gives at 20 °C m c,hh = 0.403m 0 and m c,lh = 0.0829m 0 . Our semiconductor equations, however, are based on a two-band model that does not distinguish between light-and heavy holes, so we compute the hole enhancement function as a weighted average of the heavyand light-hole enhancement functions: Here we have chosen weights approximately proportional to the corresponding densities of state. Given the dominance of heavy holes in this respect, the error incurred by making this ad hoc average assumption cannot be very large. Ge films grown on Si or other substrates are usually tetragonally distorted due to the lattice mismatch between film and substrate. This mismatch is mostly relaxed in goodquality Ge-on-Si, but the residual levels of strain can still have a non-negligible effect on the I-V characteristics and their temperature dependence, since they affect the band gaps. We correct for the strain dependence of the band gaps using the expressions in Ref. 60. We use the same values of the deformation potentials given in this reference except that we take -b 1 =2.88 eV and b 2 =0 eV, consistent with the more recent experimental results of Liu and coworkers. The strain determined experimentally is only valid at the temperature it was measured. For simulations of the temperature dependence of the I-V curves, we need to consider the possibility of additional strain due the thermal expansivity mismatch between Ge and the substrate or buffer layer used. For Ge-on-Si this additional strain can be computed based on Eqs. ( Bimolecular recombination plays a very limited role in all diodes examined here, but we included it for completeness. We computed the coefficient B bim using the theory for direct and indirect absorption discussed in Ref. 19. The results for Ge at 20 °C are B bim,dir n i 2 ⁄ = 8.89×10 12 cm -3 s -1 for the direct gap and B bim,ind n i 2 ⁄ = 1.23×10 12 cm -3 s -1 for the fundamental indirect gap. Accurate values of the intrinsic carrier concentration n i and associated Fermi levels are important for matching theoretical and experimental I-V curves and modeling their temperature dependence. As noted in Ref. 62, there are nonneglible deviations between experimental and theoretical values of n i if one uses elementary textbook expressions based on the effective masses introduced above. This is due to significant non-parabolicity effects in Ge. Thus we compute the intrinsic carrier concentrations using the model described in detail in Ref. 19 by setting n = p and solving for the common Fermi level. For these calculations we use strain-corrected values for the band gaps included. The only additional deformation potentials needed beyond those described in Ref. 60 are the ones corresponding to the third conduction band minimum along the Δ-direction (which in Si is the absolute conduction band minimum). These deformation potentials are defined in the Appendix of Ref. 63, where recommended values for Si and Ge are given. For the electron mobilities, we use the expressions proposed in Ref. 46 which were fit to experimental data as described there. For the hole mobilities, we use 1 + ( p A × 10 17 cm -3 ) α 0 , (61) which we fit to the experimental data from Trumbore and Tartaglia 64 using μ p0 (T ) = 1.05 × 10 9 × T -2.33 cm 2 /Vs from Ref. 65. The fit parameters are A = 1.9349 and α 0 =0.4302. The parameters that appear in Eq. ( and with τ n0 = 5 μs, τ p0 = 100 μs, N 0 =8×10 15 cm -3 , and N the dopant density. The temperature dependence is from Schenk. 72 Yamaguchi and coworkers derived an expression for the recombination lifetime associated with dislocations that was useful to understand the behavior of GaAs solar cells on Si. v app,initial (z) 2 ]and u p,initial (z) = exp [ v app,initial (z) 2 ext = -1 V Balbi et al. (Ref. 36