We propose an effective model for the study of the interplay between correlation and topology by decorating the Kane-Mele model with a set of localized interacting orbitals hybridized to just one sublattice, breaking the inversion symmetry. We show that in the time-reversal symmetric case, the interplay between interactions and hybridization extends the stability of the topological phase and depending on the driving mechanism very different behaviors are observed after the topological phase transition (TPT). We discuss the fate of the TPT in presence of weak ferromagnetic order, by introducing a weak local magnetic field at the localized orbitals, which splits the two band inversion points. One of the platforms to apply this model to are ferrovalley compounds, which are characterized by two independent band inversion points. Understanding this family of materials is crucial for the development of the valleytronics. An alternative to spintronics, which uses valley polarization as opposed to spin degrees of freedom as the building block, promises great opportunities for the development of information storage. In the last two decades, the topological phase transitions (TPT) have attracted considerable attention A compound with a single band inversion usually becomes more trivial as a function of the Coulomb repulsion since the Coulomb repulsion promotes the opening of a trivial band gap. This was shown in model studies using both mean-field Additional complexity in the topological phase diagram of a system can arise if it has two band inversions at inequivalent k-points. In the case of two band inversion at different k-points with different gap closures as a function of the Coulomb repulsion a two-stage correlationdriven topological transition was reported One of the possible platforms to validate these results is provided by the family of two-dimensional (2D) materials called ferrovalley compounds In this work, we propose and study an effective model describing a hexagonal lattice, in which spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and inversion symmetry breaking through hybridization with strongly correlated orbitals coexist. By construction, it could play the role of a minimal model applicable to the compounds, which can host ferrovalley physics. There the interplay between these two factors is believed to be responsible for a wide range of phenomena such as the Quantum Anomalous Hall (QAH) phase. The hexagonal lattice with SOC is modeled using the Kane-Mele model (KMM) and the inversion symmetrybreaking hybridization is modeled through coupling be-tween one of the sublattices of the KMM and localized correlated orbitals. In order to extend our studies to a ferrovalley case, in the second part of this paper we will introduce a local magnetic field acting only on the localized orbitals. This model differs from the standard model of topological Kondo insulators The model Hamiltonian discussed in this work written in the second quantization form consists of three terms: where c i,σ , d j,σ ′ are the fermionic annihilation operators of (itinerant) electrons in the orbitals forming the lattice and localized orbitals, respectively, at sites i and j and with spin projection σ and σ ′ . The H latt describes the standard Kane-Mele model hence the Pauli matrix z (s z σ,σ ′ ) in the last term of H latt . The parameter ν i,j = ±1 in this term distinguishes between a clockwise and anti-clockwise movement of particles within each sublattice. Such hopping was shown to describe a spin-orbit coupling To solve the interacting Hamiltonian 1 we will use the Cluster Perturbation Theory method. This method, introduced by Senechal et al. The solution of the isolated cluster is usually obtained either analytically for simple subsystems or through the exact diagonalization method in the case of more complex clusters. The results presented in this work were obtained using the latter approach, with the isolated cluster being the unit cell of the lattice in Eq. (1). It consists of three sites: two representing the non-equivalent sublattices of the KMM and the third site representing the localized orbitals, shown as blue, red and green circles in Fig. The information about the topological state of the system will be read out from the generalized spin-Chern number (C s ) defined as a difference of generalized Chern numbers It inherits the spin S z conservation symmetry after the full many-body Hamiltonian so it can be written as Now the generalized spin-Chern number C s can be defined as It can be obtained by, e.g., Kubo formula: with Here and n F is the number of occupied bands. This is a non-zero quantized quantity in the topological phase of this model due to S z conservation We will consider only clusters that are geometrically the same size as the unit cell of the underlying KMM. Because the additional (localized) orbital does not have inter-cluster coupling, the effective Hamiltonian will inherit the same lattice symmetries as the KMM except for the inversion symmetry. We will start with the analysis of the Hamiltonian 1 in the absence of magnetic field M (M =0) i.e. the timereversal symmetric case. In the non-interacting limit, when U = 0, the presence of localized orbitals can drive a topological phase transition through the interplay of two factors: (i) the hybridization strength J and (ii) the position of the localized orbital level ε d . The latter sets the initial position of the flat band, of localized orbitals, relative to the dispersive bands formed by the itinerant electrons. The former mixes the two types of orbitals giving rise to k-dependence in the otherwise flat band at ε d . The three orbital unit cell of the model means, that the insulating phase can only be obtained for an even number of electrons. We will focus mainly on the From the point of view of the TPT the K/K ′ points in the Brillouin zone (BZ), where the gap inversion in the KMM takes place, are crucial. The non-interacting Hamiltonian in the orbital basis for one of the spin channels is given by: Depending on which k = K, K ′ point we look at the function . At these two points the inversion symmetry-breaking hybridization J introduces mixing between only two bands, while the third is effectively decoupled. As a result, the two hybridized bands repel each other, while the third band remains unchanged. Upon increasing J one of the hybridized bands is eventually pushed across the gap to the unaltered band causing the change in the sign of the band gap and thus a TPT. The role of ε d in this scenario is to set the initial energy spacing between the in-gap (localized) band and the conduction band. Hybridization alone is sufficient to drive the TPT, while ε d is not. Worth stressing is, that in case the lattice electrons had an inverted gap at J = 0, switching on the hybridization will bend the flat band at K and K ′ points in opposite directions. As a consequence of the hybridization breaking the sub-lattice symmetry of a lattice with band inversion. On the other hand, if the lattice electrons were initially in a trivial state, i.e. due to additional sub-lattice splitting mass term, the band bending will induce curvature with the same sign at either of the two k-points. Thus, from the curvature of the initially localized band alone, one can deduce the topology of the underlying lattice. In addition, a hybridization that induces curvature with a different sign at K and K ′ points in the flat band has a greater effect on its overall bandwidth, further differentiating these two cases. To illustrate and quantify the interplay between J and ε d in the non-interacting model we constructed the topological phase diagram, shown in Fig. Armed with a better understanding of the noninteracting limit we will now proceed to U ̸ = 0 cases, fixing the localized orbital energy level at ε d = -U/2. This choice of ε d fixes the mid-point between the two levels of the localized orbitals to the center of the bare KMM. The resulting regions of stability of the topologically non-trivial phases for various t ′ are indicated in Fig. 3 filling the spectrum of the system consist of a single band originating from the localized orbitals sandwiched between the bands of the lattice electrons. The disconnected localized orbitals contribute only one band due to the particular filling of the system, which makes the localized orbitals fully occupied. Through the analogy with a Hubbard atom, double occupancy results in a spectrum with a single level shifted from its bare value by U . The smallness of the gap (≈ t ′ ) makes a topologically nontrivial phase unstable already at relatively small values J, due to the limited energy window for the band bending. Weak hybridization does not allow for correlation effects to spill into the lattice and thus the system can still be effectively separated into an itinerant (lattice) and localized electrons. At larger t ′ the wider KMM gap allows for stronger hybridization J, which leads to the discrepancies between the dashed and solid lines in the intermediate region (U ̸ = 0 and J ̸ = 0). In the limiting two cases of J = 0 or U = 0 the two lines have to match. At U = 0 the two models are simply equivalent. At J = 0 the (trivial) gap is closed when the upper Hubbard band crosses the KMM conduction band. Until then it remains below the Fermi level and the mapping to the effective model with a single flat band at U/2 is exact. But lack of hybridization makes this case uninteresting due to the lack of the TPT. Between the limiting cases (intermediate J), an increased stability of the topologically non-trivial phase is observed in the fully interacting model, when compared to the effective non-interacting model i.e. the shaded region extends beyond the dashed lines with the same color. For t ′ < 0.15 the shape of the stability region changes only quantitatively with t ′ , keeping the same monotonic decrease with J. When t ′ > 0.1 a qualitative change starts to appear. The topological phase first starts to become robust against larger U as J increases. Then the stability region develops a maximum at intermediate J values, before dropping to the U = 0 limit. As t ′ grows this maximum grows (moves to larger U ) and shifts to larger J, indicating that stronger hybridization allows for screening of stronger interactions. But the maximal allowed J value for the non-trivial phase is bounded by the U = 0 limit, which is set by the J = 0 lattice electrons gap width. Hence the observed behavior that the larger the t ′ the bigger the area between the solid and the corresponding dashed lines becomes. To illustrate this point further, in the two bottom panels of Figs. Comparison between the two spectra around the K ′ point, at first glance, would also suggest an effective increase of J, since the gap at this point in the BZ of H non is smaller than of the -G -1 (0, ⃗ k). However, the increase in J around K ′ point is consistent with the reduced effect of U . The gap between the two hybridized levels (∆ non,σ ( ⃗ k)) of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Since α σ=↑ (k = K ′ ) = -3 √ 3t ′ and ε d = U/2 the second term in the square root increases as U decreases. As a result the fully interacting model, with screened interactions has a larger gap in the spin-up channel at K ′ point. Contrasting the U values displayed in the two rightmost columns in the two bottom panels, which shows the gap closing of H non and -G -1 (0, ⃗ k), confirms that for larger t ′ this effect is even stronger extending the stability of the topological phase from U = 0.9 at t ′ = 0.1 to U = 2.9 at t ′ = 0.18. The robustness of the conduction band due to the hybridization effect is not synonymous with the rise of the Kondo physics In Fig. After the introduction of a non-zero J the spectrum of G(ω, ⃗ k) becomes more complex with features that can be divided into two sets. The first one consists of bands with orders of magnitude larger spectral weights, we will refer to them as main bands. These are the states directly connected to the eigenstates of the effective Hamiltonian from the Eq. ( The evolution with J of the low energy part of the main bands reproduces the analysis made previously for the eigenstates of the H ef f ( ⃗ k). Upon increasing J, from zero, the initially flat conduction band becomes dispersive, due to mixing between mobile non-interacting lattice electrons and localized interacting electrons. Its curvature increases with J and has the opposite sign at the K and K ′ points, as a consequence of the presence of an inverted gap in the underlying KMM. Hence in Fig. The non-zero interaction strength plays also an important role in the shape of the stability region of a topological phase. At J = 0 it controls how far away from the center of the inverted gap of the lattice the localized orbital level is occurring. The lack of particle-hole symmetry in the topological phase has an interesting consequence. The off-center (within the KMM gap) placement of the interacting orbitals means, that as the hybridization strength increases and the band bending takes place the gap at K/K ′ points is closed for different J values. For the set of parameters presented in Fig. We turn now to the analysis of correlation-driven behaviors. Figure The comparison between the three spectral functions displayed in Fig. The comparison between the spectra in two top panels of Fig. On top of the changes around the Fermi level flat bands form at higher energies, as in the previously discussed case. These secondary bands are also clustering around multiples of ∆, reflecting their inter-cluster dynamics origin. The interaction strength, surpassing the hybridization, enhances their anti-crossing with the dispersive main bands and reveals the internal structure of the high-energy flat bands. The internal structure of the flat bands is an aftermath of the charge fluctuations at the interacting orbitals caused by J, doping it away from double occupancy, combined with their two-level spectra due to a charge gap. The spectral weight of each level is connected to the density of holes and electrons in the interacting orbitals, thus the internal structure reveals itself in the hole part of the spectrum. These effects were probably also present in the U = 0.5 case, shown in Fig. A TPT in an opposite direction, from a band insulator to a topological insulator, can be also observed in systems upon adding a sufficiently strong Semenoff-type sub-lattice splitting mass term Lastly, we will analyze the impact of the local magnetic field acting on the electrons in the localized orbitals in the scenarios described above. This orbital selective field is introduced to mimic a possible ferromagnetic instability in the system. It can be either an intrinsic instability due to the system's dynamics, as reported for a similar model of decorated graphene In this section we will focus on the U -driven transition since this case could show a similar transition to the reported in Ref. 31, from trivial to non-trivial and back to the trivial phase upon increasing interaction strength. In addition, the stability of the non-trivial phase around the transition point for the paramagnetic case relied on the emergence of the local Kondo physics. The introduction of a spin-symmetry breaking term, in theory, should strongly influence the stability of the low-energy physics Figure Blue color indicates the spin-down majority and red color the spin-up majority excitations. The lack of timereversal symmetry is signaled by the different gap widths around the Fermi level at K and K ′ points for the two spin species. Compared with the results for similar U values without a magnetic field before the TPT, top panels of Fig. To test this we analyze the influence of varying the chemical potential on the spectral function. If the Kondo physics would still be at play, the low energy excitations should adjust to the position of the chemical potential. In case the flat bands are simply from hybridizing the local moments with the lattice, changing μ should eventually drive spin-polarization and the vanishing of some flat bands in the spectrum. As shown in Fig. The top panel shows the spectrum of the system in case of the chemical potential pinned to the band crossing point at K ′ point, as a reference point. At low energies, the band structure in both spin channels behaves differently due to the trivialization of the gap in the spin-up channel (red color). However, the high-energy features show the same qualitative behavior, irrespective of spin direction, with only slight splitting due to the presence of M . Introducing a relatively small shift in the chemical potential, in any direction, leads to the breakdown of this resemblance at high energies due to changes in the orbital spin composition of the system. As shown in the two bottom panels of Fig. At μ = 0.7 the relative depletion of the spin-down electrons, compared to μ = 0.8, leads to disappearance of the the low energy excitations below the Fermi level in that spin channel. The system enters spin-polarized interacting orbital limit as the spectra in the spin-up and spindown channels become connected by a reflection sym- metry with regard to the gap center of the bare KMM. Above the KMM gap in the spin-down spectrum, only one continuous band survives, which is the upper bands of the KMM. Below the gap avoided crossings are clearly visible, which form due to the hybridization of the local moment level with the lattice. For μ = 1.1 the chemical potential is moved into the upper band of the underlying KMM introducing more lattice electrons into the system, thus the two spin-resolved spectra become very distinct. In the spin-up channel it has only three bands while in the spin-down channel, the band structure is more complex. The reduction of the number of bands to only three and the absence of any flat bands means that the local charge fluctuations are frozen and the system can be directly mapped onto an effective non-interacting model with the localized orbitals level at ε d = U/2. The spin-down sector, on the other hand, has multiple avoided crossings in the occupied part of the spectrum but the electron part of the spectrum remains similar to spin-polarized case. This indicates that the inter-cluster dynamics is not yet trivialized. V. CONCLUSIONS We have studied the interplay between topology and electronic correlations in the decorated Kane-Mele model where we have two in-equivalent band inversions at K and K ′ points. We demonstrate that in the presence of the time-reversal symmetry the interplay between the possible band inversion at two k-points, the electronic correlation and the sub-lattice symmetry breaking hybridization extends the topological region of the phase diagram beyond U values predicted by a simple meanfield treatment. Despite the transition being at 2/3 (1/3) filling the Kondo physics arises in the system only at large U , making the topologically trivial phase a narrow gap insulator. By introducing an artificial magnetic field, mimicking ferromagnetic ordering at localized orbitals, we showed that a TPT at different U values for each spin channel is not allowed in this model due reminiscence of timereversal symmetry around K and K ′ points forcing the position of one of the original KMM bands for the two spin species to be at the same energy. In addition, such a magnetic field would immediately destroy the Kondo physics making the system susceptible to small variation in chemical potential. Our results reveal that a nontrivial topology can survive in a system after decorating with correlated orbitals. Ferromagnetic ordering of these orbitals could block the opening of a trivial gap. We expect that the inclusion of hybridization to the other sublattice could allow for observation of separate TPT at the two non-equivalent band inversion points. Exploration of this topic combined with similar studies using methods that more accurately account for embedding local charge fluctuation in the lattice "SHINY" and IsB27 "SLAM" grants for the availability of high-performance computing resources and support. We acknowledge the access to the computing facilities of the Poznan Supercomputing and Networking Center Grant No. 609.