Strong light-matter coupling has shown great potential for modifying the electro-optical properties of semiconducting materials in recent years. In the strong coupling regime, excitons and cavity photons form new states named excitonpolaritons, with their properties a hybrid of each constituent. Herein, we report strong coupling observed in solution-processed donor:acceptor bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells (OSCs) evidenced by the observed Rabi splitting of ~300 meV and the effects of strong coupling on OSC operations. Combining the transient photovoltage decay measurement and nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy, our results reveal that the effective charge carrier lifetimes are longer in cavity devices, attributed to the reduced bimolecular recombination. It is also found that access to CT state(s) of higher energy is enabled in cavity devices. This study demonstrates that strong coupling can effectively modify the device-and photo-physics in OSCs and opens a new pathway for engineering more efficient OSCs. Strong light-matter coupling in organic microcavities is capable of modifying the electro-optical properties of molecular systems without changing their chemical structures. In this study, the evidence of strong coupling in the BHJ cavity samples and devices is presented, with distinct polariton peaks and dispersion behaviour observed in the angleresolved reflectance measurements. The corresponding polariton peaks also appear in the external quantum efficiency spectra and the electroluminescence spectra of devices, suggesting that polariton states exist and, most importantly, are involved in the photocurrent generation in devices. The energy of the CT state(s) was found to be higher in cavity devices, as measured by electroluminescence and external quantum efficiency of devices. In addition, the charge carrier lifetimes of the reference and cavity devices were obtained from transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements and compared at the same charge carrier densities, with the charge carrier densities estimated using the transient photocurrent (TPC) measurement. Importantly, we found that the incorporation of polaritons leads to a longer effective charge carrier lifetime in cavity devices, which we attributed to reduced bimolecular recombination due to a smaller Langevin reduction coefficient, with the trend in TPV reproduced by transient drift-diffusion simulations. We verified that such longer charge carrier lifetimes are not due to resistance or capacitance effect in the electrical circuit, as the nanosecond transient absorption (TA) measurement on cavity film shows the same trend. This work demonstrates that strong coupling can be used to effectively manipulate the photo-and device physics of OSCs. Although it does not lead to an apparent efficiency increase in this case, because more than half of the light was blocked by the additional silver layer of 25 nm introduced to form the Fabry-Perot cavity, it is not an intrinsic limitation of the strong coupling phenomenon. Novel open cavity designs may be developed and used in the future to minimize this loss and improve overall device efficiencies. The donor and acceptor materials studied are PTB7-Th and PC71BM, respectively, with their chemical structures and absorption spectra of spin-coated films presented in Fig. The vibronic peaks of PTB7-Th remain the same in the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend film of 1:1.5 ratio, which indicates the aggregation of PTB7-Th in the blend is similar to the neat film. It has also been reported that diffraction measurements show the molecular packing of PTB7-Th remains almost unchanged in the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend prepared with similar procedures, with PTB7-Th showing a face-on preferential orientation in the blend and neat films. The electroluminescence (EL) spectrum of the cavity device also differs significantly from that of the reference device, as shown in Fig. In addition, effective charge carrier lifetimes are found to be longer in cavity .S3, and the physical meaning of this observation will be discussed later. The TA spectra of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM cavity sample differ from the reference sample. Most notably, the PTB7-Th GSB is obscured by a derivative-like feature around 750-800 nm. Similar features have been observed in numerous cavity transient absorption studies, and in part correspond to a phenomenon referred to as polariton contraction. Given that there is clearly excitation fluence dependence in both reference and cavity samples, it is of interest to determine whether the lifetimes of the CT states/charges are changed in the cavity. Fig. There is a level of uncertainty in the transmittance of the Ag layer, so the cavity was measured at the upper and lower bounds of the incident excitation fluence corresponding to an internal fluence of 460 μJ cm -2 , giving the shaded blue areas in Fig. Since this would only increase the cavity decay further, we can conclude that at the same or even higher fluences, the cavity decay is slower. This result is consistent with the longer lifetimes observed for cavities in TPV measurements, although the absolute magnitudes of the fluence and lifetimes are different. The cavity sample used in TA has a different configuration, and TA is measured under different conditions (i.e. in the absence of an external field and charge transporting layers), so we do not expect the magnitudes of these values to be comparable. The physical implications of our results are discussed below. Since the dominant recombination in the studied system (namely PTB7-Th:PC71BM) is reduced Langevin recombination, the decay of charges is limited by two processes: (i) the encounter of charges/formation of the CT; (ii) the subsequent relaxation of the CT state. Our results show that strong coupling can lead to a lower Langevin reduction coefficient in PTB7-Th:PC71BM cavity OSC devices, which is a potential pathway for improving photovoltaic performance. To evaluate the benefits of a smaller Langevin reduction coefficient, we performed steady-state drift-diffusion simulations and found that the improvement can indeed be significant, especially for the devices that have lower mobilities. As shown in Fig. To conclude, strong light-matter coupling is demonstrated in BHJ donor:acceptor OSCs and is shown to modify the photo-and device physics. In particular, we found that the overall photocurrent generation is enhanced in these devices if the optical loss introduced by the thin silver layer is accounted for. More importantly, we show that the CT state shows a blue shift of around 70 meV, along with a longer charge carrier lifetime in the cavity device. The longer charge carrier lifetime is attributed to a smaller Langevin reduction coefficient, which has the potential to lead to significant efficiency improvement for OSCs of low mobilities according to drift-diffusion simulations. From the perspective of engineering, replacing the planar metal mirror with other open cavity designs could reduce the optical loss and lead to a pathway toward an apparent power conversion efficiency increase in cavity solar cell devices. 