We study nonlinear response of conventional superconducting alloys with weak magnetic impurities to an external alternating electromagnetic field. In particular, we calculate a correction to superconducting order parameter |δ∆ Ω | exp(iΩt) up to the second order in external vector potential and show that frequency dependence of the order parameter amplitude has characteristic resonant shape with a maximum at frequency which is smaller than twice the magnitude of the pairing amplitude in equilibrium, Ω < 2∆, and at the same time exceeds the single-particle threshold energy. Our results suggest that in the presence of magnetic impurities the dynamics of the pairing amplitude in the collisionless regime will remain robust with respect to dissipative processes. We also evaluate the third harmonic contribution to the current as a function of the probe frequency and for various concentrations of magnetic impurities. Recent advances in state-of-the-art optical instruments and techniques have lead to an increased interest in the problems which focus on theoretical and experimental studies of various nonlinear responses in conventional and unconventional superconductors The excitation and propagation of the amplitude mode in superconductors are completely decoupled from the charge density fluctuations which are related to the phase fluctuations of the pairing field where a is some known parameter. The physical origin of this behavior has been understood using the exact solution to the problem of the BCS dynamics in a fermionic condensates It is important for our subsequent discussion to keep in mind that in the linear approximation, i.e. when the initial perturbation is weak (e.g. quenches of the pairing strength g are of small magnitude, |δg| ≪ g), ∆ ∞ is equal to the value of the pairing amplitude in equilibrium, ∆ And then there is a question whether the effects of potential disorder will affect the results we just discussed above for clean superconductors will be affected in any way. For zero-dimensional systems it is obvious that potential disorder will produce the renormalization of the single-particle energy levels and therefore will have no effect on the dynamics of the amplitude mode. In three dimensional systems the situation is more subtle. For a case of weak disorder Anderson theorem Although the effects of potential disorder on an amplitude mode have already been studied, a question of what happens to the dynamics of the amplitude mode in superconducting alloys with magnetic impurities has not been addressed until very recently The experimental progress in this direction is perhaps inhibited by the fact that it may be challenging to introduce the magnetic impurities in a control way such that their interplay with the dynamics of an amplitude mode can be probed already in the collisionless regime. One of the main results of The frequency of the Higgs mode oscillations is given by Eq. ( Naturally, there are still questions which remain unanswered, such as the one about the fate of this non-dissipative amplitude mode when ζ ∼ 1, especially in the regime of gapless superconductivity In Ref. In what follows we consider a disordered BCS superconductor in the diffusive limit ∆ ≪ 1/τ , where τ is the relaxation time due to scattering on potential impurities. It is clear that in the presence of the magnetic impurities this condition can be always fulfilled. At the same time we will assume that τ ≪ τ s . The central quantity for our analysis is the Green's function defined on the Keldysh contour: Each of component of the matrix function Ǧ is a 4×4 matrix and Nambu and spin subspaces Here D = v 2 F τ /3 is the diffusion coefficient, Q(t) = (γ 0 ⊗ Ξ3 )A(t), A(t) is proportional to an external vector potential, Ξ3 = γ0 ⊗ Ξ3 is diagonal in Keldysh subspace, γ0 is the unit Pauli matrix in the Keldysh space, Ξ3 = ρ3 ⊗ σ0 , Ǎ • B (t, t ′ ) = dt 1 Ǎ(t, t 1 ) B(t 1 , t ′ ), ρn and σm (n, m = 1, 2, 3) are the Pauli matrices acting in Nambu and spin subspaces correspondingly. Function Ǧ must satisfy the normalization condition and the third term in this equation should be understood as ∆, Ǧ = ∆(r, t) Ǧ(r; t, t ′ ) -Ǧ(r; t, t ′ ) ∆(r, t ′ ), where matrix ∆(r, t) = ∆(r, t) The pairing field must be computed self-consistently from Here λ is the dimensionless pairing strength, γ1 is the first Pauli matrix acting in the Keldysh subspace. We would like to emphasize, that equation (4) has been found by performing an exact averaging over potential and magnetic disorder configurations. The only approximation that we have made is similar to one made in Refs. The expressions for the components of Ǧ(t, t ′ ) in the ground state are found by solving the Usadel equation ( Performing the Fourier transform for the first term we find As it is well known, in equilibrium the Keldysh sub-block ĜK can always be chosen as: From the normalization condition (5) we find ĜR Below we will determine each of these Green's functions separately. Let us discuss an equation for the retarded matrix function ĜR ε first. From the form of the Usadel equation, we look for the solution for this function in the form: Here we introduced matrix Ξ2 = iρ 2 ⊗ σ0 . Inserting this expression into equation ( This equation is supplemented by the normalization condition We can use the following standard parametrization for the functions g R ε = cosh θ ε and we employ the normalization condition to write down the formal solution of ( Note that in the limit ε ≫ ∆, it is implied that u Equations ( Here u ε = u * ε implies a complex conjugation. Equation ( where ν 0 is the electron DOS per spin projection at the Fermi level in the normal state. We present the plots of ν(ε) for various values of ζ = 1/τ s ∆ in Fig. Having computed the Green's function in the ground state, we now look for the correction to the Green's function due to an application of external field. We represent the external vector potential as a superposition of two monochromatic waves Our calculation will follow closely the avenue of Refs. and the correction to the order parameter ∆(t) = ∆ + ∆1 (t). The value of the unperturbed order parameter ∆ must be computed self-consistently using equation In the ground state we assumed that the order parameter is real. Under the action of the external field it may acquire an imaginary part. This is why the most general form of three Keldysh blocks in matrix Green's function ǧ1 must be of the form: Note that due to the matrix form of ( We keep the terms linear in ǧ1 and after performing the Fourier transformation we obtain where Θa = (γ 0 ⊗ ρ3 ⊗ σa ), Ω ν,μ = ±Ω 1,2 and Ω ν+μ = Ω ν + Ω μ . Some re-arrangements of the few terms in this equation are in order. Let first look at the third and fourth terms in the left hand side of this equation: they have the same structure as the one in the right hand side. As it follows from the expression on the right hand side, we note that electromagnetic field will have an effect only when In other words, ∆1 (ε ′ -ε) is nonzero only when The remaining terms in the left hand side can be simplified. Indeed, when τ s → ∞, it is easy to see that ε Ξ3 + ∆ ∝ Ǧε τs→∞ . Taking these expressions into account, we can now re-write Here we introduced the following matrix functions: As it is easy to check, in the limit τ s → ∞ this equation coincides with the corresponding equations in For the retarded and advanced blocks on the left hand side of (26 Here we introduced functions for they allow us to simplify the resulting expressions by employing the normalization condition. It then follows ĝR(A) We would like to note that generally equation ( Next we need to compute a correction to the remaining (Keldysh) block. Correction to the Keldysh block of the Green's function is important, since it determines the correction to the order parameter (6): Function ĝK 1 (ε, ε ′ ) is itself proportional to ∆ 1 , which will ultimately allow us to compute the pairing susceptibility. The frequency at which the susceptibility diverges determines the frequency of the amplitude (Higgs) mode ω Higgs . Therefore, we will be able to directly verify whether the ω Higgs and 2∆ are equal to each other or not. For the Keldysh component ĝK 1 (ε, ε ′ ) from ( where Ňε = ε Ξ3 + ∆ and Λε = Γε -Ňε . The last two terms in the right hand side of this equation appear explicitly due to scattering on paramagnetic impurities, since ΛK ε | τs→∞ = 0. In order to solve We look for the solution of equation The first dubbed as a regular term since it does not affect the single-particle distribution function in where we are using the shorthand notation It is straightforward to verify that ĝK 1,reg (ε, ε ′ ) satisfies the normalization condition We now insert The expressions for the matrix functions ρQ (ε, ε ′ ) and ρ∆ (ε, ε ′ ) are: Having computed ĝK 1 (ε, ε ′ ) we can directly insert it into the self-consistently equation and compute the resonant frequency of the amplitude Higgs mode. We will analyze the self-consistency equation Without loss of generality, here we consider the case when This case is analogous to a setup in which a superconductor is prepared in a state which carries nonzero supercurrent. Thus, we will only need to focus on computing the Fourier component ∆ 1 (Ω) = |δ∆ Ω |e iΩt . In the limit τ s → ∞ amplitude |δ∆ Ω | has a maximum at Ω res = 2∆, which corresponds to the excitation of the amplitude Higgs mode Using the expressions for the regular and anomalous contributions to the Keldysh component of the Green's functions from the previous section, the self-consistency equation for the Fourier component ∆ 1 (Ω) can be cast into the following simple form Here δW Q = DA 0 A Ω . Functions A reg (Ω) and A an (Ω) are defined according to The term ∝ (f R ε -f A ε ) in the expression for A reg (Ω) replaces the contribution from 1/λ by virtue of the self-consistency condition in equilibrium. The expression for A an (Ω) involves a combination of retarded and advanced Green's functions and therefore have poles in both upper and lower half planes of complex variable ε. This is not so for A reg (Ω), in which all contributions containing retarded and advanced functions can be separated from each other. Therefore, in the expression for A reg (Ω) we can reduce the integration over ε to the summation over the fermionic Matsubara frequencies ω l = πT (2l +1) (l = 0, ±1, ...) by using the series representation tanh x = l 2x/[π 2 (l + 1/2) 2 + x 2 ]. Subsequent integration in the upper or lower complex half plane with respect to complex ε then yields The corresponding expressions for the Green's functions are listed in the Appendix B. Lastly, we also have found the following expressions for the functions B reg (Ω) and B an (Ω): As we have discussed above, in order to compute the frequency dependence of B reg (Ω) we convert the integral over ε into the summation over the fermionic Matsubara frequencies. In passing we note that expressions (43,45) match the corresponding formulas in Refs. This result qualitatively agrees with that of Ref. [56] in this case the dynamics of the amplitude mode becomes dissipationless, i.e. ∆ 1 (t) will periodically vary in time on a time scale t ≪ τ e-e . In order to show this explicitly within the confines of the present theoretical framework, we will have to determine the dynamics of the order parameter by solving the Usadel equation using ( In this Section we discuss the current induced by external electromagnetic radiation. Our main motivation is to get an insight into the origin of the shift in the resonance frequency from its value 2∆ in a disordered superconductor without magnetic impurities. We consider an time-dependent external electric field The first term here describes the 'pump field', E Ω , while the second one is the 'probe field', E ωp . The vector potential A(t) has the same form as Here we use the units ħ = e = c = 1. The expression for the electric current can be compactly written as: where Q(ω, ω ′ ) is the response kernel (we refer the reader to Appendix C for details): It is straightforward to verify that in the limit of very weak electromagnetic field we recover the familiar expression for the current We will be mainly interested in the calculation of the third harmonic. One would generally expect that the third harmonic component of the kernel must display a feature (e. g. cusp) at ω p = ∆ and we will interested whether this feature remain at ∆ or will shift below ∆ similar to the resonance frequency Ω res discussed above. The response kernel for the third harmonic must be of the order of O(A 2 ). It will be convenient to write it as a sum of three terms Here the first term is the anomalous one defined by ĝK 1,an and it describes the effects associated with the non-equilibrium effects on the distribution function: The remaining two terms can be classified as the regular terms since they involve the distribution functions in equilibrium: We would like to remind the reader that n E , Eq. ( We first proceed with the numerical calculation of the kernel Q 3 . In the expressions as functions of the probe frequency ω p at low temperatures T = 10 -5 ∆ and for Ω ∼ ∆. The dependence of the complex functions on the probe frequency in shown in Fig. Our main finding -the reduction of the resonance frequency Ω res below 2∆ -requires further discussion. At first glance it seems that the decrease in the resonance frequency, Figs. However, we have to also mention that the dependence of Ω res on ζ does not match the one of ω Higgs on ζ. The origin of this discrepancy is not clear to us at this point. In order to gain further insight one will have to compute the time dependence of the pairing amplitude ∆(t) after the electromagnetic pulse by solving directly the Usadel equation We have considered a problem of the nonlinear response of conventional (BCS) superconductors contaminated with weak magnetic impurities to external time-dependent electromagnetic field. Specifically, we have computed the resonant frequency of the amplitude mode and third harmonic contribution to electric current. Our main result is that the resonant frequency remains below the pair excitation threshold 2∆ with an increase in scattering due to magnetic disorder. We attribute this shift to the nonlinear suppression of the superfluid density. Taken together with the results of Ref. If we now look at the equation ( We have Here PR(A) (ε, ε ′ ) are used here to keep the expressions as compact as possible. Let us now consider the remaining two terms in (A1): and we took into account formula We now insert this expression into equation Interestingly, this equation has the same form as the one for the case of nonmagnetic disorder. Let us now simplify the expression in the right hand side of the equation (A5): In passing we note that this result matches the corresponding expressions in Refs. For the remaining contribution we find which is also in agreement with the results of Refs. and solve the resulting equation for ĝK 1,an (ε, ε ′ ) by employing the normalization condition. This yields (38) in the main text. Here we introduced the compact notation Ĝ(t, t ′ ) = Ξ3 Ĝ(t, t ′ ) Ξ3 , σ D = 2e 2 ν 0 D is the Drude conductivity and at the intermediate stages of the calculation we have used the normalization condition where the kernel Q(ω, ω ′ ) is determined from which coincides with Eq. ( which matches the corresponding expression in As it is stated in the main text, we will focus on computing the third harmonic contribution to the current. This means that in expression (C3) we need to single out the contributions which contain terms linear in ǧ1 (ε, ε ′ ): At this point it proves convenient to change the integration variable from E to ε = E + ω ′ in the first and the fourth terms under the integral, so that all functions ĝ1 have the same arguments: Using the ansatz 3 (ω, ω ′ ), Eq. ( (ω, ω ′ ), Eq. ( (ω, ω ′ ). Appendix D: Third harmonic contribution to the current In this Section we will provide the expressions for the third harmonic contribution of the response kernel Q 3 (2Ω, ω p ). We start with the anomalous contribution Q 3 , which is given by the sum of the following two functions: Note that the second contribution has a pre-factor ∆ 1 (2Ω)/δW Q ≫ 1, Fig. 3,∆ will significantly exceed Q (an) 3,Q in a range of frequencies when Ω ∼ ∆. The traces of the matrices entering into these expressions can be computed in a straightforward manner. To make the expressions which appear below as compact as possible, we will use the notations E ′ = E -ω p and E ′′ = E + 2Ω + ω p . Recall that Ξ2 Ξ2 = -1 and Ξ3 Ξ2 = Ξ1 . It then follows Similar although much lengthier expression is found for Q (an) 3,Q : Here we are using the shorthand notations 3,Q enter with the opposite signs. The regular contribution to the kernel is given by expressions Tr ĝR Using the definitions ( Tr ĝR 1 (E, E + 2Ω) ĜR (D5) Similar expression can be easily obtained for the second term in (D4) by replacing g R E-ωp with g R E+2Ω+ωp and f R E-ωp with f R E+2Ω+ωp . Since the expression (D4) contains the functions which are analytic in the upper half-plane of the complex variable E, we replace the integral over E with the summation over the fermionic Matsubara frequencies just like it has been done above. We repeated the same procedure for the term, which contains the advanced functions only. Finally, essentially the same type of trace as in (D5) need to be computed in order to evaluate Q (reg2,R) 3 (ω, ω ′ ). We will not list the resulting expression here. The dependence of these functions on ω p is presented in Fig. 