With recent advances in strain engineering and its widespread applications, it is becoming increasingly important to understand the effect of biaxial strain on the most common structural phase of perovskites -the orthorhombic P nma structure. In this work, by using a combination of group theory and first principles density functional theory, we study the effect of biaxial strain on (001) and ( Biaxial strain, applied on thin films by growing them on lattice mismatched substrates, is a commonly used strategy to modify properties of perovskites and related materials Most perovskite oxides have one more more structural distortions that make them deviate from the cubic highsymmetry reference structure. By far the most common distortion is the oxygen octahedral rotations that emerge due to the small size and hence under-bonding of the Asite cations in ABO 3 More than half of all oxide perovskites have the same oxygen octahedral rotation pattern, shown as a -a -c + in Glazer notation In this work, we use first principles density functional theory to study the structural evolution of three different P nma perovskites under biaxial strain. As three distinct examples, we consider CaTiO 3 This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we introduce the details of our computational methods. In Sec. III A, we discuss the common structural instabilities in the P nma structure. In Sec. III B and Sec. III C , we discuss the relative stability of different structures and the effect of biaxial strain on the rotation irreps under (001) and (111) strain, respectively. We compare the similarities and differences between the (001) and (111) strain in Sec. IV. We conclude with a summary in Sec. V. First-principles density functional theory calculations were performed with the revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation for solids (PBEsol) using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (vasp) In order to study the relaxed structures, Crystallographic Information Files (CIF) were generated for each structure using findsym Phonon calculations were performed using the direct method as implemented in the phonopy package DFT calculations were performed on a Γ centered Monkhorst-Pack grid In this section, we give an overview of important types of structural distortions present or can emerge in P nma perovskites. These structural distortions can be labelled with the irreducible representations (irreps) of the space group, which enables predicting the space groups of various lower symmetry phases, as well as the form of the Landau free energy expansions. The most common instabilities present in the cubic phase of perovskite oxides are the in-phase and out-of-phase octahedral rotations that transform as the M + 2 and R - 5 irreps, shown in Fig. The presence of a substrate also breaks the symmetries of the perovskite thin films. In this study, we do not consider interface effects which create a dipole field and directly break the inversion symmetry at the substrate- film interface. We also ignore any 'substrate imprinting' effects, which can lower the symmetry of a film further as a result of the structural details of the substrate In addition to the octahedral rotations, perovskites under strain often develop polar instabilities even if they are centrosymmetric (and hence nonpolar) when unstrained. Polarization transforms as the 3D Γ - 4 irrep of the cubic reference structure (Fig. Biaxial strain applied in the (001) plane by means of fixing the a and bcorrect pseudocubic lattice constants equal, and the angle between them to 90 • transforms as the Γ + 3 (a, 0) irrep, and reduces the cubic perovskite structure to the tetragonal structure with P 4/mmm symmetry. To explore the relative stability of the structures described in Table II under (001) strain, we plot the energy gain with respect to the P 4/mmm (strained-cubic) structure in Fig. Not surprisingly, all three compounds display multiple different structural phases as a function of strain. While the energy gain with respect to the P 4/mmm structure without any octahedral rotations is always of the order of multiple meV/f.u. (formula unit), there are regions where the two lowest lying states are very close in energy. It is therefore possible that the structural phase is very sensitively dependent on temperature or even quantum fluctuations at zero temperature. Since DFT cannot directly reproduce these fluctuations, we ignore this possibility, as well as a possible phase separation to accommodate strain better, and focus on the lowest energy phases in the remainder of this paper. As shown in Fig. Interestingly, the phase diagram of SrZrO 3 is quali-tatively identical to SrSnO 3 , despite the fact that Zr is a transition metal ion, and SrZrO 3 has a strong ferroelectric instability in its phonon spectrum in the cubic phase Our DFT-predicted strain phase diagram of (001)strained CaTiO 3 is rife with polar phases, as shown in Fig. A pattern that is common in these three P nma perovskites is that under tensile strain, they have the a -a -c + octahedral rotation pattern, and hence the P nma or its in-plane polar subgroup in the tensile region; whereas they have the a + b -c -rotation pattern and and either P 2 1 /m or its out-of-plane polar subgroup under compressive (001) strain. In Fig. In passing, we underline the importance of relaxing the monoclinic angle that the out-of-plane lattice vectors make with the in-plane ones in biaxial strain calculations. Especially for small strain values, this angle does not differ much from 90 • , and is often assumed to be constant for simplicity. However, especially in regions where multiple phases are close in energy, this angle can make a difference. In Fig. In this section, we consider (111) films. We impose the (111) strain in a way similar to the (001) strain by building a 2×2×2 supercell of the cubic perovskite structure, changing and fixing the lattice vectors' components on the (111) plane, and relaxing all the other degrees of freedom after applying various octahedral rotation to the BO 6 unit. The strain on the (111) plane corresponds to a shear and transforms as the Γ + 5 irrep, reducing the symmetry to rhombohedral R 3m. As a result, we use the R 3m structure as reference and obtain the energies of other structures, with octahedral rotations, with respect the reference R 3m structure of equal strain. Note that while a single lattice parameter (the length of the c-axis) is relaxed on a common (001) strain calculation without any structural distortions besides strain, the (111) strain calculation relax the length of the lattice vector along the of the rhombohedral angle or the lattice parameter in the rhombohedral structure. In other words, for a cubic perovskite without structural distortions, the (111) strain boundary conditions leave two degrees of freedom as free parameters, as opposed to a single free parameter under the (001) strain boundary conditions. This makes it easier for the compound to accommodate bond lengths without reducing symmetry. This point is illustrated in Fig. The phase diagram under (111) strain is shown in Fig. ture. Hence, the transition at ∼ 0% strain is not an isostructural transition, despite the name of the spacegroup remaining the same. We denote the two phases with spacegroup P 2 1 /c as Phase A in the compressive region and Phase B in the tensile region. In Fig. CaTiO 3 also has the same phase transition around 0% strain, and so we conclude that the presence of two different P nma-like P 2 1 /c phases is a general property of many P nma perovskites under (111) strain. Additionally, in-line with the stronger ferroelectric tendencies of CaTiO 3 discussed earlier, there is another, second-order allowed phase transition at ∼ +1% tensile strain from P 2 1 /c Phase B to the predominantly-in-plane polar P c phase. This phase is again distinct from the polar P c phase (not shown) obtained from the Phase A of P 2 1 /c even though its space group name is the same. There are distinct differences between the phase diagrams of P nma perovskites under (001) and (111) epitaxial strain. Firstly, there is a larger number of different phases present in the (001) case. This is in part because of the greater richness of the phase space in the (001) case as seen from Table Secondly, CaTiO 3 polarizes readily under (001) strain, in both the compressive and tensile region. Under (111), it only polarizes in the tensile region, and only at larger strain magnitude. A similar situation was observed from DFT in SrTiO 3 In this study, we applied first principles DFT to investigate the effect of biaxial strain on (001) and (111)oriented P nma perovskites, which constitute more than half of all perovskite oxides We performed an analysis of all distortions with different irreps present in these structures as a function of strain and found that the magnitude of irreps remain relatively stable under (111) strain. For (001) strain, many octahedral rotational modes' amplitudes reduce with increasing tensile strain, and increase with a relatively high rate under compressive strain. In summary, we compared the effects of two distinct strain directions in biaxial perovskites, and showed that the (111) strain not only realize symmetries that are not present in (001) strained films, but also the trends of octahedral rotation angles and ferroelectric polarization is very different under (111) strain than it is under (001) strain. Hence, different strain directions is a way to manipulate the crystal structure and obtain new phases of complex oxides. While all compounds we considered are band insulators, these new structural phases' effects on the electronic structure will likely provide many open questions of increasing importance due to the increas-ing availability of (111) films grown by molecular beam epitaxy or pulsed laser deposition.