We demonstrate the coherent optical control of magnetization precession in a thin Ni film by a second excitation pulse which amplifies or attenuates the precession induced by a first pulse depending on the fluences of the pump-pulses and the pump-pump delay. This control goes beyond the conventional strategy, where the same mechanism drives the precession in or out-of phase. We balance the magneto-acoustic mechanism driven by quasi-static strain and the shape-anisotropy change triggered by laser-induced demagnetization. These mechanisms tilt the transient effective magnetic field in opposite directions in case of negative magneto-elastic coupling (b 1 < 0). While the strain response is linear in the fluence, demagnetization is nonlinear near the Curie temperature, enabling fluence-based control scenarios. Since the discovery of ultrafast demagnetization in thin Ni films 1 , the field of ultrafast magnetization dynamics has evolved from observing ultrafast magnetization dynamics The fastest ways to coherently change the magnetization state is the excitation of precessional motion reported for a wide range of ferro-or ferri-magnetic metals In classical coherent control experiments In this letter, we combine coherent control of the magnetization precession by double-pulse excitation with a) Electronic mail: bargheer@uni-potsdam.de tuning of the dominant driving mechanism via the fluences of both pump-pulses and the pump-pump delay. The counterbalance of laser-induced demagnetization and the negative magneto-elastic coupling (b 1 < 0) in our 20 nm-thin Ni film strongly depends on the laserinduced temperature rise and the initial sample temperature since the demagnetization increases non-linearly near T C . We demonstrate a transition of the dominant driving mechanism of the second excitation from magneto-elastic coupling to demagnetization in three scenarios: The temperature before the second pulse is tuned via the fluence of the first excitation or the pump-pump delay or, alternatively, the fluence of the second pulse determines the temperature rise. The change of the dominant driving mechanism switches the effect of the second pulse from amplifying to attenuating the precession induced by the first pulse, which opens rich opportunities to control the precession by double-pulse excitation. In our all-optical transient polar magneto-optical Kerr experiments (trMOKE) sketched in Fig. Figure This non-linear fluence dependence originates from the opposite effect that laser-induced expansion and demagnetization have on the orientation of the effective magnetic field in materials with negative magneto-elastic coupling (1) The latter two contributions lead to effective fields that are proportional to the out-of-plane component of the magnetization vector m z . According to Eq. ( The grey solid line in Fig. Figure The left column of Fig. This selection of the dominant driving mechanism via the temperature before the second excitation T init,2 can also be realized by the pump-pump delay ∆t (see Fig. dominant driving mechanism by the fluence of the second pulse for a fixed F 1 = 1.1 mJ cm -2 . The amplitude A driven by the second pulse increases with increasing F 2 up to its maximum value for F 2 = 2.2 mJ cm -2 . A further increase of F 2 reduces the amplitude again and even inverts the sign. For the highest fluence, F 2 = 4.7 mJ cm -2 , the demagnetization-dominated mechanism for the second pulse fully switches off the precession induced by the first pulse, which is best seen in Fig. This dependence of the precession amplitude A on the fluence F 2 drastically depends on the fluence of the first pulse F 1 . Figure In summary, we demonstrated that a transition of the dominant driving mechanism of a second excitation can be achieved by the fluences of both pulses and the pumppump delay in a double-pulse excitation scheme. Our model and experiment confirm that the demagnetization and quasi-static expansion counteract each other as precession drivers if the magneto-elastic coupling is negative (b 1 < 0). The change of the dominant driving mechanism from magneto-elastic coupling to demagnetization occurs at a fluence-dependent compensation temperature T comp below the Curie temperature T C . At this point the effect of the second pulse on the precession switches from amplification to attenuation. We demonstrate that this mechanism can be exploited in various ways thanks to the non-linear fluence-dependent demagnetization mechanism, enabling coherent control beyond the standard superposition of waves. We acknowledge the DFG for financial support via No. BA 2281/11-1 and Project-No. 328545488 -TRR 227 (projects A2 and A10). We thank Alexander von Reppert from the University of Potsdam for stimulating discussions and Juan-Carlos Rojas-Sánchez from Institute Jean Lamour in Nancy, France for determining the saturation magnetization. E. Beaurepaire, J.-C. Merle, A. Daunois, and J.-Y. Bigot, "Ultrafast spin dynamics in ferromagnetic nickel," Physical review letters 76, 4250 (1996).