Quantifying the relationship between geometric descriptors of microstructure and effective properties like permeability is essential for understanding and improving the behavior of porous materials. In this paper, we employ a previously developed stochastic model to investigate microstructure-property relationships of nonwovens. First, we show the capability of the model to generate a wide variety of realistic nonwovens by varying the model parameters. By computing various geometric descriptors, we investigate the relationship between model parameters and microstructure morphology and, in this way, assess the range of structures which may be described by our model. In a second step, we perform virtual materials testing based on the simulation of a wide range of nonwovens. For these 3D structures, we compute geometric descriptors and perform numerical simulations to obtain values for permeability as an effective material property. We then examine and quantify the relationship between microstructure morphology and permeability by fitting parametric regression formulas to the obtained data set, including but not limited to formulas from literature. We show that for structures which are captured by our model, predictive power may be improved by allowing for slightly more complex formulas. Fiber-based materials, especially nonwovens, play an important role in a wide variety of applications like gas-diffusion layers in fuel cell technology By instead using a stochastic model for the 3D microstructure of nonwovens, a huge variety of virtual but realistic structures can be easily generated on the computer and still be used for numerical simulations. By this so-called virtual materials testing, relationships between the 3D geometry and effective properties can be investigated at a low cost and the development of new materials with improved properties can be accelerated The model-based approach described above is primarily motivated by the shortcomings of real-world methods. In order to investigate relationships between manufacturing, microstructure, and effective properties of porous materials through physical experimentation, it is necessary to produce a large amount of samples. This step alone would already require immense time and financial resources. Furthermore, manufacturing processes are often rigid and varying individual production parameters is not always trivial. While it is possible in theory to produce the necessary amount of samples, it would not be feasible. Even if the necessary amount of samples was available, determining all properties of interest through experimentation could prove problematic for many reasons, e.g., if the resolution of a sensor is not high enough or if a material sample is not stable enough to perform the experiment. Based on the flexible stochastic model for the 3D structure of nonwovens which was developed in First, we investigate the relationship between model parameters and geometric descriptors by systematically varying the values of selected parameters. Not surprisingly, varying parameters which directly control the porosity of the resulting structures leads to a huge variation in a wide range of geometric descriptors. Varying other model parameters which control the shape and arrangement of fibers, we are able to adjust some selected geometric descriptors. Joint variation of multiple model parameters leads to drastic differences in the resulting structures which we investigate in a second step. The major part of this paper is dedicated to investigating the relationship between geometric descriptors and permeability as illustrated in Figure ε, μ(τ ), β, S, . . . Fig. In the following, we will outline the methods applied throughout the present paper. In particular, we will give a short summary of the model proposed in For the present study, we will employ a spatial stochastic model developed in previous works For modeling the joint distribution of (P 1 , . . . , P 4 ), the z-coordinates and the (x, y)-coordinates of P i = (X i , Y i , Z i ) for i = 1, . . . , 4 are independently modeled. More precisely, Z 4 is assumed to be independent of Z 1 conditional on Z 2 , Z 3 , i.e., {Z n , n ∈ Z} forms a second-order Markov chain and, for simplicity of notation, the joint distribution of (Z 1 , Z 2 , Z 3 ) is considered. This, in turn, is equivalent to modeling the distribution of (Z 1 , Z 2 -Z 1 , Z 3 -Z 2 ). In the model proposed in For modeling the sequence of random vectors (X 1 , Y 1 ), . . . , (X 4 , Y 4 ), the angle ) and the angle B between (X 4 , Y 4 ) -(X 3 , Y 3 ) and (X 3 , Y 3 ) -(X 2 , Y 2 ) are considered. They determine the values of (X 1 , Y 1 ), . . . , (X 4 , Y 4 ) up to rigid transformations and the joint distribution of (A, B) is sufficient to describe the transition function of (X 1 , Y 1 ), . . . , (X 4 , Y 4 ). The joint distribution of (A, B) is again modeled by a copula approach where the (identical) marginal distributions of A and B are modeled by a generalized normal distribution and the correlation structure of (A, B) is modeled using a Student's t copula, see Table By systematic variation of the parameters P = (p 1 , . . . , p 14 ) of the model described in Section 2.1, we obtain a wide range of realistic, yet novel, nonwoven structures. The range of chosen parameters is based on two sets of model parameters P 1 = (p 1 1 , . . . , p 1 14 ), P 2 = (p 2 1 , . . . , p 2 14 ) which were obtained in parameter of Student's t copula modeling (A, B) 1 These are modeled via a generalized normal distribution with location parameter fixed to 0. 2 Z 1 is modeled via a generalized normal distribution. The location and scale parameters are chosen such that P(0 < Z 1 < zmax) = 0.9998 and E(Z 1 ) = zmax/2. 3 For Student's t copula, a higher value of parameter ρ corresponds to a stronger correlation. 4 For the Clayton copula, a higher value of parameter α corresponds to a weaker correlation. For the different aspects of the current study, we consider three different scenarios creating the following sets of structures: Scenario I The first set is obtained by keeping all parameters fixed with the exception of one single model parameter which is systematically varied. Each of the 14 parameters was varied in 10 steps between specifically chosen minimum and maximum values, see Table Scenario II The second set of structures was created by randomly varying all model parameters at the same time. This means that, except for the fiber diameter which was kept fixed, each entry p i of the parameter vector P = (p 1 , . . . , p 14 ) was independently drawn from a specific (truncated) normal distribution which was chosen such that the mean value was given by μ = (p 1 i + p 2 i )/2, and the standard deviation by σ = |p 1 ip 2 i |/Φ 0.75 , where Φ 0.75 denotes the 0.75-quantile of the standard normal distribution. Thus, the value of p i belongs to the interval (p 1 i , p 2 i ) with probability 0.5. The normal distributions were truncated to observe the parameter bounds shown in Table Scenario III The third set of structures is a small dataset showcasing the effect of fiber diameter d and fiber density D L on permeability. Note that the porosity ε introduced in Section 2.3 below can be approximately expressed by for some constant a > 0. Thus different combinations of fiber density and fiber diameter can lead to the same value of porosity but hugely different values of permeability. To investigate this behavior, all model parameters were kept fixed, except for the fiber diameter and fiber density. Seven different target values for porosity ε between 0.9 and 1 were chosen and for each target value, 5 different combinations of fiber diameter and fiber density leading to the specific value of porosity, were considered. For each combination, 3 structures were simulated, resulting in 105 structures. In the following, we introduce the geometric descriptors on which further analysis of microstructure-property relationships is based. Most descriptors are similar to those used in Porosity Probably the most fundamental geometric descriptor when it comes to any kind of porous material is the porosity ε ∈ [0, 1], or the solid volume fraction 1-ε. We estimate porosity from voxel images by simply counting the number of voxels belonging to the void space and dividing by the total number of voxels. Tortuosity The notion of tortuosity is often considered when investigating transport phenomena. While there exists a wide variety of different specifications of tortuosity Constrictivity A further directly transport-related property is the constrictivity β ∈ [0, 1] which measures bottleneck effects along transportation pathways. Again, we define the transport direction from z = 0 to z = z max . Then, the constrictivity β is defined as the ratio β = rmin rmax of two characteristic pore radii r min and r max , where r max is the maximum radius such that 50 % of pore space can be covered in (overlapping) spheres of that radius. These spheres are not allowed to penetrate into the solid phase, i.e., the fibers. Similarly, r min is the maximum radius of spheres which can intrude from the plane at z = 0 into the structure and fill 50 % of pore space. This concept may be viewed as a digital version of mercury intrusion porosimetry. Specific surface area The specific surface area S is the (mean) area of the solidpore interface per unit volume. It is estimated by computing the total surface area within a given sampling window and dividing it by tthe window's volume. In the case of fiber systems, the specific surface area is directly related to the porosity, the fiber diameter and the curl and overlap of fibers. Chord length distribution Chords are straight lines in a given direction fully contained in the pore space which start and end at the pore-solid interface or the boundary of the sampling window. The distribution of the length C of such segments is called chord length distribution. In this work, we consider chords in z-direction and estimate the chord length distribution by collecting all possible chords within the voxelized structure. Note that other definitions use other notions of "random chord" and essentially lead to a length-weighted distribution of chord lengths. In the following, we consider the mean chord length μ(C). Mean spherical contact distance The average distance from a randomly selected point within the pore space to the nearest point within the solid phase (i.e., to the nearest fiber) is called mean spherical contact distance, In the following, it will be denoted by μ(H). We estimate it by randomly choosing a large number of points within the pore space and averaging over their distances to the nearest fiber, computed directly on the polygonal track data. The geometric descriptors stated above are determined for all simulated structures of Scenarios I, II and III. The obtained results are stored in a database, which contains the values of model parameters used for the simulation of a given structure, along with the corresponding values computed for geometric descriptors and permeability, where the computation of permeability is explained in the next section. Mathematically, the permeability κ is a tensor and in general depends on the direction of the flow. For nonwoven, fibers tend to be oriented strongly anisotropically nearly in a plane, and only the through direction perpendicular to that plane is measured. By our convention for modelled structures, the through-direction is the z-direction. With this in mind, a scalar permeability κ is computed for the through-direction (or z-direction) based on appropriately rearranging Darcy's law Here, Q is the flow rate, A the area perpendicular to the flow direction over which the flow rate occurs, i.e., in the x-y plane, ū is the (macroscopic) flow velocity, ∆P is the pressure drop, L is the thickness of the nonwoven, i.e., length in the z-direction, and μ is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid, that contains the kinematic viscosity of the fluid and its density. The permeability κ identifies the proportionality between the pressure drop and flow velocity. Darcy's crucial observation was that the permeability is determined by the geometry of the pore space alone and thus is a constant for porous materials. The viscosity μ and media thickness L are fluid and material parameters, respectively, that must be fixed and known in order to compute κ. Darcy's Law, see Eq. ( In the computational experiments, the permeability for the nonwoven models is determined using the FlowDict module of the GeoDict software Each simulated structure is initially given as a set of polygonal tracks (fibers) within a fixed bounding cuboid W = [0, x max , y max , z max ] and equipped with a fiber diameter d. However, for the numerical flow simulations, a conversion into (binary) voxel images is done by the software. The voxel length h must be chosen small enough to resolve the fiber diameter, and so that the results of the flow simulation do not depend on it as would be the case for too large voxel sizes. For highly porous fibrous materials, as in the case under consideration here, voxel length h = d/10 is sufficient. These binary images also form the base for the computation of some of the geometric descriptors. Finally, to compute the permeability in the z-direction we add an inlet of the length l in and an outlet of the length l out to the domain to allow for the flow to be uniform far in front and behind the nonwoven, and thus to be able to use periodic boundary conditions for the velocity in all three spatial directions as well as periodic boundary conditions for the pressure. Under the assumption of slow, viscous, steady state incompressible flow through the nonwoven, the Reynolds number is zero, and the time-derivative as well as the inertial term in the Navier-Stokes equations can neglected. This means we can use the steady state incompressible Stokes equations with periodic boundary conditions on the domain and no-slip boundary conditions, see Eq. ( where G is the volume that is occupied by fibers, Ω is the computational box [0, and ∂G is the surface of G. u is the periodic velocity vector with components, u, v and w. f = (0, 0, c) is a constant body force vector where c is derived from the desired pressure drop ∆P and the length of the computational domain in the z-direction, and p is the periodic pressure. That pressure can be made physical by adding the linear function that is independent of x and y and assumes the values ∆P at the inlet boundary and 0 at the outlet boundary. Figure Fig. The linear systems of equations resulting from the discretization of Eqs. ( For the prediction of permeability from geometric descriptors, we consider different parametric regression formulas which will be discussed in Section 3.2 below. For fitting and evaluation of the prediction formulas, we use the data obtained for structures from Scenario II, where we split it into a subset for fitting the formulas and a (smaller) subset for evaluating their performance. Fitting of the formulas is performed by means of SciPy's To assess the quality of the fit, we use the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), which is given by and the coefficient of determination R 2 given by , where y 1 , . . . , y k is the ground truth data, ŷ1 , . . . , ŷk are the corresponding predictions and ȳ = 1 k k j=1 y j is the mean of the ground truth data. The values of MAPE and R 2 are computed on (not log-transformed) test data which has not been used for fitting. However, note that the least-squares fit essentially optimizes the R 2 -value for the log-transformed data. For each structure generated in Scenarios I, II and III as outlined in Section 2.2, we computed the geometric descriptors described above as well as the corresponding permeability. In the following, we present the results of the statistical analysis of this data. This includes the investigation of microstructure-property relationships, where we consider various parametric regression formulas for the prediction of permeability from a range of geometric descriptors and discuss their performance. Recall that for each specification of model parameters, 3 structures were generated which vary with respect to geometric descriptors and permeability. For structures of Scenario II, the coefficient of variation for the numerically computed values of permeability is equal to 60.10 when considering the full set of simulated structures. However, the mean coefficient of variation when considering each specification of model parameters individually is only equal to 3.06, indicating that structures which were simulated using the same specification of model parameters are rather similar. Fig. In a first step, we illustrate the range of feasible structures and investigate some basic relationships between model parameters and geometric descriptors resp. permeability. Structures of Scenario II, which were simulated using randomly chosen model parameters as discussed above, exhibit a wide range of values for many geometric descriptors, see Figure Finally, to investigate the influence of single model parameters on geometric descriptors, we consider structures of Scenario I. Figure 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 Fig. the fiber density changes many geometric descriptors, including the mean chord length. But other parameters also influence the morphology of the fiber systems. The value of β A which influences the curvature of fibers projected onto the x-y-plane has a strong influence on the constrictivity of the resulting structures. The dependence of geometric descriptors on other parameters is more complex and the effect of some model parameters on the morphology of the fiber systems may not be captured be the geometric descriptors stated in Section 2.3. Fig. However, further information can be obtained when considering pairs of descriptors simultaneously. Figure In this section we consider various parametric regression formulas which express permeability in term of geometric descriptors of the simulated fiber systems. In this context, we first analyze the correlation between different geometric descriptors and permeability. Figure While some prediction formulas are designed observing physical units, others are solely targeted to obtain the best numerical values at the cost of a limited interpretability. As a baseline formula which does not preserve meaningful units, we consider the which represents one of the most simple relationships between porosity and permeability. Based on the data of Scenario II, we obtain the fitted parameters c 1 = 3.85 × 10 -8 and c 2 = 61.07. Additionally incorporating constrictivity β and specific surface are S, the following formula was introduced in where fitting led to the parameters c 1 = 5.03 × 10 -12 , c 2 = -24.88, c 3 = 0.13 and c 4 = 59.51. Furthermore, a slightly simplified version of Eq. ( was considered in with fitted parameters c 1 = 4.80 × 10 -12 , c 2 = -8.08, c 3 = -23.06 and c 4 = 55.68. Again ignoring physical units, we consider the following slight modification of Eq. ( where fitting leads to the parameters c 1 = 2.29 × 10 -10 , c 2 = 4.41, c 3 = -1.15 and c 4 = -13.50. Adding the constrictivity β as a variable leads to the formula with fitted parameters c 1 = 5.07 × 10 -10 , c 2 = 4.21, c 3 = 1.01, c 4 = -1.00 and c 5 = -29.72. Alternatively, one may ignore the specific surface area, leading to with fitted parameters c 1 = 5.04 × 10 -8 , c 2 = 33.21, c 3 = 1.88, c 4 = -118.69. Finally, we consider a power-law type formula incorporating a wider range of geometric descriptors to investigate the theoretically achievable predictive power of these types of relationships, where fitting the formula A visual impression of the predictive power of Eqs. ( Fig. For the efficient development of improved functional materials, understanding the relationship between easy to manipulate geometric descriptors of their 3D morphology and desired material properties is important. Traditional experimental setups for the investigation of these relationships are expensive and time-consuming and, furthermore, some important aspects may not be accurately measured. By using a stochastic microstructure model combined with numerical simulations, virtual materials testing may be performed to investigate these relationships. Compared to real experiments, our approach based on modeling and simulation is cheap and can be used to generate a huge database of virtual but realistic structures for which all the desired geometric descriptors and effective properties can be easily computed. From this data, a thorough understanding of the relationship between 3D morphology and effective properties of nonwovens can be obtained. Using this knowledge, the production process may be optimized by targeting solely geometric descriptors which are easier to manipulate than the effective material properties. In this paper, we employed a stochastic model for nonwoven fiber materials to generate a large set of different structures and computed various geometric descriptors for each simulated structure. Furthermore, through numerical simulations, we computed permeability. To exemplify the approach of virtual materials testing, we then deduced parametric regression formulas to describe the relationship between 3D morphology and permeability. We used different types of formulas found in the literature as well as some custom-designed formulas and were able to show that permeability does not only depend on porosity, but very much on other geometric dscriptors as well. Our approach enables material scientists and designers to make fast predictions about a material's effective properties based purely on easy-to-measure geometric descriptors. Using the prediction formulas considered in this paper, it might also be easier to design or modify a material in order to achieve a desired permeability, as it becomes clear how individual descriptors factor into the permeability of the material. For real-world production processes this means that instead of finding the right production parameters to obtain the desired material properties, it is only necessary to optimize the process to get 3D morphologies with the right geoemtric descriptors. If the relationship between production parameters and geometric descriptors of the material is known to the manufacturer, the entire pipeline of the material's design can be done virtually. The methods shown in this paper can easily be extended to other material properties like wettability. Further work could use the large amount of virtual samples as training data for a machine learning based approach that could establish a fast and more precise, yet less interpretable link between geometric descriptors and effective properties of fiber-based materials. A (0.3, 1.5) shape parameter of the distribution 1 modeling A and B β Z 1 (1, 30) shape parameter of the distribution 2 modeling Z 1