Highlighted with improved long-term thermal and environmental stability, all-inorganic metal halide perovskites exhibit tuneable physical properties, cost-effective synthesis, and satisfactory optoelectronic performance, attracting increasing research interests worldwide. However, a less explored feature of these materials is their strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC), which is the hidden force influencing not only band structure but also properties including magnetoresistance, spin lifetime and singlet-triplet splitting. This review provides an overview of the fundamental aspects and the latest progress of the SOC and debate regarding Rashba effects in all-inorganic metal halide perovskites, providing critical insights into the physical phenomena and potential applications. Meanwhile, crystal structures and photophysics of allinorganic perovskite are discussed in the context of SOC, along with the related experimental and characterization techniques. Furthermore, a recent understanding of the band topology in the all-inorganic halide perovskites is introduced to push the boundary even further for the novel applications of all-inorganic halide perovskites. Finally, an outlook is given on the potential directions of breakthroughs via leveraging the SOC in halide perovskites. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) was first reported in semiconductors with zinc-blende structures. where m is the mass of an electron and c is the speed of light. In relativistic framework, the SOC manipulates the orbital motion of the electron with the Hamiltonian matrix: In this equation , where μB is the Bohr magneton, m is the electron mass, and c is the speed of light. SOC arises due to the interaction between an electron's intrinsic spin angular momentum (σ) and its orbital angular momentum, which is related to its motion (p) in the presence of an electric field (E). The SOC leads to the momentum-dependent splitting of energy bands and has the unique ability to control the transport properties of semiconductors without any external fields. where V0 is the Coulomb potential, and σ = (σx, σy, σz) is the vector of Pauli spin matrices. In halide perovskites, SOC becomes significant for electrons near heavy nuclei like Pb, where it depends linearly on ∇V0 and p. where αR is the Rashba parameter and ẑ is the unit vector along the z-axis. Clearly, the Rashba effect influences the energy level splitting of charge carriers when an electric field is present. ( where D is the Dresselhaus coefficient, σx, σy, σz are Pauli matrices to represent spin states of the electron, and k x , k y , k z are the components of the wavevector (k ) representing the momentum of charge carriers in the crystal. Semiconductor technology has revolutionized the modern microelectronics and laid the foundation for advanced computing and memory devices. SOC, which couples an electron's spin with its motion, impacts various aspects of semiconductor physics. Specifically, in the presence of structural "inversion asymmetry," the previously spindegenerate parabolic band structure splits into two distinct spin-polarized bands. The dispersion relationship for electrons and holes in these materials takes on the form, E ± (k) = (ħ2k2 / 2m*) ± αR|k|, where the parameter "αR" signifies the Rashba splitting. This modification engenders the appearance of new extremal points characterized by a momentum offset (k0) and a corresponding energy separation (ER), linked by the relationship αR = 2ER / k0, as portrayed in Fig. A remarkable outcome of this phenomenon is the emergence of two separate Rashba-split branches, each possessing a distinctive spin orientation. established a connection between lattice distortions and SOC, claiming notable Rashba-Dresselhaus splitting. Fig. In hybrid perovskites, B-site ions are known to determine the band structure and influence electronic and optical properties, but A-site ions also introduce a significant impact. proposed that direct optical transitions still occur because of the structural distortions and spin texture dynamics induced by the MA molecules, as depicted in Fig. It is generally believed that all-inorganic perovskite possesses a SOC effect stronger than most other semiconductors. This review presents a concise introduction to SOC and its profound impact on the physical properties and optoelectronic applications of all-inorganic halide perovskites. We begin by introducing the fundamental semiconducting and optoelectronic properties of these emerging materials with strong SOC. Subsequently, we discuss the effects of SOC and the Rashba effect on spin lifetime. Moving forward, we explain the experimental techniques used to study spin relaxation and dynamics in all-inorganic halide perovskites. We also discuss how the speculated Rashba effect and quantum confinement influence the light emission in perovskite NCs through modulating the bright and dark states. Finally, we address the recent advancements in understanding the band topology of all-inorganic halide perovskites. The all-inorganic halide perovskite materials have drawn more scientific attention in photovoltaics and optoelectronics because they are more stable under ambient conditions than their organic-inorganic hybrid counterparts. The remarkable optoelectronic characteristics exhibited by CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskites are intricately interwoven with their unique crystalline and electronic structures. Several methods have been developed to synthesize CsPbX3 perovskites in thin-film, nanowire, nanosheet, and NC forms. In Fig. Rashba-Dresselhaus splitting in MAPbI3 halide perovskites can only manifest in the presence of an out-of-equilibrium phonon population, such as that generated by coherent terahertz radiation illumination. Conversely, CsPbBr3, characterized by Cs cations and a more symmetric configuration, displayed an absence of Rashba splitting. showed spin relaxation of 32 ps at 50 K and 3 ps at 250 K. For all-inorganic halide perovskite materials, spin-related studies, such as spin relaxation and spin manipulation, are still at the primary stage. In inorganic semiconductors, the spin spin by scattering, while in the D-P mechanism, the Rashba effect from structural inversion asymmetry induces spin precession. In all-inorganic halide perovskite NCs, the exceptionally efficient light emission is attributed to a distinctive excitonic fine structure mainly composed of triplet states. illustrates a substantially stronger exchange interaction in CsPbX3 than the FA and MA counterparts, The optical techniques to access the crucial properties of halide perovskite materials such as carrier dynamics and spin lifetime often involve PL, reflectivity, and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL). and MPL are employed to study magnetic field-induced spin mixing of photogenerated e-h pairs. Spin mixing will modulate the spin population, resulting in different recombination rates and changes in PL/electroluminescence emission intensity. Optical techniques are commonly utilized because they are fast and non-invasive. PL is a primary technique widely applied in perovskite sample characterization, where a chopped, pulsed or continuous-wave (CW) laser beam, 120 is used to excite charge carriers, providing an Reproduced with permission. As shown in Fig. Furthermore, the SOC effect in CsPbBr3 in the non-linear optical regime was investigated by Xu et al., wherein the generation of transient spin-polarised electrons by two-photon absorption (TPA) using circularly polarized light excitation was demonstrated. Spin-dephasing dynamics in halide perovskite materials is important due to its prominent function in quantum information processing applications. In a recent report, spin-dephasing dynamics in CsPbBr3 were studied by time-resolved Faraday rotation (TRFR). The pump-probe techniques have become a prominent approach for time-resolved studies, widely applied in characterizing semiconductors, including halide perovskite materials. The exciton spin dynamics for perovskite materials can be investigated by different techniques such as pump-probe time-resolved Kerr rotation, pump-probe TRFR, and pump-probe time-resolved differential reflection. The optical Hanle effect is a steady-state 'pump-probe' measurement based on the Faraday rotation. to study spin relaxation, and lifetime. 136 Fig. The spin dynamics of charged carriers are usually probed using circularly polarized light. shows the optical transition between the VB and CB using circularly polarised light. Due to the magnetic nature of materials and the development of spintronic devices, the magnetic field effect (MFE) has been investigated to characterize magnetic materials. In 2012, through a high-throughput search, K. Yang et al. identified ternary halides, Cs (Sn,Pb,Ge)(Cl,Br,I)3, as one of the previously unrealized families of topological insulator materials. As shown in Fig. where Pauli matrices surface spectrum (lower row) for 51-layer slab geometry with topologically protected surface states. (e) Three-dimensional band dispersion for gapless surface states and its isoenergy contour map. Reproduced with permission. The constraint set by microscopic parameters on the nontrivial character of band topology suggests that a topologically nontrivial insulating phase can be achieved in ABX3 halide perovskite materials with large SOC and large hopping parameters. The nontrivial insulating phase can be realized either with heavy metal elements on B-sites and heavy halogen elements on X-site or via an externally controlled environment, such as pressure and straininduced enhancement in the bandwidth by decreasing the lattice constants. For instance, through various independent studies on CsBI3 (B = Pb, Sn) 145 , CsBX3 (B = Pb, Sn; X = Cl, Br, I) 148 , and CsSnX3 (X = l, Br, Cl) Unique electrical and optical properties in the topological insulating phase, due to the surface states intertwining with the bulk band topology, give rise to substantial implications in the field of electronics, spintronics, plasmonics, and optoelectronics. For instance, topological insulators materials have the ability to overcome Boltzmann tyranny and lead to low-power topological quantum electronic device applications owning to the Rashba effect 162 , negative capacitance effect 163 , and quantum confinement effects Since the origin and the tunability of band topology in all-inorganic halide perovskites is like that in the topological insulator family X2Y3 (X = Bi, Sb; Y = Te, Se), such intriguing optoelectronic properties displayed by the X2Y3 family provide a hint of band topology driven high-performance optoelectronic device applications in all-inorganic halide perovskites. Along with excellent power conversion efficiency, tunable physical properties, cost-effective synthesis, and long-term thermal and environmental stability, strong SOC and band topology may push the boundary even further for the novel applications of all-inorganic halide perovskites. In summary, the SOC effect in all-inorganic halide perovskite has been systematically discussed, along with its influence on the band structure, charge recombination, light emission, spin lifetime and other properties. While possessing better stability compared to the hybrid counterparts, all-inorganic halide perovskites retain heavy Pb atoms, which leads to a strong SOC effect that exerts a significant influence over their physical properties and device performance. In addition, the inorganic cation Cs possesses a relatively high symmetry compared to the organic ones, which underlies the composition-property correlation in this class of halide perovskite materials. However, both internal and external factors may still induce structural inversion asymmetry and slightly distort the metal-halide octahedra, thereby inducing the Rashba effect and the band splitting. Recent investigations in the domain of all-inorganic halide perovskites have unveiled several intriguing developments. There have been seminal works revealing the relative positions between the bright triplet and dark singlet states. The research exploring the correlation between spin lifetime and SOC is still in its infancy. Different techniques such as transient absorption spectroscopy, TRFR, TPA, DTS, and TRPL were used to measure all-inorganic halide perovskites with different compositions under different conditions, thus it is challenging to consolidate the results. All-inorganic halide perovskite is hypothesized to potentially exhibit a static Rashba effect at temperatures below 60 K and a dynamic Rashba effect at higher temperatures. Topological insulating phases, with unique electrical and optical properties, hold the promise of advancing electronics, spintronics, and optoelectronics, enabling low-power quantum devices. The adaptable band topology in all-inorganic halide perovskites offers highperformance optoelectronic potential, driven by efficiency, tunability, stability, SOC, and suggests that the band topology could be the next frontier for the research on all-inorganic halide perovskites. It has been predicted that the halide perovskite compounds exhibit a red shift in trivial bandgap while a blue shift in nontrivial bandgap by increasing pressure. The exciting properties enabled by the hidden force of SOC will propel all-inorganic halide perovskite materials to become a rising star in exploring novel applications. Metal halide perovskites hold great promise in revolutionizing emerging disciplines such as spintronics and opto-spintronics due to their unique features, like low-cost fabrication, tunable band gaps, and exceptional charge carrier properties. From their robust SOC to their applications in spintronic devices like vertical spin-valve configurations, spin-LEDs, and spin photovoltaic devices, these materials have already demonstrated their potential, and have open pathways for future novel devices. The ongoing exploration of inorganic metal halide perovskites and refinement of their properties offer opportunities for improved device performance and the potential to advance next-generation optoelectronics, spintronics, opto-spintronics, and related fields.