The phenomenon of electric breakdown poses serious challenge to the design of devices that operate under high gradient environments. Experimental evidence often points towards breakdown events that are accompanied by elevated temperatures and dark current spikes, presumably due to high-asperity nano-structure formation that enhances the local electric field and triggers a runaway process. However, the exact mechanistic origin of such nano-structures under typical macroscopic operational conditions of electric gradient and magnetic-field-mediated heating remains poorly understood. In this work, a model is presented that describes the evolution of a typical copper surface under the combined action of the electric fields and elevated temperatures. Using a mesoscale curvature-driven growth model, we show how the copper surface can undergo a type of dynamical instability that naturally leads to the formation of sharp asperities in realistic experimental conditions. Exploring the combined effect of fields and temperature rise, we identify critical regimes that allow for the formation of breakdown precursors. These regimes strongly resonate with previous experimental findings on breakdown of copper electrodes, hence suggesting surface diffusion to be a crucial breakdown precursor mechanism. Application of high electric field are commonplace in modern vacuum technologies ranging from space propulsion to powerful linear accelerators Previous experimental, theoretical, and computational efforts What is known is that critical breakdown rates strongly depend on applied electric and microstructural variations The synergy between the electric gradient and temperature, as well as the effect of nominal surface geometries are relatively unexplored in previous analyses The red line shows the vacuum-copper boundary Consider 2D domains that contain a vacuum and an elastic half-space that here corresponds to bulk copper (Fig. In order to determine the local electric-field (E) along the materials surface, we solve for the electrostatic potential (φ) using Gauss's law in the domain shown in Fig. The material (copper) is idealized as a perfect conductor where the electric potential vanishes, enforcing Dirichlet boundary condition at the copper/vacuum interface. At a large enough distance away from the material surface, we employ Neumann boundary conditions where the field is constrained to the nominal applied field E a . Once Eq. 1 is solved, the electric field at any position can be obtained by taking the negative gradient of the potential -∇φ = E. Although the motivation of our model is to capture surface evolution in the context of rf breakdown, the applied field is kept constant during the simulation, since the time scale for surface morphology evolution is much slower than that of an rf cycle (of roughly 100 ps in X-band.) In this context, we can assume effective dc-field conditions at the surface corresponding to the RMS of an rf cycle. To capture the effects of rf losses, we model the elastic deformation in the copper domain resulting from a uniform temperature rise. Such uniform temperature approximation stems from the fact that the high thermal conductivity of copper quickly equilibrates temperature gradients over the micron lengthscales simulated here. Indeed, experiments with rf pulse heating show that temperature gradients tend to form on the scale of mm ∼ cm The governing equations for small deformations on isotropic and homogeneous materials can be written as in Refs. where σ is the stress tensor, u is the displacement vector, ε is the infinitesimal strain tensor, λ and μ are the Lamé's elasticity parameters, α is the thermal expansion coefficient, Y is the Young's modulus, ν is Poisson's ratio, and ∆T is the temperature change from the reference room temperature of 300 K. We use fixed displacement boundary conditions at the bottom of the domain and periodic boundary conditions along the lateral boundaries. The solution of Eq. 2a produces the displacement vector field u, describing deformation of the material under a given ∆T . With the displacement vector, the corresponding strain and stress tensor can be obtained from Eq. 2b and Eq. 2c, respectively. It is important to note that thermo-elasticity only acts as a driving force if the system is mechanically constrained in some directions (perpendicular to the surface in this case). In an accelerator setting where heating from RF losses mainly affects the first few microns from the surface, confinement is provided by the rest of the material which remains colder and hence at a shorter elastic constant. Thermo-elastic driving forces would however vanish for uniformly heated systems that are allowed to freely thermally-expand in all directions. We incorporate material transport through a surface diffusion process, where the diffusion flux (J) is proportional to the surface gradient of the chemical potential (μ c ) as: where D s is surface diffusivity, k b is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and derivative with respect to s is evaluated along the surface. From mass conservation, the normal velocity V n of the surface can be expressed using the surface divergence of -J. V n can then be reformulated in terms of ∂h(x, t)/∂t, the vertical velocity of the surface profile. The latter can be written as Here h ′ x indicates the derivative with respect to x, and v s is the number of atoms per unit area. Aggregating the contribution of electrostatics, thermoelastic stresses, and surface tension, the chemical potential on the surface can be written as Here, ω T is the strain-energy density function for linear isotropic materials, U E is the electric field-energy density on the material's surface, γ is the isotropic surface free energy, and κ is the local surface curvature. The surface field-energy density and the strain energy density are calculated simultaneously on their respective mesh, and Eq. 4b is solved to calculate the vertical velocity of the surface. The meshes for the vacuum and material domains are then updated to conform to the new interface. The field and thermal stress is recalculated again for each domain after approximately 100 time steps, when the surface has evolved a sufficient amount. This frequency is adjusted depending on the geometry and the surface velocity. The open source PDE solver FEniCS We consider three different types of surface geometries: isolated perturbations, sinusoidal perturbations, and random surfaces. An example of isolated perturbation is shown in Fig. Finally, random surfaces were used to capture the evolution of realistic copper surfaces. To model random rough surfaces, the vacuum-copper boundary was represented as a sum of Fourier modes where the amplitude A n is obtained by fitting an exponential decay to an experimentally measured spatial frequency spectrum of electro-polished copper photocathodes Linear stability analysis can be utilized to complement fully nonlinear numerical solutions by providing analytical solutions in the limit of small perturbations. Hence, it serves as a baseline verification of the numerical results. By inserting Eq. 5 into Eq. 4b and assuming a small initial perturbation h(x) = h 0 sin(kx), the solution in the frequency domain takes the form of h(k, t)=h 0 exp(g(k)t) where g(k) is the growth rate corresponding to wavenumber k. In the small perturbation regime, Eq. 5 can be simplified as κ ≈ ∂ 2 h ∂x 2 = -Ak 2 sin(kx), U E =ε 0 E 2 0 (ksin(kx)), ω T = 2kY α 2 ∆T 2 , resulting in the temporal surface evolution described as where ). The result shows that perturbations corresponding to wavenumber below a critical value k 0 = 1/γ(2α 2 ∆T 2 0 Y + ε 0 E 2 0 ) will grow, while larger wavenumber modes will decay. The fastest growing mode can be found by solving ∂g(k)/∂k = 0, which gives k m = 3k 0 /4. The result indicates that the maximally unstable mode k m and critical mode k 0 both depend quadratically on the operating/applied field and temperature rises. In general, higher temperatures or applied fields allow for the spontaneous growth of perturbations at increasingly large wavenumbers (increasingly small wavelengths). For typical applied field of 100 MV/m and ∆T =100 K, the FIG. critical wavelength, λ 0 = 2π/k 0 , is approximately 12 μm. If the gradient increases to 300 MV/m, λ 0 decreases to 6 μm. Eq. 7b can be used to approximate small amplitude surface evolution by taking the Fourier transform of the equation. The critical temperature rise, T cr , and the critical nominal field, E cr , can be defined using this approximation by finding the value in which linear stability approximation predicts a zero growth velocity. It is important to note that this approximation is only expected to hold for small perturbations, as interactions between modes are not taken into account by this approach. In the following, the temporal evolution of the modeled surface profiles are reported in dimensionless time τ . Conversion to physical time units will be discussed in the Section IV. We first consider the evolution of a copper surface subjected to a uniform temperature rise in the absence of applied electric fields ing the surface diffusion: the material removed from the trough is redistributed to the surroundings of the original maximum. This is a key point -the evolution of a small amplitude perturbation dominated by temperature rise alone is unlikely to drive the formation of a type of precursor that would lead to breakdown, as flat peaks and sharp troughs do not couple efficiently with an electric field in a way that is expected to cause runaway field emission. Electric fields are therefore expected to be a critical ingredient in the formation of BD precursors. In contrast, the application of sufficiently large electric fields has been shown to lead to runaway tip growth and sharpening, due to the localized enhancement of electric fields in regions of high negative curvatures In order to unveil the synergistic effect between the two driving forces, i.e. a combined thermal and electric field effects, we conducted series of simulations by applying electric field ranging from 140-275 MV/m and temperature increase ranging from 0-100 K to act on a surface profile having an aspect ratio ranging from 0.1-1.5. Here, the initial asperity has a Gaussian profile with a 2 standard deviation width of 10 μm. Fig. At small aspect ratios (0.1 (red) and, to a lesser extent 0.5 (green)), temperature and applied electric field display synergistic effects, causing tip growth in a regime where electric fields alone would be sub-critical. This behavior is initially captured by the linear stability analysis introduced in the Section II.E above (blue dotted line), within the uncertainty of the exact location of the boundary. As the temperature rises above a certain value (about 55 K), the trend reverses and heating contributes less and less to the formation of breakdown precursors. In contrast, at higher aspect ratios (≥ 1), the propensity for BD precursor formation is unaffected by heating (as indicated by the vertical lines). Note that high amounts of heating alone do not lead to BD, as it instead leads to grooving instabilities with blunt peaks, as described above. The resulting reduction in peak (negative) curvature creates microstructures that couple weakly with the electric field, and hence to the absence of tip growth. Therefore, breakdown would not be expected in the high-T /low-E regime, as observed in Fig. The opposite regime, high-E/low-T has been previously investigated On general grounds, one might also expect that heating would not affect tip growth at high aspect ratio, as the elastic energy due to thermal loading can be efficiently relaxed since the material is not laterally constrained at the tip (in contrast to bulk materials or low aspect ratio asperities). In this limit, BD propensity can be expected to be unaffected by heating. This is again consistent with the results shown in Fig. The intermediate regime of E and T at low aspect ratio is more complex. Fig. In order to elucidate the mechanics behind the surface evolution in a coupled setting, it is useful to isolate the surface velocity contributions stemming from surface tension, electric field, and heating. Such a summary is shown in Fig. The surface tension contribution (blue line) is observed to counteract any curvature: when negative curvature develops (at tips), the surface tension's contribution is negative, leading to blunting; in contrast, when the cur- vature is positive (at grooves), the surface tension component is positive, again leading to blunting. In contrast, the electric field contributions (orange line), tend to amplify both tips and grooves, as the material diffuses along the field gradient (from grooves where the applied field is partially shielded towards tips where the field is amplified). Finally, heating (green lines) tends to amplify grooves much more than tips, as discussed below. At low aspect ratios, the velocity contributions from each driving forces are similar. In contrast, at higher aspect ratios, corresponding to Fig. Electric fields therefore provide the main driving force leading to the increase in negative curvature necessary for BD to occur. Nonetheless, Fig. As the temperature increases further, the trend reverses and the assistance provided by heating becomes less significant. Departure from the linear-stability predictions suggest that non-linear/large-deformation effects are responsible for this reversal. The behavior observed for strong heating in Fig. The analysis above focused on isolated perturbations. In realistic surfaces, roughness will initially be present on a wide range of scales Fig. Field gradient of 460 MV/m and ∆K of 130K were applied on the copper surface to simulate its morphology. The simulation result and growth behavior of the surface remains consistent with the linear stability analysis and the previous result for isolated geometry. The evolution of the frequency spectra in the simulations show the preferential growth of the maximally unstable frequency modes, while high frequency modes above the critical frequency k/2π > k 0 /2π, sharply decay. The combination of gradient and ∆T caused the surface to morph into a new more regular wave-like surface as presented by Fig. As shown, the linear stability analysis gives an excellent prediction for the growth behaviour of copper surfaces in the small amplitude (aspect ratio) regime. To understand the relation between the maximally unstable mode k m and the applied parameters, Fig. The simulation results presented above suggested that surface diffusion can be an effective mechanism that contributes to breakdown precursor formation. To predict the physical timescale over which this mechanism can be expected to occur, the simulation time unit (τ ) are related to physical times as follows: The main unknown in this conversion factor is the effective diffusivity of copper atoms on surfaces, which, on clean surfaces is of the form D s = 3.615 2 /2 × 10 12 exp(-E b /k b T ) Å2 /s According to both experimental and theoretical calculation, the migration barriers vary considerably for different surface orientations: 0.1-0.15 eV for (111), 0.25-0.30 eV for (110), and 0.38-0.69 eV for (100). . This is qualitatively consistent with the dramatic acceleration of the breakdown rate with increasing gradient and temperature observed in the literature Our results are consistent with a number of experimental observations. First, the peak pulse heating temperature is known to be strongly correlated with the breakdown rate In this work, we presented a numerical model describing how metallic surfaces undergo tip-growth instabilities through surface diffusion under combined applied electric fields and thermal stresses. Such instabilities can lead to the formation of geometrically sharp features that can act as breakdown precursor. The results show that thermal stressed induced by temperature rises of a few tens of Kelvin (which are typical of conditions caused by Joule heating in copper accelerator cavities) can significantly lower the electric fields needed for breakdown precursors to form compared to situations where heating is absent. Our results show that diffusion-driven surface evolution can spontaneously create breakdown precursors in typically accessible regimes of applied fields and tempera-ture rises for accelerator applications. Surface diffusion is therefore a viable candidate mechanism to explain the formation of sharp breakdown precursors.