Ultra-thin (UT) oxide semiconductors are promising candidates for back-end-of-line (BEOL) compatible transistors and monolithic three-dimensional integration. Experimentally, UT indium oxide (In 2 O 3 ) field-effect transistors (FETs) with thicknesses down to 0.4 nm exhibits extremely high drain current (10 4 μA/μm) and transconductance (4000 μS/μm). Here, we employ the ab initio quantum transport simulation to investigate the performance limit of sub-5-nm gate length (L g ) UT In 2 O 3 FET. Based on the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) criteria for high-performance (HP) devices, the scaling limit of UT In 2 O 3 FETs can reach 2 nm in terms of on-state current, delay time, and power dissipation. The wide bandgap nature of UT In 2 O 3 (3.15 eV) renders it a suitable candidate for ITRS low-power (LP) electronics with L g down to 3 nm. Both the HP and LP UT In 2 O 3 FETs exhibit superior energy-delay products as compared to other common 2D semiconductors such as monolayer MoS 2 and MoTe 2 . Our study unveils the immense promise of UT In 2 O 3 for both HP and LP device applications. The downsizing of silicon (Si)-based metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) driven by Moore's law has nearly approached its physical limits due to the short-channel effect (SCE). In this study, we perform first-principles quantum transport simulation to investigate the transport properties of sub-5 nm UT In 2 O 3 MOSFETs. The underlap (UL) structure offers an effective pathway to improve the device performance by reducing the tunneling current. Using an optimal UL, we show that the on-state current, delay time, and power dissipation of UT In 2 O 3 MOSFETs fulfill the high-performance (HP) demands as outlined in the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) for L g as small as 2 nm. Furthermore, the sizable bandgap of 3.15 eV in UT In 2 O 3 enables its application as LP transistors. Based on the ITRS LP criteria, the scaling limit for UT In 2 O 3 as an LP transistor can reach a gate length of 3 nm. Remarkably, the energy-delay product of UT In 2 O 3 MOSFETs under both HP and LP applications outperforms those of monolayer (ML) MoS 2 and MoTe 2 MOSFETs. These findings reveal the immense promise of UT In 2 O 3 in both HP and LP electronics. We use the QuantumATK 2022 package, which combines non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF) and density functional theory (DFT), to simulate the device properties of UT In 2 O 3 MOSFETs. here,  S ( D ) stands for the electrochemical potential of the source (drain), f S (f D ) represents the Fermi-Dirac distribution functions of the source (drain), and T(E) corresponds to the transmission function. The average of the transmission coefficient T k // E over the surface-parallel reciprocal lattice vector k // in the irreducible Brillouin zone results in T(E). T k // E can be obtained by: where is retarded/advanced central Green's function, and Γ k // l/r E is the broadening matrix. Based on the formula Throughout the simulation, the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) is employed. Cubic bulk In 2 O 3 is utilized to construct the UT In 2 O 3 , as depicted in Figure There is no standard for the sub-5-nm L g because the smallest L g scaling of the ITRS 2013 version and the latest International Roadmap for Devices and Systems (IRDS) 2022 version are 5 and 12 nm, respectively. To address this, we extrapolate the ITRS 2013 criteria for various parameters into the sub-5 nm L g regime based on the available data, as presented in Tables S1 (HP) and S2 (LP). Hereafter, we refer "ITRS 2013 version" as "ITRS" for notational simplicity. Considering the experimentally observed n-type characteristics of the UT In 2 O 3 , On-state current (I on ) is a crucial figure of merit for transistors. The on-state point (I on , V g on ) at I-V g curve is determined by V g on = V g off + V dd , where V g off is the off-state voltage corresponding to I off , and V dd is the supply voltage. The ITRS recommended values of I off and V dd are presented in Tables As discussed above, the UL structure effectively enhances the I on of UT In 2 O 3 MOSFETs. To understand the working mechanism of UL structure more clearly, we plot the local density of states (LDOS) and the spectrum current density of UT In 2 O 3 MOSFETs at L g = 2 nm (Figure At the off-state, I tunnel dominates over I therm for both UL lengths of 0 and 1 nm. A longer UL length corresponds to a larger barrier width w, leading to a smaller I tunnel (I tunnel ∝ e -w√m*Φ ). To achieve the same I off at L g = 2 nm (0.1 μA/μm), 1-nm UL generally requires a smaller Ф. This is evident in the LDOS, where Ф for UL = 1 nm (0.23 eV) is smaller than that of UL = 0 nm (0.69 eV). When V dd is applied, Ф is reduced, and the corresponding UT In 2 O 3 MOSFETs are switched from off-state to on-state. As the modulation of Ф is similar for both devices, a considerable Ф (0.33 eV) is observed for the 0-nm-UL MOSFET at on-state due to the large Ф at off-state, while Ф of the 1-nm-UL MOSFET is decreased to -0.15 eV. Therefore, the current density at the on-state is dominated by I tunnel and I therm for UL of 0 and 1 nm, respectively, which leads to a difference of about three magnitudes of order in the peak current density (10 -8 vs 10 -5 A/eV for UL = 0 vs 1 nm) and I on (4 vs 1020 μA/μm for UL = 0 vs 1 nm). In a word, a longer UL length usually results in a smaller Ф for the off-state and on-state and thus a larger on-state current. A proper UL length is also beneficial for promoting gate control. The UL serves as a spacer that reduces the influence of electrodes on the channel, as observed in the LDOS. When the UT In 2 O 3 MOSFETs are tuned from the off-state to the on-state, Ф is decreased by 0.38 eV for UL = 1 nm, which is larger than that of the 0-nm UL (0.36 eV). The gate controllability in the subthreshold region can be described by the subthreshold swing SS = These findings further demonstrate the improvement in gate controllability. Additionally, the largest g m values reach 3415 and 3264 S/μm for HP and LP devices, respectively. Therefore, both the gate control abilities in the subthreshold and superthreshold regions are significantly improved by the UL structure. The delay time τ depicts the switching speed of a FET and can be obtained via τ = C t V dd /I on , where C t is the total capacitance. A smaller τ is preferred. According to the ITRS criteria, C t is three times C g , which is defined as C g = ∂Q ch ∂V g ⁄ (Q ch is the total charge in the channel). The C t of UT In 2 O 3 MOSFETs with respect to L g is plotted in Figure Owing to the improvement in I on by the UL structure, the τ of UT In We now discuss the potential experimental realization of UT In 2 O 3 MOSFET in terms of device fabrication process. A possible fabrication process flow is illustrated in Figure In conclusion, we simulated the transport characteristics of a sub- 