Resistance switching in multilayer structures are typically based on materials possessing ferroic orders. Here we predict an extremely large resistance switching based on the relative spin-orbit splitting in twisted transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayers tunnel junctions. Because of the valence band spin splitting which depends on the valley index in the Brillouin zone, the perpendicular electronic transport through the junction depends on the relative reciprocal space overlap of the spin-dependent Fermi surfaces of both layers, which can be tuned by twisting one layer. Our quantum transport calculations reveal a switching resistance of up to 10 6 % when the relative alignment of TMDs goes from 0 • to 60 • and when the angle is kept fixed at 60 • and the Fermi level is varied. By creating vacancies, we evaluate how inter-valley scattering affects the efficiency and find that the resistance switching remains large (10 4 %) for typical values of vacancy concentration. Not only this resistance switching should be observed at room temperature due to the large spin splitting, but our results show how twist angle engineering and control of van der Waals heterostructures could be used for next-generation memory and electronic applications. Introduction -A two-level resistance switch is at the core of information storage and processing in current technologies, and continues to be nowadays a major field of research In magnetic tunnel junctions, for example, R low and R high correspond to metals with parallel and antiparallel magentic orientations, and R sw typically reaches values of few hundreds Although different physics govern the distinct types of switching devices, common challenges exist that limit their potential. Interface quality and scalabilty are major concerns, especially in ferroic systems where decreasing the system size may render the ordered phases more susceptible to thermal fluctuations Another recent improvement in the field of magnetic tunnel junctions has been the fact that momentumdependent transmission between the different layers involved in the vertical transport In this Letter, we apply the concept of momentumdependent transmission in tunnel junctions comprised of TMD monolayers to realize a resistance switch based on their valley-dependent spin splitting One of the most widely known property of hexagonal arXiv:2311.08397v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 14 Nov 2023 TMDs is the spin-valley locking of the valence bands that produces an opposite spin splitting at K and K ′ valleys If we now separate this bilayer with a thin insulating barrier like hexagonal boron nitride, the transport through the junction will just involve tunneling of TMD states between top and bottom layers. Therefore, the tunneling conductance or resistance will strongly depend on whether those states have the same or opposite spin polarization given by sτ , akin to ferromagnetic tunnel junctions where that role is given by the magnetization. In this way, when θ = 0 • , both TMDs have effectively the same sτ and the transport through the junction will show a low resistance state. In contrast, we expect a large resistance increase for θ = 60 • due to swapping sτ in one of the layers. This idea is shown in Fig. Device modeling -To calculate transport properties in a tunnel junction device, we implement the tightbinding model of Ref. For this work, we restrict ourselves to nearest-neighbor only, as this is enough to capture the spin-valley physics of the valence band. Noting that our results are general for any TMD showing spin-valley locking, we focus here on WSe 2 because it has a large energy separation between the valence band maximum of the K, K ′ points and the Γ point. This is important as the bands at Γ point do not show spin-valley physics and would be detrimental for the resistance switching. The values of the parameters are reported in Ref. Having the tight-binding for the TMDs, we now proceed in modeling the tunnel junction device, which we schematically plot in Fig. [49] for additional information regarding implementation. Results -We plot in Fig. Although the basic concept of this work compares the resistance between TMD bilayers with the same and opposite sign of spin-valley locking, one may wonder what happens for twist angles between 0 and 60 degrees. For example, for θ = 30 • the Fermi surface pockets of the two layers may not coincide at all in the Brillouin zone, thus making the device even more insulating. To elucidate such nontrivial trend, we calculate the resistance as a function of both energy and twist angle, and plot the results in Fig. Previously, we mentioned that scattering in the metalbarrier interface is important as that can couple states with different momentum (and same spin) and reduce R sw . Importantly for us, not all kinds of disorder will affect R sw in the same manner. Long-range disorder will induce scattering involving small momentum changes, i.e. intra-valley scattering. This type of disorder should not severely impact R sw . On the other hand, shortrange scatterers, such as adatoms or vacancies, can mix states far away in the Brillouin zone and therefore produce inter-valley scattering that allow vertical transport even when the TMDs are not aligned. To unveil the dependence of inter-valley scattering to the switching resistance, we model vacancies in our tight-binding model [49, Discussion -We have revealed a spin-dependent switching resistance in a system without magnetic order. Such hitherto unprecedented phenomena originates from the effective tunning of SOC in TMD bilayers with twist angle. Carefully tuning the twist angle between TMD monolayers allows to control the relative sign of the spinvalley locking between layers, achieving in this way low and high resistance states in vertical transport depending on the relative orientation of the TMDs. The efficiency of the resistance switch is above 10 6 %, making it comparable to state-of-the-art two-dimensional magnetic tunnel junctions. Motivated by the fascinating physics of moiré materials 