Superconductor-insulator transition (SIT) driven by disorder and transverse magnetic field has been investigated in ultrathin MoN films by means of transport measurements and scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy. Upon decreasing thickness, the homogeneously disordered films show increasing sheet resistance Rs, shift of the superconducting transition Tc to lower temperatures with the 3 nm MoN being the last superconducting film and thinner films already insulating. Fermionic scenario of SIT is evidenced by applicability of the Finkel'stein's model, by the fact that Tc and the superconducting gap  are coupled with a constant ratio, and by the spatial homogeneity of the superconducting and electronic characteristics. The logarithmic anomaly found in the tunneling spectra of the non-superconducting films is further enhanced in increased magnetic field due to the Zeeman spin effects driving the system deeper into the insulating state and pointing also to fermionic SIT. A quantum phase transition from superconducting to insulating state (SIT) can be induced in quasi twodimensional systems by disorder or magnetic field. This transition occurs at the critical disorder, where the electron's mean free path is extremely small and the Ioffe-Regel parameter, the product of the Fermi momentum and the mean free path kFl is close to unity The bosonic SIT has been observed by scanning tunneling spectroscopy in TiN, InOx, NbN and a-MoGe showing emergence of local superconducting puddles with varying superconducting gap present on both superconducting and insulating sides of the transition and a pseudogap above critical temperature Tc or magnetic field Bc2 At fermionic SIT when increased Coulomb interaction is operative, neither pseudo-gap above Tc or Bc2, nor spatial variation of the superconducting gap appear, i.e. "fermionic" systems are spatially homogeneous at homogeneous disorder. Recently, Carbillet et al. Here, we present studies on MoN films starting from 30 nm thickness down through the whole SIT where 3 nm MoN is the last superconducting film and thinner films no longer exhibit superconductivity on large scale as evidenced by resistive measurements. Based on our transport and low-temperature STM measurements we show that the SIT in MoN thin films tuned by both disorder and/or magnetic fields is realized by the fermionic pathway. In particular, the spin-dependent AA effect in insulating state points to the dominance of Zeeman effects supporting the fermionic scenario. Molybdenum forms several nitrides including cubic γ-phase of Mo2N, tetragonal -Mo2N and hexagonal -MoN The basic characterization of our samples was done by transport measurements. A more detailed discussion can be found in the Suppl. Mat. The tunneling conductance was calculated by numerical differentiation of the I-V curves. The dI(V)/dV spectra measured through the tunnel junction between a normal metal and a superconductor can be described by the equation where E = eV is the energy and the derivative of the Fermi distribution in the square brackets represents thermal smearing.N is the constant DOS of the metallic tip and N S represents the superconducting DOS, resp. The BCS theory defines N S as where ∆ is the superconducting energy gap. Tunneling spectra with spectral smearing higher than the thermal broadening can be described by the phenomenological modification of the BCS DOS of Dynes where A includes all constants and parameters of the tunneling barrier, f is the logarithmic function defined in The first and the second terms originate from the interaction of the electron and the hole with a zero projection of the total spin on the direction of the magnetic field, and the third (and fourth) term from interactions with opposite spins. In the case when the ratio λ 1 2λ 0 ⁄ is from interval 〈-1/3,0〉 at zero magnetic field the logarithmic anomaly of the first term is partly compensated by three equal logarithmic terms with opposite sign. In the presence of applied magnetic field a part of the electronic DOS at the Fermi energy is removed due to spin polarization and two singularities/maxima should appear at E = ±E Z . Then, the logarithmic singularity/minimum at the Fermi level is more pronounced than it was in the zero-field case. The temperature dependencies of the sheet resistance Rs(T) obtained on 30, 10, 5, 3, 2 and 1.5 nm thin MoN films at temperatures from 100 K down to 0.3 K are shown in Fig. Low temperature STM measurements were performed to study the surface topography of our thin films. Figure In Fig. We also studied the effect of perpendicular magnetic field on the tunneling spectra on samples with thicknesses of 30 nm, 3 nm, 2 nm and 1.5 nm at T = 0.5 K. The magnetic dependence of the dI(V)∕dV spectra measured on the thickest 30 nm superconducting sample shown in Fig. The main panels at the top of Fig. ensures the balance of quasiparticles after the transition to the superconducting state. Here, we employ this model to describe the magnetic field dependence of the tunneling spectra measured on our 3 nm thin MoN superconducting sample. We started to fit our spectra in the normal state at B = 8 T without superconducting contribution. We determined the values of the parameters A = -0. While in the 3 nm MoN film and similarly in MoC films in our previous study To describe these magnetic field dependencies quantitatively, we fit the spectra at selected magnetic fields as shown in the lower panels of Fig. As a result, the spin dependent AA correction to the normal density of states describes well the effect of magnetic field in the both non-superconducting samples, and also in our thinnest 3 nm superconducting sample. In the latter case remarkably, the field dependent AA correction contributes very weakly (< 4 %) to the total DOS in the superconducting state at B < Bc2 (Fig. In Fig. In the following we argue that the SIT introduced in our thin MoN films by disorder and magnetic field follows the fermionic scenario. First argument is based on the fact that superconducting transition temperature Tc versus the films sheet resistance Rs in Fig. Second evidence supporting the fermionic SIT is based on the fact that with increasing disorder the superconducting energy gap  and the transition temperature are suppressed simultaneously and the superconducting coupling is constant, not depending on the increasing disorder. In our case it is so and the coupling parameter is 2Δ(0)/kBTc ~ 3.5 -3.6 for the 30 nm film down to 3 nm MoN (see Fig. Third argument employs the fact that spectral characteristics on increasingly disordered superconductors remains homogeneous, i.e. a long-range coherence holds and no local variations of the superconducting gap emerge. We have studied the superconducting energy gap locally by the STM measurements on all our superconducting samples down to 3 nm thickness close to the critical disorder. The gap maps constructed from these measurements, as well as the zero-bias conductance maps (ZBC) demonstrate the homogeneity of the superconducting state on the flat regions of the investigated surfaces. Homogeneity of tunneling spectra measured on the 3 nm sample along a 40 nm white line from Fig. We also studied the coherence-peaks height map on the 3 nm sample, which could reflect the loss of phase coherence, too In some areas of the 3 nm thin superconducting film, islands a few nanometers wide with slightly different values of the superconducting energy gap than in other locations are observed. However, as already shown in our previous paper Obviously, the question may arise how close to SIT the disordered films would have to be for bosonic effects to occur, and whether our 3 nm MoN was that close. For example, in strongly disordered NbN Carbillet et al. Fourthly, we show, that the transverse magnetic field applied to the thin films in close proximity to SIT acts through paramagnetic Zeeman spin-splitting effect. In the previous work The dominance of spin splitting effects has also been observed in systems that are close to the metal-insulator transition and exhibit "bad metallic" behavior due to strong electron correlations. Bogdanovich et al. MoN films reveal a transition from superconducting to insulating/bad metallic phase upon decreasing thickness from 30 nm to 1.5 nm. The superconducting transition temperature is gradually shifted from about 6 K to 2.7 K in the case of 3 nm films accompanied by decreasing Ioffe-Regel parameter approaching unity. Films thinner then 3 nm are already non-superconducting. The shift of Tc is also accompanied by the increase of the sheet resistance and can be modelled by the Finkel'stein's model for the enhanced electron interaction providing the critical sheet resistance Rcr = 2.3 kΩ where the superconductivity terminates. The scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy measurements prove that Tc and the superconducting gap  are coupled with a constant ratio for all films and that the superconducting DOS and the normalstate Altshuler-Aronov DOS corrections are spatially homogeneous and no emergent granularity appears on either sides of SIT. The logarithmic AA DOS correction, is enhanced in increased magnetic field due to the Zeeman spin effects driving the system deeper into the insulating state. All this is pointing to purely fermionic SIT scenario in the system. The critical temperatures of the thin films as the function of the corresponding sheet resistances were analyzed in the framework of the widely used Finkel'stein's model 