Multiferroic compounds have gained research attention in the field of ferroelectric photovoltaics due to the presence of transition-metal d states from magnetic ions, which tend to reduce the bandgap value. In this work, 0.5Pb(Zr0.52Ti0.48)O3-0.5Pb(Fe0.5Nb0.5)O3 [PZTFN0.5] thin films were synthesized using a sol-gel route to investigate the effect of iron doping on optical and multiferroic properties. For comparative analysis, the end-member compositions, Pb(Zr0.52Ti0.48)O3 [PZT] and Pb(Fe0.5Nb0.5)O3 [PFN], were also synthesized under identical conditions. Our results revealed that the presence of Fe 3+ ions, besides inducing multiferroic behavior, effectively enhances the optical absorption of the material in the visible light region. Optical transitions at ~3.0 eV (~2.4 eV) and ~2.7 eV (~2.2 eV) for the direct (indirect) bandgap were determined for PZTFN0.5 and PFN, respectively, indicating that the absorption edges of the iron-containing films result more promising than PZT (Eg~3.6eV) for photovoltaic applications. Both PZTFN0.5 and PFN thin films exhibit multiferroic behavior at room temperature, with different electric and magnetic properties. While PZTFN0.5 presents saturated hysteresis loops with remanent polarization values around 10 μC/cm 2 and magnetization of 1.6 emu/cm 2 , PFN displays significantly larger remanence (31 emu/cm 2 ) but poorer ferroelectric properties due to the presence of leakage. Microscopic insights into the structural and electronic properties of the PZTFN0.5 solid solution were provided from first-principles calculations. Multiferroic materials have attracted significant attention for both fundamental understanding and potential applications in a wide variety of multifunctional devices. Among them, BiFeO3 (BFO) is the most extensively studied single-phase multiferroic material due to the coexistence of magnetic and ferroelectric orders under ambient conditions. Interestingly, BFO has also been the subject of numerous studies for photovoltaic applications The photocurrent generation in multiferroics is fundamentally similar to the photovoltaic effect in ferroelectrics, that is, the spontaneous polarization is the compelling force for separating photoinduced electrons and holes. However, in multiferroic materials, there would be possibilities of both electric-field and magnetic-field control of properties, such as the photocurrent direction The films were synthesized by modified sol-gel routes developed at our laboratory. Two compatible routes, based on the use of acetoin (3-hydroxy-2butanone) as a chelating agent, were developed for the synthesis of PZT and PFN precursors, with concentration values of 0.2 M. The 0.5PZT-0.5PFN precursor was then prepared by mixing equal volumes of PZT and PFN solutions. Details about the preparation process are presented in reference The films were characterized by X-ray diffraction using a Phillips X'pert Pro X-Ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation of wavelength 1.5406 Å. The measurements were taken in the grazing incident configuration with an incident beam angle of 5o, 2θ varying between 20o and 60o and a scanning time of 0.02 o/s. Raman spectra were acquired with a Renishaw inVia Raman spectrometer by means of the 514 nm Ar-ion laser line (10mW nominal power). The surface morphology of the samples was observed by atomic force microscopy (Nanotec ELECTRONIC AFM equipment) in tapping mode using a silicon probe with 150 kHz resonance frequency and a constant force of 7.4 N/m. For electrical measurements, 0.25 mm diameter platinum top electrodes were deposited by DC-sputtering on the surface of the films, and then thermally treated at 350 °C for 10 minutes. Dielectric properties were measured using an impedance meter (LCR meter) QuadTech 7600 plus. The ferroelectric cycles were obtained at room temperature from a Sawyer-Tower circuit applying alternate signals at frequencies of 50 Hz and 1 kHz. The magnetic measurements were carried out in a commercial superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer (SQUID). UV-visible light transmission and absorption characteristics were measured by a JASCO UV/VIS 550. For the first-principles electronic structure calculations we used the plane augmented wave method (PAW) as implemented in the Vienna Ab-Initio Package (VASP) The films were deposited onto Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si wafers for electric and magnetic characterizations, and onto FTO-coated aluminum-borosilicate glass (FTO-AG) substrates for optical measurements. The latter substrate is adequate for the deposition of PZT films due to its high thermal resistance and low cost compared to quartz The X-ray diffraction patterns of the synthesized films, shown in Fig. Pyrochlore-free films are obtained on platinized silicon substrates (left panel), whereas on FTO-AG substrates, the deposition of iron-containing films reveals some pyrochlore phase formation (right panel). The broad shape of the (002) and (112) peaks suggest the presence of tetragonal symmetry in PZT and PZTFN0.5 films deposited on both kinds of substrates. On the other hand, these peaks become sharper for PFN films, indicating a pseudocubic structure 4E+3A1+B1. When describing the Raman spectra of PFN and other pseudocubic relaxor ferroelectrics, the Fm-3m symmetry is considered a good approximation The modes at 429 cm -1 , 565 cm -1 and 694 cm -1 can be ascribed to Fe-O stretching vibration, O-B-O bending and B-O stretching of the oxygen octahedron, respectively have similar values (~15 nm). Interestingly, the RMS roughness for PFN is roughly twice as large (31 nm). The ferroelectric and ferromagnetic features of the films are presented in Fig. films display similar ferroelectric behavior, with well saturated hysteresis loops, remanent polarization (Pr) values of ~10 μC/cm 2 and coercive fields (Ec) of 200 and 120 kV/cm, respectively. The loop measured at 50 Hz for the PFN film is not saturated and displays a small coercive field (~20 kV/cm) with a Pr value of ~20 μC/cm 2 . However, it's important to note that this value depends on the applied voltage frequency and it becomes lower for higher frequencies. This frequency dependency can be clearly seen in the inset of Figure In Figure The three films display clearly different absorption edges. Increasing the Fe-content shifts the absorption onset towards higher wavelengths, which is an outcome of the increasing ability of the multiferroic films to absorb lower-energy photons. This result suggests a reduction in the bandgap value due to the incorporation of Fe 3+ and Nb 5+ ions into the PZT lattice. For the determination of bandgap energies (Eg), the absorption coefficient (α) was evaluated from the corresponding absorbance spectra as α = (2.303 A) / d, where A is the absorbance and d is the film thickness. The gaps were estimated from Tauc plots (αhν) n vs. hν, where the n factor depends on the nature of the electron transition and is equal to 2 or 1/2 for the direct and indirect transitions, respectively. Here, hν results the energy of the incident photon. The Eg values were determined by extending the linear region of the Tauc plots to the horizontal axis. Direct bandgap energies of 3.6, 3.0 and 2.7 eV were obtained for PZT, PZTFN0.5 and PFN, respectively (Fig. The bandgap undergoes a redshift with the addition of Fe ions, and we note that the value of 2.7 eV obtained for the PFN film is in good agreement with the one reported for epitaxial thin films synthesized by pulsed laser deposition Figure Although perovskites in the ternary system PT-PZT-PFN have attracted significant interest due to their ability to exhibit simultaneous ferroelectric and ferromagnetic behavior, there is a lack of first-principles theoretical studies in this system. Here, we used the VASP package for conducting first-principles electronic structure calculations in order to get microscopic insights into the crystal and electronic structure of the PZTFN0.5 solid solution. For the sake of simplicity, we first studied the structural properties of the solid solution between PFN and lead titanate (PT): 0.5PbTiO3-0.5Pb(Fe0.5Nb0.5)O3 [PTFN0.5]. A 2 × 2 × 2 supercell with 2Fe, 2Nb and 4Ti was used, and we tried all possible configurations for the transition ions. Full structural relaxation was allowed for all inequivalent configurations. We show in Fig. It's worth noting that experiments also suggest a tetragonal ground state for the PT-PFN0.5 solid solution We note that the DFT results support the idea of Fe clustering as there is a preference for two Fe 3+ ions to occupy adjacent sites. This feature, also observed in DFT calculations for PFN (compare, for instance, the top views shown in Figs. In Figure Finally, it is interesting to note that Fe/Nb co-doping induce a reduction of the unit-cell volume, which increases the band widths and reduces bandgap. We performed DFT calculations for PbZr0.5Ti0.5O3 using a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell with 4 Zr and 4 Ti, and all possible configurations were tested. We found that the lowest energy configuration corresponds to Zr ions located at sites 1, 2, 7, and 8 (according to the numbering shown in the inset of Fig. In both cases, the unit-cell volume is larger than the one obtained for the PZTFN0. parameters calculated for the three compositions deposited on Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si substrates.