The advancement in thin-film exfoliation for synthesizing oxide membranes has opened up new possibilities for creating artificially-assembled heterostructures with structurally and chemically incompatible materials. The sacrificial layer method is a promising approach to exfoliate as-grown films from a compatible material system, allowing their integration with dissimilar materials. Nonetheless, the conventional sacrificial layers often possess intricate stoichiometry, thereby constraining their practicality and adaptability, particularly when considering techniques like Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE). This is where easy-to-grow binary alkaline earth metal oxides with a rock salt crystal structure are useful. These oxides, which include (Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba)O, can be used as a sacrificial layer covering a much broader range of lattice parameters compared to conventional sacrificial layers and are easily dissolvable in deionized water. In this study, we show the epitaxial growth of single-crystalline perovskite SrTiO3 (STO) on sacrificial layers consisting of crystalline SrO, BaO, and Ba1-xCaxO films, employing a hybrid MBE method. Our results highlight the rapid (≤ 5 minutes) dissolution of the sacrificial layer when immersed in deionized water, facilitating the fabrication of millimeter-sized STO membranes. Using high-resolution xray diffraction, atomic-force microscopy, scanning transmission electron microscopy, impedance spectroscopy, and scattering-type near-field optical microscopy (SNOM), we demonstrate epitaxial STO membranes with bulk-like intrinsic dielectric properties. The employment of alkaline earth metal oxides as sacrificial layers is likely to simplify membrane synthesis, particularly with MBE, thus expanding research possibilities. Modern electronic devices demand the integration of functional materials with diverse functionalities. Traditionally, the functional materials used in devices are grown on commercially available substrates using thin-film deposition techniques such as sputtering, Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD), or MBE. The use of a rigid substrate clamps the thin film, imposing limitations such as reduced flexibility and bendability. Limitations in the choice of available substrates further restrict the degree of strain engineering. Additionally, the substrate clamping effect makes the creation of 3D architectures of such functional materials less feasible A traditional method to create a freestanding membrane is via wet/dry etching of the crystalline substrate in acidic solutions or using lasers. This is a destructive approach that can potentially damage the membrane When considering a material for use as an epitaxially-grown sacrificial layer, there are several criteria to take into account. These criteria may vary depending on the specific application, but some common factors include: (i) Compatibility: epitaxial growth of the single-crystalline functional film should be possible on top of the sacrificial layer without interfacial reaction/diffusion, (ii) Selectivity: the sacrificial layer should be etchable (preferably in non-acidic solutions) without damaging the functional film, (iii) Stability: the sacrificial layer should be thermally stable at the growth temperature which is typically > 800 °C for epitaxial oxide films, (iv) Processability: the sacrificial layer should be easily processable and reproducible using the existing equipment and processes and finally (v) Tunability: the sacrificial layer should have tunable lattice parameters for coherent, epitaxial growth of functional crystalline films Various sacrificial layers have been developed The binary alkaline earth metal oxides (AO, A= Mg, Ca, Sr, and Ba) have great potential as a sacrificial layer in epitaxial membrane synthesis as they can also meet all the above criteria. They are easy to grow in MBE since the alkaline earth metals can be easily sublimated (300-500 °C) and readily oxidized. The binary oxides can also form a solid solution owning to the structural similarity (rock salt structure, Figure Figure In this study, we demonstrate easy-to-synthesize sacrificial layers -SrO, BaO, and Ba1-xCaxO with a simple stoichiometry followed by the synthesis of high-quality, epitaxial SrTiO3 (STO) membranes. Using a binary oxide sacrificial layer of SrO, we show successful epitaxial growth, exfoliation, and transfer of STO membranes. Epitaxial and single-crystalline growth of STO on (Ba,Ca)O layer is also achieved. Direct growth of STO on (Ba,Ca)O layer resulted in polycrystalline films. This issue was addressed by inserting a thin diffusion barrier layer consisting of epitaxial BaSnO3 (BSO) or CaSnO3 (CSO). The as-grown STO films are exfoliated by dissolving SrO/BaO/Ba1-xCaxO in deionized water, followed by the transfer onto various host substrates. A rapid (≤ 5 minutes) dissolution of the sacrificial layer was achieved when immersed in deionized water. By fabricating metal-insulator-metal (MIM) capacitors of STO membranes on an Au-coated Si substrate, we demonstrate a bulk-like intrinsic dielectric constant in these membranes. Scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM) further demonstrated bulk-like phonon modes in membranes transferred on a Si substrate. We use hybrid MBE to grow STO and the sacrificial layer of SrO, details of which are provided in the Materials and Methods section. Figures Relative to the bulk lattice parameters (aSTO-bulk = 3.905 Å and aSrO-bulk = 5.139 Å), both structures yielded partially strained STO films and a nearly fully relaxed SrO. The SrO layer grows with an in-plane rotation of 45° (aSrO-bulk /√2= 3.634 Å) to minimize the lattice mismatch. The ɸ-scans in The insets of Figures Note that all the measurements were conducted soon after the samples were taken out of the vacuum chamber to avoid deterioration of the SrO sacrificial layer when exposed to air. To investigate this effect, we performed a detailed study using a thickness series of STO/SrO/LAO(001). Our goal is two-fold: (1) to examine the potential effect of SrO deterioration on STO crystallinity, and (2) to see whether or not an ex-situ rocking curve measurement be used to examine the quality of epitaxial growth of STO on a sacrificial SrO layer. The latter is particularly important as the rocking curve's full-width at half maximum (FWHM) can be broadened after growth due to the deterioration of the underlying SrO layer. We found exactly the same: Figures Figure To further assess the adaptability of binary oxides as sacrificial layers, we chose to focus on (Ba,Ca)O due to its close lattice match with STO (001) and its high hygroscopic nature, which facilitates quicker dissolution in deionized water. Our initial attempts to directly grow STO on a 16 nm BaO/STO (001) substrate resulted in the formation of polycrystalline films (see Figure We attribute this outcome to the undesirable intermixing between BaO and STO, creating a suboptimal template for epitaxial growth (refer to our discussion in Figure Figure Following the successful epitaxial growth of STO on three distinct sacrificial layers, namely SrO, BaO, and Ba1-xCaxO, we developed a methodology for the exfoliation and transfer procedure, as outlined in the Materials and Methods section. Figure HRXRD scans confirm the phase-pure, single-crystalline STO membrane of varying thicknesses on Au-coated Si substrate using SrO sacrificial layer, with an out-of-plane lattice parameter of 3.905 ± 0.002 Å, identical to that of the bulk-single crystal (Figure Finally, as a more sensitive measure of structural quality, we performed capacitance measurements as a function of frequency by fabricating a parallel-plate electrode geometry. We used photolithography to pattern a circular array of metallic electrodes followed by electron-beam evaporation to deposit Au electrodes. A device schematic along with a top-view optical image of the fabricated MIM device structure are shown in the insets of Figure Treating the structure as a parallel-plate capacitor, we can extract the static dielectric constant (εr) using eq. 2, where tSTO is the membrane thickness, A is the area of the top electrode, and εo is the permittivity of free space. Experimental data and the fitting results are shown in Figure The value of the intrinsic dielectric constant can be extracted by rearranging the above equation and plotting the measured capacitance (A/Ceffective) as a function of membrane thickness (tSTO) as given by eq. 4. ' To this end, we grew a series of STO membranes with thicknesses ranging from 10 nm to 422 nm and transferred them onto Au-coated Si substrates. MIM capacitor structures were fabricated, and their dielectric properties were characterized using an impedance analyzer (data shown in Figure Infrared (IR) spectroscopy provides a powerful means to probe crystallographic order and symmetry in perovskites such as STO, which are quantified most simply through the frequency (ω)-dependent complex-valued infrared permittivity ε(ω). To compare with the established permittivity of bulk STO (40), we examined ε(ω) of a thin STO membrane using nano-scale Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (nanoFTIR). We targeted a 16-nm-thick single STO membrane and an artificially-created stack consisting of two 16-nm-thick STO membranes assembled at an arbitrary twist angle (Figure To extract infrared optical constants describing our quasi-2D STO membrane, we fit our nano-spectroscopy data using a quantitative model of near-field spectroscopy showcasing the sensitivity of near-field imaging and spectroscopy to membrane thickness. Meanwhile, the frequencies ωTO and ωLO extracted by our fit are identically consistent with those of unstrained bulk single-crystal STO, whereas the free parameter of our fit, the Ti-O phonon scattering rate ɣ, is found to be 1.9 greater than that identified from bulk single-crystals In summary, we demonstrate the potential of using binary alkaline earth oxides as a sacrificial layer for synthesizing perovskite oxide membranes. We employ hMBE to grow an epitaxial single-crystalline STO film on sacrificial layers consisting of crystalline SrO, BaO, and Ba1-xCaxO films. We demonstrate that STO growth on BaO results in polycrystallinity and can be avoided by coherently growing a thin barrier layer of CSO or BSO. These films are then transformed into millimeter-sized membranes by dissolving the SrO or BaO or Ba1-xCaxO sacrificial layer in deionized water, allowing for their integration with various structurally and chemically dissimilar substrates. Notably, the use of binary oxides as a sacrificial layer resulted in a rapid membrane synthesis (≤ 5 min) enabled by the faster dissolution kinetics of binary oxides. The intrinsic dielectric properties of the membranes are characterized using an impedance analyzer, and the phonon modes are observed using near-field spectroscopy. The results show that the dielectric properties and phonon modes are identical to those of bulk single-crystal STO, indicating that the membranes possess bulk-like structural and dielectric properties. The versatility of this approach is further demonstrated by successfully developing membranes of STO/CSO, STO/BSO, and STO using a family of binary oxide sacrificial layers. We use a hybrid MBE system (Scienta Omicron Inc) to grow STO and SrO films on the LAO (001) substrate (MTI corporation). All films were grown on a 5 mm × 5 mm substrate. An effusion cell containing 99.99% Sr source was used to supply strontium. A liquid precursor of titanium tetra isopropoxide -TTIP (99.999% Sigma-Aldrich) is used to supply Ti that is injected inside the MBE system with the help of a line-of-sight gas injector (E-Science Inc) and a customized gas-inlet system controlled via a linear-leak valve and a Baratron capacitance monometer (MKS Instruments Inc). An RF oxygen plasma source was used for supplying oxygen. Oxygen plasma was operated at 250 W at an oxygen pressure of 5 × 10 -6 Torr. The beam equivalent pressure (BEP) of Sr was fixed at 1.2 × 10 -7 Torr for STO and SrO growth. TTIP was fixed at a Baratron pressure of 135 mTorr for an adsorption-controlled growth of STO films The growth of Ba1-xCaxO sacrificial layer was performed at a substrate temperature of 900 ̊C by supplying Ba and Ca using an effusion cell containing 99.99% Ba source and 99.99% Ca source, respectively, and oxygen using oxygen plasma operated at 250 W with oxygen pressure of 5 × 10 -6 Torr. The growth of CSO was performed using a Ca effusion cell fixed at a BEP of 9 ×10 - 9 Torr and a hexamethylditin (HMDT) precursor operated at 250 mTorr Baratron pressure. A customized gas-inlet system similar to TTIP was used for HMDT precursor. Following growth (at 900 ̊C), STO was grown with the same growth conditions as discussed earlier in this section. For SrO and BaO layer All samples were exfoliated within a day of being removed from the vacuum chamber. The first step is to apply support to the STO/AO/LAO sample (A = Sr, Ba). The sample is spin-coated with a polymer supporting layer of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) at 3000 rpm for 60 seconds, and a thermal release tape with a square cut is applied on top of the PMMA. The sample was placed in the DI water for the duration of 24 hours that was heated to a temperature of 60 °C. Although higher temperatures (80 ̊C) helped dissolve a 15 nm thick SrO layer within 30 minutes, lower temperatures and high time were used to avoid potential damage to the exfoliated film from bubbling at a higher temperature. SrO dissolves via reaction SrO + H2O → Sr(OH)2, the substrate falls down in the water or is gently lifted off, and a free-standing membrane of STO (with Tape/PMMA) is left floating in the container. The floating film (Tape/PMMA/STO) is subsequently scooped on top of the desired substrate. The PMMA supporting layer is removed using acetone, and thermal release tape is naturally detached. The same exfoliation and transfer process for SrO was used for all target substrates including Si and metal-coated Si. Similar steps were followed for exfoliation and transfer of films grown on the Ba1-xCaxO sacrificial layer, except that PDMS or Tape was used as a supporting layer instead of PMMA. The were first attached with these supporting layers, followed by the dissolution of the sacrificial layer in water kept at 80 ̊C via reaction Ba1-xCaxO + (y)H2O ⟶ (1-x)Ba(OH)2 + (x)Ca(OH)2. The substrate falls down in the water, resulting in free-standing STO/CSO heterostructures. The PDMS and Tape are removed from the membrane by heating the supporting layer/STO/CSO/host substrate stack to 120 ̊C. Photolithography (lift-off process) was used to pattern an array of 100 μm diameter circles on the sample. First, the STO membrane on an Au-coated Si substrate was spin-coated with a photoresist (NR71 3000p) at 3000 rpm for 45 seconds. The sample was then baked at 120 °C for 1 minute. The photoresist, covered with a mask (having a circular pattern), was exposed to UV light for 20 seconds. After exposure, the sample was heated on a hot plate at 100 °C for a minute. The photoresist was removed by a developer (RD 6) creating a circular pattern. 400 nm thick Au electrodes were then deposited on the patterned sample using e-beam deposition. To avoid the delamination of the deposited Au on the STO membrane, ultra-sonication was done at low power for 1 minute in the resist remover (RR41). The photoresist was further removed gently by blowing the resist remover using a syringe on the pattern. The process was repeated 4 to 5 times slowly until the pattern was entirely developed while ensuring the Au electrode remained adhered to STO. Optical images were taken during and after the pattern development to ensure a sharp circular pattern was formed on membranes. An impedance analyzer (Keysight E4990A) connected to a probe station was used for impedance layer from 2016 to present (August 2023). For complex sacrificial layers, there are 67 papers using PLD, 7 papers using MBE There were only 2 papers using an epitaxial binary oxide using PLD. Inset shows a schematic illustrating the structure consisting of a functional film/sacrificial layer/substrate. (b) Binary alkaline earth metal oxide with a rock salt crystal structure. Alkaline earth elements are labeled in yellow, whereas oxygen atoms are labeled in red color. (c) Lattice parameters of sacrificial layers with complex stoichiometry (light blue), binary alkaline earth metal oxide sacrificial layers along with their growth orientations (yellow band), the commercially available substrates (grey), and several functional films (black). Pseudocubic lattice parameters are used for non-cubic perovskites and other functional materials. Lattice parameters are taken from 