Simple and low-cost biosensing solutions are suitable for point-of-care applications aiming to overcome the gap between scientific concepts and technological production. To compete with sensitivity and selectivity of golden standards, such as liquid chromatography, the functionalization of biosensors is continuously optimized to enhance the signal and improve their performance, often leading to complex chemical assay development. In this research, the efforts are made on optimizing the methodology for electrochemical reduction of graphene oxide to produce thin film-modified gold electrodes. Under the employed specific conditions, 20 cycles of cyclic voltammetry (CV) are shown to be optimal for superior electrical activation of graphene oxide into electrochemically reduced graphene oxide (ERGO). This platform is further used to develop a matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2) biosensor, where specific anti-MMP2 aptamers are utilized as a biorecognition element. MMP-2 is a protein which is typically overexpressed in tumor tissues, with important roles in tumor invasion, metastasis as well as in tumor angiogenesis. Based on impedimetric measurements, we were able to detect as low as 3.32 pg mL -1 of MMP-2 in PBS with a dynamic range of 10 pg mL -1 -10 ng mL -1 . Further experiments with real blood samples revealed a promising potential of the developed sensor for direct measurement of MMP-2 in complex media. High specificity of detection is demonstrated -even to the closely related enzyme MMP-9. Finally, the potential of reuse was demonstrated by signal restoration after experimental detection of MMP-2. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are enzymes of a broad spectrum of physiological and pathological processes primarily in an extracellular matrix (ECM) The critical point is its concentration found in human fluids from healthy and diseased individuals. Morgia et al. evaluated MMP-2 activity (activated MMP-2) in patients diagnosed with prostate cancer (PC) from plasma samples Electrochemical (EC)-based biosensors have been shown to be very sensitive for protein detection, especially when novel technologies based on nanomaterials (magnetic beads, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs), graphene, quantum dots, and carbon nanotubes) are employed Graphene and its derivatives are extensively used 2D nanomaterials in biosensing technologies GO is a single carbon layer decorated with oxygen groups on the basal plane and its edges. It often contains defects, which gives GO hybrid structure composed of sp 2 -and sp 3 -hybridized carbon atoms resulting in different properties such as fluorescence quenching, biocompatibility, facile chemical modification but low electrical conductivity Herein, the EC reduction protocol of GO towards yielding an ERGO thin film on commercial gold electrodes is optimized. Further surface functionalization with suitable aptamers is achieved and demonstrated for selective and highly sensitive impedimetric detection of MMP-2. A CV reduction protocol was optimized to improve electrical performance of GO, enabling the development of a sensitive and selective electrochemical biosensor for MMP-2 detection. Graphene oxide (2 mg ml -1 , dispersion in H2O); potassium chloride (≥99.0%); potassium ferricyanide (≥99.0%); magnesium chloride hexahydrate (99.0-102.0%); Dulbecco's phosphate buffered saline, modified without CaCl2 and MgCl2; 1-pyrenebutanoic acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (PBASE) (95%); N,N-dimethylformamide, anhydrous (DMF) (99.8%); 1-methyl 2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) (≥99.0%); (3aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) (≥99.0%); β-mecaptoethylamine (MEA, cysteamine) (≥98.0% RT) were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). Matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9), human recombinant, pre-activated, were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). Ethanol, absolute was obtained from Chem-Lab NV (Belgium). Potassium ferrocyanide trihydrate (≥99.5%) was purchased from Fluka (Spain). MMP2-specific aptamer of the sequence All electrochemical measurements (cyclic voltammetry (CV), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)) were performed on Biologic VMP-3e Multichannel Potentiostat (France) and EC-lab software. The electrolyte with redox probe used for all electrochemical experiments was 0.1 M KCl with 5 mM K3[Fe(CN)6]/K4[Fe(CN)6] (ferro/ferricyanide redox probe). Raman spectroscopy was performed on XploRA Plus Raman Spectrometer (Horiba, France), using the 532 nm laser source, 100x objective (Olympus, Japan) (NA 0.9), and laser power 0.9 mW. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Solver-PRO, NT-MDT, Russia) was used to estimate the GO thickness and surface coverage. Prior to gold IDE modification, each electrode was washed in ethanol and DI water with ultrasonication for 5 minutes, and finally dried with pressurized air. Washed electrodes were pre-conditioned using CV between -0.5 and 1.0 V with a scan rate 0.5 V s -1 in 0.05 M H2SO4. To modify the surface with positively charged amino groups, silanization of the glass surface with APTES was performed by incubation with 2% APTES in ethanol for 1 hour. After rinsing with pure ethanol, electrodes were dried and annealed at 120 °C for 1 hour. The gold surface was then modified with a 10 mM MEA aqueous solution by incubating for 1 hour. After rinsing with DI water, IDEs were dried and prepared for GO deposition. GO suspension was diluted with NMP to 0.2 mg mL -1 and homogenized by sonication. To produce ultra-thin films of GO, 10 μL droplets were cast over working electrodes and left for 2 hours at RT, ensuring negligible solvent evaporation to produce the film as uniform as possible. After incubation, the GO droplet was removed, and electrodes were annealed in low-temperature conditions (100 °C) for 30 minutes to evaporate the excess of solvent. Thin-film GO was reduced electrochemically by running 20 cycles of CV in 1X PBS using voltage range between -1.2 and -0.4 V (0.05 V s -1 scan rate). Graphene-based biosensor was developed using our previous functionalization protocol MMP-2 stock solution was serially diluted in 1X PBS solution to obtain working concentrations ranging from 1 pg ml -1 to 100 ng ml -1 . To evaluate the sensitivity of the biosensing platform, EIS measurements were taken for each concentration, as well as blank measurement in pure 1X PBS. Prior to each impedance measurement in the frequency range 0.25 -100,000 Hz (10 mV potential amplitude), 20 μL of the analyte was incubated for 15 minutes, then the electrode was rinsed with ultrapure water, electrolyte solution with 5 mM ferro/ferricyanide redox probe was introduced, and measurement was performed three times (average value was taken). Biosensor signal is calculated as S = (Rct,i -Rct,b)/Rct,b * 100 (in %), where Rct,i is a fitted impedance obtained from Nyquist plot of the certain analyte concentration and Rct,b is a fitted impedance of the blank measurement. For the cross-selectivity measurements, anti-MMP2 aptamer-functionalized biosensor was tested against MMP-9, FBG, and ErbB2 proteins prepared also in 1X PBS. The measurements were performed in the same manner as explained above. Biosensor regeneration tests were performed after each series of measurement to study the possibility of the biosensor re-use. For that manner, 10 mM NaOH solution was used to thoroughly wash out MMP-2 after final analyte concentration and restore aptamer configuration Blood samples were taken from three diabetic patients and serum samples were prepared. To evaluate the concentration of MMP-2 in real samples, ELISA test was performed according to manufacturer's procedures (Table To maximize the surface coverage with positively charged amino groups and achieve full coverage of GO and a homogeneous film on the working electrodes, the self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of MEA on Au electrodes was conducted, while functionalization of the glass substrate was achieved by silanization with APTES The working solution of 0.2 mg mL -1 GO monolayer sheets (<10 μm diameter) was prepared by dilution with NMP in a 1:9 ratio. The obtained GO suspension in the water/NMP mixture was demonstrated to be stable for months after short sonication A GO thin film was successfully deposited, which can be recognized by the CV and EIS signal change (Figure Characterization of GO and ERGO by Raman spectroscopy. Compared to the graphene monolayer, which is characterized by first order scattering of the E2g mode (G-band), overtone 2D-band, and small defectinduced D-band, GO film has more broadened D-and G-band with similar intensities Multilayer cross-section thickness can be used to roughly calculate the number of layers. As depicted in Figure Electrochemical reduction removes oxidation groups, which is explained through the reduction peak diminishing in CV voltammogram. However, it does not reconfigure carbon lattice at defect sites and that is confirmed by Raman D peak stability after the reduction, meaning that despite the increased conductivity of the film, the quality of the film remains the same. Nevertheless, functionalization of such a film is more suitable for electrochemical system, compared to as-deposited dielectric GO, because there is much less reactive oxide groups and electrochemical conductivity is more pronounced. ERGO-IDE surface is functionalized using a standard linker-based protocol Sensitivity. An anti-MMP2 aptamer, with a dissociation constant (Kd) of 5.59 nM The comparison of other biosensing solutions with our approach is given in Table FBG is recently discussed as a natural inhibitor of MMP-2 Real samples. MMP-2 detection by the proposed biosensor was tested on the human serum samples as a proof-of-concept. The comparison of the concentrations determined by the ELISA and biosensor showed that our device is able to detect MMP-2 in a complex matrix, such as human serum, see Figure A novel facile methodology for the development of highly sensitive and selective biosensors for the detection of MMP-2 has been successfully employed and tested. Commercial gold IDEs and its glass substrate are functionalized with positively charged amine groups which enabled efficient electrostatic attachment of GO through drop-casting methodology. Here, a fully electrochemical strategy was further applied to reduce GO thin film to the ERGO conductive films by an optimized CV technique. After employing 20 CV cycles, a highly conductive film was produced, as proven by the increased oxidative peak current in CV or reduced Rct impedance shown by EIS, while the morphology of GO is preserved as confirmed by Raman spectroscopy. Moreover, this system was applied in the development of a biosensor for MMP-2 detection, using pyrene-based modification of ERGO and covalent attachment of specific anti-MMP2 aptamer. With this approach, the high biosensor sensitivity was demonstrated by detecting very low concentration (of active MMP-2 in a standard buffer solution), with the calculated LOD of 3.32 pg mL - . The ERGO-IDE aptasensor further showed good cross-selectivity to MMP-2 over similar enzyme MMP-9 and other proteins, such as fibrinogen and tyrosine-protein kinase receptor 2. The potential of reuse by aptamer regeneration is also demonstrated, which further supports the advantages of the employed methodology. Finally, our biosensor was able to compete with validated standard methods, such as ELISA, in detection of MMP-2 in human serum. The employed technology and novel biosensor exhibit promising characteristics for use in point-of-care devices for MMP-2 detection and applications in the prognosis and early diagnosis of cancer, but also for other pathological processes where MMP-2 overexpression is involved.