In conventional ferroelectric materials, polarization is an intrinsic property limited by bulk crystallographic structure and symmetry. Recently, it has been demonstrated that polar order can also be accessed using inherently non-polar van der Waals materials through layer-by-layer assembly into heterostructures, wherein interfacial interactions can generate spontaneous, switchable polarization. Here, we show that introducing interlayer rotations in multilayer vdW heterostructures modulates both the spatial ordering and switching dynamics of polar domains, engendering unique tunability that is unparalleled in conventional bulk ferroelectrics or polar bilayers. Using operando transmission electron microscopy we show how changing the relative rotations of three WSe 2 layers produces structural polytypes with distinct arrangements of polar domains, leading to either a global or localized switching response. Introducing uniaxial strain generates structural anisotropy that yields a range of switching behaviors, coercivities, and even tunable biased responses. We also provide evidence of physical coupling between the two interfaces of the trilayer, a key consideration for controlling switching dynamics in polar multilayer structures more broadly. Ferroelectric (FE) materials with three-dimensional lattices have been employed in an array of applications, including nonvolatile memory, actuators, and sensors, for decades. To view the moiré structure in these two polytypes we use dark-field TEM (DF-TEM), which is a diffraction-based imaging technique that can be used to filter signal in multicomponent structures, The distinct arrangements of polar domains in the AtA ′ and tAB ′ trilayers suggest that these two polytypes will behave differently in an applied field. We first investigate the structural response in the AtA ′ polytype. Fig. Previous studies have demonstrated that this order parameter can be used as a proxy for net polarization. It is also common for moiré structures to acquire heterostrain during sample fabrication, where one or more layers are uniaxially stretched relative to the adjacent layer(s). To understand the origin of the different switching responses exhibited by these two groups of domain walls, we calculate the polarizability for various PDW segments with different orientations for the sample shown in Fig. Some PDWs run through a heterostrain gradient where the small moiré is considerably more distorted on one side of the domain wall than the other. For example, in the regions shown in Fig. Remarkably, this asymmetry in the polarization curve can be systematically tuned down to the length scale of an individual polar domain. To demonstrate, we consider a PDW in a continuously varying heterostrain gradient. Fig. Next we discuss how the tAB ′ polytype responds to an applied field. Whereas the AtA ′ polytype had a highly localized polarization switching response, the tAB ′ structure globally deforms under application of an electric field (Fig. DF-TEM images of the tAB ′ structure show that the domain walls of the larger moiré are roughly commensurate with the domain walls in the smaller moiré, and as a field is applied, these two sets of domain walls appear to be pinned to one another (Fig. Considering that one or more layers are sliding and stretching in response to the applied field, it is unlikely that the local lattice mismatch between layers is decreasing (we would expect the converse instead), and therefore we conclude that changes in local rotational offset between the middle and top layers (θ 23 , Fig. Importantly, these results indicate that the interfaces in polar multilayer heterostructures are not decoupled from one another and cooperative effects can influence observed switching dynamics, such as the reduction in polarizability observed in Fig. Two-dimensional vdW materials have exhibited promise as FE components in emerging technologies Four-dimensional STEM datasets were acquired using a Gatan K3 direct detection camera located at the end of a Gatan Continuum imaging filter on a TEAM I microscope (aberrationcorrected Thermo Fisher Scientific Titan 80-300). The microscope was operated in energyfiltered STEM mode at 80 kV with a 10 eV energy filter centred around the zero-loss peak (to reduce background from inelastic scattering), an indicated convergence angle of 1.71 mrad, and a beam current of 40-50 pA. These conditions yield an effective probe size of 1.25 nm (full-width at half-maximum value). Diffraction patterns were collected using a step size of 2 nm with 200 x 200 beam positions, covering an area of 400 nm x 400 nm. The K3 camera was used in full-frame electron counting mode with a binning of 4 × 4 pixels in each diffraction pattern and an energy-filtered STEM camera length of 800 mm. Diffraction patterns were acquired with an exposure time of 13 ms per pattern, which is the sum of multiple counted frames. Analysis of 4D-STEM data was performed using Python on a personal computer. Published modules 