Superconductivity in topological insulators is expected to show very unconventional features such as p+ip order parameter, Majorana fermions etc. However, the intrinsic superconductivity has been observed in a very limited number of materials in which the pairing symmetry is still a matter of debate. Here, we study the topological crystalline insulator (Pb1-xSnx)1-yInyTe, where a peculiar insulator to superconductor transition was previously reported near the gap inversion transition, when the system is nearly a 3-dimensional Dirac semimetal. Both the existence of superconductivity near the 3-dimensional Dirac semimetal and the occurrence of insulator to superconductor transition in an isotropic material is highly unusual. We suggest that the observed phenomena are related to an intrinsic instability of a 3-dimensional Dirac semimetal state in (Pb1-xSnx)1-yInyTe and "flattening" of the bulk valence and conduction bands as they acquire a Mexican hat-like dispersion on the inverted side of the phase diagram. This favors the pairing instability if the chemical potential is pinned to these flat regions. A 3-dimensional (3D) Dirac point with linear dispersion in all three directions can be created at a timereversal invariant momentum (TRIM) by tuning an external parameter m, if the valence and conduction bands have the opposite parities Another interesting aspect of In-doped Pb 1-x Sn x Te is the posibility that its superconducting phase represents an intrinsic topological superconductor An alternative avenue towards topological superconductivity in heterostructures involving superconductors and topological insulators has been also explored Here, we show that the topological crystalline insulator Pb 1-x Sn x Te might be a good candidate for an intrinsic topological superconductor when doped with Indium. When near the gap inversion point, In-doped Pb 1-x Sn x Te shows a transition between a real bulk TCI and a bulk superconductor The ARPES experiments were carried out on a Scienta SES-R4000 electron spectrometer at beamline U5UA at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS), in the photon energy range from 12.5 to 62 eV and at the OASIS-laboratory at Brookhaven National Laboratory, using monochromatized He I α radiation Thick, bulk-like (2-5 μm) films of (111) (Pb 1-x Sn x ) 1-y In y Te were grown either on BaF 2 or Bi 2 Te 3 substrates, using the open hot wall epitaxy method A. Pure Pb1-xSnxTe Fig. On the surface terminated mostly by Pb-Sn, the bottom of the bulk conduction band is visible at hν = 17 eV, enabling the determination of the direct band-gap ∆ L ≈ 130 meV at 50 K, in agreement with the early optical studies at similar compositions At higher energies, the contours become distorted and strongly trigonally warped, both below and above the L point (panel (f)), with the direction of warping being opposite across the zone boundary. This was predicted in the band structure calculations, but never observed experimentally Fig. So, the question is why is the In-doped Pb 1-x Sn x Te superconducting only on the gap-inverted, TCI side of the phase diagram We note that both the gap magnitudes and the details in dispersions of valence/conduction bands shown in Fig. On the other hand, the question whether the superconductivity in (Pb 1-x Sn x ) 1-y In y Te is conventional or topological is still open. Topological superconductors are accompanied by gapless states at their boundaries, and they may be composed of Majorana fermions. The point-contact spectroscopy on In-doped SnTe suggests the odd-parity pairing and topological superconductivity 