CrxSe (x≤1) is a class of quasi-layered binary compounds with potential applications in spintronics due to its intriguing antiferromagnetic properties. In this work, CrxSe single crystals with high Cr content (x=0.87, 0.91 and 0.95) were grown, and their magnetic and transport properties were investigated in detail. It is found that with small increase of Cr content, the Néel temperature (TN) of the samples can dramatically increase from 147 K to 257 K, accompanied with obvious changes in the magnetic anisotropy and hysteresis. The phenomena of field-induced spin-flop transitions were unveiled in these alloys, indicating their comparatively low anisotropy. The magnetoresistance (MR) of the three compounds showed positive dependence at low temperatures and particularly, non-saturated linear positive MR was observed in Cr0.91Se and Cr0.95Se, with a large value of 16.2% achieved in Cr0.91Se (10K, 9T). The calculated Fermi surface and MR showed that the quasi-linear MR is a product of carrier compensation. Our work revealed highly sensitive magnetic and transport properties in the Cr-Se compounds, which can lay foundation when constructing further antiferromagnetic spintronic devices based on them. In recent years, antiferromagnets have attracted increasing interest in the spintronic community due to their technical potential for developing ultra-high-density and high-speed spintronic devices It is worth noting that in either devices, the read-out of signal is ascribed to the AFM anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) or anomalous Hall effect. Therefore, the anisotropic magnetic and transport properties are fundamentally important for the application of AFM materials in spintronic devices. The chromium-selenium system CrxSe (x≤1) has drawn much attention concerning their intriguing AFM properties. For instance, exchange bias effect due to exchange coupling between the interface spins in AFM and FM has been reported in Cr2Se3 CrSe crystals with grain size reaching the sub-millimeter scale prepared by atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (CVD) were assumed to be ferromagnetic in the ultrathin layer. The contradictory properties are possibly related to the highly sensitive properties of Cr-Se alloys, which deserves to be clarified by more systematic studies. Therefore, in this work, single crystals of CrxSe with high x content (x=0.87, 0.91 and 0.95) were synthesized and their magnetic and transport properties were systematically investigated. It is found that the magnetic properties of the CrxSe system are very sensitive to the Cr content. As the Cr content increases with a small amount, the Néel temperature (TN), magnetic anisotropy and hysteresis would change significantly. A field-induced spin-flop behavior was identified in these alloys, which also varied greatly depending on the composition. This highly sensitive and tunable magnetism could provide a promising platform for future device applications. The magnetoresistance (MR) of the three compounds showed positive dependence at low temperatures, which transformed to negative as the temperature increased, and nonsaturated linear positive MR was observed in Cr0.91Se and Cr0.95Se. The underlying physical mechanisms of linear MR signals were further explored by combining first-principles calculations with Boltzmann transport theory methods. Single crystals of CrxSe were grown by the flux method. To adjust the Cr content, we have tried different fluxes to synthesize. Firstly, the sample with actual composition of Cr0.87±0.07Se was grown with the low melting point metal Ga as the flux. Cr, Se and Ga in the stoichiometric ratio of 2:2:98 was mixed and loaded into the alumina crucible sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. The sealed quartz tube was heated continuously to 1100°C with a duration of 2h, and it was slowly cooled to 730°C at a rate of 3 K/h, afterwards the flux (Ga) was removed by highspeed centrifugation. As a result, air-stable single crystals with a shiny surface and an average size of ~ 4 × 3 × 0.1 mm 3 were obtained. To obtain samples with higher Cr content, Sn was taken as the flux, and the start ratio and the end temperature were also adjusted. When the start ratio of Cr:Se:Sn is 2.3:2:98 and the end temperature is set as 650°C , we can obtain the samples with actual composition of Cr0.91±0.10Se, while a higher start ratio of 2.4:2:98 can lead to Cr0.95±0.08Se. But when we continue to increase the start ratio, the Cr content will not increase. The average sizes of the two samples were about 2 × 2 × 0.1 mm 3 and 1 × 1 × 0.1 mm 3 , respectively. All these compositions were examined by using energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) equipped in the scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI Quanta 250F). To be simplified, Cr7Se8 (for Cr0.87Se), Cr0.91Se and Cr0.95Se were used to describe our samples in the following text. The structure of samples was identified by x-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker-AXS D8 Advance) with Cu-Kα radiation. The magnetic and transport properties were characterized by using the Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design). For measuring the longitudinal resistance, a four-probe method was applied and the electrode contact were made of silver paste. The final MR was symmetrized to exclude the misalignment of the electrode. First principles calculations were performed with the projector augmented wave (PAW) method, as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Fig. The Tt transition in Cr0.91Se was further inspected by the in-plane ac susceptibility measurement under constant external field (H=1000 Oe) and in the temperature range of 10-300 K (Inset of Fig. In order to further understand the magnetic behavior of the three alloys, the Curie-Weiss law was applied to fit the χ(T) curves (along H//ab) above the TN, as shown by the black solid lines in Figs. where C is the Curie constant, θ P is the Weiss temperature, and χ 0 is the Pauli PM constant. The fitted parameters and their corresponding errors for the three samples are given in Table The negative θ P are obtained for all the samples, the values of |θ P | become larger with increase of x, in line with their AFM ordering and the variation of TN. The effective magnetic moment μ eff are also obtained by where k B = 1.38 × 10 -16 erg/K, NA =6.02 × 10 23 mol -1 , and Z is the atom number per unit cell. The μ eff of the three samples are listed in the In the measurement of the susceptibility, it is noticed that the magnetic anisotropy also varies with x. Hence the isothermal magnetization M(H) curves are further investigated at various temperatures between 10 and 100 K for both H//ab and H//c directions. To measure the M(H) curves, the samples were first cooled to 10K under the measurement field of M(T) curves (1kOe), then warmed to each measurement temperature at zero field. The field sequence is 0T-9T-0T, including the virgin curve. There are several features that are noteworthy: i) Magnetic field-induced magnetization jumps were observed in a certain temperature range below TN in all the three samples, almost along both directions, except for Cr0.95Se. ii) Large magnetic hysteresis exists in Cr7Se8, while it decreases in Cr0.91Se and totally vanishes in Cr0.95Se. iii) For Cr7Se8, the M(H) behaviors along the two directions are nearly superposed, like the case of Cr0.68Se These discontinuous magnetization jumps are the so-called field-induced spin-flop (SF) transitions, which can take place in collinear AFM systems with weak magnetic anisotropy The samples were cooled to the target temperature under the stopping field of the previous measurement (9T or -9T). For clarity, all the MR curves are shifted vertically. As shown in Figs. 4(a-c), the three compounds share a common feature of that, the MR is positive at low temperatures, and turns to negative with higher temperatures (above 30 or 50K). At relatively high temperatures, the suppression of spin disorder scattering by the applied magnetic field dominates, resulting in negative MR. This contribution starts to diminish below a certain temperature and the MR due to Lorentz force starts to become significant. The MR behavior of Cr7Se8 at 50 K [Fig. However, the details of the MR are largely varied with different compositions, which are related to their distinct magnetization behaviors. In Cr7Se8, resembling to its M(H) curves, large hysteresis is also observed in MR. However, due to the different field sequence of the MR and MH, some details, like the closing field at 10K, might not completely be the same. In addition, the MR curves will usually turn at the SF field, which are most pronounced in Cr7Se8 and H//ab of Cr0.95Se. The MR turn can be attributed to the different ordering of spin structure across the SF transition. Meanwhile, changes in the electronic structures can also have an impact on the MR. For example, the emergence of superzone band gaps The temperature dependences of the resistivity (ρ(T)) for the three samples are also shown in Fig. The 11 th band consists of a closed central pocket (Γ point) and a large multiply connected surface (Fig. The FS in Fig. Finally, it is observed that the sample Cr0.91Se exhibits the largest MR, which cannot be explained by the perfect structure model here. Since in real metals, there may be structure defects, like vacancies, disorder or impurities, etc. Here when the Cr concentration deviates from the proportional value (x=7/8 or 1), the crystal defect is supposed to be maximized, which can heighten the spin disorder scattering , leading to large MR In summary, the magnetic and transport properties of the three hexagonal chromium-selenium compounds, Cr7Se8, Cr0.91Se and Cr0.95Se, are investigated after successfully synthesizing their single crystals. It is found that with small increase of Cr content, the TN of the samples can dramatically increase from 147 K to 257 K, accompanied with obvious change in the magnetic anisotropy and hysteresis. The Cr7Se8 single crystal exhibits almost isotropic electrical and magnetic behaviors, while the Cr0.95Se presents obvious anisotropy, which is originated from the gradual deflection of the spin orientation from the canted state to in-plane. Hysteresis phenomenon is detected in Cr7Se8 and the low temperature region of Cr0.91Se, owing to the possible ferromagnetic clusters existed in the AFM matrix. Furthermore, field-induced SF transitions are identified in all samples and are very sensitive to the composition. Uncovering of this highly sensitive magnetism can help address some controversial issues regarding this system, and provide guidelines when trying to take advantage of its antiferromagnetic properties. The MR signals of the three compounds showed positive dependence at low temperatures, which transform to negative as the temperature increases, as a result of the competition between the electron orbital scattering by the Lorentz effect and spin disorder scattering. Remarkably, non-saturated linear positive MR is observed in Cr0.91Se and Cr0.95Se. By calculating the FS acquired from first principles methods and MR based on Boltzmann transport theory, it is suggested that the quasi-linear MR is mainly a product of carrier compensation. according to the principle of electric neutrality. (See supplementary material for calculation details)