FeCrAl ODS steels for accident tolerant fuel claddings are designed to bear high-Cr and Al for enhancing oxidation resistance. In this study, we investigated the effects of Cr content on ion-irradiation hardening of three ODS ferritic steels with different Cr contents added with 9 wt% Al, Fe12Cr9Al (SP12), Fe15Cr9Al (SP13), and Fe18Cr9Al (SP14). The specimens were irradiated with 6.4MeV Fe 3+ at 300 °C to nominal 3 dpa. The irradiation hardening was measured by nanoindentation method, and the Nix-Gao plots were used to evaluate the bulk-equivalent hardness. The results showed that the irradiation hardening decreased with increasing Cr content. The reason is due to the growth of dislocation loops hindered by solute Cr atoms. TEM observations showed both ⟨100⟩ and 1/2⟨111⟩ dislocation loops existed in the irradiated area. The irradiation hardening was estimated by dispersed barrier hardening (DBH) model with dislocation loops. Accident tolerant fuel (ATF) cladding has been proposed to enhance the safety of light water reactors (LWR) under design-basis and beyond-designbasis accident scenarios, aiming to delay the onset of detrimental oxidation and chemical interaction processes with hot water The FeCrAl ODS steels are designed with different Cr (< 20wt%) and Al (< 10wt%) contents. The upper-limit content of Cr can be due to the αα ′ phase separation during service at elevated temperatures through spinodal and nucleation-growth mechanism according to the miscibility gap So far, irradiation effects on FeCrAl ODS steels are mainly studied for the steels with Al around 3 6 wt% Another issue of FeCrAl alloys is the effect of Cr content on irradiation hardening. As is well known, Cr improves the corrosion resistance by forming protective Cr 2 O 3 layers. However, the irradiation embrittlement could be accelerated by increasing Cr content which causes α -α ′ separation by radiation enhanced diffusion To fill the gap of research in high-Al FeCrAl ODS steels, we investigated the FeCrAl ODS ferritic steels with 9wt% Al which is close to its up-limit. Particularly to understand the Cr-dependent irradiation hardening, steels with different concentration of Cr Three FeCrAl ODS ferritic steels, of which the chemical compositions are shown in Table ??. These steels were produced by mechanical alloying in Ar atmosphere. The mixed powder was encapsulated into a steel capsule, hot-extruded at 1150°C and followed by the final step of the heat treatment at 1150°C for 1hr followed by air cooling. The detail of production procedure is available in a recent review Ion irradiation was performed with Dual-beam Facility for Energy Science and Technology (DuET) in Kyoto University. DuET is composed of a 1.7 MV tandem accelerator for heavy ion irradiation and a 1.0MV single accelerator for helium implantation. Details of the construction can be found in Ref The irradiation damage and implanted ion distribution (Fig. Tensile tests were performed on the tensile machine (INTESCO Co., Ltd) with a load cell of 0.5 kN. The geometries of a dog-born sheet type of miniature tensile specimens measured gauge-length=5 mm, width=1.2 mm and thickness=0.25 mm with the gripping area on both sides of 4 × 4mm 2 . The displacement speed was 0.2 mm/min resulting in an initial strain rate of 6.67 × 10 -4 /s. The yield stress was defined as 0.2% off-set flow stress. Three tests for each material were done at room temperature. Micro-Vickers hardness was measured at room temperature by a hardness tester, HMV-2T (Shimadzu Corp.), with 2 kg load and holding time for 10 sec. Jeol 2010 TEM with a side-mount CCD camera. The cross-section of irradiated specimens was fabricated by focused ion beam machining (FIB, Hitachi FB2200). TEM specimens were flashing-polished in 5% HClO4 and 95% CH3OH at -30 °C and 30 V as final thinning. The images were taken under two-beam bright field condition, with (110) αFe diffraction plane excited. The thickness of TEM specimens was measured by extinction fringes along specimen margins or inclined non-twinned large angle grain boundaries under g3g weak beam central dark field condition. The oxides in Al-added FeCrAl ODS steels are mainly Y-Al-O types. The lattice image analysis by Oono et al showed that most of the oxides were Y 4 Al 2 O 9 (YAP) and Y AlO 3 (YAM) Fig. Bulk-equivalent nano-hardness of unirradiated materials were estimated by data between 100 to 2000nm. Relationships among nano-hardness (NH), Vickers hardness (HV) and yielding stress (YS, σ 0.2 ) were shown in Fig. Fig. Fig. Song et al The average diameter and number density of dislocation loops were summarized in Table The profiles of nanoindentation hardness of irradiated and unirradiated FeCrAl ODS steels are shown in Fig. The Nix-Gao hardness plots of both irradiated and unirradiated steels are shown in Fig. The depth range selection for hardness evaluation of irradiation is not only dependent on the linear correlation. This is because the profile of Nix-Gao plots is usually not absolutely linear In this study, we chose the 100nm-300nm as the standard range to evaluate bulk-hardness for irradiated materials, because in this range, the indentation deforming zone is fully within the irradiated region. Fig. Figure affect the formation of Al-enrich β ′ precipitates, and consistent with the decreasing trend of irradiation hardening. However, the effect is doubtful because of the tiny difference of the Al concentrations (< 1%). One explanation might be that the α ′ was not precipitate at all under current irradiation flux. Ke et al The hardening in FeCrAl ODS steels in this study was mainly owing to the dislocation loops. The solution atoms of Cr could play an essential role in the evolution of dislocation loops under irradiations Secondly, the Cr will hinder the migration of 1/2 < 111 > loops. The formation of < 100 > loops by two glissile 1/2 < 111 > reaction will be suppressed Cottrell et al Where n is the number of atomic spacing in a dislocation segment, U 0 is the binding energy of atom in the core of edge dislocation, c is the concentration of alloying element. In the case of Cr, U 0 =0.032 eV. For the typical value n=25, the activation energy by Cr atoms is 0.048 eV for Fe12Cr9Al, 0.053 eV for Fe15Cr9Al, and 0.056 eV for Fe18Cr9Al ODS steels, respectively. The activation energy is increased with the Cr content; however, the increases are very small in comparison to Al (0.764 eV). The examination of the dislocation loops was performed in Fe12Cr9Al and Fe15Cr9Al ODS steels. As the samples are limited, only the information of total dislocation loops was compared (Table The simplified dispersed barrier hardening (DBH) model (equation 3) is used to evaluate the hardening induced by dislocation loops. In equation 3, M = 3.06 is the Taylor factor for FCC and BCC materials. The coefficient α = 0.2 is a strength factor. The shear modulus μ is 82 GPa for FeCrAl ODS steels. The Burgers vector b is 0.249 nm for glissile 1/2 < 111 > dislocations. N and d present for the number density and diameter of loops, respectively. The estimated hardening by dislocation loops for SP12 and SP13 are 1.28 GPa and 1.18 GPa respectively. The measured hardening by nanoindentation were 1.45 ± 0.27 GPa and 1.35 ± 0.33 GPa for SP12 and SP13 (Table Other factors which may influence the hardening are defect sink position including grain boundaries, pre-existed dislocations, and oxides. In the solidsolution strengthening analysis by Ukai et al Lower irradiation hardening usually indicates better irradiation resistance, though it is not absolutely correct due to various assessment standards. The irradiation hardening results in this study suggest the mechanism of Cr dependence in ion-irradiation is different to neutron irradiation. The current study in high Al FeCrAl steels will help to understand materials behavior at the irradiation conditions. It may contribute to the FeCrAl material design near the safe boundary of element concentration. The Cr dependent irradiation hardening in Fe-CrAl ODS steels with high Al concentration was studied. Three FeCrAl ODS steels, Fe12Cr9Al (SP12), Fe15Cr9Al (SP13), and Fe18Cr9Al (SP14), were irradiated with 6. We gratefully acknowledge Prof. Kondo and Mr. Hashitomi for their helping with the ion irradia-tion in DuET, Kyoto University. ZXZ acknowledges Prof. Stuart A. Maloy in Los Alamos National Laboratory for the discussion ATF element selection. ZXZ acknowledges Prof. Kasada in Tohoku University for discussion on nanoindentation. ZXZ would like to thank Prof. Akihiko Kimura in Kyoto University for the supporting of the experiment and the research communications. is barely interference of the implanted irons at this range. The samples were irradiated to nominal 3 dpa at 300 ± 10řC with the beam flux of 1.1 ± 10 12 ions/cm 2 /s, which is corresponding to 3.3 ± 10 -4 dpa/s. The peak dose is located around 1.6 μm. The maximum damage distribution is about 2.3 μm.