Magnetic skyrmions exhibit unique, technologically relevant pseudo-particle behaviors which arise from their topological protection, including well-defined, three-dimensional dynamic modes that occur at microwave frequencies. During dynamic excitation, spin waves are ejected into the interstitial regions between skyrmions, creating the magnetic equivalent of a turbulent sea. However, since the spin waves in these systems have a well-defined length scale, and the skyrmions are on an ordered lattice, ordered structures from spin wave interference can precipitate from the chaos. This work uses small angle neutron scattering (SANS) to capture the dynamics in hybrid skyrmions and investigate the spin wave structure. Performing simultaneous ferromagnetic resonance and SANS, the diffraction pattern shows a large increase in low-angle scattering intensity which is present only in the resonance condition. This scattering pattern is best fit using a mass fractal model, which suggests the spin waves form a long-range fractal network. The fractal structure is constructed of fundamental units with a size that encodes the spin wave emissions and are constrained by the skyrmion lattice. These results offer critical insights into the nanoscale dynamics of skyrmions, identify a new dynamic spin wave fractal structure, and demonstrates SANS as a unique tool to probe high-speed dynamics. Magnetic skyrmions are a type of chiral soliton which are of interest for their fundamental properties that arise from a non-trivial, geometrically-defined topology. As the skyrmions undergo dynamic motion spin waves are ejected and propagate into the interstitial spaces between the skyrmions. Specifically, as the skyrmion undergoes dynamic distortion the constantly changing magnetization is compensated by the emission of spin waves. In most magnetic systems, the wavelength distribution of the spin waves follows a dispersion curve relationship of the form f∝k Altogether, the current works reports on the dynamic structure of the skyrmion lattice (topological solitons), the spin waves which are ejected during their gyration, and the resulting dynamic structure (2D fractal network). A microwave-frequency excitation is applied to a thin film of hybrid skyrmions, driving them into resonant gyration and causing spin wave emissions. The magnetic structure is captured using small angle neutron scattering (SANS); SANS has been a critical tool in the investigation of skyrmions, Thin films with a nominal structure of Si/Ta(50 Å)/[Fe(3.6 Å)/Gd(4.0 Å)]120/Ta(50 Å) were grown by sputtering as described previously For the FMR measurement the skyrmion state was prepared without tilting the sample, e.g. as domains with local hexagonal ordering, but no long-range orientation. FMR measurements were performed using a 'flip-chip' geometry with a grounded coplanar waveguide, generating an in-plane microwave excitation, with an out-of-plane static magnetic field. Figure In the negative field range -110 mT < 0H < 0 mT, identified as Region IV, no apparent resonant signal is observed. In this region, the skyrmions are expected to combine, forming a labyrinth-like worm domain structure. The SANS measurements discussed in the main text were performed on the GPSANS instrument at the High-Flux Isotope Reactor and the results discussed in the Supplementary Material were taken on the vSANS instrument at the NIST Center for Neutron Research. For the measurements on GPSANS, five films were stacked for the measurement to increase the signal. These samples were prepared to be in a long-range ordered skyrmion lattice following a magnetic field sequence reported in the Methods. Integrating the SANS pattern across all azimuthal angles at fixed radii (q) generates a plot of intensity (I) versus q, shown in Fig. σ , where A1 is the Gaussian amplitude, σ is the peak width, and μ is the central peak position. As the applied field is increased towards 180 mT, a broad scattering feature appears at low-q, which rapidly decays. This decaying feature cannot be reasonably fit by many of the expected functions, including a power law (representing standard Porod-like scattering) or second-order exponential ( e -q 2 c ), which would represent quasielastic scattering. A Lorentzian-squared function of the form The best fitting model, shown in Figure The mass fractal model is conventionally used to describe a system constructed of monodisperse structures ordered into a fractal network. In the current system, the correlation between the mass fractal intensity, A3, and the magnetic resonance suggests that spin waves take up this role. However, spin waves generally follow an energy-dependent dispersion curve, with a continuum of wavevectors (and corresponding wavelengths), making them inherently polydisperse; the fractal model implies that the spin waves have a well-defined length scale. It is also notable that this length scale is similar to the radius of the skyrmion, previously measured in similar films to be ≈350 Å. In the described experimental configuration, the skyrmion lattice exists in the plane of the Gd/Fe thin film with a static magnetic field applied along the film normal direction, parallel to the skyrmion tubes, and an in-plane excitation field. This geometry excites gyration of the skyrmion tube with the orbit in the plane of the film. Previous simulations performed on conventional skyrmion tubes reported that the structure of the skyrmion during its resonant motion can be significantly distorted, especially for higher-order dynamics. Each of the dynamic modes shown in Fig. The ejected spin waves interfere to generate a diffraction pattern in the neutron data, however, it is the variation of these spin waves which causes this diffraction pattern to correlate with the mass fractal model. Specifically, considering a system of identical skyrmions with identical gyrations, the spin waves and resulting interreference pattern will be identical within each of the skyrmion lattice unit cells. The resulting spin wave interference pattern will have translational symmetry matching the skyrmion lattice, giving rise to a diffraction peak which is commensurate with the skyrmion lattice itself. Considering the spin wave emissions as a mechanism to conserve angular momentum during the gyration, switching the gyration direction inverts the polarity of the spin waves along the direction transverse to the excitation field, shown in Fig. As a final consideration, the periodicity of the ejected spin waves is discussed. The neutron scattering suggests that the spin waves have a periodicity of ≈800 Å, corresponding to a wave number of 78 m -1 . Using a standard f∝k 2 dispersion relationship, Micromagnetic simulations of a hexagonally ordered lattice consisting of 16 skyrmions during resonant dynamic gyration were performed as discussed in Methods. While the simulation in Fig. In the z-contrasted images the skyrmions at resonance are not circular and have a distribution of sizes when compared to the off-resonance images, which show circular structures with a regular size. Both images show the skyrmions in an ordered hexagonal lattice, which is consistent with the SANS results. Zcontrasted video of the dynamics confirm that the skyrmions gyrate, but also that there are additional modes which propagate along the boundary of the textures. The irregular shape and edge modes may indicate that the driving frequency is slightly off resonance or may be the result of spin-wave mediated interactions between skyrmions. Video of the off-resonance condition shows minimal motion from the skyrmions. Notably, the spin waves are not visible in the z-contrasted video or images. In the y-contrasted images captured during resonance the boundaries of the skyrmion lattice are clearly visiblethe large red and blue crescentsbut there is also a turbulent background resulting from the spin waves. The spin wave interference pattern lacks the well-defined structure which exists in deterministic fractals, again as a result of this being a 'natural' fractal, generated by a statistical kernel. Video of this state shows that the spin waves move very rapidly across the entire simulation space. Notably, the sizes of the magnetic regions are approximately regularthere are very few red, blue or white regions which are exceedingly small or large. The radius of the regions can be measured from the images and is found to be ≈220 ±30 Å, which is in reasonable agreement with the SANS results, which identified the radius of the 'building blocks' as 150 Å -200 Å. Again, images taken in the off-resonance condition do not show any appreciable magnetic contrast beyond the static skyrmion lattice. The spin wave fractal network presents a novel dynamic structure which depends sensitively on the local skyrmion configuration. This structure necessarily incorporates elements of chaos to generate a quasiordered network, with multiscale self-similarity, but a lack of explicit translational symmetry. These qualities may present unique opportunities in novel magnon-based spintronic architectures. Previous works have also demonstrated that the periodic spatial modulation of the magnetization which results from the skyrmion lattice represents a natural two-dimensional magnonic crystal. These in situ SANS results provide several insights into the dynamics of hybrid magnetic skyrmions: (1) the skyrmion lattice is preserved and does not change significantly passing through resonance, suggestive of their robust topological protection, (2) the skyrmion dynamics eject spin waves with an associated length scale of ≈800 Å which are well represented with a mass fractal model, (3) fitting with the mass fractal model suggests that the spin waves at resonance extend outside of the individual skyrmions to form an extended structure analogous to a fractal network, (4) the observed mass fractal model supports the simulation and theory predictions presented by Satywali et al. These last three observations provide new insights into the complex magnetic landscape which is generated during skyrmion dynamics and suggests the emergence of a macroscopic magnetic superstructure. While the correlation of the FMR and SANS results and subsequent high-quality fit offer compelling evidence that these results are correlated, considerations of alternative models are provided in the Supplemental Material. This result presents a unique insight into magnetic dynamics and spin waves which may be applied beyond skyrmions to other magnetic systems. Specifically, the qualities of phonons and spin waves (magnons) are conventionally measured using inelastic neutron scattering techniques such as triple axis spectroscopy However, the momentum transfer presented in these techniques is different from the momentum transfer vector discussed in SANS diffraction measurements which were performed here; this distinction is understood in scattering jargon as little-q (momentum gain or loss relative to an elastic scattering event) versus big-Q (momentum transfer vector, change in the momentum direction but not magnitude). The momentum transfer in TAS and ToF does not explicitly encode the real space structure of the phonon or spin wave, only its direction, energy and total momentum. These other qualities can be derived from the dispersion curve, but a direct relationship, such as d=2π/q where d is the real space periodicity, which correlates the real-space structure to the diffraction peak location in elastic measurements, does not exist. The SANS measurements performed here, measured at unusually low-q from the spin waves at the elastic position and does encode their real space structure, which is exceptionally rare. We have successfully observed the gyration mode in magnetic skyrmions, as well as their spin wave emissions and their collective structure, using SANS as an in-situ probe. The gyration modes for the skyrmion lattice, including resonant and off-resonant states, can be excited by an in-plane gigahertz magnetic field and an out-of-plane static field. Throughout the measurements, including on-and offresonance, the excitation field has a negligible effect on the structure of skyrmion lattice. However, during resonant gyration, a strong enhancement of background intensity in the form of a low-q decay function, increasing the total scattering intensity by more than four-fold, is reported. This function can be fit with a Lorentzian squared function, corresponding to a collection of disordered magnetic clusters, but is better fit using a mass fractal model. The mass fractal model, which represents systems constructed of monodispersed elements coordinated into a fractal network, is attributed to the interference pattern generated by spin waves ejected during gyration. Notably, the lack of significant changes in the scattering from the skyrmion lattice and precipitation of an ordered spin wave network are surprising results. These measurements provide surprising new insights into an emergent long-range structure within the skyrmion lattice during dynamic gyration and suggests that SANS could become a relevant technique to investigate high-frequency magnetization dynamics. Thin-films with a nominal structure of Ta(50 Å)/[Fe(3.6 Å)/Gd(4.0 Å)]120/Ta(50 Å) and Ta(50 Å)/[Fe(3.4 Å)/Gd(4.1 Å)]120/Ta(50 Å) were grown on a 1 cm × 1 cm Si (001) substrate using direct current magneton sputtering. Film growth was performed at room temperature in a 3 mTorr Ar atmosphere. An ultra-high vacuum (UHV) background pressure of ≈1×10 A skyrmion state with local ordering is prepared by the following field sequence: (1) +300 mT outof-plane static field to saturate the sample, which (2) is then decreased to 0, precipitating a labyrinth domain structure, then (3) apply an out-of-plane field of +195 mT, which precipitates the magnetic skyrmions. Following this sequence the skyrmions form domains with short-range (several micron) hexagonal ordering but no long-range coherent orientation. A skyrmion state with long-range ordering is prepared by the following field sequence: (1) A saturating magnetic field (+500 mT) is applied at 45° relative to the film normal direction, which (2) is then decreased to 0, resulting in magnetic stripe domains; the orientation of the stripes is determined by the inplane component of the magnetic field. (3) Then a +195 mT field is applied along the film normal direction, breaking up the stripes to form hybrid skyrmions. The skyrmions form a hexagonally packed lattice, now with a long-range orientation defined by the initial stripe phase. The FMR measurements were performed using a grounded coplanar waveguide (CPW) connecting to a vector network analyzer (VNA) system. This VNA system can provide an alternating current through the CPWs with a range of frequency from 500 kHz to 32 GHz, generating a magnetic field which encircles the stripline. The Fe/Gd thin film is mounted with the film facing the CPW, with a Kapton film electrically insulating the film from the CPW structure; the generated magnetic field is thus in the plane of the film. Then the waveguide is inserted into a physical property measurement system (PPMS), which is used to control the temperature (1.8 K to 400 K) and static magnetic field (-9 T to 9 T); this static magnetic field is along the film normal direction. At resonance, this magnetic field excites the magnetic skyrmions into resonant dynamic modes; the energy transfer from the stripline to sample is identifiable in the electronic transmission through the stripline, S1,2. Measurements were performed at frequencies between 1 GHz and 3 GHz, with static out-of-plane magnetic fields between 0 and 300 mT. This measurement concludes in the saturated state. Next, the skyrmion state is reset by the same preparation process and S1,2 was again measured at static fields between 0 and -300 mT. Small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) experiments were performed on the GPSANS instrument at the High-Flux Isotope Reactor and the vSANS instrument at the NIST Center for Neutron Research. Measurements on GPSANS were taken at the maximal sample-detector distance (20 m), using longwavelength neutrons (=16 Å, Δλ/λ = 0.13). Data from GPSANS were reduced using the GRASP software package; 61 data from vSANS were reduced using the IgorPro Software. Three dimensional micromagnetic simulations for Fe/Gd multi-layers were performed for an individual skyrmion in simulation volume of (x=304 nm, y=280 nm, z=106 nm) using a rectangular mesh (x=6 nm, y=6 nm, z=2 nm). The material parameters in the simulated block include the exchange stiffness (A=0.7×10 -11 J/m), the saturation magnetization (Ms=3.5165×10 5 A/m) and the uniaxial anisotropy the z-direction (Ku=1.1×10 5 J/m 3 ). This exchange stiffness is chosen to be slightly smaller than the one in Ni (0.9×10 -11 J/m), while Ms is directly measured by magnetometry and Ku is calculated using the hard-axis saturation field. 