The pursuit of discovering new high-temperature superconductors that diverge from the copper-based paradigm 1-3 carries profound implications for elucidating mechanisms behind superconductivity and may also enable new applications Here, our investigation reveals that application of pressure effectively suppresses the spin and charge order in trilayer nickelate La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals, leading to the emergence of superconductivity with a maximum critical temperature (Tc) of around 30 K at 69.0 GPa. The DC susceptibility measurements confirm a substantial diamagnetic response below Tc, indicating the presence of bulk superconductivity with a volume fraction exceeding 80%. In the normal state, we observe a "strange metal" behavior, characterized by a linear temperaturedependent resistance extending up to 300 K. Furthermore, the layer-dependent superconductivity observed hints at a unique interlayer coupling mechanism specific to nickelates, setting them apart from cuprates in this regard. Our findings provide crucial insights into the fundamental mechanisms underpinning superconductivity, while also introducing a new material platform to explore the intricate interplay between the spin/charge order, flat band structures, interlayer coupling, strange metal behavior and high-temperature superconductivity. Cuprates are the first family of high-temperature (high-Tc) superconducting materials, characterized by layers of CuO2 interleaved with charge reservoir layers 1,2 . Despite intensive research on various cuprates, the mechanism responsible for high-temperature superconductivity remains elusive 2,3 . Consequently, the pursuit of high-temperature superconductors that do not rely on copper oxides has become a focal point of intense experimental and theoretical exploration since the discovery of cuprates nearly four decades ago 4-8 . This is motivated by the belief that such materials may help to elucidate the enigmatic mechanisms governing high-temperature superconductivity while opening doors to new applications. Nickel, situated immediately to the left of copper on the Periodic Table, offers a playground for materials and chemistry designs aimed at replicating high-temperature unconventional superconductivity 8-12 . However, despite intensive efforts, achieving superconductivity in nickelates has proven to be a formidable challenge. In 2019, an intriguing development occurred when superconductivity was observed in "infinite-layer" nickelate thin films with Tc = 5-20 K More recently, signatures of superconductivity have also been observed in the Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) bilayer perovskite La3Ni2O7 under high pressure, achieving a Tc of approximately 80 K above 14 GPa (ref. 17). Subsequent studies have observed zero resistance under improved hydrostatic pressure conditions facilitated by a liquid pressure-transmitting medium Of particular interest, it is well known that the Tc in cuprates depends on the number of CuO2 layers (n) in a non-monotonic way, reaching a maximum for n = 3 in most cases 24- 26 . As a result, trilayer cuprates have the highest Tc among all cuprates, reaching up to 135 K at ambient pressure and 164 K under high pressure for mercury-based compounds Theoretical considerations have suggested that trilayer La4Ni3O8, with its Ni 1.33+ (d In contrast to many nickelates that display insulating behavior, including trilayer La4Ni3O8, the trilayer RP compound La4Ni3O10 stands out as a rare oxide compound that maintains its metallic character even at low temperatures under ambient pressure However, the investigations of La4Ni3O10 were significantly hampered by the scarcity of high-quality single crystals, which necessitated their growth under a high oxygen pressure atmosphere In this paper, we report detailed measurements of La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals under both ambient conditions and high pressures, reaching up to 70 GPa. The high-quality La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals were grown using a high-pressure vertical optical-image floating-zone furnace. Our X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments conducted on powdered La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals at ambient conditions confirm the presence of a pure phase of trilayer La4Ni3O10-δ (Extended Data Fig. Figure To assess the influence of pressure on the crystal structure, we conducted synchrotronbased XRD measurements on powdered La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals (Extended Data Fig. The refinement analyses reveal a subtle structural transition associated with the tilting of the NiO6 octahedra, shifting from monoclinic P21/a to tetragonal I4/mmm at pressures exceeding approximately 13-15 GPa (Extended Data Fig. To further characterize the material, magnetic susceptibility measurements were conducted, revealing a distinct kink in the data at TN ≈ 136 K (Fig. These results are consistent with the material's monoclinic P21/a structure at ambient pressure The electrical resistance R(T) of La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals under various pressure conditions is presented in Fig. When external pressure is exerted on the piston-cylinder cell, the characteristic kink related to the spin/charge ordering in the resistivity curve is rapidly suppressed (Fig. Resistances above 2.5 GPa were measured in a Be-Cu alloy diamond anvil cell (DAC). To ensure the best hydrostatic condition inside the DAC, we use helium as the pressuretransmitting medium. The resistance initially exhibits weak insulating behavior, accompanied by a peak anomaly associated with the spin order transition at 3.0 GPa (Fig. We also conducted temperature-dependent resistance measurements in a DAC using KBr as the pressure-transmitting medium. Across the pressure range spanning from 2.2 to 24.6 GPa, a moderate decrease of resistance below a critical temperature of 2-20 K is observed (Fig. To provide additional confirmation of the pressure-induced superconductivity, we conducted ultrasensitive DC magnetic susceptibility measurements under high pressures within a custom-built miniature Be-Cu alloy DAC, using nitrogen as the pressure-transmitting medium to provide a hydrostatic pressure environment. A distinctive diamagnetic response at Tc is clearly evident in the zero-field-cooled (ZFC) curve at 40.0 GPa, and as pressure increases, Tc also rises, consistent with the resistance measurements, further confirming the emergence of superconductivity (Fig. Interestingly, concomitant with the emergence of zero resistance at 43.0 GPa, the normal state resistance follows a linear temperature dependence up to 300 K (Fig. Figs. 4a-d display the temperature-dependent magnetoresistance measured in magnetic fields perpendicular to the ab plane under various pressures. As the magnetic field is increased, superconductivity is progressively suppressed, providing further confirmation that the transition in resistance is due to the onset of superconductivity. We use the 90% resistance transition to the normal state near Tc and fit it to the Ginzburg-Landau form Hc2(T) = Hc2(0)[(1-t 2 )/(1+t 2 )], where t = T/Tc. This analysis yields an estimation of the upper critical field, with values reaching 44 T at 63.0 GPa when utilizing the helium DAC, and 48 T at 69.0 GPa with the KBr DAC (Fig. Figure Furthermore, it's important to consider the impact of the interlayer coupling, a factor that could potentially promote superconductivity and has been intensively discussed in multilayer cuprates and bilayer La3Ni2O7 In summary, we present evidences of bulk superconductivity in trilayer nickelate La4Ni3O10- single crystals under pressure. Our experiments also unveil intriguing "strange metal" behavior in the normal state, characterized by linear temperature dependence of resistance up to 300 K, which may be linked to the enhanced spin The precursor powder for the La4Ni3O10- compound was prepared using the conventional solid-state reaction method. Chemically stoichiometric raw materials, La2O3 and NiO (Aladdin, 99.99%), were meticulously ground and mixed using a Vibratory Micro Mill (FRITSCH PULVERISETTE 0). An additional 0.5% of NiO was included to compensate for potential NiO volatilization during the crystal growth process. The resulting mixture underwent calcination at 1373 K for 24 hours, with two repeated calcination cycles to ensure complete and homogeneous reactions. Subsequently, the resulting precursor material was pressed into a cylindrical rod, approximately 13 cm in length and 6 mm in diameter, using a hydrostatic pressure of 300 MPa. The shaped rod then underwent once sintering at 1673 K for 12 hours in air. Single crystals were grown using a vertical optical-image floating zone furnace (Model HKZ, SciDre GmbH, Dresden) at Fudan University. During the crystal growth process, we carefully maintained an oxygen pressure within the range of 18-22 bar, and employed a 5 kW Xenon arc lamp as the light source. The rod was rapidly traversed through the growth zone at a speed of 15 mm/h to enhance the density, after which a growth rate of 3 mm/h was maintained. The STEM experiments were performed on a double aberration corrected S/TEM (Themis Z, Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at 300 kV. For STEM-HAADF imaging, the probe semi-convergent angle is 21.4 mrad, and the HAADF collection angle is from 79 to 200 mrad. The atomic resolution EDX imaging was recorded with a Super-X detector. We conducted electrical resistance measurements on La4Ni3O10- single crystals under pressure in a physical property measurement system (PPMS) by Quantum Design. The temperature range covered was from 1.8 to 300 K, and magnetic fields up to 9 T were applied. The electrical resistivity measurements at low pressures (below 2.5 GPa) were performed in a piston cylinder cell using the standard four-probe method (Fig. Ultrasensitive magnetic susceptibility measurements under pressure were conducted using a custom-built beryllium-copper alloy mini-DAC equipped with a rhenium gasket, employing a design similar to refs. 49 and 50. The mini-DAC has dimensions of approximately 8.5 mm in diameter and 30 mm in length. The measurements were performed using a Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS3, Quantum Design). The DAC includes a pair of diamond anvils with a diameter of 300 μm and a sample chamber with a diameter of 210 μm. The sample chamber was filled with a single crystal of La4Ni3O10- and liquid nitrogen as the pressure transmitting medium to provide a hydrostatic pressure environment. The samples had a diameter of approximately 150-200 μm and a thickness of roughly 25 μm. The single-crystal neutron-diffraction experiments were performed using the HB-3A four-circle single-crystal neutron diffractometer at the High Flux Isotope Reactor at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. A Si (220) monochromatic neutron beam with a wavelength of 1.533 Å was employed for the measurements. In-situ lab-based highpressure XRD measurements on powder and single crystals were carried out using a Bruker D8 Venture diffractometer, utilizing Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.7107 Å) in a diamond anvil cell with 300-μm-diameter culets and stainless steel gaskets (Extended Data Fig. The susceptibility m of a superconductor can be decomposed into: where f is the superconducting volume fraction, p denotes the paramagnetic susceptibility, and d denotes the diamagnetic susceptibility. In SI units, d = -1, and p → 0, eq. ( Upon converting between unit systems, the susceptibility equation becomes: where μ ≈ -1.69×10 -6 emu represents the measured magnetic moment at 5 K after subtracting the constant background signal at onset of Tc for sample S6 at 20 Oe and 50 GPa. m ~ 3.16 μg is the sample mass which was calculated based on the refined density ρ = 7.16 g/cm The demagnetizing factor N of a finite cylinder with axial magnetic field can be approximated using where A is the diameter and C is the thickness of the sample. For sample S6, A = 160 μm and C = 22 μm at ambient condition, yielding a demagnetizing factor of N = 0.82. This factor remains largely unchanged under hydrostatic pressure due to the proportional contraction of the lattice dimensions of the crystal structure (Supplementary Table The upper critical fields of nickelates are comparable with those observed in hole-doped cuprate and iron-pnictide superconductors exhibiting similar Tc values Recently, a growing number of theoretical preprints on La4Ni3O10 have appeared, examining its intricate electronic structure, the unique layer-dependent magnetism of its trilayer configuration, and its superconductivity. These analyses underscore the critical impact of electronic correlations, spin fluctuations, and interlayer coupling on the material's "strange metal" behavior and its unconventional superconducting pairing mechanism, with an emphasis on the s±-wave pairing symmetry While preparing this manuscript, we became aware of three related preprints that reported resistance measurements on La4Ni3O10 polycrystalline samples References 66 and 67 describe a reduction in resistance-ranging from 4-7% below the 15-20 K temperature range-under pressures exceeding roughly 30 GPa, while ref. 65 does not observe this phenomenon below 50 GPa. † These authors contribute equally to this work. * Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.Z. (zhaoj@fudan.edu.cn) or J.G.G. (jgguo@iphy.ac.cn) or Q.S.Z.(zengqs@hpstar.ac.cn) 