The Hohenberg-Mermin-Wagner theorem states that a two-dimensional system cannot spontaneously break a continuous symmetry at finite temperature. This is supported by the observation of layer-dependent superconductivity in the quasitwo-dimensional superconductor NbSe2, in which the superconducting transition temperature (Tc) is reduced by about 60% in the monolayer limit. However, for the extremely anisotropic copper-based high-Tc superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ (Bi-2212), the Tc of the monolayer is almost identical to that of its bulk counterpart. To clarify the effect of dimensionality on superconductivity, here we successfully fabricate ultrathin flakes of CsCa2Fe4As4F2, a highly anisotropic iron-based high-Tc superconductor, down to monolayer. The monolayer flake exhibits the highest Tc of 24 K (after tuning to the optimal doping by ionic liquid gating), which is about 20% lower than that of the bulk crystal. We also fabricate ultrathin flakes of CaKFe4As4, another iron-based superconductor with much smaller anisotropy. The Tc of the 3-layer flake decreases by 46%, showing a more pronounced dimensional effect than that of CsCa2Fe4As4F2. By carefully examining their anisotropy and the c-axis coherence length, we reveal the general trend and empirical law of the layer-dependent superconductivity in these quasi-twodimensional superconductors. From this, the Tc of a new monolayer superconductor can be extrapolated. When a three-dimensional (3D) crystalline superconductor is thinned towards the twodimensional (2D) limit, a crucial question is whether the superconductivity in the monolayer differs from that in the bulk crystal. Based on the Hohenberg-Mermin-Wagner theory, superconductivity, as a long-range order, is strongly suppressed in systems with reduced dimensions The 2D nature of Bi-2212 is apparently related to its extremely high anisotropy, here defined as the ratio of c-axis and ab-plane resistivity ρc/ρab, which is in the order of 10 5 (refs. To clarify this issue, we focus on two related iron-based superconductors: the 12442 system (ACa2Fe4As4F2, A = K, Rb, Cs) In this work, we successfully fabricate large-area thin flakes of CsCa2Fe4As4F2 (Cs-12442) down to monolayer by the Al2O3-assisted exfoliation method and study its layer-dependent superconductivity through electrical transport measurements. As the flake thickness decreases, the Tc initially maintains unchanged (about 30 K) until 4 layers, and then decreases 20% to 24 K for the monolayer (after modulated by ionic liquid gating to minimize the effect of doping change from the fabrication process). The signature of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition indicates a 2D feature of the superconductivity in the monolayer Cs-12442. Furthermore, thin flakes of CaKFe4As4 were also fabricated down to 3 layers, and a reduction of Tc by 14%, 22%, and 46% was observed in the 5-layer, 4-layer, and 3-layer samples, respectively. We carefully examine the anisotropy and the c-axis coherence length of Bi-2212, Cs-12442, NbSe2, and CaKFe4As4, and figure out the general trend and empirical law of dimensional effect on the superconductivity in the 2D limit for layered superconductors. As plotted in Fig. The four-probe method with cold-welded indium electrodes or evaporated Cr/Au electrodes (device setup shown in Fig. Figure The BKT transition, which can be revealed from I -V characteristic curves, is regarded as evidence for 2D superconductivity Figure As shown in Fig. Secondly, it is well known that the Tc of iron-based superconductors depends on the doping level, showing a superconducting dome In monolayer Bi-2212, the Tc can be tuned to the optimal value by changing the oxygen content through annealing in ozone In Fig. The anisotropy gradually decreases for these materials, from 1.5  10 5 in Bi-2212 to ~ evident that the material with smaller anisotropy shows a more pronounced Tc reduction when approaching the 2D limit. Such a general trend can be seen more clearly in Fig. The c-axis coherence length ξc represents the distance that the Cooper pairs extend along the c axis in quasi-2D superconductors, therefore it is a more important parameter to characterize the 2D nature of the superconductivity. For Bi-2212, ξc  0.6 Å is only 1/25 of dmonolayer, the thickness of its monolayer Therefore, Cs-12442 shows a weak dimensional effect with 20% reduction of Tc in the monolayer. While for NbSe2 and CaKFe4As4, ξc is larger than or comparable with dmonolayer In Fig. The Tc reduction in FeSe thin flakes is even faster than in the 1144 system Interestingly, for the FeSe thin films ( 2L) grown on bilayer graphene, Tc scales inversely with the thickness Note that there may be some other exceptions which does not obey above empirical law. For example, the Tc of FeSe monolayer grown on SrTiO3 substrate can be remarkably enhanced to over 60 K by electron doping and interfacial electronphonon coupling Fabricating Cs-12442 thin flakes. High-quality single crystals of CsCa2Fe4As4F2 were grown from CsAs flux Electrical transport measurements on Cs-12442. Two methods were applied to fabricate electrical contacts to Cs-12442 ultrathin flakes: (1) indium cold welding and (2) direct metal deposition through a stencil mask. The indium cold welding method was used for most samples since there is no thermal perturbation during the fabrication of electrodes. The direct metal deposition method was applied for the samples in the gate-tuning experiment, and in this case, the evaporated Cr/Au electrodes have a good chemical inertness during the electrochemical gating. For the indium cold welding method, an indium thin foil was first cut into small stripes with a sharp vertex angle. Then a PDMS stamp was used to hold these stripes, with which we align the Cs-12442 ultrathin flakes under an optical microscope. We then pressed the indium stripes onto the sample to form electrical contacts, before lifting off the PDMS stamp. Since Cs-12442 thin flakes are very sensitive to the air, all the device-fabrication processes were performed in an argon-filled glove box to avoid sample degradation. The resistance measurements of the thin flakes were performed in a 4 K cryocooler equipped with electrical transport systems (Multi-Fields & Group) inside the glove box, and in a physical properties measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design) when magnetic field was needed. Gating devices for Cs-12442 ultrathin flakes. The Cs-12442 ultrathin flakes were immersed in the ionic liquid N,N-diethyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl)-N-methylammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide, and a large area gold electrode was used as the gating electrode, which was also immersed in the ionic liquid. For the gating process, the sample was first warmed up to 220 K, then the Vg was applied to 3 V with the speed of 0.1 V/min, and held for tg at least 1 hour. Vg, Tg and tg were further increased in the following gating procedures based on this initial condition. Finally, the sample was cooled down with the speed of 1 K/min, in order to avoid the accidental fragmentation during the freezing of ionic liquid. Single crystals of CaKFe4As4 were grown using the self-flux method. The fabrication and measurement methods of CaKFe4As4 thin flakes are the same as Cs-12442. published. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.Y.L. (shiyan_li@fudan.edu.cn) and G.H.C. (ghcao@zju.edu.cn). for these materials with various number of layers. The dashed curves represent the general trand. The data of anisotropy are from ref. 