In this work we consider the superfluid stiffness of a generically non-Galilean invariant interacting system and investigate under what conditions the stiffness may nonetheless approach the Galilean-invariant value n/m. Within Eliashberg theory we find that the renormalized stiffness is approximately given by n/m in the case when the l = 0 and l = 1 components of the effective Fermi-surface projected interaction are approximately equal over a range of frequencies. This holds, in particular, when the interaction is peaked at zero momentum transfer. We examine this result through three complementary lenses: the δ(ω) term in the conductivity, the phase dependence of the Luttinger-Ward free energy, and the coupling of the amplitude and phase sectors in the Hubbard-Stratonovich collective mode action. From these considerations we show that the value of the stiffness is determined by the strength of renormalization of the current vertex and that the latter can be interpreted as the shift of the self-consistent solution due to flow of the condensate, or alternatively as coupling of the phase mode to l = 1 fluctuations of the order parameter. We highlight that even though the superfluid stiffness in some non-Galilean systems approaches the Galilean value, this is not enforced by symmetry, and in general the stiffness may be strongly suppressed from its BCS value. As a corollary we obtain the generic form of the phase action within Eliashberg theory and charge and spin Ward identities for a superconductor with frequency dependent gap function. The superfluid stiffness D s (T ) is one of the key characteristics of a superconductor -it determines the strength of the δ-functional contribution to the optical conductivity and the energy cost of phase fluctuations. In two dimensions (2D), D s has the dimension of energy and we explicitly define it via σ(ω → 0) = e 2 πD s (T )δ(ω) + . . . or equivalently, via E cond = (1/8)D s (∇φ(r)) 2 , where E cond is the condensation energy per unit volume, and φ(r) is the phase of a superconducting order parameter ∆(r) = ∆e iφ(r) In a clean BCS superconductor, D s (T = 0) = E F /π, where E F is the Fermi energy The subject of this paper is the analysis of the superfluid stiffness at T = 0 in strongly coupled clean superconductors, with special attention to systems in the vicinity of a quantum critical point (QCP), where superconductivity emerges out of a non-Fermi liquid. We will not discuss here disorder effects Our primary goal is to understand the interplay between the contributions to D s from the quasiparticle residue 1/Z and from the renormalization of the current vertex. Without vertex renormalization, D s is renormalized down from the BCS value to D s ∼ E F /Z and is substantially reduced at strong coupling, when the quasiparticle residue is small. It was argued, however Our goal is to understand the interplay between 1/Z and vertex renormalizations in systems near a QCP. A frequently used low-energy model for such systems is one of fermions near the Fermi surface Yukawa-coupled to soft dynamical bosonic collective fluctuations in the corresponding spin or charge channel. The bosonic dynamics plays a crucial role for the pairing and non-Fermiliquid behavior in the normal state We argue that near-cancellation happens already without the additional terms. The key here is the observation that for a Galilean-invariant system, a spin/charge order emerges with q = 0 In this communication we discuss the interplay between Z and the renormalization of the current vertex near a q = 0 QCP in some detail. We obtain a generic expression for D s for interacting fermions near a QCP and show under which condition it reduces to the BCS result D s = n/m. This condition (the equivalence between two functions of Matsubara frequency) is satisfied for a Galilean-invariant system, but also approximately holds for a non-Galilean-invariant system. We call these systems effectively Galilean. We obtain how D s changes once the condition is violated and illustrate this for the case of fermions interacting with a boson with propagator χ(q, Ω m ) ∝ 1/(ω 2 D + ω 2 m + (cq) 2 ). We use the boson velocity c as a control parameter and show within Eliashberg theory how the renormalization of D s evolves between the limits of large c, when the scattering is predominantly in forward direction, and small c, when scattering by any q is equally probable. We show that in the first case D s ≈ n/m, while in the second case D s is reduced to ∼ (n/mZ). This last result holds for the interaction mediated by an Einstein phonon. These results appear naturally when the superfluid stiffness is identified with the prefactor for the δ(ω) term in the optical conductivity. We also show how the fully dressed D s emerges in the Luttinger-Ward (LW) description of a superconductor with coordinate-dependent phase φ = q • r, or, equivalently, of a superconductor with a non-zero total momentum q of a pair. The key issue we discuss here is how the corrections to the current vertex emerge in this approach. We show that they originate from the change of the fermionic self-energy due to the phase twist exp(iq • r) and that the existence of such corrections is a general feature of linear response in the LW formalism. We also show how the fully renormalized superfluid stiffness can be derived within the Hubbard-Stratonovich (HS) formalism in the context of the phase action. We restrict our analysis primarily to the cases when superconductivity emerges near a q = 0 QCP and soft bosonic excitations are peaked at q = 0. For a QCP with a finite Q (e.g. towards (π, π) antiferromagnetic order), the renormalization of the current vertex is unrelated to that of the spin vertex, and in general the fully dressed superfluid stiffness scales with 1/Z. The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section II, we outline the model and provide a brief review of the Eliashberg theory of superconductivity. In Section III, we explicitly calculate the superfluid stiffness within Eliashberg theory as the weight of the δ-function in the DC conductivity, with a particular focus on the role of vertex corrections and the notion of effective Galilean invariance. In Section IV, we recontextualize Eliashberg theory in terms of the LW functional and employ this description to naturally obtain the superfluid stiffness, including vertex corrections. Finally, in Section V, we make contact with the HS description of Eliashberg theory and present the associated phase action, including the important role played by coupling of phase and amplitude gap fluctuations. Some technical aspects are discussed in Appendices A-E. In particular, in Appendix B we explicitly derive Ward identities for charge, spin, and momentum for a superconductor with a frequency-dependent gap. We consider a model of fermions described by a Matsubara action where the effective interaction V (x -x ′ ) is mediated by a soft dynamical boson. The notations are k = (ε n , k) and x = (τ, x). We assume the fermion dispersion ξ and interaction V to be rotationally invariant. We define Nambu spinors Ψ(x) = (ψ ↑ (x), ψ↓ (x)) with Green's function Ĝ(x, x ′ ) ≡ -⟨Ψ(x) ΨT (x ′ )⟩. Eliashberg theory approximates the matrix self-energy by the 1-loop self-consistent expression, Fig. where φ represents the pairing vertex while Σ and χ are respectively the odd and even parts of the normal state self-energy For a translationally invariant system, the equations for Σ and real pairing amplitude φ can be written in momentum space The dependence of the self-energy on the magnitude of momentum is weak within Eliashberg theory, due to the separation of momentum scales between fermions and bosons (see below), allowing us to approximate Within the same approximation, the Nambu Green's function takes the form We can now directly perform the integral over ξ k and obtain the Fermi-surface projected Eliashberg equations: (8) with S n the surface area of the n-sphere and ν the density of states per spin at the Fermi surface (we keep dimension d arbitrary, but will later apply the results to d = 2). Here, ĝn (k F ) is the ξ-integrated Green's function weighted with τ3 (9) For simplicity of presentation we consider s-wave superconductivity, in which case we obtain the isotropic Eliashberg equations where we have defined Σn = ε n + Σ n and the Fermi surface average of the interaction It will also be convenient to define the related quantities [20] which obey equations We see that there is only one self-consistent equation for ∆ n , while Z n is a functional of ∆ n There are two approximations used in derivation of the Eliashberg equations. First, Eq. ( Given a solution to Eqs. We then identify the superfluid stiffness via D s ≡ -Re J R (ω → 0, q = 0). The low energy velocity-velocity correlator is expressed in terms of the Nambu Green's functions Ĝ by the diagram in Fig. where Q = (iΩ m , 0) and K = (iε n , k). Here γ k is the bare velocity vertex and Γ K+Q,K the renormalized velocity vertex within the ladder approximation, Fig. (16) The vertex correction is evaluated within the ladder approximation, consistent with the Eliashberg scheme for calculation of the self-energy where we have defined the generalized l = 1 harmonic of the interaction (cf. Eq. ( Within the Eliashberg theory, particle-hole symmetry restricts solutions of Eq. ( where Explicitly evaluating the fermonic bubbles one finds n . (23) Equation ( In the Galilean invariant case, there is a special Ward identity relating the fully renormalized current vertex to the self-energy as This relation is obtained from a combination of the Ward identity for conservation of momentum, and the identity j = e(k/m) allowing the renormalized current vertex to be expressed in terms of the renormalized momentum vertex (see Appendix B 2 d). At Ω m → 0, this reduces to In components: Γ n = 1 + ∂Σn ∂εn and Γ n = i ∂ φn ∂εn Using these formulas, we obtain We now use Eq. ( Inserting this into Eq. ( At T = 0, replacing 2πT n by dε n , we obtain The integrand is a total derivative: Evaluating the integral we then obtain This result implies that in an interacting Galileaninvariant system, the superfluid stiffness retains its bare value To understand how and when Eq. ( whose solution is the same as for Γn+m,n in the Galileaninvariant case: (see Appendix B for details). In the limit Ω m → 0, when Γsp n+m,n = Γsp n , this reduces to Γ sp,(0) n = 1 + ∂Σn ∂εn and Γ sp,(1) n = i ∂ φn ∂εn . We emphasize that these relations hold for both the Galilean-invariant case and non-Galileaninvariant case. We also note that Eq. ( Comparing with Eq. ( There is one fundamental difference between an effectively Galilean-invariant and a truly Galilean-invariant system. In the first, the cancellation between fermionic Z and vertex correction occurs between terms involving only quasiparticles in the vicinity of the Fermi surface. In a generic Galilean-invariant system, the special Ward identity establishes the relation between properties of the system near and far away from the surface. So while D s = n/m in an effectively Galilean-invariant system, the reason why interaction-driven corrections cancel out is in general quite different from that in a truly Galileaninvariant system. We now investigate in more detail how the vertex corrections restore the Galilean value of D s when n . The role of the vertex corrections in the effectively Gailean invariant case can be elucidated by the following three cases (A) A frequency independent self-energy (such as from an instantaneous interaction) and ∆ ∼ const. This is the BCS case. (B) A matrix self-energy of the form Σ n ∼ ε n , ∆ ∼ const. This is the case of superconductivity out of a Fermi liquid away from a QCP. (C) A matrix self-energy in which both ∆ n and Z n are strongly frequency dependent. This is the case of superconductivity out of a non-FL at a QCP. For case (A), Z = 1 and both vertex corrections Γ (0) -1 and Γ (1) vanish, giving Indeed, one can easily verify that Z = Γ (0) = 1 and Γ (1) = 0 is the solution of Eqs. ( For case (B), the expression for D s is The constant factor in the last bracket cancels out because for For case (C), Σ n /ε n ̸ = (∂Σ n /∂ε n ) and thus Z and 1 + ∂Σ n /∂ε n no longer cancel. One needs to include the frequency derivative of the pairing vertex on equal footing with ∂Σ n /∂ε n to get the cancellation of Z and reproduce We also note that for all cases (A)-(C) the relation D s = n/m holds independent of the fermionic dispersion. This is, of course, only approximately true as in linearizing about the Fermi surface we have neglected corrections of order ∆/E F to D s . These corrections cancel out only in the truly Galilean-invariant case, where the relation D s = n/m is exact. We now consider how the stiffness gets modified when n + δ Γn (in the limit when external bosonic frequency Ω m → 0). The vertex δ Γn obeys the modified Bethe-Salpeter equation Splitting δ Γn into components we obtain for the stiffness If the difference between V l=1 n-n ′ and V l=0 n-n ′ is small for all relevant frequencies, this will be a small correction of order δV . This is the case for interactions which are dominated by small angle scattering, as then scattered particles do not distinguish between different harmonics. That small angle scattering leads to approximate relations between the renormalized current and spin vertices has previously been appreciated in the normal state As an example, consider an interaction mediated by a propagating boson with mass ω D and dispersion (cq) 2 : For fermions on the Fermi surface , where θ is the angle between k F and k ′ F . We can then write with and The relevant frequencies Ω m are of order ∆ m . The characteristic scale for the latter is the gap function at zero frequency at T = 0, which we label simply by ∆. We see that δV m /V l=0 m is small when the velocity c is large enough such that ck F ≫ (∆ 2 + ω 2 D ) 1/2 . This is the limit of small angle scattering. We furthermore note that in this limit, δV m is determined by scattering to large angles and remains non-singular at a QCP even if we set Ω m → 0. As a consequence, δD s = D s -D Gal s also remains non-singular. For a Galilean-invariant system, this non-singular δD s cancels exactly with contributions coming from interactions with non-critical bosons. A near cancellation between Γ and Z factors in D s for small-angle scattering θ is similar to the near-cancellation between self-energy and Maki-Thompson contributions to optical conductivity in the normal state, in a similar situation of small momentum scattering (these are the insertions of self-energy and vertex corrections into the conductivity bubble) At i.e., D s differs from D Gal s . A particularly extreme example where cancellation is absent is the case of c = 0, when V l=1 = 0. This case describes, in particular, the pairing mediated by a soft Einstein phonon. At T = 0, we have ) Near a QCP, Z(∆) is large Eliashberg theory for electron-phonon interactions is valid as long as Eliashberg parameter λ E = ḡ2 /ω D E F remains small. Using that at small ω D , T c and ∆ are both of order ḡ While the superfluid stiffness appears naturally as a transport property in the conductivity, it can also be obtained directly from the thermodynamic properties of the system. In particular, it parametrizes the free energy cost associated with twisting the phase boundary conditions of the superconducting state Luttinger and Ward showed that a many body system can be described by the variational free energy where G, the fully dressed Green's function, is to be minimized over, and Φ[ Ĝ] is the LW functional, which can be obtained diagrammatically as the sum of all two-particle irreducible vacuum skeleton diagrams. This description has the properties • The equilibrium Green's function G eq minimizes Ω • The self-energy is the functional derivative of the LW functional Φ, Σ = δΦ/δ Ĝ • The minimal value of Ω is the equilibrium free energy, The variational free energy Ω is also known as the Baym-Kadanoff functional Eliashberg theory corresponds to the 1-loop approximation for the diagrammatic series for the LW functional Φ[ Ĝ] Minimizing the free energy leads to the Eliashberg equations Eq. ( The superfluid stiffness of a superconductor can be obtained by considering the energy cost associated with phase twists of the ground state. Since the generator of the broken U (1) symmetry is simply τ3 in the Nambu basis we consider the free energy of the superconducting state as a function of a phase twist imposed on the Nambu spinors. In terms of the LW variational free energy we define a modified functional to be minimized over Green's functions with self energies of the form [46] The superfluid stiffness -twice the coefficient of the can then be obtained as Functionally, the relation between Ω and Ω Q is that we replace Ĝ-1 in the LW variational free energy. Within our evaluation scheme (performing the integration over ξ k first) the diamagnetic term ∝ Q 2 τ3 can be neglected (see Appendix D). The Q 2 in the action is then entirely due to the source term v F • Q. Noting this, we can straightforwardly evaluate the derivatives in Eq. ( where in the second equality we have used the definition of the ξ k -integrated Green's function, Eq. ( in terms of the Q = 0 solution ĝn . This allows us to compactly express the superfluid stiffness as What remains is to calculate δĝ n . We start by noting that the integration over the dispersion ξ k can be performed for arbitrary Σn (k F ) and yields (see Appendix C) where we have defined Υ = π + Σ n and π = ε n + iv F • Q. We now introduce, by analogy with Eq. ( Using these notations, we express ĝn in a form independent of Z as We see that the gap equation separates into a selfconsistency condition for ∆ and functional definition of Z in terms of ∆, as in the isotropic case. It is now straightforward to obtain the first order correction to the ξ k -integrated Green's function δg n by defining ∆ n (k F ) = ∆n + iv F • Qδ∆ n + • • • , with ∆n the equilibrium solution. Expanding Eq. ( and therefore Note the similarity to Eq. ( Using Eq. ( We now expand the Nambu self-energy, Eq. ( Equating the first order terms using Eqs. ( we find (65) The definition of the ξ k -integrated Green's function Eq. ( This allows us to rewrite Eq. (65) as Equation ( in agreement with Eq. ( As a final perspective, we now employ the HS formulation of Eliashberg theory This form is identical to the BCS phase action, however D s is the fully renormalized stiffness. Note that the prefactor of the Ω 2 m term remains the same as in BCS theory. We argue below that this term comes from high energies, where fermions are free quasiparticles. We now derive Eq. ( One can verify that the saddle-point equation of Eq. ( where ΣL contains only longitudinal fluctuations around saddle-point solution: We compute the phase action by making use of the Gauge-invariance of the theory The action is then compactly written as and Ĝ-1 sp is the inverse of the saddle point Green's function (the solution of the Eliashberg equations). Performing a second order expansion in derivatives and in longitudinal fluctuations leads to the gaussian action where θ is the bare phase action, S L the bare action for the longitudinal mode, and S c the coupling term. The bare phase action is where the constants κ (b) and D s are given by and we recall that k = (ξ k , ε n ) and k = T n dξ k . In explicit form, we have for κ (b) It is natural to do the integration over ξ k first as this integral can be evaluated exactly. This integration, however, should be done with care as the full integral over ξ k and ε n is not uniformly convergent. To regulate the integral, we introduce a UV cutoff Λ, and then take it to infinity at the end of the calculation (see Ref. s we have Here we replaced Λ -Λ dξ k by ∞ -∞ dξ k as the integral over |ξ k | > Λ cancels out with the diamagnetic contribution. Evaluating the integral over ξ, we obtain (81) This is the expression for the stiffness without vertex corrections. Next, the longitudinal action is and the coupling term is where we have expanded δ Σ in Pauli matrices δ Σ = μ δΣ μ τ μ and introduced the couplings Upon integrating out the longitudinal modes δ ΣL the effective phase action can be written in terms of bare constants κ (b) , D s and vertex corrections δκ, δD s . where (86) Since T μν k,k ′ ,q is non-singular at q → 0, we can safely set q = 0 in the integrands. One can verify that lim q→0 (C ω ) μ k+q,k = 0 (see Appendix A), hence δκ = 0. For δD ij s we obtain where Π μν n is the same as in Eq. ( To recapitulate, we have shown that within the Eliashberg theory, the phase action is generically of the BCSlike form Eq. ( In this work, we have calculated the superfluid stiffness for a family of 2D non-Galilean invariant models within the Eliashberg approximation. We showed explicitly, by calculating the delta functional contribution to the conductivity, that in some cases the stiffness approaches its Galilean invariant value D gal s = n/m, despite the absence of Galilean invariance in the model. In particular, when the l = 0 and l = 1 harmonics of the interaction on the Fermi surface are identical, the renormalization of the current vertex is fully determined by the Ward identity for the spin vertex, up to corrections of order O(∆/E F ). In this situation, the frequency-dependent renormalization of the current vertex cancels out the frequency-dependent renormalization of the quasiparticle mass, and the stiffness remains the same as in the Galilean-invariant case. We labeled such systems as having effectively Galilean invariant superfluid response. As an example, we considered a set of models with boson-mediated interaction in the density-density channel, strongly peaked at zero momentum transfer, and isotropic but otherwise arbitrary fermionic dispersion. For such systems, the l = 0 and l = 1 harmonics of the interaction are nearly identical and differ by O(θ 2 sc ), where θ sc is a characteristic scattering angle. We showed that these systems are effectively Galilean invariant with D s ≈ n/m + O(θ 2 sc ). For a truly Galilean-invariant system, the relation D gal s = n/m is restored by going beyond the single boson exchange and including Aslamazov-Larkin type diagrams. We also argued that for arbitrary dispersion the O(θ 2 sc ) term in D s vanishes only when the boson velocity is taken to infinity, corresponding to an instantaneous action. We discussed one qualitative difference between an effectively Galilean invariant system and a truly Galileaninvariant one. In a Galilean-invariant system, the relation D s = n/m is due to the existence of a special Ward identity relating the renormalized current vertex and spin-vertices exactly. This Ward identity results from the combination of the the Ward identity for momentum conservation and the precise relation j = ek/m and thus depends on the behavior of particles both near and far from the Fermi surface. In contrast, the stiffness of an effectively Galilean invariant system approaches n/m by fine tuning of the low-energy interaction parameters of the model so that the relation between current and spin is approximately satisfied. Thus, while the value of the stiffness is approximately the same, the underlying physics is generally quite different. We also argued that for both Galilean-invariant and non-Galilean-invariant systems with a frequency dependent gap function, one must include the contribution to the stiffness from the anomalous component of the renormalized current vertex, which is given by the frequency derivative of the pairing vertex. This contribution must be included on an equal footing with the usual renormalizations to the normal current vertex. The presence of the anomalous contribution to D s reflects the fact that in the superconducting state, in addition to the usual diagram renormalizing the normal current vertex, one must take into account the doppler shift of the pairing vertex due to the flow of the condensate. To further elucidate the nature of the vertex corrections we presented complementary perspectives on the stiffness by obtaining the above results from the LW functional and the HS decoupling of our model. In the LW description of Eliashberg theory, corresponding to keeping only the lowest order diagram in the LW functional, the correct prescription for calculating linear-response is to minimize the free energy in presence of the external fields and take derivatives of the minimal free energy over the fields to get the associated susceptibilities. Then at the end of the calculation one may set the external fields to zero. This is the sense in which the LW formalism produces 'conserving approximations' when the LW functional is truncated at any order. Performing the calculation in this way, we showed that the required vertex corrections to the external current vertex appear naturally as the shift of the self-energy due to the phase winding Γ ∼ (∂ Ĝ-1 /dQ), exactly reproducing the results of the diagrammatic calculation. In the HS description, we extracted the stiffness from the phase action of an Eliashberg superconductor. Using the Gauge-invariance of the action, we showed that the Gaussian action for the phase sector includes the bare phase action as well as a coupling to the l = 1 longitudinal modes. Upon integrating out the longitudinal modes we showed that the phase action within Eliashberg theory takes the generic form S = 1 2 dτ dr 2ν|∂ τ θ| 2 + D s |∇θ| 2 . Here, D s is the same stiffness as obtained in the previous sections, with the vertex corrections arising from the longitudinal mode propagators evaluated at q = 0, iΩ m → 0. On the other hand, the coefficient of the (∂ t θ) 2 is unrenormalized from its bare value, reflecting its origin as coming from fermions away from the Fermi surface which are agnostic to emergence of a pairing vertex at low energy. For clarity and simplicity of presentation this work focused on s-wave superconductivity in rotationally symmetric systems. The general considerations still apply when either of these constraints are relaxed, but the calculations become more involved as one needs to evaluate products of velocities and form factors of a non-s-wave gap along the Fermi surface. The key result of our work is that an effectively Galilean-invariant value of the stiffness in a non-Galileaninvariant system requires a specific relationship between the low energy interaction channels of the system, which is not guaranteed by the symmetries of the system. Indeed interaction via Einstein phonons is an example of system which strongly violates these conditions. Therefore, we expect that generically the superfluid stiffness of a quantum critical superconductor, where the pairing vertex is strongly frequency dependent and the Z-factor large, may be strongly reduced from the Galilean invariant value D gal s ≈ n/m. We discuss specific examples in a separate paper We define Σ n in the normal state via G -1 (k, ε n ) = iε n -Σ n -ξ k , where ξ k is the fermionic dispersion. The relations between Γ ch , Γ sp and Σ n are The bosonic Ω m is the difference between outgoing and incoming fermionic frequencies. To set the stage for our analysis in the superconducting state, we present the diagrammatic proof of this relation. For this we note that within Eliashberg theory the fermionic self-energy is obtained within the one-loop approximation, as a convolution of the fermionic propagator and the effective frequency-dependent "local" interaction V l=0 n-n ′ , which is ) integrated over the Fermi surface. Within the same computational scheme, the vertex Γ ch is obtained by summing up ladder series of vertex corrections, with the same V l=0 n-n ′ . For Γ sp , the analysis is more nuanced: ladder series hold when ) is of density-density form, i.e.when spin projection (up or down) is conserved along the interaction line. ) is a spin-spin interaction with spin σ-matrices in the vertices, one has to add additional Aslamazov-Larkin-type terms to get the proper series for Γ sp The ladder series in Fig. where ν is the density of states at the Fermi level. The self-energy is given by The product of the two Green's functions in Eq. (B3) can be decoupled as Substituting into Eq. (B3), we obtain One can straightforwardly verify that Γ n+m,n from Eq. (B2) is the solution of this equation. Indeed, substituting this Γ n ′ +m,n ′ into the r.h.s of Eq. (B6) we find that it reduces to Using Eq. (B4), we re-express this as which is exactly Γ n+m,n . Using the Ward identities, one can straightforwardly demonstrate that charge and spin correlators (the polarization bubbles) vanish at a zero incoming momentum and a finite incoming frequency, as should be the case for a conserved quantity X. [The choice of zero momentum and a finite frequency implies that one probes a variation of the total X in the sample between different times. For a conserved X, there is no such variation.] The fully dressed polarization bubble is shown in Fig. It is natural to integrate over ξ k first as this integration is straightforward. One cannot, however, integrate over ξ k in infinite limits as at large frequencies, when ε n > Σ n and T n → (1/2π) dε n , the Green's function approaches the unrenormalized form G n (ξ k ) = 1/(iε n -ξ k ) and the double integral dε n dξ k /(iε n -ξ k ) 2 diverges logarithmically. The physically sound way to regularize the divergence is to restrict the ξ k integration to |ξ k | < Λ and set Λ → ∞ only at the end of the calculation. Carrying out the integration over ξ k this way, we obtain as it should be. As in the main text, for definiteness we consider s-wave suprconductivity, in which case the pairing vertex φ n and the gap function ∆ n are independent on the angle along the Fermi surface. We also set T = 0 to avoid complications due to discreteness of Matsubara frequencies. We keep the notations Σ n , etc, with the understanding that Σ n = Σ(ε n ), where ε n is a continuous variable along the Matsubara axis. We argue below that in a superconductor charge and spin correlators have to be treated differently as the first one acquires an additional contribution from coupling to phase fluctuations. The distinction between spin and charge correlators can be seen already for a BCS superconductor. Both spin and charge polarization bubbles have to vanish at zero incoming momentum and a nonzero incoming frequency Ω m , and we show below that this is indeed the case. However, to prove this for the charge case, extra care is needed. Specifically, for a BCS superconductor, it is tempting to neglect the interaction and express spin and charge correlators as bubbles made of free-fermion Nambu Green's functions. For the charge bubble this gives and for the spin case we have where i = x, y, z. For definiteness, we set i = z below. Let's set continuous Ω m to be finite but infinitesimally small. One can easily verify that for a non-zero ∆, the limit Ω m → 0 is entirely regular, and one can just set Ω m = 0 in the calculations. Using Eq. ( and In Gorkov's notations of normal and anomalous Green's functions , the polarization bubbles are and The two polarization bubbles differ in the sign of the F 2 term. The integration over ε n and ξ k in Eqs. (B13) and (B14) can be carried out in any order, and the results are Π sp,zz free (q = 0, Ω m → 0) = 0, Π ch free (q = 0, Ω m → 0) = -2ν (B17) We see that Π sp,zz free (q = 0Ω m → 0) vanishes, as expected, but Π ch free (q = 0Ω m → 0) remains finite. Because charge conservation must be satisfied, there must be another contribution to charge polarization, which cancels the free-fermion contribution, as was pointed out by Nambu where the overall factor 2 is due to spin summation and where V l=0 > 0 is an attractive interaction in the s-wave channel. Using V l=0 Π pp (0, 0) = 1 and expanding in Ω m , we obtain (B20) We next compute the coupling S(Ω m ). There are two topologically different triangular GF diagrams for S(Ω m ) as shown in Fig. We then obtain Combining with Eq. (B17), we find that Π ch free (q = 0, Ω m → 0) + Π ch ex (q = 0, Ω m → 0) = 0, as it should be because the total charge is the conserved quantity. For the spin correlator, the two contributions to the coupling S(Ω m ) cancel out at order Ω m . Then there is no additional Ω m -independent contribution to the spin propagator, consistent with the vanishing of Π sp,zz free (q = 0, Ω m → 0). From a physics perspective, this is a consequence of the fact that spin fluctuations do no couple linearly to phase fluctuations. Below we extend the analysis of a BCS superconductor to the case when the effective 4-fermion interaction is a dynamical V n-n ′ . A dynamical interaction gives rise to fermionic self-energy Σ n , and also the pairing vertex φ n and the gap function ∆ n become functions of frequency. The proof of the Ward identities in this situation is more involved, and for the charge correlator it is further involved by the necessity to include the coupling to phase fluctuations. For this reason, we consider Ward identities associated with spin and charge conservation separately. n+m,n τ1 , (see Eqs. ( and Integrating over ξ k in the same was as we did in the normal state and then taking the limit Λ → ∞, we obtain Expressing dφ n /dε n via Eq. (B29), we re-write Eq. (B35) as Using Eq. (B31) we re-express the integrand in the r.h.s. of Eq. (B36) as the full derivative: We see that Π sp,ii (q = 0, Ω m → 0) indeed vanishes. The Bethe-Salpeter equation for Γn+m,n is In the last line we used that the integrand is a total derivative. We thus verify that the particle density is conserved if the relation between the vertex function and the self-energy is given by Eq. (B43). With some extra effort, one can extend the analysis to finite Ω m and show that the solution of Eq. (B42) is n+m,n = -i This result has been obtained by Nambu Comparing Ward identities for spin and charge vertices, Eqs. (B28) and (B48), we see that the ones for Γ (0) are identical, while the ones for Γ (1) are different. In particular, for the spin vertex Γ (1) vanishes for frequency-independent gap, while for the charge vertex it remains finite and moreover is singular at Ω m → 0. As we said, the origin for the difference is in the fact that charge fluctuations couple linearly to massless phase fluctuations and spin fluctuations do not couple to phase fluctuations. For completeness, we also consider the Ward identity associated with translational invariance, i.e., with conservation of the total momentum. Let us consider a model with action where Ψ are Nambu spinors and we allow for the possibility of a time-dependent interaction due to exchange of bosons. This defines, through Noether's theorem, the total momentum of the system ⟨P(τ )⟩ via Note that only for an instantaneous interaction is the total fermionic momentum separately conserved. This simply reflects the fact that the bosons mediating the interaction may carry momentum too. In the usual fashion We now use the fact that α m is arbitrary and additionally act on both sides with the inverse of the Green's functions to arrive at the Ward identity for the momentum vertex This relation holds for both Galilean-invariant and non-Galilean-invariant systems. However, in general this does not determine the form of the current vertex. Only in a Galilean invariant system, is the current given by and thus the renormalized current vertex is determined directly from Eq. (B58). The determinant is To regulate the sum, we will first integrate over momentum within finite limits and then take the limits to infinity at the end. Defining S n (k Let us define dimensionless variables We can thus safely neglect χ and Q 2 /(2m 2 ) since they are, by assumption, much smaller than Λ. We evaluate the remaining integral using integration by parts In the limit of Λ → ∞, the integral I n (k F ) consists of an (infinite) constant term, which is irrelevant for the response of the system plus a a term of order Λ 0 We thus arrive at the expression for the kinetic part of the quasi-classical free energy (D14) The potential term is straightforwardly simplified using the definition of the ξ-integrated Green's function Eq. ( In combining the two terms we note that we can rewrite the kinetic part,