We present the results of simulations of the spectral and thermodynamic properties of frustrated Pr 2 Zr 2 O 7 crystals using the distribution function of random strains induced by point defects in an elastically anisotropic continuum. Rare-earth oxides with the general formula RE 2 M 2 O 7 (where RE -rare-earth (RE) ion, M -tetravalent metal ion) are isostructural to pyrochlore mineral. Pyrochlore has a cubic facecentered lattice (space group Fd3m). In pyrochlores, the RE ion sublattice forms a network of vertex-connected tetrahedra. Four RE ions located at the vertices of one such tetrahedron are crystallographically equivalent, but magnetically nonequivalent. Such compounds are geometrically frustrated magnets and show a wide variety of magnetic behavior at low temperatures, thus attracting the attention of the scientific community. The magnetic properties of these compounds (in case where the metal ion is nonmagnetic) are determined by magnetic exchange and dipole interactions between RE ions and the interaction of RE ions with the crystal field (CF). RE ions are coordinated by eight oxygen ions located at the vertices of the distorted cube. The main 3 H 4 multiplet of the Pr 3+ ion in the trigonal CF of a perfect crystal with the pyrochlore structure splits into 3 3   doublets and 3 1 2 2      singlets (corresponding irreducible representations of the D 3d point symmetry group in the position of praseodymium ions are indicated). In the CF of praseodymium zirconate, as was shown in In the experimental temperature dependences of the heat capacity Pr 2 Zr 2 O 7 A characteristic feature of crystals with the pyrochlore structure is their nonstoichiometric In the The theory of random deformations caused by lattice point defects was built up in In the presence of crystal lattice defects, the main electron doublet 3   of the Pr 3+ ion in the Pr 2 Zr 2 O 7 lattice splits due to local symmetry reduction. The splitting value is determined by the local deformation, which is random in nature and depends on the concentration and type of defects, and the parameters of the electron-deformation interaction. The distribution function of random strains caused by point defects in the crystal lattice, taking into account elastic anisotropy, is the generalized Lorentz distribution for six independent components of the strain tensor of a cubic crystal Here   e   -linear combinations of the strain tensor components e αβ in the Cartesian coordinate system with the axes X, Y, Z along the tetragonal axes of symmetry of the cubic lattice, transformed by the row  of the irreducible representation  : The values of the parameters A  =0.92, E  =33.01, F  =34.47, which characterize the difference in the width of the distribution function for strains transformed according to the irreducible representations A 1g , E g and F 2g of the cubic group, respectively, were calculated by us according to the method described in parameter characterizes the width of the distribution function, which is proportional to the concentration of d C defects and "to the strength" of defects (the ratio of the change in the lattice cell volume ν to the number of defects) cell parameter. The  parameter was overviewed as a variable adjustable parameter. The observed physical quantities ( ) A T were calculated as follows: the quantummechanical and quantum-statistical averages ( , ) A T e were calculated for fixed values of the components of the strain tensor e and temperature T and then averaged with the distribution function of random strains: The following Hamiltonian of the Pr 3+ ion was used in the calculations: where 0 H -Hamiltonian of a free ion, CF H -Hamiltonian of an ion in a crystal field of a perfect crystal, Z H -energy of interaction of electrons with a local magnetic field, el-def H -Hamiltonian of interaction of 4f-electrons with lattice deformations. The Hamiltonian 0 H of the free Pr 3+ ion was written in the space of 91 states of the 2 4f ground electronic configuration and included the energy of the electrostatic interaction between 4f electrons, the energy of the spin-orbit interaction and the spin-alien orbit interaction, the energy of the interconfiguration interaction The Hamiltonian CF H in the local coordinate system with the trigonal symmetry axis z directed from the center of the tetrahedron formed by RE ions, to which the Pr 3+ ion under study belongs, to the corresponding vertex, is determined by six parameters k p B of the CF: where k p O -linear combinations of spherical tensor operators similar to Stevens operators Several sets of CF parameters on the Pr 3+ ion in the Pr 2 Zr 2 O 7 We calculated the CF parameters on the Pr 3+ ion in the Pr 2 Zr 2 O 7 lattice as part of the semiphenomenological model of exchange charges The energies of sublevels of the ground multiplet calculated by us are compared with the experimental data in Table where   , ( )    -electronic operators. The procedure for calculating the EDI parameters is described in As part of the effective spin Hamiltonian (S = 1/2), the contribution of the EDI is described by the Hamiltonian el-def . .  are Pauli matrices. The linear function of the components of the strain tensor is determined by two parameters (the matrix elements of the corresponding operators V   on the wave functions of the ground doublet), the values   g E V = 242 cm -1 and   2g F V = 1386 cm -1 of which were obtained as part of the microscopic CF model with six parameters given in Table Praseodymium has a stable isotope 141 Pr with nuclear spin I = 5/2 (natural abundance 100%). When calculating the nuclear contribution to the heat capacity, the Hamiltonian (4) of the Pr 3+ ion also included the hyperfine interaction operator HF H , the explicit form of which is given in We have obtained an assessment for the width of the random strain distribution function based on an analysis of experimental data on inelastic neutron scattering. The position of the line observed in the low-energy part of the inelastic neutron scattering spectrum in the absence of an external magnetic field depends on the sample and lies in area 2-3 cm -1 Fig. Comparison of the experimental dependences of the heat capacity of a crystal Pr 2 Zr 2 O 7 where ρ -ion density matrix Pr 3+ with Hamilton operator Avogadro number, B k -Boltzmann constant. It can be seen that the application of the theory of random deformations allows to qualitatively describe the Schottky anomaly observed near 2 K. Fig. Thus, the use of the theory of random deformations allowed to qualitatively reproduce the low-energy profile of the inelastic neutron scattering spectrum and features in the temperature dependences of the heat capacity of praseodymium zirconate at low temperatures. In order to estimate the concentration of point defects, which corresponds to the obtained value of the width of the strain distribution function, one can use the "stuffed pyrochlore" (Pr 2+x Zr 2-x O 7-x/2 ) model and X-ray diffraction data. As part of this model, we get x a da dx   , where a = 10.677 Å Our calculations show the importance of taking into account random deformations caused by defects in the crystal lattice when studying the properties of pyrochlores with non-Kramers ions at low temperatures. The effects caused by the influence of displacements of oxygen sublattices corresponding to lattice vibrations of symmetry F 2g , active in the spectrum of Raman light scattering, on the coupling parameters of the electron subsystem with macroscopic deformations require additional study. In addition, there may be additional significant effects due to multipole interactions between RE ions through the phonon field and two-particle terms in the electron-deformation interaction. From the point of view of experimental research, it is of interest to measure the speed of sound and forced magnetostriction at low temperatures and in weak magnetic fields for pyrochlores containing Pr 3+ and Tb 3+ non-Kramers ions. The analysis of the data from these measurements will allow to correct the set of electron deformation interaction parameters for further study of the defects effect on the properties of pyrochlores containing non-Kramers RE ions. 