This paper presents the results of long-term experiments conducted on fixed-tilt (FT) and single-axis tracked (SAT) open-rack photovoltaic (PV) modules in South Africa. Utilizing Faiman's heat dissipation model and data filtering method, the study demonstrates favourable comparisons of FT experimental results with literature, while yielding novel heat dissipation factors for SAT modules. Enhanced heat dissipation is observed in no/low wind conditions for SAT modules compared to FT modules. Analyses reveal the influence of plane-of-array (POA) irradiance, wind speed and direction on module temperature, with SAT modules exhibiting greater heat dissipation stability. An investigation into data filtering methods suggests minor sensitivity for both configurations, with a slightly more pronounced impact on SAT modules. Assessments comparing module temperature predictions using diverse heat dissipation factors for FT modules reveal negligible sensitivity. This suggests that exact heat dissipation factor values may not be crucial for accurate predictions of module temperature in FT open-rack systems. Annual power output simulations using PVsyst software demonstrate a 2.9% and 3.3% enhancement for FT and SAT configurations, respectively, when employing experimentally determined heat dissipation factors. These findings highlight the importance of realistic, configuration-specific heat dissipation factors in optimizing PV system performance, particularly in the competitive context of modern PV power plant construction and technoeconomic calculations. The power output of solar PV arrays is affected by their operational efficiency, which in turn depend on the temperatures experienced by the module cells. Heat dissipation from PV modules plays a major role in determining module temperature, with the effectiveness of heat dissipation in PV arrays being influenced by the installation configuration Module efficiency reductions with temperature are universal, regardless of mounting configuration or module type. For each degree rise in module operating temperature, typical conversion efficiency reductions of 0.3% -0.5% have been reported Various steady-state models for predicting PV module temperature have been proposed. Among these, an early study by Ross Faiman His method uses linear regression to obtain two heat dissipation constants that describe the heat transfer from the module to the environment. Semi-empirical explicit correlations are presented by Skoplaki et al. The model by Faiman The user is required to input specific heat dissipation factors based on the module configuration, whereafter the software calculates annual power output based on the annualized meteorological data at the location (solar irradiation, ambient temperature, and wind speed). The PV module temperature according to this model is calculated from: where the modified heat dissipation factors UU 0 ′ and UU 1 ′ are determined using: In this context, UU 0 is the constant heat dissipation factor, which encompasses the influence of radiation and natural convection heat transfer with the environment. The factor UU 1 , on the other hand, represents the wind-dependent heat dissipation factor. Lastly, ηo and ηe denote the optical and electrical efficiency of the PV module, respectively, while H is the POA irradiance. A number of research studies, utilizing Faiman's model, have performed experimental investigations to determine Faiman's heat dissipation factors for PV modules in various installation configurations. Most of this work has focussed on open-rack applications, while some building-integrated PV (BIPV) The focus of this paper is on PV module heat dissipation for FT and SAT open-rack applications, according to the Faiman approach. Considering this emphasis, the following contributions from literature for FT installations are noteworthy. Faiman This section describes details of the test site, experimental setup, equipment, method, and data processing. All tests were conducted at the Stellenbosch University Renewable Energy Center (SUNREC) facility, located approximately 10 km outside Stellenbosch, South Africa. Experimental measurements for several solar photovoltaic and solar thermal projects are hosted at the facility. The site consists of open farmland, which is ideal for measurements on PV arrays in open-rack configuration. Figure During the testing period, PV module temperature, meteorological conditions, and SAT position data was monitored at the site. A schematic of the equipment position and connections is presented in Figure The base station facilitates communication between the node and a personal computer (PC). It manages the wireless data transmission within the network and enables real-time data visualization and up-to-date data collection. It connects to the PC via Universal Serial Bus (USB) and interfaces with compatible software, which stores the recorded data for remote access. The PC was situated within a repurposed shipping container on site, positioned approximately 90 m away from the modules. To enable remote data collection and system monitoring, a mobile router was linked to the PC, which had remote access capabilities. An Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) was installed to guarantee continuous power supply and data collection. The weather data was gathered using Campbell Scientific's CR300 datalogger. The PC400 datalogger support software was used for unit programming and remote data collection via PC and the LoggerLink app allowed for data collection directly to a mobile phone. All instruments were calibrated prior to testing. After commencement of the experiment, data was collected 24 hours a day. Instruments recorded averaged values over 1-minute intervals. Data was accessed remotely, while periodic site visits were done to check the equipment and setup condition. The module temperature models developed for steady state analysis typically determine parameters used to model a representative value of the average temperature across a module and an average across an array in the case of power output simulations. In this work, the module temperature was calculated by averaging the two thermocouple measurements for each module. Fluctuations in conditions during testing can influence the accuracy of a model and filtering is applied to limit the analysis to times of relatively stable conditions. Such filtering is standard practice for thermal measurements on PV modules and the IEC 61853-2 standard [21] has defined measurement and filtering requirements. The main concern of this study and associated results was developing heat dissipation factors according to the Faiman model, and as such the decision was made to implement the filtering strategy originally deployed by Faiman • Clear sky days -no irradiance fluctuation during analysis period. • Analysis between 10:00 and 14:00. The reason for this period of data selection was to reduce noise in the data resulting from dividing small numbers by small numbers In addition to the above strategy from • Acceptable analysis should consist of data points from at least ten different days, each of those days should have at least ten data points before and after solar noon. • Use 5-minute average wind speeds when plotting. A range of data points along the xaxis should cover at least 4 m/s. • From all acceptable data points, calculate the average module temperature and plot HH/(TT mmmmmm -TT aammaa ) as a function of the 5-minute average wind speed. Use linear regression to determine the slope and intercept (UU 1 ′ and UU 0 ′ respectively) of the model. • Report dates of experiment and the heat dissipation factors UU 0 ′ and UU 1 ′ . The standard [21] encompasses a broader set of criteria for data collection, data filtering, and evaluation details when compared to the methodology employed in this research. Our equipment and data sampling method does, however, provide sufficient accuracy to be comparable with testing according to the letter of the standard. The study's approach to filtering does not deviate from the idea of presenting steady state data. Rather, it is in keeping with Faiman's original work, with valuable criteria from the standard [21] adding quality to the data set while being practically achievable within the scope of this study. The standard [21] goes on by noting that heat dissipation factors are ultimately used in the calculation of annualized energy yield and advises to check the coefficient impact on yields, and not only considering parameter uncertainty. This comparison will be conducted in Section 4, wherein we will assess the impact of the acquired heat dissipation factors on PV annual energy yield simulations through the utilization of PVsyst. This section presents the experimental results. Initially, a normalized distribution of the main experimental variables is given to provide context on the range of environmental conditions experienced during testing. Thereafter, general trends of the measured parameters are shown. Subsequently, we present the heat dissipation factors acquired for both FT and SAT configurations, followed by an exploration of the distinctions and the corresponding heat transfer mechanisms. The sections that follow explore the relationships between irradiance, wind speed and module temperature, and investigate the sensitivity of heat dissipation factor values to the method of data filtering and daily variations. Histograms of wind speed (Vw), ambient temperature (Tamb) and POA irradiance (H) are shown in Figure Experimental measurements for three selected days of the testing period are shown in Figure The daily trends therefore unmistakably affirm the anticipated significant impact of irradiance on module temperatures, as it governs the heat flux absorbed by the modules. Simultaneously, wind speed plays a crucial role in facilitating heat dissipation from the modules, contributing to the observed temperature variations. Figure Higher levels of scatter at higher wind speeds indicate that heat dissipation is more sensitive under these conditions, potentially also due to some wind speed fluctuations occurring at such times. A mean module temperature prediction was also produced from the above data, which resulted in a Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of 2.55°C. Faiman Turning to the SAT configuration in Figure As previously mentioned, the SAT configuration produced less usable data than the FT configuration. To enable a direct comparison, the FT data set was restricted to the same 1746 intervals utilized for the SAT evaluation. This adjustment did not significantly impact the values of the heat dissipation factors, with the values changing slightly to UU 0 ′ = 25.6 W/m 2 K and UU 1 ′ = 10.3 Ws/m 3 K for the FT modules. The time average plots of Figure The acceleration and heightened mixing effects induced by Southerly winds consequently lead to superior heat dissipation compared to that with Northerly winds. In contrast, the SAT modules would experience boundary layer development over the front and rear surfaces during Southerly winds, as these would effectively act as flat plates relative to the wind direction. Based on forced convection heat transfer theory, heat dissipation from the SAT module surfaces would therefore be lower compared to the FT modules. A comparison of the left-and right-hand side of Figure Figure Ultimately, the right-hand plot of Figure • Higher overall module operating temperatures for the FT modules, therefore enhanced heat dissipation from SAT modules. This is especially clear under no / low wind conditions. • A greater level of data scatter for the FT modules, due to a larger range of irradiance incident on the North-facing surface as well as a sensitivity to wind direction. In this section, we address the impact of the chosen data filtering approach on the predicted heat dissipation. While this study utilized the filtering approach of Faiman [21]. The standard specifically rejects data according to the following filters: • Low irradiance filter: Irradiance values below 400 W/m 2 . • Irradiance fluctuations filter: Irradiance values for a 10-minute interval when the irradiance varies by more than 10% from the irradiance value during the preceding 10minute interval. • Wind fluctuations and gust filter: Wind speed values in a 10-minute interval which includes a deviation of the instantaneous wind speed below 0.25 m/s or gusts larger than +200% from the 10-min average. To evaluate the influence of filtering approach, the complete FT and SAT 5-minute averaged data sets between 30/03/2023 and 07/08/2023 were filtered according to the above method. For the SAT configuration, periods of tracker malfunction were excluded from the pre-filtered data set. Figure Table Three noteworthy conclusions can be drawn from these results. First, although the IEC filtering method had a more scattered plot and lower R 2 value of fit compared to Faiman's filtering approach, there was no inaccuracy as a result. Therefore, using the simpler Faiman method of filtering instead of the IEC filters shows no loss in accuracy when predicting the module temperature. Second, except for PVsyst, the heat dissipation factors from all relevant sources predicted module temperature for the FT open-rack configuration within 0.5°C of each other. This seems to suggest that the exact values of the heat dissipation factors are not crucial in the accuracy of predicting module temperature for FT open-rack modules. We believe that this insensitivity stems from the high level of exposure of both surfaces of open-rack installations to the environment. It would be our expectation that different BAPV systems, for example, would show greater sensitivity to the specific configuration and local conditions of the particular setup. It should however be noted that our above analysis considered heat dissipation factors within certain limits, as well as a single data set, and it is consequently not clear whether this finding will always be valid for FT open-rack systems. Thirdly, results suggest that it is preferable to consider both heat dissipation factors for prediction of module temperatures instead of an inflated UU 0 ′ value only, even if accurate information is not available. Among the 44 days with clear skies, Figure Despite comparable atmospheric conditions, module temperatures are higher for the blue data. Consequently, the ratio of H to the temperature difference (TT mmmmmm -TT aammaa ) is lower for the blue data due to the higher denominator, causing the data points to lie below the trendline. The variance in module temperature between these two days is attributed to differences in wind direction. under identical ambient conditions, the SAT modules consistently conform to the linear trendline. In instances of elevated wind speeds, the data for both configurations tend to be in closer proximity to the trendline. These observations again highlight the variability in heat dissipation from FT modules, the enhanced heat dissipation capability of the SAT modules during low wind, and the relatively similar heat losses during higher wind conditions. The implications of the configuration-specific heat dissipation factors which were obtained in this study are investigated through simulation. The annual electricity output of systems with each mounting configuration is determined using PVsyst version 7.4. Equations 2 and 3 are used, together with the assumptions noted below, to convert the accented heat dissipation factors to the UU 0 and UU 1 input values that PVsyst requires. For each configuration, the following scenarios were simulated: 1. Modelled configuration using default heat dissipation factors defined by PVsyst. The ~5 kW PV system sizing was chosen for its modelling simplicity. The system allows the PV array to be connected to one string and connected to an inverter where there is no limit to the annual energy generated. The heat dissipation factors for the FT and SAT simulation scenarios and the annual electricity output for each are given in Table This study conducted long-term experiments for FT and SAT open-rack PV modules at a site in South Africa. The heat dissipation model and data filtering method of Faiman was employed, which entails the consideration of clear sky day data only between 10:00 and 14:00. 