Density functional theory based calculations have been performed for solving the phonon Boltzmann transport equation to investigate the thermal transport properties of monolayer (ML) ZnO under in-plane isotropic biaxial tensile strain. The in-plane lattice thermal conductivity (κL) of ML-ZnO increases dramatically in response to the biaxial tensile strain ranging from 0% to 10%, conflicting the general belief. The strain-induced stiffening of the ZA phonon mode and the resulting concomitant increase in group velocity and decrease in phonon population is found to play a significant role behind the unusual enhancement of κL. The mode resolved analysis shows the tensile strain driven competitive behavior between different phonon properties, mainly the group velocity and phonon lifetimes, being responsible for the observed unusual enhancement in κL. Additionally, the phonon scattering calculations show the importance of inclusion of 4-phonon scattering in the thermal transport calculations suggesting the significance of higher-order anharmonicity in ML-ZnO. A strikingly high 4-phonon scattering strength in ML-ZnO primarily results from the strong anharmonicity, quadratic ZA mode dispersion, large frequency gap in phonon dispersion, and reflection symmetry induced selection rule. The incorporation of 4-phonon scattering significantly alters the transport characteristics of all the phonon modes, in general and ZA phonons, in particular. At large strains, a linear dispersion of the ZA mode and closure of the frequency gap is observed, which results in significant reduction of 4-phonon scattering strength in ML-ZnO. The discovery of graphene Due to the significant challenges associated with the fabrication of high quality 2D materials and the precise measurement of their thermal conductivity, first principles based theoretical approaches, such as density functional theory (DFT) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, have become indispensable to predict and analyze the thermal conductivity of these material systems. The κ L of ML-ZnO, using first-principle DFT based calculations, is found to be only 4.5 Wm -1 K -1 Strain engineering, due to its easy implementation and reversible application, has emerged as an efficient way to tune the electrical, mechanical, or thermal properties of low-dimensional materials Over the years, the first-principles DFT based calculations have been successfully employed in accurately predicting the κ L of various materials at a low computational expense ML-ZnO has been attracting an intensive interest from the scientific community owing to its distinctive electronic properties and therefore, have been explored thoroughly over the years. However, in spite of the critical phonon properties that may give rise to unconventional heat conduction behavior, the phonon transport properties of ML-ZnO have not been avidly explored. Here, in this work, we have proposed a strategy to engineer the phonon transport properties and thereby, tune the κ L of ML-ZnO in a wide range. Additionally, we have illustrated the underlying mechanism of the atypical thermal transport behavior of ML-ZnO with tensile strain through systematic first-principles investigations. Moreover, in spite of possessing all the signatures that may lead to a very strong 4-phonon scattering, the influence of higher-order anharmonicity on the thermal transport properties of ML-ZnO has not been studied yet. In this study, we have explored the impact of 4-phonon scattering on the thermal conductivity of ML-ZnO and its variation with application of tensile strain. First-principles calculations coupled with the phonon Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) have been performed using ab-initio density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) The phonon dispersion curves are calculated based on the supercell approach using the finite displacement method with an amplitude of 0.015 Å as implemented in the phonopy code Combining the first-principle calculations with the semi-classical Boltzmann transport equation (BTE), the lattice thermal conductivity (κ L ) of a material can be calculated as: where λ is a particular phonon mode with frequency ω λ at a particular wave-vector q, V is the volume of the Brillouin zone (BZ), N q corresponds to the total number of q-points sampled in the first BZ, n 0 λ is the Bose-Einstein distribution function associated with the phonon mode λ at a particular temperature T, ν λ,x is the x component of the phonon group velocity, τ λ is the carrier lifetime of the λ mode phonons. The term ħω λ ∂n 0 λ ∂T corresponds to the phonon specific heat of the λ mode (C λ ). The intrinsic phonon scattering rates (τ -1 λ ) and therefore, the carrier lifetime (τ λ ) are computed according to the Fermi's golden rule and the detailed derivation of the formulas can be found elsewhere where 1 τ 3,λ and 1 τ 4,λ denote the 3-phonon and 4-phonon scattering rates, respectively. The total scattering rate is, therefore, computed by summing the contribution from all the possible phonon modes. The optimized crystal structure of monolayer (ML) ZnO is shown in Fig. The phonon band structure of ML-ZnO constructed from the harmonic 2nd order IFCs are shown in Fig. The 3-phonon scattering limited intrinsic lattice thermal conductivity (κ L ) of ML-ZnO is calculated with temperature in a range of 200 to 1000 K by solving the phonon BTE within the relaxation time approximation (RTA). As can be seen from the κ L vs T plot shown in Fig. Note that, the calculation of κ L of ML-ZnO both in the unstrained and strained conditions have been performed based on the RTA solved phonon BTE. It is understood that the resulting κ L would be underestimated by a magnitude determined by the ratio of the Normal (N) to Umklapp (U) scattering strength. This happens as the RTA consider the N-processes to be a resistive process, while only the U-processes are the source of direct thermal resistance. However, if we assume that the ratio of the N to U scattering strength remains unaltered upon application of strain, then the deviation from the accurate κ L would remain more or less the same at all strain values. Since the focus of the current study is to investigate the modifications in the thermal transport properties of ML-ZnO induced by tensile strain, a small and constant underestimation in κ L would not alter the conclusions. We, therefore, chose to compute the κ L of ML-ZnO for unstrained as well as strained conditions based on the RTA solved phonon BTE. To investigate the effect of tensile strain on the thermal transport properties of ML-ZnO, we applied in-plane isotropic biaxial tensile strain of 4% and 10% on ML-ZnO. The evolution of κ L of ML-ZnO with the applied strain as a function of temperature is shown in Fig. To get further insight, we have computed the strain-induced modifications in the various independent parameters that constitute the analytical modelling of κ L (κ L = λ κ Lλ = λ C λ ν λ ν λ τ λ ), such as the specific heat (C λ ), group velocity (ν λ ) and relaxation time (τ λ ) of a particular phonon mode λ at temperature 300 K. From the plots of C v (= λ C λ ) as a function of phonon frequency, shown in Fig. However, the large changes in the phonon dispersion induced by the tensile strain is likely to result in significant modifications in the group velocity of the phonon modes (ν g = λ ν λ ). The ν g of ML-ZnO at 0 K as a function of phonon frequency at different strained conditions are shown in Fig. The most relevant phonon property that governs the transport characteristics of a material is the phonon lifetime (τ 3 ), which is determined from the intrinsic phonon scattering rates (τ -1 3 ) corresponding to the 3-phonon scattering processes resulting from the lowest-order crystal anharmonicity. Presumably, two parameters govern the 3-phonon scattering strength for any material, e.g. (1) Grüneisen parameter (γ), (2) 3-phonon scattering phase space (P 3 ). To understand the changes in the phonon scattering rates with strain, we first have analyzed the strain induced modifications in these two parameters. The Grüneisen parameter (γ) characterizes the crystal anharmonicity of a material and thus, is a measure of the asymmetry present in atomic vibrations. The intrinsic phonon scattering rate is strongly influenced by the crystal anharmonicity. The mode Grüneisen parameter (γ i ) can be defined as , where ω i is the frequency of a phonon mode i at the equilibrium volume V 0 . The higher the magnitude of γ i , the larger the anharmonicity, and stronger will be the associated phonon scattering strength. The highest values of γ i of ML-ZnO, as can be seen from Fig. Three-phonon phase space (P 3 ), on the other hand, is a measure of the available scattering channels involving three phonons satisfying both the energy and momentum conservation criteria. For a particular phonon mode and for an individual scattering channel, the higher the P 3 , the more probable it is for that particular phonon scattering event to take place. Therefore, the P 3 has a significant control over the phonon scattering mechanism and the overall FIG. 3 ) does not depend entirely on the P 3 , but also depends proportionally on the square of the corresponding scattering matrix element. The total P 3 of ML-ZnO, including both the 3-phonon combination and splitting processes, i.e. the two possible ways three phonons can engage in a scattering event, for different phonon modes along the k-path Γ-M under strains of 0%, 4%, and 10% are presented in Fig. The variation in the overall 3-phonon scattering rate (τ -1 3 ) of ML-ZnO at temperature 300 K for different strained conditions (0%, 4% and 10%) are shown in Fig. 3 ). The scattering rates corresponding to the combination and splitting processes as a function of phonon frequency are also presented in Fig. The mode-resolved phonon scattering rates (τ -1 3 ) at 300 K along the k-path Γ-M for the unstrained and the strained cases are shown in Fig. 3 ) of ML-ZnO with phonon frequency at 300 K under unstrained (left), 4% (middle) and 10% (right) biaxially strained conditions. The plots include the total 3-phonon scattering rates along with the separate individual 3-phonon scattering rates corresponding to the combination (+) and splitting (-) processes. Here, combination refers to the phenomena where two phonons merge to form one phonon and splitting refers to the process where one phonon splits into two new phonons. FIG. 3 ) corresponding to all the phonon modes of ML-ZnO at 300 K for the different strained conditions plotted as a function of the reduced wave vector along the k-path Γ-M. for the ZA mode phonons. With increasing strain, the τ -1 3 of the ZA phonons further lowers. The lowest values of τ -1 3 for the ZA phonons occur due to two reasons; (1) large frequency gap in the phonon dispersion, (2) reflection symmetry in ML-ZnO. Due to the large frequency gap, the low-frequency ZA phonons can hardly scatter into the high-frequency optical branches obeying the energy conservation criterion. Thereby, the ZA phonons can only scatter into some other low-frequency acoustic phonons and thus, the associated lifetime (τ 3 ) becomes large. Furthermore, the horizontal reflection symmetry in ML-ZnO imposes a unique selection rule for the allowed phonon scattering events, in addition to the energy and momentum conservation rule. According to the selection rule, phonon scattering processes of any order that involve an odd number of out-of-plane phonons (flexural) are forbidden. Therefore, 3phonon scattering processes may involve only zero or two flexural phonons. Thus, a significant number of scattering channels involving odd numbers of ZA phonons are restricted. This unique selection rule, combined with the large frequency gap, results in a remarkably high lifetime (τ 3 ) corresponding to the ZA phonons. Similar overestimation in the ZA phonon lifetime and their contribution in thermal transport have been observed in graphene 3 . Owing to the closure of the frequency gap at 10% strain, while the τ -1 3 corresponding to all the phonon modes increase significantly following the increase in P 3 , the τ -1 3 of the ZA phonons remains nearly unaltered. The TA mode phonons, on the other hand, having nearly the same dispersion that of ZA mode, experiences a large increase in τ -1 3 . This can be understood as due to the additional selection rule imposed on the ZA phonons, which restricts a single ZA phonon to couple with two other in-plane phonons or three ZA phonons to couple among themselves. Analyzing the strain induced modifications of the τ -1 3 can provide useful insight into the phonon transport mechanism in ML-ZnO and its variation with strain. FIG. 9. The contribution from the individual phonon modes to the total thermal conductivity (κL) of ML-ZnO at 300 K under the unstrained, 4% and 10% biaxial tensile strained condition. Combining the effects of strain on the various independent parameters, such as the C λ , ν λ , and τ 3 , the underlying physics responsible for the anomalous enhancement in κ L with tensile strain can be constituted. In order to understand the effect of strain on the thermal transport behavior of the individual phonon modes, the mode-resolved contribution to κ L at 300 K for different strain levels are plotted in Fig. The strikingly high dominance of the ZA phonons in the thermal transport mechanism of ML-ZnO in the unstrained as well as in the strained conditions poses a serious question towards the competency of the 3-phonon based calculations. Note that, in all the calculations of thermal transport properties of ML-ZnO, discussed so far, the intrinsic phonon scattering rates are calculated considering only the 3-phonon scattering processes, which originates from the first-order anharmonic term in the crystal Hamiltonian. The higher-order anharmonic terms are neglected owing to their presumably small scattering strength. Recently, in some materials including bulk and 2D, the 4-phonon scattering strength is found to be unusually high, even higher than the 3-phonon scattering strength In summary, first-principles calculations have been performed to investigate the effects of in-plane isotropic biaxial tensile strains on the thermal transport properties of ML-ZnO. It is found that the lattice thermal conductivity (κ L ) of ML-ZnO increases significantly with the application of tensile strain, opposing the conventional wisdom. The strain induced quadratic to linear transition of the ZA mode dispersion not only results in an increase of the group velocity (ν λ ), but also decreases the 3-phonon phase space (P 3 ) owing to the reduced phonon population. This, coupled with the dramatically reduced Grüneisen parameter (γ), results in a large ZA phonon lifetime (τ ), which plays a major role behind the unusual enhancement of κ L with strain. The strain driven vying effects between the ν λ and τ -1 3 lead to the up and down behavior in the thermal transport contribution of the other phonon modes. The τ of the ZA phonons are found to be brutally overestimated when only 3-phonon scattering is considered owing to the 