Using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), low energy electron diffraction (LEED), and density functional theory (DFT), we demonstrate the formation of quasicrystalline gallium adlayer on icosahedral (i)-Al-Pd-Mn. Quasiperiodic motifs are evident in the STM topography images, including the Ga white flower (GaWF) and τ inflated GaWF (τ -GaWF), where τ is the golden mean. A larger and more complicated ring motif is also identified, comprised of a bright center and an outer ring of pentagons. The fast Fourier transform of the STM images exhibits distinct quasiperiodic spots, thereby establishing quasiperiodicity on a length scale of ∼350 nm. Based on our DFT calculations, the preferred adsorption sites of Ga on i-Al-Pd-Mn are determined to be either the Mn atoms at the center of the Penrose P1 tile or the vertices of the P1 tile containing Pd atoms at the center of a cluster of 5 Al atoms (5-Al). The GaWF motif is modeled by an inner 6 atom Ga cluster (6-Ga) around the central Mn atom and an outer ring of 5 Ga atoms adsorbed at the centers of the 5-Al clusters, both having pentagonal symmetry. The τ -GaWF motif is modeled by the 6-Ga arranged on the τ -P1 tiling, while the ring motif is modeled by Ga atoms adsorbed at the center of 5-Al clusters above a Pd atom. The side lengths and diameters of the GaWF, τ -GaWF, and the ring motifs are τ scaled and show excellent agreement with the DFT-based models. An additional indication of the quasiperiodic characteristics of the Ga monolayer is the 5-fold LEED patterns that were detected throughout the entire range of beam energy that was measured. Quasicrystals are a distinct type of material that display aperiodic order with rotational symmetries, including 5-fold, 8-fold, 10-fold, and 12-fold, which are forbidden in crystals with translational order Since more than two decades, researchers have studied elemental quasicrystalline films to investigate the impact of aperiodic order on the physical and electronic properties that are independent of the chemical complexity of the ternary quasicrystals. But to date, only a few elements have demonstrated quasiperiodicity Gallium is an interesting element due to its relatively low melting point (303 K) and its complex solid-state structure. The latter produces a notable dip at the Fermi level (E F ), which is believed to be the consequence of partial covalent bonding The STM measurements were carried out using a variable temperature STM from Scientaomicron GmbH at a base pressure of 5×10 -11 mbar. All the STM measurements were performed at RT in the constant current mode using a tungsten tip that was prepared by sputtering and the voltage pulse method. The tip was biased, and the sample was kept at the ground potential. STM images were recorded for varying bias voltages. The Fast Fourier transform (FFT) was averaged for 2-4 STM images, as in our previous work The 5-fold surface of the monocrystalline i -Al-Pd-Mn was polished using a 0.25 μm diamond paste before inserting it into the ultra-high vacuum chamber. The polished i -Al-Pd-Mn surface was treated in-situ by repeated cycles of Ar + ion sputtering at 1-2 keV for 30-60 min and annealing to 970 K for 2-2.5 hr to produce an atomically clean surface with a composition similar to the bulk The DFT calculations to probe the interaction of Ga atoms with the i-Al-Pd-Mn surface were performed us-ing the method of the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) , where E tot is the energy of the i-Al-Pd-Mn surface model A. Nucleation of Ga on i-Al-Pd-Mn A STM topography image for a deposition time (t d ) of 2 min results in a coverage of 0.1 ML Ga on i-Al-Pd-Mn. The coverage is determined by the fraction of the total area covered by the Ga clusters that are identified by the bright regions in Fig. To understand the origin of the GaWF, we have performed DFT calculation for the adsorption of Ga atoms on the 5-fold i-Al-Pd-Mn surface that was modeled as the 2/1 approximant [Fig. Quasicrystalline surfaces offer a greater number of inequivalent adsorption sites compared to ordinary crystals, allowing for the formation of various adatom configurations. On the 5-fold i-Al-Pd-Mn surface, there are two kinds of regular sites that preferably adsorb Ga atoms. The first site is the center of the surface 5-Al cluster that has a Pd atom. These Pd atoms can be 0.048 nm or 0.126 nm below the surface plane. Therefore, there are 2 kinds of the Pd sites and only one can adsorb the adatoms. The Ga atoms are adsorbed preferably only at the centers of the 5-Al cluster with the deeper Pd atom. These deeper Pd atoms are the centers of the Bergman clusters In the bulk pMC cluster, in the first shell around the Mn atom, there are only 7 nearest neighbors In previous studies The formation of the central 6-Ga cluster is slightly (-0.16 eV/Ga atom) preferred over the formation of both rings simultaneously. The central Ga atom in the 6-Ga cluster is elevated by 0.1 nm compared to the five Ga neighbors. Therefore, the center of the GaWF cluster may appear brighter in the STM images than the outer ring. Also, on the 6-Ga cluster at the center, additional Ga atoms can be adsorbed, which can lead to a brighter center and an irregular shape. We also note that, due to stochastic reasons, some GaWF motifs have a dark center, which could be caused by the absence of the 6-Ga cluster at the center. It should be noted that the edge length of the P1 tiling a 0 (= 0.776 nm) is in excellent agreement with the side length of the GaWF from STM (0.79±0.1 nm). Additionally, the typical distance between two neighboring Mn atoms on which the 6-Ga clusters are centered is 1.255 nm (= τ ×a 0 , where τ = 1.618). This distance also agrees well with the distance between the nearest neighbor GaWFs, as shown by the white ovals in Fig. For comparison, in Discussion I of the SM, we also present the adsorption energies of the previously studied Sn white flower (SnWF) cluster The 5-fold surface of i-Al-Pd-Mn is primarily composed of Al atoms, with the top two atomic planes of the 5/3approximant consisting of 75.9% Al, 19.6% Pd, and 4.5% Mn In Fig. It is interesting to note here that besides the GaWF motifs (white circles), larger sized white flower motifs [yellow circles in Fig. To establish the quasiperiodic nature of the Ga adlayer at 0.4 ML coverage, in Fig. The STM topography image in Fig. The FFT in Fig. Figure Curiously, in this figure, isolated bright condensed islands are observed. In Fig. In Fig. A STM topography image in Fig. The STM images in Figs. To show that these motifs are τ inflated compared to the GaWF motifs, we determine the edge length of the pentagon shown by yellow dashed lines in Figs. The size of this motif can be approximately estimated by the diameter of a circle circumscribing it drawn such that the τ -GaWF motif is contained in it. The distribution of the diameter, considering several such motifs, is plotted as a histogram in Fig. If around the Mn atoms of the τ -P1 pentagon the 6-Ga clusters grow, a new Ga superstructure can be observed that would represent τ -GaWF, as shown in Fig. A zoomed view of the ring motif (red circles in Figs. In Fig. Ga/i -Al-Pd-Mn Figure The intensity profiles of the inner and outer sets of spots for 1.2 ML LEED pattern in Fig. There is no evidence of splitting or broadening of the spots indicating the absence of surface defects or steps of multiple heights Ag Although the LEED patterns of the Ga adlayer resemble the substrate in Fig. To understand these differences, the intensity (I) of a LEED spot as a function of E p -called I-V curve In conclusion, our present study utilizing scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), low energy electron diffrac-tion (LEED), and density functional theory (DFT) demonstrates that Ga monolayer on i-Al-Pd-Mn exhibits quasiperiodic order at room temperature. The FFTs of the STM images exhibit the characteristic quasiperiodic spots, while the real space images reveal motifs such as Ga white flower (GaWF) and τ -inflated GaWF (τ -GaWF), where τ is the golden mean. A larger sized ring motif made up of pentagons in a circular congregation with a bright center is also observed. STM shows that the quasiperiodic order persists over a length scale of ∼350 nm. The quasiperiodic nature of the Ga monolayer is further supported by the 5-fold LEED patterns observed across the entire range of the beam energy. Auger electron spectroscopy provides additional evidence that the Ga adlayer does not exhibit any surface alloying or chemical reactions with the substrate. Our DFT calculations indicate that Ga prefers to adsorb on i-Al-Pd-Mn at two specific sites: (i) the vertices of the Penrose P1 tile located at the center of a cluster consisting of 5 Al atoms that has a Pd atom at the center but positioned below the surface plane, and (ii) the Mn atom positioned at the center of the P1 tile. The GaWF motif is represented by a pentagonal outer ring comprising 5 Ga atoms adsorbed at the center of 5-Al clusters and a pentagonal inner cluster consisting of 6 Ga atoms (6-Ga) surrounding the central Mn atom. The 6-Ga clusters arranged on the τ -P1 tiling serve as a model for the τ -GaWF motif, while the ring motif is represented by Ga atoms that adsorb at the reactive centers of 5-Al clusters above the marked Pd sites. Excellent agreement is observed between the side length and the diameter of the motifs between the experiment and the DFT-based models. Our research reveals a previously unknown characteristic of gallium, i.e., its quasicrystallinity. It is intriguing that Ga exhibits quasiperiodic order despite the substrate temperature being near its melting point; this characteristic sets it apart from other systems. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS M.K. is thankful for the support from the Slovak Grant Agency VEGA (No. 2/0144/21) and APVV (No. . We are grateful to M. Mihalkovič and K. Pussi for insightful discussions. We thank D. L. Schlagel and T. A. Lograsso for providing us with the i-Al-Pd-Mn substrate. Special appreciation is extended to V. K. Singh for his suggestions regarding the STM measurement. e-mail addresses: * marian.krajci@savba.sk, † barmansr@gmail.com