In the osmotic power generation field, reaching the industrial benchmark has been challenging because of the need for capillaries close to the sizes of ions and molecules. Here, we fabricated well-controlled 'along-the-capillary' membranes of Na-vermiculite with a capillary size of ∼ 5 Å. They exhibit 1600 times enhanced conductivity compared to commonly studied 'across-the-capillary' membranes. Interestingly, they show a very high cation selectivity of 0.83 for NaCl solutions, which resulted in large power densities of 9.6 W/m 2 and 12.2 W/m 2 at concentration gradients of 50 and 1000, respectively, at 296 K, for an unusually large membrane length of 100 μm. The power density shows an exponential increase with temperature, reaching 65.1 W/m 2 for a concentration gradient of 50 at 333 K. This markedly differs from the classical behavior and indicates the role of ion (de)hydration in enhancing power density, opening new possibilities for exploiting such membranes for energy harvesting applications. The significant salt concentration difference at the seawater and river water interface is a clean source of enormous osmotic power of ∼ 2.4 TW In this regard, J. Feng et al. Several micron-thick membranes were extensively studied; however, in the pristine form, most of these membranes failed to achieve the required power density of 5 W/m 2 , even for a salt concentration gradient of 500 between seawater and freshwater. Examples include MXenes 9 , montmorillonite For our study, we picked vermiculite as the archetypal membrane material since it has a considerable surface charge density and small interlayer space. We recently successfully synthesized highly waterstable cation-intercalated vermiculite membranes The sodium intercalated vermiculite (Na-V) membrane was fabricated with a procedure described in our previous work We fabricated several devices with lengths, L, from 15 mm to 100 μm (Note S1). A strip of vermiculite membrane was encapsulated between two acrylic sheets with epoxy (Loctite Stycast 1266). This ensured that the only path for the ion transport is along the membrane's capillaries. The longer side was polished further using P1000 emery sandpaper to get the desired membrane length. The obtained sample was then glued onto an acrylic holder with a pre-fabricated hole of size 4 mm x 2 mm (Figure (B) Cross-sectional SEM image of Na-V membrane, which provides a thickness estimate of ∼ 4 μm. (C) Sample fabrication steps for 'along-the-capillary' transport devices. Inset: Optical microscope image of the acrylic encapsulating the membrane, which measures a membrane length of ∼ 100 μm. In the 'alongthe-capillary' devices, this becomes the transport length. The membrane, along with the acrylic support, is placed in between two reservoirs made of PEEK (polyether ether ketone). We measured the ionic conductivity of the membrane using aqueous NaCl solutions with the same molar concentration, C, in both reservoirs. All the experiments were conducted at the room temperature of 296 K. We used a pair of home-made Ag/AgCl electrodes to convert ionic current to electronic and vice versa, which are connected to a source-measure unit (Keithley-Tektronix 2614B) and LabVIEW software. The schematic of the measurement is shown in the inset of Figure To understand the capability of these membranes for osmotic power generation, we performed driftdiffusion experiments at a temperature of 296 K. The experimental setup involved exposing the membrane to different concentration gradients, Δ of NaCl, as depicted in an inset of Figure Where, S = t+ -t-. Here, t+ and t-denote the transport numbers for cations and anions, respectively, and t+ + t-= 1, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature (296 K), z = 1, e is the elementary charge. For an ideal cation-selective membrane, t+ = 1. We analyzed the variation of Vdiff with Δ (= CH/CL) using Eqn.1, providing a cation transport number, t+ of 0.92 (S = 0.83). This suggests that Na-stabilized vermiculite membranes are cation-selective, a property required to generate large osmotic energy. We note there is a slight decrease in diffusion potential at Δ = 10 3 . This can be related to the increased boundary layer resistance The energy efficiency is approximately 34%, which is quite large given that the theoretical maximum conversion efficiency of a perfectly selective membrane is only 50%. We wanted to check if the most commonly used KCl can give a better power density than NaCl. For this measurement, we used K-intercalated vermiculite (K-V) membranes. With KCl, we observed a very high selectivity, S of 0.95 (t+ = 0.97), compared to NaCl, where the latter has S = 0.83 (t+ = 0.92) (Figure It is interesting to know how the length, L, of the membrane affects the power density. We started with an L of 15 mm, the membrane exhibited a selectivity of 0.83 and a power density of 0.05 W/m 2 for a NaCl concentration gradient of 50. However, when L was reduced from millimeters to micrometers, a significant improvement in power density was observed. For example, the power density increased 175 times from ∼ 0.05 W/m 2 to 9.6 W/m 2 at Δ = 50 (Figure To estimate how much power this device delivers to an external load, we evaluated the power from the measured I-V curves as well as by testing the device under several external load resistances. The maximum output power density was calculated using the relation, power density, P = V diff 2 /(4R × Area), where the Area = 528 μm Next, we wanted to check whether the pH of the electrolyte (Note S3) affects the osmotic power. We observe that the power density shows an increase from 6.4 to 13.1 W/m 2 at Δ = 50 when pH increases from 3 to 11, which is approximately a factor of 2 (Figure The remarkable thermal stability of vermiculite Where σ is the ionic conductivity, σo is the Arrhenius constant, EA is the activation energy, R is the universal gas constant, and T is the temperature. The Arrhenius plot of conductivity for 'along-the-capillary' and 'across-the-capillary' membranes provide activation energy values of 36.0 kJ mol -1 and 37.5 kJ mol -1 , respectively (Figure To understand this anomalous temperature dependence of power density, we performed COMSOL Multiphysics simulations as described in Note S6 (Table With this, we could match the experimental diffusion I-V curves, which further confirms the ion (de)hydration behavior with increase in temperature (Figure To test the stability of these membranes over long-term operation, we measured the diffusion characteristics at regular intervals. Under ambient conditions, the membrane exhibits stable diffusion potential and power density when operated for more than 60 hours (Figure To demonstrate its usefulness, we increased the membrane area to ∼ 0.4 mm 2 , stacked multiple membranes using epoxy (Figure The hydration effects are found to be crucial to enhance the power density many folds. If the channel sizes are much smaller than the hydration size, this will result in smaller ionic currents, and hence the achievable power will be lower, which is not desirable. If the channels are much larger than the hydration sizes, the hydration effects will weaken, resulting in a bulk-like temperature dependency on power. Therefore, it is desirable to have membranes with channel size close to hydration size to observe a similar power density variation with temperature. This effect can be explored in MXenes, and Al-stabilized GO, which could be potential candidates for future research. In the clay's family, montmorillonite, bentonite, talc, kaolinite, and gypsum could be explored for these applications. Even though there have been many studies to enhance the osmotic power density but most of them fail to meet the industry bench mark with NaCl solutions. The decreased mobility of Na + as compared to K + is one of the reasons that limits these studies to solutions like KCl We demonstrated that 100 μm long membranes could generate high power densities. Apart from the mechanical polishing method discussed in this work, alternative techniques like ion beam thinning (Ion milling/ FIB), ultramicrotomy, and electropolishing can also be employed to achieve thinner samples. A better power density is expected if length is reduced below 100 μm. However, reducing the length to less than microns will likely not enhance the power density due to concentration polarization In conclusion, by transporting the ions along the interlayer space direction, we achieved high ion selectivity and conductance, which lead to high power density and energy efficiency. The angstrom-sized capillaries provided a hydration barrier for the ions, which the ions needed to overcome. Because of this, the ion mobility shows an exponential variation with temperature, resulting in an exponentially large power density. We reported an enormous power density of 65.1 W/m 2 at an accessible temperature of 333 K. We combined six such devices to demonstrate its ability to power up red and yellow LEDs. The shortest membrane that we tried was 100 μm long, however, this could be further scaled down with several techniques, promising even better power density. By choosing capillaries that are close to the hydration size of the ions, it is possible to control the ion transport with a (de)hydration barrier. The manipulation of ion (de)hydration characteristics provides another possibility to separate different ions from a mixture of ions. The success in this direction would primarily depend on our ability to fabricate angstrom scale capillary devices. Resource Availability Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Kalon Gopinadhan (gopinadhan.kalon@iitgn.ac.in). This study did not generate new unique materials. A two-step ion exchange was used where 100 mg of vermiculite crystals (Sigma Aldrich) were dispersed in 200 ml of saturated sodium chloride (NaCl) solution, heated for 24 hours at 100°C, and washed with water. The product is then dispersed in a 2 M lithium chloride (LiCl) solution and again heated for 24 hours, expanding interlayer spaces of vermiculite crystals. These crystals were then rigorously washed and dried to remove any residual salts. The resultant Li-V crystals were added to water with a 1 mg/ml concentration and sonicated for 40 minutes. The obtained suspension was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 minutes to remove unexfoliated and multilayer flakes. The supernatant was used to make membranes via vacuum filtration on 0.22 μm pore size PVDF support. The fabricated Li-V membrane was unstable in water and hence stabilized by dipping in 1 M NaCl for 24 hours. The membrane was thoroughly washed to remove any excess salt that may be present on the surface and then used for "along-the-capillary" device preparation. To change the pH of the NaCl solution, 1 M HCl and 1 M NaOH were used as acid and base buffer, respectively. The following calculations were used to prepare 1 M NaCl and 0.02 M NaCl for pH 3 to acquire a concentration gradient of 50. A 30 μL solution of 1 M HCl was added to 5 mL of 1 M NaCl solution to obtain 1 M NaCl solution of pH 3. For the low concentration side, to prepare ∼ 0.2 M of a solution, we added 30 μL of 1 M HCl to 5 mL of 0.014 M NaCl. To finalize the volume and molarity of the mixing solutions, we used the equation: Molarity of the solution = n/V, where n is the total number of moles = (Molarity of NaCl × Volume of the NaCl) + (Molarity of buffer solution × Volume of the buffer solution), and V is the total volume of the solution = Volume of NaCl solution + Volume of buffer solution. The same procedure was used to prepare solutions with pH 11. Note S4. Variation of power density with respect to temperature. Since the power density, P = V diff 2 /(4R × Area), where V diff = V 0 -V R , is the membranes diffusion potential, V0 is the zero-current potential, VR is the redox potential, R is the resistance (1/G), and Area = 528 μm 2 . The diffusion potential and resistance values (1/G) obtained from I-V graphs at different temperatures are used to calculate the power density, which displays an exponential increase with temperature. The percentage change in power density can be calculated by ∆P P 296 K × 100 %, where ∆P = P 333 K -P 296 K . We observed a 578 % increase in power density with a rise in temperature from 296 K to 333 K. Table Where R is the universal gas constant, T is the temperature, |z| = 1, F is the Faraday constant, and Λ m o is the limiting molar conductivity of the ions at a particular temperature. Using the Λ m o values at the different temperatures Where μ + and μ -are the cation and anion mobility respectively, z + = +1 and z -= -1. To obtain μ + and, μ - we measured the conductivity of 1 M NaCl across the temperature range, 296 K to 333 K. Since conductivity can be described by: σ ≈ F(C + μ + + C -μ -), where C + and C -are the concentrations of cations and anions, respectively. Using this, along with equation (2), will provide us with the mobility of cations and anions (Figure The enhanced osmotic power density with temperature through vermiculite membrane was modelled using a continuum based two dimensional coupled Poisson-Nernst-Planck equation using COMSOL Multiphysics 2 software. The Poisson equation describes the distribution of electric potential and the Nernst-Planck equation describes the concentration of cationic and anionic distribution through the channel. The total ionic flux J ± of each ionic species resulting from the contributions of the diffusion term associated with the concentration gradient and electrophoretic term associated with the electric potential gradient is shown below. ∇. J ± = ∇. (-D ± ∇C ± -z ± Fμ ± C ± ∇φ ) = 0 (3) Where C + , C -, D + , D -, μ + , μ -, z + and, z -are the concentrations, diffusion coefficients, ionic mobilities and valences of cations and anions, respectively and F is the Faraday constant. At high temperature, the ionic mobility follows the Arrhenius equation ) Where μ 0± is the Arrhenius constant, N = 2666 is the number of layers for a 4 μm thick membrane, α = 0.00487 is a fitting factor and E a = 36 kJ/mol is the activation energy. Hence, according to Stokes-Einstein relation, the diffusion co-efficient of ion is D ± = μ ± k B T e (5) The total ionic current through the nanochannel is calculated by integrating the total ionic flux over one of the reservoirs I = ∫ s F(z + J + + z -J -). n dS Where n is the unit vector normal to the surface and S is the surface boundary. An electrostatic potential arises from the space-dependent ion concentration as well as the fixed negative surface charge which is solved by using Poisson equation given as Where ԑ 0 is the dielectric constant of free space, ԑ r is the relative dielectric constant of the aqueous solution and ρ e is the net space charge density of the ions, defined as ρ e = F(z + C + + z -C -) In order to conserve the charge on the walls of the channel, the following electrostatic boundary condition is applied n. (ԑ 0 ԑ r ∇φ) = σ s (8) Where n is the unit normal vector pointing outwards to the nanochannel and σ s is the surface charge density which is taken to be -3.7 mC/m 2 calculated using Gouy-Chapman equation for a zeta potential of -45 mV (in 1 mM NaCl solution) 