Gatemon qubits are the electrically tunable cousins of superconducting transmon qubits. In this work, we demonstrate the full coherent control of a gatemon qubit based on hole carriers in a Ge/Si core/shell nanowire, with the longest coherence times in group IV material gatemons to date. The key to these results is a high-quality Josephson junction obtained in a straightforward and reproducible annealing technique. We demonstrate that the transport through the narrow junctions is dominated by only two quantum channels, with transparencies up to unity. This novel qubit platform holds great promise for quantum information applications, not only because it incorporates technologically relevant materials, but also because it provides new opportunities, like an ultrastrong spin-orbit coupling in the few-channel regime of Josephson junctions. Quantum computing has become a topic of intense activity due to its potential to revolutionize information processing Presently, one of the most popular platforms are superconducting circuits in the form of transmon qubits, which are already employed in solving noisy intermediate-scale quantum problems An alternative to metallic transmons are semiconductor-superconductor (Sm-S) hybrid systems More suitable for CMOS technology would be group IV materials, but only very few gatemon-related experiments have been reported so far: on carbon-nanotubes In this work, we report the full functionality of a gatemon qubit based on narrow Ge/Si core/shell NWs. The key step is the fabrication of highly transparent Josephson junctions (JJs), in an undemanding ex-situ annealing step Our gatemon qubit can be understood as a nonlinear LC oscillator that consists of a gate-tunable Ge/Si core/shell NW JJ as the non-linear inductance, depicted in Fig. The gatemon shunt capacitance C qb (red) is provided by a T-shaped NbTiN island etched into the surrounding ground plane, as shown in Fig. An overview of the circuit QED chip is shown in Fig. Readout and manipulation of the gatemon qubit is accomplished using standard circuit QED techniques. When the qubit frequency f q is strongly detuned from the resonator frequency f r , the system is in the dispersive regime The bare resonator frequency f r,b = 7.3527 GHz can be directly found at gate voltages V g > -15 V, where the semiconducting part of the NW is close to depletion, so that the Josephson current is negligible and the resonator frequency exhibits no shift. The corresponding internal quality factor of Q i ≈ 2.41 × 10 5 is found by simultaneously fitting the resonator transmission amplitude and phase in the vicinity of f r,b To study the quantised energy levels of the device, we perform pulsed two-tone spectroscopy. We apply a 500 ns drive tone at frequency f d to the feedline, followed by a 1 μs probe tone at an optimised frequency of f p ≈ f r to probe the resonator. We note that we obtain similar results when driving via the side gate. The in-phase I and quadrature Q components of the transmitted probe tone are obtained using heterodyne detection techniques. We plot the normalized amplitude A/A 0 of the complex signal, which depends on the state of the qubit. In order to resolve fine features, we plot the numerically calculated second derivative of A/A 0 with respect to f d , as shown in Fig. The main features in Fig. To explicitly identify these two peaks, we perform twotone spectroscopy as a function of frequency and power of the drive tone, as plotted in Fig. Figure and with the Josephson energy given by the prefactor of the harmonic φ2 -term in the Hamiltonian, Here, we use the gap ∆ = 210 μeV found in DC transport experiments in a control device (see SI Fig. In the second limit, often called the "quantum point contact (QPC) limit", we assume one fully transmitting (T I = 1) and one partially transmitting channel, with a free parameter T II . This limit yields the lowest possible |α| for a given T Σ . The resulting dependence is shown in Fig. To demonstrate the full functionality of the gatemon qubit, we performed time-domain measurements, namely Rabi oscillations and Ramsey interferometry, and extract the corresponding relaxation and dephasing time. For these measurements, we use a Josephson parametric amplifier (JPA) to enhance the readout signal already at base temperature First, we perform Rabi experiments at a fixed gate voltage V g and drive at the frequency f d ≈ f 01 . The drive pulse of duration τ Rabi and power P is immediately followed by a 1 μs probe pulse. The drive pulse induces Rabi oscillations between the states |0⟩ and |1⟩ defining the z-axis of a Bloch sphere. The resulting qubit-state dependent resonator response is plotted in Fig. Next, we perform Ramsey interferometry, with the corresponding pulse sequence shown schematically in the upper panel of Fig. To quantitatively assess the qubit quality, we now measure the energy relaxation time T 1 and the dephasing time T * 2 . First, to measure T 1 , a X π pulse is applied to bring the qubit to state |1⟩. After a delay time τ delay , the occupation is measured with a probe pulse. Due to the qubit relaxing to the ground state, the probability of finding the qubit in the excited state decays exponentially over a characteristic time scale of T 1 = 1.27 μs. Similarly, we extract the dephasing time T * 2 from a Ramsey measurement at a detuning of δf = 80 MHz, see Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated a fully functional gatemon qubit based on a narrow Ge/Si core/shell nanowire, with a highly transmissive few-channel Josephson junction fabricated using a simple annealing technique, without resorting to sophisticated epitaxial growth techniques. From a detailed analysis of the gatemon anharmonicity, we conclude that the JJ is dominated by two quantum channels with transmissions up to unity. To demonstrate coherent control in the time domain, we performed Rabi and Ramsey interferometry experiments, yielding a T 1 time on par with gatemons in the more established III/V materials. Since we find T * 2 ≪ 2T 1 , the qubit coherence is not limited by the energy relaxation, but rather by dephasing caused by on-chip noise sources Our experiments show that Ge/Si core/shell NW gatemons are a competitive platform for electrically tunable supercondcuting qubits. JJs in the few-channel QPC limit might significantly reduce the charge noise sensitivity as shown in Ref. The circuit QED chip was fabricated on an undoped silicon substrate with a 100 nm top thermal oxide, using a combination of optical and electron-beam lithography. After cleaning the wafer, a 68 nm NbTiN film was sputter deposited on the wafer, in which the resonator, feed line and gate line were patterned using optical lithography, and further defined using dry etching in an ICP-RIE process with Ar and Cl 2 gas. Next, we fabricated gold markers to later align the nanowire, and we deposited gold islands (size ∼ 500 μm • 500 μm) near the borders of the NbTiN film for better thermalization. The resulting resonator quality factors we obtained in fits shown in SI Fig. The Ge/Si core/shell NWs were then transferred to the circuit QED chip using a micro-manipulator. Source and drain contacts as well as side gates were fabricated using standard electron beam lithography. To remove the native oxide on the Si shell, an 8 s wet etch in buffered HF (buffered oxide etchant 10:1, 4.6% HF) was performed, followed by rinsing in DI water. Next, the chip was immediately loaded into the evaporator where 40 nm of Al was deposited by thermal evaporation. After lift-off, the chip is annealed on a hotplate in ambient at 200 • C for 10 min. The NWs were then imaged in a scanning electron microscope to confirm the channel length. Importantly, the annealing and imaging steps can be iterated to obtain the targeted channel length. For each qubit island, we fabricated 3 or 4 annealed junctions, from which we selected the most promising one and connected it to the capacitor and the grounding plane. Ar milling was used to remove the native Al oxide before contacting. The DC and RF wiring of the dilution refrigerator, as well as the measurement setups are discussed in SI Fig. In this section, we elucidate how we extracted the peak positions in the two-tone experiments. The raw data of Fig. Next, we extract the peak positions as the positions of the maxima in the second derivative of the smoothed raw data. These positions are pointed out by red dots in the two-tone spectroscopy map in Fig. In a pure two-level system, the Rabi oscillations are faster for larger power, with a frequency proportional to the drive amplitude, or to the square root of the power. In Fig. The switching between two qubit frequencies could have various origins. In our case, two possibilities can be excluded: 1) quasiparticle poisoning With changes in the gate voltage (and therefore the qubit frequency), T 1 changes seemingly randomly between 0.6 to 1.3 μs. Similar to To compare the coherence times of our gatemon to other platforms, we show the results from prior studies in Fig. The superconducting gap ∆ is measured in a control device, shown in Fig. When the NW is gate-tuned close to pinch off, the NW channel forms a quantum dot, tunnel coupled to the annealed Al in the NW. In this regime, we can perform tunnel spectroscopy to determine the superconducting gap ∆. For this, we measured the differential conductance ∂I D /∂V SD as a function of source-drain voltage bias V SD and side gate voltage V SG . As shown in Fig. The RF measurements were performed either using a Rohde&Schwarz ZNB-8 vector network analyzer or a Zurich Instrument SHFQA Quantum Analyzer. The drive and probe signals were heavily attenuated by 66 dB and filtered with home-made Ecosorb filters at low temperature. The output signals were amplified in an amplification chain consisting of a Josephson parametric amplifier (JPA), several circulators, an Ecosorb filter and dual junction isolators, followed by a HEMT amplifier. All components are shown in detail in Fig. The qubit drive tone is generated by a vector signal generator (Agilent E8267D) modulated by an envelope signal from an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG, Tektronix 5014C). The DC flux and gate lines are filtered using Ag epoxy filters at the coldplate and a 3-stage LC-filter with the cutoff frequencies 80 MHz, 225 MHz and 400 MHz. The qubit drive via the gate is achieved by combining a DC and an RF line on the PCB with a RC bias tee using a 1 kΩ resistor and a 15 nF capacitor. 