Laser technologies improved after the understanding of the Chirped Pulse Amplification (CPA) which allows energetic laser beams to be compressed to tens of femtosecond (fs) pulse durations and focused to few m. Protons of tens of MeV can be accelerated using for instance the Target Normal Sheath Acceleration (TNSA) method and focused on secondary targets. In such conditions, nuclear reactions can occur and radioisotopes relevant for medical purposes be produced. High repetition lasers can be used to produce enough isotopes for medical applications. This route is competitive to conventional methods mostly based on accelerators. In this paper we study the production of 67 Cu, 63 Zn, 18 F and 11 C currently used in positron emission tomography (PET) and other applications. At the same time, we study the reaction 10 B(p,) 7 Be and 70 Zn(p,4n) 67 Ga to put further constraints to the proton distributions at different angles and to the reaction 11 B(p,) 8 Be relevant for energy production. The experiment was performed at the 1 petawatt (PW) laser facility at Vega III located in Salamanca-Spain. Angular distributions of radioisotopes in the forward (with respect to the laser direction) and backward directions were measured using a High Purity Germanium Detector (HPGE). Our results are reasonably reproduced by the numerical estimates following the approach of Kimura et al. (NIMA637(2011)167). Laser accelerated proton beams have been applied to radioisotopes production for medical purposes by several groups Those systems rely on the Chirped Pulse Amplification (CPA) method (a) 63 Cu(p,n) 63 Zn, Q = -4.15 MeV; (b) 70 Zn(p,n) 67 Ga, Q = -27.68 MeV; (c) 70 Zn(p,) 67 Cu, Q = 2.62 MeV; (d) 10 B(p,) 7 Be, Q = 1.14 MeV; (e) 11 B(p,n) 11 C, Q = -2.76 MeV; (f) 18 O(p,n) 18 F, Q = -2.44 MeV. It is important to notice that the reactions above have positive and negative Q values, thus from their measurement we will test the proton distribution at different energies The experiment was performed at the Centro de Laseres Pulsados (CLPU)-VEGA Following refs. N1 = 1.2 10 13 , T1 = 3.3 MeV, N2 = 2.3 10 12 , T2 = 13.5 MeV are parameters fitted to the experimental results of ref. There may be a scaling due to the different pulse duration We can compare our 'benchmark' proton distribution function To calculate the number of reactions in the target is a more complicated process since we need to consider the proton energy distribution, the reaction cross section and the range of protons in the (assumed cold) target in the limit of thick targets. We can estimate this as: Where  is the (secondary) target density, d its thickness, σ(E) is the reaction cross section of the process (taken from https://www.nndc.bnl.gov), R(E) is the range obtained from the SRIM (Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter software) In the limiting case that the proton distribution is a delta function of the energy (such as for accelerators), eq. ( S(E) is written in terms of a Taylor expansion in energy The free parameters ai and b are fitted to available experimental data, the number of parameters is chosen to have a good data reproduction. The parameterization in eq. ( i) The experimental production of 67 Ga indicates that there are protons of energy higher than 28 MeV (#3 of Table If there are enough -particles produced through the fusion reactions #5,7 in Table In fact,  particles of energy larger than 10 MeV can produce 65 Zn and this would indicate that their energy distribution is modified It is also important to determine the number of reactions produced per shot since we were in multi-shot accumulation regime. Even if there may be large fluctuations from shot to shot In Table Standard analysis techniques were applied to derive the number of produced isotopes at the end of irradiation, see for example refs. From the reaction #2 in Table MeV are observed and we cannot exclude that even higher energy protons are also produced, but their yield is below the sensitivity of the TP Reactions #3&4 in Table Figure In Fig. Furthermore, the fact the yield of the two reactions is comparable (if we have proton energies higher than 30 MeV) is because the cross sections differ of more than one order of magnitude especially at high energies, see also Fig. In Table In Fig. Probability contribution of each shot to the production of 11 C and 7 Be isotopes at End of Bombardment (EOB) as a function of shooting time starting from the first one (tshot = 0 s) to the last one when the chamber is opened, and the sample decays were measured using the HPGE detector. The well-known half-life (T1/2) of both isotopes were used to produce this result. In the nat B target we can also produce 7 Be from reaction #5 in Table I The  spectrum for these reactions is dominated by 11 C at shorter times, while at longer times only 7 Be remains. Furthermore, the  energy decay of 7 Be (478 keV) is quite different from 11 C (511 keV) and can be quite easily distinguished in the plot, see Fig. The produced yield of 7 Be is displayed in Fig. We have investigated nuclear reaction products using the PW laser at Vega III in Salamanca-Spain. The pitcher-catcher method was adopted with protons produced by an aluminum target and impinging on several different targets, both in the forward and the back direction, with respect to the laser one. We found the production of medical radioisotopes in agreement with expectations and the predictions of ref. We have also estimated theoretically the production of different nuclei and made some assumptions for the cross sections in energy regions where they have not been measured. The "TNSA mechanism" should be studied more in detail and adjusted to the various physical scenarios that one would like to implement. In particular, the role of the electrons must be clarified and if possible, used to favor nuclear reactions in the plasma. This may be crucial if we would like to apply this method to neutronless reaction energy production. Our predictions in Table AB devised the scheme to measure radioisotopes and wrote the first draft of paper. MRDR performed the data analysis of the HPGE and ME the data analysis of the zero-degree TP. FaC was the spokesperson of the main experiment for  production. All authors contributed to the experiment proposal, preparation and on the final form of the manuscript. updated acquisition system was used for all the other measurements using a CAEN DT5781 quadruple independent 16k digital MCA (2) and the CoMPASS (2) , a multiparametric data acquisition software for physics applications. The main advantage of this set up is the capability to have a timestamp for each event, besides the use of an updated computer system. The HPGe detector dead time was 1-10% and the energy resolution 1.0-2.5 keV (FWHM). The distances of detector cap to the sources were in the range of 20 and 120 mm. The 20 mm distance was only used for sources with low activities. The -ray spectra were measured and analyzed up to 1600 keV. Measurements of the 22 Na, 155 Eu and 137 Cs sources were performed at the detector cap to the source distances in different days. These measurements were used in the detector energy and efficiency calibration. The absolute photopeak efficiencies for the different source-detector distances and source geometries were determined using the results of the experimental efficiencies from the sources measurements and the LabSOCS (Laboratory Sourceless Calibration Software) mathematical efficiency calibration software (1) . For instance, efficiency curves generated by LabSOCS considering plaques sources of 10 x 10 mm 2 , 25 x 50 mm 2 and 100 x 100 mm 2 are presented in Figure The data consists of the energy and timestamp for each event as described in the previous section. One example can be observed in In cases where the statistics is too low and the gaussian fit is not adequate to determine the area, the net area is obtained with the integral of the raw spectra in a fix width and subtracted by the integral of the room background spectrum normalized to T in the same width. The next step is the fit of the FEP rate as a function of time to identify the contribution of possible radionuclides that had enough different half-lives to be separated in the fit, see Fig. Where R the photo-peak rate at energy Eγ, ε HPGe the detector efficiency of the HPGe detector at the  -energy considered, I the intensity of the γ-line of interest, λ the decay constant of the radionuclide. Considering the production and decay in a multi-shot accumulation regime the number of radionuclei produced is given by: N(t) = ∑ N 0i e -λ(t-t shot i ) n i=0 ≈ N 0 ∑ e -λ(t-t shot i ) n i=0 (B2) for t > t shot n , where t = 0s is the time of the first shot and t shot i is the time of the subsequent shots, n is the number of shots, N 0i is the number of particles produced at shot i. If an average number of particles produced at each shot as N 0 is assumed, the approximation on right side of eq. B2 can be used to fit the N exp data and obtain the value of N 0 , as seen on Fig. The corrections due to backscattering and coincidence summing peaks for 11 C, 0.17-0.35%,  selfabsorption up to 4%, the respective targets isotopic enrichment, were also included in the results. The uncertainties are propagation of the full-energy-peaks (FEPs) net area and the detector efficiency uncertainties. The detection lower limit identification was 0.015(3) particles/s. The blue points are the number of radionuclides obtained with the  -spectroscopic analysis (eq. B1). The solid red line represents the eq. B2 fitted to experimental data. Jumps in the plot correspond to the time when a laser shot occurred. The cyan lines are the contribution for each shot. reaction rates N (corrected by concentration) using eq. (