Halide perovskite semiconductors have emerged as promising materials for the development of solution-processed, scalable, high performance optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs) as well as coherent single photon emitters. Their integration to nanophotonic cavities for radiative enhancement and strong nonlinearity is underexplored. In this work, we demonstrate cavity-enhanced emission and saturable absorption using colloidal CsPbBr 3 perovskite quantum dots coupled to a high-Q cavity mode of a circular Bragg grating structure designed to facilitate integration of solution-processed materials . We achieve an order of magnitude increase in brightness and 8-fold increase in the spontaneous emission rate for the cavity-coupled emitters. This result indicates the possibility of achieving transform-limited photon coherence for the halide perovskites at cryogenic temperatures. We also observe saturable absorption of the emitters through intensity-dependent cavity quality factor. These results pave the way towards achieving improved photon indistinguishability and strong optical nonlinearities for cavity coupled perovskite systems. Halide perovskite quantum dots are promising light emitters because of their bright emission, color tunable optical properties, low-cost chemical synthesis, The integration of halide perovskites with nanophotonic cavities can enhance optical emission and enable strong optical nonlinearities. Nanophotonic cavities can improve the spontaneous emission rate through the Purcell effect In this letter, we report enhanced spontaneous emission and saturable absorption from halide perovskites coupled to a nanophotonic cavity. We integrate CsPbBr 3 quantum dots capped with zwitterionic ligands into a circular bullseye cavity with a mode exhibiting a quality factor of . We achieve an order of magnitude improvement in the 1980 brightness of the cavity coupled dots compared to dots on an unpatterned surface. From time-resolved lifetime measurement, we observe an average cavity-enhanced lifetime of ps, which gives us a Purcell factor of This 20 8. lifetime is below the ps dephasing time previously reported, We synthesized the CsPbBr 3 quantum dots used in this work using a room-temperature synthesis employing trioctylphosphine oxide as a capping ligand as reported in previous work. Fig1a shows the TEM image of the synthesized quantum dots. As expected based on the synthetic route, these quantum dots have a spheroidal shape, Figure1: a) TEM image of perovskite quantum dots. b) Absorbance (black) and photoluminescence(green) spectra of perovskites dispersed in toluene. The solid green curve is the photoluminescence at room temperature in toluene solution, and the dashed green curve is the photoluminescence at3.2K. To enhance the emission of the CsPbBr 3 quantum dots, we fabricated planar supported bullseye structures as illustrated Fig. We fabricated the cavity using e-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma etching. First, we deposited a nm layer of SiN by stoichiometric low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) on a substrate of Si with a 120 SiO 2 on top. We then patterned the bullseye design on SiN with standard e-beam lithography using a ZEP 520 2 μm mask, followed by Fluorine-based inductively coupled plasma reactive dry etching using a CHF 3 / SF 6 gas mixture. We undercut the etched structure by wet-etching the sacrificial SiO 2 layer using buffered oxide solution. We performed all the measurements in a confocal microscope setup that can operate at both room temperature and . We excited the sample above the bandgap using a continuous wave laser at nm and collected the signal 3. 2 K 405 from the sample using an objective lens with a numerical aperture of . We filtered the collected emission signal 0. 7 with a dichroic mirror of cutoff at nm and further eliminated the laser with a notch filter at nm. We 490 405 measured the photoluminescence using a grating spectrometer with a spectral resolution of nm. 0. 02 Figure ). We observed both the low first order mode and higher second order mode, both of μ μm power. For comparison we also plot the photoluminescence emission from an unpatterned region of the device (blue circles). The emission from the higher order cavity mode is an order of magnitude brighter than the unpatterned region. When averaged over multiple cavities, we observe about 9 times improvement in the emission intensity. To characterize the enhancement of spontaneous emission, we next conducted time-resolved photoluminescence lifetime measurements. We performed the photoluminescence lifetime measurements using excitation pulses at 405 nm generated by frequency doubling a Ti: Sapphire laser. The pulsed excitation repetition rate was MHz and 76 pulse duration of ps. We conducted the measurements below saturation and in the regime where emission intensity 2 is linearly proportional to excitation power. We filtered the emission through a spectrometer grating and slit and the signal was detected using an avalanche photodiode(APD). Subsequently, we used a time correlated single photon counting setup (TCSPC) (Picoharp 300) for signal measurement. Figure Here, represents the photoluminescence intensity at time t, is the background intensity, is the emission I(t) I 0 A intensity at time zero, is the characteristic lifetime, and β is the stretching parameter reflecting heterogeneity in the τ lifetime of the emitter population, varying within the range of 0 to 1. The stretched exponential model describes an ensemble of emitters with different lifetimes. It is thus highly suitable for quantum dots coupled to the cavity mode, since each dot exhibits a different Purcell effect due to variations in the spatial position and dipole orientations. From this equation, we determine the average lifetime of the cavity and unpatterned surface to be ps and ps 26 265 respectively. These results indicate a lifetime enhancement of for this particular cavity. 10 To get a more accurate statistical estimate of the Purcell enhancement, we performed measurements on multiple cavities and unpatterned regions. Figure 9. 39 ps, while the average lifetime of the unpatterned surface is +/-ps. These values correspond to an average 168. 03 49 Purcell factor of . The radiative lifetimes of all our measured cavities are below ps, which is the coherence time 8 80 previously measured for these emitters. Figure From the fit, we obtain the saturation intensity to be . This corresponds to a saturation fluence of Psat = 75. 7mW . The intensity shows a clear saturation behavior, indicating that the device is operating below 19. 2 μJ/cm 2 /pulse lasing threshold. Figure ) . The increases Q = λ / Δλ Q from an initial value of at low power to its final saturated value of at a peak power of mW. This value 980 1200 800 represents a increase in the quality factor. This change in cavity is caused by saturable absorption of 20% Q emitters in the cavity, which is expected when the emitters are below lasing threshold. Because we are below the lasing threshold, the increase in quality factor is not due to Schawlow-Townes linewidth narrowing (corresponding to a fluence of ~, and . The slight difference in the 23. 3μJ/cm 2 /pulse) Q ab = 4760 Q c = 1244 saturation fluence for cavity quality and quantum dot saturation might arise because of the errors introduced while measuring the linewidths of the emission peak for quantifying cavity quality. In another study that incorporated a different colloidal saturable absorber non-linearity into optical cavity investigations, comparable saturation fluence was observed. However, the quantum dots utilized in that research proved to be excessively unstable, rendering them unsuitable for practical applications. In conclusion, we demonstrate cavity enhanced photon emission and saturable absorption for an ensemble of CsPbBr 3 quantum dots. We achieve an order of magnitude enhancement in intensity and an average Purcell enhancement factor of 8, potentially improving the photon indistinguishability for the emitters coupled to a relatively high Q mode of circular bullseye cavity. We also measured saturable absorption of the dots through cavity quality where the cavity Q increases by around 20%. The nonlinearity in this device may find use in a variety of applications including all-optical switching, 