Here, we quantitatively estimate the impact of the inevitable Si surface passivation prior to III-V/Si heteroepitaxy on the surface energy of the Si initial substrate, and explore its consequences for the description of wetting properties. Density Functional Theory is used to determine absolute surface energies of P-and Gapassivated Si surfaces and their dependencies with the chemical potential. Especially, we show that, while a ≈90 meV/Å2 surface energy is usually considered for the nude Si surface, surface passivation by Ga-or Patoms leads to a strong stabilization of the surface, with a surface energy in the [50-75 meV/Å2] range. The all-ab initio analysis of the wetting properties indicate that a complete wetting situation would become possible only if the initial passivated Si surface could be destabilized by at least 15 meV/Å2 or if the III-V (001) surface could be stabilized by the same amount. Heteroepitaxy of III-V semiconductors on silicon has gained renewed interest in the last past years because of its scalability potential for the development of high quality and low-cost devices in the field of photonic or energy applications. While III-V on silicon monolithic integration was recently improved for solar cells, In this paper, we quantitively determine the influence of the passivation by group III or group-V atoms of the initial Si surface on the wetting properties of III-V semiconductors on Si substrates. To this aim, we use DFT to determine the surface energies of Ga-terminated and P-terminated reconstructed Si surfaces over the whole range of chemical potential. From the determination of absolute GaP surface energies, absolute GaP/Si interface energies, and absolute Si-passivated surface energies, we propose a full ab initio determination of the spreading parameter for GaP/Si materials. On this quantitative basis, III-V/Si wetting properties are finally discussed. All the calculations were performed within DFT where γ Surface is the surface energy of the non-polar surface, A is the surface area, Eslab is the slab energy calculated by DFT (after structural relaxation), μi is the chemical potential of the species i in the slab, and N is the number of particles of the species. Hereafter, we apply the same methodology to determine the absolute surface energy of passivated surfaces. However, the relationship is adapted from equation (1) as follows: where γ Si:X is the absolute surface energy of the passivated surface, μSi-bulk is the chemical potential of the Si in its bulk, N is the number of particles of the species, and μSiX-bulk is the chemical potential of the thermodynamically stable SiX material. A, Eslab, and N are the parameters described above. It is worth mentioning that in the following, for GaP, we used the heat formation ΔH f (GaP) equal to -0.928 eV, which defines the length of the interval between the two extreme Ga-rich and P-rich cases. To determine the surface energy of P-passivated Si surface as a function of the chemical potential variation, we must first define the thermodynamical region where the passivated surface can form and is stable. Then, for the surface energy of Ga passivated Si surface, we took Ga-rich and P-rich as the extreme limits of the GaP case, as shown in Fig. In Figure where γ S (Si:X) and γ S (GaP) are the absolute surface energies of the most stable passivated silicon and GaP surfaces, which depend on the chemical potential for both. In addition, γ i (GaP/Si) is the absolute interface energy of the most stable GaP/Si interface. The physical meaning of the spreading parameter, Ω, is inherent to its sign. Thus, a positive value of Ω corresponds to perfect wetting conditions. Conversely, a negative value corresponds to partial wetting, a Volmer-Weber growth. This wetting situation corresponds to the formation of 3D islands whose equilibrium shape depends on Ω. FIG. Figure From the previous quantitative analysis of surfaces and interfaces energies, and considering the numerical uncertainty that DFT can have for calculating surface and interface energy values in the chemical potential scale, we are now able to provide a first accurate description of the energies involved during III-V/Si heteroepitaxy. As already mentioned in previous studies, although this work is performed on the GaP/Si materials system, the surface and interface energies contributions are likely very similar in most usual Zinc-Blende III-V/Si materials systems. In conclusion, we have used density functional theory to quantitively determine the surface energies of Ga-or Ppassivated Si surfaces. We show that the inevitable passivation of Si prior to GaP/Si heteroepitaxy leads to a large decreasing of the substrate surface energy, which in turn lead to a large decreasing of the spreading parameter in this system. From this analysis, a synthetic overview of surface and interface energy contributions involved in the wetting properties of III-V/Si heteroepitaxial systems is presented. While the stabilization of the initial Si surface through passivation is expected to be a driving force for 3D Volmer-Weber crystal growth, it is established that a complete wetting situation would become possible if the passivated Si surface could be destabilized by at least 15 meV/Å2 or if the III-V (001) surface could be stabilized by the same amount.