Gapless topological boundary states characterize nontrivial topological phases arising from the bulk-boundary correspondence in symmetry-protected topological materials, such as the emergence of helical edge states in a two-dimensional Z2 topological insulator. However, the incorporation of symmetry-breaking perturbation terms in the Hamiltonian leads to the gapping of these edge bands, resulting in missing these crucial topological boundary states. In this work, we systematically investigate the robustness of bulk-boundary correspondence in the quantum spin Hall insulator via recently introduced feature spectrum topology. Our findings present a comprehensive understanding of feature-energy duality, illustrating that the aggregate number of gapless edge states in the energymomentum (E-k ) map and the non-trivial edge states in the Ŝz feature spectrum equals the spin Chern number of multilayer quantum spin Hall insulator. We identify a van der Waals material bismuth bromide (Bi4Br4) as a promising candidate through first-principles calculations. Our work not only unravels the intricacies of bulk-boundary correspondence but also charts a course for exploring quantum spin Hall insulators with high spin-Chern number. The two-dimensional (2D) quantum spin Hall effect has attracted significant attention over the past two decades due to the unconventional spin propagation on the edge of the materials and its potential application in spintronics devices as well as quantum computations In this work, we investigate the bulk-boundary correspondence via feature spectrum topology Very recently, an alternative perspective to understanding the essence of topological phases of matter, namely the feature spectrum topology, has been proposed In examining the feature spectrum topology of QSHI in the Kane-Mele model, we select Ŝz as the quantum operator to formulate the feature operator FSz = P Ŝz P . The four-band Kane-Mele tight-binding Hamiltonian where c † iα and c jα represent the creation and the annihilation operator of an electron with spin polarization α at sites i and j, respectively. The symbols i, j and i, j run over the nearest-neighbor and next-nearest-neighbor hopping sites. s = (s x , s y , s z ) denotes the Pauli matrix for the spin degree of freedom. The first term represents the nearest-neighbor hopping with hopping strength t. The second term denotes intrinsic spin-orbital coupling (SOC), in which λ I is the strength of intrinsic SOC and ν ij = 1(-1) indicates clockwise(counter-clockwise) next-nearest-neighbor hopping with respect to positive ẑ axis. The third term introduces next-nearest-neighbor Rashba SOC with strength λ so . Here μ i = 1(-1) denotes A(B) site and dij is the unit vector of the next-nearestneighbor hopping. The last term breaks SU (2) symmetry For simplicity, we initially focus on the first two terms. The resulting band structure is illustrated in Fig. The calculation of the SChN for the QSHI within the framework of feature spectrum topology can be determined based on the eigenstates of each sector in the feature spectrum The brown lines in Fig. The first term corresponds to the original Kane-Mele model in Eq. 1. The second term introduces the Zeeman exchange field M to break the time-reversal symmetry. The third term presents the sublattice onsite energy with strength l, which eliminates the out-of-plane mirror symmetry M z . The topological edge band structure from Eq. 1 is shown in Fig. A single layer of QSHI carries SChN C s = 1, it is therefore intuitively inferred that increasing the number of stacked layers of QSHI will elevate the Chern number and the corresponding topological edge states carried by the system if the interaction between layers can be treated as perturbations. To examine this conjecture, we introduce the bilayer Kane-Mele model with interlayer coupling The first term is the monolayer Kane-Mele model from Eq. 1. The second term represents the interlayer coupling, where c † ilα and c ilα denotes the creation and the annihilation operator of an electron with spin polarization α at site i in layer l, respectively. μ i = 1(-1) corresponds to A(B) site with strength t l , breaking the in-plane mirror symmetry M // . The third term is the interlayer onsite energy, where ξ l = 1(-1) for the first(second) layer, which eliminates out-of-plane mirror symmetry M z with strength t o . The band structure of bilayer Kane-Mele model is shown in Fig. The feature spectrum topology provides an advanced perspective for comprehending the bulk-boundary correspondence. Since it depends only on valence bands within the band structure, it is well-suited for the evaluation in first-principles calculations, allowing for quantitative predictions in condensed matter materials. Here, we consider Bi 4 Br 4 , which is a van der Waals material predicted to be a 2D topological insulator with Z 2 = 1 in monolayer The β-Bi 4 Br 4 crystallizes in the monoclinic space group C 3 2h (C2/m) with AA stacking between alternating layers (Fig. In bilayer Bi 4 Br 4 (AA stacking of monolayer), the originally paired gapless edge bands of each layer give rise to an insulator state due to non-negligible interlayer coupling (Fig. Proceeding to trilayer Bi 4 Br 4 . The band structure of the edge states in trilayer Bi 4 Br 4 closely resembles a combination of the edge states from the monolayer and bilayer counterparts (Fig. Fig. We discuss the universality of the feature-energy duality and the bulk-boundary correspondence in multilayer QSHI, as depicted in Fig. Our investigation reveals that the SChN C s can always be well-defined through the feature spectrum topology In conclusion, our exploration of bulk-boundary correspondence through feature spectrum topology, employing the Ŝz feature operator in both monolayer and bilayer Kane-Mele models, has revealed a feature-energy duality. Our calculation unveils that the combination of gapless edge states in the E-k map and non-trivial edge states in the feature spectrum equals the SChN in multilayer QSHI. Additionally, we propose the van der Waals material Bi 4 Br 4 as a candidate. Our results validate the feature-energy duality and further identify Bi4Br4 as a layer-dependent high-spin Chern insulator. The discovery of the feature spectrum topology not only deepens our comprehension of the classification of topological phases but also opens avenues for the exploration of QSHI with high-spin Chern number. The first-principle calculations on the Bi 4 Br 4 thin film were performed using the Vienna ab Initio simulation package (VASP) 