We investigate the direction-dependent switching current in a flux-tunable four-terminal Josephson junction defined in an InAs/Al two-dimensional heterostructure. The device exhibits the Josephson diode effect, with switching currents that depend on the sign of the bias current. The superconducting diode efficiency, reaching a maximum of |η| ≈ 34%, is widely tunable-both in amplitude and sign-as a function of magnetic fluxes and gate voltages. Our observations are supported by a circuit model of three parallel Josephson junctions with non-sinusoidal current-phase relation. With respect to conventional Josephson interferometers, phase-tunable multiterminal Josephson junctions enable large diode efficiencies in structurally symmetric devices, where local magnetic fluxes break both time-reversal and spatial-inversion symmetries. Our work establishes a pathway to develop Josephson diodes with wide-range tunability and that do not rely on exotic materials or externally applied magnetic fields. Nonreciprocal transport phenomena play a key role in modern electronics, with semiconductor diodes serving as the fundamental components for numerous devices An alternative platform proposed to achieve the SDE in Josephson devices-where it is usually referred to as Josephson diode effect (JDE)-relies on a super-current interferometer, where two JJs with nonsinusoidal current-phase relations (CPRs) are combined in a SQUID In this work, we report on the superconducting transport properties of a superconductor-semiconductor fourterminal JJ (4TJJ) embedded in a double-loop geometry. Supercurrents are tuned by magnetic fluxes threading the superconducting loops and by gate electrodes that control the number and transmissions of ABSs. We find strong JDE, tunable in both efficiency and sign with gate voltages and two independent superconducting phasescontrolled via integrated flux-bias lines, without the need for external magnetic fields-reaching a peak efficiency of ±34%. One of the loops was further controlled by gating an additional JJ with large critical current, enabling operation of the device in a single-loop configuration. We provide an in-depth explanation of the JDE in our system by means of a simple circuit model, which maps our device to the combination of two SQUIDs, or a bi-SQUID. Simulations are performed both in an idealized case with minimal assumptions, and in an extended version that accurately captures the experimental results. We demonstrate several novelties with respect to previous work. First, we devise a geometry that combines both gate control of the current path and phase tunability in a 2D space, offering new insights into multiterminal JJs. Second, the phase-tunable bi-SQUID allows for a large diode efficiency to occur without the need of a JJ imbalance in harmonic content, which is required in conventional interferometers The device under study, consisting of a multiterminal JJ embedded in a double-loop geometry, is displayed in Fig. Nonreciprocal supercurrents in the 2D phase space First, we present the differential resistance R as a function of the current bias I SD and of the left flux-line current I L for fixed right flux-line current I R = 0.1 mA. Here, R was measured with standard lock-in techniques and I SD was swept from 0 to positive or negative values to avoid retrapping effects. Figure of approximately 21%. We also note that the switching current vanished in a small range around I L ≈ -60 μA (yellow arrow), namely the device had finite differential resistance at I SD = 0. Similar maps obtained at different settings of I R are presented in Fig. To efficiently measure the switching currents I ± sw and the diode efficiency η as functions of both I L and I R , we changed measurement technique and periodically ramped I SD from zero to the amplitude A = ±260 nA with a repetition rate of 133 Hz, and detected when the voltage drop across the device exceeded a threshold. The time spent in the low-resistance state, averaged over 32 consecutive measurements, was converted to a current, resulting in a rapid measurement of I + sw or I - sw (depending on the sign of A) displayed in Figs. Next, in Figs. Electrostatic tunability over the supercurrents and the JDE was enabled by gates controlling the electron density in the semiconducting region of the 4TJJ. In Fig. To investigate the voltage-tunability of the JDE, we measured the switching currents I ± sw as functions of I L and I R (as in Figs. In each case, the switching current measured as a function of I L and I R for positive current bias is displayed in the first panel, while the second panel presents the diode efficiency extracted from I + sw and I - sw . The two configurations revealed a complementary behavior: the switching current oscillations and the diode efficiency were almost completely suppressed as a function of Φ L(R) when V L(R) was set to sufficiently negative value, depleting the semiconducting region between terminals S and L (R). This highlights the possibility of routing the supercurrents flowing in our device by gating, which enabled electrostatic control over the phase dependence of the JDE. The results obtained for V R = -0.5 V (panels a and b) were reminiscent of those previously ob-served for V J = -1.5 V (Figs. Finally, we restored the symmetric gate configuration V L = V R = -0.1 V and studied the effect of depleting the middle gate V M , set to -1 V (see Fig. To understand the behavior of our device in more depth, and the underlying origin of the JDE, we introduce a simple circuit model that describes the supercurrents of the 4TJJ. In the switch-ON configuration, ter- minals L, M and R are all connected to the same node D, therefore the current can flow from S to D (or from D to S) via three available JJs S-L, S-M and S-R. That is, the 4TJJ is mapped onto a bi-SQUID as three distinct JJs are connected in parallel. The total current flowing into lead S is thus expressed as: where I Sα is the current flowing from terminal S to terminal α via the corresponding JJ. First, we consider the minimal model of a single numerical parameter, schematically shown in Fig. with ∆ the superconducting gap (∆ = 180 μeV is used considering Al leads) and ħ = h/2π. We assume a high transmission τ = 0.9, for which the CPR of Eq. 3 has a significantly nonsinusoidal character, as harmonics higher than the first provide a sizable contribution. The independent variables in the model are the three superconducting phase differences φ L , φ R and φ S , defined with respect to φ M ≡ 0. The first two phases are related to the external magnetic fluxes by φ L(R) = 2πΦ L(R) /Φ 0 (neglecting the inductance of the loops, see discussion in the Supplementary Material, Section 5), whereas φ S varies depending on current bias I SD . The critical currents for the two bias directions are then obtained as: In Figs. , exhibit patterns that are prominently asymmetric with respect to φ L = φ R = 0 (modulo 2π), which leads to a strong JDE with η up to approximately 27%. The dependence of η on φ L and φ R reflects the triangular shapes observed for I ± c , with features arranged according to three main orientations in the phase space. The origin of the JDE is investigated by fixing φ L and φ R and computing the CPR of Eq. 2 as a function of φ S , I S (φ S ), and its components I SL (φ S ), I SM (φ S ) and I SR (φ S ), all obtained from Eq. 3. For simplicity we always keep φ R = 0 and select four values of φ L (colored markers in Fig. , their width and direction indicate the magnitude and direction of the current. We note that all individual CPRs I Sα (φ S ) have the same amplitude ≈ 30 nA and skewness, both given by the transmission τ (identical for the three channels), but notably I SL (φ S ) is phase-shifted by φ L . When φ L = 0 (Fig. We note that the JDE has been derived within our minimal model despite the presence of three identical channels, i.e., of same harmonic content, whereas in a conven-tional SQUID comprising two JJs the harmonic content must be different between the two JJs After discussing the origin of the JDE by means of a minimal, single-parameter model, we extend the latter to better capture the experimental data presented in Fig. where e∆T α /2ħ is the critical current of the sinusoidal component and T α the sum of the transmissions of all low-transmission channels. We note that τ α and T α may vary depending on the junction S-α. With this extended model, that is schematically represented in Fig. The switch-OFF configuration (Fig. The higher η obtained in the switch-OFF case is understood by considering the higher asymmetry in the supercurrent distribution obtained in this setting. In fact, the supercurrent flowed directly from S to the common node D only via S-L and S-M, which had largely different transmissions due to the device geometry, while it had to traverse both S-R and R-M to reach D via R. This realized a strongly asymmetric situation, where junctions with different harmonic components led to large diode efficiencies We finally note that our model captured the main experimental results well without invoking hybridized ABSs in the semiconducting region, even though such states were measured in the same devices by means of local tunneling spectroscopy We reported switching current measurement of a 4TJJ in a InAs/Al heterostructure hosting ABSs with large transmission probabilities, resulting in nonsinusoidal CPRs between pairs of terminals. The switching current measured between two contacts showed a strong dependence on the bias current direction, resulting in a JDE. The JDE efficiency could be widely controlledboth in amplitude and sign-by magnetic fluxes, independently tuned via integrated flux-bias lines, and gate electrodes, which routed the supercurrent to different transport channels. No external magnetic fields were required. In a first gate setting, where transport through the entire semiconductor region was allowed, the JDE efficiency was periodically modulated by magnetic fluxes, with peak values reaching η ≈ ±21%, including large regions in parameter space with η ≈ 0. When a superconducting arm was interrupted, introducing a larger asymmetry in the supercurrent distribution, a peak efficiency η ≈ ±34% was reached. The 4TJJ was mapped onto a simple bi-SQUID geometry, with three parallel JJs containing ABSs with large transmission probability. A theoretical model reproduced the experimental observations to a good degree, including switching current and diode efficiency patterns. In our devices, the JDE is a consequence of the nonsinusoidal CPR and the multiterminal geometry, which allows breaking of spatialinversion symmetry by controlling the magnetic fluxes in the loops. Unlike realizations based on a single loop, an asymmetry between junctions is not required. Our work highlights the potential of phase-tunable multiterminal JJs to engineer JDE with large and widely controllable efficiencies, without the need for exotic materials or external magnetic fields, and underscores the role of these devices as a versatile platform for upcoming applications. Devices were realized in a III-V heterostructure grown by molecular beam epitaxy on an InP (001) substrate In the fabrication process, large mesa structures were first isolated, suppressing parallel conduction between devices and across the middle regions of the superconducting loops. This was done by selectively etching the Al layer with Transene type D, followed by a second chemical etch to a depth of ∼ 380 nm into the III-V material stack, using a 220 : 55 : 3 : Next, features were defined in the Al layer by wet etching with Transene type D at 50 • C for 4 s. The dielectric, uniformly deposited on the entire chip by atomic layer deposition, consisted of a 3 nm thick layer of Al 2 O 3 and a 15 nm thick layer of HfO 2 . Gate electrodes and flux-bias lines were defined by evaporation and lift-off. In a first step, 5 nm of Ti and 20 nm of Au were deposited to realize the fine features of the gates; in a second step, a stack of Ti/Al/Ti/Au with thicknesses 5 nm, 340 nm, 5 nm and 100 nm was deposited to connect the mesa structure to the bonding pads and to define the flux-bias lines. Experiments were performed in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature at the mixing chamber below 10 mK. The sample was mounted on a QDevil QBoard sample holder system, without employing any light-tight enclosure. Electrical contacts to the devices, excepts for the flux-bias lines, were provided via a resistive loom with QDevil RF and RC low-pass filters at the mixing chamber stage, and RC low-pass filters integrated on the QBoard sample holder. Currents were passed through the fluxbias lines via a superconducting loom with only QDevil RF filters at the mixing chamber stage. Signals were applied to all gates and flux-bias lines via home-made RC filters at room temperature. In all electrical measurements, a bias current I SD was driven between terminal S and node D of the device by applying equal and opposite voltages to S and D via bias resistors, whose resistance was much larger than that of the device under study. The voltage drop across S and D was detected in a four-terminal configuration. Measurements of the differential resistance were performed with lock-in-amplifier techniques, by applying a fixed AC current δI = 2.5 nA to D in addition to the DC bias I SD and detecting the AC voltage δV between S and D, thus obtaining the differential resistance R ≡ δV /δI. Measurements of I ± sw were done by periodically ramping I SD from 0 to an amplitude A, where A was positive or negative depending on whether I + sw or I - sw was measured; the absolute value of A was adjusted depending on the gate configuration to be slightly larger than I ± sw . The signal form was a sawtooth wave, applied at a frequency f = 133 Hz using a waveform generator. The voltage drop across S and D was measured with an oscilloscope (averaging 32 measurements), which detected the time interval ∆t where the voltage was below a threshold, hence allowing for the calculation of the switching current as I ± sw = |A|f ∆t. The dilution refrigerator was equipped with a superconducting vector magnet which, despite not being utilized for the experiments, produced a small magnetic field offset. Therefore, small offsets in the flux-bias line currents I L and I R (up to ∼ 100 μA) were considered in datasets, in such a manner that the point where I L = I R = 0 corresponded to a point of the phase space where η = 0 and I ± sw were maximal, as expected when no magnetic fluxes thread the superconducting loops. junctions, arXiv:2307.06715 (2023). [49] C. W. J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3836 (1991). [50] M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity, 2nd ed. (Dover Publications, 2004). [51] Geometric inductance Lgeom of a loop was calculated analytically using the following expression, valid for a rectangular loop: Here, H = 26 μm and W = 4.5 μm are the dimensions of the loop, d = 1 μm is the width of the Al strip forming the loop and μ0 is the vacuum magnetic permeability. [52] A. J. Annunziata, D. F. Santavicca, L. Frunzio, G. Catelani, M. J. Rooks, A. Frydman, and D. E. Prober, Nanotechnology 21, 445202 (2010). The switching current measured for positive bias current I + sw in the phase space (i.e., as a function of both fluxline currents I L and I R ), shown in Fig. Staying in the gate configuration with V L = -0.28 V, V R = -0.31 V, we defined two phase-space linecuts (colored markers in In Fig. To further study the JDE arising in a four-terminal Josephson junction (4TJJ) embedded in a double-loop geometry, we characterized a second device fabricated on the same chip. The circuit layout of Device 2 and the geometry of the two superconducting loops were lithographically identical to Device 1 (see Figs. Current-bias measurements were performed as described for Device 1. Figure S.7 shows the switching current I ± sw and the extracted diode efficiency η as functions of the flux-line currents I L and I R for three configurations of the gate voltages V L and V R (set to a common value): -0.4 V (a-c), -0.5 V (d-f) and -0.6 V (g-i). The other gate voltages were V S = 0.15 V, V M = -0.15 V and V J = 0 (switch ON). Switching current oscillations in the 2D phase space at V L = V R = -0.4 V qualitatively resemble those observed for Device 1 in Figs. Switching currents and diode efficiency of Device 2 were also measured in the switch-OFF configuration (V J = -1.5 V), as shown in The results shown for Device 2 were qualitatively captured by our extended theoretical model, with parameters (τ L , τ M , τ R , T L , T M , T R ) set to (0.91, 0.87, 0.93, 3.5, 2, 6.5) for Figs. S.9a-c (Configuration 1), to (0.44, 0.65, 0.87, 1, 1, 3.3) for Figs. S.9d-f (Configuration 2), and to (0, 0.53, 0.67, 0.2, 0.2, 1) for Figs. S.9g-i (Configuration 3). Furthermore, we simulated the device in the switch-OFF case using the same parameters as in Configuration 2 and, in addition, τ RM = 0.75, T RM = 4; the result is displayed in Fig. S.10. In all cases, the phase axes (φ L , φ R ) were converted to flux-line-current axes (I L , I R ) using the transformation described in Section 5. We note that the chosen parameters were such that τ L < τ R and T L < T R , supporting our interpretation of the asymmetry between Φ L and Φ R as a result of asymmetric supercurrent flow in the device between terminals L and R. In Configuration 3, the data was best described by using τ L = 0, suggesting that the high-transmission channel between S and L was depleted. The measurements performed on Device 2 and the simulations done within the same model introduced for Device 1 support the generality of the observed phenomena, and in particular corroborate the presence and origin of the JDE in our device. The b-SQUID geometry of our devices enables control over two superconducting phase differences (between terminals L and M, and between R and M), tuned by the currents in the two flux-bias lines, I L and I R . These currents generated magnetic fluxes threading the two superconducting loops, Φ L and Φ R , with a cross-coupling leading to an effect of I L(R) on the flux through the opposite loop, Φ R(L) . As a consequence, the Φ L -and Φ R -axes had a finite slope with respect to the I L -and I R -axes, as visible in Fig. To quantify M (for Device 1), we consider the (Φ L , Φ R ) and (I L , I R ) coordinates of two points of the phase space [in addition to the origin, (Φ L , Φ R ) = (I L , I R ) = (0, 0)], such as (Φ 0 , 0) and (0, Φ 0 ), and substitute them in Eq. 6 The resulting 4 × 4 equation system leads to the mutual inductance matrix: The inverse transformation, obtained by inverting the mutual inductance matrix, was employed to map the phase space (φ L , φ R ) to the flux-line-current space (I L , I R ) for the simulated data of Figs. 6 of the Main Text, S.9 and S.10. In this transformation, the phase differences were considered to be linearly related to the fluxes, thus Φ L(R) = Φ 0 × φ L(R) /2π were substituted in Eq. 6 to obtain a direct relation between phases and currents. This assumption is justified by noting that the inductance of the superconducting loops, comprising geometric and kinetic contributions L loop = L geom + L k , is negligible compared to the Josephson inductance L J existing between any pairs of terminals in the 4TJJ. For each superconducting loop, the geometric inductance is estimated as L geom ≈ 24 pH [51], while the kinetic inductance is calculated using the expression [52]: where l = 57 μm is the length of the loop perimeter, w = 1 μm the width of the Al strip forming the loop, h the Planck's constant, R □ ≈ 1.5 Ω the normal state resistivity of the heterostructure stack (measured in Hall bar geometry where the Al was not removed) and ∆ ≈ 180 μeV is the superconducting gap of Al. Geometric and kinetic contributions lead to a total inductance L loop ≈ 124 pH. The Josephson inductance between two superconducting terminals (for example, L and M when considering the left loop) is estimated as L J = Φ 0 /2πI c ∼ 3 nH, where I c ∼ 100 nA gives the order of magnitude of the junction's critical current. 