We report a systematic investigation of anisotropic magnetocaloric effects in single crystal Cr2Te3. Single crystal samples are synthesized by chemical vapor transport and characterized by x-ray and Laue diffraction methods. The maximum magnetic entropy change -ΔSM max is 4.50 J kg -1 K -1 for the easy c-axis (3.36 J kg -1 K -1 for the hard ab-plane) and the relative cooling power RCP is 296.7 J kg -1 for the easy c-axis (183.84 J kg -1 for the hard axis ab-plane) near the Curie temperature for a magnetic field change of 9 T. The magneto-crystalline anisotropy constant Ku is estimated to be 486.92 kJ m -3 at 146 K, decreasing to 148.60 kJ m -3 at 168 K. Meanwhile, the maximum of the rotational magnetic entropy change ΔSM R (T, H) between the c-axis and the ab-plane is about 1.14 J kg -1 K -1 for magnetic-field change of 9 T. The critical exponents are estimated by analyzing magnetocaloric effects, which indicate 2D-Ising type magnetic system. The accuracy of estimated critical exponents is verified by scaling analysis. The maximum magnetic entropy change -ΔSM max ∼5.25 J kg -1 K -1 (along the c-axis) and the corresponding adiabatic temperature change ΔTad ∼3.31 K (along the c-axis) are estimated by analyzing heat capacity measurements with a magnetic field up to 9 T. After the discovery of long-range intrinsic magnetism down to the monolayer limit in twodimensional materials, transition-metal chalcogenides have received renewed interest from the academic community because some of these binary phases may show room temperature ferromagnetism down to monolayer limit which could be suitable for low dimensional spintronics applications In this article, we will report the anisotropic magnetocaloric properties of single crystal Cr2Te3. The magnetic properties of bulk Cr2Te3 and the correlation between their structural and magnetic properties have been studied before Fang Wang et al. reported the organic solution phase synthesis of Cr2Te3 nanorods with ultra-high coercivity However, our goal here is to explore the anisotropic magnetocaloric properties of single crystal Cr2Te3 which has not been reported before. Magnetic refrigeration using the magnetocaloric effect (MCE) has a huge potential to meet the worldwide demand for environmentally friendly, green, and energy-efficient thermal management Here, we report the anisotropic magnetocaloric properties of a single crystal Cr2Te3 sample by studying field-dependent isothermal magnetization along its c-axis and ab-plane. By analyzing the magneto-caloric effects, we show there is a 2 nd order (paramagnetic to ferromagnetic) magnetic phase transition. Moreover, by determining the magneto-caloric effects as a function of field and temperature, we calculate its full width at half maximum (FWHM), and refrigerant capacity or relative cooling power (RCP). With the help of these physical parameters, the critical exponents related to this magnetic phase transition are estimated. We then verify the accuracy of our estimated critical exponents by scaling analysis. Lastly, we estimated adiabatic temperature and change of magnetic entropy from the temperature-dependent heat capacity measurement to justify our analysis. Single crystal samples were synthesized by the chemical vapor transport (CVT) method. These CVT experiments were performed in a Thermo Scientific Lindberg Blue M three-zone furnace equipped with UP150 model program controllers. Cr (Alfa Aesar, powder, -100+325 mesh, 99.99% metals basis) and Te (Thermo Scientific, shot, 2-5 mm diameter, 99.9999% metals basis) were used as received without further purification. Stoichiometric amounts of Cr and Te are combined in a fused quartz tube. Between 35-50 mg of solid iodine is used as the vapor transport agent. The iodine is added to the tube, which is then sealed under vacuum. The sealed tube is, at minimum, long enough to equal the distance between two zones of a three-zone furnace. This tube is then placed inside the three-zone furnace. All three zones are heated up at a rate of 100 o C per hour, with the charge zone reaching 900 o C and the crystallization zone reaching 800 o C. This temperature gradient is held for one week, then the furnace is cooled at a rate of 100 o C per hour to room temperature. Room temperature x-ray powder diffraction measurements were carried out at the Pair Distribution Function (PDF) beamline (28-ID-1) of the National Synchrotron Light Source-II. We collected our data on grounded single crystal samples in capillary transmission geometry using a PerkinElmer amorphous silicon detector placed 1000 mm downstream from the sample Figure To further explore magnetic anisotropy, we performed isothermal magnetization studies around its transition temperature (~170 K). Figures To understand magnetism in the single-crystal Cr2Te3 system, we estimate changes in magnetic entropy along different axes in this material. The change of magnetic entropy ΔSM (T, H) is defined as the following Using the Maxwell's relation [∂S(T, H)/∂H = ∂M(T, H)/∂T], this can be expressed as following: In the case of isothermal magnetization measured at small discrete magnetic fields and temperature intervals, ΔSM(T, H) is the isothermal change of entropy in the interval of the magnetic field from 0 to H and can be approximated as The calculated -ΔSM values as a function of temperature in various fields up to 9 T applied along the c-axis and ab-plane are shown in Figures Figure The anisotropy is gradually suppressed at a higher field, as seen in Figure To further explore the nature of its magnetic phase transition, we analyzed the ΔSM data following the proposed universal scaling analysis θ-= (Tpeak -T)/(Tr1 -Tpeak), T < Tpeak, (4) θ+ = (T -Tpeak)/(Tr2 -Tpeak), T > Tpeak, For a material undergoing a second-order magnetic phase transition Here ΔSM max is the maximum value of ΔSM, δTFWHM is the full width at half maximum of ΔSM (T, H) curve and RCP is the relative cooling power. In the case of magnetic refrigerators, RCP determines the cooling efficiency of the refrigerant and corresponds to the amount of heat that can be transferred between the cold and hot parts of the refrigerator in an ideal thermodynamic cycle Therefore, |ΔSM max |, RCP, and δTFWHM are related to the applied magnetic field with power law relation, as expressed in equations ( Here, β, γ, and δ are called critical exponents For a material undergoing a second-order magnetic phase transition, the maximum magnetic entropy change follows a power law dependence with applied magnetic field: -ΔS max M = aH n , where a is a constant and the exponent n is related to the magnetic order. This can be expressed in another way n(T, H) = d ln|ΔSM|/d ln(H). Using this expression, all n(T) curves for each magnetic field can be estimated. Figure For a second-order magnetic phase transition, the ΔSM(H) vs. T curves under different external fields can be rescaled by the scaled equation of state: H/M δ = f(ε/M 1/β ), where δ and β are critical exponents Figures The estimated critical exponent values are listed in Table Based on the critical exponents obtained above, the range of magnetic exchange interaction in Cr2Te3 can be estimated. For a homogeneous magnet, the universality class of the magnetic phase transition depends on the exchange distance J(r). Fisher et al. theoretically treated this kind of magnetic ordering as an attractive interaction of spins, in which the renormalization group theory analysis suggests that the interaction decays with distance r as J(r) ∼ 1/r (d+σ) , where d is the spatial dimensionality, and σ is a positive constant , Δσ = σ -d/2, and n is the spin dimensionality. Using d = 2 in equation ( For the spatial dimension d = 3, computed σ values using equation ( Cr2Te3 is not a layered van der Walls (vdW) material like CrI3 Temperature dependence of heat capacity Cp for single crystal Cr2Te3 measured in constant magnetic fields (up to 9 T) applied along the c-axis is shown in Figure Here it is assumed that the electronic and lattice contributions are not field-dependent In summary, we have systematically studied the anisotropic magnetocaloric effects (MCE) of single crystal Cr2Te3. We have grown these Cr2Te3 samples by CVT and characterized by x-ray diffraction. The second-order nature of the paramagnetic-to-ferromagnetic phase transition near TC = 171 K has been verified by the scaling analysis of magnetic entropy change. The critical exponents β, γ, and δ are estimated by analyzing the magnetocaloric effect, and the scaling analysis of magnetic entropy change confirms the accuracy of our estimated critical exponents. A large magneto-crystalline anisotropy constant Ku is estimated to be 486.9158 kJ m -3 at 146 K. Using the heat capacity measurements, we estimate adiabatic temperature ΔTad = 3.53 K for 9 T magnetic field. Our analysis shows that Cr2Te3 behaves like a 2D Ising system with a long-range magnetic ordering. Cr0.62Te Cr5Te8 