The electrical characteristics of a point section of niobium oxide between a massive cathode made of a superconducting indium-tin alloy and a niobium film before the oxide breakdown and the nanocontact that appears after the breakdown of the oxide at room temperature have been studied. The dependences of the point breakdown voltage of the oxide and the resistance of nanocontacts on the method of breakdown and the thickness of the oxide in the range of 15-60 nm have been established. In particular, a minimum value of the breakdown current has been established (about 1 μA), below which breakdown does not occur. The voltage-current characteristic (VCC) of the oxide has a semiconductor character and indicates the dependence of the breakdown voltage of the oxide on its polarity. The VCC of the nanocontact is nonlinear, which is associated with phase transitions in the nanocontact material caused by its heating by the transport current. Point electrical contacts (PECs) have been studied for more than 100 years Such contacts have found application as detectors and generators of microwave radiation and superconducting quantum interferometers (SQUIDs) The choice of these materials with a critical temperature above 4.2 K is an important advantage, because allows quantum devices to operate in liquid helium without pumping out helium vapor. The breakdown of other dielectrics between tin films was also studied by I.K. Yanson Previously The purpose of the experimental studies presented in this article is to determine the formation features and properties of a new type of PEC formed as a result of a point electrical breakdown of a niobium oxide nanolayer with a thickness of 15 nm to 60 nm between film and massive electrodes made of superconducting materials. The mechanical and at the same time electrical connection of the cathode with the oxidized anode is called point only conditionally by analogy with clamping contacts without an intermediate oxide, used in weak superconductivity To ensure mechanical contact of the cathode with the oxide before breakdown, a device described in Figure -a slow increase in direct voltage (SIV) on the oxide in the range of 0-30 V until breakdown, -a slow increase in single-cycle alternating voltage, -a method of the combined action (MCA) of direct voltage and capacitor discharge A generator ТЕС 9 was used as a source of adjustable direct voltage, and a G3-18 generator was used as a source of alternating voltage with a frequency from 60 Hz to 16 kHz. The DC voltage on the bridge was recorded using a digital voltmeterV7-28, and the alternating voltageusing an oscilloscope S1-83. To switch voltage sources, a key K and a drum-type switch with three groups of contacts K1, K2, K3 were used. The voltage on the oxide was measured either with a digital voltmeter V2 or an oscilloscope (Osc). Single-cycle rectification of alternating voltage was performed using a diode (D) type.... Limiting RL = R2 and discharge resistance R3 were adjustable. The resistance of R1 was 1 kOhm. The current through the structure was measured with an ammeter (mA) type M253. determination of the area of "point" contact of the cathode with the surface of the oxide before breakdown and its electrical properties, -study of the dependence of the breakdown voltage of the oxide and the electrical resistance of the metal nano-sized bridge that appears inside it, -study of the transport properties of the formed bridges. The characteristic electrical properties of the oxide are presented using the example of the voltagecurrent characteristic (VCC) and the electrical capacitance of a point contact of a massive cathode with a 30 nm oxide before its breakdown. The capacitance was measured using digital set E7-8.The dependences of the breakdown voltage and bridge resistance on the oxide thickness were obtained for oxide thicknesses of 15, 30, 45 and 60 nm. The current-voltage characteristic of a bridge across an oxide with a thickness of 30 nm gives an idea of its transport properties. All measurements were performed at room temperature (300K). 3.1 Electrical capacity and resistance of the oxide at the point where the cathode is located before breakdown. Pressing a cathode coated with a relatively soft indium-tin alloy against a niobium oxide surface can lead to the formation of a flat area in the area where it touches. In the experiments performed, the force of action of the cathode on the oxide was about 10 -4 N, which corresponds to a load of 1 g. With such an impact on the alloy, with a contact area of several square microns, a mechanical stress arises in it that exceeds Young's modulus for metals such as tin and aluminum where 0 and s are, respectively, the absolute dielectric constant and the oxide thickness. Formula (1) allows you to calculate the area of mechanical quasi-point contact with the oxide if the capacitance and relative dielectric constant  are known. From our measurements it follows that at s = 30 nm, Cp = 0.2×10 -12 F and 40 To determine the resistance of niobium oxide at a temperature T = 300K before its breakdown, the voltagecurrent characteristic (VCC) of a point section of the oxide with a thickness of 30 nm was measured (Fig. with currents of different directions, sharply asymmetrical. Oxide breakdown occurs at 10 and 6 volts, respectively. In this case, the absolute value of the current in different directions of its flow differs by almost two orders of magnitude. The lowest current corresponds to a negative potential at the cathode. Thus, a point region of niobium oxide has semiconductor properties before its breakdown. In accordance with Fig. -10 Fig. Figure -at C = 10 -3 μF and s ˃ 15 nm, breakdown either does not occur at all at voltages up to 30 V, or occurs only at some points of the oxide. In this case, an oxide with a thickness of 15 nm breaks through, but the breakdown voltage becomes greater than with large capacitors, -breakdown voltage at oxide thicknesses of 30-60 nm almost does not depend on the capacitance value of the capacitor if C = 0.96 μF and 0.16 μF, and is noticeably higher than in the SIV mode at the same value of R2, -the breakdown voltage of an oxide with a thickness of 15 nm is practically independent of the capacitance of the capacitor in the range from 0.96 μF to 0.015 μF. The first feature can be explained by the insufficient energy stored in the capacitor with a capacity of 10 -3 μF. As estimates show, this energy may be less than the energy required to maintain the avalanche-like process The second feature that distinguishes a point breakdown using a capacitor from an SIV breakdown between planar film electrodes is explained by the fact that in the latter case a breakdown of an electrically weakened dielectric occurs. The reason for this is the penetration (during deposition of a film cathode) of film atoms into the surface inhomogeneities of the oxide. As a result of these micro-inhomogeneities in the relief of the cathode film, the electric field strength between the electrodes required for breakdown may decrease. The consequence of this is a decreasing of breakdown voltage. The third feature is probably the breakdown property of niobium oxide with such a minimum thickness for our experiments (15 nm). The absence or weak influence of the capacitance value and energy stored in the capacitor on the breakdown voltage value can be useful in the process of applied developments using such point superconducting contacts. the value of the limiting resistance. Table The first feature of breakdown at low values of its current can be explained by the low density of this current, because according to the theory of electron breakdown A/cm 2 . The second feature of such a breakdown can be explained by the better homogeneity of the oxide with a thickness of 15 nm compared to thicknesses of 30-60 nm. The third feature of the increased average breakdown voltage (in comparison with the electrical strength of the oxide between the film electrodes) can be explained by the higher electrical strength of the oxide point section under the clamping cathode. thickness and method of breakdown. Tables -the spread in the resistance values of bridges formed by a point breakdown using SIV is two or more times greater (excluding bridges at s = 15 nm and R2 = 1 kΩ), exceeds the spread in the breakdown voltage values. This is especially evident at R2 = 10 5 -10 7 Ω, -resistance of bridges with a thickness of 15 nm obtained by the SIV method at R2= 1 kΩ, exceeds the resistance of bridges with thicknesses of 30-60 nm. Thus, in the Rb(s) dependence, a minimum of Rb values is formed in the thickness region of 30 nm, -resistance of bridges obtained by point breakdown using MCA, less resistance of bridges obtained using SIV. In this case, the resistance value of these bridges decreases with increasing capacitance C. The first of these properties of the bridge resistance can be explained by the fact that its value depends not only on the breakdown voltage. The resistance is also affected by the breakdown current density and the microstructure of the oxide at the breakdown point. These parameters may differ at different points of the oxide. The second property may be a consequence of bridge diameter decreasing due to the decreasing of its length, equal to the oxide thickness, to 15 nm. The third property can be explained by the fact that in the MCA method the bridge is formed mainly due to the energy of the pulsed discharge of the capacitor. As the capacitance of the capacitor increases, the energy entering the breakdown region increases, which probably contributes to more complete ionization of the electrically conductive channel and the formation of a well-conducting metal bridge after cooling. Measurements of the breakdown voltage amplitudes and the resistance of the bridges formed during breakdown were carried out at a unipolar rectified alternating voltage at frequencies of 67, 376, 480, 5000 and 10000 Hz. In all experiments, a negative electrical potential was present at the massive catode. The oxide thickness was 15, 30, 45 and 60 nm, the limiting resistance varied from 1 kΩ to 100 kΩ A comparison of the breakdown voltage and bridge resistance values obtained under the influence of alternating voltage and direct voltage showed that the magnitude and spread of their values are close to each other and do not depend on frequency. In these experiments, one of the oscilloscope beams corresponded to the rectified voltage of the generator, and the other to either the voltage across the oxide or the voltage across the limiting resistance. The latter voltage was proportional to the current through the oxide (Fig. The transport properties of various contacts are usually determined by their voltagecurrent characteristic s (VCCs). The most well-known in works with superconducting contacts are the VCCs at various cryogenic temperatures. Much less frequently mentioned are the VCCs of contacts between electrodes made of superconducting materials, measured at room (laboratory) temperature. At the same time, such current-voltage characteristics can provide important evaluation information about the potential applications of these contacts at low temperatures, as well as about their critical states at room temperature. This is due to the fact that in the region of weak superconductivity, experimenters are forced to perform auxiliary measurements, in particular, with film structures at room temperature. In this case, for example, in Dayem film bridges, a measuring current of 10 mA for the VCC can have a density about 10 5 A/cm 2 . In some cases, such a current can heat up and melt the bridge, since it is known that fuses in electrical networks are designed to blow at a current density of 10 4 -10 5 A/cm 2 . In addition, with the current state of rapidly developing electronics and electrical engineering, random electromagnetic interference exists in the surrounding space and in the wired network, which can act on structures with Josephson contacts and destroy them even at room temperatures. Therefore, it is necessary to know the transport capabilities of weak contacts. For this purpose, we carried out for the first time at an ambient temperature of 300 K (t = 27 0 C) measurements of the VCCs of Josephson bridges manufactured by the method of electrical breakdown of a dielectric nanolayer in the form of niobium oxide with a thickness of 15 nm. Figure In addition, at a current of 15 mA a kink appears on the VCC, which is clearly visible due to the mismatch of the line continuation of its initial section with the experimental part of the VСC. The second graph in Fig. Resistance was determined as the quotient of the voltage divided by the current through the bridge. The flow of current through the bridge causes it to heat up. The dependence of the bridge resistance (Rt) on its temperature (t) is described by the formula where R20 and α are, respectively, the bridge resistance at a temperature of 20 0 C (i.e. at the initial voltage values on the current-voltage characteristic) and the temperature coefficient of the bridge resistance. At currents of 0-15 mA, the resistance increases slightly compared to R20 = 6.9 Ω. At currents of 15 -20 mA, the rate of resistance increasing increases. With a resistance of R = 8.5 Ω, the calculated temperature of the bridge (α=2.3×10 -3 / C 0 ) is about 120 0 C. This temperature is close to the melting point (126 0 C One more feature of the formed bridge should also be noted. The bridge was formed at a breakdown current of 0.14 mA with a calculated density of about 0.4×10 8 A/cm 2 . When the current increases to 15 mA, the resistance of the bridge changes little, but the current density in the stable state of the bridge increases by two orders of magnitude (up to 0.4×10 10 A/cm 2 ). This may indicate the increased resistance of such a bridge to current overloads that arise in practice. As a result of experimental studies of point contact between a massive and film electrode through a nanolayer of niobium oxide, the semiconducting properties of an oxide with a thickness of 15 nm and an area of about 6 square microns were established. At negative and positive potentials on a massive electrode made of an indium-tin alloy, electrical breakdown of the oxide occurs at a voltage of 10 and 6 volts, respectively. It has been established that the breakdown electric field strength is about 4×10 6 V/cm for nanooxides with a thickness of 30, 45, 60 nm, and with a thickness of 15 nm it increases to 6×10 6 V/cm. The resistance of bridges arising after the breakdown of an oxide with a thickness of 15 nm is greater than after the breakdown of oxides with a thickness of 30, 45 and 60 nm. The magnitude of the breakdown voltage of oxides of different thicknesses and, especially, the magnitude of the resistance of the bridges that arise after the breakdown have scatter of values, which can be caused by point heterogeneity of the oxide structure. A study of the features of a point breakdown depending on the value of the limiting resistance that determines the breakdown current in the SIV mode showed that at breakdown currents less than 1-2 μA, breakdown either does not occur or occurs only in some areas of the oxide. At breakdown currents of about 10 mA, the magnitude and spread of resistance values of point bridges is greater than that of bridges formed between film electrodes. A study of the characteristics of breakdown depending on the capacitance value of the capacitor in the breakdown circuit in the MCA mode showed that with a capacitance of less than 10 -3 μF breakdown does not occur. The cessation of breakdown can be explained by the insufficient magnitude and duration of current flow through the oxide, necessary for the formation of an avalanche of electrons, characteristic of the phenomenon of point breakdown. The transport properties of the bridge formed as a result of the breakdown of niobium oxide with a thickness of 15 are manifested in its nonlinear current-voltage characteristic and the unusual dependence of the bridge resistance on current. It is shown that their appearance is explained by a change in the phase state of the bridge as the current through it increases. At low currents (up to 15 mA) the bridge is in a solid state, at currents of 15-20 mA the bridge begins to melt, and at currents of 20-32 mA it is in a liquid state. At a current of 33 mA, the liquid metal boils and a sharp multiple increase in its resistance occurs. It should be noted that in the solid state the bridge is capable of passing current with a density of up to 0.4×10 10 A/cm 2 . This suggests that such a bridge is very resistant to random electrical interference that exists under real operating conditions. This work was financially supported by the of leading Program of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine "Fundamental research on the most important problems of natural sciences" (section "Quantum nano-sized superconducting systems: theory, experiment, practical implementation"). State registration number of the work is 0122U001503. 180 μF, R3 = 10 Ω, RL = R2 = 1 kΩ.