Dielectric breakdown is an example of a natural phenomenon that occurs on very short time scales, making it incredibly difficult to capture optical images of the process. Event initiation jitter is one of the primary challenges, as even a microsecond of jitter time can cause the imaging attempt to fail. Initial attempts to capture images of dielectric breakdown with a gigahertz frame rate camera and an exploding bridge wire initiation were stymied by high initiation jitter. Subsequently, a novel optical delay line apparatus was developed in order to effectively circumvent the jitter and reliably image dielectric breakdown. The design and performance of the optical delay line apparatus are presented. The optical delay line increased the image capture success rate from 25% to 94% while also permitting enhanced temporal resolution and has applications for use in imaging other high-jitter, extremely fast phenomena. Imaging very fast phenomena with nanosecond time resolution is challenging for several reasons-the events are incredibly brief such that their evolution cannot be captured with a typical camera, and many phenomena do not have practical or predictable triggering mechanisms. One such phenomenon that has proven difficult to image is mechanically-initiated dielectric breakdown. Dielectric breakdown is the process by which an insulating material rapidly transitions to a highly conductive state when subjected to electric potential gradients above the material-dependent dielectric breakdown threshold 10.1063/5.0168764 Initial attempts were made to capture images of a dielectric breakdown event (DBE), and the corresponding formation of damage patterns with a high-speed framing camera at Los Alamos National Laboratory. The breakdown process was initiated in electron-loaded polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) by mechanical shock from the explosion of an exploding bridgewire detonator (EBW). The EBW was chosen for its precise timing and electrical firing control, which would permit camera synchronization. However, it was discovered that there exists substantial variation in time, around 0.7 μs, between the EBW detonation and the initiation of breakdown in the dielectric. This breakdown initiation jitter time was greater than the duration of the DBE itself. As a result, the majority of images did not capture the desired breakdown dynamics; the framing camera either began taking photos too early or too late. Figure To circumvent this jitter time, an Optical Delay Line (ODL) was developed and introduced. Previous work used ODLs as a method for time resolving The samples imaged in this work were rectangular prisms of commercially procured PMMA (Pease Plastics) with dimensions of 305 mm by 102 mm for the imaged front face and thickness 25 mm with a tolerance of ±3 mm on all lengths. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. 10.1063/5.0168764 The samples were irradiated via electron beam using the 4.5 MeV electron Dynamitron at E-Beam Services in Lebanon, Ohio. The electron beam charged each sample in the direction normal to the 305 mm by 102 mm face which was to be imaged. Each sample was individually loaded with charge densities ranging between 10 and 18 mC/m 2 at the midplane. Once loaded and transported to Los Alamos National Laboratory, dielectric breakdown of these charged samples was initiated by mechanical insult. This insult resulted in the expulsion of the retained charge from the plastic through the region of mechanical damage, as the dielectric breakdown figure grew outward into the remaining undamaged material. In order to capture images of the extremely rapid DBE, state-of-the-art framing cameras are required. A Specialised Imaging SIMX16 framing camera capable of 3 ns minimum exposure for 16 beam splitter coupled CCDs (Specialised Imaging 2023) was used for this work. One CCD in the camera was disabled due to prior instrument damage, so only 15 individual image frames were captured for each discharge. The image-intensified CCDs in the SIMX16 camera must receive a trigger signal at least 65 ns prior to beginning exposure. This is known as the "shutter lag". The shutter lag could be increased beyond 65 ns with the camera software, but it could not be reduced below 65 ns. This delay presents the central challenge to imaging dielectric breakdown. Non-zero shutter lag requires precommitment to a designated trigger time. But if the timescale of the event being captured is short compared to the event initiation jitter time, most attempts to image the event will capture images from either before or after the event, rather than of the event itself. Thus, there are two options: (if possible) minimize the event jitter by modifying the initiation process or develop a method to coordinate the initiation time to the camera shutter time on a shot-by-shot basis. The first approach taken to image a DBE was to use an EBW. The system used trigger breakdown and image the resultant event is shown in figure 10.1063/5.0168764 In total, 84 DBEs were initiated using the EBW system, of which 1260 images were captured (15 for each discharge). Of these images, only approximately 25% contained breakdown evolution; many were dark images before breakdown occurred, or images of already formed plasma channels after the breakdown. Analysis of the images and chosen camera shutter lags revealed that the breakdown initiation jitter time-the standard deviation of times between EBW detonation and first light released by the event-is approximately 0.7 μs. Due to this jitter, photographing the DBE on any of the 15 frames when recorded over a time span less than 500 ns was difficult. Because breakdown travels longitudinally through the dielectric bulk The ODL apparatus involves the use of a plane mirror and reflected light from the sample in order to coordinate the timing of the DBE with the camera shutter lag. A schematic and photograph of the ODL system are shown in figure The measured current signal from the CT secondary was attenuated and split with a 6 dB power splitter (Midwest Microwave 2533). Half of the signal was recorded by the experiment oscilloscope (Keysight MSOX6004A) to capture the current traces for each trial, while the other half traveled to a fast linear discriminator (Ortec 436) which generated a TTL pulse to trigger the SIMX16. When image acquisition begins, the SIMX16 also outputs a TTL signal with a width corresponding to This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. 10.1063/5.0168764 the image record length which was also recorded by the oscilloscope in order to verify shot timing. The relative timing of these timing signals as recorded by the experimental oscilloscope is shown in figure Table In SIMX16 In Oscilloscope Channel In For a distance of 45 m, to achieve the desired 0.5 mm spatial resolution and 10:1 signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), a 406 mm aperture, f/8 Ritchey Chrétien telescope (Guan Sheng Optical 406 mm F/8 RC OTA) was used as the image forming optic for the SIMX16 framing camera. Beyond removing Crayford focuser to permit direct imaging, no modifications to the telescope were required. Due to the finite distance to the sample, it has been calculated that the working f-number of the imaging system was increased to f/8.3, making the usual unity pupil magnification assumption. The theoretical light gathering efficiency of the ODL is close to 1:10 -6 , about three orders of magnitude less than the light gathering efficiency of the EBW imaging system. However, for the distances used in the ODL and the particular luminous intensity of the DBE, it was found that aperture-limited This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. 10.1063/5.0168764 imaging performance was bottlenecked by resolution rather than light gathering efficiency, in part due to the image intensifier. Because the object distance was quite close and the telescope was designed for focusing at infinity, the telescope and camera were placed on separate tables to achieve the 0.7 m required back focus distance. Because the telescope and camera were both very large, direct mechanical connection between the two through extension tubes would have frustrated the fine motions required to focus the system. Instead, baffling was placed between the discharge fixture and camera, and the laboratory lights were turned off. In total, the ODL was used to record 116 dielectric breakdown events. A typical image series of a breakdown event is shown in figure Because the total capture time was reduced to 17 ns, one nanosecond temporal resolution was achieved, allowing for greatly enhanced analysis of sequential breakdown behavior. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. 10.1063/5.0168764 Several important limitations of the experimental apparatus described above should be noted. Among these are limited spatial resolution, the inability to image dim or non-luminous events, and inherent light gathering limits due to the distance between the source and imaging aperture. It is expected that further improvements will remediate many of these limitations. The spatial resolution of the ODL system was still substantially worse than the angular resolution of the telescope (the Dawes limit). The reflecting mirror opposite the telescope suffered from distortions (exaggerated by thermally induced stresses due to low temperatures in the laboratory during the scheduled dates for the experiment) which caused poor optical collimation. For several event image captures, some correction of this collimation was achieved by obstructing the areas of the mirror with highest distortion to reach a compromise between CCD illumination (and thus SNR) and resolution. A new mirror with good flatness and thermal characteristics along with a more accommodating mount should both improve the spatial resolution and light gathering ability of the existent system. As shown in Figure This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. 10.1063/5.0168764 FIG. The choice of a telescope as opposed to an optical relay for imaging of the mirror, was dictated by the short time in which the experimental apparatus could be assembled and operated. Aligning the large number of optical elements in a 45 m optical relay would have left too little time for data acquisition. Future system implementations constructed around an optical relay would enjoy greatly improved light gathering and the attendant SNR improvement. Additionally, placing the objective closer to the object may permit a practical increase in numerical aperture resulting in improved spatial resolution. Two consequences of such a modification would be a reduction in the orthography of the resulting image and depth of field, which may or may not be relevant considerations for specific imaging applications. The ODL system shows promise for accommodating the shutter lag of modern high speed framing cameras. Initial experiments to image dielectric breakdown using a framing camera without an ODL measured high discharge initiation time jitter and involved many frustrating failed imaging attempts. The inclusion of an ODL in the imaging system improved imaging success from 25% to 94%, while also permitting breakdown to be reliably imaged at frame rates 35 times higher than previously achievable in these experiments. With simple modifications and improvements, it is believed that the ODL system will permit reliable imaging of other high-speed phenomena which are either impractical to trigger or suffer from high trigger jitter time. The only requirement being that the phenomenon provides some detectable signal concurrent to the event itself.