The ability to rapidly develop materials with desired properties has a transformative impact on a broad range of emerging technologies. In this work, we introduce a new framework based on the diffusion model, a recent generative machine learning method to predict 3D structures of disordered materials from a target property. For demonstration, we apply the model to identify the atomic structures of amorphous carbons (a-C) as a representative material system from the target X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectra-a common experimental technique to probe atomic structures of materials. We show that conditional generation guided by XANES spectra reproduces key features of the target structures. Furthermore, we show that our model can steer the generative process to tailor atomic arrangements for a specific XANES spectrum. Finally, our generative model exhibits a remarkable scale-agnostic property, thereby enabling generation of realistic, large-scale structures through learning from a small-scale dataset (i.e., with small unit cells). Our work represents a significant stride in bridging the gap between materials characterization and atomic structure determination; in addition, it can be leveraged for materials discovery in exploring various material properties as targeted. An accelerated materials discovery pipeline with desired properties holds a transformative impact on a broad range of emerging technologies, from energy storage and conversion to ion-selective membranes Materials development through inverse design departs from the traditional methods. Instead of deriving properties from structures, target material properties are specified beforehand and materials satisfying these requirements are inferred Among the different classes of generative models, the diffusion model In this study, we demonstrate the application of the diffusion model to identify 3D structures of disordered solid materials from a target property, which in this work is chosen to be spectroscopy to address an outstanding challenge in materials characterization: predicting 3D structures of disordered materials from spectroscopic measurements. We focus on XANES spectroscopy that is widely used to probe local atomic structures, and demonstrate with amorphous carbons (a-C) as a representative system. In a similar vein, Comin and Lewis Our conditional diffusion model framework shown in Fig. We present our results regarding a-C 3D structure generation with and without XANES spectroscopy conditioning. In the unconditional case, we focus on the fidelity of the generation, and highlight that the generation is scale-agnostic. In the conditional case, the performance of a structure-to-spectroscopy forward model is briefly discussed, and the spectroscopy-guided generation is validate in two scenarios. The extent of the conditioning effect is also briefly analyzed. Overall, we demonstrate realistic, scale-agnostic generation of a-C structures based on spectra inputs/guides. The conditional generative/denoising process of amorphous carbon (a-C) involves a pair of decoupled (i.e., trained separately) score model and forward model. The score model, based on the diffusion model formalism, provides the prior score, while the forward model, trained to predict spectroscopic curves, is used to provide the likelihood score. The prior score serves to denoise initial random motifs towards realistic topologies without bias, and the likelihood score serves to bias the denoising trajectory towards atomic motifs that satisfy a given spectroscopic target/guide. Notably, the forward model is optional, and the generative process is simply unconditional without a forward model. The fidelity of the structure generation is first examined without considering the conditioning effect. We emphasize that our generation model is scale-agnostic, i.e., the model can learn from small-scale molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories and consequently generate similar configurations at any arbitrary scale. This is enabled by the node-centric (local) predictions of the underlying graph neural network architecture. The denoising process therefore amounts to shifting each atom's coordinate towards realistic topologies based on its local environment without the need to observe global variables. This scale-agnostic feature is particularly useful for generating large domains encompassing diverse topologies, which can be costly to sample via MD simulations. In this regard, the large-scale generated structures can be interpreted as having "stitched" or combined the small but diverse MD-simulated motifs. Such a generation is important for examining material properties where a large supercell with diverse local structures is required for yielding sufficient statistics. Examples include predicting hydrogen diffusion The scale-agnostic feature is demonstrated in Fig. The unconditionally generated structures are realistic (Fig. the generated topologies are similar to, but not exact copies of, the training atom motifs. Second, the bond angle, RDF, and Voronoi cell volume distributions further validate that the generated configurations are realistic, resembling the configurations of the training set (Fig. Since the conditional generation formulation requires a forward prediction model, we trained a forward model to predict XANES spectra of a-C configurations from their atomic structures (Supplemental Fig. We now validate the guided generation result of our conditional diffusion model. As previously stated, even without a given spectroscopy target, the a-C generation outcome depends on the user-specified density, to the extent that sp/sp 2 carbons dominate at low densities, and sp 2 /sp 3 carbons dominate at high densities. In other words, density implicitly imposes a strong conditioning effect on the structural generation. Therefore, to investigate the conditioning effect of the spectroscopy guide alone, we provided two distinctively different spectral inputs while fixing the density (2.0 g/cm 3 ). One of the spectral guides is an averaged spectral curve from all sp carbons, and the other from all sp 3 carbons in the training set. Effectively, these spectral inputs serve to guide the generation towards sp or sp 3 topologies in structures that would otherwise be dominated by sp 2 carbons at 2.0 g/cm 3 . As shown in Fig. Further, the sp-guided generation resulted in a stronger signature in the Voronoi cell volume distribution for the sp topology It is crucial to point out that by design a XANES target might not be always fully achievable in the context of our conditional generative model. In this regard, it is more appropriate to consider XANES spectra as a guide for our diffusion model, where the generative process is biased towards certain topologies based on a given spectral target. As evident in Fig. As another demonstration of guided generation, we initialized a heavily perturbed diamond structure that would by default be denoised into perfect diamond via the unconditional denoising trajectory. We note that a separate generative model was trained in this case, where the training dataset includes only the perfect diamond structure and an amorphous structure of the same density (3.5 g/cm 3 ). As shown in Fig. We propose a conditional generative framework based on a diffusion model to predict 3D atomic structures from spectroscopic data. This framework can be generalized to different targets that fit to a broader field of materials discovery by inverse design. First, we show that the generative model exhibits a remarkable scaleagnostic property, enabling it to learn from small-scale MD trajectories and generate large-scale structures. This versatility is useful for scenarios where accurate prediction of material properties is contingent on the generation of sufficiently large domains with diverse topologies. Second, our conditional generation process, influenced by spectroscopy input, offers control over the composition and structure of generated molecules. Therefore, one can guide the generative process to produce specific atomic arrangements, thereby tailoring materials for desired properties and applications. Lastly, through extensive fidelity assessments, we demonstrated the fidelity of our generative model. Specifically, the prior model accurately replicates key structural features observed in training data, while our posterior model yields structures that closely align with target data, including spectral predictions and structural characteristics. Our work represents a significant stride in bridging the gap between materials characterization and atomic structure determination. In particular, by leveraging advanced generative models, our approach offer a promising solution to address to longstanding challenges in reverse engineering atomic structures from complex spectroscopic data. Our methodology holds promise for a multitude of future endeavors. For example, beyond the current scope, it can be applied to multiple targets, including X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, pair distribution function, and others, opening new avenues for predicting atomic structures from multi-modal materials characterizations. Finally, our framework can be leveraged for materials discovery, not only in the realm of spectroscopy but also in exploring various material properties as targeted. Examples include mechanical strengths of materials under extreme conditions, electrocatalytic activity of catalysts for hydrogen production, and permeability of ion-selective membranes, and so on. The methodologies employed in this work are described below, including disordered/amorphous structure generation via unconditional diffusion model, its extension to conditional/guided diffusion model formulation with the use of a forward model, how the models are trained, their GNN architectures, and the spectroscopy simulations performed for gathering data. We approach the task of amorphous/disordered structure generation with a machine learned generative model, namely the diffusion model where f (t) and g(t) are drift and diffusion coefficients related to (α t , σ t ), and w t is the standard Wiener process. To generate a realistic data point, one first samples from the unit Gaussian latent distribution x t ∼ N (0, I) at t = 1 and then maps it back to the original data space at t = 0 via the reverse denoising process. While the forward noising operation is trivial, the reverse denoising operation is not and requires a learned model. It is described as the following SDE: where ∇ xt log p t (x t ) is the so-called score function and in this work is approximated by the score model s θ (x t , t) with parameters θ. The score function can also be approximated using ε θ , which learns to predict the noise ε in noisy x t , and is related to s θ by ε θ = -σ t s θ . The reverse denoising SDE can then be solved using well known techniques such as the Euler-Maruyama method While the above formulation of the diffusion model is generally applicable to many data types, it is modified in this work to account for atomic structures in periodic cell boundaries. Note that an atomic structure may be generally represented as a tuple of the atomic coordinates and atom types (r, z), along with unit cell dimensions A = (a 1 , a 2 , a 3 ) ∈ (R 3 , R 3 , R 3 ) if the structure is periodic. However, the amorphous carbon systems studied in this work are single-element only (carbon) and therefore z is omitted, leaving x = r. Since r lies in a unit cell with periodic boundaries, it is sensible to apply the "variance-exploding" scheme for the noise schedule, where α t is fixed to 1 and σ t monotonically increases from 0 to some maximum value k. This means that the drift coefficient becomes zero f (t) = 0. The updated forward noising SDE is then and its corresponding reverse denoising SDE is Importantly, due to the periodic boundaries, the noisy, perturbed structure becomes asymptotically a uniformly random structure. Therefore, to sample a realistic structure, one instead initializes a set of uniformly random coordinates r inside a periodic unit cell-rather than Gaussian-distributed r-and then applies the reverse denoising SDE. The structure generation algorithm is listed in Algorithm 1. In this work we define the noise schedule as (α t , σ t ) = (1, kt), where the span of t is still set to (0, 1). Notably, the structure generation algorithm is scale-agnostic, allowing for users to specify the unit cell dimensions A and structure density D, which influence the number of atoms N a for the generation. In practice, D should have a realistic value, similar to the densities of the structures in the training dataset. Require: Periodic unit cell A = (a 1 , a 2 , a 3 ), density D, learned score model s θ , noise schedule g(t), and timestep size ∆t (which has a negative value). Determine number of atoms N a from A and ρ x ← U(Ω) for N a atoms, where Ω is the domain inside A t ← 0.999 The theory of the diffusion model, based on an underlying score function, can be quite naturally extended for conditional generation. First, the score function introduced in the previous section is written as ∇ xt log p t (x t ) and is regarded as the unconditional, unguided, or prior score function, i.e., without conditioning bias or guide during the generation/denoising process. Then, consider a conditioning or posterior score function ∇ xt log p t (x t |y) that is conditioned on some target or guide property y. Importantly, this posterior score can be decomposed via Bayes' rule into It is now apparent that conditional generation enabled by the diffusion model can be very flexible, since computing the posterior score amounts to simple addition of the decoupled prior score ∇ xt log p t (x t )-approximated by s θ -and the likelihood score ∇ xt log p t (y|x t ). Further, computing the likelihood score entails taking the gradient of (the log of) a probabilistic forward prediction model p t (y|x t ). For different conditional quantities y such as spectral signatures, Steinhardt parameters, band gap, and so on, different forward models can be combined with the prior model in a plug-and-play fashion. In the case of a deterministic forward model y = F (x), converting it into the probabilistic counterpart can be straightforward by adding Gaussian noises of variance σ2 to the forward prediction: y = F (x) + ε, ε ∼ N (0, σ2 I). The resulting likelihood score is then which can be interpreted as pointing to lower values of the L2 loss between the forward prediction F (x t ) and a given target y. In terms of implementation, the conditional generation process is virtually identical to Algorithm 1 except for the input score model, which is replaced by ∇ xt log p t (x t |y). However, there is still a caveat with the conditional generation formulation: evaluating the forward prediction F (x t ) involves noisy input x t but the forward model may be ill-defined with respect to noisy, highly perturbed x t , which at t = 1 is complete noise without any meaningful signal. For some forward models, this does not pose as an issue, such as the case of atomic descriptors/fingerprints, e.g., Steinhardt followed by forward model prediction, resulting in the following likelihood score: where the stepsize ρ is another implementation practice by Chung et al. As previously stated, the forward model used in this work for the purpose of conditional or guided generation of disordered carbons is a spectroscopy prediction model. Specifically, it is a GNN that outputs per-atom spectroscopic curves based on local atomic motifs. In this representation, the atomic structure is represented as a graph, wherein nodes encapsulate information pertaining to atomic species and atomic positional coordinates, while edges encode atomic bonding information in the form of vectorized interatomic distances. The GNN is subjected to training on a dataset containing atomistic structures along with their corresponding XANES spectra. The score model s θ (x t , t) is a GNN trained with dataset D s = {(x 0 , A) (i) } that consists of MD snapshots containing atomic coordinates x 0 and unit cell dimensions A, with atom type information z omitted due to the dataset being single-element. The score is learned via the denoising score matching loss x t = α t x 0 + σ t ε, ε ∼ N (0, I), where A is implicitly accounted for by the atomic graph representation. The forward model is also a GNN, trained with dataset D F = {(x 0 , A, y) (i) } that additionally has per-atom spectroscopic curves y. The spectroscopic prediction is learned via a simple mean-squared-error (MSE) loss between the predicted output ŷ and y: L MSE = MSE(ŷ, y). For both the score model and the forward model, exponential moving average (EMA) was used to faciliate training. Rectified Adam (RAdam) was used as the gradient descent optimizer without learning rate or weight decay. For every sampled minibatch of the structure snapshots, the atomic coordinates are randomly rotated in order for the score, (forward) model to learn rotational equivariance (invariance). The training parameters are detailed in Table Both the score model and the forward model share the same GNN architecture design, which consists of three components: an Encoder, a Processor (for graph message-passing), and a Decoder. The input atomic graph to these operations is denoted as (V, E), where V is a set node features {h i } for nodeatom i, and E is a set of edge/bond features {e ij } from node i to node j. The set of edges E is determined by a cutoff distance r c , within which a pair of nodes form an edge connection. In the Encoder stage, the node features are computed as a combined embedding of the atom type z and the fictitious time t: where M H and M T are multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) that embed the one-hot representation of z and the Gaussian Fourtier features where ⊕ designates concatenation of features. M H , M E , and M T consist of two dense linear layers, with SiLU activation function after the first layer and layer normalization after the second. We used the Processor from MeshGraphNets The Decoder is a simple MLP M O that maps the node features into prediction output: For the score model, the output is the approximated score function, and for the forward model, the output is the spectroscopic signature. M O has the same architecture as that of M H , M E , and M T , except that there is no layer normalization at the end. Model parameters are listed in Table Since the generative model in this work is not constrained by physics rule, there is always a chance for the model to generate unphysical topologies that are extremely unlikely or virtually impossible. Such "bad" samples occur since there are always errors associated with any fitted score model. In this work one main instance of unphysical a-C topology is carbons with a coordination number of only one (CN1), which can exist in our generation results using the usual SDE sampler. To address this, we have found the restart sampling method We extracted a dataset consisting of 58 atomic configurations of a-C at different densities from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with the Gaussian approximation potential (GAP), which has been shown to provide a good description of structural properties of a-C at the room temperature 