Beam profile engineering, where a desired optical intensity distribution can be generated by an array of phase shifting (or amplitude changing) elements is a promising approach in laser material processing. For example, a spatial light modulator (SLM) is a dynamic diffractive optical element allowing for experimental implementations of controllable beam profile. Scalar Mathieu beams have elliptical intensity distribution perceivable as "optical knives" in the transverse plane and scalar Weber beams have a parabolic distribution, which enables us to call them "optical shovels". Here, we introduce vector versions of scalar Mathieu and Weber beams and use those vector beams as a basis to construct controllable on-axis phase and amplitude distributions with polarization control. Further, we generate individual components of optical "knife" and "shovel" beams experimentally using SLMs as a toy model and report on our achievements in the control over the beam shape, dimensions and polarization along the propagation axis. Laser beam shaping is an important technique used in modern laser beam applications such as light sheet microscopy, microfabrication and photopolimerisation to name a few. In situations where the same pattern is needed over long propagation distance it is advantageous to use nondiffracting beams. One of them is Bessel beam In some cases the microfabrication process is sensitive to the polarization structure of the laser beam In a similar fashion, additional degree of freedom in the transverse profiles with asymmetrical intensity distributions, which have comparable to Bessel beam properties, can be achieved after introducing the so-called Mathieu-Gaussian and parabolic-Gaussian (Weber-Gaussian) beams. Mathieu beams possess a rather complicated distribution of electric field (sometimes called an "optical knife") which also has some practical applications due to its asymmetrical cross-section Thus, both families exhibit non-diffracting properties similar to Bessel beams, where a relatively long focal depth retains unchanging intensity distribution, which makes them a promising candidate in laser processing. Control of the focal line and engineering its transverse profile Here, we introduce vector versions of those beams with controllable polarization and investigate numerically their spatial spectra. We use vector Mathieu beams Nondiffracting beams can be introduced while searching for solutions of the scalar Helmholtz equation ) which can be easily solved using the method of the separation of the variables ( , , , ) ( , ) ( , ), x y z t R x y Z z t ψ = (2) where Z is the longitudinal and time dependent part and the function R represents the part of the solution, which is transverse. Textbooks on mathematical physics name four (Cartesian, polar, elliptic and parabolic) different cylindrical coordinate systems, where this method leads to the expression of the electric field as an integral over plane waves, DOI: 10.2961/jlmn.2018.03.0023 which are situated on the cone defined by the transverse component of the wave vector k ρ : The spatial spectra ( , ) S k ρ φ of this electromagnetic field can be to the angular function ( ) A φ as [18, 19] ( ) ( ) According to the Morse and Feshbach, see Ref. 1 . Here a constant vector a  defines some internal symmetries of the vector beams. The first solution is the transverse magnetic mode of the vector Helmholtz equation and the second one represents a transverse electric mode. In an obvious manner, the dual electromagnetic field can be handily expressed using those two solutions as a basis functions with coefficients an and bn, leading to ( ), ( ). i Moreover, it can be shown, that the spatial spectra of a single mode from Eq. ( In our case, we will be using Fig. We define elliptic cylinder coordinates by the transformation acosh( ) x iy i 9) which introduces the so-called elliptical cylinder coordinates cosh( ) cos( ), sinh( ) sin( ), here α is ellipticity parameter, , η ξ are transverse elliptic coordinates. In these coordinates the three-dimensional Helmholtz equation separates into a longitudinal and transverse parts as given in Ref. Fig. Mathieu beam with different ellipticity parameter (q = 0, 5, 20, from the left to the right). In order to fully explain properties of nondiffracting pulses, full vectorial description must be used. Thus we vectorize scalar elliptic nondiffracting fields using ( , ) ( , )e . Radially polarized Mathieu beam exhibit also a nonzero longitudinal component of the electric field, while azimuthally polarized fields are transverse only. We define parabolic cylinder coordinates by the transformation . 2 i x iy In these coordinates the three-dimensional Helmholtz equation separates into a longitudinal and transverse parts ( ) ( ) ( ). Longitudinal part has solution with dependence exp(ikzz), and a transverse part Here t k is a transverse vector and p is a dimensionless parabolicity parameter. We change variables according to the rules σξ ν → and u ση → , where , so Eqs. ( Solutions to this differential equations are found by standard methods (e.g., Frobenius). So, even (e), odd (o) and traveling (T) nondiffracting parabolic beams are ( , ; ) ( , ; ) ( ) where ( , ) ( , ) ( , ) A longitudinal distribution of the beams intensity can be controlled by adding up vector Mathieu or Weber beams with different projections of the longitudinal wave vector. The axial intensity distribution and its spatial spectrum are associated via the Fourier transform ( ) ( ) where -, and 0 z k is the projection of the carrier spatial frequency, ( ) f z is a desired longitudinal intensity profile. Thus, the full control of optical beam can be obtained by experimentally realizing Eqs. For a radially polarized beam the spatial spectrum of a vector beam can be expressed as ( , ) ( ) ( ) , , and for azimuthally it is ( , ) ( ) ( ) , , As a toy model we choose two axial profile functions: 1) an axial distribution described by a boxcar (or a rectangular) function , where L is its length, L1 is the position and 2) an axial distribution described by a function Lz L +Π -, L1 and L2 are positions of two steps. For the start, we choose the second axial distribution for the Mathieu based optical engineering. The spatial vector spectra of the optical beam is depicted in the Figure For the Weber beams based beams, we choose the first axial distribution, described by the function The spatial vector spectra of the optical beam is represented in the Fig. The experimental setup for simulation of Mathieu and Weber beams (linear constituents of a vector field) is presented in the Figure Ideally one would use a single vectorial element, for an example, a transmissive geometrical phase (GP) element (something similar to the S-waveplate, see Ref. For the sake of brevity and due to the lack of space, we restrict ourselves to a single polarization for each case of a different cross-section profile: elliptical beams will be presented only azimuthally polarized whereas only radially polarized Weber beams will be considered. Moreover, a single boxcar function will represent the axial profile of the Weber beams based optically engineered beams. A two step function Lz L +Π will be used as toy model for Mathieu beams based experiments. First, we start with experimental verification of how vector Mathieu beams are generated. Experimental results are depicted in the Fig. Our preliminary analysis reveals, that this is happening due to the physical limitations of our experimental system -the dimensions of the liquid crystal matrix in the SLM are too small to properly represent the complex structure of the spatial spectrum. Lastly, we demonstrate the outcomes of our experimental measurements for the case of azimuthally polarized Weber beams, with axial intensity distribution described by a function Individual components are presented in the Fig. A three-dimensional depiction of the dominant xcomponent is presented in the Fig. In conclusion, we have presented a flexible theoretical technique, which enables us to create controlled axial profiles of vector optical "knives" (Mathieu based with elliptical crossection) and optical "shovels" (Weber beam based with parabolical crossection) with independent axial intensity profiles and polarization orientation. The method presented here may allow us to create various vector spatial structures with controllable on-axis polarization and axial intensity profile which might be applicable for possible specific microfabrication tasks or optical tweezing set-ups due to their elliptically or parabolically shaped transverse profiles. A phase only spatial light modulator was successfully employed here as a toy model of an actual optical element in order to probe propagation of individual components of a radially polarized "optical knife" and azimuthally polarized "optical shovel" with two step axial profile. Of course, implementation of this approach into high power laser systems will require us to move away from the conventional spatial light modulators, as they cannot sustain high laser powers (with some costly exceptions), however the spatial light modulator can be a versatile toy model for a geometrical phase element, which are known for their sustainability to high powers Nevertheless, we can report already on successful production of very first geometrical phase elements, designed with a know-how described in this report und suitable for simultaneous generation of both linearly polarized constituents of vector Mathieu and Weber beams based optical beams with controllable profiles and polarizations. Those results will be presented elsewhere.