LiMn2O4 (LMO), cathodes present large stability when cycled in aqueous electrolytes, contrasting its behavior in conventional organic electrolytes in Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). To elucidate the mechanisms underlying this distinctive behavior, we employ unconventional characterization techniques, including Variable Energy Positron Annihilation Lifetime Spectroscopy (VEPALS), Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (TERS) and macro-Raman Spectroscopy (with hundreds of μm-size laser spot). These still rather unexplored techniques in the battery field provide complementary information across different length scales, revealing previously hidden features. VEPALS offers atomic-scale insights, uncovering cationic defects and sub-nanometer pores that tend to collapse with cycling. TERS, operating at the nanometric range at the surface, captured the presence of Mn3O4 and its dissolution with cycling, elucidating dynamic changes during operation. Additionally, TERS highlights SO4 2-accumulation at grain boundaries. Macro-Raman Spectroscopy focuses on the micrometer scale, depicting small changes in the cathode's long-range order, suggesting a slow but progressive loss of crystalline quality under operation. Integrating these techniques provides a comprehensive assessment of LMO cathode stability in aqueous electrolytes, offering multifaceted insights into phase and defect evolution that can help to rationalize the origin of such stability when compared to conventional organic electrolytes. Our findings advance the understanding of LMO behavior in aqueous environments and provide guidelines for its development for nextgeneration LIBs. The development of advanced cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) has been at the forefront of research aiming at improving the performance, cost and safety of energy storage systems. Since its first reports by J.C. Hunter and Goodenough's group back in the 80s, In this work, we examine the structural and phase evolution of LMO films in aqueous electrolyte as a function of cycling by three novel characterization techniques that allow us to examine surface and bulk properties at very different length scales: Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (TERS), macro-Raman Spectroscopy and Variable Energy Positron Annihilation Lifetime Spectroscopy (VEPALS). TERS is a relatively new surface-sensitivity technique that overcomes the spatial resolution limitations of conventional Raman (~500 -1000 nm) reaching even single molecule detection. In VEPALS, the films are irradiated with positrons that recombine (annihilate) with electrons in the films at defined depths, creating gamma rays, which are subsequently detected. Characterization of the as-deposited LMO films LMO thin films were fabricated by Large Area Pulsed Laser Deposition with our wellestablished method of compensating Li losses with a multilayer deposition of LiMn2O4 parent compound and Li2O acting as Li reservoir. We further characterized the films with VEPALS. The average positron lifetime versus positron implantation energy is quite homogeneous along the film thickness (Fig. Combining the different techniques, one can conclude that the LMO films are composed mainly of the electrochemically active spinel phase and impurities of Mn3O4, which are located primarily at the surface of the films and, especially, at the grain boundary level. The films also show the presence of vacancy-like defects and their clusters (probably at grain boundaries) across the film and to a lesser extent, two families of sub-nm pores. The fabricated polycrystalline LMO films were cycled as previously detailed elsewhere showing the same electrochemical and structural properties as those previously reported by our group. In contrast, the Mn3O4 main mode appears to remain largely unaffected at the macroscopic level, emphasizing its inactive electrochemical role. However, a closer examination of the surface using Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (TERS) mapping during cycling unveils two critical observations. Fig. TERS maps in e, h and k. For the film cycled 1 time, size 500 x 500 nm 2 : d) Topography, e) TERS map and f) overlay of both. For the film cycled 100 times, size 500 x 500 nm 2 : g) Topography, h) TERS map and i) overlay of both. For the film cycled 300 times, size 500 x 440 nm 2 : j) Topography, k) TERS map and l) overlay of both. All the measurements were done at full charge (SoC 100%). Comparing the spatial distribution of Mn3O4 (blue) and sulfate signals (red) in films cycled 1x (Fig. To complement our findings, VEPALS measurements were carried out to gain insights into defect evolution during cycling. Detailed descriptions of the deconvolution of the PALS signal into various components can be found in the Supporting Information, Section I. A critical observation emerges from the data analysis: our films' average positron lifetime (τaverage) decreases from the first cycle onward, stabilizing after 100 and 300 cycles. This decline in τaverage, directly linked to the free volume, can be attributed to the dynamic evolution of the electrolyte solution within grain boundaries and through pores within the film. Deconvolution of the different defect signals reveals that the most significant changes occur in τ4, representing a family of larger sub-nm pores. Its relative intensity, proportional to pore density, decreases from approximately 17% after 1 cycle to around 8% after 300 cycles. This decline could imply that a part of these characteristic pores might being filled, likely with sulfate ions, as suggested by our TERS measurements, or the pore size increase by coalescence to some extent. This shift in pore density redistributes the contribution of the other three components within the defects, which tend to become more significant in the signal. Specifically, the smaller vacancies (τ1) and their clusters (τ2) demonstrate an increase with cycling (Fig. Our study aligns with recent research that underscores the dominant role of fast grain boundary and surface diffusion, surpassing grain diffusion by a staggering four orders of magnitude. On the other hand, importantly, grain boundaries within LiMn2O4 are known to carry a positive charge and establish a space charge layer around them. The surface dilution of Mn3O4 during cycling, primarily restricted to a few grain boundaries after 300 cycles, stands in stark contrast to its behavior in organic electrolytes. In organic electrolytes, Mn3O4 tends to form at the LiMn2O4 grain surface upon charging to 4.3V vs. Li/Li + , leading to partial irreversibility and cracking. Our findings regarding the presence of ionic species from the electrolyte anchored at the grain boundaries and surface not only contribute to unraveling the complexities of grain boundary chemistry but also align with recent efforts to incorporate lithium sulfate protective coatings in high-voltage cathodes, as documented in the literature. Our research provides valuable structural and chemical insights across a spectrum of length scales for the defect evolution with cycling in LMO cathodes. Beginning at the sub-nanometer scale, we have identified vacancy-like defects and their clusters, with the latter emerging as the most prevalent defect within our films. These defects appear to grow in size with cycling, possibly due to the dissolution of Mn 2+ ions, introducing a degree of disorder into the films. Additionally, we have discerned the presence of two distinct families of sub-nanometer pores, notably, the larger pores (τ4) appear to reach a saturation point with cycling, hinting either at complete fill up of part of the pores in a gradual manner with electrolyte species or pore coalescence with cycling. Zooming out to the nanoscale, our TERS measurements unveil that, unlike in organic electrolytes, Mn3O4 does not form at the surface during cycling in aqueous electrolytes. Instead, it undergoes dissolution and likely electrochemical transformation into another Mn-based phase, which remarkably maintains overall performance and stability. TERS also highlights the preferential adsorption of SO4 2-species at grain boundaries, with their bond strength appearing to intensify during cycling. In addition to the diminishing Mn3O4 signal, TERS and macro-Raman Spectroscopy suggest an increase in disorder within the electrochemically active Raman modes, aligning seamlessly with the observed enlargement of defects at the sub-nanometer scale. Notably, this marks the first successful utilization of TERS to investigate grain boundary effects in battery materials, revealing the strong bonding of electrolyte-derived species to the grain boundary core and its surroundings. Expanding our observations to the macroscopic scale, macro-Raman Spectroscopy provides robust confirmation of the increased disorder within electrochemically active phases. Importantly, macro-Raman Spectroscopy maintains the overall intensity of the Mn3O4 impurities peaks. This finding validates our earlier TERS discovery that Mn3O4 impurities primarily dissolve at the surface. Notably, weak points, particularly grain boundaries, appear to be safeguarded by the absorption of sulfate ions. Our study advances our understanding of this cathode behavior in aqueous electrolytes, holding great promise for the development of more sustainable and stable electrode materials. We hope this knowledge does not only pertain to aqueous systems but also extends towards enhancing the stability of cathodes in organic electrolytes. The dynamic nature of grain boundaries and their interactions with electrolytes must be taken into account in future protective coating designs. Thin-Film Fabrication. Commercially available ceramic targets of LiMn2O4 and Li2O (CODEX) were employed for the Larga-Area Pulsed Laser Deposition (LA PLD-5000, PVD Products), equipped with a Coherent (Lambda Physik) COMPex Pro 205 KrF excimer laser (λ = 248 nm). Both targets were ablated sequentially following a multi-layer approach, as previously described. Structural characterization. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed at IREC with a Zeiss Auriga (30 kV Gemini FESEM column and an in-lens detector). X-ray diffraction was performed thanks to an XRD Bruker-D8 Advance diffractometer in θ-2θ configuration between 10 and 60° (step size of 0.01°). The region around the main reflection of Pt was avoided during the measurement to protect the detector. Raman characterization. Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (TERS) measurements were performed on an Xplora Nano (HORIBA), with a 632 nm laser with p-polarization (parallel to the tip axis) and Au-coated OMNI TERS tips and 100x objective and a laser power of ~3 mW. Maps were acquired with a resolution of 10 nm per pixel to build 500 × 500 nm maps, plotted using a 2 px weight average. Acquisition times of 5 s per spectra and a 1200 g•mm -1 grating were used. The protocol to ensure TERS signal consists of checking the TERS signal on a carbon nanotubes sample test before and after the experiment. In addition, TERS is demonstrated in our films, the reader is referred to the Supporting Information, section III, for more details about our TERS configuration. For the macro-Raman Spectroscopy measurements, Raman scattering spectra were measured using iHR320 Horiba Jobin-Yvon monochromator coupled with i-DUS CCD from Andor. NIR solid-state laser (785 nm, ~80 W/cm 2 ) was used as excitation source. The measurements were performed in backscattering configuration through the specific probes developed in IREC. The spectral position was corrected using monocrystalline Si as a reference by imposing the main Raman peak to 520 cm -1 . Variable energy positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy. VEPALS was carried out at the Mono-energetic Positron Source (MePS) beamline at HZDR (Germany) Electrochemical measurements. For electrochemical measurements, we established electrical contacts with the LMO films by accessing the exposed Pt regions at the sample edges, securely embedding them within a durable dual-component resin. This resin was applied thinly enough to facilitate mechanically stable TERS and PALS characterizations. The electrochemical measurements were conducted employing an open cell assembly, wherein a substantial portion of the film's surface remained exposed, facilitated by the resin's coverage. The exposed surface area typically ranged from 30 to 40 mm 2 . This configuration allowed for the rapid quenching of the electrochemical cell, subsequent immersion of the film in DI water, and fast drying using a nitrogen gun for storage within a protective atmosphere. The electrochemical experiments encompassed a voltage window spanning from 0.5 to 1.05 V versus Ag/AgCl (3M KCl), employing a Pt mesh as the counter electrode.