We propose a new type of high-temperature superconducting (HTS) conductor concept: modularized conductors (MC) connected by Chinese traditional tenon-mortise (TM) connection structure, reffered as TMMC. The conductor consists of multiple concentric round sub-conductors with slots for stacking REBCO tapes. Innovatively, the REBCO stacks in the adjacent sub-conductors are arranged with the fully-misaligned configuration to enhance the critical current's isotropy with respect to magnetic field and reduce ac loss. For example, the angle between the adjacent stacks in the two adjacent sub-conductors is 45 o if each subconductor contains 4 REBCO stacks. In order to construct the fully-misaligned configuration, the sub-conductors are designed with two open half-circular formers and connected by tenonmortise structure which makes the conductor modulrized and simply to assembly and disassembly. Based on the design concept, a prototype conductor containing 160 REBCO tapes distributed in the four concentric sub-conductors is fabricated. The conductor's measured critical current is 13.69 kA at 77 K and sefl-field, which is consistent to the simulaiton result. In order to further improve the TMMC's engineering critical current density (Jce) and bending performance, we propose two enhancement approaches: reducing the former's thickness and re-arrange stacks in the outer sub-conductors. With the enhancements, both TMMC's radius and Jce are comparable to the existing slotted-core conductor. The study shows the TMMC's advantages of non-twisted structures, easy assembly, high-current carrying and low ac losses, which makes it promising for constructing large-scale scientific devices. The second-generation (2G) high-temperaturesuperconducting (HTS) materials, namely the rare-earthbarium-copper-oxide (REBCO) tapes, are promising in manufacturing both small-aperture high-static-field (>30 T) solenoid coils Several conductor/cable designs have been proposed using REBCO tapes, and most of them present the twisted or transposed concepts, constituting cable-in-conduit conductors (CICC) inspired by the low-temperature-superconducting Figure Meanwhile, considering of the highly anisotropic properties and remarkable ac loss effects of REBCO tapes, optimized structures are also employed in the non-twisted HTS conductors. For example, tapes are arranged vertically and horizontally in the Quasi-Isotropic strand to reduce the anisotropic values of critical current with repect to magnetic field Step 1: copper former and ReBCO stack Step 2: Install tenon to complete the first layer Installation hole for tenon In this paper, we propose a new type of HTS conductor concept: modularized conductors (MC) which are assembled without soldering but Chinese traditional tenon-mortise (TM) connection structure, therefore the new conductor is referred as TMMC. The article is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the idea and concept design of the modularized conductor baded on tenon-mortise connection. The detailed optimization process of designing the stacks' configuration is presented in Section 3. A prototype conductor with 4 concentric sub-conductors is fabricated and its critical current at 77 K and self-field is measured and simulated in Section 4. Section 5 gives the discussions about enhancing the TMMC's engineering critical current density and reducing ac losses further. Figure A challenge is to maintain the misaligned configurations of REBCO stacks in the different sub-conductors. In order to facilitate manufacturing long conductors, we design the subconductors consisting two open half-cirlces, which are connected as a complete round sub-conductor by the tenonmortise structure inspired by the traditional Chinese connection method used in architecture, furniture, and instruments. The connection structure bascially includes two components: convex (tenon) and concave (mortise) parts, which have many variants in practical. In our design, the swallow-tailed tenons and mortises are used to joint the two open half-circles, as shown in figure Since the assembly of sub-conductors is independent from each other, the conductor is easily fabricated to multiple layers to carry high currents, which makes the first successful development of a modularized REBCO conductor. However, the bending performance and engineering current density of the conductor will be decreased because of the multiple-layer structures which results in larger diameters. To solve the issues, one can minimise the thicknesses of the formers, and besides re-arrange the REBCO stacks in the outer subconductors, which are discussed in Section 5. Firstly, we design a simplified conductor with 4 stacks and 2-layer tapes per stack to investigate the effects of tape's arrangement in different layers on the conductor's ac losses. Different tape-layout structures are characterized by the misalignment angle (a) between the centre of the two layers of tapes, whose maximum angle is 45 degrees in this case from figure Different configurations with various angles are simulated by H formulation and finite-element method . where E is the induced electric field and J is the transporting current density. Jc is the tape's critical current density. Ec=1E-4 V/m is the value of voltage criterion for critical current measurement, and n=25 is defined from DC measurement of the superconductor's highly non-linear I-V characteristic. The Kim-like model where Jc0=3.74e11 A/m 2 , B0=1.67279 T, k=9.13e-3, and a=0.76939 can be found in A question arises when stacking more-layer REBCO tapes. Take the example of a 3-layer conductor: should the third layer be stacked with the maximum misalignment angle calculated from the adjacent layers (e.g. α=45 degrees with 4 tapes in each layer), or should all three layers be considered as a whole to reconstruct a fully-misaligned configuration (e.g. α=30 degrees), as shown in figure Above studies demonstrate that minimal AC losses occur when adjacent layers of tapes are distributed at the maximum misalignment angle. In practical high-current conductor manufacturing with many tape in one stack, it is not possible to misalign every single tape as one layer. Consequently, only a limited number of layers can be misaligned, with tapes in each layer still stacked unidirectionally. In this part, we investigate the impact of the layer numbers on the conductor's electromagnetic properties. The conductor contains 160 REBCO tapes distributed in the former with 4 slots around a circular cooling channel. In the conventional stacked conductor, each stack comprises 40 REBCO tapes, marked by 1 layer in figure Following the misaligned configuration, we construct conductors with 2, 3, and 4 layers, with adjacent layers aligned at 45 degrees. Initially, we examine the critical currents of these four conductors under an external magnetic field of 20 T at 4.2 K using the load-line method. As the critical current of REBCO tapes strongly depends on the angle between the tapes and the magnetic field, we vary this angle from 0 to 45 degrees to assess the effect of layer numbers on the anisotropy of critical currents with respect to the magnetic field. As presented in figure We have manufactured a prototype TMMC according to the above design concept, which consists of 4 concentric subconductors (referred as layer 1 to 4 from inside out) accommodating a total of 160 REBCO tapes. Each subconductor has 4 slots with 10 tapes in each, as shown in figure The REBCO tapes are produced by Shanghai Superconductor with 4 mm width and 144 A self-field critical current at 77 K. The tape's anisotropic dependence of critical current on magnetic field is measured and calculated in simulations by interpolation function of the data. The numerical models for calculating conductor's critical current are implemented based on H formulation, in which the superconducting region is considered as a whole to carry current so that the non-uniform current repartition among tapes can be presented. Besides, the MAX criterion is selected as the criteria determining conductor's critical current, which means that when the voltage drop per unit length reaches the critical value Ec (1μV/cm) in at least one tape, the imposed current is considered as the conductor's critical current REBCO tapes are longer than the formers of the subconductors in the cable fabrication Sub-conductor number 4 Slot number in each sub-conductor 4 Tape number in each slot 10 The depth of each slot Outer and inner diameters of layer 4 31 mm/ 25 mm Firstly, we measure the critical current of the prototype TMMC with only 1-layer sub-conductor contining 40 tapes, whose data is depicted in the figure Figures Copper former Step 1: copper former and ReBCO stack Step 2: Install tenon to complete the first layer Step 3: Complete the assembly of the second layer (45°between it and 1st layer) Although the structure of concentric sub-conductors connected by tenon-mortise joints makes the conductor modularized and easy to be assembled, the multiple formers influence the conductor's engineering critical current density compared with the traditional stacked-tape conductors. And the engineering critical current density is 55 A/mm 2 in the slotted-core conductor AC losses of the prototype TMMC with different radii are calculated under the same engineering current density, and compared with the traditional unidirectional stacks. The normalized current density distributions and ac losses of different conductors are shown in figure In this paper, a new kind of HTS modularized conductor (MC) concept is proposed, in which the conductor consists of multiple concentric half-circle sub-conductors connected by Chinese traditional tenon-mortise (TM) structure. Therefore, the proposed HTS conductor is referred as TMMC. Innovatively, the REBCO stacks are arranged by the fullydisalligned configurations of the adjacent sub-conductors, which benefits for improving the isotropy of conductor's critical current on magnetic field and reducing ac loss. According to the design concept, prototype TMMCs are manufactured. The measured critical currents of 1-layer and 4-layer TMMCs are 4.012 kA and 13.69 kA, respectively, at 77 K and self-field, which are close to the predicted values of 4.072 kA and 15.328 kA. In order to further improve the TMMC's engineering critical current density (Jce) and bending performance, we propose two enhancment approaches to reduce TMMC's radius: reducing the former's thickness and re-arrange stacks in the outer sub-conductors. With the enhancements, the TMMC's Jce is increased by 4 times. The TMMC's radius, Jce and ac losses are comparable to the unidirectional-stack conductor, which makes it feasible to construct magnets. With the advantages of non-twisted structures, easy assembly, high-current carrying capacity and low ac losses, the proposed tenon-mortise modularized conductor is promising for constructing large-scale scientific devices. And we are planning to implement more tests to verify the performances of TMMC and promote it to be employed more widely. 