Reports of unconventional superconductivity in UBe13 in 1983 and soon thereafter of the possible coexistence of bulk superconductivity and spin fluctuations in UPt3 marked the beginning of a 40-year adventure in the study of strongly correlated quantum materials and phenomena at Los Alamos. The subsequent discovery and exploration of heavy-fermion magnetism, cuprates, Kondo insulators, Ce-and Pu-115 superconductors and, more broadly, quantum states of narrow-band systems provided challenges for the next 30 years. Progress was not made in a vacuum but benefitted from significant advances in the Americas, Asia and Europe as well as from essential collaborations, visitors and Los Alamos students and postdocs, many subsequently setting their own course in SCES. As often the case, serendipity played a role in shaping this history. Strongly correlated electron systems (SCES) as a field of study has a rich history, and we recount a small part of that history in the Americas. Our primary aim, though, is to share some memories of how the study of heavy-fermion materials evolved at Los Alamos. Before coming to that history, we begin with some earlier context. Already by the mid-1970's, the theoretical and experimental study of SCES was emerging as an active field, especially in Europe, Japan and the U.S but also in South America and India. In the Fall of 1976, Ron Parks organized what reasonably should be considered the first international SCES conference,[1] certainly in the Americas, that brought together early pioneers including At the time of this conference, paramagnetic CeAl3 had been discovered to be the first example of a material with very massive charge carriers As an outgrowth of Bernd Matthias' earlier discovery of itinerant ferromagnetism in ZrZn2, in the late 1970's, work at Los Alamos Like the report of a resistive transition in UBe13, the discovery by Frank Steglich and coworkers of superconductivity that developed out of a normal state of "heavy quasiparticles" in strongly paramagnetic CeCu2Si2 Also in the Fall of 1982, Jaap Franse at Amsterdam sent to Los Alamos a collection of papers by his group, including one that would be published by P. H. Frings et al. on magnetic properties of UxPty compounds at temperatures above 1.4 K. By the end of 1984, the Los Alamos team had discovered heavy-fermion paramagnetism in CeCu6 and antiferromagnetism in NpBe13, U2Zn17 and UCd11 Publications by us in these early days often carried the by-line 'Center for Materials Science,' though only JLS was officially a member (Chairman) of this new organization with one of its missions being to host distinguished university and industrial scientists for collaboration with Lab staff. Heavy-fermion research was a logical focus of outreach objectives, and the Center sponsored visits by many of the world's leading SCES scientists, especially theorists. An outgrowth of so-called summer working groups at the Center was a critical assessment by some of those visitors of the state of heavy-fermion theory Insights from the study of heavy-fermion materials set the stage for the SCES community to respond immediately to surprising reports of superconductivity in copper oxides. After the initial world-wide push to understand existing and discover new cuprate superconductors, an equilibrium between heavy-fermion and cuprate research began to emerge at the end of this remarkable decade. This is reflected in presentations at the September 1989 International Conference on the Physics of Strongly Correlated Electron Systems, organized by Jack Crow, JLS and others from Los Alamos A major development at this time was the report by a Berkeley-Grenoble-Los Alamos collaboration of two bulk superconducting transitions in UPt3. The next three decades began with the first conference in the Americas with the title Strongly Correlated Electron Systems, which was chaired by ZF, Pradep Kumar and Maple during the summer of 1993 in San Diego. In spite of joining Florida State University and the newly established National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in 1994, ZF continued active involvement in heavy-fermion work at Los Alamos during extended summer visits and whenever time would allow. In his absence, we returned to CeRh2Si2, which our earlier work had suggested to have a quantum critical point below 1 GPa, and found pressure-induced superconductivity with a maximum Tc of 0.4 K near the T=0 antiferromagnetic/paramagnetic boundary at 0.8 GPa. Before the end of June, 2000, we had submitted a CeCoIn5 manuscript where we noted that, as in the cuprates, Tc reached 20% of the relevant temperature scale Tsf for magnetically mediated superconductivity, an important insight provided by Phillipe Monthoux. By August, 2001, there was strong evidence that superconductivity in CeIrIn5 and CeCoIn5 was d-wave An interesting new direction for SCES emerged in 2010 with the theoretical prediction that Kondo insulators, particularly SmB6, might host a topologically protected surface state. So, what lies ahead? As the past has shown, surprises happen, but meaningful progress requires more than serendipity. A steady commitment to the discovery of new heavy-fermion materials and their study is essential. This path has proven to be fruitful at Los Alamos and elsewhere. Theoretical modelling, simulation and computation of SCES phenomena have made remarkable progress in the past 40 years; nevertheless, the challenge of handling the many-body physics central to a microscopic understanding of the quantum-entangled degrees-of-freedom in heavyfermion/Kondo-lattice/Anderson-lattice systems is daunting. Purposefully integrating experiment and theory holds promise and is beginning to yield results. An example is the effort of an experiment/theory team, led out of Los Alamos by Filip Ronning and past group member Marc Janoschek, to understand the Kondo-/Anderson-lattice physics in sufficient first-principles detail that it is allows materials-specific prediction of response functions in related systems. In combination with theory, their chargeand spin-spectroscopy studies on prototypical examples CePd3 and CeIn3 have revealed in new detail how local moments hybridize with itinerant states to form a coherent band of heavy quasiparticles at low temperatures, 