Magnetic Er 3+ is doped into the well-studied frustrated normal spinel ZnCr2O4. Various spectroscopies are employed to prove that Er 3+ successfully enters the spinel to form ZnCr2-xErxO4 for x less than 0.005. The low levels of Er 3+ doping possible nonetheless have a significant effect on the frustrated magnetism and the ordering that is seen near 12 K in the undoped material. ZnCr2O4 is a well-studied AB2O4 normal spinel and is one of the prototype materials for the study of frustrated Heisenberg magnetism Er 3+ (S=15/2), a small rare-earth but a relatively large cation, can potentially substitute for Cr 3+ (S=3/2) on the Kagome net Structural analysis was done by X-ray diffraction. Vibrational analysis was studied by Raman and IR spectroscopies. We hope to inspire studies on frustrated magnetism in a partially disturbed Kagome lattice with two types of magnetic ions. Polycrystalline Synthesis: The Er2O3 employed (Thermo scientific 99.99%) was dried at 900 oC in air overnight. The starting materials ZnO, Cr2O3 and Er2O3 were weighed in the appropriate molar ratios. The resulting powder was mixed well and transferred into alumina crucibles. The samples were heated in a high-temperature furnace (Sentro Tech Corp. ST-1600C-445 High-Temperature Box Furnace) in air at 1300 oC and 1500 oC for 24 hours at each temperature. Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) measurements were carried out after each grinding step utilizing a Brucker D8 FOCUS diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation ( = 1.5406 Ǻ). Magnetic Property Measurements: Magnetic measurements on single-phase polycrystalline samples were performed using a Quantum Design Dynacool Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). The magnetic susceptibility (χ) was defined as the ratio of the magnetization (M) to the applied field (H). Zero-field cooled (ZFC) magnetic data were acquired under a magnetic field of H = 0.1 T (1000 Oe) over a temperature range spanning from 1.8 K to 300 K. A modified Curie-Weiss law -0 = C/(T-CW) was fitted to the inverse  data over the temperature range of 225-275 K in order to derive the Curie constant (C) and Weiss temperature (θCW), with 0 representing a temperature-independent correction factor accounting for the core diamagnetism and the magnetization of the sample holders. The effective magnetic moment (μeff) per formula unit, expressed in Bohr magnetons (B), was calculated from the constant C in the above expression using √8C. Isothermal magnetization under magnetic fields ranging from -9 T to +9 T (-90.000 to + 90,000 Oe) at 1.8K and 300K was collected. Changes in magnetic susceptibility were observed. Thus, in addition to the X-ray and magnetism measurements, Raman spectroscopy, IR, SEM, EDX, and The parent phase of ZnCr2O4 was reported to be face-centered cubic with space group Fd-3m (227) with Zn in tetrahedral sites and Cr in octahedral sites ZnCr2O4 has Raman-active phonon modes at 185, 514, 607, and 691 cm -1 with the labelled peaks matched to the reported results in green In the zoom-in temperature in Figure We have shown that it is possible to dope small amounts (less than 0.5%) of a highly magnetic ion into the normal spinel ZnCr2O4. Even the small amount of doping found results in significant changes in the magnetic behavior of the material. Studies of larger and smaller dopants with no magnetic moment show that it is in fact the magnetism of the Er that impacts the behavior most, not the ionic size or disorder. Further, although it has been reported that higher temperature synthesis result in disorder of this material, this is not seen for the current case, Various follow up studies are suggested including one where many three-plus rare-earth ions are substituted for Cr in ZnCr2O4 to determine which has the greatest effect on the magnetism.