The interfacial FeSe/TiO2-δ coupling induces high-temperature superconductivity in monolayer FeSe films. Using cryogenic atomically resolved scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy, we obtained atomic-site dependent surface density of states, work function, and pairing gap in the monolayer FeSe on SrTiO3(001)-(√13 × √13)-R33.7° surface. Our results disclosed the out-of-plane Se-Fe-Se triple layer gradient variation, switched DOS for Fe sites on and off TiO5□, and inequivalent Fe sublattices, which gives global spatial modulation of pairing gap contaminant with the (√13 × √13) pattern. Moreover, the coherent lattice coupling induces strong inversion asymmetry and in-plane anisotropy in the monolayer FeSe, which is demonstrated to correlate with the particle-hole asymmetry in coherence peaks. The strong atomic-scale correlations in lattice and electronic structure, and pairing gap in particular, put constraints on exploring the unconventional high-temperature superconductivity emerging from interface coupling, e.g., strong demand for atomic-scale interface engineering and characterization. The monolayer FeSe interfaced with dual-TiO2-δ layer is a prototypical high-temperature superconducting heterostructure in the 2D limit, particularly an exclusive charge carrier layer that can be directly probed Here we chose SrTiO3(001) -(√13 × √13)-R33.7° surface as the substrate, for it hosts the most open network of adlayer TiO5□ among all the dual-TiO2-δ terminated SrTiO3(001) surfaces As depicted in Fig. Figure The monolayer FeSe exhibits concomitant atomic contrast with the (√13 × √13) reconstruction, exactly, the Z-TiO5□-pentamer. The bias-dependent atomically resolved images of monolayer FeSe displayed in Figs. A detailed investigation on the nearest neighbor Se-Se separation (SM Fig. The coherent FeSe/TiO2-δ lattice coupling induces the modulation of electronic structure and superconductivity in the monolayer FeSe with spatial variation upon single Z-pentamer and single TiO5□, as further resolved from the spectroscopy measurement of work function φ displayed in Fig. 1(f-h), i.e., higher work function values at the LV center and in the LZ zone. The statistics by category of two Se layers and two Fe sublattices give a gradual increase towards the surface and relatively small value in the α-Fe, i.e., φ(Se-bottom) < φ(α-Fe) < φ(β-Fe) < φ(Se-upper) (Table Within each zone, the Fe sites have narrower and flatter δ than the Se sites, correspondingly, more prominent two-gaps with smaller outer-gap magnitudes but sharper coherence peaks and wider zero-conductance plateau around EF, characteristics of more spectra weight loss due to pairing, i.e., higher superfluid density. The β-Fe exhibits stronger coherence peaks, accompanied by a little more prominent σ-band and η-band edges, whereas the α-Fe sites show widening outer gaps (green dashed lines). Moreover, the Fe sites on the middle TiO5□ (Fe-m) have sharper coherence peaks than those on the terminal-and corner-ones (inferred as Fe-t and Fe-c, respectively). Compared with upper-layer Se atoms, the bottom-layer Se atoms exhibit slightly lower DOS between ξ and σ bands and higher ± Vin coherence peaks, bearing more resemblance to Fe sites. Notably, the pairing gap contrasts are more directly discernable from the normalized spectra (SM Fig. The tunneling spectra in Figs. To get further insight into the (√13 × √13)-tuned Fe-3d-orbitals and the corresponding pairing gaps, we collected bias-dependent tunneling conductance mapping images at the characteristic energies of Fermi level (0 V, Fig. Besides bias-switched electronic anisotropy from topographic images, the in-plane asymmetry is further identified from tunneling conductance mapping images. The intensity contrast between the qA and qB Bragg spots is IqA > IqB at 0 -10, and -20 meV but IqA < IqB at larger energies. The unidirectional electronic structure are directly identified from the respective inverse-FFT images in Fig. With the distinct local anisotropy, the two units indeed exhibit varied contrast between Fe sublattices and on/off TiO5□, despite consistent dipole-induced Se-Fe-Se triple layer gradient (Fig. Our spatially atomically resolved cryogenic STM/STS characterization on the FeSe monolayer films on SrTiO3(001)-(√13 × √13) surface consistently demonstrate atomic-scale modulations in topography (Figs. The most important finding is the paring gaps tuned by the TiO5□-Z-pentamer exhibit anticorrelated gap magnitude and coherence peaks and switched particle-hole asymmetry. The out-of-plane electronic dipole and in-plane lattice asymmetry cooperatively affect the particlehole symmetry, as exemplified by the remarkable contrasts in on/off TiO5□-Z-pentamer, Se-Fe-Se triple layers, and Fe sublattices ((Figs. Though the tunneling current detected by the atomic sharp tip removes the momentum resolution due to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, the bias-dependent reversed features in both DOS contrast and the in-plane anisotropy suggest orbital-selective tunneling probability. The robust contrast between α-Fe and β-Fe puts the inequivalent Fe sublattices as competitive atomic-scale lattice carriers of electronic nematicity. In summary, we disclosed atomic-site dependent pairing gap in monolayer FeSe tuned by intertwined lattice and electronic interaction under broken inversion and rotational symmetry. The atomic-scale FeSe/TiO2-δ coupling and its correlation with Fermi structure and pairing disclosed the essential role of 2D lattice and symmetry. The anti-correlated gap magnitude and coherence peaks and switched particle-hole asymmetry observed here are ubiquitous features in cuprates Our experiments are carried out in a Createc ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) low-temperature STM system equipped with a molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) chamber for film preparation. The base pressure is better than 1.0 × 10 -10 Torr. The Nb-doped SrTiO3(001) (0.05 wt. %) substrates were annealed at 880 °C for 2-3 hours to obtain atomically flat TiO2-δ-terminated surface with (√13 × √13) reconstruction. FeSe films were then grown by co-evaporating high-purity Fe (99.995%) and Se (99.999%) from standard Knudsen cells at a substrate temperature of 380 °C. 