MXenes are a family of two-dimensional (2D) carbides and nitrides that display extraordinary electrical, optical, chemical, and electrochemical properties. There is a perception that MXenes are unstable and degrade quickly, limiting potential applications and requiring specific storage conditions to last for a long time. This was true for delaminated MXenes flakes in dilute dispersions prepared from defective precursors when MXene research was in its infancy. Since then, significant developments in MXene synthesis, processing, and understanding of its chemistry led to dramatic increases in environmental stability. Herein, we analyze Ti3C2Tx freestanding films aged from 4 to 9 years through structural and morphological characterization along with electrical conductivity measurements to reveal the effect, or lack thereof, of prolonged storage under ambient conditions. Further, we show that the decrease in electronic conductivity over time is largely caused by the uptake of water by the hydrophilic surface chemistry of MXenes, which can be easily removed and its effect reversed by vacuum annealing. MXenes, first reported in 2011, are a family of two-dimensional materials composed of alternating layers of transition metals and carbon or nitrogen. Film fabrication and collection. 65 freestanding films of Ti3C2Tx MXene produced between 2014 and 2021 were collected for analysis. Films were produced through two deposition techniques: (1) Vacuum-assisted filtration from colloidal dispersion of MXene in water through porous membranes (typically polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) with 450 nm pores); Drying of Ti3C2Tx films was done at 200°C for 24 hours in an Across International vacuum oven at less than 0.5 torr. After drying, the films were stored under a vacuum for 6 days before the XRD measurements were made. X-ray diffraction analysis was performed using a Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer from 3° to 25° 2θ with a step size of 0.01°. The incident X-ray wavelength was 1.5406 Å. For the pre-drying data, the scan rate was 1° per minute, and for the post-drying data, the scan rate was 2° per minute. Scanning electron microscopy was performed using a Zeiss Supra 50VP SEM. Samples were mounted on aluminum stubs using adhesive copper tape. Images were collected with an InLens detector at a working distance of 8-9 nm, a vacuum level of 1.5*10 -5 Torr, and an accelerating voltage of 5.0 kV. Fig. In Fig. To confirm this, both films A and B were dried in a vacuum at 200°C for 24 hours and then recharacterized. The drying conditions were identical to the previous treatment of film A. Fig. Films A and B were both etched with hydrofluoric acid and sulfuric acid, and they exhibited superior conductivity to other films etched with hydrofluoric acid and hydrochloric acid. This method of using sulfuric acid produces clean surfaces with few surface terminations due to the removal of residual aluminum compounds. Hydrochloric acid, on the other hand, produces some chlorine terminations which increase interlayer spacing and may hydrolyze when water is imbibed due to the reactivity of the Ti-Cl bond. Scanning electron microscopy analysis was conducted on films A, B, and C. The SEM images of all films show a smooth surface throughout most, if not all, of the area; however, in film C, some areas showed a rough, disjointed surface with cracks and peeled-off layers. The method of delamination of film C is the likely cause. It was delaminated with tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAOH), a large organic molecule exceptionally adept at exfoliating multilayer MXene into its single-layer counterpart. This work focuses on the characterization of Ti3C2Tx MXene films produced over the past 10 years to demonstrate their stability and identify the factors that contribute to it. Electrical conductivity measurements were made to quantify the effect of degradation over time. The etching and delamination conditions have a great effect on the films' stability, and when prepared with the best practices, Ti3C2Tx can retain virtually all of its conductivity after years of storage. Central to the stability of these films over time is control of the interlayer spacing, as a small interlayer spacing prevents water from entering and facilitating oxidation and degradation. On the other hand, the use of TMAOH or TBAOH, whose ions increase interlayer spacing and provide access to water and oxygen, leads to the degradation of the films over time. Using milder etchants that decrease the concentration of defects and yield larger flakes, compared to the 50 wt.% HF used in the first few years of MXene research, also prolongs the lifetime of MXene films. HF/H2SO4-etched Ti3C2Tx displayed remarkable stability with 90% of initial conductivity (~10,000 S cm -1 ) after 5 years in the laboratory environment. This suggests that clean surfaces with no chlorine terminations or residual aluminum etching products lead to the highest environmental stability. Chlorine and fluorine surface terminations may hydrolyze over time if water can access the interlayer spacing, and create nucleation sites for oxide formation. A decrease of the interlayer spacing after drying at elevated temperature resulted in MXene films that retained high conductivity. This method can be used to produce highly conductive and environmentally stable MXene. Drying at 200oC and higher temperatures is a simple and powerful tool to increase the stability of MXenes. It removes interlayer water and welds the MXene layers together, guarding against future degradation. The fact that drying can restore the conductivity of aged MXene films suggests that the observed decrease in conductivity is largely due to water penetration between the hydrophilic MXene layer, not the degradation of MXene. When oxidation or hydrolysis products are formed between MXene sheets, the lattice spacing cannot be recovered by drying. We anticipate that polymer coatings or any packaging methods used in the semiconductor industry that protect the material from humidity are expected to greatly prolong the lifetime of MXene films.