We compute the rotational anisotropy of the free energy of α-RuCl3 in an external magnetic field. This quantity, known as the magnetotropic susceptibility, k, relates to the second derivative of the free energy with respect to the angle of rotation. We have used approximation-free, auxiliaryfield quantum Monte Carlo simulations for a realistic model of α-RuCl3 and optimized the path integral to alleviate the negative sign problem. This allows us to reach temperatures down to 30 K -an energy scale below the dominant Kitaev coupling. We demonstrate that the magnetotropic susceptibility in this model of α-RuCl3 displays unique scaling, k = T f (B/T ), with distinct scaling functions f at high and low temperatures. In comparison, for the XXZ Heisenberg model, the scaling k = T f (B/T ) breaks down at a temperature scale where the uniform spin susceptibility deviates from the Curie law (i.e. at the energy scale of the exchange interactions) and never recovers at low temperatures. Our findings suggest that correlations in α-RuCl3 lead to degrees of freedom that respond isotropically to a magnetic field. One possible interpretation for the apparent scaleinvariance observed in experiments could be fractionalization of the spin degrees of freedom in the extended Kitaev model. Introduction.-Quantum spin liquids are believed to harbor exotic fractionalized excitations that defy the conventional categories of fermions and bosons. The Kitaev model, originally proposed by Alexei Kitaev in 2006 α-RuCl 3 has emerged as a leading candidate for realizing the Kitaev spin liquid QMC methods allow for the numerical solution of target models for a given lattice size and temperature without further approximations. Frustrated spin systems, like Kitaev materials, generically suffer from the infamous negative sign problem that leads to an exponential increase in the required computational power as a function of the volume V of the system and inverse temperature β Minimal models for Kitaev materials.-We consider first-neighbor, Kitaev K 1 , and off-diagonal symmetric, Γ 1 , couplings, as well as first-neighbor (third-neighbor) Heisenberg couplings, J 1 (J 3 ), on the honeycomb lattice: Here i runs over the A sublattice and i + δ γ (i + δ ′ γ ) over the first (third) neighbors. For the first term (γ, α, β) = (1, 2, 3) for the X bonds, (γ, α, β) = (2, 3, 1) for the Y bonds, and (γ, α, β) = (3, 1, 2) for the Z bonds on each lattice site [see Fig. To study the magnetotropic susceptibility of α-RuCl 3 under high magnetic fields reported in Ref. where the direction of the magnetic field in the cubic spin basis corresponds to B||[xyz] (see Fig. In Kitaev materials such as α-RuCl 3 , the [111] axis aligns with the c axis, perpendicular to the honeycomb lattice, whereas the Hamiltonian (1) was simulated using the AFQMC method of Ref. , σ the vector of Pauli matrices, and with the constraint f † f = 1. The key point is to consider a space of path integral formulations and to maximize the average sign over this space. As we will see, this optimization process allows us to reach temperatures down to 30 K . We use a Trotter discretization in the range ∆τ ∈ [0.01, 0.05] depending upon the temperature. For this range of ∆τ , the systematic error is contained within our error bars. We simulated lattices with L × L unit cells (each containing two spins, i.e., V = 2L 2 lattice sites on the honeycomb lattice) and periodic boundary conditions. Uniform spin susceptibilities.-A key question is whether our QMC approach allows one to reach temperature scales that are relevant to experiments for Kitaev materials. To determine the lowest accessible temperature, we measure the spin susceptibility tensor χ = χ α,α ′ , where Here r runs over the A sublattice (or unit cell) and R = 2/3(A 2 -A 1 /2) with the primitive lattice vectors 2 ). Projecting χ α,α ′ (q = Γ) onto the in-plane (out-of-plane) direction yields the in-plane (out-of-plane) uniform spin susceptibility χ ∥ = e T ab χe ab (χ ⊥ = e T c χe c ). Figure For model parameters proposed to describe α-RuCl 3 Magnetotropic susceptibility.-We now focus our attention on recent measurements for α-RuCl 3 concerning the so-called magnetotropic susceptibility over a wide range of temperatures and magnetic fields with Ŝtot = i,α Ŝα i and an imaginary time τ . Figure Scaling behavior of the form k = T f (B/T ) is satisfied for independent local moments for any anisotropic g-factor (see Supplemental Material). This is expected for any spin system when the temperature exceeds the magnetic exchange energy and the scaling is expected to break down below this energy scale. However, the case of α-RuCl 3 reveals a more complex scenario. Our QMC data show two distinct scaling behaviors: scaling that is characteristic of a free spin at high temperatures, as well as a new emergent scaling at low temperatures. To underline the uniqueness of the low-temperature scaling behavior observed in α-RuCl 3 , we now compare our previous findings with those from a non-frustrated spin model, where no fractionalization occurs. We consider the XXZ model on the honeycomb lattice, Ĥs = ⟨i,j⟩ J Ŝx , and present QMC results for J z /J = -0.5 in Fig. As the temperature decreases, the uniform spin susceptibility χ deviates from the high-temperature Curie law (see Fig. The magnetotropic susceptibility relates to the fluctuations of the torque ∂F ∂θ = μ B i ti with ti = (e×B)•ĝ• Ŝi . A naive explanation for the emergence of scaling at low temperature would be proximity to a critical point at which long wave length fluctuations of the torque, ti , become critical and dominate the value of k. In Fig. This point of view places strong constraints on low lying excitations of Kitaev materials: torque fluctuations beyond the lattice scale are strongly suppressed. The absence of magnetic anisotropy cannot uniquely define the nature of the low lying excitations. Nevertheless one appealing way of understanding the result is through fractionalization. In the supplemental material we show that one can formulate, for the Kitaev model, a mean-field theory in which the low lying excitations have no magnetic anisotropy and hence have vanishing torque fluctuations. The magnetotropic coefficient quantifies how the free energy of a system changes as the direction of the magnetic field varies, especially under small rotations. This quantity, denoted as k, is defined as the second derivative of the free energy with respect to the rotation angle λ of the magnetic field Now consider an arbitrary vector B representing the magnetic field. Assume that the direction of this vector fluctuates within a plane. This plane is defined by its normal vector e. The fluctuations or oscillations occur around the direction of B, within the defined plane. To describe these rotations, we employ the generators of SO(3) symmetry, specifically e i K•eλ . Here, K consists of purely imaginary entities which satisfy the commutation relations [ Kα , Kβ ] = iε α,β,γ Kγ . Within this, when the magnetic field is rotated by small angle λ, the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( with Ŝtot = i,α Ŝα i . ĝ represents the anisotropic g factor. The free energy, in relation to the Hamiltonian given by F (λ) = -1 β log Tr e -β Ĥ(λ) with the inverse temperature β. We can now expand the Hamiltonian Here, the term Ĥ1 captures the second-order effects of the rotation, and is given by This expansion allows to express the second derivative of the free energy with respect to the rotation angle λ in terms of Ĥ1 The integration runs over an imaginary time τ . Taking the first and second derivatives of Ĥ1 in Eq. ( Synthesizing Eqs. ( Within our QMC simulations, this form is employed to compute the magnetotropic coefficient. Properties of the magnetotropic susceptibility in free spin systems The main text references the temperature-magnetic field scaling behavior of the form βk = f (βB) for free spins. Now consider Ĥs = 0 in the Hamiltonian of Eq. Here, R(e, λ) = e i K•eλ represents the rotation matrix in the presence of the magnetic field, and B = Bn with n being the unit vector pointing in the direction of the magnetic field. This simplified expression for the free energy provides an explicit link between the rotation angle and the behavior of the system under a magnetic field. Taking this forward, the magnetotropic coefficient k in this context is given by Upon further simplification, we arrive at the key relationship: This equation accentuates the intricate relationship between the temperature and magnetic field strength. ( Here i runs over the A sublattice and i + δ α with α = (1, 2, 3) over the first neighbors. Now we represent the spin-1/2 degree of freedom Ŝα i in terms of Abrikosov fermions with the local constraint s f † i,s fi,s = 1. s-corresponds to a spin index and σ corresponds to the vector of Pauli spin-1/2 matrices. Using a Fierz transformation an exact rewriting of the Kitaev model reads: with Di,i+δγ = f † i,s σ γ s,s ′ fi+δγ,s ′ . Di,j accounts for a spinindependent hopping between sites i, j such that Di,j D † i,j corresponds to an spin independent or SU(2) invariant exchange process. Dγ i,j accounts for spin-flip processes and encodes the magnetic anisotropy of the Kitaev model. A mean field Ansatz that does not break any symmetries of the original Hamiltonian and leads to a mean field description of a spin liquid reads: χ 1 = ⟨ D † i,i+δγ ⟩, and iχ 2 = ⟨ Dγ † i,i+δ1 ⟩, where both χ 1 and χ 2 are real. The result of the mean-field self-consistent equations are shown in Fig. 