The 8 eV first nuclear excited state in 229 Th is a candidate for implementing a nuclear clock. Doping 229 Th into ionic crystals such as CaF 2 is expected to suppress non-radiative decay, enabling nuclear spectroscopy and the realization of a solid-state optical clock. Yet, the inherent radioactivity of 229 Th prohibits the growth of high-quality single crystals with high 229 Th concentration; radiolysis causes fluoride loss, increasing absorption at 8 eV. These radioactively doped crystals are thus a unique material for which a deeper analysis of the physical effects of radioactivity on growth, crystal structure and electronic properties is presented. Following the analysis, we overcome the increase in absorption at 8 eV by annealing 229 Th doped CaF 2 at 1250 • C in CF 4 . This technique allows to adjust the fluoride content without crystal melting, preserving its single-crystal structure. Superionic state annealing ensures rapid fluoride distribution, creating fully transparent and radiation-hard crystals. This approach enables control over the charge state of dopants which can be used in deep UV optics, laser crystals, scintillators, and nuclear clocks. Thorium-229 ( 229 Th), possessing an 8 eV and approximately 600-second lifetime first nuclear excited state (isomer state), enables high-precision vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) laser spectroscopy Th is required to be in a 3+ or higher charge state to suppress the non-radiative decay Th were used to grow single crystalline Th:CaF 2 using the vertical gradient freeze method The process of growing CaF 2 in a vacuum environment leads to a fluoride ion (F -) deficit due to thermal dissociation of CaF 2 and its reaction with the residual water in the system Due to the presence of a radioactive element during growth, radiolysis causes enhanced dissociation of CaF 2 Radioactivity not only affects growth: (doped) CaF 2 Superionic Th:CaF 2 subjected to radiation from radioactive decay after growth shows complex behavior centered around fluoride motion in the lattice The presence of a radioactive element in the CaF 2 matrix is a source of excitation of the lattice, which produces defects and aggregates which lie at the core of understanding the dynamic processes. Mainly the motion of fluorine determines the produced defects and their respective absorption and emission bands: fluoride moves through the crystal expending much less energy (0.6-1.5 eV) than the calcium ions and the formation energy of an anion Frenkel pair (F -interstitial and vacancy) is 2.7 eV as compared to 6 eV to form a cation Frenkel pair. Therefore the main defects in CaF 2 are related to fluoride: F, H and V k centers. The F center is an electron trapped at the location of a fluoride vacancy, which is similar to an electron in a box. Therefore the F center has rich optical absorption and emission bands. Th H center is a fluoride interstitial, which shares a trapped hole with a lattice fluoride thereby creating an F - 2 dimer with high mobility. The V k center is a trapped hole shared between two lattice fluorides, thereby also creating an F - 2 dimer. The energy deposited by 229 Th and its daughters through α and β decay is in the range of 100 keV to 8.5 MeV per decay. Such a high energy excitation will produce core shell holes and highly excited electrons. These will decay through various mechanisms such as Auger electrons, x-ray emission and plasmons to electron hole pairs (12.2 eV formation energy), and self-trappedexcitons (STE, formation energy 11.18 eV, absorption bands at 282 and 482 nm, emission bands from 200 to 500 nm). The electron hole pair can annihilate under photon emission, non-radiatively create a separate F and H center in the lattice (imperfect damaged crystal) or decay to a STE. The STE initially constitutes of a selftrapped-hole (V k center) and a captured electron, but quickly decays to an F and H pair. The F-H pair again either annihilates and emits a photon, or decays nonradiatively and leaves a separate F and H center in the crystal. The F center (absorption at 378 nm, emission at 585 nm) agglomerates into higher order M (2 F), R (3 F) and N (4 F) centers and continues to form Ca metallic colloids (fluoride vacancy agglomeration in CaF 2 is metallic Ca) as it is energetically favorable. The agglomeration shifts absorption and emission bands to lower energies. Most importantly the Ca colloids absorb in two bands, from 550 to 960 nm and 160 to 200 nm depending on their size The H center (absorption at 310 nm) can further collapse either to an impurity trapped hole (identified at 295 nm for Th) or two H centers form an interstitial dimer (two interstitial F -that share a hole,F - 2 ). The dimer formation can also aggregate to form dislocation loops (as observed). Through hopping, the single (or higher order) F and H centers can again find one another and annihilate (evaporate) under photon emission, thereby again producing a perfect crystal. If a stoichiometric amount of Ca and F 2 is present, this can be done through annealing at 600 • C. If not, fluoride annealing needs to be applied. Due to the constant internal irradiation of this crystal, the above processes are dynamic and the fluorides are in motion. Defects will accumulate until a steady state of growth and evaporation of Ca colloids and H center dimers is reached. The constant irradiation also provides a constant stream of Cherenkov photons (200 to 122 nm). Irradiated non-stoichiometric CaF 2 damages faster, as a larger amount of F and H centers is already present to compensate for non-stoichiometry, which can quickly aggregate upon irradiation to larger more absorbing defects. The damage steady state is reached quicker and annealing does not completely repair radiation damage. To create more transparent and radiation resistant CaF 2 , fluorine needs to be added for a stoichiometric crystal. Therefore we study the impact of the Th:CaF 2 crystal composition on its VUV transmission and the electronic structure of the dopant sites. Due to the 229 Th radioactivity, radiolysis becomes the major cause of the fluorine (F 2 ) loss during the growth phase. This substantial F 2 loss modifies the electronic structure of the CaF 2 crystal, resulting in a consequential change in its absorption profile We follow We use an induction heated carbon crucible to anneal Th:CaF 2 at above its superionic temperature, but below its melting temperature, in a carbon tetrafluoride (CF 4 ) atmosphere. The crystal is placed in the center of an induction coil in a carbon crucible, after which the system is evacuated to approximately 1 × 10 -6 mbar. The chamber is then filled with 1.1 bar CF 4 . In the heating step, the carbon crucible is heated using the induction coil (1300 • C, heating rate 20 K/min) while the walls of the vacuum system are water-cooled, creating a steep temperature gradient. The temperature gradient causes the CF 4 gas to be reactive only at the crystal surface and inert at the vacuum system walls, which significantly reduces safety concerns while ensuring the efficiency of the process. After annealing for 1 hour while holding the temperature, the system is cooled down (cooling rate 1 K/min) and at room temperature the CF 4 is replaced by N 2 . A schematic representation of the process is shown in Figure Above the superionic transition temperature of CaF 2 (1250 • C To produce a heavily fluoride deficient crystal, we first performed superionic annealing in vacuum instead of a CF 4 atmosphere on a 232 Th:CaF 2 crystal. Excessive flu-orine loss from the crystal during vacuum superionic annealing for 24 hours has turned an initially transparent crystal into a cloudy and opaque one (see Figure To quantitatively describe the VUV absorption profile over the time of fluorination, we identify three absorption lines (assuming gaussian profile) in Figure After fluorination of the 229 Th:CaF 2 , no change in color is observed in the crystal over the course of a year as opposed to the original fluoride deficient crystals The VUV transmission decreased from 50% to 35% over the course of 1 year, as opposed to complete VUV opacity in 3 days for non-fluorinated crystals. The original transmission could be completely regained through superionic fluoride transfer. After a year, no other changes in the radioactive crystals are observed such as cracking, thus it is concluded the radiation hardness significantly increased after fluorination as predicted. Alternative methods of fluorination of low-doped 229 Th:CaF 2 crystals were also tested. Highly fluoride deficient crystals (opaque) were treated using 3 different methods. The first method was annealing in an F 2 atmosphere. A Mg sample holder was passivated for two days at 600 • C (heating rate: 4 K h -1 , cooling rate: 1 K min -1 ) in an F 2 flow (20 % F 2 in N 2 atmosphere, 5 cm 3 min -1 ). The 229 Th:CaF 2 crystal was placed in the sample holder and was fluorinated for five days at 600 • C (heating rate: 4 K h -1 , cooling rate: 1 K min -1 ) in an F 2 flow (20 % F 2 in N 2 atmosphere, 5 cm 3 min -1 ). The second method was treatment using an NF 3 plasma. In this method a Ni sample holder was passivated in a fluorine plasma at room temperature for one hour. The 229 Th:CaF 2 crystal was placed in the sample holder and was fluorinated in a fluorine plasma at room temperature for three hours. NF 3 was used as feeding gas with a flow rate of 30 cm 3 min -1 . The third method was treatment in a F 2 filled autoclave. In this method a Ni sample holder was passivated for one day at 400 • C and approximately 400 bar (heating rate: 100 K h -1 , cooling rate: 4 K min -1 , 20% F 2 in Ar atmosphere). The 229 Th:CaF 2 crystal was placed in the Ni sample holder and was high-pressure fluorinated at 400 • C and approximately 400 bar for five days (heating rate: 100 K h -1 , cooling rate: 4 K min -1 , 50% F 2 in Ar atmosphere). The resulting crystals still displayed high absorption as can be seen in Figure Compared to alternative treatments, only superionic annealing under CF 4 atmosphere demonstrated a significant improvement in the VUV transmission (compare Figure Many facts have been gathered on 229 Th:CaF 2 : The observed absorption centers at 122, 130 and 150 nm, their change with fluoride content and the known fluorescence of 229 Th:CaF 2 at 184 nm The cerium analogue we will use to compare spectroscopic data in CaF 2 , as its 4+ and more common 3+ states have similar electronic configuration. Due to relativistic effects, the differences between Ce and Th might be large. The hafnium analogue we will use for the charge state thorium assumes, as neutral hafnium has a similar valence electron configuration (5d 2 6s 2 vs. 6d 2 7s 2 ) and chemically behaves similar to thorium. Just as thorium, hafnium almost exclusively takes a 4+ charge state, as opposed to cerium. It is known that the rare earths in CaF 2 reduce upon Xray irradiation Comparing Th 3+ to Ce 3+ doped in CaF 2 , we can find that Ce 3+ has several 4f n to 4f n-1 5d excitations around 180 nm This report demonstrates the enhancement of optical transmission in ionic crystals through superionic fluoride transfer. This superionic state substantially decreases the treatment duration. Furthermore, our findings suggest the possibility of controlling the dopant surrounding in CaF 2 by the addition or removal of F -, although the removal process carries a potential risk of creating Ca metallic nanoparticles. We have developed a simple and safe method of fluorine manipulation in fluoride ionic crystals. Utilizing this method, we are able to fabricate highly transparent, heavily doped 229 Th:CaF 2 crystals for a solid-state nuclear clock. The manipulation of the electronic structure brings the potential for advancements in optics, scintillator and laser crystal development by optimizing light absorption and emission through dopant and cation surrounding control (e.g., Eu:CaF 2 ).