Intertwined charge and magnetic fluctuations in high-T c copper oxide superconductors (cuprates) are hypothesized to be a consequence of their correlated electronic nature. Among other observables, this is apparent in the doping dependence of incommensurate magnetic order, known as the Yamada relation (YR). We analyze the Hubbard model to challenge the universality of YR as a function of interaction strength U through Kotliar-Ruckenstein slave-boson (SB) mean-field theory and truncated unity functional renormalization group (TUFRG). While TUFRG tends to lock in to a doping dependence of the incommensurate magnetic ordering vector obtained for the perturbative weak-coupling limit, SB not only exhibits an enhanced sensitivity upon a variation of U from weak to strong coupling, but also shows good agreement with experimental data. It supports the placement of weakly hole-doped cuprates in the intermediate-to-strong coupling regime. Introduction -Due to its condensed simplification and yet remarkable complexity in terms of quantum phases of matter it gives rise to, the Hubbard model is considered the drosophila of correlated condensed matter physics. With respect to copper oxide superconductors (cuprates), the Hubbard model suggests itself to even capture many rather subtle features of magnetic/charge order and superconductivity. Despite its elementary formulation and robust microscopic foundation, the Hubbard model has proven immensely challenging to solve, rendering its solution in two and more spatial dimensions a cornerstone in the quest for understanding and predicting the properties of cuprate-type materials. For instance, recent strives for finding the exact ground state are just one of many ongoing concerted efforts by the scientific community to determine the properties of the Hubbard model One of the many intriguing phenomena observed in the Hubbard model is the emergence of incommensurate magnetic spiral order, in particular for hole doping away from pristine half filling. Such a spiral is characterized by a periodic modulation of the magnetic moments, where the modulation does not have an integer number of wavelengths within the underlying lattice. While such phenomena are readily interpreted from a weak coupling itinerant limit where the nesting, and hence the preferred magnetic ordering, continuously detunes a function of hole-doped Fermiology, the microscopic attribution of doping-dependent incommensurate magnetic order is much more difficult in the intermediate to strong coupling regime. Approaching such a parametric domain of the Hubbard model from a holistic perspective calls for methods, which are (i) not limited by real space cluster size in their resolution of incommensurability, (ii) capable of including the dynamical interplay of charge and spin fluctuations, and (iii) feature a comprehensive tunability of U. The truncated unity functional renomalization group (TUFRG) In this paper we do two things: First, we employ TUFRG and SB to analyze the hole-doping dependence of magnetic order in the Hubbard model. As TUFRG approaches the intermediately coupled electronic regime from the perturbative weak-coupling limit, while SB additionally features certain controlled asymptotic limits in the complementary stronglycoupled limit, we assume our combined assessment from both methods to accurately capture a broad range of interaction strengths. Moreover, both methods allow extracting similar observables, and hence enable a comparison on equal footing. Second, we challenge our analysis of incommensurate magnetic order with experimental evidence. In particular, this concerns the Yamada relation in hole-doped La-based cuprate materials Model -We analyze the one-band tt ′ -U Hubbard model on the two-dimensional square lattice defined by where the operator c † i,σ creates an electron with spin σ ∈ {↑ , ↓} at site i. Moreover, ⟨i, j⟩ n denotes a n th nearest neighbor pair, and μ 0 is the chemical potential. To introduce particlehole asymmetry as experimentally observed we employ t ′ /t = -0.15 throughout the paper, which is a generic parameter in cuprate systems Bare Susceptibility -To give an initial intuition of the model and its propensity towards incommensurate order, we investigate the bare susceptibility χ 0 which -in the absence of orbital dependencies -is equivalent to the random-phase approximation (RPA) spin susceptibility χ s with n F representing the Fermi-Dirac distribution and ε k the energy eigenvalues of Eq. (1) with U → 0. The results reveal nesting properties of the undressed electrons, which stem from the Fermiology of the underlying band structure. The leading nesting vectors for a range of fillings are shown in the upper row of Fig. Truncated-Unity FRG -To investigate weak-tointermediate coupling strengths, we employ the TUFRG. This method emphasizes the diagrammatic transfer momenta of the three channels: particle-hole, crossed particle-hole, and particle-particle, and thus captures occurring instabilities of all three. The secondary -slowly varying -momentum dependencies are projected onto basis functions φ = e ikr , with r lattice sites, to reduce computational cost. The resulting TUFRG flow equations are solved by introducing an artificial regulator, interpolating between the high-scale no-fluctuation regime and the full-fluctuation regime at low scale. Reformulating the problem as derivatives w.r.t. this artificial scale Λ, we obtain an infinite hierarchy of coupled ordinary differential equations. Focusing on the two-particle terms, we can integrate the equations to obtain the effective two-particle interaction at the phase transition The initial condition is given by the bare action of the system at high temperature, while termination is indicated by a divergence of vertex elements and thereby defines the critical scale of Λ c ≈ T c . The nature of the phase transition implied by the divergence, we ascertain by means of a simple eigendecomposition in the formfactor space φ of the effective two-particle interaction V Λ c φφ ′ (Q). The subspace of the leading eigenvalues determines the ordering vector Q. If we do not encounter a divergence above a threshold scale, we determine the system to be a Fermi liquid (FL). Slave-boson mean-field approximation -To complement the weak-to-intermediate coupling captured by the TUFRG, we apply the spin rotation invariant Kotliar-Ruckenstein slave-boson representation Here, α and β are sets of quantum numbers uniquely labeling local states. The transformation between physical electrons and pseudofermions is governed by a renormalization matrix Z, with bosonic operators as entries To determine the ground state, we employ a static meanfield (MF) ansatz. Charge degrees of freedom are approximated as spatially uniform ⟨n i ⟩ = n, while spin degrees are constrained to a spiral ⟨S i ⟩ = S [ψ] (cos(Q r i ), sin(Q r i ), 0) with ordering vector Q, where S 0 indicates magnetic order. Utilizing block diagonality, the MF Hamiltonian is represented by a 2 × 2 matrix for arbitrary Q, facilitating the comparatively easy exploration of incommensurabilities Comparison of phase diagrams -Fig. Consistent with prior large-T SB studies of the Hubbard model Additionally, a SBMF phase diagram (c) at zero temperature T = 0 reveals incommensurate spiral magnetism with wavevecors Q/2π = 1 2 , 1 2 ± δ s and Q/2π = 1 2 ± δ s , 1 2 ± δ s as well as a more pronounced incommensurability parameter δ s . Notably, SBMF studies at low T suggest phase separation of commensurate and incommensurate antiferro- In contrast, TUFRG recovers the weak coupling line predicted by the RPA susceptibility, but fails at high interaction strengths U > 2. The experimental RXS We contrast our results with the critical interaction U c for the spin channel predicted by RPA, which qualitativly follows the results found using TUFRG and the corresponding incommensurability parameters can be inferred from Fig. To connect to experimental results, we remember that the Hubbard model is often used as a simple model of cuprate systems. This relies on the electron's confinement to the copper-atoms for the electron-doped regime and the Zhang-Rice-singlet Experimental results and Yamada relation -Incommensurability is not merely a theoretical concept; it manifests in high-T c cuprates. Yamada et al. Further investigations on related materials Note, that other cuprate families, e.g., Y-and Bi-based compounds, do not follow the Yamada relation and realize other types of spin and charge incomensurablilties Incommensurability as a function of filling -In Fig. Conclusion -We analyze the one-band Hubbard model to explore the dependence of incommensurate magnetic order on doping and interaction strength U within a wide parameter space. Comparing the results of our chosen SB and TUFRG approaches, both methods reproduce the Fermiology-driven magnetic instability already visible from the bare susceptiblity. At intermediate-to-large U, it is SB that most accurately reproduces a magnetic footprint akin to the Yamada relation for hole-doped cuprates. As this is a comprehensive theoretical reproduction of this experimental phenomenology, one might expect a renaissance of SB methodology to address intricate many-body phenomena in strongly correlated electron systems.