In the RAl(Si,Ge) (R: lanthanides) family, both spatial inversion and time-reversal symmetries are broken. This may offer opportunities to study Weyl-fermion physics in nontrivial spin structures emerging from a noncentrosymmetric crystal structure. In this study, we investigated the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in NdAlGe via magnetotransport, magnetization, and magnetic torque measurements down to 40 mK (0.4 K for magnetization). The single crystals grown by a laser-heated floating-zone method exhibit a single magnetic phase transition at T M = 13.5 K, where the T M is the transition temperature. With the magnetic field parallel to the easy [001] axis, the AHE gradually evolves as the temperature decreases below T M . The anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) reaches ∼320 Ω -1 cm -1 at 40 mK in the magnetically saturated state. Except in low-temperature low-field plateau phases, the AHC and magnetization are proportional, and their ratio agrees with the ratios for conventional ferromagnets, suggesting that the intrinsic AHE occurs by the Karplus-Luttinger mechanism. Below ∼0.6 K, the curves of Hall resistivity against the field exhibit plateaus at low fields below ∼0.5 T, correlating with the plateaus in the magnetization curve. For the first plateau, the magnetization is one order of magnitude smaller than the magnetically saturated state, whereas the AHE is more than half that in the saturated state. This finding under well below T M suggests that the AHE at the first plateau is not governed by the magnetization and may be interpreted based on a multipole or spin chirality. Topologically nontrivial phases in condensed matter have attracted much attention recently due to their novel physical properties applications The RAl(Si,Ge) (R: lanthanides) family with the space group I4 1 md (No. 109) is a new class of magnetic Weyl semimetals where both the inversion and time-reversal symmetries are broken We focused on NdAlGe in this study. The physical properties of NdAlGe were investigated by several groups using flux-grown crystals Recently, we have succeeded in growing the single crystals of NdAlGe by a laser-heated floating-zone technique Single crystals of NdAlGe were grown by a laser-heated floating-zone method. The detailed growth procedure was described in The crystals were cut and polished into rectangles with a typical size of 3.4 × 0.5 × 0.4 mm 3 in [100], [010]], and [001] directions, respectively. The electrical contacts were spot-welded and supported with silver paste. The contact resistances were below 0.1 Ω. The magnetoresistivity and Hall resistivity were measured simultaneously using a low-frequency (∼13 Hz) AC method. The measurements were performed in a top-loading 3 He - 4 He dilution refrigerator at temperatures (T ) down to 40 mK with sweeping magnetic field (H) between -17.5 and +17.5 T. The electrical current and magnetic field were applied in the [100] and [001] directions, respectively, unless specified otherwise. Because the misalignments of the contact electrodes can cause mixing of the magnetoresistivity and Hall resistivity, the magnetoresistivity (ρ xx ) and Hall resistivity (ρ yx ) were obtained by T were performed down to 2 K using the options of Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design). The measurement at 0.4 K was performed using the Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS3, Quantum Design) with a 3 He cooling option. The specific-heat (C P ) under zero field was measured down to 0.4 K using the options of Physical Property Measurement System (Quantum Design). The measurement was performed by a relaxation method. ), revealing a single sharp transition at T M . Notably, the transition width of the specific-heat jump at T M is as sharp as 0.4 K, suggesting that the floating-zone crystal in this study is highly homogeneous. In comparison, two successive transitions were observed at lower temperatures (∼5 K and ∼6 -7 K) Figure Herein, the field angle (θ) was measured from [001] to [010] (inset of Fig. Figure Our conclusion regarding the intrinsic AHE agrees with the conclusion drawn from studies on flux-grown crystals by Dhital et al Next, we focus on the first plateau in the Hall resistivity. Figure Nevertheless, the ρ yx has a substantial value of ρ yx ∼ 1.5 μΩ cm, ∼55% of its value in the polarized state and has the same positive sign. For the first plateau, where M = 0.043 T, the ratio σ AHE xy /M is 4.3 × 10 3 Ω -1 cm -1 /T, exceeding the aforementioned empirical range. Recent studies on anomalous Hall antiferromagnets indicated that the contribution of the Berry curvature to AHE is not necessarily controlled by magnetization For flux-grown NdAlGe samples, neutron diffraction measurements were performed, and the low-temperature zero-field spin structure was found to be composed of basically antiferromagnetic spin "down-up-up" chains along V. SUMMARY we performed magnetotransport and magnetic torque measurements down to 40 mK and magnetization ones to 0.4 K on floating-zone single crystals of NdAlGe. We observed only one magnetic phase transition at T M = 13.5 K, in contrast to the two transitions observed in some of the flux-grown crystals 