The two-dimensional (2D) material Cr2Ge2Te6 is a member of the class of insulating van der Waals magnets. Here, using high resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy in a detailed temperature dependence study, we identify a clear response of the electronic structure to a dimensional crossover in the form of two distinct temperature scales marking onsets of modifications in the electronic structure. Specifically, we observe Te p-orbital-dominated bands to undergo changes at the Curie transition temperature TC while the Cr d-orbital-dominated bands begin evolving at a higher temperature scale. Combined with neutron scattering, density functional theory calculations, and Monte Carlo simulations, we find that the electronic system can be consistently understood to respond sequentially to the distinct temperatures at which in-plane and out-of-plane spin correlations exceed a characteristic length scale. Our findings reveal the sensitivity of the orbital-selective electronic structure for probing the dynamical evolution of local moment correlations in vdW insulating magnets. Exploring the magnetism in quasi-2D materials has been a fascinating subject in quantum physics for more than five decades. This field has received strong stimuli from both the discovery of high temperature superconductivity in the lamellar copper oxides in the late 1980s and, more recently, by studies of the ferromagnetism in van der Waals (vdW) materials Here we report the observation of the electronic response to the development of the spin correlations across a wide range of temperatures in the vdW magnet Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 via angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). By mapping out the temperature dependent band structure and the one-electron spectral evolution across T C , we observe two types of band evolutions. One group associated with Cr d orbitals that exhibits a gradual shift with an onset temperature well above T C , and another associated with Te p orbitals that rapidly shift near T C . From a combination of neutron scattering, Monte Carlo simulations, and Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations, we arrive at a holistic understanding of the sequential electronic response as tracking the development of in-plane and out-of-plane spin correlations. Due to the anisotropy in the in-plane and out-of-plane exchange couplings, the in-plane correlation length exceeds that of the lattice constant at a temperature roughly twice that of T C , while the outof-plane spin correlation length reaches that of a lattice constant much closer to T C , affecting more significantly the Te p orbitals through the Cr-Te-Cr superexchange interactions near T C . Our results provide a consistent understanding of the two-step evolution of the electronic response to the interplay between local moments in 2D magnets, and demonstrate the sensitivity of using orbital-dependent electronic structure to track evolution of spin correlations in these vdW magnets. Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 forms in the space group 148 ( R3) in a layered structure with weak vdW coupling between adjacent layers (Fig. Next, we present the ARPES measured electronic structure in the FM phase. The electronic structure of Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 mimics that of a semiconductor, with holelike bands at the Γ points of the Brillouin zone (BZ) as the valence band top (VBT), consistent with previous reports To pave the way for understanding the temperatureinduced evolution of the electronic structure, we present temperature-dependent ARPES data in Fig. To gain insights into the possible origin of the higher temperature band evolution, we consider that for a quasi-2D magnet, while the in-plane and out-of-plane spin correlations both diverge at the same rate near T C , the in- The simulated change in the in-plane ξ ∥ and out-of-plane ξ ⊥ correlation lengths, in units of the nearest-neighbor lattice spacing, as well as their ratio, as a function of temperature. The crossover scale T2D ∼ 2Tc when ξ ∥ = 1. The horizontal dotted line is a guide to the eye denoting the nearest-neighbor spacing with T2D indicated here as the point where ξ ∥ begins to exceed this distance. plane correlations, due to larger in-plane exchange interactions, would exceed several lattice constants at higher temperatures compared to that of the out-of-plane correlations, manifesting in a 2D to 3D crossover behavior, as has been reported for the iron-based superconductors , with m n being the mass of neutron To substantiate this understanding, we carried out classical Monte Carlo simulations using a classical Heisenberg model with the anisotropic exchange couplings from previous reports With this understanding, we finally discuss the implications for the sequential band evolution observed by ARPES in comparison to DFT calculations. To model the development of in-plane and out-of-plane spin correlations, we model the highest temperature phase above T 2D with all single spins anti-aligned, which effectively mimics the persistence of local moments with no ferromagnetic spin correlations. For T 2D > T > T C , we simulate the in-plane FM spin correlations via A-type AFM spin arrangement, where in-plane spins are co-aligned. The lowest temperature T < T C is the FM order where all spins are aligned along the c direction. The orbital projected DFT calculations for these three different models are plotted on top of the corresponding ARPES data (Fig. 